1. Biochemistry. 1999 Mar 23;38(12):3733-43. doi: 10.1021/bi982707s.

Replacement of the proximal histidine iron ligand by a cysteine or tyrosine 
converts heme oxygenase to an oxidase.

Liu Y(1), MoÃ«nne-Loccoz P, Hildebrand DP, Wilks A, Loehr TM, Mauk AG, Ortiz de 
Montellano PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of 
California, San Francisco, California 94143-0446, USA.

The H25C and H25Y mutants of human heme oxygenase-1 (hHO-1), in which the 
proximal iron ligand is replaced by a cysteine or tyrosine, have been expressed 
and characterized. Resonance Raman studies indicate that the ferric heme 
complexes of these proteins, like the complex of the H25A mutant but unlike that 
of the wild type, are 5-coordinate high-spin. Labeling of the iron with 54Fe 
confirms that the proximal ligand in the ferric H25C protein is a cysteine 
thiolate. Resonance-enhanced tyrosinate modes in the resonance Raman spectrum of 
the H25Y.heme complex provide direct evidence for tyrosinate ligation in this 
protein. The H25C and H25Y heme complexes are reduced to the ferrous state by 
cytochrome P450 reductase but do not catalyze alpha-meso-hydroxylation of the 
heme or its conversion to biliverdin. Exposure of the ferrous heme complexes to 
O2 does not give detectable ferrous-dioxy complexes and leads to the uncoupled 
reduction of O2 to H2O2. Resonance Raman studies show that the ferrous H25C and 
H25Y heme complexes are present in both 5-coordinate high-spin and 4-coordinate 
intermediate-spin configurations. This finding indicates that the proximal 
cysteine and tyrosine ligand in the ferric H25C and H25Y complexes, 
respectively, dissociates upon reduction to the ferrous state. This is confirmed 
by the spectroscopic properties of the ferrous-CO complexes. Reduction potential 
measurements establish that reduction of the mutants by NADPH-cytochrome P450 
reductase, as observed, is thermodynamically allowed. The two proximal ligand 
mutations thus destabilize the ferrous-dioxy complex and uncouple the reduction 
of O2 from oxidation of the heme group. The proximal histidine ligand, for 
geometric or electronic reasons, is specifically required for normal heme 
oxygenase catalysis.

DOI: 10.1021/bi982707s
PMID: 10090762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]