1. Br J Cancer. 1999 Apr;80(1-2):11-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6690314.

Microsatellite instability and mismatch repair gene inactivation in sporadic 
pancreatic and colon tumours.

Ghimenti C(1), Tannerg√•rd P, Wahlberg S, Liu T, Giulianotti PG, Mosca F, 
Fornaciari G, Bevilacqua G, Lindblom A, Caligo MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Pisa, Italy.

Genomic instability has been proposed as a new mechanism of carcinogenesis 
involved in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and in a large 
number of sporadic cancers like pancreatic and colon tumours. Mutations in human 
mismatch repair genes have been found in HNPCC patients, but their involvement 
in sporadic cancer has not been clarified yet. In this study we screened 21 
pancreatic and 23 colorectal sporadic cancers for microsatellite instability by 
ten and six different microsatellite markers respectively. Microsatellite 
alterations were observed at one or more loci in 66.6% (14/21) of pancreatic 
cancers and in 26% (6/23) colon tumours, but all the pancreatic and half of the 
colon samples showed a low rate of microsatellite instability. All the unstable 
samples were further analysed for mutations in the hMLH1 and hMSH2 genes and for 
hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter region. Alterations in the hMLH1 gene 
were found only in colorectal tumours with a large presence of microsatellite 
instability. None of the pancreatic tumours showed any alteration in the two 
genes analysed. Our results demonstrate that microsatellite instability is 
unlikely to play a role in the tumorigenesis of sporadic pancreatic cancers and 
confirm the presence of mismatch repair gene alterations only in sporadic colon 
tumours with a highly unstable phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6690314
PMCID: PMC2363009
PMID: 10389971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]