1. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(3):238-45. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(200003)15:3<238::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-3.

A missense mutation in the OCTN2 gene associated with residual carnitine 
transport activity.

Wang Y(1), Kelly MA, Cowan TM, Longo N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Primary carnitine deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of fatty acid 
oxidation caused by defective carnitine transport. This disease can present 
early in life with hypoketotic hypoglycemia and acute metabolic decompensation, 
or later in life with skeletal or cardiac myopathy. Mutations abolishing the 
function of OCTN2, an organic cation/carnitine transporter with twelve putative 
transmembrane spanning domains, were recently demonstrated in patients with 
early- and late-onset (up to seven years of age) presentation of this syndrome. 
Most of the reported mutations are null alleles. Here we evaluate the OCTN2 gene 
in a male patient who presented at seven years of age with severe dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Plasma carnitine levels were undetectable and carnitine 
transport by his fibroblasts was reduced to about 3% of normal controls. This 
patient was homozygous for a single base pair change in exon 8 of the OCTN2 gene 
(1354G>A) converting the codon for Glu 452 to Lys (E452K) in the predicted 
intracellular loop between transmembrane domains 10 and 11. Stable expression of 
the mutant E452K-OCTN2 cDNA in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells caused a 
partial increase in carnitine transport to 2-4% of the levels measured in the 
wild type transporter. This reduced transport activity was associated with 
normal Km toward carnitine (3.1 +/- 1.1 microM), but markedly reduced Vmax. 
These results indicate that primary carnitine deficiency can be caused by 
mutations encoding for carnitine transporters with residual activity, and that 
the E452K affects a domain not involved in carnitine recognition.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(200003)15:3<238::AID-HUMU4>3.0.CO;2-3
PMID: 10679939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]