1. Mol Vis. 2000 Apr 7;6:51-62.

G239T mutation in Repeat 1 of human IRBP: possible implications for more than 
one binding site in a single repeat.

Gross EA(1), Li GR, Ruuska SE, Boatright JH, Nickerson JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

PURPOSE: Interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein(IRBP) is a four-repeat 
protein found in the interphotoreceptor space. Each repeat can bind retinoids 
and fatty acids. The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of the 
single amino acid substitution, G239T, versus the wild type sequence of human 
IRBP Repeat 1, on ligand binding at equilibrium, ligand off rates, and 
protection of retinol from degradation.
METHODS: G239T was created by site-specific mutagenesis, expressed in E. coli, 
and purified. E. coli expressed wild type Repeat 1 (EcR1) and G239T were 
subjected to thermal denaturation and analyzed by circular dichroism 
spectroscopy. We compared the ligand binding properties by fluorescence 
enhancement of retinol and 16-anthroyloxy-palmitate, tryptophan quenching of the 
proteins by different ligands, binding competition assays, protection of retinol 
from degradation, and stopped-flow kinetics to measure transfer of ligands to 
and from model membranes.
RESULTS: Circular dichroism, fluorescence, and absorbance spectroscopy of G239T 
and EcR1 showed similar wavelength scans. G239T exhibited about three-fold less 
fluorescence of bound all-trans-retinol or 13-cis-retinol versus EcR1. Retinol 
quenching of intrinsic protein fluorescence was reduced by 37% in G239T versus 
EcR1. Other retinoids used as quenchers produced no difference between intrinsic 
protein fluorescence of either G239T or EcR1; all exhibited saturable high 
affinity binding to each protein. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) served as a 
competitive inhibitor of retinol fluorescence enhancement with EcR1. However, 
DHA did not alter retinol fluorescence with G239T. 16-anthroyloxy-palmitate 
(16-AP) exhibited about 30% higher levels of fluorescence enhancement when bound 
to G239T versus EcR1. EcR1 prevented oxidative damage of all-trans-retinol, 
whereas G239T provided much less protection. Each protein could accept 
9-cis-retinal from small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) as measured by stopped flow 
kinetics. Off rates were the same in comparing G239T and EcR1 as acceptors.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the general similarity in shape between G239T and EcR1 and 
the nearly identical binding behavior with some ligands, distinct differences 
exist in the ligand binding properties of G239T and EcR1. Fluorescence 
enhancement/quenching and retinol protection experiments suggest that retinol 
binding is reduced by about 50% in G239T versus EcR1. The data suggest that 
either: (1) EcR1 contains two binding sites for retinol and G239T has lost one 
site or (2) EcR1 has a single binding site that is altered in G239T to reduce 
retinol binding. Results of all the experiments were consistent with the first 
model while some of the data were not consistent with the second model. Thus, it 
is possible that position 239, found in Domain B2 of IRBP Repeat 1, is located 
in or near one of two retinol binding sites.

PMID: 10756181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]