1. Biochemistry. 2000 Jun 27;39(25):7398-405. doi: 10.1021/bi992735q.

Insertion loop 256-268 in coagulation factor IX restricts enzymatic activity in 
the absence but not in the presence of factor VIII.

Kolkman JA(1), Mertens K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plasma Proteins, CLB, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Insertions in surface loops bordering the substrate-binding groove have been 
shown to play a major role in the interaction of serine proteases with their 
cognate inhibitors and substrates. In the present study, we investigated the 
functional role of factor IX insertion loop 256-268, and in particular of 
residues Asn(264) and Lys(265) therein. To this end, the purified and activated 
mutants des-(N264,K265)-FIX and FIX-K265A were compared to normal factor IXa 
with regard to a number of functional properties. The catalytic efficiency of 
des-(N264,K265)-FIXa and FIXa-K265A toward the amide substrate 
CH(3)SO(2)-Leu-Gly-Arg-pNA was 2-3-fold increased relative to that of normal 
factor IXa. Comparison of the activities of normal and mutant factor IXa toward 
a series of closely related amide substrates indicates that mutation of residues 
Asn(264)-Lys(265) influences the interactions in the S2-binding site. The 
mutations in loop 256-268 also increased the susceptibility of factor IXa to 
antithrombin inhibition by approximately 3-fold. Factor X activation experiments 
in the absence of factor VIIIa revealed that the catalytic efficiency of 
des-(N264,K265)-FIXa and FIXa-K265A was about 20 times higher than that of 
normal factor IXa. In the presence of factor VIIIa, however, the activity toward 
factor X was similar to that of normal factor IXa. The reduced sensitivity of 
the factor IXa mutants to factor VIIIa was neither due to an increase in factor 
IXa-dependent inactivation of factor VIIIa, nor to a lower affinity for this 
cofactor. Overall, these data demonstrate that loop 256-268 restricts the 
activity of factor IXa toward both synthetic and natural substrates. Complex 
formation with factor VIIIa alleviates the inhibitory effect of this insertion 
loop on the activation of FX.

DOI: 10.1021/bi992735q
PMID: 10858287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]