1. Brain Res. 2000 Jul 28;872(1-2):1-10. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02314-3.

Differential expression of a(2a), A(1)-adenosine and D(2)-dopamine receptor 
genes in rat peripheral arterial chemoreceptors during postnatal development.

Gauda EB(1), Northington FJ, Linden J, Rosin DL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins Medical 
School, 600 N Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD 21287-3200, USA. 
egauda@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

The sensitivity of peripheral arterial chemoreceptors in the carotid body to 
hypoxia increases with postnatal maturation. Carotid sinus nerve activity is 
augmented by adenosine binding to A(2a)-adenosine receptors and attenuated by 
dopamine binding to D(2)-dopamine receptors. In this study, we used in situ 
hybridization histochemistry to determine the change in the levels of mRNA 
expression for A(2a) and A(1)-adenosine receptors and D(2)-dopamine receptors in 
the rat carotid body. We also investigated the cellular distribution and 
possible colocalization of these receptor mRNAs and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) 
mRNAs during the first 2 weeks of postnatal development. By using 
immunohistocytochemistry, we detected A(2a)-adenosine receptor protein in the 
carotid body and petrosal ganglion. We found that A(2a)-adenosine receptor mRNA 
and protein are expressed in the carotid body in animals at 0, 3, 6 and 14 
postnatal days. The level of A(2a)-adenosine receptor mRNA expression 
significantly decreased by 14 postnatal days (P<0.02 vs. day 0) while 
D(2)-dopamine receptor mRNA levels significantly increased by day 3 and remained 
greater than D(2)-dopamine receptor mRNA levels at day 0 (P<0.001 all ages vs. 
day 0). TH mRNA was colocalized in cells in the carotid body with A(2a) 
adenosine receptor and D(2)-dopamine receptor mRNAs. A(1)-adenosine receptor 
mRNA was not expressed in the carotid body at any of the ages examined. In the 
petrosal ganglion, A(1)-adenosine receptor mRNA was abundantly expressed in 
numerous cells, A(2a)-adenosine receptor mRNA was expressed in a moderate number 
of cells while D(2)-dopamine receptor mRNA was seen in a few cells in the 
rostral petrosal ganglion. In conclusion, using in situ hybridization 
histochemistry, we have shown that mRNA for both the excitatory, A(2a)-adenosine 
receptor, and the inhibitory, D(2)-dopamine receptor, is developmentally 
regulated in presumably type I cells in the carotid body which may contribute to 
the maturation of hypoxic chemosensitivity. Furthermore, the presence 
A(1)-adenosine receptor mRNAs in cell bodies of the petrosal ganglion suggests 
that adenosine might also have an inhibitory role in hypoxic chemotransmission.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02314-3
PMID: 10924669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]