1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2000 Sep;15(9):1344-7. doi: 10.1093/ndt/15.9.1344.

Deregulated platelet-activating factor levels and acetylhydrolase activity in 
patients with idiopathic IgA nephropathy.

Denizot Y(1), Aupetit C, Bridoux F, Alphonse JC, Cogné M, Aldigier JC.

Author information:
(1)EP CNRS 118, Faculté de Médecine, 2 rue Dr Marcland, Limoges,

BACKGROUND: Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a phospholipid mediator with 
potent inflammatory activities. PAF stimulates IgA synthesis by B cells while 
IgA aggregates enhance PAF production by neutrophils and mesangial cells. These 
results led us to investigate blood PAF levels and plasma acetylhydrolase (AHA, 
the PAF catabolic enzyme) activity in patients with idiopathic IgA nephropathy 
(IgAN).
METHODS: PAF and AHA levels were investigated using the platelet aggregation 
assay and degradation of (3)H-labelled PAF, respectively. The genotype of AHA 
with regard to the G994-->T mutation in exon 9 was assessed by an 
allele-specific polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Blood PAF levels were significantly (P:=0.003, Mann-Whitney U:-test) 
elevated in IgAN patients (50.6+/-6.8 pg/ml, n=33) compared with healthy 
controls (18+/-5 pg/ml, n=18). In contrast, plasma AHA levels were significantly 
(P:=0.0001, Mann-Whitney U:-test) reduced in patients with IgAN (61+/-2 
nmol/ml/min, n=51) compared with healthy controls (78+/-4 nmol/ml/min, n=53). 
G994-->T transversion in exon 9 of AHA was not found in any of the IgAN 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Elevated circulating levels of PAF in IgAN patients might result 
from an insufficient AHA probably related to environmental factors rather than 
genetic ones. The mechanism and the precise role of the PAF/AHA deregulation in 
IgAN patients remain to be clarified.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/15.9.1344
PMID: 10978389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]