1. Hum Mutat. 2001 May;17(5):389-96. doi: 10.1002/humu.1114.

Germline and somatic mutation analyses in the DNA mismatch repair gene MLH3: 
Evidence for somatic mutation in colorectal cancers.

Lipkin SM(1), Wang V, Stoler DL, Anderson GR, Kirsch I, Hadley D, Lynch HT, 
Collins FS.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch and Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-6050, USA.

DNA mismatch repair is of considerable scientific and medical importance because 
of its essential role in maintaining genomic integrity, and its association with 
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC). Germline mutations in five 
mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, PMS1, PMS2, and MSH6) have been associated 
with HNPCC susceptibility. Our laboratory recently identified MLH3, a novel DNA 
mismatch repair gene. We screened the MLH3 coding sequence in 60 probands with 
increased genetic risk factors for colorectal cancer susceptibility and no 
mutations in the other candidate genes. No definite MLH3 germline mutations were 
found. We subsequently screened 36 colon tumors, and discovered an appreciable 
frequency of somatic MLH3 coding mutations in MSI-H tumors (25%). In four of six 
tumors, evidence of biallelic inactivation was noted. Furthermore, MLH3 nonsense 
mutations were identified in two of 12 microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors with 
14q24 loss of heterozygosity. While our analyses do not exclude the existence of 
germline MLH3 mutations in patients with increased genetic risk factors for 
colorectal cancer susceptibility, they suggest such mutations are uncommon in 
this patient population. The finding of an appreciable frequency of somatic MLH3 
mutations is consistent with a possible role for this gene in the progression of 
colorectal cancer tumorigenesis. Hum Mutat 17:389-396, 2001. Published 2001 
Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1114
PMID: 11317354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]