1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;126(1):52-8. doi: 10.1006/gcen.2001.7766.

Comparison of R128Q mutations in human, ovine, and chicken leptins.

Raver N(1), Vardy E, Livnah O, Devos R, Gertler A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, Faculty of 
Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Human leptin and its R128Q mutant, as well as the R128Q mutants of ovine and 
chicken leptins, were prepared, expressed in Escherichia coli, refolded, and 
purified to homogeneity yielding electrophoretically pure, over 95% monomeric 
protein. R128Q mutations did not change the binding properties to BAF/3 cells 
stably transfected with the long form of human leptin receptor compared, 
respectively, to non-mutated human, ovine, and chicken leptins. In contrast, the 
biological activity tested in a proliferation assay in the same cells was 
drastically changed. Human leptin R128Q lost its activity and even became a weak 
antagonist, whereas the activities of ovine and chicken leptins were reduced 25- 
and 80-fold. If dimerization models were applicable leptin receptor activation, 
the present results would suggest that site 2 of the hormone was impaired. Two 
models, the human growth hormone:human growth hormone receptor (hGH:hGHR) (1:2) 
and the granulocyte-colony stimulating factor:granulocyte-colony stimulating 
factor receptor (GCSF:GCSFR) (2:2) complexes, were used for modeling. 
Superimposing the leptin structure on the hGH and GCSF models in the complex 
structures did not indicate any role for R128 in receptor binding. This made it 
impossible to correlate the results shown in the present work with the currently 
available models. Therefore, leptin may bind its receptors in a manner different 
than those proposed until now.

DOI: 10.1006/gcen.2001.7766
PMID: 11944966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]