1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5616-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.15.5616-5625.2002.

Major histocompatibility complex class II transcriptional platform: assembly of 
nuclear factor Y and regulatory factor X (RFX) on DNA requires RFX5 dimers.

Jabrane-Ferrat N(1), Nekrep N, Tosi G, Esserman LJ, Peterlin BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94115-0703, USA.

Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) genes are regulated in a 
B-cell-specific and gamma interferon-inducible manner. Conserved upstream 
sequences (CUS) in their compact promoters bind nuclear factor Y (NFY) and 
regulatory factor X (RFX) complexes. These DNA-bound proteins form a platform 
that attracts the class II transactivator, which initiates and elongates MHC-II 
transcription. In this report, we analyzed the complex assembly of these 
DNA-bound proteins. First, we found that NFY can interact with RFX in cells. In 
particular, NFYA and NFYC bound RFXANK/B in vitro. Next, RFX5 formed dimers in 
vivo and in vitro. Within a leucine-rich stretch N-terminal to the DNA-binding 
domain in RFX5, the leucine at position 66 was found to be critical for this 
self-association. Mutant RFX5 proteins that could not form dimers also did not 
support the formation of higher-order DNA-protein complexes on CUS in vitro or 
MHC-II transcription in vivo. We conclude that the MHC-II transcriptional 
platform begins to assemble off CUS and then binds DNA via multiple, spatially 
constrained interactions. These findings offer one explanation of why in the 
Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome, which is a congenital severe combined 
immunodeficiency, MHC-II promoters are bare when any subunit of RFX is mutated 
or missing.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.15.5616-5625.2002
PMCID: PMC133954
PMID: 12101253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]