1. EMBO J. 2002 Aug 1;21(15):3970-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf404.

Calmodulin and lipid binding to synaptobrevin regulates calcium-dependent 
exocytosis.

Quetglas S(1), Iborra C, Sasakawa N, De Haro L, Kumakura K, Sato K, Leveque C, 
Seagar M.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 464, 
Université de la Méditerranée, 13916 Marseille Cedex 20, France.

Neurotransmitter release involves the assembly of a heterotrimeric SNARE complex 
composed of the vesicle protein synaptobrevin (VAMP 2) and two plasma membrane 
partners, syntaxin 1 and SNAP-25. Calcium influx is thought to control this 
process via Ca(2+)-binding proteins that associate with components of the SNARE 
complex. Ca(2+)/calmodulin or phospholipids bind in a mutually exclusive fashion 
to a C-terminal domain of VAMP (VAMP(77-90)), and residues involved were 
identified by plasmon resonance spectroscopy. Microinjection of wild-type 
VAMP(77-90), but not mutant peptides, inhibited catecholamine release from 
chromaffin cells monitored by carbon fibre amperometry. Pre-incubation of PC12 
pheochromocytoma cells with the irreversible calmodulin antagonist ophiobolin A 
inhibited Ca(2+)-dependent human growth hormone release in a permeabilized cell 
assay. Treatment of permeabilized cells with tetanus toxin light chain (TeNT) 
also suppressed secretion. In the presence of TeNT, exocytosis was restored by 
transfection of TeNT-resistant (Q(76)V, F(77)W) VAMP, but additional targeted 
mutations in VAMP(77-90) abolished its ability to rescue release. The 
calmodulin- and phospholipid-binding domain of VAMP 2 is thus required for 
Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis, possibly to regulate SNARE complex assembly.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdf404
PMCID: PMC126150
PMID: 12145198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]