1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):43724-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205795200. Epub
2002  Sep 9.

Reciprocal modulation between the alpha and beta 4 subunits of hSlo 
calcium-dependent potassium channels.

Jin P(1), Weiger TM, Levitan IB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia 19104, USA. pingjin@mail.med.upenn.edu

Large conductance Ca(2+)-dependent potassium (K(Ca) or maxi K) channels are 
composed of a pore-forming alpha subunit and an auxiliary beta subunit. We have 
shown that the brain-specific beta4 subunit modulates the voltage dependence, 
activation kinetics, and toxin sensitivity of the hSlo channel (Weiger, T. M., 
Holmqvist, M. H., Levitan, I. B., Clark, F. T., Sprague, S., Huang, W. J., Ge, 
P., Wang, C., Lawson, D., Jurman, M. E., Glucksmann, M. A., Silos-Santiago, I., 
DiStefano, P. S., and Curtis, R. (2000) J. Neurosci. 20, 3563-3570). We 
investigated here the N-linked glycosylation of the beta4 subunit and its effect 
on the modulation of the hSlo alpha subunit. When expressed alone in HEK293 
cells, the beta4 subunit runs as a single molecular weight band on an SDS gel. 
However, when coexpressed with the hSlo alpha subunit, the beta4 subunit appears 
as two different molecular weight bands. Enzymatic deglycosylation or mutation 
of the N-linked glycosylation residues in beta4 converts it to a single lower 
molecular weight band, even in the presence of the hSlo alpha subunit, 
suggesting that the beta4 subunit can be present as an immature, core 
glycosylated form and a mature, highly glycosylated form. Blockage of protein 
transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi compartment with brefeldin 
A abolishes the mature, highly glycosylated beta4 band. Glycosylation of the 
beta4 subunit is not required for its binding to the hSlo channel alpha subunit. 
It also is not necessary for cell membrane targeting of the beta4 subunit, as 
demonstrated by surface biotinylation experiments. However, the double 
glycosylation site mutant beta4 (beta4 N53A/N90A) protects the channel less 
against toxin blockade, as compared with the hSlo channel coexpressed with wild 
type beta4 subunit. Taken together, these data show that the pore-forming alpha 
subunit of the hSlo channel promotes N-linked glycosylation of its auxiliary 
beta4 subunit, and this in turn influences the modulation of the channel by the 
beta4 subunit.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205795200
PMID: 12223479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]