1. Haematologica. 2002 Oct;87(10):1068-73.

Co-segregation of thrombophilic disorders in factor V Leiden carriers; the 
contributions of factor VIII, factor XI, thrombin activatable fibrinolysis 
inhibitor and lipoprotein(a) to the absolute risk of venous thromboembolism.

Libourel EJ(1), Bank I, Meinardi JR, Baljé -Volkers CP, Hamulyak K, Middeldorp 
S, Koopman MM, van Pampus EC, Prins MH, Büller HR, van der Meer J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hemostasis, Thrombosis and Rheology, University Hospital 
Groningen, the Netherlands. e.j.libourel@int.azg.nl

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2002 Oct;87(10):1013.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The clinical expression of factor V Leiden varies 
widely within and between families and only a minority of carriers will ever 
develop venous thromboembolism. Co-segregation of thrombophilic disorders is a 
possible explanation. Our aim was to assess the contributions of high levels of 
factor VIII:C, factor XI:C, thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) 
and lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a)) to the risk of venous thromboembolism in factor V 
Leiden carriers.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Levels of the four proteins were measured, in addition to 
tests of deficiencies for antithrombin, protein C and protein S, and the 
prothrombin G20210A mutation, in 153 factor V Leiden carriers, derived from a 
family cohort study. The (adjusted) relative risk and absolute risk of venous 
thromboembolism for high levels of each protein were calculated.
RESULTS: Of carriers, 60% had one or more concomitant thrombophilic disorders. 
Crude odds ratios (95% CI) of venous thromboembolism for high protein levels 
were: 3.2 (1.1-9.3) (factor VIII:C); 1.7 (0.6-4.9) (factor XI:C); 3.0 (1.1-8.2) 
(TAFI); and 1.9 (0.7-5.7) (Lp(a)). Adjusted for age, sex, other concomitant 
thrombophilic disorders and exogenous risk factors, the odds ratio for venous 
thromboembolism were 2.7 (0.8-8.7) for high factor VIII:C levels and 1.8 
(0.6-5.3) for high TAFI levels. Annual incidences in subgroups of carriers were 
0.35% (0.09-0.89), 0.44% (0.05-1.57) and 0.94% (0.35-2.05) for concomitance of 
high levels of factor VIII:C, TAFI and both, respectively, as compared to 0.09% 
(0.00-0.48) in single factor V Leiden carriers and 1.11% (0.30-2.82) for other 
concomitant disorders.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: High levels of factor VIII:C and TAFI, in 
contrast with factor XI:C and Lp(a), are mild risk factors for venous 
thromboembolism, and substantially contribute to the risk of venous 
thromboembolism in factor V Leiden carriers. Our data support the hypothesis 
that the clinical expression of factor V Leiden depends on co-segregation of 
thrombophilic disorders.

PMID: 12368162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]