1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2341-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M211131200. Epub 2002
 Nov 13.

Interaction of nitric oxide with human heme oxygenase-1.

Wang J(1), Lu S, MoÃ«nne-Loccoz P, Ortiz de Montellano PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San 
Francisco, 94143-0446, USA.

NO and CO may complement each other as signaling molecules in some physiological 
situations. We have examined the binding of NO to human heme oxygenase-1 
(hHO-1), an enzyme that oxidizes heme to biliverdin, CO, and free iron, to 
determine whether inhibition of hHO-1 by NO can contribute to the signaling 
interplay of NO and CO. An Fe(3+)-NO hHO-1-heme complex is formed with NO or the 
NO donors NOC9 or 2-(N,N-diethylamino)-diazenolate-2-oxide.sodium salt. 
Resonance Raman spectroscopy shows that ferric hHO-1-heme forms a 6-coordinated, 
low spin complex with NO. The nu(N-O) vibration of this complex detected by 
Fourier transform IR is only 4 cm(-1) lower than that of the corresponding 
metmyoglobin (met-Mb) complex but is broader, suggesting a greater degree of 
ligand conformational freedom. The Fe(3+)-NO complex of hHO-1 is much more 
stable than that of met-Mb. Stopped-flow studies indicate that k(on) for 
formation of the hHO-1-heme Fe(3+)-NO complex is approximately 50-times faster, 
and k(off) 10 times slower, than for met-Mb, resulting in K(d) = 1.4 microm for 
NO. NO thus binds 500-fold more tightly to ferric hHO-1-heme than to met-Mb. The 
hHO-1 mutations E29A, G139A, D140A, S142A, G143A, G143F, and K179A/R183A do not 
significantly diminish the tight binding of NO, indicating that NO binding is 
not highly sensitive to mutations of residues that normally stabilize the distal 
water ligand. As expected from the K(d) value, the enzyme is reversibly 
inhibited upon exposure to pathologically, and possibly physiologically, 
relevant concentrations of NO. Inhibition of hHO-1 by NO may contribute to the 
pleiotropic responses to NO and CO.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M211131200
PMID: 12433915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]