1. Anticancer Drugs. 2003 Feb;14(2):125-35. doi:
10.1097/00001813-200302000-00006.

Clinical pharmacology and pharmacogenetics of flavopiridol 1-h i.v. infusion in 
patients with refractory neoplasms.

Zhai S(1), Sausville EA, Senderowicz AM, Ando Y, Headlee D, Messmann RA, Arbuck 
S, Murgo AJ, Melillo G, Fuse E, Figg WD.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Research Core, Medical Oncology Clinical Research Unit 
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A phase I trial of flavopiridol administered as a 1-h i.v. infusion schedule was 
explored. Fifty-five patients were treated with flavopiridol at doses ranging 
from 12 to 78 mg/m2 daily for 5, 3 and 1 day every 3 weeks. Pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic analysis was performed together with analysis of a promoter 
polymorphism of the UGT1A1 gene. Peak concentrations and areas under the 
time-concentration curve of flavopiridol were linear within the doses studied. 
Estimated clearance was 13.8+/-4.9 l/h/m2 (mean+/-SD), volume of distribution at 
steady-state was 64.9+/-43.4 l/m2 and elimination half-life was 5.2+/-4.9 h. 
Forty-nine of the 55 patients were genotyped for the promoter polymorphism. We 
found five (10%) homozygous and 11 (22%) heterozygous patients for UGT1A1*28, 
which alters the reference sequence (TA)6TAA to the variant (TA)7TAA by an extra 
TA dinucleotide insertion within the TATA box. One patient was heterozygous for 
the sequence of five TA repeats, (TA)5TAA. The remaining 32 patients did not 
have the UGT1A1*28 allele (homozygous for the reference sequence). Associations 
of the UGT1A1 promoter genotype with either the pharmacokinetic parameters or 
diarrhea (occurrence and severity) were not observed in this study. The 
pharmacogenetic analyses did not support that the UGT1A1 promoter polymorphism 
could affect flavopiridol pharmacokinetics and alter the incidence and severity 
of diarrhea induced by the drug.

Copyright 2003 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/00001813-200302000-00006
PMID: 12569299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]