1. J Cell Sci. 2003 Jun 1;116(Pt 11):2213-22. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00440.

A tyrosine-based sorting signal is involved in connexin43 stability and gap 
junction turnover.

Thomas MA(1), Zosso N, Scerri I, Demaurex N, Chanson M, Staub O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Lausanne, 1005 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The gap junction protein connexin43 is known to have a rapid turnover, involving 
degradation by both the proteasomal and lysosomal systems, but the structural 
features of connexin43 that govern these actions are not known. The connexin43 
C-terminal sequence contains a proline-rich region corresponding to the 
consensus of a protein-protein interaction PY-motif (xPPxY), and an overlapping 
putative tyrosine-based sorting signal (Yxxphi; =hydrophobic), known to play a 
role in the intracellular trafficking of many membrane proteins. As both motifs 
may control turnover of connexin43, we used a combination of metabolic 
radiolabelling, immuno-precipitation and functional assays to determine the 
possible role of these motifs in controlling degradation of human connexin43 
expressed in SKHep1 cells. Mutation V289D in the tyrosine-based sorting motif 
increased the steady-state pool of connexin43 by approximately 3.5-fold, while 
mutation P283L in the PY-motif produced a comparatively modest augmentation 
(1.7-fold). No additive effect was observed when the overlapping tyrosine was 
mutated. In pulse-chase experiments, the Y286A substitution increased the 
half-life of connexin43 from 2 to 6 hours, indicating that the increased 
steady-state levels reflected reduced protein degradation. Moreover, expression 
at the junctional membrane, as well as gap junction-mediated intercellular 
communication (GJC), were nearly abolished by lysosomal inhibitors and Brefeldin 
A in cells expressing wild-type connexin43, but were unaffected in the tyrosine 
mutant. These results provide strong evidence that the tyrosine-based motif of 
human connexin43 is a prime determinant controlling connexin43 stability, and 
consequently GJC, by targeting connexin43 for degradation in the 
endocytic/lysosomal compartment.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00440
PMID: 12730291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]