1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2004 May 1;12(9):2021-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2004.02.037.

Exploring distal regions of the A3 adenosine receptor binding site: sterically 
constrained N6-(2-phenylethyl)adenosine derivatives as potent ligands.

Tchilibon S(1), Kim SK, Gao ZG, Harris BA, Blaustein JB, Gross AS, Duong HT, 
Melman N, Jacobson KA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health, and Human Services, Bethesda, MD 20892-0810, USA.

We synthesized phenyl ring-substituted analogues of 
N(6)-(1S,2R)-(2-phenyl-1-cyclopropyl)adenosine, which is highly potent in 
binding to the human A(3)AR with a Ki value of 0.63 nM. The effects of these 
structural changes on affinity at human and rat adenosine receptors and on 
intrinsic efficacy at the hA(3)AR were measured. A 3-nitrophenyl analogue was 
resolved chromatographically into pure diastereomers, which displayed 10-fold 
stereoselectivity in A(3)AR binding in favor of the 1S,2R isomer. A molecular 
model defined a hydrophobic region (Phe168) in the putative A(3)AR binding site 
around the phenyl moiety. A heteroaromatic group (3-thienyl) could substitute 
for the phenyl moiety with retention of high affinity of A(3)AR binding. Other 
related N(6)-substituted adenosine derivatives were included for comparison. 
Although the N(6)-(2-phenyl-1-cyclopropyl) derivatives were full A(3)AR 
agonists, several other derivatives had greatly reduced efficacy. 
N(6)-Cyclopropyladenosine was an A(3)AR antagonist, and adding either one or two 
phenyl rings at the 2-position of the cyclopropyl moiety restored efficacy. 
N(6)-(2,2-Diphenylethyl)adenosine was an A(3)AR antagonist, and either adding a 
bond between the two phenyl rings (N(6)-9-fluorenylmethyl) or shortening the 
ethyl moiety (N(6)-diphenylmethyl) restored efficacy. A QSAR study of the N(6) 
region provided a model that was complementary to the putative A(3)AR binding 
site in a rhodopsin-based homology model. Thus, a new series of high-affinity 
A(3)AR agonists and related nucleoside antagonists was explored through both 
empirical and theoretical approaches.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2004.02.037
PMCID: PMC4667970
PMID: 15080906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]