1. Biochemistry. 2004 Apr 27;43(16):4810-8. doi: 10.1021/bi036135+.

Effects of Parkinson's disease-linked mutations on the structure of 
lipid-associated alpha-synuclein.

Bussell R Jr(1), Eliezer D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Molecular Medicine, Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Alpha-synuclein (alphaS) is a lipid-binding synaptic protein of unknown function 
that is found in an aggregated amyloid fibril form in the intraneuronal Lewy 
body deposits that are a defining characteristic of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Although intrinsically unstructured when free in solution, alphaS adopts a 
highly helical conformation in association with lipid membranes or membrane 
mimetic detergent micelles. Two mutations in the alphaS gene have been linked to 
early onset autosomal dominant hereditary forms of PD, and have been shown to 
affect the aggregation kinetics of the protein in vitro. We have used 
high-resolution NMR spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and limited proteolysis to 
investigate the effects of these PD-linked mutations on the helical structure 
adopted by alphaS in the lipid or detergent micelle-bound form. We show that 
neither the A53T nor the A30P mutation has a significant effect on the structure 
of the folded protein, although the A30P mutation may cause a minor perturbation 
in the helical structure around the site of the mutation. The A30P, but not the 
A53T, mutation also appears to decrease the affinity of the protein for lipid 
surfaces, possibly by perturbing the nascent helical structure of the free 
protein. The potential implications of these results for the role of alphaS in 
PD are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi036135+
PMID: 15096050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]