1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Jun 1;1699(1-2):173-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2004.02.015.

Effects of mutagenesis of residue 221 on the properties of bacterial and 
mitochondrial elongation factor EF-Tu.

Hunter SE(1), Spremulli LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lineberger Cancer Research Center, University of 
North Carolina, Campus Box 3290, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3290, USA.

During protein biosynthesis, elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) delivers 
aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) to the A-site of ribosomes. This factor is highly 
conserved throughout evolution. However, several key residues differ between 
bacterial and mammalian mitochondrial EF-Tu (EF-Tu(mt)). One such residue is 
Ser221 (Escherichia coli numbering). This residue is conserved as a Ser or Thr 
in the bacterial factors but is present as Pro269 in EF-Tu(mt). Pro269 reorients 
the loop containing this residue and shifts the adjoining beta-strand in 
EF-Tu(mt) compared to that of E. coli EF-Tu potentially altering the binding 
pocket for the acceptor stem of the aa-tRNA. Pro269 was mutated to a serine 
residue (P269S) in EF-Tu(mt). For comparison, the complementary mutation was 
created at Ser221 in E. coli EF-Tu (S221P). The E. coli EF-Tu S221P variant is 
poorly expressed in E. coli and the majority of the molecules fail to fold into 
an active conformation. In contrast, EF-Tu(mt) P269S is expressed to a high 
level in E. coli. When corrected for the percentage of active molecules, both 
variants function as effectively as their respective wild-type factors in 
ternary complex formation using E. coli Phe-tRNA(Phe) and Cys-tRNA(Cys). They 
are also active in A-site binding and in vitro translation assays with E. coli 
Phe-tRNA(Phe). In addition, both variants are as active as their respective 
wild-type factors in ternary complex formation, A-site binding and in vitro 
translation assays using mitochondrial Phe-tRNA(Phe).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2004.02.015
PMID: 15158725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]