1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):C1067-76. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00438.2003. Epub 2004 Jun 16.

pH-dependent modulation of Kv1.3 inactivation: role of His399.

Somodi S(1), Varga Z, Hajdu P, Starkus JG, Levy DI, Gáspár R, Panyi G.

Author information:
(1)University of Debrecen, Medical and Health Science Center, Department of 
Biophysics and Cell Biology, Nagyerdei krt. 98, H-4012 Debrecen, Hungary.

The Kv1.3 K(+) channel lacks N-type inactivation, but during prolonged 
depolarized periods it inactivates via the slow (P/C type) mechanism. It bears a 
titratable histidine residue in position 399 (equivalent of Shaker 449), a site 
known to influence the rate of slow inactivation. As opposed to several other 
voltage-gated K(+) channels, slow inactivation of Kv1.3 is slowed when 
extracellular pH (pH(o)) is lowered under physiological conditions. Our findings 
are as follows. First, when His399 was mutated to a lysine, arginine, leucine, 
valine or tyrosine, extracellular acidification (pH 5.5) accelerated 
inactivation reminiscent of other Kv channels. Second, inactivation of the 
wild-type channel was accelerated by low pH(o) when the ionic strength of the 
external solution was raised. Inactivation of the H399K mutant was also 
accelerated by high ionic strength at pH 7.35 but not the inactivation of H399L. 
Third, after the external application of blocking barium ions, recovery of the 
wild-type current during washout was slower in low pH(o). Fourth, the 
dissociation rate of Ba(2+) was pH insensitive for both H399K and H399L. 
Furthermore, Ba(2+) dissociation rates were equal for H399K and the wild type at 
pH 5.5 and were equal for H399L and the wild type at pH 7.35. These observations 
support a model in which the electric field of the protonated histidines creates 
a potential barrier for potassium ions just outside the external mouth of the 
pore that hinders their exit from the binding site controlling inactivation. In 
Kv1.3, this effect overrides the generally observed speeding of slow 
inactivation when pH(o) is reduced.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00438.2003
PMID: 15201143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]