1. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004 Aug;60(Pt 8):1476-80. doi: 
10.1107/S0907444904013241. Epub 2004 Jul 21.

Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic analysis of endonuclease VIII 
in its uncomplexed form.

Golan G(1), Zharkov DO, Fernandes AS, Zaika E, Kycia JH, Wawrzak Z, Grollman AP, 
Shoham G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 91904, 
Israel.

The Escherichia coli DNA repair enzyme endonuclease VIII (EndoVIII or Nei) 
excises oxidized pyrimidines from damaged DNA substrates. It overlaps in 
substrate specificity with endonuclease III and may serve as a back-up for this 
enzyme in E. coli. The three-dimensional structure of Nei covalently complexed 
with DNA has been recently determined, revealing the critical amino-acid 
residues required for DNA binding and catalytic activity. Based on this 
information, several site-specific mutants of the enzyme have been tested for 
activity against various substrates. Although the crystal structure of the 
DNA-bound enzyme has been fully determined, the important structure of the free 
enzyme has not previously been analyzed. In this report, the crystallization and 
preliminary crystallographic characterization of DNA-free Nei are described. 
Four different crystal habits are reported for wild-type Nei and two of its 
catalytic mutants. Despite being crystallized under different conditions, all 
habits belong to the same crystal form, with the same space group (I222) and a 
similar crystallographic unit cell (average parameters a = 57.7, b = 80.2, c = 
169.7 A). Two of these crystal habits, I and IV, appear to be suitable for full 
crystallographic analysis. Crystal habit I was obtained by vapour diffusion 
using PEG 8000, glycerol and calcium acetate. Crystal habit IV was obtained by a 
similar method using PEG 400 and magnesium chloride. Both crystals are 
mechanically strong and stable in the X-ray beam once frozen under cold nitrogen 
gas. A full diffraction data set has recently been collected from a wild-type 
Nei crystal of habit I (2.6 A resolution, 85.2% completeness, Rmerge = 9.8%). 
Additional diffraction data were collected from an Nei-R252A crystal of habit IV 
(2.05 A resolution, 99.9% completeness, Rmerge = 6.0%) and an Nei-E2A crystal of 
habit IV (2.25 A resolution, 91.7% completeness, Rmerge = 6.2%). These 
diffraction data were collected at 95-100 K using a synchrotron X-ray source and 
a CCD area detector. All three data sets are currently being used to obtain 
crystallographic phasing via molecular-replacement techniques.

DOI: 10.1107/S0907444904013241
PMID: 15272182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]