1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 15;130A(1):40-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30023.

Significant association between nonsyndromic oral clefts and arylhydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT).

Kayano S(1), Suzuki Y, Kanno K, Aoki Y, Kure S, Yamada A, Matsubara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.

The etiology of nonsyndromic oral clefts (cleft lip, cleft palate, or cleft lip 
and palate) is still controversial, but is considered to involve both genetic 
and environmental factors. One of suspected environmental factors is 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) found in tobacco, herbicides, 
contaminated soil, and food. TCDD administered during organogenesis in mice 
causes a high incidence of CP in fetuses. There is ample evidence that aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT), and cytochrome P450 
1A1 (CYP1A1) are involved in TCDD metabolism. We assessed whether there is any 
association in the Japanese population of nonsyndromic oral clefts with single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the AHR, ARNT, and CYP1A1 genes using 
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) and case-control study. We identified and 
investigated three SNPs in ARNT; 567G/C (V189V), IVS12-19T/G, and 2117C/T 
(P706L). Two amino acid substitutions, R554L in AHR and I462V in CYP1A1, were 
also investigated. In the TDT, the C allele of ARNT 567G/C was preferentially 
transmitted to patients (P = 0.033). When a haplotype consisting of 567G/C and 
IVS12-19T/G in ARNT was considered, the preferential transmission of the CT 
(567C-IVS12-19T) haplotype was observed (P = 0.0012). In a case-control study, a 
significant association of IVS12-19T/G in ARNT was observed (P = 0.021). The 
SNPs studied in AHR and CYP1A1 were not associated with the disease. Our results 
suggest that ARNT is involved in the development of nonsyndromic oral clefts in 
the Japanese population.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30023
PMID: 15368494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]