1. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Nov 1;300(2):283-96. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.07.029.

PAP-1, the mutated gene underlying the RP9 form of dominant retinitis 
pigmentosa, is a splicing factor.

Maita H(1), Kitaura H, Keen TJ, Inglehearn CF, Ariga H, Iguchi-Ariga SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

PAP-1 is an in vitro phosphorylation target of the Pim-1 oncogene. Although 
PAP-1 binds to Pim-1, it is not a substrate for phosphorylation by Pim-1 in 
vivo. PAP-1 has recently been implicated as the defective gene in RP9, one type 
of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). However, RP9 is a rare 
disease and only two missense mutations have been described, so the report of a 
link between PAP-1 and RP9 was tentative. The precise cellular role of PAP-1 was 
also unknown at that time. We now report that PAP-1 localizes in nuclear 
speckles containing the splicing factor SC35 and interacts directly with another 
splicing factor, U2AF35. Furthermore, we used in vitro and in vivo splicing 
assays to show that PAP-1 has an activity, which alters the pattern of pre-mRNA 
splicing and that this activity is dependent on the phosphorylation state of 
PAP-1. We used the same splicing assay to examine the activities of two mutant 
forms of PAP-1 found in RP9 patients. The results showed that while one of the 
mutations, H137L, had no effect on splicing activity compared with that of 
wild-type PAP-1, the other, D170G, resulted in both a defect in splicing 
activity and a decreased proportion of phosphorylated PAP-1. The D170G mutation 
may therefore cause RP by altering splicing of retinal genes through a decrease 
in PAP-1 phosphorylation. These results demonstrate that PAP-1 has a role in 
pre-mRNA splicing and, given that three other splicing factors have been 
implicated in adRP, this finding provides compelling further evidence that PAP-1 
is indeed the RP9 gene.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.07.029
PMID: 15474994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]