1. Hum Mutat. 2005 Mar;25(3):239-47. doi: 10.1002/humu.20131.

cblE type of homocystinuria due to methionine synthase reductase deficiency: 
functional correction by minigene expression.

Zavadáková P(1), Fowler B, Suormala T, Novotna Z, Mueller P, Hennermann JB, 
Zeman J, Vilaseca MA, Vilarinho L, Gutsche S, Wilichowski E, Horneff G, Kozich 
V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2005 Dec;26(6):590.

The cblE type of homocystinuria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by 
impaired reductive activation of methionine synthase. Although earlier 
biochemical studies proposed that the methionine synthase enzyme might be 
activated by two different reducing systems, mutations were reported in only the 
methionine synthase reductase gene (MTRR) in cblE patients. The pathogenicity of 
MTRR mutations, however, has not yet been tested functionally. We report on nine 
patients of European origin affected by the cblE type of homocystinuria. They 
presented between 2 weeks and 3 years of age (median age 4 weeks) with anemia, 
which was macrocytic in only three patients, and with neurological involvement 
in all but two cases. Bone marrow examination performed in seven patients showed 
megaloblastic changes in all but one of them. All patients exhibited moderate to 
severe hyperhomocysteinemia (median plasma total homocysteine [Hcy] 92 mumol/L, 
range 44-169), while clearly reduced methionine was observed only in four cases. 
Pathogenic mutations were identified in both parental alleles of the MTRR gene 
in all patients. Five known (c.903+469T>C, c.1361C>T, c.1459G>A, 
c.1557-4_1557+3del7, and c.1622_1623dupTA) and three novel mutations (c.7A>T, 
c.1573C>T, and c.1953-6_1953-2del5) were detected. Importantly, transfection of 
fibroblasts of cblE patients with a wild-type MTRR minigene expression construct 
resulted in a significant approximately four-fold increase of methionine 
synthesis, indicating correction of the enzyme defect. Our study shows a link 
between a milder predominantly hematological presentation and homozygosity for 
the c.1361C>T mutation, but no other obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. The 
identification of mutations in the MTRR gene, together with restoration of 
methionine synthesis following MTRR minigene expression in cblE cells confirms 
that this disease is caused by defects in the MTRR gene.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20131
PMID: 15714522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]