1. Int J Legal Med. 2006 May;120(3):129-37. doi: 10.1007/s00414-005-0019-0. Epub 
2005 Jul 13.

Sudden infant death syndrome and long QT syndrome: an epidemiological and 
genetic study.

Wedekind H(1), Bajanowski T, Friederich P, Breithardt G, Wülfing T, Siebrands C, 
Engeland B, Mönnig G, Haverkamp W, Brinkmann B, Schulze-Bahr E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, University of Münster, Münster, 
Germany. dr.h.wedekind@bernward-khs.de

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is a frequent cause of death among infants. 
The etiology of SIDS is unknown and several theories, including fatal 
ventricular arrhythmias, have been suggested. We performed an epidemiological 
and genetic investigation of SIDS victims to estimate the presence of inherited 
long QT syndrome (LQTS) as a contributor for SIDS. Forty-one consecutively 
collected and unrelated SIDS cases were characterized by clinical and 
epidemiological criteria. We performed a comprehensive gene mutation screening 
with single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and sequencing techniques 
of the most relevant LQTS genes to assess mutation frequencies. In vitro 
characterization of identified mutants was subsequently performed by 
heterologous expression experiments in Chinese hamster ovary cells and in 
Xenopus laevis oocytes. A positive family history for LQTS was suspected by mild 
prolonged Q-T interval in family members in 2 of the 41 SIDS cases (5%). In 
neither case, a family history of sudden cardiac death was present nor a 
mutation could be identified after thorough investigation. In another SIDS case, 
a heterozygous missense mutation (H105L) was identified in the N-terminal region 
of the KCNQ1 (LQTS 1) gene. Despite absence of this mutation in the general 
population and a high conservational degree of the residue H105 during 
evolution, electrophysiological investigations failed to show a significant 
difference between wild-type and KCNQ1(H105L)/minK-mediated I(Ks) currents. Our 
data suggest that a molecular diagnosis of SIDS related to LQTS genes is rare 
and that, even when an ion channel mutation is identified, this should be 
regarded with caution unless a pathophysiological relationship between SIDS and 
the electrophysiological characterization of the mutated ion channel has been 
demonstrated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00414-005-0019-0
PMID: 16012827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]