1. Atherosclerosis. 2005 Sep;182(1):129-34. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.02.001. Epub 2005 Feb 26.

The -514C/T polymorphism of the hepatic lipase gene significantly modulates the 
HDL-cholesterol response to statin treatment.

Lahoz C(1), Peña R, Mostaza JM, Laguna F, García-Iglesias MF, Taboada M, Pintó 
X; RAP Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Arteriosclerosis, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, C/Sinesio Delgado 
10, 28029 Madrid, Spain. clahoz.hciii@salud.madrid.org

A number of studies have evaluated the effect of the -514C/T polymorphism of the 
hepatic lipase (HL) gene on concentration and composition of the plasma 
lipoproteins. However, the effect of this polymorphism on the response to 
hypolipaemic treatment has not been addressed. We evaluated the effect of this 
polymorphism on baseline lipids and lipoproteins and their response to treatment 
comprising 20mg/day pravastatin for 3 months. The study was multi-centred, 
prospective and interventional in 236 hypercholesterolaemic subjects (mean age 
57.3 years; 45% males) from 21 Primary Health-care Centres. The lipid and 
genotype measurements were conducted centrally. The genotype distribution was 
60.2% homozygous for the C allele and 36.0% heterozygous. No significant 
differences in baseline lipid concentrations between the genotypes were 
observed, except that carriers of the T allele had higher concentrations of 
triglycerides (p=0.021). Post-pravastatin, concentrations of HDL-C increased by 
6.9% (95% CI: 2.9-10.8%) in those carrying the T allele with almost no change 
(0.8%) in the CC genotypes (95% CI: -2.3-4.0%) (p=0.019). The significance 
remained (p=0.014) following adjustment for other confounding factors (age, 
basal HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides). We conclude that the 
-514C/T polymorphism modulates significantly the HDL-C response to pravastatin, 
irrespective of the baseline lipoprotein concentrations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.02.001
PMID: 16115483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]