1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2005 Dec;37(12):843-50. doi: 
10.1111/j.1745-7270.2005.00113.x.

cDNA cloning, sequence analysis of the porcine LIM and cysteine-rich domain 1 
gene.

Wang J(1), Deng CY, Xiong YZ, Zuo B, Xing L, Li FE, Lei MG, Zheng R, Jiang SW.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, 
College of Animal Sciences, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, 
China.

LIM domain proteins are important regulators in cell growth, cell fate 
determination, cell differentiation and remodeling of the cell cytoskeleton by 
their interaction with various structural proteins, kinases and transcriptional 
regulators. Using molecular biology combined with in silico cloning, we have 
cloned the complete coding sequence of pig LIM and the cysteine-rich domain 1 
gene (LMCD1) which encodes a 363 amino acid protein. The estimated molecular 
weight of the LMCD1 protein is 40,788 Da with a pI of 8.39. It was found to be 
highly expressed in both skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle. Alignment analysis 
revealed that the deduced protein sequence shares 86%, 91% and 93% homology with 
that of its human, mouse and rat counterparts, respectively. The LMCD1 protein 
was predicted by bioinformatics software to contain a novel cysteine-rich domain 
in the N-terminal region, two LIM domains in the C-terminal region, nine 
potential protein kinase C phosphorylation sites, seven casein kinase II 
phosphorylation sites, a tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site, seven 
N-glycosylation and N-myristoylation sites and a single potential 
N-glycosylation site, which is similar to the protein's human counterpart. 
Phylogenetic tree was constructed by aligning the amino acid sequences of the 
LIM domain from different species. In addition, four base mutations were 
detected by comparing the sequences of Large White pigs with those of Chinese 
Meishan pigs. The G294A mutation site was confirmed by polymerase chain 
reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Its allele 
frequencies were studied in five pig breeds.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-7270.2005.00113.x
PMID: 16331329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]