1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 2;281(22):15287-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M600937200. Epub
2006  Mar 20.

Heavy and light chain variable single domains of an anti-DNA binding antibody 
hydrolyze both double- and single-stranded DNAs without sequence specificity.

Kim YR(1), Kim JS, Lee SH, Lee WR, Sohn JN, Chung YC, Shim HK, Lee SC, Kwon MH, 
Kim YS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ajou University School of Medicine, San 5, 
Woncheon-dong, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon 443-749, Korea.

Anti-DNA antibodies (Abs) are of biomedical interest because they are associated 
with autoimmune diseases in human and mice. Previously we isolated an anti-DNA 
monoclonal Ab 3D8 from an autoimmune-prone MRL-lpr/lpr mouse. Here we have 
characterized DNA binding kinetics and hydrolyzing activities of the recombinant 
single chain variable fragment (scFv) and the single variable domains of heavy 
chain (VH) and light chain (VL) using various single-stranded (ss) and 
double-stranded (ds) DNA substrates. All the Abs bound to both ds- and ssDNAs 
without significant preferential sequence specificity showing scFv higher 
affinities (KD = approximately 17-74 nm) than VH (KD = approximately 2.4-8.4 
microm) and VL (KD = approximately 3.2-72 microm), and efficiently hydrolyzed 
both ds- and ssDNAs without sequence specificity in a Mg2+-dependent manner, 
except for the poor activity of 3D8 scFv for ss-(dT)40. Elucidated crystal 
structure-based His to Ala mutations on the complementarity determining regions 
of VH (His-H35 --> Ala) and/or VL (His-L94 --> Ala) of 3D8 scFv significantly 
inhibited the catalytic activities, indicating that the His residues are 
involved in the catalytic mechanism of 3D8 scFv. However, the DNA hydrolyzing 
activities of single domain VH and VL were not affected by the mutations, 
indicative of their different catalytic mechanisms from that of 3D8 scFv. Our 
results demonstrate single domain Abs with DNase activities for the first time, 
which might provide new insights into substrate recognition and catalytic 
mechanisms of anti-DNA Abs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M600937200
PMID: 16551636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]