1. J Korean Med Sci. 2006 Jun;21(3):385-90. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2006.21.3.385.

Non-cancer diseases of Korean atomic bomb survivors in residence at Hapcheon, 
Republic of Korea.

Ju YS(1), Jhun HJ, Kim JB, Kim JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Sacred Heart Hospital, 
Hallym University, Anyang, Korea.

Many Koreans, in addition to Japanese, were killed or injured by the atomic 
bombs detonated over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945. Our study examined 
noncancer diseases of Korean A-bomb survivors in residence at Hapcheon, Republic 
of Korea and evaluated whether they had significantly higher prevalence of 
noncancer diseases than non-exposed people. We evaluated a number of tests, 
including anthropometric measurements, blood pressure, blood chemistry, 
hepatitis B surface antigen, and urinalysis, of survivors (n=223) and controls 
(n=372). Univariate analysis revealed significantly lower fasting glucose and 
creatinine, and higher diastolic blood pressure, aspartate aminotransferase, 
alanine aminotransferase, and blood urea nitrogen levels in the survivors than 
in the controls. The calculation of crude prevalence ratios (PRs) revealed that 
A-bomb survivors had a significantly higher prevalence of hypertension (PR, 
1.16; 95% CI, 1.00-1.35) and chronic liver disease (2.20; 1.59-3.06) than 
controls. After adjusting for covariates (age, sex, body mass index, marital 
status, education, alcohol consumption, and smoking), A-bomb survivors had a 
significantly higher prevalence of hypertension (1.24; 1.06-1.44), chronic liver 
disease (2.07; 1.51-2.84), and hypercholesterolemia (1.79; 1.11-2.90) than 
controls. This study suggests that A-bomb exposure is associated with a higher 
prevalence of non-cancer diseases in Korean survivors.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2006.21.3.385
PMCID: PMC2729939
PMID: 16778377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]