1. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2006 Aug;50(8):769-74. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.200600020.

G1793A polymorphisms in the methylene-tetrahydrofolate gene: effect of folic 
acid on homocysteine levels.

Melo SS(1), Persuhn DC, Meirelles MS, Jordao AA, Vannucchi H.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Program, University of Vale do Itajaí, Itajaí, SC, Brazil.

Mutations or polymorphisms in the gene of the enzyme methylenetetrahydrofolate 
(MTHFR) are associated with hyperhomocysteinemia and possibly with an elevated 
risk for vascular diseases. A study was conducted on 83 individuals with type 2 
diabetes in order to determine the allelic and genotypic frequencies of the 
G1793A mutation and to assess the effect of folic acid supplementation on plasma 
homocysteine concentrations. The patients were attended by the Diabetes and 
Hypertension Program--Balneario Camboriu/SC and received daily supplements 
containing 1 mg of folic acid for 3 months. DNA was previously extracted from 
leukocytes and the G1793A mutation was detected by PCR-RFLP. Blood samples were 
collected during the basal period and after supplementation for the 
determination of homocysteine by HPLC, and of folic acid and vitamin B(12) by 
RIA. The allele frequency for the G1793A mutation was 3.01% and no homozygous 
individuals with mutant alleles were detected. Hyperhomocysteinemia was 
diagnosed in 27.71% of the patients, folic acid deficiency in 15.66%, and 
vitamin B(12) deficiency in 7.23%. Plasma homocysteine concentrations were 
inversely correlated with folic acid (r = -0.27, p = 0.01) and vitamin B(12) (r 
= -0.21; p = 0.05) concentrations. The individuals with a heterozygous genotype 
for the G1793A mutation showed borderlines or deficient values in folic acid and 
vitamin B(12) concentrations compared to individuals with a normal genotype. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia and the vitamin deficiencies presented by type 2 diabetic 
individuals, included with a heterozygous genotype for the G1793A mutation in 
the MTHFR gene, reached normal values by daily folic acid supplementation.

DOI: 10.1002/mnfr.200600020
PMID: 16865747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]