1. Transl Res. 2006 Oct;148(4):196-206. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2006.05.006.

Mixture models of serum iron measures in population screening for 
hemochromatosis and iron overload.

McLaren CE(1), Li KT, McLaren GD, Gordeuk VR, Snively BM, Reboussin DM, Barton 
JC, Acton RT, Dawkins FW, Harris EL, Eckfeldt JH, Moses GC, Adams PC.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Division, Department of Medicine, University of California, 
Irvine, CA 92697, USA. cmclaren@uci.edu

Homozygosity for the C282Y mutation of the hemochromatosis gene on chromosome 6p 
(HFE) is a common genetic trait that increases susceptibility to iron overload. 
The authors describe and apply methodology developed for the analysis of 
phenotypic and genotypic data from 46,136 non-Hispanic Caucasians, a subset of 
the multi-ethnic cohort enrolled in the Hemochromatosis and Iron Overload 
Screening (HEIRS) Study. For analysis of the distribution of transferrin 
saturation (TS), mixtures of normal distributions were considered and the 
expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm was applied for parameter estimation. 
Maximized log-likelihoods were compared, and significance was assessed by 
resampling. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values from the modeled 
subpopulations were compared with the actual observed genotypes for C282Y and 
H63D mutations in the HFE gene. A strong association between HFE genotype and TS 
subpopulations was found in these data collected from different geographic 
regions, confirming the external validity of the statistical approach when 
applied to population-based data. It was concluded that mixture modeling of 
phenotypic data may provide a clinical guide for screening with gender-specific 
thresholds to identify potential samples for genetic testing.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2006.05.006
PMID: 17002922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]