1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 24;103(43):15900-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0603808103. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Diversin regulates heart formation and gastrulation movements in development.

Moeller H(1), Jenny A, Schaeffer HJ, Schwarz-Romond T, Mlodzik M, Hammerschmidt 
M, Birchmeier W.

Author information:
(1)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 13092 
Berlin, Germany.

Canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling regulate crucial events in the 
development of vertebrates and invertebrates. In this work we show that 
vertebrate Diversin, a potential orthologue of Drosophila Diego, controls fusion 
of heart precursors and gastrulation movements in zebrafish embryogenesis. These 
events are regulated by noncanonical Wnt signaling, which is independent of 
beta-catenin. We found that Diversin directly interacts with Dishevelled and 
that this interaction is necessary and sufficient to mediate signals of the 
noncanonical Wnt pathway to downstream effectors like Rho family GTPases and Jun 
N-terminal kinase. The ankyrin repeats of Diversin are required for the 
interaction with Dishevelled, for the activation of noncanonical Wnt signaling, 
and for the biological responses. The mutation K446M in the DEP domain of 
vertebrate Dishevelled, which mimics a classical Drosophila loss of function 
mutation, prevents functional interaction with Diversin's ankyrin repeats. 
Diversin also affects planar cell polarity in Drosophila, which is controlled by 
the noncanonical Wnt signaling pathway. Our data thus demonstrate that Diversin 
and Dishevelled function together in a mutually dependent fashion in zebrafish 
gastrulation and organ formation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0603808103
PMCID: PMC1635100
PMID: 17032765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.