1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Dec 15;364(5):1073-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.10.002. Epub 
2006 Oct 4.

A mutation in the S-switch region of the Runt domain alters the dynamics of an 
allosteric network responsible for CBFbeta regulation.

Li Z(1), Lukasik SM, Liu Y, Grembecka J, Bielnicka I, Bushweller JH, Speck NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

The Runt domain is the DNA binding domain of the core binding factor (CBF) Runx 
subunits. The CBFs are transcription factors that play critical roles in 
hematopoiesis, bone, and neuron development in mammals. A common non-DNA binding 
CBFbeta subunit heterodimerizes with the Runt domain of the Runx proteins and 
allosterically regulates its affinity for DNA. Previous NMR dynamics studies 
suggested a model whereby CBFbeta allosterically regulates DNA binding by 
quenching conformational exchange in the Runt domain, particularly in the 
S-switch region and the betaE'-F loop. We sought to test this model, and to this 
end introduced all possible single amino acid substitutions into the S-switch 
region and the betaE'-F loop, and screened for mutations that enhanced 
DNA-binding. We demonstrate that one Runt domain mutant, R164N, binds both DNA 
and CBFbeta with higher affinity, but it is less sensitive to allosteric 
regulation by CBFbeta. Analysis of NMR relaxation data shows that the chemical 
exchange exhibited by the wild-type Runt domain is largely quenched by the R164N 
substitution. These data support a model in which the dynamic behavior of a 
network of residues connecting the CBFbeta and DNA binding sites on the Runt 
domain plays a critical role in the mechanism of allosteric regulation. This 
study provides an important functional link between dynamic behavior and protein 
allosteric function, consistent with results on other allosterically regulated 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.10.002
PMCID: PMC1783549
PMID: 17059830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]