1. J Biochem. 2007 Feb;141(2):173-80. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvm016. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Characterization of a major secretory protein in the cane toad (Bufo marinus) 
choroid plexus as an amphibian lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase.

Irikura D(1), Inui T, Beuckmann CT, Aritake K, Schreiber G, Miyano M, Inoue T, 
Urade Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 
Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

Here we report the enzymatic and ligand-binding properties of a major secretory 
protein in the choroid plexus of cane toad, Bufo marinus, whose protein is 
homologous with lipocalin-type prostaglandin (PG) D synthase (L-PGDS) and is 
recombinantly expressed in Xenopus A6 cells and Escherichia coli. The toad 
protein bound all-trans retinal, bile pigment, and thyroid hormones with high 
affinities (K(d)=0.17 to 2.00 microM). The toad protein also catalysed the 
L-PGDS activity, which was accelerated in the presence of GSH or DTT, similar to 
the mammalian enzyme. The K(m) value for PGH(2) (17 microM) of the toad protein 
was almost the same as that of rat L-PGDS (14 microM), whereas the turnover 
number (6 min(-1)) was approximately 28 fold lower than that of rat L-PGDS. 
Site-directed mutagenesis based on a modeled structure of the toad protein 
revealed that Cys(59) and Thr(61) residues were crucial for the PGDS activity. 
The quadruple Gly(39)Ser/Ala(75)Ser/Ser(140)Thr/Phe(142)Tyr mutant of the toad 
protein, resembling mouse L-PGDS, showed a 1.6 fold increase in the turnover 
number and a shift in the optimum pH for the PGDS activity from 9.0 to 8.5. Our 
results suggest that the toad protein is a prototype of L-PGDS with a highly 
functional ligand-binding pocket and yet with a primitive catalytic pocket.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvm016
PMID: 17167040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]