1. Synapse. 2007 Aug;61(8):606-14. doi: 10.1002/syn.20410.

Adenosine A2A receptor antagonists improve deficits in initiation of movement 
and sensory motor integration in the unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine rat model of 
Parkinson's disease.

Pinna A(1), Pontis S, Borsini F, Morelli M.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cagliari, CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Cagliari, Italy.

Evidence obtained in rodent and primate models of Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
preliminary clinical trials, indicates that adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists 
might represent a promising nondopaminergic therapeutic tool for the treatment 
of PD. Those studies demonstrated the ability of adenosine A(2A) receptor 
antagonists to potentiate l-dopa-mediated motor improvement, whereas very little 
is known about counteraction of specific motor deficits and on the effects of 
these compounds when administered alone. To this aim we evaluated the effects of 
different adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists on initiation of movement 
deficits, gait impairment and sensory-motor deficits, induced in rats by a 
unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesion of dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons. The 
following tests were used: (1) initiation time of stepping; (2) adjusting step 
(stepping with forelimb was measured as the forelimb was dragged laterally); (3) 
vibrissae-elicited forelimb placing (as index of sensory-motor integration 
deficits). Acute administration of the A(2A) receptor antagonists SCH 58261 (5 
mg/kg i.p.) and ST 1535 (20 mg/kg i.p.) similarly to l-dopa (6 mg/kg i.p.) 
counteracted the impairments in the initiation time of stepping test, in the 
adjusting step and in the vibrissae-elicited forelimb placing induced by the 
lesion. The intensity of the effect was l-dopa > SCH 58261 > ST 1535. The 
results provide the first evidence that blockade of A(2A) receptors is effective 
in antagonizing specific motor deficit induced by DA neuron degeneration, such 
as initiation of movement and sensory-motor integration deficits, even without 
l-dopa combined administration.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.20410
PMID: 17476684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]