1. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Aug;72(2):259-68. doi: 10.1124/mol.107.035840. Epub 2007
May  1.

APETx1 from sea anemone Anthopleura elegantissima is a gating modifier peptide 
toxin of the human ether-a-go-go- related potassium channel.

Zhang M(1), Liu XS, Diochot S, Lazdunski M, Tseng GN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, 1101 E. Marshall Street, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

We studied the mechanism of action and the binding site of APETx1, a peptide 
toxin purified from sea anemone, on the human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) 
channel. Similar to the effects of gating modifier toxins (hanatoxin and SGTx) 
on the voltage-gated potassium (Kv) 2.1 channel, APETx1 shifts the 
voltage-dependence of hERG activation in the positive direction and suppresses 
its current amplitudes elicited by strong depolarizing pulses that maximally 
activate the channels. The APETx1 binding site is distinctly different from that 
of a pore-blocking peptide toxin, BeKm-1. Mutations in the S3b region of hERG 
have dramatic impact on the responsiveness to APETx1: G514C potentiates whereas 
E518C abolishes the APETx1 effect. Restoring the negative charge at position 518 
(methanethiosulfonate ethylsulfonate modification of 518C) partially restores 
APETx1 responsiveness, supporting an electrostatic interaction between E518 and 
APETx1. Among the three hERG isoforms, hERG1 and hERG3 are equally responsive to 
APETx1, whereas hERG2 is insensitive. The key feature seems to be an arginine 
residue uniquely present at the 514-equivalent position in hERG2, where the 
other two isoforms possess a glycine. Our data show that APETx1 is a gating 
modifier toxin of the hERG channel, and its binding site shares characteristics 
with those of gating modifier toxin binding sites on other Kv channels.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.107.035840
PMID: 17473056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]