1. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 13;3(2):e1557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001557.

Higher infection of dengue virus serotype 2 in human monocytes of patients with 
G6PD deficiency.

Chao YC(1), Huang CS, Lee CN, Chang SY, King CC, Kao CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of 
China.

The prevalence of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is high in 
Asia. An ex vivo study was conducted to elucidate the association of G6PD 
deficiency and dengue virus (DENV) infection when many Asian countries are 
hyper-endemic. Human monocytes from peripheral mononuclear cells collected from 
12 G6PD-deficient patients and 24 age-matched controls were infected with one of 
two DENV serotype 2 (DENV-2) strains-the New Guinea C strain (from a case of 
dengue fever) or the 16681 strain (from a case of dengue hemorrhagic fever) with 
a multiplicity of infection of 0.1. The infectivity of DENV-2 in human monocytes 
was analyzed by flow cytometry. Experimental results indicated that the 
monocytes of G6PD-deficient patients exhibited a greater levels of infection 
with DENV-2 New Guinea C strain than did those in healthy controls 
[mean+/-SD:33.6%+/-3.5 (27.2% approximately 39.2%) vs 20.3%+/-6.2 (8.0% 
approximately 30.4%), P<0.01]. Similar observations were made of infection with 
the DENV-2 16681 strain [40.9%+/-3.9 (35.1% approximately 48.9%) vs 27.4%+/-7.1 
(12.3% approximately 37.1%), P<0.01]. To our knowledge, this study demonstrates 
for the first time higher infection of human monocytes in G6PD patients with the 
dengue virus, which may be important in increasing epidemiological transmission 
and perhaps with the potential to develop more severe cases pathogenically.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001557
PMCID: PMC2216061
PMID: 18270558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.