1. Endocr J. 2008 May;55(2):415-23. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.k07e-064. Epub 2008 Apr
1.

Thyrotropin receptor and thyroid transcription factor-1 genes variant in Chinese 
children with congenital hypothyroidism.

Yuan ZF(1), Mao HQ, Luo YF, Wu YD, Shen Z, Zhao ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health Care, The Children's Hospital of Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the mutation/variant of 
thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) genes in 
Chinese children with congenital hypothyroidism (CH). Seventy-nine and 
forty-nine Chinese children with CH were enrolled for molecular analysis of the 
TSHR gene and TTF-1 gene, respectively. One hundred normal children were 
evaluated as control. The coding regions of TSHR and TTF-1 genes were amplified 
by polymerase chain reaction and sequenced. Sequencing of the TSHR gene revealed 
a compound heterozygous variants (Pro52Thr/Val689Gly) and a heterozygous variant 
(Gly245Ser) in 2 of 79 patients. In 30 patients and 33 controls the normal 
cytosine at position 2181 in exon 10 of TSHR gene was replaced by a 
guanineCresulting in the replacement of Asp (727) by Glu. In 47 patients and 50 
controls, the normal thymidine at position 561 in exon 7 of TSHR gene was 
replaced by a cytosine. This substitution did not change the amino acid in 
position 187. Sequencing of the TTF-1 gene revealed no mutation or polymorphism 
in 49 patients and 100 controls. In conclusion, three heterozygous variants 
(Pro52Thr, Gly245Ser, Val689Gly) of TSHR gene were firstly detected in Chinese 
children with CH. There were polymorphisms in exon 10 at nucleotide 2181 (C/G) 
and in exon 7 at nucleotide 561 (T/C) in TSHR gene. No mutation or polymorphism 
was detected in the coding region of TTF-1 gene. The mutation/variant of TSHR 
and TTF-1 genes is relatively rare in Chinese children with CH.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.k07e-064
PMID: 18379122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]