1. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 5;7:51. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-51.

Transformation of MCF-10A cells by random mutagenesis with frameshift mutagen 
ICR191: a model for identifying candidate breast-tumor suppressors.

Zientek-Targosz H(1), Kunnev D, Hawthorn L, Venkov M, Matsui S, Cheney RT, Ionov 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New 
York 14263, USA. zient_targ@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Widely accepted somatic mutation theory of carcinogenesis states 
that mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in genomes of somatic 
cells is the cause of neoplastic transformation. Identifying frequent mutations 
in cancer cells suggests the involvement of mutant genes in carcinogenesis.
RESULTS: To develop an in vitro model for the analysis of genetic alterations 
associated with breast carcinogenesis, we used random mutagenesis and selection 
of human non-tumorigenic immortalized breast epithelial cells MCF-10A in 
tissue-culture conditions that mimic tumor environment. Random mutations were 
generated in MCF-10A cells by cultivating them in a tissue-culture medium 
containing the frameshift-inducing agent ICR191. The first selective condition 
we used to transform MCF1-10A cells was cultivation in a medium containing 
mutagen at a concentration that allowed cell replication despite p53 protein 
accumulation induced by mutagen treatment. The second step of selection was 
either cell cultivation in a medium with reduced growth-factor supply or in a 
medium that mimics a hypoxia condition or growing in soft agar. Using 
mutagenesis and selection, we have generated several independently derived 
cultures with various degrees of transformation. Gene Identification by 
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay Inhibition (GINI) analysis has identified the 
ICR191-induced frameshift mutations in the TP53, smoothelin, Ras association 
(RalGDS/AF-6) domain family 6 (RASSF6) and other genes in the transformed 
MCF-10A cells. The TP53 gene mutations resulting in the loss of protein 
expression had been found in all independently transformed MCF-10A cultures, 
which form large progressively growing tumors with sustained angiogenesis in 
nude mice.
CONCLUSION: Identifying genes containing bi-allelic ICR191-induced frameshift 
mutations in the transformed MCF-10A cells generated by random mutagenesis and 
selection indicates putative breast-tumor suppressors. This can provide a model 
for studying the role of mutant genes in breast carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-51
PMCID: PMC2430587
PMID: 18534021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]