1. J Gen Virol. 2008 Oct;89(Pt 10):2377-2387. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/004895-0.

Vaccinia virus protein C16 acts intracellularly to modulate the host response 
and promote virulence.

Fahy AS(1), Clark RH(1), Glyde EF(1), Smith GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, St 
Mary's Campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, UK.

The vaccinia virus (VACV) strain Western Reserve C16 protein has been 
characterized and its effects on virus replication and virulence have been 
determined. The C16L gene is present in the inverted terminal repeat and so is 
one of the few VACV genes that are diploid. The C16 protein is highly conserved 
between different VACV strains, and also in the orthopoxviruses variola virus, 
ectromelia virus, horsepox virus and cowpox virus. C16 is a 37.5 kDa protein, 
which is expressed early during infection and localizes to the cell nucleus and 
cytoplasm of infected and transfected cells. The loss of the C16L gene had no 
effect on virus growth kinetics but did reduce plaque size slightly. 
Furthermore, the virulence of a virus lacking C16L (vDeltaC16) was reduced in a 
murine intranasal model compared with control viruses and there were reduced 
virus titres from 4 days post-infection. In the absence of C16, the recruitment 
of inflammatory cells in the lung and bronchoalveolar lavage was increased early 
after infection (day 3) and more CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells expressed the CD69 
activation marker. Conversely, late after infection with vDeltaC16 (day 10) 
there were fewer T cells remaining, indicating more rapid clearance of 
infection. Collectively, these data indicate that C16 diminishes the immune 
response and is an intracellular immunomodulator.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/004895-0
PMCID: PMC2885005
PMID: 18796705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]