1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Dec;95(4):224-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.09.002. Epub 
2008 Oct 11.

Novel sequence variants of the alpha-galactosidase A gene in patients with Fabry 
disease.

Erdos M(1), Németh K, Tóth B, Constantin T, Rákóczi E, Ponyi A, Dajnoki A, 
Grubits J, Pintér I, Garzuly F, Hahn K, Bencsik K, Vécsei L, Fekete G, Maródi L.

Author information:
(1)Lysosomal Storage Disease Center, Department of Infectious and Pediatric 
Immunology, Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Nagyerdei 
krt. 98, Debrecen, Hungary.

We carried out molecular studies of 15 unrelated Hungarian families diagnosed 
with Fabry disease (FD). Genetic analysis of the alpha-galactosidase A gene was 
performed in 22 hemizygous males and 34 females. One of the female patients with 
severe disease phenotype showed homozygosity for the recurrent c.644A>G mutation 
due to parental consanguinity. The c.644A>G mutation that has previously been 
found mostly in patients with the cardiac variant of FD, was associated with 
renal but not cardiac involvement in this female and in two other family 
members. In nine families, eight novel sequence variants such as small deletions 
(c.363delT, c.477delT, c.746delAC) and single nucleotide changes (c.107T>C, 
c.493G>C, c.796G>T, c.866T>G, c.871G>A) were found in addition to six previously 
described private mutations. This report contributes to the identification of 
novel disease-causing mutations in FD, and increases our knowledge on 
demographics and molecular characteristics of this rare lysosomal storage 
disorder. This is the first comprehensive overview of molecular genetic features 
of Hungarian patients with FD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.09.002
PMID: 18849176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]