1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Nov 1;146A(21):2822-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32523.

Phenotypic consequences of a novel SCO2 gene mutation.

Verdijk RM(1), de Krijger R, Schoonderwoerd K, Tiranti V, Smeets H, Govaerts LC, 
de Coo R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, ErasmusMC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands. r.verdijk@erasmusmc.nl

SCO2 is a cytochrome c oxidase (COX) assembly gene. Mutations in the SCO2 gene 
have been associated with fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy. We report on 
the phenotype of a novel SCO2 mutation in two siblings with fatal infantile 
cardioencephalomyopathy. The index patient died of heart failure at 25 days of 
age. Muscle biopsy was performed for histology and biochemical study of the 
oxidative phosphorylation system complexes. The entire coding region of the SCO2 
gene was sequenced. Autopsy was performed on the index patient and on a female 
sibling delivered at 23 weeks of gestation following termination of pregnancy 
during which amniocentesis and genetic testing had been performed. Muscle biopsy 
and biochemical analysis of heart and skeletal muscle detected a severe isolated 
COX-IV deficiency. Pathologic findings in both patients confirmed hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Sequencing of the SCO2 gene showed compound heterozygous 
mutation; the common E140K mutation and a novel W36X nonsense mutation. Newborns 
with a combination of hypotonia and cardiomyopathy should be evaluated for 
multiple congenital anomaly syndromes, inborn errors of metabolism and 
mitochondrial derangements, and may require extensive diagnostic testing. 
Mutations in the SCO2 gene are a cause of prenatal-onset hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32523
PMID: 18924171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]