1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(22):7192-206. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn829. Epub
2008  Nov 12.

Functional characterization of alternatively spliced human SECISBP2 transcript 
variants.

Papp LV(1), Wang J, Kennedy D, Boucher D, Zhang Y, Gladyshev VN, Singh RN, 
Khanna KK.

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 
Herston, Queensland, Australia. Laurap@qimr.edu.au

Synthesis of selenoproteins depends on decoding of the UGA stop codon as the 
amino acid selenocysteine (Sec). This process requires the presence of a Sec 
insertion sequence element (SECIS) in the 3'-untranslated region of 
selenoprotein mRNAs and its interaction with the SECIS binding protein 2 (SBP2). 
In humans, mutations in the SBP2-encoding gene Sec insertion sequence binding 
protein 2 (SECISBP2) that alter the amino acid sequence or cause splicing 
defects lead to abnormal thyroid hormone metabolism. Herein, we present the 
first in silico and in vivo functional characterization of alternative splicing 
of SECISBP2. We report a complex splicing pattern in the 5'-region of human 
SECISBP2, wherein at least eight splice variants encode five isoforms with 
varying N-terminal sequence. One of the isoforms, mtSBP2, contains a 
mitochondrial targeting sequence and localizes to mitochondria. Using a 
minigene-based in vivo splicing assay we characterized the splicing efficiency 
of several alternative transcripts, and show that the splicing event that 
creates mtSBP2 can be modulated by antisense oligonucleotides. Moreover, we show 
that full-length SBP2 and some alternatively spliced variants are subject to a 
coordinated transcriptional and translational regulation in response to 
ultraviolet type A irradiation-induced stress. Overall, our data broadens the 
functional scope of a housekeeping protein essential to selenium metabolism.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn829
PMCID: PMC2602786
PMID: 19004874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]