1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2009 Feb;33(2):332-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00837.x. Epub 2008 Nov 19.

Characterization of a functional polymorphism in the 3' UTR of SLC6A4 and its 
association with drinking intensity.

Seneviratne C(1), Huang W, Ait-Daoud N, Li MD, Johnson BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of 
Virginia, 1670 Discovery Drive, Charlottesville, VA 22911, USA.

BACKGROUND: The propensity for severe drinking is hypothesized to be regulated 
by differential expression of serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) in the human 
brain. The SLC6A4 promoter region 5-HTTLPR has been examined previously as a 
candidate polymorphic variant associated with severe drinking. In this study, we 
investigated whether other SLC6A4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are 
associated with drinking intensity among treatment-seeking alcoholics and 
whether these polymorphic variants result in differential SLC6A4 expression 
levels.
METHODS: We analyzed associations of drinking intensity in 275 (78.5% male) 
treatment-seeking alcoholics of Caucasian and Hispanic origin, with 6 SLC6A4 
polymorphisms. Next, to examine the functionality of the SNP that showed a 
significant association with drinking intensity, we transfected the 2 alleles of 
rs1042173 into HeLa cell cultures and measured serotonin transporter mRNA and 
protein expression levels by using qRT-PCR and western blotting techniques.
RESULTS: One of the 6 polymorphisms we examined, rs1042173 in the 3' 
untranslated region (3'-UTR) of SLC6A4, showed a significant association with 
drinking intensity. The G allele carriers for rs1042173 were associated with 
significantly lower drinking intensity (p = 0.0034) compared to T-allele 
homozygotes. In HeLa cell cultures, the cells transfected with G allele showed a 
significantly higher mRNA and protein levels than the T allele-transfected 
cells.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the allelic variations of rs1042173 
affect drinking intensity in alcoholics possibly by altering serotonin 
transporter expression levels. This provides additional support to the 
hypothesis that SLC6A4 polymorphisms play an important role in regulating 
propensity for severe drinking.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2008.00837.x
PMCID: PMC2657929
PMID: 19032574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]