1. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005290. Epub 2009 Apr
24.

A partial structural and functional rescue of a retinitis pigmentosa model with 
compacted DNA nanoparticles.

Cai X(1), Nash Z, Conley SM, Fliesler SJ, Cooper MJ, Naash MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

Previously we have shown that compacted DNA nanoparticles can drive high levels 
of transgene expression after subretinal injection in the mouse eye. Here we 
delivered compacted DNA nanoparticles containing a therapeutic gene to the 
retinas of a mouse model of retinitis pigmentosa. Nanoparticles containing the 
wild-type retinal degeneration slow (Rds) gene were injected into the subretinal 
space of rds(+/-) mice on postnatal day 5. Gene expression was sustained for up 
to four months at levels up to four times higher than in controls injected with 
saline or naked DNA. The nanoparticles were taken up into virtually all 
photoreceptors and mediated significant structural and biochemical rescue of the 
disease without histological or functional evidence of toxicity. 
Electroretinogram recordings showed that nanoparticle-mediated gene transfer 
restored cone function to a near-normal level in contrast to transfer of naked 
plasmid DNA. Rod function was also improved. These findings demonstrate that 
compacted DNA nanoparticles represent a viable option for development of 
gene-based interventions for ocular diseases and obviate major barriers commonly 
encountered with non-viral based therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005290
PMCID: PMC2669177
PMID: 19390689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Mark J. Cooper is an 
employee of Copernicus Therapuetics and owns stock in the company.