1. Pharmacol Res. 2009 Nov;60(5):429-37. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.05.008. Epub
2009  Jun 2.

H(1) antihistamine drug promethazine directly blocks hERG K(+) channel.

Jo SH(1), Hong HK, Chong SH, Lee HS, Choe H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Kangwon 
National University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea. 
suhyunjo@kangwon.ac.kr

Promethazine is a phenothiazine derivative with antihistaminic (H(1)), sedative, 
antiemetic, anticholinergic, and antimotion sickness properties that can induce 
QT prolongation, which may lead to torsades de pointes. Since block of cardiac 
human ether-a-go-go-related gene (hERG) channels is one of the leading causes of 
acquired long QT syndrome, we investigated the acute effects of promethazine on 
hERG channels to determine the electrophysiological basis for its proarrhythmic 
potential. Promethazine increased the action potential duration at 90% of 
repolarization (APD(90)) in a concentration-dependent manner, with an IC(50) of 
0.73microM when action potentials were elicited under current clamp in guinea 
pig ventricular myocytes. We examined the effects of promethazine on the hERG 
channels expressed in Xenopus oocytes and HEK293 cells using two-microelectrode 
voltage-clamp and patch-clamp techniques. Promethazine induced a 
concentration-dependent decrease of the current amplitude at the end of the 
voltage steps and hERG tail currents. The IC(50) of promethazine dependent hERG 
block in Xenopus oocytes decreased progressively relative to the degree of 
depolarization. The IC(50) for the promethazine-induced block of the hERG 
currents in HEK293 cells at 36 degrees C was 1.46microM at +20mV. Promethazine 
affected the channels in the activated and inactivated states but not in the 
closed states. The S6 domain mutations, Y652A and F656A partially attenuated 
(Y652A) or abolished (F656A) the hERG current block. These results suggest that 
promethazine is a blocker of the hERG channels, providing a molecular mechanism 
for the arrhythmogenic side effects during the clinical administration of 
promethazine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.05.008
PMID: 19497368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]