1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;17(1):203-11. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1031.

Delusion symptoms and response to antipsychotic treatment are associated with 
the 5-HT2A receptor polymorphism (102T/C) in Alzheimer's disease: a 3-year 
follow-up longitudinal study.

Angelucci F(1), Bernardini S, Gravina P, Bellincampi L, Trequattrini A, Di Iulio 
F, Vanni D, Federici G, Caltagirone C, Boss√π P, Spalletta G.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy. f.angelucci@hsantalucia.it

Although the etiology of psychotic symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) in 
Alzheimer's disease is still not known, alterations in serotonergic 
neurotransmission have been proposed. In a 3-year follow-up study, we evaluated 
the association of serotonin (5-HT) receptor 5-HT2a 102T/C polymorphism (allelic 
variants CC, CT and TT) with psychotic symptom severity and response to 
treatment with atypical antipsychotics (risperidone, olanzapine and quietapine) 
in 80 patients with a diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease. The 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) was administered to determine the frequency and 
severity (FxS) of psychotic and other behavioral symptoms. There was a 
significant difference in the NPI FxS delusion score among the three variants of 
the 5-HT2a 102T/C polymorphism, with patients carrying the TT genotype the most 
delusional during the follow-up period. In particular, NPI FxS delusion score 
was higher in TT than in CC genotype at year 2. Moreover, patients with delusion 
symptoms carrying the CT and TT genotypes were resistant to the treatment with 
antipsychotic drugs. Thus our study, although at preliminary level, suggests 
that the presence of T allele of the 102T/C polymorphism in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease is associated with both increased presence of delusion 
symptoms and treatment-resistance to second generation antipsychotic drugs.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1031
PMID: 19494443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]