1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2009 Dec;10(8):550-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2009.00515.x.
 Epub 2009 Jun 10.

An infant with combination gene mutations for Monogenic Diabetes of Youth (MODY) 
2 and 4, presenting with Diabetes Mellitus Requiring Insulin (DMRI) at 8 months 
of age.

Odem J(1), Munzinger E, Violand S, Van Morlan A, Rife D, Bachrach B.

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri Children's Hospital, Division of Pediatric 
Endocrinology, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2009 Dec;10(8):497-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-5448.2009.00560.x.

Monogenic Diabetes of Youth (MODY) is an autosomal dominant form of diabetes. 
[Fajans SS, et al. NEJM 2001: 345: 971-980.] There are at least six different 
types of MODY, all of which involve a loss of function gene mutation that 
results in diminished insulin production. MODY2 results from a mutation in the 
glucokinase gene (GCK), which decreases enzyme activity. MODY4 results from a 
mutation in the insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1) gene, a transcription factor 
which regulates the transcription of insulin. [Sperling M, et al. NEJM 2006: 
355: 507-510.] TJ presented at 8 months of age with diabetes mellitus requiring 
insulin (DMRI) with negative islet autoantibodies. She had a prolonged honeymoon 
period, as evidenced by her insulin requirement of 0.5 units/kg/day at three 
years of age. Genetic testing showed combination MODY2 (c.1019+18G >A) and MODY4 
(c.226G>A) gene mutations. The father was homozygous for MODY2 and the mother 
was heterozygous for MODY4. [Athena Diagnostics Evaluations "2007 # 839 - 
Monogenic Diabetes (MODY) Evaluation for the patient, the patient's father, and 
the patient's mother] Neither parent had diabetes mellitus. The clinical course 
and negative islet autoantibodies support that the combination of benign MODY2 
and MODY4 gene mutations in the parents resulted in DMRI in TJ.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2009.00515.x
PMID: 19515026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]