1. Anal Chem. 2009 Jul 1;81(13):5421-5. doi: 10.1021/ac900732w.

Measurement of deuterium-labeled phylloquinone in plasma by high-performance 
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry.

Fu X(1), Peterson JW, Hdeib M, Booth SL, Grusak MA, Lichtenstein AH, Dolnikowski 
GG.

Author information:
(1)Jean Mayer U.S. Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on 
Aging at Tufts University, 711 Washington Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, 
USA.

Phylloquinone (vitamin K(1)) is a lipophilic compound present in plasma at low 
concentrations, which presents technical challenges for determining its 
bioavailability or metabolic fate using stable isotopes. We developed a method 
to simultaneously measure unlabeled and deuterium-labeled phylloquinone 
concentrations in plasma specimens using high-performance liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry with atmospheric pressure chemical ionization 
(LC-APCI/MS). Phylloquinone was extracted from plasma using hexane, further 
purified by solid-phase extraction, and then quantified using high-performance 
liquid chromatography with an APCI/MS as a detector. Plotting the expected 
versus the measured amount of serial dilutions of either unlabeled or labeled 
phylloquinone gave correlation coefficients (R) of 0.999 for both compounds. The 
minimum detectable concentrations of unlabeled and labeled phylloquinone were 
0.05 and 0.08 pmol/injection, respectively. Pooled plasma samples spiked with 
between 0.5 and 32 nmol phylloquinone/L gave average recoveries of 96.7% with 
5.4% relative standard deviation (RSD) for unlabeled phylloquinone and 96.2% 
with 6.6% RSD for labeled phylloquinone. Plasma phylloquinone concentrations 
determined by LC-fluorescence and LC-APCI/MS methods from healthy subjects (n = 
17) were not statistically different (P = 0.13). The LC-APCI/MS method is a 
sensitive technique for simultaneous determination of both unlabeled and labeled 
phylloquinone and can be applied to bioavailability studies.

DOI: 10.1021/ac900732w
PMCID: PMC2733890
PMID: 19563214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]