1. Hepatology. 2009 Aug;50(2):546-54. doi: 10.1002/hep.23041.

Keratin variants are overrepresented in primary biliary cirrhosis and associate 
with disease severity.

Zhong B(1), Strnad P, Selmi C, Invernizzi P, Tao GZ, Caleffi A, Chen M, Bianchi 
I, Podda M, Pietrangelo A, Gershwin ME, Omary MB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Keratins (K) 8 and 18 variants predispose carriers to the development of 
end-stage liver disease and patients with chronic hepatitis C to disease 
progression. Hepatocytes express K8/K18, whereas biliary epithelia express 
K8/K18/K19. K8-null mice, which are predisposed to liver injury, spontaneously 
develop anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA) and have altered hepatocyte 
mitochondrial size and function. There is no known association of K19 with human 
disease and no known association of K8/K18/K19 with human autoimmune liver 
disease. We tested the hypothesis that K8/K18/K19 variants associate with 
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), an autoimmune cholestatic liver disease 
characterized by the presence of serum AMA. In doing so, we analyzed the entire 
exonic regions of K8/K18/K19 in 201 Italian patients and 200 control blood bank 
donors. Five disease-associated keratin heterozygous variants were identified in 
patients versus controls (K8 G62C/R341H/V380I, K18 R411H, and K19 G17S). Four 
variants were novel and included K19 G17S/V229M/N184N and K18 R411H. Overall, 
heterozygous disease-associated keratin variants were found in 17 of 201 (8.5%) 
PBC patients and 4 of 200 (2%) blood bank donors (P < 0.004, odds ratio = 4.53, 
95% confidence interval = 1.5-13.7). Of the K19 variants, K19 G17S was found in 
three patients but not in controls and all K8 R341H (eight patients and three 
controls) associated with concurrent presence of the previously described 
intronic K8 IVS7+10delC deletion. Notably, keratin variants associated with 
disease severity (12.4% variants in Ludwig stage III/IV versus 4.2% in stages 
I/II; P < 0.04, odds ratio = 3.25, 95% confidence interval = 1.02-10.40), but 
not with the presence of AMA.
CONCLUSION: K8/K18/K19 variants are overrepresented in Italian PBC patients and 
associate with liver disease progression. Therefore, we hypothesize that 
K8/K18/K19 variants may serve as genetic modifiers in PBC.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.23041
PMCID: PMC2756069
PMID: 19585610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None