1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Feb 15;243(1):35-45. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2009.11.010. Epub 2009 Nov 13.

Manipulation of cellular GSH biosynthetic capacity via TAT-mediated protein 
transduction of wild-type or a dominant-negative mutant of glutamate cysteine 
ligase alters cell sensitivity to oxidant-induced cytotoxicity.

Backos DS(1), Brocker CN, Franklin CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate Program in Toxicology, School 
of Pharmacy, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The glutathione (GSH) antioxidant defense system plays a central role in 
protecting mammalian cells against oxidative injury. Glutamate cysteine ligase 
(GCL) is the rate-limiting enzyme in GSH biosynthesis and is a heterodimeric 
holoenzyme composed of catalytic (GCLC) and modifier (GCLM) subunits. As a means 
of assessing the cytoprotective effects of enhanced GSH biosynthetic capacity, 
we have developed a protein transduction approach whereby recombinant GCL 
protein can be rapidly and directly transferred into cells when coupled to the 
HIV TAT protein transduction domain. Bacterial expression vectors encoding TAT 
fusion proteins of both GCL subunits were generated and recombinant fusion 
proteins were synthesized and purified to near homogeneity. The TAT-GCL fusion 
proteins were capable of heterodimerization and formation of functional GCL 
holoenzyme in vitro. Exposure of Hepa-1c1c7 cells to the TAT-GCL fusion proteins 
resulted in the time- and dose-dependent transduction of both GCL subunits and 
increased cellular GCL activity and GSH levels. A heterodimerization-competent, 
enzymatically deficient GCLC-TAT mutant was also generated in an attempt to 
create a dominant-negative suppressor of GCL. Transduction of cells with a 
catalytically inactive GCLC(E103A)-TAT mutant decreased cellular GCL activity in 
a dose-dependent manner. TAT-mediated manipulation of cellular GCL activity was 
also functionally relevant as transduction with wild-type GCLC(WT)-TAT or mutant 
GCLC(E103A)-TAT conferred protection or enhanced sensitivity to H(2)O(2)-induced 
cell death, respectively. These findings demonstrate that TAT-mediated 
transduction of wild-type or dominant-inhibitory mutants of the GCL subunits is 
a viable means of manipulating cellular GCL activity to assess the effects of 
altered GSH biosynthetic capacity.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2009.11.010
PMCID: PMC2819613
PMID: 19914271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]