1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010 Jul;25(7):2245-52. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp760. Epub
 2010 Jan 12.

Calcium kidney stones are associated with a haplotype of the calcium-sensing 
receptor gene regulatory region.

Vezzoli G(1), Terranegra A, Arcidiacono T, Gambaro G, Milanesi L, Mosca E, 
Soldati L; GENIAL network (Genetics and Environment in Nephrolithiasis Italian 
Alliance).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Scientific Institute San Raffaele Hospital, 
Universit√† Vita Salute University, Milan, Italy. vezzoli.giuseppe@hsr.it

BACKGROUND: Calcium-sensing receptor gene (CaSR) is a candidate to explain 
susceptibility to calcium kidney stones. Thus, we studied CaSR gene 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes associated with stones.
METHODS: Four hundred and sixty-three calcium stone formers and 213 healthy 
controls were genotyped for 21 SNPs mapping the whole CaSR gene. CaSR gene 
structure was studied. SNPs and haplotypes were analysed for association with 
stones.
RESULTS: Three haplotype blocks were identified in the CaSR gene. The first 
block was characterized by six SNPs and included gene promoters. The rs7652589 
and rs1501899 SNPs and the CATTCA haplotype of the first block were 
significantly more frequent in normocitraturic calcium kidney stone formers than 
controls. The risk of stones was increased in normocitraturic homozygous 
patients and heterozygotes for the CATTCA haplotype. The rate of stones was 
higher in stone formers with the CATTCA haplotype. In a three-generation family, 
calcium stones were associated with the CATTCA haplotype. The bioinformatic 
analysis identified a new site for the octamer-binding transcription factor 1 in 
the presence of the variant alleles at the rs7652589 and rs1501899 SNPs. This 
transcription factor may downregulate the transcription of vitamin D-dependent 
genes and the CaSR expression. Conclusion. SNPs and CATTCA haplotype of the CaSR 
gene first block is associated with kidney stones in normocitraturic patients.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfp760
PMID: 20067903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]