1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13066-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.093203. Epub 
2010 Feb 17.

Structural determination and tryptophan fluorescence of heterokaryon 
incompatibility C2 protein (HET-C2), a fungal glycolipid transfer protein 
(GLTP), provide novel insights into glycolipid specificity and membrane 
interaction by the GLTP fold.

Kenoth R(1), Simanshu DK, Kamlekar RK, Pike HM, Molotkovsky JG, Benson LM, 
Bergen HR 3rd, Prendergast FG, Malinina L, Venyaminov SY, Patel DJ, Brown RE.

Author information:
(1)Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, Minnesota 55912, USA.

HET-C2 is a fungal protein that transfers glycosphingolipids between membranes 
and has limited sequence homology with human glycolipid transfer protein (GLTP). 
The human GLTP fold is unique among lipid binding/transfer proteins, defining 
the GLTP superfamily. Herein, GLTP fold formation by HET-C2, its glycolipid 
transfer specificity, and the functional role(s) of its two Trp residues have 
been investigated. X-ray diffraction (1.9 A) revealed a GLTP fold with all key 
sugar headgroup recognition residues (Asp(66), Asn(70), Lys(73), Trp(109), and 
His(147)) conserved and properly oriented for glycolipid binding. Far-UV CD 
showed secondary structure dominated by alpha-helices and a cooperative thermal 
unfolding transition of 49 degrees C, features consistent with a GLTP fold. 
Environmentally induced optical activity of Trp/Tyr/Phe (2:4:12) detected by 
near-UV CD was unaffected by membranes containing glycolipid but was slightly 
altered by membranes lacking glycolipid. Trp fluorescence was maximal at 
approximately 355 nm and accessible to aqueous quenchers, indicating free 
exposure to the aqueous milieu and consistent with surface localization of the 
two Trps. Interaction with membranes lacking glycolipid triggered significant 
decreases in Trp emission intensity but lesser than decreases induced by 
membranes containing glycolipid. Binding of glycolipid (confirmed by 
electrospray injection mass spectrometry) resulted in a blue-shifted emission 
wavelength maximum (approximately 6 nm) permitting determination of binding 
affinities. The unique positioning of Trp(208) at the HET-C2 C terminus revealed 
membrane-induced conformational changes that precede glycolipid uptake, whereas 
key differences in residues of the sugar headgroup recognition center accounted 
for altered glycolipid specificity and suggested evolutionary adaptation for the 
simpler glycosphingolipid compositions of filamentous fungi.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.093203
PMCID: PMC2857133
PMID: 20164530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]