1. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 May;16(5):557-68. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.47. Epub 2010 Apr 
20.

Imprinting in the schizophrenia candidate gene GABRB2 encoding GABA(A) receptor 
Î²(2) subunit.

Pun FW(1), Zhao C, Lo WS, Ng SK, Tsang SY, Nimgaonkar V, Chung WS, Ungvari GS, 
Xue H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China.

Schizophrenia is a complex genetic disorder, the inheritance pattern of which is 
likely complicated by epigenetic factors yet to be elucidated. In this study, 
transmission disequilibrium tests with family trios yielded significant 
differences between paternal and maternal transmissions of the 
disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs6556547 and its 
haplotypes. The minor allele (T) of rs6556547 was paternally undertransmitted to 
male schizophrenic offsprings, and this parent-of-origin effect strongly 
suggested that GABRB2 is imprinted. 'Flipping' of allelic expression in 
heterozygotes of SNP rs2229944 (C/T) in GABRB2 or rs2290732 (G/A) in the 
neighboring GABRA1 was compatible with imprinting effects on gene expression. 
Clustering analysis of GABRB2 mRNA expressions suggested that imprinting brought 
about the observed two-tiered distribution of expression levels in controls with 
heterozygous genotype at the disease-associated SNP rs1816071 (A/G). The deficit 
of upper-tiered expressions accounted for the lowered expression levels in the 
schizophrenic heterozygotes. The occurrence of a two-tiered distribution 
furnished support for imprinting, and also pointed to the necessity of 
differentiating between two kinds of heterozygotes of different parental origins 
in disease association studies on GABRB2. Bisulfite sequencing revealed 
hypermethylation in the neighborhood of SNP rs1816071, and methylation 
differences between controls and schizophrenia patients. Notably, the two 
schizophrenia-associated SNPs rs6556547 and rs1816071 overlapped with a CpG 
dinucleotide, thereby opening the possibility that CpG methylation status of 
these sites could have an impact on the risk of schizophrenia. Thus multiple 
lines of evidence pointed to the occurrence of imprinting in the GABRB2 gene and 
its possible role in the development of schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2010.47
PMID: 20404824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]