1. J Neurochem. 2010 Jul;114(1):97-109. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06744.x.
Epub  2010 Apr 9.

beta-Chemokine production by neural and glial progenitor cells is enhanced by 
HIV-1 Tat: effects on microglial migration.

Hahn YK(1), Vo P, Fitting S, Block ML, Hauser KF, Knapp PE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia 23298-0709, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 neuropathology results from collective 
effects of viral proteins and inflammatory mediators on several cell types. 
Significant damage is mediated indirectly through inflammatory conditions 
promulgated by glial cells, including microglia that are productively infected 
by HIV-1, and astroglia. Neural and glial progenitors exist in both developing 
and adult brains. To determine whether progenitors are targets of HIV-1, a 
multi-plex assay was performed to assess chemokine/cytokine expression after 
treatment with viral proteins transactivator of transcription (Tat) or 
glycoprotein 120 (gp120). In the initial screen, ten analytes were basally 
released by murine striatal progenitors. The beta-chemokines CCL5/regulated upon 
activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted, CCL3/macrophage inflammatory 
protein-1alpha, and CCL4/macrophage inflammatory protein-1beta were increased by 
12-h exposure to HIV-1 Tat. Secreted factors from Tat-treated progenitors were 
chemoattractive towards microglia, an effect blocked by 2D7 anti-CCR5 antibody 
pre-treatment. Tat and opiates have interactive effects on astroglial chemokine 
secretion, but this interaction did not occur in progenitors. gp120 did not 
affect chemokine/cytokine release, although both CCR5 and CXCR4, which serve as 
gp120 co-receptors, were detected in progenitors. We postulate that chemokine 
production by progenitors may be a normal, adaptive process that encourages 
immune inspection of newly generated cells. Pathogens such as HIV might usurp 
this function to create a maladaptive state, especially during development or 
regeneration, when progenitors are numerous.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06744.x
PMCID: PMC2992981
PMID: 20403075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]