1. Mol Pharm. 2010 Aug 2;7(4):1149-58. doi: 10.1021/mp1000229.

Cytoplasmic delivery of liposomes into MCF-7 breast cancer cells mediated by 
cell-specific phage fusion coat protein.

Wang T(1), Yang S, Petrenko VA, Torchilin VP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Nanomedicine, Northeastern 
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Earlier, we have shown that doxorubicin-loaded liposomes (Doxil) modified with a 
chimeric phage fusion coat protein specific toward MCF-7 breast cancer cells 
identified from a phage landscape library demonstrated a significantly enhanced 
association with target cells and an increased cytotoxicity. Based on some 
structural similarities between the N-terminus of the phage potein and known 
fusogenic peptides, we hypothesized that, in addition to the specific targeting, 
the phage protein may possess endosome-escaping potential and an increased 
cytotoxicity of drug-loaded phage protein-targeted liposomes may be explained by 
an advantageous combination of both, cell targeting and endosomal escape of 
drug-loaded nanocarrier. The use of the fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) technique allowed us to clearly demonstrate the pH-dependent membrane 
fusion activity of the phage protein. Endosomal escape and cytosolic delivery of 
phage-liposomes was visualized with fluorescence microscopy. Endosome 
acidification inhibition by bafilomycin A 1 resulted in decreased cytotoxicity 
of the phage-Doxil, while the endosome disruption by chloroquine had a 
negligible effect on efficacy of phage-Doxil, confirming its endosomal escape. 
Our results demonstrated an endosome-escaping property of the phage protein and 
provided an insight on mechanism of the enhanced cytotoxicity of phage-Doxil.

DOI: 10.1021/mp1000229
PMCID: PMC2914188
PMID: 20438086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]