1. J Reprod Immunol. 2010 Dec;87(1-2):74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2010.06.001. Epub
 2010 Jul 3.

Association of CCR5, TLR2, TLR4 and MBL genetic variations with genital tract 
infections and tubal factor infertility.

Laisk T(1), Peters M, Saare M, Haller-Kikkatalo K, Karro H, Salumets A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, L. Puusepa 8, 
51014 Tartu, Estonia. triin.laisk@ut.ee

Upper genital tract infections can inflict inadequate immune response and cause 
Fallopian tube damage and concomitant female infertility. However, the exact 
role of host genetic variation in the development of tubal factor infertility 
remains unclear. We selected nine genetic variations in four genes involved in 
immune response modulation (CCR5, TLR2, TLR4 and MBL2) and assessed their 
association with tubal factor infertility by comparing genotype frequencies 
among 163 women with tubal factor infertility and 400 control individuals. The 
CCR5, TLR2 and TLR4 genotypes were not associated with tubal factor infertility, 
although the TLR4 Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile heterozygosity was associated with a 
decreased incidence of pathogens associated with genital tract infections in 
tubal factor infertility patients. In contrast, MBL2 low-producing genotypes 
were associated with an increased incidence of such pathogens. In addition, 
hyper-producing MBL2 genotype HYA/HYA and low-producing MBL2 genotypes were 
associated with susceptibility to tubal factor infertility, while a protective 
effect was associated with the high-producing MBL2 genotype HYA/LYA. Overall, 
these data suggest that polymorphisms in TLR4 and MBL2 play a role in 
receptiveness to pathogens causing genital tract infections, while MBL2 
genotypes contribute to susceptibility to tubal factor infertility.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jri.2010.06.001
PMID: 20598754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]