1. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;12(5):636-43. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100010. Epub 2010
 Aug 5.

Diagnostic testing for pandemic influenza in Singapore: a novel dual-gene 
quantitative real-time RT-PCR for the detection of influenza A/H1N1/2009.

Lee HK(1), Lee CK, Loh TP, Tang JW, Chiu L, Tambyah PA, Sethi SK, Koay ES.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Diagnosis Centre, Department of Laboratory Medicine, National 
University Hospital, 5 Lower Kent Ridge Road, Singapore.

With the relative global lack of immunity to the pandemic influenza A/H1N1/2009 
virus that emerged in April 2009 as well as the sustained susceptibility to 
infection, rapid and accurate diagnostic assays are essential to detect this 
novel influenza A variant. Among the molecular diagnostic methods that have been 
developed to date, most are in tandem monoplex assays targeting either different 
regions of a single viral gene segment or different viral gene segments. We 
describe a dual-gene (duplex) quantitative real-time RT-PCR method selectively 
targeting pandemic influenza A/H1N1/2009. The assay design includes a 
primer-probe set specific to only the hemagglutinin (HA) gene of this novel 
influenza A variant and a second set capable of detecting the nucleoprotein (NP) 
gene of all swine-origin influenza A virus. In silico analysis of the specific 
HA oligonucleotide sequence used in the assay showed that it targeted only the 
swine-origin pandemic strain; there was also no cross-reactivity against a wide 
spectrum of noninfluenza respiratory viruses. The assay has a diagnostic 
sensitivity and specificity of 97.7% and 100%, respectively, a lower detection 
limit of 50 viral gene copies/PCR, and can be adapted to either a qualitative or 
quantitative mode. It was first applied to 3512 patients with influenza-like 
illnesses at a tertiary hospital in Singapore, during the containment phase of 
the pandemic (May to July 2009).

DOI: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100010
PMCID: PMC2928428
PMID: 20688908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]