1. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 1;70(17):6804-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0409.
Epub  2010 Aug 10.

PIK3CA mutation uncouples tumor growth and cyclin D1 regulation from MEK/ERK and 
mutant KRAS signaling.

Halilovic E(1), She QB, Ye Q, Pagliarini R, Sellers WR, Solit DB, Rosen N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA.

Mutational activation of KRAS is a common event in human tumors. Identification 
of the key signaling pathways downstream of mutant KRAS is essential for our 
understanding of how to pharmacologically target these cancers in patients. We 
show that PD0325901, a small-molecule MEK inhibitor, decreases MEK/ERK pathway 
signaling and destabilizes cyclin D1, resulting in significant anticancer 
activity in a subset of KRAS mutant tumors in vitro and in vivo. Mutational 
activation of PIK3CA, which commonly co-occurs with KRAS mutation, provides 
resistance to MEK inhibition through reactivation of AKT signaling. Genetic 
ablation of the mutant PIK3CA allele in MEK inhibitor-resistant cells restores 
MEK pathway sensitivity, and re-expression of mutant PIK3CA reinstates the 
resistance, highlighting the importance of this mutation in resistance to 
therapy in human cancers. In KRAS mutant tumors, PIK3CA mutation restores cyclin 
D1 expression and G(1)-S cell cycle progression so that they are no longer 
dependent on KRAS and MEK/ERK signaling. Furthermore, the growth of KRAS mutant 
tumors with coexistent PIK3CA mutations in vivo is profoundly inhibited with 
combined pharmacologic inhibition of MEK and AKT. These data suggest that tumors 
with both KRAS and phosphoinositide 3-kinase mutations are unlikely to respond 
to the inhibition of the MEK pathway alone but will require effective inhibition 
of both MEK and phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway signaling.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0409
PMCID: PMC3178450
PMID: 20699365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]