1. Proteins. 2010 Nov 1;78(14):2867-72. doi: 10.1002/prot.22813.

Dissection of the conformational cycle of the multidrug/lipidA ABC exporter 
MsbA.

Doshi R(1), Woebking B, van Veen HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PD, 
United Kingdom.

Recent crystal structures of the multidrug ATP-binding cassette (ABC) exporters 
Sav1866 from Staphylococcus aureus, MsbA from Escherichia coli, Vibrio cholera, 
and Salmonella typhimurium, and mouse ABCB1a suggest a common alternating access 
mechanism for export. However, the molecular framework underlying this mechanism 
is critically dependent on assumed conformational relationships between 
nonidentical crystal structures and therefore requires biochemical verification. 
The structures of homodimeric MsbA reveal a pair of glutamate residues (E208 and 
E208') in the intracellular domains of its two half-transporters, close to the 
nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), which are in close proximity of each other in 
the outward-facing state but not in the inward-facing state. Using 
intermolecular cysteine crosslinking between E208C and E208C' in E. coli MsbA, 
we demonstrate that the NBDs dissociate in nucleotide-free conditions and come 
close on ATP binding and ADP·vanadate trapping. Interestingly, ADP alone 
separates the half-transporters like a nucleotide-free state, presumably for the 
following catalytic cycle. Our data fill persistent gaps in current studies on 
the conformational dynamics of a variety of ABC exporters. Based on a single 
biochemical method, the findings describe a conformational cycle for a single 
ABC exporter at major checkpoints of the ATPase reaction under experimental 
conditions, where the exporter is transport active.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.22813
PMID: 20715055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]