1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3935-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.187492. Epub
2010  Dec 2.

Hetero-oligomerization of neuronal glutamate transporters.

Nothmann D(1), Leinenweber A, Torres-Salazar D, Kovermann P, Hotzy J, Gameiro A, 
Grewer C, Fahlke C.

Author information:
(1)Institut f√ºr Neurophysiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30625 
Hannover, Germany.

Excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs) mediate the uptake of glutamate into 
neuronal and glial cells of the mammalian central nervous system. Two 
transporters expressed primarily in glia, EAAT1 and EAAT2, are crucial for 
glutamate homeostasis in the adult mammalian brain. Three neuronal transporters 
(EAAT3, EAAT4, and EAAT5) appear to have additional functions in regulating and 
processing cellular excitability. EAATs are assembled as trimers, and the 
existence of multiple isoforms raises the question of whether certain isoforms 
can form hetero-oligomers. Co-expression and pulldown experiments of various 
glutamate transporters showed that EAAT3 and EAAT4, but neither EAAT1 and EAAT2, 
nor EAAT2 and EAAT3 are capable of co-assembling into heterotrimers. To study 
the functional consequences of hetero-oligomerization, we co-expressed EAAT3 and 
the serine-dependent mutant R501C EAAT4 in HEK293 cells and Xenopus laevis 
oocytes and studied glutamate/serine transport and anion conduction using 
electrophysiological methods. Individual subunits transport glutamate 
independently of each other. Apparent substrate affinities are not affected by 
hetero-oligomerization. However, polarized localization in Madin-Darby canine 
kidney cells was different for homo- and hetero-oligomers. EAAT3 inserts 
exclusively into apical membranes of Madin-Darby canine kidney cells when 
expressed alone. Co-expression with EAAT4 results in additional appearance of 
basolateral EAAT3. Our results demonstrate the existence of heterotrimeric 
glutamate transporters and provide novel information about the physiological 
impact of EAAT oligomerization.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.187492
PMCID: PMC3030394
PMID: 21127051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]