1. Clin Dev Immunol. 2011;2011:691956. doi: 10.1155/2011/691956. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

Treatment of disseminated mycobacterial infection with high-dose IFN-γ in a 
patient with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency.

Alangari AA(1), Al-Zamil F, Al-Mazrou A, Al-Muhsen S, Boisson-Dupuis S, 
Awadallah S, Kambal A, Casanova JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, King Saud University, P.O. Box 
2925, Riyadh 11461, Saudi Arabia. aangari@ksu.edu.sa

IFN-γ has been used in the treatment of IL-12Rβ1 deficiency patients with 
disseminated BCG infection (BCGosis), but the optimal dose to reach efficacy is 
not clear. We used IFN-γ in the treatment of a 2.7-year-old patient with 
IL-12Rβ1 deficiency and refractory BCG-osis. IFNγ was started at a dose of 50 
μg/m² 3 times per week. The dose was upgraded to 100 mcg/m² after 3 months, then 
to 200 mcg/m² 6 months afterwards. Serum mycobactericidal activity and 
lymphocytes number and function were evaluated throughout the study. There was 
no clinical response to IFN-γ with 50 or 100 μg/m² doses. However, there was 
some response to the 200 μg/m² dose with no additional adverse effects. The 
serum mycobactericidal activity was not significantly different during the whole 
treatment period. Lymphocytes proliferation in response to PHA was significantly 
higher after 3 months of using the highest dose as compared to the lowest dose. 
The tuberculin skin test reaction remained persistently negative. We conclude 
that in a patient with IL-12Rβ1 deficiency, IFN-γ at a dose of 200 μg/m², but 
not at lower dosages, was found to have a noticeable clinical effect with no 
additional adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/691956
PMCID: PMC3014684
PMID: 21234109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]