1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 May;55(5):2018-25. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01593-10.  Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Comparative genome sequencing of an isogenic pair of USA800 clinical 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolates obtained before and after 
daptomycin treatment failure.

Boyle-Vavra S(1), Jones M, Gourley BL, Holmes M, Ruf R, Balsam AR, Boulware DR, 
Kline S, Jawahir S, Devries A, Peterson SN, Daum RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, KCBD 4152, 900 E 57th 
Street, Chicago, IL 60657, USA. sboyleva@uchicago.edu

We describe here a clinical daptomycin treatment failure in a patient with 
recurrent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteremia in whom 
daptomycin was administered after a failed empirical treatment course with 
vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. We had the opportunity to compare the 
genome sequences of an isogenic pair of daptomycin-susceptible and -resistant 
MRSA isolates obtained before and after initiation of daptomycin therapy, 
respectively. The genotype of both isolates was USA800, ST5, SCCmec type IV, agr 
type II. There was no increase in cell wall thickness in the 
daptomycin-resistant strain despite having decreased susceptibility to both 
vancomycin and daptomycin. By comparing the genome sequences by pyrosequencing, 
we identified a polymorphism (S337L) in the tenth transmembrane segment of the 
multiple peptide resistance factor, MprF, encoding lysyl phosphatidylglycerol 
transferase. This enzyme has been shown previously to promote repulsion of 
daptomycin at the cell surface by addition of positively charged lysine to 
phosphatidylglycerol. Also, the hlb open reading frame (ORF) encoding the 
Î²-toxin was interrupted by a prophage in the daptomycin-susceptible strain; this 
phage was missing in the daptomycin-resistant isolate and the hlb ORF was 
restored. Loss of the phage in the resistant isolate also resulted in loss of 
the virulence factor genes clpP, scn, and sak. This is the first study to use 
pyrosequencing to compare the genomes of a daptomycin-susceptible/resistant MRSA 
isolate pair obtained during failed daptomycin therapy in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01593-10
PMCID: PMC3088213
PMID: 21343446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]