1. Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Oct;44(2):160-5. doi: 10.1007/s12035-011-8180-6. Epub 2011
 Apr 19.

Addictive genes and the relationship to obesity and inflammation.

Heber D(1), Carpenter CL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Nutrition, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. dheber@mednet.ucla.edu

There is increasing evidence that the same brain reward circuits involved in 
perpetuating drug abuse are involved in the hedonic urges and food cravings 
observed clinically in overweight and obese subjects. A polymorphism of the D2 
dopamine receptor which renders it less sensitive to dopamine stimulation has 
been proposed to promote self-stimulatory behavior such as consuming alcohol, 
abusing drugs, or binging on foods. It is important to determine how this 
polymorphism may interact with other well-known candidate genes for obesity 
including polymorphisms of the leptin receptor gene and the opiomelanocortin 
gene. Leptin is a proinflammatory cytokine as well as a long-term signal 
maintaining body fat. Upper-body obesity stimulates systemic inflammation 
through the action of multiple cytokines including leptin throughout many organs 
including the brain. The association of numerous diseases including diabetes 
mellitus, heart disease, as well as depression with chronic low-grade 
inflammation due to abdominal obesity has raised the possibility that 
obesity-associated inflammation affecting the brain may promote addictive 
behaviors leading to a self-perpetuating cycle that may affect not only foods 
but addictions to drugs, alcohol, and gambling. This new area of 
interdisciplinary research holds the promise of developing new approaches to 
treating drug abuse and obesity.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-011-8180-6
PMCID: PMC3180592
PMID: 21499988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]