1. Biochemistry. 2011 Jul 26;50(29):6387-95. doi: 10.1021/bi200403e. Epub 2011
Jun  29.

Resistance to the third-generation cephalosporin ceftazidime by a 
deacylation-deficient mutant of the TEM β-lactamase by the uncommon 
covalent-trapping mechanism.

Antunes NT(1), Frase H, Toth M, Mobashery S, Vakulenko SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, Indiana 46556, USA.

The Glu166Arg/Met182Thr mutant of Escherichia coli TEM(pTZ19-3) β-lactamase 
produces a 128-fold increase in the level of resistance to the antibiotic 
ceftazidime in comparison to that of the parental wild-type enzyme. The single 
Glu166Arg mutation resulted in a dramatic decrease in both the level of enzyme 
expression in bacteria and the resistance to penicillins, with a concomitant 
4-fold increase in the resistance to ceftazidime, a third-generation 
cephalosporin. Introduction of the second amino acid substitution, Met182Thr, 
restored enzyme expression to a level comparable to that of the wild-type enzyme 
and resulted in an additional 32-fold increase in the minimal inhibitory 
concentration of ceftazidime to 64 μg/mL. The double mutant formed a stable 
covalent complex with ceftazidime that remained intact for the entire duration 
of the monitoring, which exceeded a time period of 40 bacterial generations. 
Compared to those of the wild-type enzyme, the affinity of the TEM(pTZ19-3) 
Glu166Arg/Met182Thr mutant for ceftazidime increased by at least 110-fold and 
the acylation rate constant was augmented by at least 16-fold. The collective 
experimental data and computer modeling indicate that the deacylation-deficient 
Glu166Arg/Met182Thr mutant of TEM(pTZ19-3) produces resistance to the 
third-generation cephalosporin ceftazidime by an uncommon covalent-trapping 
mechanism. This is the first documentation of such a mechanism by a class A 
β-lactamase in a manifestation of resistance.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/bi200403e
PMID: 21696166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]