1. J Clin Invest. 2011 Sep;121(9):3747-55. doi: 10.1172/JCI44778. Epub 2011 Aug
1.

A noninhibitory mutant of the caveolin-1 scaffolding domain enhances 
eNOS-derived NO synthesis and vasodilation in mice.

Bernatchez P(1), Sharma A, Bauer PM, Marin E, Sessa WC.

Author information:
(1)Providence Heart and Lung Institute, St. Paulâ€™s Hospital, James Hogg Research 
Centre, 1081 Burrard St., Room 166, Vancouver (BC) Canada, V6Z 1Y6. 
pbernatc@interchange.ubc.ca

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jan;122(1):419.

Aberrant regulation of eNOS and associated NO release are directly linked with 
various vascular diseases. Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), the main coat protein of 
caveolae, is highly expressed in endothelial cells. Its scaffolding domain 
serves as an endogenous negative regulator of eNOS function. Structure-function 
analysis of Cav-1 has shown that phenylalanine 92 (F92) is critical for the 
inhibitory actions of Cav-1 toward eNOS. Herein, we show that F92A-Cav-1 and a 
mutant cell-permeable scaffolding domain peptide called Cavnoxin can increase 
basal NO release in eNOS-expressing cells. Cavnoxin reduced vascular tone ex 
vivo and lowered blood pressure in normal mice. In contrast, similar experiments 
performed with eNOS- or Cav-1-deficient mice showed that the vasodilatory effect 
of Cavnoxin is abolished in the absence of these gene products, which indicates 
a high level of eNOS/Cav-1 specificity. Mechanistically, biochemical assays 
indicated that noninhibitory F92A-Cav-1 and Cavnoxin specifically disrupted the 
inhibitory actions of endogenous Cav-1 toward eNOS and thereby enhanced basal NO 
release. Collectively, these data raise the possibility of studying the 
inhibitory influence of Cav-1 on eNOS without interfering with the other actions 
of endogenous Cav-1. They also suggest a therapeutic application for regulating 
the eNOS/Cav-1 interaction in diseases characterized by decreased NO release.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI44778
PMCID: PMC3163946
PMID: 21804187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]