1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Oct 31;52(11):8479-87. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.11-8182.

Analysis of the ABCA4 gene by next-generation sequencing.

Zernant J(1), Schubert C, Im KM, Burke T, Brown CM, Fishman GA, Tsang SH, Gouras 
P, Dean M, Allikmets R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, 
USA.

PURPOSE: To find all possible disease-associated variants in coding sequences of 
the ABCA4 gene in a large cohort of patients diagnosed with ABCA4-associated 
diseases.
METHODS: One hundred sixty-eight patients who had been clinically diagnosed with 
Stargardt disease, cone-rod dystrophy, and other ABCA4-associated phenotypes 
were prescreened for mutations in ABCA4 with the ABCA4 microarray, resulting in 
finding 1 of 2 expected mutations in 111 patients and 0 of 2 mutations in 57 
patients. The next-generation sequencing (NGS) strategy was applied to these 
patients to sequence the entire coding region and the splice sites of the ABCA4 
gene. Identified new variants were confirmed or rejected by Sanger sequencing 
and analyzed for possible pathogenicity by in silico programs and, where 
possible, by segregation analyses.
RESULTS: Sequencing was successful in 159 of 168 patients and identified the 
second disease-associated allele in 49 of 103 (~48%) of patients with one 
previously identified mutation. Among those with no mutations, both 
disease-associated alleles were detected in 4 of 56 patients, and one mutation 
was detected in 10 of 56 patients. The authors detected a total of 57 previously 
unknown, possibly pathogenic, variants: 29 missense, 4 nonsense, 9 small 
deletions and 15 splice-site-altering variants. Of these, 55 variants were 
deemed pathogenic by a combination of predictive methods and segregation 
analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Many mutations in the coding sequences of the ABCA4 gene are still 
unknown, and many possibly reside in noncoding regions of the ABCA4 locus. 
Although the ABCA4 array remains a good first-pass screening option, the NGS 
platform is a time- and cost-efficient tool for screening large cohorts.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.11-8182
PMCID: PMC3208189
PMID: 21911583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]