1. Brain Pathol. 2012 Jul;22(4):472-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2011.00542.x.
Epub  2011 Nov 14.

Novel antibody capture assay for paraffin-embedded tissue detects wide-ranging 
amyloid beta and paired helical filament-tau accumulation in cognitively normal 
older adults.

Postupna N(1), Rose SE, Bird TD, Gonzalez-Cuyar LF, Sonnen JA, Larson EB, Keene 
CD, Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

Quantifying antigens in formalin-fixed tissue is challenging and limits 
investigation in population-based studies of brain aging. To address this major 
limitation, we have developed a new technique that we call "Histelide": 
immunohistochemistry (HIST-) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
(-EL-) performed on a glass slide (-IDE). We validated Histelide in sections of 
prefrontal cortex from 20 selected cases: 12 subjects with clinically and 
neuropathologically diagnosed Alzheimer's disease (AD), either autosomal 
dominant or late-onset forms, and 8 clinical and neuropathologic controls. AD 
cases had significantly increased amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide and paired helical 
filament- (PHF-) tau per area of neocortex that was proteinase K-sensitive, and 
significantly decreased amount of synaptophysin. We next investigated prefrontal 
cortex from 81 consecutive cases of high-cognitive performers from the Adult 
Changes in Thought (ACT) study, a population-based study of brain aging and 
incident dementia. As expected, latent AD was common in this group; however, our 
results quantified widely individually varying levels of Aβ peptides and PHF-tau 
among these high-cognitive performers. This novel approach obtains quantitative 
data from population-based studies, and our initial studies with high-cognitive 
performers provide important quantitative insights into latent AD that should 
help guide expectations from neuroimaging and prevention studies.

© 2011 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2011 International Society of 
Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2011.00542.x
PMCID: PMC3295908
PMID: 21999410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]