1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026213. Epub 2011 Oct 
21.

Polymerase II promoter strength determines efficacy of microRNA adapted shRNAs.

Lebbink RJ(1), Lowe M, Chan T, Khine H, Wang X, McManus MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Diabetes Center, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.

Since the discovery of RNAi and microRNAs more than 10 years ago, much research 
has focused on the development of systems that usurp microRNA pathways to 
downregulate gene expression in mammalian cells. One of these systems makes use 
of endogenous microRNA pri-cursors that are expressed from polymerase II 
promoters where the mature microRNA sequence is replaced by gene specific 
duplexes that guide RNAi (shRNA-miRs). Although shRNA-miRs are effective in 
directing target mRNA knockdown and hence reducing protein expression in many 
cell types, variability of RNAi efficacy in cell lines has been an issue. Here 
we show that the choice of the polymerase II promoter used to drive shRNA 
expression is of critical importance to allow effective mRNA target knockdown. 
We tested the abundance of shRNA-miRs expressed from five different polymerase 
II promoters in 6 human cell lines and measured their ability to drive target 
knockdown. We observed a clear positive correlation between promoter strength, 
siRNA expression levels, and protein target knockdown. Differences in RNAi from 
the shRNA-miRs expressed from the various promoters were particularly pronounced 
in immune cells. Our findings have direct implications for the design of 
shRNA-directed RNAi experiments and the preferred RNAi system to use for each 
cell type.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026213
PMCID: PMC3198731
PMID: 22031824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.