1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 2;287(1):393-407. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.259465. Epub
2011  Nov 17.

Phospholipase D2 (PLD2) shortens the time required for myeloid leukemic cell 
differentiation: mechanism of action.

Di Fulvio M(1), Frondorf K(1), Henkels KM(1), Grunwald WC Jr(2), Cool D(2), 
Gomez-Cambronero J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University 
School Medicine, Dayton, Ohio, 45435.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Wright State University School 
Medicine, Dayton, Ohio 45435.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State University 
School Medicine, Dayton, Ohio, 45435. Electronic address: 
julian.cambronero@wright.edu.

Cell differentiation is compromised in acute leukemias. We report that mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) and S6 kinase (S6K) are highly expressed in the 
undifferentiated promyelomonocytic leukemic HL-60 cell line, whereas PLD2 
expression is minimal. The expression ratio of PLD2 to mTOR (or to S6K) is 
gradually inverted upon in vitro induction of differentiation toward the 
neutrophilic phenotype. We present three ways that profoundly affect the 
kinetics of differentiation as follows: (i) simultaneous overexpression of mTOR 
(or S6K), (ii) silencing of mTOR via dsRNA-mediated interference or inhibition 
with rapamycin, and (iii) PLD2 overexpression. The last two methods shortened 
the time required for differentiation. By determining how PLD2 participates in 
cell differentiation, we found that PLD2 interacts with and activates the 
oncogene Fes/Fps, a protein-tyrosine kinase known to be involved in myeloid cell 
development. Fes activity is elevated with PLD2 overexpression, phosphatidic 
acid or phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate. Co-immunoprecipitation indicates a 
close PLD2-Fes physical interaction that is negated by a Fes-R483K mutant that 
incapacitates its Src homology 2 domain. All these suggest for the first time 
the following mechanism: mTOR/S6K down-regulation→PLD2 overexpression→PLD2/Fes 
association→phosphatidic acid-led activation of Fes kinase→granulocytic 
differentiation. Differentiation shortening could have a clinical impact on 
reducing the time of return to normalcy of the white cell counts after 
chemotherapy in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.259465
PMCID: PMC3249091
PMID: 22094461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]