1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1290-305. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.283036. Epub
2011  Nov 22.

Molecular and cellular effects of Tamm-Horsfall protein mutations and their 
rescue by chemical chaperones.

Ma L(1), Liu Y, El-Achkar TM, Wu XR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10016, USA.

Correct folding of a nascent polypeptide in the lumen of the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) into a three-dimensional conformation is a crucial step in the 
stability, intracellular trafficking, and targeting to the final destination of 
a protein. By transiently and stably expressing human-relevant mutants of 
Tamm-Horsfall protein in polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney cells, we show here 
that a cysteine-altering mutation in the evolutionally conserved cysteine-rich 
domain had more severe defects in ER exit and surface translocation and 
triggered more apoptosis than a cysteine-altering mutation outside the domain. 
Both mutants were able to specifically bind and trap the wild-type Tamm-Horsfall 
protein (THP) and prevent it from exiting the ER and translocating to the cell 
surface. This explains at least partly why in patients with THP-associated 
diseases there is a marked urinary reduction of both the mutant and the 
wild-type THP. Exposure of mutant-expressing cells to low temperature (30 Â°C), 
osmolytes (glycerol, trimethylamine N-oxide, and dimethyl sulfoxide), and the 
Ca(2+)-ATP inhibitor thapsigargin only slightly relieved ER retention and 
increased surface targeting of the mutants. In contrast, sodium 4-phenylbutyrate 
and probenecid, the latter a uricosuric drug used clinically to treat gout, 
markedly reduced ER retention of the mutants and increased their surface 
translocation and secretion into the culture media. The rescue of the THP 
mutants was associated with the restoration of the level and subcellular 
localization of cytosolic chaperone HSP70. Our results reveal intricate 
mechanistic details that may underlie THP-associated diseases and suggest that 
novel therapeutics enhancing the refolding of THP mutants may be of important 
value in therapy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.283036
PMCID: PMC3256885
PMID: 22117067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]