1. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2012 Feb;25(2):59-66. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzr058. Epub 
2011 Dec 12.

High-level secretion of recombinant monomeric murine and human single-chain Fv 
antibodies from Drosophila S2 cells.

Gilmartin AA(1), Lamp B, Rümenapf T, Persson MA, Rey FA, Krey T.

Author information:
(1)Départment de Virologie, Institut Pasteur, Unité de Virologie Structurale, 
CNRS URA 3015, Paris, France.

Single-chain variable fragment (scFvs) antibodies are small polypeptides (∼26 
kD) containing the heavy (V(H)) and light (V(L)) immunoglobulin domains of a 
parent antibody connected by a flexible linker. In addition to being frequently 
used in diagnostics and therapy for an increasing number of human diseases, 
scFvs are important tools for structural biology as crystallization chaperones. 
Although scFvs can be expressed in many different organisms, the expression 
level of an scFv strongly depends on its particular amino acid sequence. We 
report here a system allowing for easy and efficient cloning of (i) scFvs 
selected by phage display and (ii) individual heavy and light chain sequences 
from hybridoma cDNA into expression plasmids engineered for secretion of the 
recombinant fragment produced in Drosophila S2 cells. We validated the method by 
producing five scFvs derived from human and murine parent antibodies directed 
against various antigens. The production yields varied between 5 and 12 mg 
monomeric scFv per liter of supernatant, indicating a relative independence on 
the individual sequences. The recombinant scFvs bound their cognate antigen with 
high affinity, comparable with the parent antibodies. The suitability of the 
produced recombinant fragments for structural studies was demonstrated by 
crystallization and structure determination of one of the produced scFvs, 
derived from a broadly neutralizing antibody against the major glycoprotein E2 
of the hepatitis C virus. Structural comparison with the Protein Data Bank 
revealed the typical spatial organization of V(H) and V(L) domains, further 
validating the here-reported expression system.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzr058
PMCID: PMC3258843
PMID: 22160929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]