1. Int J Oncol. 2012 Apr;40(4):1122-32. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1302. Epub 2011 Dec
 15.

Identification of prognostic biomarkers for glioblastomas using protein 
expression profiling.

Jung Y(1), Joo KM, Seong DH, Choi YL, Kong DS, Kim Y, Kim MH, Jin J, Suh YL, 
Seol HJ, Shin CS, Lee JI, Kim JH, Song SY, Nam DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Samsung Medical Center and Samsung Biomedical 
Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Gangnam-Gu, 
Seoul 135-710, Republic of Korea.

A set of proteins reflecting the prognosis of patients have clinical 
significance since they could be utilized as predictive biomarkers and/or 
potential therapeutic targets. With the aim of finding novel diagnostic and 
prognostic markers for glioblastoma (GBM), a tissue microarray (TMA) library 
consisting of 62 GBMs and 28 GBM-associated normal spots was constructed. 
Immunohistochemistry against 78 GBM-associated proteins was performed. 
Expression levels of each protein for each patient were analyzed using an image 
analysis program and converted to H-score [summation of the intensity grade of 
staining (0-3) multiplied by the percentage of positive cells corresponding to 
each grade]. Based on H-score and hierarchical clustering methods, we divided 
the GBMs into two groups (n=19 and 37) that had significantly different survival 
lengths (p<0.05). In the two groups, expression of nine proteins (survivin, 
cyclin E, DCC, TGF-Î², CDC25B, histone H1, p-EGFR, p-VEGFR2/3, p16) was 
significantly changed (q<0.05). Prognosis-predicting potential of these proteins 
were validated with another independent library of 82 GBM TMAs and a public GBM 
DNA microarray dataset. In addition, we determined 32 aberrant or mislocalized 
subcellular protein expression patterns in GBMs compared with relatively normal 
brain tissues, which could be useful for diagnostic biomarkers of GBM. We 
therefore suggest that these proteins can be used as predictive biomarkers 
and/or potential therapeutic targets for GBM.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1302
PMCID: PMC3584590
PMID: 22179774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]