1. Genet Mol Res. 2011 Dec 12;10(4):3070-9. doi: 10.4238/2011.December.12.6.

Back fat thickness and meat tenderness are associated with a 526 Tâ†’A mutation in 
the exon 1 promoter region of the MyF-5 gene in Chinese Bos taurus.

Ujan JA(1), Zan LS, Ujan SA, Adoligbe C, Wang HB.

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A & F University, 
Yangling, Shaanxi, PR China.

Qualitative trait loci (QTL) for growth and meat quality traits in cattle (Bos 
taurus) have been previously mapped to three chromosome regions, 0 to 30, 55 to 
70, and 70 to 80 cM on chromosome 5. We evaluated the allele frequencies and 
gene-specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of bovine myogenic factor 5 
(MyF-5) in the QTL regions and their associations with live weight and meat 
characteristics in indigenous Chinese cattle breeds. PCR-SSCP methodology showed 
a T>A mutation at 526 bp. Least square analysis revealed a significant 
association of this SNP with backfat thickness and meat tenderness (P < 0.05), 
while no significant association was found with live weight, loin eye height, 
loin eye area, rib area, or water holding capacity. Allele frequencies of 
MyF-5-A/B in the five breeds were 0.760/0.239, 0.752/0.247, 0.629/0.370, 
0.715/0.284, and 0.750/0.250, for JiaXian red, Luxi, Nanyang, Qinchuan, and 
XiaNan crossbreed, respectively. The genotype distributions for these alleles in 
two of the Chinese cattle breeds (Luxi and Qinchuan) were not in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium (P < 0.05); while those for the other three breeds (JiaXian red, 
Nanyang, and XiaNan) were in agreement with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 
0.05). The genotypic frequencies among all five cattle breeds showed moderate 
diversity (0.25 < polymorphism information content < 0.5). Based on our 
findings, we suggest that the MyF-5 gene influences back fat thickness and meat 
tenderness in Chinese Bos taurus. This SNP could be useful for marker-assisted 
selection for meat quality traits in these cattle.

DOI: 10.4238/2011.December.12.6
PMID: 22194162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]