1. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):144-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1904.

Opposing effects of pigment epithelium-derived factor on breast cancer cell 
versus neuronal survival: implication for brain metastasis and 
metastasis-induced brain damage.

Fitzgerald DP(1), Subramanian P, Deshpande M, Graves C, Gordon I, Qian Y, 
Snitkovsky Y, Liewehr DJ, Steinberg SM, Paltán-Ortiz JD, Herman MM, Camphausen 
K, Palmieri D, Becerra SP, Steeg PS.

Author information:
(1)Women's Cancer's Section, Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Brain metastases are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality for patients 
with cancer, yet preventative and therapeutic options remain an unmet need. The 
cytokine pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) is downregulated in resected 
human brain metastases of breast cancer compared with primary breast tumors, 
suggesting that restoring its expression might limit metastatic spread. Here, we 
show that outgrowth of large experimental brain metastases from human 231-BR or 
murine 4T1-BR breast cancer cells was suppressed by PEDF expression, as 
supported by in vitro analyses as well as direct intracranial implantation. 
Notably, the suppressive effects of PEDF were not only rapid but independent of 
the effects of this factor on angiogenesis. Paralleling its cytotoxic effects on 
breast cancer cells, PEDF also exerted a prosurvival effect on neurons that 
shielded the brain from tumor-induced damage, as indicated by a relative 
3.5-fold reduction in the number of dying neurons adjacent to tumors expressing 
PEDF. Our findings establish PEDF as both a metastatic suppressor and a 
neuroprotectant in the brain, highlighting its role as a double agent in 
limiting brain metastasis and its local consequences.

©2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1904
PMCID: PMC3254209
PMID: 22215693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
No potential conflicts of interest