1. FASEB J. 2012 May;26(5):1970-81. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-190082. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Evidence of endoplasmic reticulum stress and protein synthesis inhibition in the 
placenta of non-native women at high altitude.

Yung HW(1), Cox M, Tissot van Patot M, Burton GJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Trophoblast Research, Physiology Laboratory, Downing St., 
Cambridge, CB2 3EG, UK.

Pregnancy at high altitude is associated with a reduction in birth weight of 
∼100 g/1000 m of ascent. The underlying mechanisms are unclear but may involve 
alteration in energy-demanding activities, such as protein synthesis. To test 
this hypothesis, both in vivo and in vitro approaches were used. Placental 
tissues from pregnant women residing at 3100 m were studied, and placental cells 
were incubated under hypoxia. In the 3100-m placentas, we observed dilation of 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cisternae, increased phosphorylation of eukaryotic 
initiation factor 2 subunit α (P-eIF2α), reduced AKT phosphorylation, and 
reduced P-4E-BP1 but increased 4E-BP1 protein compared to sea level controls. 
These findings suggest the presence of ER stress and protein synthesis 
inhibition. Hypoxia (1% O(2)) reduced proliferation of trophoblast-like JEG-3 
cells, BeWo cells, and placental fibroblasts by ∼40, ∼60, and ∼18%, 
respectively. Sublethal dosage of salubrinal, an eIF2α phosphatase inhibitor, 
increased P-eIF2α and reduced BeWo cell and placental fibroblast proliferation 
by ∼50%. Administration of the PI-3K inhibitor LY294002 also reduced JEG-3 
proliferation. Our results demonstrate that exposure to chronic hypobaric 
hypoxia causes mild placental ER stress, which, in turn, modulates protein 
synthesis and slows proliferation. These effects may account for the reduced 
placental villous volume, and contribute to the low birth weight that typifies 
high-altitude populations.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.11-190082
PMCID: PMC3336782
PMID: 22267338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]