1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(14):6673-82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks314. Epub 2012
 Apr 9.

Combinatorial targeting of ribbon-helix-helix artificial transcription factors 
to chimeric recognition sites.

Zampini M(1), Hayes F.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences and Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, The 
University of Manchester, 131 Princess Street, Manchester M1 7DN, UK.

Artificial transcription factors (ATFs) are potent synthetic biology tools for 
modulating endogenous gene expression and precision genome editing. The 
ribbon-helix-helix (RHH) superfamily of transcription factors are widespread in 
bacteria and archaea. The principal DNA binding determinant in this family 
comprises a two-stranded antiparallel β-sheet (ribbons) in which a pair of 
eight-residue motifs insert into the major groove. Here, we demonstrate that 
ribbons of divergent RHH proteins are compact and portable elements that can be 
grafted into a common α-helical scaffold producing active ATFs. Hybrid proteins 
cooperatively recognize DNA sites possessing core tetramer boxes whose 
functional spacing is dictated by interactions between the α-helical backbones. 
These interactions also promote combinatorial binding of chimeras with different 
transplanted ribbons, but identical backbones, to synthetic sites bearing 
cognate boxes for each protein either in vitro or in vivo. The composite 
assembly of interacting hybrid proteins offers potential advantages associated 
with combinatorial approaches to DNA recognition compared with ATFs that involve 
binding of a single protein. Moreover, the new class of RHH ATFs may be utilized 
to re-engineer transcriptional circuits, or may be enhanced with affinity tags, 
fluorescent moieties or other elements for targeted genome marking and 
manipulation in bacteria and archaea.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks314
PMCID: PMC3413123
PMID: 22492712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]