1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34492. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034492. Epub 2012 Apr
3.

Vascular dysfunction induced in offspring by maternal dietary fat involves 
altered arterial polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis.

Kelsall CJ(1), Hoile SP, Irvine NA, Masoodi M, Torrens C, Lillycrop KA, Calder 
PC, Clough GF, Hanson MA, Burdge GC.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, Hampshire, United Kingdom.

Nutrition during development affects risk of future cardiovascular disease. 
Relatively little is known about whether the amount and type of fat in the 
maternal diet affect vascular function in the offspring. To investigate this, 
pregnant and lactating rats were fed either 7%(w/w) or 21%(w/w) fat enriched in 
either 18:2n-6, trans fatty acids, saturated fatty acids, or fish oil. Their 
offspring were fed 4%(w/w) soybean oil from weaning until day 77. Type and 
amount of maternal dietary fat altered acetylcholine (ACh)-mediated 
vaso-relaxation in offspring aortae and mesenteric arteries, contingent on sex. 
Amount, but not type, of maternal dietary fat altered phenylephrine (Pe)-induced 
vasoconstriction in these arteries. Maternal 21% fat diet decreased 20:4n-6 
concentration in offspring aortae. We investigated the role of Δ6 and Δ5 
desaturases, showing that their inhibition in aortae and mesenteric arteries 
reduced vasoconstriction, but not vaso-relaxation, and the synthesis of specific 
pro-constriction eicosanoids. Removal of the aortic endothelium did not alter 
the effect of inhibition of Δ6 and Δ5 desaturases on Pe-mediated 
vasoconstriction. Thus arterial smooth muscle 20:4n-6 biosynthesis de novo 
appears to be important for Pe-mediated vasoconstriction. Next we studied genes 
encoding these desaturases, finding that maternal 21% fat reduced Fads2 mRNA 
expression and increased Fads1 in offspring aortae, indicating dysregulation of 
20:4n-6 biosynthesis. Methylation at CpG -394 bp 5' to the Fads2 transcription 
start site predicted its expression. This locus was hypermethylated in offspring 
of dams fed 21% fat. Pe treatment of aortae for 10 minutes increased Fads2, but 
not Fads1, mRNA expression (76%; P<0.05). This suggests that Fads2 may be an 
immediate early gene in the response of aortae to Pe. Thus both amount and type 
of maternal dietary fat induce altered regulation of vascular tone in offspring 
though differential effects on vaso-relaxation, and persistent changes in 
vasoconstriction via epigenetic processes controlling arterial polyunsaturated 
fatty acid biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034492
PMCID: PMC3317992
PMID: 22509311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.