1. Cancer. 2012 Nov 15;118(22):5489-96. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27599. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Clinical significance of SOD2 and GSTP1 gene polymorphisms in Chinese patients 
with gastric cancer.

Xu Z(1), Zhu H, Luk JM, Wu D, Gu D, Gong W, Tan Y, Zhou J, Tang J, Zhang Z, Wang 
M, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation is a common 
phenomenon in carcinogenesis. However, the rationale behind ROS involvement in 
gastric cancer is unclear. In this study, the authors investigated the clinical 
significance of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 2 ROS metabolic 
process-related genes: superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and glutathione 
S-transferase π (GSTP1).
METHODS: In total of 929 patients with gastric cancer who had definitive 
clinicopathologic and follow-up data were collected. SOD2 reference SNP 4880 
(rs4880) and GSTP1 rs1695 genotyping were examined in DNA samples extracted from 
paraffin-embedded tumor tissue. Association of the 2 SNPs with each 
clinicopathologic feature was analyzed using the Pearson chi-square test and the 
independent Student t test. Gastric cancer-specific overall survival was 
analyzed using Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank tests. Multivariate Cox 
regression analyses of these SNPs also were performed.
RESULTS: The SOD2 rs4880 CT + CC genotypes were significantly associated with a 
high level of lymph node metastasis (P = .023), whereas the GSTP1 rs1695 GA + GG 
genotypes were significantly associated with larger tumor size (>5 cm long; P = 
.048). Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression data indicated that the SOD2 rs4880 CT + 
CC genotypes alone (hazard ratio, 1.299; 95% confidence interval, 1.053-1.603; P 
= .015) and the GSTP1 rs1695 GA + GG combined genotypes (hazard ratio, 1.496; 
95% CI, 1.078-2.074; P = .016) were independent predictors for overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The current data, based on a large cohort (n = 929) of Chinese 
patients with gastric cancer, suggested that the presence of SOD2 rs4880 and 
GSTP1 rs1695 genotypes may contribute to cancer progression as well as tumor 
aggressiveness. The components of ROS metabolism pathways may be potential 
therapeutic targets for this aggressive malignancy.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27599
PMID: 22517484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]