1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 May 15;52(10):2091-107. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.03.013. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

The effects of chromium(VI) on the thioredoxin system: implications for redox 
regulation.

Myers CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. cmyers@mcw.edu

Hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] compounds are highly redox active and have long 
been recognized as potent cytotoxins and carcinogens. The intracellular 
reduction of Cr(VI) generates reactive Cr intermediates, which are themselves 
strong oxidants, as well as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radical. 
These probably contribute to the oxidative damage and effects on redox-sensitive 
transcription factors that have been reported. However, the identification of 
events that initiate these signaling changes has been elusive. More recent 
studies show that Cr(VI) causes irreversible inhibition of thioredoxin reductase 
(TrxR) and oxidation of thioredoxin (Trx) and peroxiredoxin (Prx). Mitochondrial 
Trx2/Prx3 are more sensitive to Cr(VI) treatment than cytosolic Trx1/Prx1, 
although both compartments show thiol oxidation with higher doses or longer 
treatments. Thiol redox proteomics demonstrate that Trx2, Prx3, and Trx1 are 
among the most sensitive proteins in cells to Cr(VI) treatment. Their oxidation 
could therefore represent initiating events that have widespread implications 
for protein thiol redox control and for multiple aspects of redox signaling. 
This review summarizes the effects of Cr(VI) on the TrxR/Trx system and how 
these events could influence a number of downstream redox signaling systems that 
are influenced by Cr(VI) exposure. Some of the signaling events discussed 
include the activation of apoptosis signal regulating kinase and MAP kinases 
(p38 and JNK) and the modulation of a number of redox-sensitive transcription 
factors including AP-1, NF-κB, p53, and Nrf2.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.03.013
PMCID: PMC3955998
PMID: 22542445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]