1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 22;287(26):21673-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.336537. Epub 
2012 May 8.

Comparative processing and function of human and ferret cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator.

Fisher JT(1), Liu X, Yan Z, Luo M, Zhang Y, Zhou W, Lee BJ, Song Y, Guo C, Wang 
Y, Lukacs GL, Engelhardt JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 
52242, USA.

The most common cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene 
mutation is ΔF508, and this causes cystic fibrosis (CF). New CF models in the 
pig and ferret have been generated that develop lung, pancreatic, liver, and 
intestinal pathologies that reflect disease in CF patients. Species-specific 
biology in the processing of CFTR has demonstrated that pig and mouse ΔF508-CFTR 
proteins are more effectively processed to the apical membrane of airway 
epithelia than human ΔF508-CFTR. The processing behavior of ferret WT- and 
ΔF508-CFTR proteins remains unknown, and such information is important to 
predicting the utility of a ΔF508-CFTR ferret. To this end, we sought to compare 
processing, membrane stability, and function of human and ferret WT- and 
ΔF508-CFTR proteins in a heterologous expression system using HT1080, HEK293T, 
BHK21, and Cos7 cells as well as human and ferret CF polarized airway epithelia. 
Analysis of the protein processing and stability by metabolic pulse-chase and 
surface On-Cell Western blots revealed that WT-fCFTR half-life and membrane 
stability were increased relative to WT-hCFTR. Furthermore, in BHK21, Cos7, and 
CuFi cells, human and ferret ΔF508-CFTR processing was negligible, whereas low 
levels of processing of ΔF508-fCFTR could be seen in HT1080 and HEK293T cells. 
Only the WT-fCFTR, but not ΔF508-fCFTR, produced functional cAMP-inducible 
chloride currents in both CF human and ferret airway epithelia. Further 
elucidation of the mechanism responsible for elevated fCFTR protein stability 
may lead to new therapeutic approaches to augment CFTR function. These findings 
also suggest that generation of a ferret CFTR(ΔF508/ΔF508) animal model may be 
useful.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.336537
PMCID: PMC3381131
PMID: 22570484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]