1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38538. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038538. Epub 2012 Jun
4.

Caution in interpreting results from imputation analysis when linkage 
disequilibrium extends over a large distance: a case study on venous thrombosis.

Germain M(1), Saut N, Oudot-Mellakh T, Letenneur L, Dupuy AM, Bertrand M, Alessi 
MC, Lambert JC, Zelenika D, Emmerich J, Tiret L, Cambien F, Lathrop M, Amouyel 
P, Morange PE, Trégouët DA.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR_S 937, ICAN Institute, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, 
France.

By applying an imputation strategy based on the 1000 Genomes project to two 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), we detected a susceptibility locus for 
venous thrombosis on chromosome 11p11.2 that was missed by previous GWAS 
analyses that had been conducted on the same datasets. A comprehensive linkage 
disequilibrium and haplotype analysis of the whole locus where twelve SNPs 
exhibited association p-values lower than 2.23 10(-11) and the use of 
independent case-control samples demonstrated that the culprit variant was a 
rare variant located ~1 Mb away from the original hits, not tagged by current 
genome-wide genotyping arrays and even not well imputed in the original GWAS 
samples. This variant was in fact the rs1799963, also known as the FII G20210A 
prothrombin mutation. This work may be of major interest not only for its 
scientific impact but also for its methodological findings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038538
PMCID: PMC3366937
PMID: 22675575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Funding was received from 
Sanofi-Synthélabo. The Lille Génopôle received an unconditional grant from 
Eisai. There are no patents, products in development or marketed products to 
declare. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies 
on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the guide for authors.