1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38059. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038059. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Ecto-5'-nucleotidase: a candidate virulence factor in Streptococcus sanguinis 
experimental endocarditis.

Fan J(1), Zhang Y, Chuang-Smith ON, Frank KL, Guenther BD, Kern M, Schlievert 
PM, Herzberg MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Biological Sciences, School of Dentistry, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.

Streptococcus sanguinis is the most common cause of infective endocarditis (IE). 
Since the molecular basis of virulence of this oral commensal bacterium remains 
unclear, we searched the genome of S. sanguinis for previously unidentified 
virulence factors. We identified a cell surface ecto-5'-nucleotidase (Nt5e), as 
a candidate virulence factor. By colorimetric phosphate assay, we showed that S. 
sanguinis Nt5e can hydrolyze extracellular adenosine triphosphate to generate 
adenosine. Moreover, a nt5e deletion mutant showed significantly shorter lag 
time (P<0.05) to onset of platelet aggregation than the wild-type strain, 
without affecting platelet-bacterial adhesion in vitro (P=0.98). In the absence 
of nt5e, S. sanguinis caused IE (4 d) in a rabbit model with significantly 
decreased mass of vegetations (P<0.01) and recovered bacterial loads 
(log(10)CFU, P=0.01), suggesting that Nt5e contributes to the virulence of S. 
sanguinis in vivo. As a virulence factor, Nt5e may function by (i) hydrolyzing 
ATP, a pro-inflammatory molecule, and generating adenosine, an immunosuppressive 
molecule to inhibit phagocytic monocytes/macrophages associated with valvular 
vegetations. (ii) Nt5e-mediated inhibition of platelet aggregation could also 
delay presentation of platelet microbicidal proteins to infecting bacteria on 
heart valves. Both plausible Nt5e-dependent mechanisms would promote survival of 
infecting S. sanguinis. In conclusion, we now show for the first time that 
streptococcal Nt5e modulates S. sanguinis-induced platelet aggregation and may 
contribute to the virulence of streptococci in experimental IE.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038059
PMCID: PMC3369921
PMID: 22685551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.