1. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Oct;48(1):132-40. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.06.017. Epub
2012  Jun 29.

Motor terminal degeneration unaffected by activity changes in SOD1(G93A) mice; a 
possible role for glycolysis.

Carrasco DI(1), Bichler EK, Rich MM, Wang X, Seburn KL, Pinter MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

This study examined whether activity is a contributing factor to motor terminal 
degeneration in mice that overexpress the G93A mutation of the SOD1 enzyme found 
in humans with inherited motor neuron disease. Previously, we showed that 
overload of muscles accomplished by synergist denervation accelerated motor 
terminal degeneration in dogs with hereditary canine spinal muscular atrophy 
(HCSMA). In the present study, we found that SOD1 plantaris muscles overloaded 
for 2months showed no differences of neuromuscular junction innervation status 
when compared with normally loaded, contralateral plantaris muscles. Complete 
elimination of motor terminal activity using blockade of sciatic nerve 
conduction with tetrodotoxin cuffs for 1month also produced no change of 
plantaris innervation status. To assess possible effects of activity on motor 
terminal function, we examined the synaptic properties of SOD1 soleus 
neuromuscular junctions at a time when significant denervation of close 
synergists had occurred as a result of natural disease progression. When 
examined in glucose media, SOD1 soleus synaptic properties were similar to 
wildtype. When glycolysis was inhibited and ATP production limited to 
mitochondria, however, blocking of evoked synaptic transmission occurred and a 
large increase in the frequency of spontaneous mEPCs was observed. Similar 
effects were observed at neuromuscular junctions in muscle from dogs with 
inherited motor neuron disease (HCSMA), although significant defects of synaptic 
transmission exist at these neuromuscular junctions when examined in glucose 
media, as reported previously. These results suggest that glycolysis compensates 
for mitochondrial dysfunction at motor terminals of SOD1 mice and HCSMA dogs. 
This compensatory mechanism may help to support resting and activity-related 
metabolism in the presence of dysfunctional mitochondria and prolong the 
survival of SOD1 motor terminals.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.06.017
PMCID: PMC3430970
PMID: 22750521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]