1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;32(1):157-68. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120520.

Identification of a late onset Alzheimer's disease candidate risk variant at 
9q21.33 in Polish patients.

Gaj P(1), Paziewska A, Bik W, Dąbrowska M, Baranowska-Bik A, Styczynska M, 
Chodakowska-Żebrowska M, Pfeffer-Baczuk A, Barcikowska M, Baranowska B, 
Ostrowski J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical Center for 
Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland.

Late onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) accounts for about 95% of all Alzheimer's 
disease cases. While the APOE ε4 variant seems to have unparalleled influence on 
increased LOAD risk, it does not explain all of the heritability of LOAD. In 
this study, we present the application of a cost-effective, pooled DNA 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) to uncover genetic risk variants associated 
with LOAD in Polish women diagnosed with either mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
or well-defined LOAD. A group of 141 patients (94 LOAD and 47 MCI), as well as 
141 controls, were assayed using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 arrays. 
Allele frequency distributions were compared using χ(2)-tests, and significantly 
associated SNPs at p < 0.0001 with a proxy SNP were selected. GWAS marker 
selection was conducted using PLINK, and selected SNPs were validated on DNA 
samples from the same cohort using KASPar Assays. In addition, to determine the 
genotype of APOE variants (rs429358, rs7412), a multiplex tetra-primer 
amplification refractory mutation system was applied. The GWAS revealed nine 
SNPs associated with MCI and/or LOAD. Of these, the association of seven SNPs 
was confirmed by genotyping of individual patients. Furthermore, the APOE ε4 
appeared to be a risk variant for LOAD, while the APOE ε3 showed a protective 
effect. Multivariate analysis showed association between rs7856774 and LOAD, 
independently from the effect of APOE variation. Pooled DNA GWAS enabled the 
identification of a novel LOAD candidate risk variant, rs7856774 (9q21.33), 
tagging a possible genomic enhancer affecting proximal transcribed elements 
including DAPK1 gene.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120520
PMID: 22785395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]