1. Mol Biol Int. 2012;2012:256982. doi: 10.1155/2012/256982. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

The Impact of HIV Genetic Polymorphisms and Subtype Differences on the 
Occurrence of Resistance to Antiretroviral Drugs.

Wainberg MA(1), Brenner BG.

Author information:
(1)Jewish General Hospital AIDS Centre, McGill University, 3755 
Cote-Ste-Catherine Road, Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 1E2.

The vast majority of reports on drug resistance deal with subtype B infections 
in developed countries, and this is largely due to historical delays in access 
to antiretroviral therapy (ART) on a worldwide basis. This notwithstanding the 
concept that naturally occurring polymorphisms among different non-B subtypes 
can affect HIV-1 susceptibility to antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) is supported by 
both enzymatic and virological data. These findings suggest that such 
polymorphisms can affect both the magnitude of resistance conferred by some 
major mutations as well as the propensity to acquire certain resistance 
mutations, even though such differences are sometimes difficult to demonstrate 
in phenotypic assays. It is mandatory that tools are optimized to assure 
accurate measurements of drug susceptibility in non-B subtypes and to recognize 
that each subtype may have a distinct resistance profile and that differences in 
resistance pathways may also impact on cross-resistance and the choice of 
regimens to be used in second-line therapy. Although responsiveness to 
first-line therapy should not theoretically be affected by considerations of 
viral subtype and drug resistance, well-designed long-term longitudinal studies 
involving patients infected by viruses of different subtypes should be carried 
out.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/256982
PMCID: PMC3390109
PMID: 22792462