1. Bone. 2012 Oct;51(4):688-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.07.010. Epub 2012 Jul
24.

Significant association between body composition phenotypes and the osteocalcin 
genomic region in normative human population.

Korostishevsky M(1), Malkin I, Trofimov S, Pei Y, Deng HW, Livshits G.

Author information:
(1)Human Population Biology Research Unit, Department of Anatomy and 
Anthropology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Osteocalcin, a major inorganic component of bone matrix and marker of bone 
formation, is also involved in regulation of glucose and fat mass metabolism. 
However, much uncertainty remains about whether the above effect on fat mass has 
a genetic component. Our main aim was to test whether a variation of body 
composition phenotypes is associated with BGLAP genomic region variants. To 
achieve this aim, we used an ethnically homogeneous discovery sample of 230 
families consisting of 1112 apparently healthy individuals (561 males and 551 
females) of European origin. We conducted association analysis between six SNPs 
and five obesity-related phenotypes: plasma levels of leptin, anthropometrical 
fat mass (FM), principal component scores of eight skinfold (SK_PC) and nine 
circumference (CR_PC) measurements, and body mass index (BMI). Two powerful and 
robust tools were applied: the pedigree disequilibrium test and variance 
component models, taking into account both familial and genetic effects. 
Significant association results were observed for all phenotypes. The most 
significant results were observed between the haplotype composed of three SNPs 
(rs2758605-rs1543294-rs2241106) and BMI (p=8.07(-7)), and CR_PC (p=5.29(-5)). 
The association with BMI was tested and confirmed in our replication study, 
including 2244 unrelated adult US Caucasians, who were previously assessed for 
whole genome SNP data. In addition, we obtained an evidence of potential 
non-additive interactions between the above three SNPs concerning their 
association with BMI. Bioinformatics sources suggest that the aforementioned 
interaction could originate from different genetic loci in this region; however, 
ascertaining the exact circumstances requires a detailed molecular-genetic 
study.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.07.010
PMCID: PMC4450085
PMID: 22842327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]