1. Leukemia. 2013 Feb;27(2):278-85. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.218. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Targeting the KIT activating switch control pocket: a novel mechanism to inhibit 
neoplastic mast cell proliferation and mast cell activation.

Bai Y(1), Bandara G, Ching Chan E, Maric I, Simakova O, Bandara SN, Lu WP, Wise 
SC, Flynn DL, Metcalfe DD, Gilfillan AM, Wilson TM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1881, USA.

Activating mutations in the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT, most notably KIT 
D816V, are commonly observed in patients with systemic mastocytosis. Thus, 
inhibition of KIT has been a major focus for treatment of this disorder. Here we 
investigated a novel approach to such inhibition. Utilizing rational drug 
design, we targeted the switch pocket (SP) of KIT, which regulates its catalytic 
conformation. Two SP inhibitors thus identified, DP-2976 and DP-4851, were 
examined for effects on neoplastic mast cell proliferation and mast cell 
activation. Autophosphorylation of both wild-type and, where also examined, KIT 
D816V activation was blocked by these compounds in transfected 293T cells, HMC 
1.1 and 1.2 human mast cell lines, and in CD34(+)-derived human mast cells 
activated by stem cell factor (SCF). Both inhibitors induced apoptosis in the 
neoplastic mast cell lines and reduced survival of primary bone marrow mast 
cells from patients with mastocytosis. Moreover, the SP inhibitors more 
selectively blocked SCF potentiation of FcÉ›RI-mediated degranulation. Overall, 
SP inhibitors represent an innovative mechanism of KIT inhibition whose dual 
suppression of KIT D816V neoplastic mast cell proliferation and SCF-enhanced 
mast cell activation may provide significant therapeutic benefits.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2012.218
PMCID: PMC3529859
PMID: 22907049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The NIH authors reported no 
potential conflicts of interest. W-P.L., S.C.W. and D.L.F. are employees of 
Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, which is the owner of DP-2976 and DP-4851, the 
compounds studied and reported in this work.