1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48051. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048051. Epub 2012 Oct 
19.

In vivo imaging of brain ischemia using an oxygen-dependent degradative fusion 
protein probe.

Fujita Y(1), Kuchimaru T, Kadonosono T, Tanaka S, Hase Y, Tomimoto H, Hiraoka M, 
Kizaka-Kondoh S, Ihara M, Takahashi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Within the ischemic penumbra, blood flow is sufficiently reduced that it results 
in hypoxia severe enough to arrest physiological function. Nevertheless, it has 
been shown that cells present within this region can be rescued and resuscitated 
by restoring perfusion and through other protective therapies. Thus, the early 
detection of the ischemic penumbra can be exploited to improve outcomes after 
focal ischemia. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 is a transcription factor 
induced by a reduction in molecular oxygen levels. Although the role of HIF-1 in 
the ischemic penumbra remains unknown, there is a strong correlation between 
areas with HIF-1 activity and the ischemic penumbra. We recently developed a 
near-infrared fluorescently labeled-fusion protein, POH-N, with an 
oxygen-dependent degradation property identical to the alpha subunit of HIF-1. 
Here, we conduct in vivo imaging of HIF-active regions using POH-N in ischemic 
brains after transient focal cerebral ischemia induced using the intraluminal 
middle cerebral artery occlusion technique in mice. The results demonstrate that 
POH-N enables the in vivo monitoring and ex vivo detection of HIF-1-active 
regions after ischemic brain injury and suggest its potential in imaging and 
drug delivery to HIF-1-active areas in ischemic brains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048051
PMCID: PMC3477118
PMID: 23094105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.