1. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Nov 13;5:629. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-629.

Association studies of the copy-number variable ß-defensin cluster on 8p23.1 in 
adenocarcinoma and chronic pancreatitis.

Taudien S(1), Gäbel G, Kuss O, Groth M, Grützmann R, Huse K, Kluttig A, Wolf A, 
Nothnagel M, Rosenstiel P, Greiser KH, Werdan K, Krawczak M, Pilarsky C, Platzer 
M.

Author information:
(1)Genome Analysis, Leibniz Institute for Age Research - Fritz Lipmann 
Institute, Beutenbergstr 11, D-07745, Jena, Germany. stau@fli-leibniz.de

BACKGROUND: Human ß-defensins are a family of antimicrobial peptides located at 
the mucosal surface. Both sequence multi-site variations (MSV) and copy-number 
variants (CNV) of the defensin-encoding genes are associated with increased risk 
for various diseases, including cancer and inflammatory conditions such as 
psoriasis and acute pancreatitis. In a case-control study, we investigated the 
association between MSV in DEFB104 as well as defensin gene (DEF) cluster copy 
number (CN), and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and chronic 
pancreatitis (CP).
RESULTS: Two groups of PDAC (N=70) and CP (N=60) patients were compared to 
matched healthy control groups CARLA1 (N=232) and CARLA2 (N=160), respectively. 
Four DEFB104 MSV were haplotyped by PCR, cloning and sequencing. DEF cluster CN 
was determined by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.Neither the 
PDAC nor the CP cohorts show significant differences in the DEFB104 haplotype 
distribution compared to the respective control groups CARLA1 and CARLA2, 
respectively.The diploid DEF cluster CN exhibit a significantly different 
distribution between PDAC and CARLA1 (Fisher's exact test P=0.027), but not 
between CP and CARLA2 (P=0.867).
CONCLUSION: Different DEF cluster b CN distribution between PDAC patients and 
healthy controls indicate a potential protective effect of higher CNs against 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-629
PMCID: PMC3532138
PMID: 23148552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]