1. Pol J Pathol. 2012 Nov;63(3):193-8. doi: 10.5114/pjp.2012.31505.

RAD51 gene polymorphisms and sporadic colorectal cancer risk in Poland.

Romanowicz-Makowska H(1), Samulak D, Michalska M, Sporny S, Langner E, Dziki A, 
Sychowski R, Smolarz B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital, 
Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: DNA repair processes play an important role in protection against 
carcinogenic factors. Mutations in DNA repair genes, which code proteins engaged 
in repair processes, may lead to carcinogenesis and among others also to 
colorectal cancer (CRC) development. The genetic variability in RAD51 may 
contribute to the appearance and progression of various cancers including CRC. 
The aim of the study was to compare the distribution of genotypes of RAD51 
135G>C and 172G>T polymorphism between colorectal cancer patients and controls.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Both polymorphisms were evaluated by PCR-RFLP methods in 
colorectal tissue of 320 colorectal cancer subjects and 320 healthy subjects who 
served as controls.
RESULTS: In the present work we demonstrated a significant positive association 
between the RAD51 C/C genotype and colorectal carcinoma. Variant 135C allele of 
RAD51 increased the cancer risk. However, we did not observe any relationship 
between each polymorphism and colorectal cancer progression assessed by node 
metastasis, tumour size and Dukes' stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that variant genotypes of the 135G>C of RAD51 
polymorphism may be positively associated with colorectal carcinoma in the 
Polish population. Further studies conducted on a larger group are required to 
clarify this point.

DOI: 10.5114/pjp.2012.31505
PMID: 23161237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]