1. J Clin Neurosci. 2013 Mar;20(3):453-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2012.05.031. Epub 
2012 Dec 8.

TGFBR2 gene polymorphism is associated with ossification of the posterior 
longitudinal ligament.

Jekarl DW(1), Paek CM, An YJ, Kim YJ, Kim M, Kim Y, Lee J, Sung CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea College 
of Medicine, Yeouido St. Mary's Hospital, 62 Yeouido-dong, Youngdeungpo-gu, 
150-713 Seoul, Republic of Korea.

This preliminary study assessed the association between ossification of the 
posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) and the transforming growth factor β 
receptor type 2 (TGFBR2) gene, with autoimmune disease examined as a possible 
underlying factor. Twenty-one patients diagnosed with OPLL and 42 control 
patients without OPLL (non-OPLL) were enrolled in the study. The TGFBR2 gene, 
composed of one promoter and seven exons, including the 5' untranslated region 
and flanking introns of each exon, was sequenced. Laboratory tests, including 
indirect immunofluorescence, were performed to detect autoimmune antibodies. The 
most common types of OPLL were the continuous (n=8, 38.1%) and segmental (n=8, 
38.1%) types, with the fifth cervical veterbra (C5) the most common level of 
cervical spine involvement (n=15, 71.4%). In addition, significant associations 
between 455-4T→A (p=0.007) and 571G→A (p=0.024) gene variation and OPLL were 
found. The 95-35C→T variation in intron 1, a previously unreported variation, 
was also found in all patients with OPLL. Four patients revealed positive 
results for autoimmune antibodies and exhibited a nucleolar pattern by indirect 
immunofluorescence. Of these four patients, two were diagnosed with Sjogren's 
syndrome. The previously reported association of 455-4T→A and 571G→A 
polymorphisms of the TGFBR2 gene with OPLL was confirmed in this study. In 
addition, the 95-35C→T polymorphism in intron 1, which to our knowledge is a 
novel, previously unreported, nucleotide variation, was detected in all 
patients. Additional functional studies are required to verify the association 
between OPLL and the genetic variations found in this study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2012.05.031
PMID: 23228659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]