1. Nat Protoc. 2013 Jan;8(1):148-61. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2012.146. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Thermodynamic analysis of protein-ligand binding interactions in complex 
biological mixtures using the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation.

Strickland EC(1), Geer MA, Tran DT, Adhikari J, West GM, DeArmond PD, Xu Y, 
Fitzgerald MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

The detection and quantification of protein-ligand binding interactions is 
crucial in a number of different areas of biochemical research from fundamental 
studies of biological processes to drug discovery efforts. Described here is a 
protocol that can be used to identify the protein targets of biologically 
relevant ligands (e.g., drugs such as tamoxifen or cyclosporin A) in complex 
protein mixtures such as cell lysates. The protocol utilizes quantitative, 
bottom-up, shotgun proteomics technologies (isobaric mass tags for relative and 
absolute quantification, or iTRAQ) with a covalent labeling technique, termed 
stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX). In SPROX, the 
thermodynamic properties of proteins and protein-ligand complexes are assessed 
using the hydrogen peroxide-mediated oxidation of methionine residues as a 
function of the chemical denaturant (e.g., guanidine hydrochloride or urea) 
concentration. The proteome-wide SPROX experiments described here enable the 
ligand-binding properties of hundreds of proteins to be simultaneously assayed 
in the context of complex biological samples. The proteomic capabilities of the 
protocol render it amenable to the detection of both the on- and off-target 
effects of ligand binding. The protocol can be completed in 5 d.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2012.146
PMCID: PMC3717606
PMID: 23257983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]