1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057141. Epub 2013 Feb
22.

Early activation of rat skeletal muscle IL-6/STAT1/STAT3 dependent gene 
expression in resistance exercise linked to hypertrophy.

Begue G(1), Douillard A, Galbes O, Rossano B, Vernus B, Candau R, Py G.

Author information:
(1)INRA, UMR866 Dynamique Musculaire et Métabolisme, Université Montpellier 1, 
F-34060, Montpellier, France.

Cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) is an essential regulator of satellite 
cell-mediated hypertrophic muscle growth through the transcription factor signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). The importance of this 
pathway linked to the modulation of myogenic regulatory factors expression in 
rat skeletal muscle undergoing hypertrophy following resistance exercise, has 
not been investigated. In this study, the phosphorylation and nuclear 
localization of STAT3, together with IL-6/STAT3-responsive gene expression, were 
measured after both a single bout of resistance exercise and 10 weeks of 
training. Flexor Digitorum Profundus muscle samples from Wistar rats were 
obtained 2 and 6 hours after a single bout of resistance exercise and 72 h after 
the last bout of either 2, 4, or 10 weeks of resistance training. We observed an 
increase in IL-6 and SOCS3 mRNAs concomitant with phosphorylation of STAT1 and 
STAT3 after 2 and 6 hours of a single bout of exercise (p<0.05). STAT3-dependent 
early responsive genes such as CyclinD1 and cMyc were also upregulated whereas 
MyoD and Myf5 mRNAs were downregulated (p<0.05). BrdU-positive satellite cells 
increased at 2 and 6 hours after exercise (p<0.05). Muscle fiber hypertrophy 
reached up to 100% after 10 weeks of training and the mRNA expression of Myf5, 
c-Myc and Cyclin-D1 decreased, whereas IL-6 mRNA remained upregulated. We 
conclude that the IL-6/STAT1/STAT3 signaling pathway and its responsive genes 
after a single bout of resistance exercise are an important event regulating the 
SC pool and behavior involved in muscle hypertrophy after ten weeks of training 
in rat skeletal muscle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057141
PMCID: PMC3579782
PMID: 23451164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.