1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057298. Epub 2013 Feb
28.

A genome-wide scan for breast cancer risk haplotypes among African American 
women.

Song C(1), Chen GK, Millikan RC, Ambrosone CB, John EM, Bernstein L, Zheng W, Hu 
JJ, Ziegler RG, Nyante S, Bandera EV, Ingles SA, Press MF, Deming SL, 
Rodriguez-Gil JL, Chanock SJ, Wan P, Sheng X, Pooler LC, Van Den Berg DJ, Le 
Marchand L, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, Haiman CA, Stram DO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine and Norris 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) simultaneously investigating hundreds of 
thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) have become a powerful tool 
in the investigation of new disease susceptibility loci. Haplotypes are 
sometimes thought to be superior to SNPs and are promising in genetic 
association analyses. The application of genome-wide haplotype analysis, 
however, is hindered by the complexity of haplotypes themselves and 
sophistication in computation. We systematically analyzed the haplotype effects 
for breast cancer risk among 5,761 African American women (3,016 cases and 2,745 
controls) using a sliding window approach on the genome-wide scale. Three 
regions on chromosomes 1, 4 and 18 exhibited moderate haplotype effects. 
Furthermore, among 21 breast cancer susceptibility loci previously established 
in European populations, 10p15 and 14q24 are likely to harbor novel haplotype 
effects. We also proposed a heuristic of determining the significance level and 
the effective number of independent tests by the permutation analysis on 
chromosome 22 data. It suggests that the effective number was approximately half 
of the total (7,794 out of 15,645), thus the half number could serve as a quick 
reference to evaluating genome-wide significance if a similar sliding window 
approach of haplotype analysis is adopted in similar populations using similar 
genotype density.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057298
PMCID: PMC3585353
PMID: 23468962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.