1. Behav Neurosci. 2013 Jun;127(3):387-99. doi: 10.1037/a0032026. Epub 2013 Apr
1.

Two functional serotonin polymorphisms moderate the effect of food reinforcement 
on BMI.

Carr KA(1), Lin H, Fletcher KD, Sucheston L, Singh PK, Salis RJ, Erbe RW, Faith 
MS, Allison DB, Stice E, Epstein LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University at Buffalo, School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Buffalo, NY 14214-3000, USA.

Food reinforcement, or the motivation to eat, has been associated with increased 
energy intake, greater body weight, and prospective weight gain. Much of the 
previous research on the reinforcing value of food has focused on the role of 
dopamine, but it may be worthwhile to examine genetic polymorphisms in the 
serotonin and opioid systems as these neurotransmitters have been shown to be 
related to reinforcement processes and to influence energy intake. We examined 
the relationship among 44 candidate genetic polymorphisms in the dopamine, 
serotonin, and opioid systems, as well as food reinforcement and body mass index 
(BMI) in a sample of 245 individuals. Polymorphisms in the monoamine oxidase A 
(MAOA-LPR) and serotonin receptor 2A genes (rs6314) moderated the effect of food 
reinforcement on BMI, accounting for an additional 5-10% variance and revealed a 
potential role of the single nucleotide polymorphism, rs6314, in the serotonin 
2A receptor as a differential susceptibility factor for obesity. Differential 
susceptibility describes a factor that can confer either risk or protection 
depending on a second variable, such that rs6314 is predictive of both high and 
low BMI based on the level of food reinforcement, while the diathesis stress or 
dual-gain model only influences one end of the outcome measure. The interaction 
with MAOA-LPR better fits the diathesis stress model, with the 3.5R/4R allele 
conferring protection for individuals low in food reinforcement. These results 
provide new insight into genes theoretically involved in obesity, and support 
the hypothesis that genetics moderate the association between food reinforcement 
and BMI.

PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2013 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0032026
PMCID: PMC4049455
PMID: 23544600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the other authors declared a conflict of 
interest.