1. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Jul 2;47(13):6925-34. doi: 10.1021/es3045899. Epub 
2013 May 30.

Attachment of pathogenic prion protein to model oxide surfaces.

Jacobson KH(1), Kuech TR, Pedersen JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, United States.

Prions are the infectious agents in the class of fatal neurodegenerative 
diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, which affect 
humans, deer, sheep, and cattle. Prion diseases of deer and sheep can be 
transmitted via environmental routes, and soil is has been implicated in the 
transmission of these diseases. Interaction with soil particles is expected to 
govern the transport, bioavailability and persistence of prions in soil 
environments. A mechanistic understanding of prion interaction with soil 
components is critical for understanding the behavior of these proteins in the 
environment. Here, we report results of a study to investigate the interactions 
of prions with model oxide surfaces (Al2O3, SiO2) using quartz crystal 
microbalance with dissipation monitoring and optical waveguide light mode 
spectroscopy. The efficiency of prion attachment to Al2O3 and SiO2 depended 
strongly on pH and ionic strength in a manner consistent with electrostatic 
forces dominating interaction with these oxides. The presence of the N-terminal 
portion of the protein appeared to promote attachment to Al2O3 under globally 
electrostatically repulsive conditions. We evaluated the utility of recombinant 
prion protein as a surrogate for prions in attachment experiments and found that 
its behavior differed markedly from that of the infectious agent. Our findings 
suggest that prions would tend to associate with positively charged mineral 
surfaces in soils (e.g., iron and aluminum oxides).

DOI: 10.1021/es3045899
PMCID: PMC4091914
PMID: 23611152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]