1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Jun;20(6):679-86. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2570. Epub 2013 
May 12.

Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate clusters act as molecular beacons for 
vesicle recruitment.

Honigmann A(1), van den Bogaart G, Iraheta E, Risselada HJ, Milovanovic D, 
Mueller V, Müllar S, Diederichsen U, Fasshauer D, Grubmüller H, Hell SW, 
Eggeling C, Kühnel K, Jahn R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nanobiophotonics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Synaptic-vesicle exocytosis is mediated by the vesicular Ca(2+) sensor 
synaptotagmin-1. Synaptotagmin-1 interacts with the SNARE protein syntaxin-1A 
and acidic phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). 
However, it is unclear how these interactions contribute to triggering membrane 
fusion. Using PC12 cells from Rattus norvegicus and artificial supported 
bilayers, we show that synaptotagmin-1 interacts with the polybasic linker 
region of syntaxin-1A independent of Ca(2+) through PIP2. This interaction 
allows both Ca(2+)-binding sites of synaptotagmin-1 to bind to 
phosphatidylserine in the vesicle membrane upon Ca(2+) triggering. We determined 
the crystal structure of the C2B domain of synaptotagmin-1 bound to 
phosphoserine, allowing development of a high-resolution model of synaptotagmin 
bridging two different membranes. Our results suggest that PIP2 clusters 
organized by syntaxin-1 act as molecular beacons for vesicle docking, with the 
subsequent Ca(2+) influx bringing the vesicle membrane close enough for membrane 
fusion.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2570
PMCID: PMC3676452
PMID: 23665582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]