1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Dec;28(12):2550-60. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2001.

Analyses of RANK and RANKL in the post-GWAS context: functional evidence of 
vitamin D stimulation through a RANKL distal region.

Yoskovitz G(1), Garcia-Giralt N, Rodriguez-Sanz M, Urreizti R, Guerri R, 
Ariño-Ballester S, Prieto-Alhambra D, Mellibovsky L, Grinberg D, Nogues X, 
Balcells S, Diez-Perez A.

Author information:
(1)URFOA, IMIM (Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques), Red 
Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), 
Barcelona, Spain.

Over the past decade, many genome-wide association studies (GWAs) and 
meta-analyses have identified genes and regions involved in osteoporotic 
phenotypes. Nevertheless, the large majority of these results were not tested at 
any functional level. GWA-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near 
candidate genes such as RANK and RANKL suggest that these SNPs and/or other 
variants nearby may be involved in bone phenotype determination. This study 
focuses on SNPs along these two genes, which encode proteins with a 
well-established role in the bone remodeling equilibrium. Thirty-three SNPs, 
chosen for their location in evolutionary conserved regions or replicated from 
previous studies, were genotyped in the BARCOS cohort of 1061 postmenopausal 
women and tested for association with osteoporotic phenotypes. SNP rs9594738, 
which lies 184 kb upstream of the RANKL gene, was the only SNP found to be 
associated with a bone phenotype (dominant model: beta coefficient = -0.034, p = 
1.5 × 10(-4) , for lumbar spine bone mineral density). Functional experiments 
exploring a distal region (DR) of 831 bp that harbors this SNP in a centered 
position (nt 470) demonstrated its capacity to inhibit the RANKL promoter in 
reporter gene assays. Remarkably, this DR inhibition was significantly reduced 
in the presence of vitamin D. In conclusion, the GWA-associated SNP rs9594738 
lies in a region involved in transcription regulation through which vitamin D 
could be regulating RANKL expression and bone mineral density.

© 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2001
PMID: 23744843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]