1. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 1;319(13):1998-2005. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.05.025. 
Epub 2013 Jun 4.

ALS/FTLD-linked TDP-43 regulates neurite morphology and cell survival in 
differentiated neurons.

Han JH(1), Yu TH(1), Ryu HH(1), Jun MH(1), Ban BK(1), Jang DJ(2), Lee JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Nanotechnology, 
Hannam University, Dajeon 305-811, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Applied Biology, College of Ecology and Environment, Kyungpook 
National University, 386, Gajang-dong, Sangju-si, Kyungbuk 742-711, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Nanotechnology, 
Hannam University, Dajeon 305-811, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
leeja@hnu.kr.

Tar-DNA binding protein of 43kDa (TDP-43) has been characterized as a major 
component of protein aggregates in brains with neurodegenerative diseases such 
as frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). However, physiological roles of TDP-43 and early cellular pathogenic 
effects caused by disease associated mutations in differentiated neurons are 
still largely unknown. Here, we investigated the physiological roles of TDP-43 
and the effects of missense mutations associated with diseases in differentiated 
cortical neurons. The reduction of TDP-43 by siRNA increased abnormal neurites 
and decreased cell viability. ALS/FTLD-associated missense mutant proteins 
(A315T, Q331K, and M337V) were partially mislocalized to the cytosol and 
neurites when compared to wild-type and showed abnormal neurites similar to 
those observed in cases of loss of TDP-43. Interestingly, cytosolic expression 
of wild-type TDP-43 with mutated nuclear localization signals also induced 
abnormal neurtie morphology and reduction of cell viability. However, there was 
no significant difference in the effects of cytosolic expression in neuronal 
morphology and cell toxicity between wild-type and missense mutant proteins. 
Thus, our results suggest that mislocalization of missense mutant TDP-43 may 
contribute to loss of TDP-43 function and affect neuronal morphology, probably 
via dominant negative action before severe neurodegeneration in differentiated 
cortical neurons.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.05.025
PMID: 23742895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]