1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013 Aug 1;86(5):956-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.003.

Effect of normal lung definition on lung dosimetry and lung toxicity prediction 
in radiation therapy treatment planning.

Wang W(1), Xu Y, Schipper M, Matuszak MM, Ritter T, Cao Y, Ten Haken RK, Kong 
FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to compare lung dose-volume histogram (DVH) parameters 
such as mean lung dose (MLD) and the lung volume receiving â‰¥20 Gy (V20) of 
commonly used definitions of normal lung in terms of tumor/target subtraction 
and to determine to what extent they differ in predicting radiation pneumonitis 
(RP).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: One hundred lung cancer patients treated with definitive 
radiation therapy were assessed. The gross tumor volume (GTV) and clinical 
planning target volume (PTVc) were defined by the treating physician and 
dosimetrist. For this study, the clinical target volume (CTV) was defined as GTV 
with 8-mm uniform expansion, and the PTV was defined as CTV with an 8-mm uniform 
expansion. Lung DVHs were generated with exclusion of targets: (1) GTV (DVHG); 
(2) CTV (DVHC); (3) PTV (DVHP); and (4) PTVc (DVHPc). The lung DVHs, V20s, and 
MLDs from each of the 4 methods were compared, as was their significance in 
predicting radiation pneumonitis of grade 2 or greater (RP2).
RESULTS: There are significant differences in dosimetric parameters among the 
various definition methods (all Ps<.05). The mean and maximum differences in V20 
are 4.4% and 12.6% (95% confidence interval 3.6%-5.1%), respectively. The mean 
and maximum differences in MLD are 3.3 Gy and 7.5 Gy (95% confidence interval, 
1.7-4.8 Gy), respectively. MLDs of all methods are highly correlated with each 
other and significantly correlated with clinical RP2, although V20s are not. For 
RP2 prediction, on the receiver operating characteristic curve, MLD from DVHG 
(MLDG) has a greater area under curve of than MLD from DVHC (MLDC) or DVHP 
(MLDP). Limiting RP2 to 30%, the threshold is 22.4, 20.6, and 18.8 Gy, for MLDG, 
MLDC, and MLDP, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The differences in MLD and V20 from various lung definitions are 
significant. MLD from the GTV exclusion method may be more accurate in 
predicting clinical significant radiation pneumonitis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.05.003
PMCID: PMC4028143
PMID: 23845844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none.