1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e67603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067603. Print 
2013.

Generation of reactive oxygen species by polyenylpyrroles derivatives causes DNA 
damage leading to G2/M arrest and apoptosis in human oral squamous cell 
carcinoma cells.

Hua KF(1), Liao PC, Fang Z, Yang FL, Yang YL, Chen YL, Chiu YC, Liu ML, Lam Y, 
Wu SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Animal Science, National Ilan University, 
Ilan, Taiwan. kfhua@niu.edu.tw

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) accounts for 5.8% of all malignancies in 
Taiwan and the incidence of OSCC is on the rise. OSCC is also a common 
malignancy worldwide and the five-year survival rate remains poor. Therefore, 
new and effective treatments are needed to control OSCC. In the present study we 
have investigated the efficacy and associated mechanisms of polyenylpyrroles and 
their analogs in both in vitro cell culture and in vivo nude mice xenografts. 
Auxarconjugatin B (compound 1a) resulted in cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase 
and caspase-dependent apoptosis in OEC-M1 and HSC-3 cells by activating DNA 
damage and mitochondria dysfunction through the loss of mitochondrial membrane 
potential, release of cytochrome c, increase in B-cell lymphoma-2-associated X 
protein level, and decrease in B-cell lymphoma-2 level. Compound 1a-induced 
generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species through cytochrome P450 1A1 
was identified as a major mechanism of its effect for DNA damage, mitochondria 
dysfunction and apoptosis, which was reversed by antioxidant N-acetylcysteine as 
well as cytochrome P450 1A1 inhibitor and specific siRNA. Furthermore, compound 
1a-treated nude mice showed a reduction in the OEC-M1 xenograft tumor growth and 
an increase in the caspase-3 activation in xenograft tissue. These results 
provide promising insights as to how compound 1a mediates cytotoxicity and may 
prove to be a molecular rationale for its translation into a potential 
therapeutic against OSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067603
PMCID: PMC3695893
PMID: 23840748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.