1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10449-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt787. Epub
2013  Sep 2.

Engineering modular 'ON' RNA switches using biological components.

Ceres P(1), Trausch JJ, Batey RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, 596 UCB, 
Boulder, CO 80309-0596, USA.

Riboswitches are cis-acting regulatory elements broadly distributed in bacterial 
mRNAs that control a wide range of critical metabolic activities. Expression is 
governed by two distinct domains within the mRNA leader: a sensory 'aptamer 
domain' and a regulatory 'expression platform'. Riboswitches have also received 
considerable attention as important tools in synthetic biology because of their 
conceptually simple structure and the ability to obtain aptamers that bind 
almost any conceivable small molecule using in vitro selection (referred to as 
SELEX). In the design of artificial riboswitches, a significant hurdle has been 
to couple the two domains enabling their efficient communication. We previously 
demonstrated that biological transcriptional 'OFF' expression platforms are 
easily coupled to diverse aptamers, both biological and SELEX-derived, using 
simple design rules. Here, we present two modular transcriptional 'ON' 
riboswitch expression platforms that are also capable of hosting foreign 
aptamers. We demonstrate that these biological parts can be used to facilely 
generate artificial chimeric riboswitches capable of robustly regulating 
transcription both in vitro and in vivo. We expect that these modular expression 
platforms will be of great utility for various synthetic biological applications 
that use RNA-based biosensors.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt787
PMCID: PMC3905868
PMID: 23999097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]