1. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):90-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.015. Epub
2013  Aug 29.

Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 coordinate digit number in a Gli3-dependent manner.

Collette NM(1), Yee CS, Murugesh D, Sebastian A, Taher L, Gale NW, Economides 
AN, Harland RM, Loots GG.

Author information:
(1)Biology and Biotechnology Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 
7000 East Avenue, L-452, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.

WNT signaling is critical in most aspects of skeletal development and 
homeostasis, and antagonists of WNT signaling are emerging as key regulatory 
proteins with great promise as therapeutic agents for bone disorders. Here we 
show that Sost and its paralog Sostdc1 emerged through ancestral genome 
duplication and their expression patterns have diverged to delineate 
non-overlapping domains in most organ systems including musculoskeletal, 
cardiovascular, nervous, digestive, reproductive and respiratory. In the 
developing limb, Sost and Sostdc1 display dynamic expression patterns with Sost 
being restricted to the distal ectoderm and Sostdc1 to the proximal ectoderm and 
the mesenchyme. While Sostdc1(-/-) mice lack any obvious limb or skeletal 
defects, Sost(-/-) mice recapitulate the hand defects described for 
Sclerosteosis patients. However, elevated WNT signaling in Sost(-/-); 
Sostdc1(-/-) mice causes misregulation of SHH signaling, ectopic activation of 
Sox9 in the digit 1 field and preaxial polydactyly in a Gli1- and Gli3-dependent 
manner. In addition, we show that the syndactyly documented in Sclerosteosis is 
present in both Sost(-/-) and Sost(-/-); Sostdc1(-/-) mice, and is driven by 
misregulation of Fgf8 in the AER, a region lacking Sost and Sostdc1 expression. 
This study highlights the complexity of WNT signaling in skeletal biology and 
disease and emphasizes how redundant mechanism and non-cell autonomous effects 
can synergize to unveil new intricate phenotypes caused by elevated WNT 
signaling.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.015
PMCID: PMC3861057
PMID: 23994639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]