1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 9;8(10):e75684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075684. 
eCollection 2013.

ESAT-6 and HspX improve the effectiveness of BCG to induce human dendritic 
cells-dependent Th1 and NK cells activation.

Marongiu L(1), Donini M, Toffali L, Zenaro E, Dusi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, Section of General Pathology, 
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

The limited efficacy of the BCG vaccine against tuberculosis is partly due to 
the missing expression of immunogenic proteins. We analyzed whether the addition 
to BCG of ESAT-6 and HspX, two Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) antigens, could 
enhance its capacity to activate human dendritic cells (DCs). BCG showed a weak 
ability to induce DC maturation, cytokine release, and CD4(+) lymphocytes and NK 
cells activation. The addition of ESAT-6 or HspX alone to BCG-stimulated DC did 
not improve these processes, whereas their simultaneous addition enhanced 
BCG-dependent DC maturation and cytokine release, as well as the ability of 
BCG-treated DCs to stimulate IFN-γ release and CD69 expression by CD4(+) 
lymphocytes and NK cells. Addition of TLR2-blocking antibody decreased IL-12 
release by BCG-stimulated DCs incubated with ESAT-6 and HspX, as well as IFN-γ 
secretion by CD4(+) lymphocytes co-cultured with these cells. Moreover, HspX and 
ESAT-6 improved the capacity of BCG-treated DCs to induce the expression of 
memory phenotype marker CD45RO in naïve CD4(+) T cells. Our results indicate 
that ESAT-6 and HspX cooperation enables BCG-treated human DCs to induce T 
lymphocyte and NK cell-mediated immune responses through TLR2-dependent IL-12 
secretion. Therefore ESAT-6 and HspX represent good candidates for improving the 
effectiveness of BCG vaccination.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075684
PMCID: PMC3794045
PMID: 24130733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.