1. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Dec 5;13(6):734-44. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.09.015. Epub
 2013 Oct 17.

Transplantation of expanded fetal intestinal progenitors contributes to colon 
regeneration after injury.

Fordham RP(1), Yui S, Hannan NR, Soendergaard C, Madgwick A, Schweiger PJ, 
Nielsen OH, Vallier L, Pedersen RA, Nakamura T, Watanabe M, Jensen KB.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust & Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK; Anne McLaren Laboratory for 
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, CB2 0SZ, UK.

Regeneration and homeostasis in the adult intestinal epithelium is driven by 
proliferative resident stem cells, whose functional properties during organismal 
development are largely unknown. Here, we show that human and mouse fetal 
intestine contains proliferative, immature progenitors, which can be expanded in 
vitro as Fetal Enterospheres (FEnS). A highly similar progenitor population can 
be established during intestinal differentiation of human induced pluripotent 
stem cells. Established cultures of mouse fetal intestinal progenitors express 
lower levels of Lgr5 than mature progenitors and propagate in the presence of 
the Wnt antagonist Dkk1, and new cultures can be induced to form mature 
intestinal organoids by exposure to Wnt3a. Following transplantation in a 
colonic injury model, FEnS contribute to regeneration of colonic epithelium by 
forming epithelial crypt-like structures expressing region-specific 
differentiation markers. This work provides insight into mechanisms underlying 
development of the mammalian intestine and points to future opportunities for 
patient-specific regeneration of the digestive tract.

Copyright Â© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.09.015
PMCID: PMC3858813
PMID: 24139758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]