1. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Feb;33(2):277-300. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1582. Epub 2013 
Dec 10.

Comparison of gene expression profiles and related pathways in chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension.

Gu S(1), Su P(1), Yan J(1), Zhang X(1), An X(1), Gao J(1), Xin R(1), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100020, P.R. China.

Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is one of the main causes 
of severe pulmonary hypertension. However, despite treatment (pulmonary 
endarterectomy), in approximately 15-20% of patients, pulmonary vascular 
resistance and pulmonary arterial pressure continue to increase. To date, little 
is known about the changes that occur in gene expression in CTEPH. The 
identification of genes associated with CTEPH may provide insight into the 
pathogenesis of CTEPH and may aid in diagnosis and treatment. In this study, we 
analyzed the gene expresion profiles of pulmonary artery endothelial cells from 
5 patients with CTEPH and 5 healthy controls using oligonucleotide microarrays. 
Bioinformatics analyses using the Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG databases were 
carried out to identify the genes and pathways specifically associated with 
CTEPH. Signal transduction networks were established to identify the core genes 
regulating the progression of CTEPH. A number of genes were found to be 
differentially expressed in the pulmonary artery endothelial cells from patients 
with CTEPH. In total, 412 GO terms and 113 pathways were found to be associated 
with our list of genes. All differential gene interactions in the Signal-Net 
network were analyzed. JAK3, GNA15, MAPK13, ARRB2 and F2R were the most 
significantly altered. Bioinformatics analysis may help gather and analyze large 
amounts of data in microarrays by means of rigorous experimental planning, 
scientific statistical analysis and the collection of complete data. In this 
study, a novel differential gene expression pattern was constructed. However, 
further studies are required to identify novel targets for the diagnosis and 
treatment of CTEPH.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1582
PMCID: PMC3896458
PMID: 24337368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]