1. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4023-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1526-0. Epub 2013 
Dec 27.

Role of ERCC1 variants in response to chemotherapy and clinical outcome of 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.

Huang SJ(1), Wang YF, Jin ZY, Sun JY, Guo ZL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of 
Inner Mongolia Medical University, Huhhot, Inner Mongolia, 010059, China.

Excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) and xeroderma 
pigmentosum-F (XPF) in the nucleotide excision repair pathway have been 
effectively repairing DNA damage induced by chemotherapeutic agents. We 
conducted a cohort study to assess the associations of ERCC1 and XPF 
polymorphisms with response to platinum-based chemotherapy and clinical outcome 
of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). One hundred eighty-seven NSCLC cases 
treated with platinum-based chemotherapy were prospectively analyzed. The 
predictive value of four SNPs in ERCC1 and two SNPs in XPF in patient's response 
and survival related to platinum-based chemotherapy were analyzed using Ï‡(2) 
tests, Kaplan-Meier method, log-rank test, and Cox proportional hazards 
regression. The overall chemotherapy response rate for treatment was 51.18%. One 
hundred eighty-seven patients were followed up, and the median survival time is 
17.6 months (ranged from 1 to 50 months). A total of 106 patients (56.68%) died 
from NSCLC during the follow-up period. Carriers of the rs3212986 AA and A 
allele had a borderline significantly lower response rate to the chemotherapy. 
In the Cox proportional hazards model, patients carrying the ERCC1 rs3212986 AA 
genotype were significantly associated with increased risk of death from NSCLC 
when compared with those with CC genotype as a reference variable. This study 
reported that variants in ERCC1 can be used as a prognostic maker to 
platinum-based chemotherapy in NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-013-1526-0
PMID: 24370899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]