1. Immunogenetics. 2014 Mar;66(3):171-84. doi: 10.1007/s00251-014-0758-5. Epub
2014  Jan 31.

A two-nucleotide deletion renders the mannose-binding lectin 2 (MBL2) gene 
nonfunctional in Danish Landrace and Duroc pigs.

Bergman IM(1), Edman K, van As P, Huisman A, Juul-Madsen HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Aarhus University, Postboks 50, 8830, Tjele, 
Denmark.

The mannose-binding lectins (MBLs) are central components of innate immunity, 
facilitating phagocytosis and inducing the lectin activation pathway of the 
complement system. Previously, it has been found that certain single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in porcine MBL1 and MBL2 (pMBL1, pMBL2) affect mRNA 
expression, serum concentration, and susceptibility to disease, but the 
combinatory effect of pMBL1 and pMBL2 genotypes needs further elucidation. In 
the present study, pMBL1 and pMBL2 alleles, combined pMBL haplotypes, and MBL-A 
concentration in serum were analyzed in purebred Landrace (N = 30) and Duroc 
(N = 10) pigs. Furthermore, the combined pMBL haplotypes of 89 Piètrain × (Large 
White × Landrace) crossbred pigs were studied, and the genotypes of 67 
crossbreds challenged with Escherichia coli were compared to their individual 
disease records. In the purebred animals, three non-synonymous SNPs and a 
two-nucleotide deletion were detected in the coding sequence of pMBL2. The 
two-nucleotide deletion was present at a frequency of 0.88 in the Landrace pigs 
and 0.90 in the Duroc pigs, respectively. In the crossbreds, the T allele of the 
SNP G949T in pMBL1-previously shown to have profound effect on MBL-A 
concentration even in the heterozygote condition-was detected in 47 % of the 
animals. Finally, an association was found between low-producing MBL genotypes 
and low body weight on the day of weaning in the same animals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-014-0758-5
PMID: 24477343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]