1. Virulence. 2014 May 15;5(4):477-97. doi: 10.4161/viru.28595. Epub 2014 Mar 25.

Streptococcus suis infection: an emerging/reemerging challenge of bacterial 
infectious diseases?

Feng Y(1), Zhang H(2), Wu Z(3), Wang S(4), Cao M(5), Hu D(5), Wang C(5).

Author information:
(1)Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases & State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Disease; First Affiliated Hospital; Zhejiang University School of Medicine; 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, PR China; Department of Medical Microbiology and 
Parasitology; Zhejiang University School of Medicine; Hangzhou, Zhejiang, PR 
China.
(2)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC); Urbana, IL USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine; Iowa State 
University; Ames, IA USA.
(4)College of Life Sciences; Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University; Fuzhou, 
Fujian, PR China.
(5)Department of Epidemiology; Research Institute for Medicine of Nanjing 
Command; Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.

Streptococcus suis (S. suis) is a family of pathogenic gram-positive bacterial 
strains that represents a primary health problem in the swine industry 
worldwide. S. suis is also an emerging zoonotic pathogen that causes severe 
human infections clinically featuring with varied diseases/syndromes (such as 
meningitis, septicemia, and arthritis). Over the past few decades, continued 
efforts have made significant progress toward better understanding this zoonotic 
infectious entity, contributing in part to the elucidation of the molecular 
mechanism underlying its high pathogenicity. This review is aimed at presenting 
an updated overview of this pathogen from the perspective of molecular 
epidemiology, clinical diagnosis and typing, virulence mechanism, and protective 
antigens contributing to its zoonosis.

DOI: 10.4161/viru.28595
PMCID: PMC4063810
PMID: 24667807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]