1. Balkan J Med Genet. 2013 Dec;16(2):59-66. doi: 10.2478/bjmg-2013-0033.

Lack of Association of Tumor Necrosis Factor-α G-308A and Transforming Growth 
Factor-β1 C-509T Polymorphisms in Patients with Deep Neck Space Infections.

Jevtović-Stoimenov T(1), Despotović M(1), Pešić Z(2), Cosić A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Niš, Niš, 
Serbia.
(2)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, Dental Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Niš, Niš, Serbia.

Deep neck space infections are defined as infections that spread along the 
fascial planes and spaces of the head and neck. Even in the era of antibiotics, 
these infections can and have been potentially life-threatening conditions. The 
role of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α) and transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) genes in deep neck infections 
has not been studied. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate the 
distribution of the TNF-α G-308A and TGF-β1 C-509T polymorphisms in patients 
suffering from infections of deep neck spaces and to determine the correlation 
of these polymorphisms with the values of inflammation markers [C-reactive 
protein (CRP) and white blood cell (WBC) count]. A total of 41 patients with 
infections of deep neck spaces and 44 healthy controls were screened for TNF-α 
G-308A and TGF-β1 C-509T polymorphisms using the polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. The 
distribution of the TNF-α G-308A genotype in patients did not reveal 
statistically significant correlation compared to con-trols (p = 0.483, χ(2) = 
0.491) as well as the distribution of the TGF-β1 C-509T genotypes (p = 0.644, 
χ(2) = 0.725). The distribution of TNF-α -308 and TGF-β1 -509 alleles was not 
significantly different in patients compared to controls. Moreover, CRP levels 
and WBC counts were not associated with TNF-α G-308A and TGF-β1 C-509T promoter 
polymorphisms in patients with deep neck infections. In conclusion, our study 
suggests that the TNF-α G-308A and TGF-β1 C-509T polymorphisms are not 
associated with infections of deep neck spaces.

DOI: 10.2478/bjmg-2013-0033
PMCID: PMC4001417
PMID: 24778565