1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:451826. doi: 10.1155/2014/451826. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Protective effects of pretreatment with oleanolic acid in rats in the acute 
phase of hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury: role of the PI3K/Akt pathway.

Gui B(1), Hua F(2), Chen J(3), Xu Z(4), Sun H(5), Qian Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, 1st Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China ; Key laboratory of Anesthesiology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 
China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, 2rd Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of Emergency, 1st Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Jiangsu Tumor Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(5)Center for Drug Discovery, College of Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing, China.

Erratum in
    Mediators Inflamm. 2020 Nov 28;2020:9649787. doi: 10.1155/2020/9649787.

Retraction in
    Mediators Inflamm. 2022 Apr 26;2022:9825785. doi: 10.1155/2022/9825785.

Oleanolic acid (OA) has been used to treat liver disorders, but whether it can 
attenuate hepatic ischemia-reperfusion- (IR-) associated liver dysfunction 
remains unexplored. In the present study, 160 male Sprague-Dawley rats were 
equally divided into five groups: group SH received neither hepatic IR nor 
drugs; group IR received hepatic IR without drugs; group CM and group OA 
received 0.5% sodium carboxymethylcellulose and 100 mg/kg OA, intragastrically, 
once a day for seven days before the hepatic IR, respectively; on the basis of 
treatment in group OA, group OA+wortmannin further received 15 μg/kg of PI3K 
inhibitor wortmannin, intraperitoneally, 30 min before the hepatic IR. Then each 
group was equally divided into four subgroups according to four time points 
(preoperation, 0 h, 3 h, and 6 h after reperfusion). Serum ALT activity, IL-1β 
concentration, and hepatic phosphorylation of PI3K, Akt, and GSK-3β protein 
expression were serially studied. We found that OA pretreatment improved 
histological status and decreased serum ALT and IL-1β levels. It also increased 
p-PI3K, p-Akt, and p-GSK-3β protein expression at all the four time points. 
Prophylactic wortmannin partially reversed OA's protective effects. The data 
indicate that OA pretreatment protects liver from IR injury during the acute 
phase partially through PI3K/Akt-mediated inactivation of GSK-3β.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/451826
PMCID: PMC4009183
PMID: 24829521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]