1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 24;9(6):e100252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100252. 
eCollection 2014.

Genetically-encoded yellow fluorescent cAMP indicator with an expanded dynamic 
range for dual-color imaging.

Odaka H(1), Arai S(2), Inoue T(3), Kitaguchi T(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Group, Waseda Bioscience Research Institute in Singapore 
(WABIOS), Waseda University, Singapore, Singapore; Department of Life Science 
and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda 
University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Cell Signaling Group, Waseda Bioscience Research Institute in Singapore 
(WABIOS), Waseda University, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Cyclic AMP is a ubiquitous second messenger, which mediates many cellular 
responses mainly initiated by activation of cell surface receptors. Various 
FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer-based ratiometric cAMP indicators have been 
created for monitoring the spatial and temporal dynamics of cAMP at the 
single-cell level. However, single fluorescent protein-based cAMP indicators 
have been poorly developed, with improvement required for dynamic range and 
brightness. Based on our previous yellow fluorescent protein-based cAMP 
indicator, Flamindo, we developed an improved yellow fluorescent cAMP indicator 
named Flamindo2. Flamindo2 has a 2-fold expanded dynamic range and 8-fold 
increased brightness compared with Flamindo by optimization of linker peptides 
in the vicinity of the chromophore. We found that fluorescence intensity of 
Flamindo2 was decreased to 25% in response to cAMP. Live-cell cAMP imaging of 
the cytosol and nucleus in COS7 cells using Flamindo2 and nlsFlamindo2, 
respectively, showed that forskolin elevated cAMP levels in each compartment 
with different kinetics. Furthermore, dual-color imaging of cAMP and Ca2+ with 
Flamindo2 and a red fluorescent Ca2+ indicator, R-GECO, showed that cAMP and 
Ca2+ elevation were induced by noradrenaline in single HeLa cells. Our study 
shows that Flamindo2, which is feasible for multi-color imaging with other 
intracellular signaling molecules, is useful and is an alternative tool for 
live-cell imaging of intracellular cAMP dynamics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100252
PMCID: PMC4069001
PMID: 24959857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.