1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e102132. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102132. 
eCollection 2014.

A polymer-based magnetic resonance tracer for visualization of solid tumors by 
13C spectroscopic imaging.

Suzuki Y(1), Iida M(1), Miura I(2), Inubushi T(3), Morikawa S(3).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic Division, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokushima, Tokushima, 
Japan.
(2)Pharmaceutical Division, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokushima, 
Tokushima, Japan.
(3)Biomedical MR Science Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Morphological imaging precedes lesion-specific visualization in magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) because of the superior ability of this technique to 
depict tissue morphology with excellent spatial and temporal resolutions. To 
achieve lesion-specific visualization of tumors by MRI, we investigated the 
availability of a novel polymer-based tracer. Although the 13C nucleus is a 
candidate for a detection nucleus because of its low background signal in the 
body, the low magnetic resonance sensitivity of the nucleus needs to be resolved 
before developing a 13C-based tracer. In order to overcome this problem, we 
enriched polyethylene glycol (PEG), a biocompatible polymer, with 13C atoms. 
13C-PEG40,000 (13C-PEG with an average molecular weight of 40 kDa) emitted a 
single 13C signal with a high signal-to-noise ratio due to its ability to 
maintain signal sharpness, as was confirmed by in vivo investigation, and 
displayed a chemical shift sufficiently distinct from that of endogenous fat. 
13C-PEG40,000 intravenously injected into mice showed long retention in 
circulation, leading to its effective accumulation in tumors reflecting the 
well-known phenomenon that macromolecules accumulate in tumors because of leaky 
tumor capillaries. These properties of 13C-PEG40,000 allowed visualization of 
tumors in mice by 13C spectroscopic imaging. These findings suggest that a 
technique based on 13C-PEG is a promising strategy for tumor detection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102132
PMCID: PMC4090184
PMID: 25007334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: YS, MI and IM are employees 
of Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. SM and TI have received donations for 
developing new magnetic resonance imaging technology from Otsuka Pharmaceutical 
Co., Ltd. YS and MI have stocks of Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. YS, MI and IM 
are registered as inventors of a related patent currently pending (WO 
2007/132806). Patent application name: Magnetic resonance contrast medium using 
polyethylene glycol and magnetic resonance image pick-up method. International 
application number: PCT/JP2007/059849. International publication number: WO 
2007/132806. The patent has been registered at this stage in Japan (Patent 
number: 5435940), Taiwan (Patent number: I400091) and Europe (Patent number: 
EP2020244B1). In addition to the patent information, the authors would like to 
describe related stockholding of authors in the competing interests section as 
follows. There are no further patents, products in development or marketed 
products to declare. This does not alter our adherence to all the PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the guide for 
authors.