1. Springerplus. 2014 Jun 24;3:307. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-307. eCollection
2014.

Scientometric analyses of studies on the role of innate variation in athletic 
performance.

Lombardo MP(1), Emiah S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Grand Valley State University, Allendale, MI 49401 
USA.

Historical events have produced an ideologically charged atmosphere in the USA 
surrounding the potential influences of innate variation on athletic 
performance. We tested the hypothesis that scientific studies of the role of 
innate variation in athletic performance were less likely to have authors with 
USA addresses than addresses elsewhere because of this cultural milieu. Using 
scientometric data collected from 290 scientific papers published in 
peer-reviewed journals from 2000-2012, we compared the proportions of authors 
with USA addresses with those that listed addresses elsewhere that studied the 
relationships between athletic performance and (a) prenatal exposure to 
androgens, as indicated by the ratio between digits 2 and 4, and (b) the 
genotypes for angiotensin converting enzyme, Î±-actinin-3, and myostatin; traits 
often associated with athletic performance. Authors with USA addresses were 
disproportionately underrepresented on papers about the role of innate variation 
in athletic performance. We searched NIH and NSF databases for grant proposals 
solicited or funded from 2000-2012 to determine if the proportion of authors 
that listed USA addresses was associated with funding patterns. NIH did not 
solicit grant proposals designed to examine these factors in the context of 
athletic performance and neither NIH nor NSF funded grants designed to study 
these topics. We think the combined effects of a lack of government funding and 
the avoidance of studying controversial or non-fundable topics by USA based 
scientists are responsible for the observation that authors with USA addresses 
were underrepresented on scientific papers examining the relationships between 
athletic performance and innate variation.

DOI: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-307
PMCID: PMC4082256
PMID: 25013748