1. J Pathol. 2014 Nov;234(3):365-74. doi: 10.1002/path.4401. Epub 2014 Aug 11.

The mutational burdens and evolutionary ages of early gastric cancers are 
comparable to those of advanced gastric cancers.

Kim TM(1), Jung SH, Kim MS, Baek IP, Park SW, Lee SH, Lee HH, Kim SS, Chung YJ, 
Lee SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, College of Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, 137-701, Republic of Korea.

Early gastric cancers (EGCs) precede advanced gastric cancers (AGCs), with a 
favourable prognosis compared to AGC. To understand the progression mechanism of 
EGC to AGC, it is required to disclose EGC and AGC genomes in mutational and 
evolutionary perspectives. We performed whole-exome sequencing and copy number 
profiling of nine microsatellite (MS)-unstable (MSI-H) (five EGCs and four AGCs) 
and eight MS-stable (MSS) gastric cancers (four EGCs and four AGCs). In the 
cancers, we observed well-known driver mutations (TP53, APC, PIK3CA, ARID1A, and 
KRAS) that were enriched in cancer-related pathways, including chromatin 
remodelling and tyrosine kinase activity. The MSI-H genomes harboured ten times 
more mutations, but were largely depleted of copy number alterations (CNAs) 
compared to the MSS cancers. Interestingly, EGC genomes showed a comparable 
level of mutations to AGC in terms of the number, sequence composition, and 
functional consequences (potential driver mutations and affected pathways) of 
mutations. Furthermore, the CNAs between EGC and AGC genomes were not 
significantly different in either MSI-H and MSS. Evolutionary analyses using 
somatic mutations and MSI as molecular clocks further identified that EGC 
genomes were as old as AGC genomes in both MSS and MSI-H cancers. Our results 
suggest that the genetic makeup for gastric cancer may already be achieved in 
EGC genomes and that the time required for transition to AGC may be relatively 
short. Also, the data suggest a possibility that the mutational profiles 
obtained from early biopsies may be useful in the clinical settings for the 
molecular diagnosis and therapeutics of gastric cancer patients.

Copyright Â© 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4401
PMID: 25042771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]