1. J Med Genet. 2014 Sep;51(9):581-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102282. Epub
2014  Jul 22.

TRMT10A dysfunction is associated with abnormalities in glucose homeostasis, 
short stature and microcephaly.

Gillis D(1), Krishnamohan A(2), Yaacov B(3), Shaag A(3), Jackman JE(2), Elpeleg 
O(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Ein-Kerem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio State Biochemistry Program and 
Center for RNA Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(3)Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Trm10 is a tRNA m(1)G9 methyltransferase, which in yeast modifies 12 
different tRNA species, yet is considered non-essential for viability under 
standard growth conditions. In humans, there are three Trm10 orthologs, one 
mitochondrial and two presumed cytoplasmic. A nonsense mutation in one of the 
cytoplasmic orthologs (TRMT10A) has recently been associated with microcephaly, 
intellectual disability, short stature and adolescent onset diabetes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The subjects were three patients who suffered from 
microcephaly, intellectual disability, short stature, delayed puberty, seizures 
and disturbed glucose metabolism, mainly hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. A 
homozygous Gly206Arg (G206R) mutation in the TRMT10A gene was identified using 
whole exome sequencing. The mutation segregated in the family and was absent 
from large control cohorts. Determination of the methylation activity of the 
expressed wild-type (WT) and variant TRMT10A enzymes with transcripts of (32)P 
-tRNA(Gly) GCC as a substrate revealed a striking defect (<0.1% of WT activity) 
for the variant enzyme. The binding affinity of the G206R variant enzyme to 
tRNA, determined by fluorescence anisotropy, was similar to that of the WT 
enzyme.
CONCLUSIONS: The completely abolished m(1)G9 methyltransferase activity of the 
mutant enzyme is likely due to significant defects in its ability to bind the 
methyl donor S-adenosyl methionine. We propose that TRMT10A deficiency accounts 
for abnormalities in glucose homeostasis initially manifesting both ketotic and 
non-ketotic hypoglycaemic events with transition to diabetes in adolescence, 
perhaps as a consequence of accelerated Î² cell apoptosis. The seizure disorder 
and intellectual disability are probably secondary to mutant gene expression in 
neuronal tissue.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102282
PMID: 25053765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]