1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):25351-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533281. Epub 
2014 Jul 25.

The HIV-1 integrase mutant R263A/K264A is 2-fold defective for TRN-SR2 binding 
and viral nuclear import.

De Houwer S(1), Demeulemeester J(1), Thys W(1), Rocha S(1), Dirix L(1), Gijsbers 
R(1), Christ F(1), Debyser Z(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of 
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)From the Laboratory for Molecular Virology and Gene Therapy, Department of 
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
3000, Leuven, Belgium zeger.debyser@med.kuleuven.be.

Transportin-SR2 (Tnpo3, TRN-SR2), a human karyopherin encoded by the TNPO3 gene, 
has been identified as a cellular cofactor of HIV-1 replication, specifically 
interacting with HIV-1 integrase (IN). Whether this interaction mediates the 
nuclear import of HIV remains controversial. We previously characterized the 
TRN-SR2 binding interface in IN and introduced mutations at these positions to 
corroborate the biological relevance of the interaction. The pleiotropic nature 
of IN mutations complicated the interpretation. Indeed, all previously tested IN 
interaction mutants also affected RT. Here we report on a virus with a pair of 
IN mutations, IN(R263A/K264A), that significantly reduce interaction with 
TRN-SR2. The virus retains wild-type reverse transcription activity but displays 
a block in nuclear import and integration, as measured by quantitative PCR. The 
defect in integration of this mutant resulted in a smaller increase in the 
number of two-long terminal repeat circles than for virus specifically blocked 
at integration by raltegravir or catalytic site mutations 
(IN(D64N/D116N/E152Q)). Finally, using an eGFP-IN-labeled HIV fluorescence-based 
import assay, the defect in nuclear import was corroborated. These data 
altogether underscore the importance of the HIV-IN TRN-SR2 protein-protein 
interaction for HIV nuclear import and validate the IN/TRN-SR2 interaction 
interface as a promising target for future antiviral therapy.

Â© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.533281
PMCID: PMC4155696
PMID: 25063804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]