1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Nov;66(11):2976-88. doi: 10.1002/art.38809.

Endoplasmic reticulum degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-like protein 1 targets 
misfolded HLA-B27 dimers for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation.

Guiliano DB(1), Fussell H, Lenart I, Tsao E, Nesbeth D, Fletcher AJ, Campbell 
EC, Yousaf N, Williams S, Santos S, Cameron A, Towers GJ, Kellam P, Hebert DN, 
Gould KG, Powis SJ, Antoniou AN.

Author information:
(1)University College London and University of East London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: HLA-B27 forms misfolded heavy chain dimers, which may predispose 
individuals to inflammatory arthritis by inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR). This study was undertaken to 
define the role of the UPR-induced ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway in 
the disposal of HLA-B27 dimeric conformers.
METHODS: HeLa cell lines expressing only 2 copies of a carboxy-terminally 
Sv5-tagged HLA-B27 were generated. The ER stress-induced protein ER 
degradation-enhancing α-mannosidase-like protein 1 (EDEM1) was overexpressed by 
transfection, and dimer levels were monitored by immunoblotting. EDEM1, the 
UPR-associated transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1), the E3 
ubiquitin ligase hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase degradation 1 
(HRD1), and the degradation-associated proteins derlin 1 and derlin 2 were 
inhibited using either short hairpin RNA or dominant-negative mutants. The 
UPR-associated ERAD of HLA-B27 was confirmed using ER stress-inducing 
pharamacologic agents in kinetic and pulse chase assays.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that UPR-induced machinery can target HLA-B27 dimers 
and that dimer formation can be controlled by alterations to expression levels 
of components of the UPR-induced ERAD pathway. HLA-B27 dimers and misfolded 
major histocompatibility complex class I monomeric molecules bound to EDEM1 were 
detected, and overexpression of EDEM1 led to inhibition of HLA-B27 dimer 
formation. EDEM1 inhibition resulted in up-regulation of HLA-B27 dimers, while 
UPR-induced ERAD of dimers was prevented in the absence of EDEM1. HLA-B27 dimer 
formation was also enhanced in the absence of XBP-1, HRD1, and derlins 1 and 2.
CONCLUSION: The present findings indicate that the UPR ERAD pathway can dispose 
of HLA-B27 dimers, thus presenting a potential novel therapeutic target for 
modulation of HLA-B27-associated inflammatory disease.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.38809
PMCID: PMC4399817
PMID: 25132672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST; The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest.