1. Med Oncol. 2014 Sep;31(9):173. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0173-7. Epub 2014 Aug
23.

A miRNA-binding site single nucleotide polymorphism in the 3'-UTR region of the 
NOD2 gene is associated with colorectal cancer.

Ahangari F(1), Salehi R, Salehi M, Khanahmad H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the common malignancies worldwide. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in miRNA-binding site on gene transcripts are reported 
to play important role in increased risk of CRC in different population. We 
performed a case-control study using 88 CRC patients and 88 non-cancer 
counterparts to evaluate the association between NOD2 rs3135500 polymorphism 
located at 3' untranslated region of the gene and risk of sporadic CRC. 
Genotyping of rs3135500 polymorphism was performed by polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay. We found a 
significant association of AA genotype with risk of CRC (adjusted OR 3.100, CI 
1.621-5.930, p < 0.001). Also, significant difference in physical activity (p = 
0.001) between case and control groups was found. We also found that individuals 
in control group were more aspirin or NSAID user compared to sporadic CRC cases 
(p = 0.002). In the case group, individuals with GG genotype consumed more 
aspirin or NSAID compared with AA+AG genotypes (33.3 vs. 9.6 %, adjusted OR 
4.71, CI 1.25-17.76, p = 0.02). However, in the control group, individuals with 
AA+AG genotypes used more aspirin or NSAID compared with GG genotypes (47.2 vs. 
11.4 %, adjusted OR 14 %, CI 0.05-0.47, p < 0.001).

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0173-7
PMID: 25148897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]