1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 2;9(9):e106535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106535. 
eCollection 2014.

Inhibition of West Nile virus by calbindin-D28k.

Siddharthan V(1), Wang H(1), Davies CJ(2), Hall JO(3), Morrey JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Antiviral Research, Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary 
Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Center for Integrated BioSystems, Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary 
Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, United States of America.
(3)Utah Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Animal, Dairy, and 
Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, United States of 
America.

Evidence indicates that West Nile virus (WNV) employs Ca(2+) influx for its 
replication. Moreover, calcium buffer proteins, such as calbindin D28k 
(CB-D28k), may play an important role mitigating cellular destruction due to 
disease processes, and more specifically, in some neurological diseases. We 
addressed the hypothesis that CB-D28k inhibits WNV replication in cell culture 
and infected rodents. WNV envelope immunoreactivity (ir) was not readily 
co-localized with CB-D28k ir in WNV-infected Vero 76 or motor neuron-like NSC34 
cells that were either stably or transiently transfected with plasmids coding 
for CB-D28k gene. This was confirmed in cultured cells fixed on glass coverslips 
and by flow cytometry. Moreover, WNV infectious titers were reduced in 
CB-D28k-transfected cells. As in cell culture studies, WNV env ir was not 
co-localized with CB-D28k ir in the cortex of an infected WNV hamster, or in the 
hippocampus of an infected mouse. Motor neurons in the spinal cord typically do 
not express CB-D28k and are susceptible to WNV infection. Yet, CB-D28k was 
detected in the surviving motor neurons after the initial phase of WNV infection 
in hamsters. These data suggested that induction of CB-D28k elicit a 
neuroprotective response to WNV infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106535
PMCID: PMC4152291
PMID: 25180779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.