1. Redox Biol. 2014;3:72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.11.004. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

CYP2E1 autoantibodies in liver diseases.

Sutti S(1), Rigamonti C(2), Vidali M(2), Albano E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University "Amedeo Avogadro" of East Piedmont 
and Interdepartmental Research Centre for Autoimmune Diseases (IRCAD), Novara, 
Italy.
(2)Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University "Amedeo Avogadro" of East Piedmont 
and Interdepartmental Research Centre for Autoimmune Diseases (IRCAD), Novara, 
Italy. Electronic address: albano@med.unipmn.it.

Autoimmune reactions involving cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) are a feature of 
idiosyncratic liver injury induced by halogenated hydrocarbons and isoniazid, 
but are also detectable in about one third of the patients with advanced 
alcoholic liver disease (ALD) and chronic hepatitis C (CHC). In these latter the 
presence of anti-CYP2E1 auto-antibodies is an independent predictor of extensive 
necro-inflammation and fibrosis and worsens the recurrence of hepatitis 
following liver transplantation, indicating that CYP2E1-directed autoimmunity 
can contribute to hepatic injury. The molecular characterization of the antigens 
recognized by anti-CYP2E1 auto-antibodies in ALD and CHC has shown that the 
targeted conformational epitopes are located in close proximity on the molecular 
surface. Furthermore, these epitopes can be recognized on CYP2E1 expressed on 
hepatocyte plasma membranes where they can trigger antibody-mediated 
cytotoxicity. This does not exclude that T cell-mediated responses against 
CYP2E1 might also be involved in causing hepatocyte damage. CYP2E1 structural 
modifications by reactive metabolites and molecular mimicry represent important 
factors in the breaking of self-tolerance against CYP2E1 in, respectively, ALD 
and CHC. However, genetic or acquired interferences with the mechanisms 
controlling the homeostasis of the immune system are also likely to contribute. 
More studies are needed to better characterize the impact of anti-CYP2E1 
autoimmunity in liver diseases particularly in relation to the fact that common 
metabolic alterations such as obesity and diabetes stimulates hepatic CYP2E1 
expression.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.11.004
PMCID: PMC4297929
PMID: 25462068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]