1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2015 Nov;30(11):1909-18. doi: 10.1007/s00467-014-3006-1. Epub
 2014 Dec 6.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 and acute kidney injury.

Neyra JA(1), Moe OW(1)(2)(3), Hu MC(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX, 75390-885, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Charles and Jane Pak Center for Mineral Metabolism and Clinical Research, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, 
TX, 75390-885, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX, 75390-885, USA. 
ming-chang.hu@utsouthwestern.edu.
(5)Charles and Jane Pak Center for Mineral Metabolism and Clinical Research, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, 
TX, 75390-885, USA. ming-chang.hu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), which is produced in bone, participates in 
the maintenance of phosphate metabolism and can serve as a biomarker for adverse 
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease and end-stage 
renal disease. Circulating FGF23 rapidly increases after acute kidney injury 
(AKI), preceding other known markers such as neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin and serum creatinine. The increase in FGF23 in AKI appears to be 
independent of parathyroid hormone, vitamin D signaling pathways, and dietary 
phosphate. The potential mechanisms include: (1) increased production of FGF23 
in the bone by yet-to-be-identified factors; (2) ectopic production of FGF23 by 
injured renal tubules; and (3) decreased renal clearance of circulating FGF23. 
Circulating FGF23 determined by intact FGF23 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) is a more reliable biomarker of AKI than FGF23 C-terminal ELISA (a mixed 
readout of C-terminal fragment and intact FGF23). Given that FGF23 can be 
ectopically expressed in differentiated renal tubules and iron modulates FGF23 
metabolism, an effect of iron on FGF23 expression in renal tubules is 
conceivable but remains to be confirmed. More clinical and experimental studies 
are required to validate the use of circulating FGF23 as a biomarker for the 
early identification of AKI and prediction of short- and long-term adverse 
outcomes post-AKI. More importantly, the biologic effect of increased FGF23 in 
AKI needs to be defined.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-014-3006-1
PMCID: PMC4458234
PMID: 25480729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]