1. Mol Aspects Med. 2015 Apr;42:19-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2014.12.002. Epub 2014 
Dec 24.

Natural history of β-cell adaptation and failure in type 2 diabetes.

Alejandro EU(1), Gregg B(2), Blandino-Rosano M(1), Cras-Méneur C(1), 
Bernal-Mizrachi E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetes, Brehm Center for Diabetes Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetes, Brehm Center for Diabetes Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA; VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address: 
ebernal@med.umich.edu.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) is a complex disease characterized by β-cell 
failure in the setting of insulin resistance. The current evidence suggests that 
genetic predisposition, and environmental factors can impair the capacity of the 
β-cells to respond to insulin resistance and ultimately lead to their failure. 
However, genetic studies have demonstrated that known variants account for less 
than 10% of the overall estimated T2D risk, suggesting that additional 
unidentified factors contribute to susceptibility of this disease. In this 
review, we will discuss the different stages that contribute to the development 
of β-cell failure in T2D. We divide the natural history of this process in three 
major stages: susceptibility, β-cell adaptation and β-cell failure, and provide 
an overview of the molecular mechanisms involved. Further research into 
mechanisms will reveal key modulators of β-cell failure and thus identify 
possible novel therapeutic targets and potential interventions to protect 
against β-cell failure.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2014.12.002
PMCID: PMC4404183
PMID: 25542976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]