1. J Intensive Care. 2014 Oct 29;2(1):60. doi: 10.1186/s40560-014-0060-5. 
eCollection 2014.

Role of prothrombin complex concentrate in perioperative coagulation therapy.

Tanaka KA(1), Mazzeffi M(1), Durila M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Cardiothoracic Anesthesia Division, University 
of Maryland, Suite S8D12, 22 South Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201 USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Second Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

Prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) is a term to describe pharmacological 
products that contain lyophilized, human plasma-derived vitamin K-dependent 
factors (F), FII, FVII, FIX, FX, and various amounts of proteins C and S. PCCs 
can be rapidly reconstituted in a small volume (20Â ml for about 500 
international units (IU)) at bedside and administered regardless of the 
patient's blood type. PCCs are categorized as 4-factor PCC if they contain 
therapeutic amounts of FVII, and 3-factor PCC when FVII content is low. In 
addition, activated PCC which contains activated FVII and FX with prothrombin is 
available for factor VIII bypassing therapy in hemophilia patients with 
inhibitors. Currently, 4-factor PCC is approved for the management of bleeding 
in patients taking warfarin, but there has been increasing use of various PCCs 
in the treatment of acquired perioperative coagulopathy unrelated to warfarin 
therapy and in the management of bleeding due to novel oral anticoagulants. 
There is also an ongoing controversy about plasma transfusion and its potential 
hazards including transfusion-related lung injury (TRALI). Early fixed ratio 
plasma transfusion has been implemented in many trauma centers in the USA, 
whereas fibrinogen concentrate and PCC are preferred over plasma transfusion in 
some European centers. In this review, the rationales for including PCCs in the 
perioperative hemostatic management will be discussed in conjunction with plasma 
transfusion.

DOI: 10.1186/s40560-014-0060-5
PMCID: PMC4336276
PMID: 25705417