1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1591-7. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3536. Epub 2015 Mar 
24.

Ser49Gly polymorphism in the β-adrenergic receptor 1 gene in a population sample 
from Rio de Janeiro state, Brazil, stratified by self-identified skin color and 
genetic ancestry.

Santos KT(1), De Freitas RG(1), Manta FS(1), De Carvalho EF(1), Silva DA(1).

Author information:
(1)DNA Diagnostic Laboratory, Biology Institute, Rio de Janeiro State 
University, Rio de Janeiro 20550‑013, Brazil.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) have the highest worldwide mortality rate of any 
type of disease. In recent years, genetic research regarding CVD has been 
conducted using association studies, in which the presence of a genetic 
polymorphism associated with a specific cell signaling pathway in a lower or in 
a higher frequency among patients may be interpreted as a possible causal 
factor. Genetic polymorphisms that occur in the β-adrenergic receptor 1 (β-ADR1) 
can result in significant changes in its function that may result in 
physiopathologies. Ambiguous categorizations, such as skin color and 
self-reported ethnicity have been used in pharmacogenetic studies as phenotypic 
proxies for ancestry; however, admixed populations present a particular 
challenge to the effectiveness of this approach. The main objective of the 
present study was to estimate the diversity and the frequency of the Ser49Gly 
polymorphism of the β-ADR1 gene in a sample of 188 male individuals from the 
population of Rio de Janeiro. The Ser49Gly frequencies were analyzed by two 
forms of sample stratification: The phenotypic criterion of black or non-black 
skin color, and African or non-African ancestry, defined using Y-chromosome 
single nucleotide polymorphisms and autosomal indel markers. These results were 
used to evaluate whether marker-based ancestry criteria and/or skin color were 
associated with the frequency of the Ser49Gly polymorphisms in the heterogeneous 
Rio de Janeiro/Brazilian population. The DNA fragments of interest were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction with specific primers for the Ser49Gly 
marker, and genotyping reactions were performed by restriction with the enzyme 
Eco0109I. Heterozygosity values ranging from 0.25 to 0.50 and 0.20 to 0.41 were 
found for the groups stratified by ancestry and skin color, respectively. Using 
the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at the ser49Gly marker, it was found that there 
was no significant deviation in the genotype distribution of the whole Rio de 
Janeiro sample or the stratified sample. Analysis of the allelic distribution in 
the Rio de Janeiro population sample revealed frequencies of 80.30 and 19.70% 
for the wild-type (Ser49) and mutated (Gly49) alleles, respectively. Significant 
differences were observed in the allele frequencies of the Ser49Gly marker 
between the self-defined black and non-black phenotype, and the African and 
non-African descendant genotype population samples. A significant difference was 
also observed between blacks and African-descendant individuals, with a lesser 
degree of genetic differentiation. The results presented in the present study 
suggest that the Ser49Gly marker has a distribution that is influenced by an 
ancestral component, due to the increased prevalence of the Gly49 polymorphism 
in the black and African descendant populations of the Rio de Janeiro state. 
This evidence, in combination with clinical studies, may contribute to a 
detailed analysis of the pattern of susceptibility to CVD involved in β-ADR1 
receptor mechanism failure.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3536
PMID: 25815601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]