1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Jul;84:254-262. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.03.021. Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Sod1 gene ablation in adult mice leads to physiological changes at the 
neuromuscular junction similar to changes that occur in old wild-type mice.

Ivannikov MV(1), Van Remmen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, NYU School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: mvi205@nyu.edu.
(2)Free Radical Biology and Aging Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. Electronic address: 
Holly-VanRemmen@omrf.org.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are believed to be important mediators of muscle 
atrophy and weakness in aging and many degenerative conditions. However, the 
mechanisms and physiological processes specifically affected by elevated ROS in 
neuromuscular units that contribute to muscle weakness during aging are not well 
defined. Here we investigate the effects of chronic oxidative stress on 
neurotransmission and excitation-contraction (EC) coupling mechanisms in the 
levator auris longus (LAL) muscle from young (4-8 months) and old (22-28 months) 
wild-type mice and young adult Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase 1 knockout (Sod1(-/-)) 
mice. The frequency of spontaneous neurotransmitter release and the amplitude of 
evoked neurotransmitter release in young Sod1(-/-) and old wild-type LAL 
neuromuscular junctions were significantly reduced from the young wild-type 
values, and those declines were mirrored by decreases in synaptic vesicle pool 
size. Presynaptic cytosolic calcium concentration and mitochondrial calcium 
uptake amplitudes showed substantial increases in stimulated young Sod1(-/-) and 
old axon terminals. Surprisingly, LAL muscle fibers from old mice showed a 
greater excitability than fibers from either young wild-type or young Sod1(-/-) 
LAL. Both evoked excitatory junction potential (EJP) and spontaneous mini EJP 
amplitudes were considerably higher in LAL muscles from old mice than in fibers 
from young Sod1(-/-) LAL muscle. Despite a greater excitability, sarcoplasmic 
calcium influx in both old wild-type and young Sod1(-/-) LAL muscle fibers was 
significantly less. Sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium levels were also reduced in 
both old wild-type and young Sod1(-/-) mice, but the difference was not 
statistically significant in muscle fibers from old wild-type mice. The protein 
ratio of triad calcium channels RyR1/DHPR was not different in all groups. 
However, fibers from both young Sod1(-/-) and old mice had substantially 
elevated levels of protein carbonylation and S-nitrosylation modifications. 
Overall, our results suggest that young Sod1(-/-) recapitulate many 
neuromuscular and muscle fiber changes seen in old mice. We also conclude that 
muscle weakness in old mice might in part be driven by ROS-mediated EC 
uncoupling, while both EC uncoupling and reduced neurotransmitter release 
contribute to muscle weakness in Sod1(-/-) mice.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.03.021
PMCID: PMC4762177
PMID: 25841780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]