1. J Cell Biol. 2015 Apr 13;209(1):47-58. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201409087.

Microtubule minus end motors kinesin-14 and dynein drive nuclear congression in 
parallel pathways.

Scheffler K(1), Minnes R(2), Fraisier V(1), Paoletti A(1), Tran PT(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche and BioImaging Cell and Tissue Core Facility of the 
Institut Curie (PICT-IBiSA), Institut Curie, F-75248 Paris, France Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unite Mixte de Recherche 144, F-75248 
Paris, France.
(2)Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104.
(3)Centre de Recherche and BioImaging Cell and Tissue Core Facility of the 
Institut Curie (PICT-IBiSA), Institut Curie, F-75248 Paris, France Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unite Mixte de Recherche 144, F-75248 
Paris, France Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 phong.tran@curie.fr.

Microtubules (MTs) and associated motors play a central role in nuclear 
migration, which is crucial for diverse biological functions including cell 
division, polarity, and sexual reproduction. In this paper, we report a dual 
mechanism underlying nuclear congression during fission yeast karyogamy upon 
mating of haploid cells. Using microfluidic chambers for long-term imaging, we 
captured the precise timing of nuclear congression and identified two minus 
end-directed motors operating in parallel in this process. Kinesin-14 Klp2 
associated with MTs may cross-link and slide antiparallel MTs emanating from the 
two nuclei, whereas dynein accumulating at spindle pole bodies (SPBs) may pull 
MTs nucleated from the opposite SPB. Klp2-dependent nuclear congression proceeds 
at constant speed, whereas dynein accumulation results in an increase of nuclear 
velocity over time. Surprisingly, the light intermediate chain Dli1, but not 
dynactin, is required for this previously unknown function of dynein. We 
conclude that efficient nuclear congression depends on the cooperation of two 
minus end-directed motors.

Â© 2015 Scheffler et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201409087
PMCID: PMC4395489
PMID: 25869666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]