1. Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip. 2014 May 4;28(3):402-407. doi: 
10.1080/13102818.2014.918709. Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Detection of Potato spindle tuber viroid sequence variants derived from 
PSTVd-infected Phelipanche ramosa in flower organs of tomato plants.

Vachev T(1), Ivanova D(1), Yahubyan G(1), Naimov S(1), Minkov I(1), Gozmanova 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Physiology and Molecular Biology, University of Plovdiv , 
Plovdiv , Bulgaria.

Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) is an infectious small, circular, non-coding 
single-stranded RNA that induces disease on many crop species, ornamental 
plants, weeds and parasitic plants. PSTVd propagate in their host as a 
population of closely related but non-identical RNA variants referred to as 
quasispecies. Recently, we have described three de novo arising PSTVd variants 
in the parasitic plant Phelipanche ramosa after mechanical inoculation with the 
PSTVd KF440-2 isolate. These P. ramosa derived mutants were designated as 
G241-C, C208-U and C227-U PSTVd variants. Each of these variants carries a 
single-nucleotide substitution compared to the PSTVd KF440-2 sequence from which 
they are considered to have evolved. Here we complement our previous studies on 
these mutants by exploring their potential to infect the floral organs of tomato 
plants. We found that the PSTVd G241-C and C208-U variants were able to 
replicate in systemic leaves and floral organs of tomato plants, while the PSTVd 
C227-U variant did not develop systemic infection. Furthermore, we analysed the 
progeny of these PSTVd variants in sepals and petals of tomato plants for 
retention of the specific mutations.

DOI: 10.1080/13102818.2014.918709
PMCID: PMC4434055
PMID: 26019526