1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Nov;72(22):4399-407. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1944-9. 
Epub 2015 Jun 4.

PI3 kinase is indispensable for oncogenic transformation by the V560D mutant of 
c-Kit in a kinase-independent manner.

Lindblad O(1), Kazi JU(1), Rönnstrand L(1), Sun J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Cancer Research and Lund Stem Cell Center, 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Medicon Village 404C3, 
Scheelevägen 8, 22363, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Division of Translational Cancer Research and Lund Stem Cell Center, 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Medicon Village 404C3, 
Scheelevägen 8, 22363, Lund, Sweden. jianmin.sun@med.lu.se.

Oncogenic mutants of c-Kit are often found in mastocytosis, gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors and acute myeloid leukemia. The activation mechanism of the most 
commonly occurring mutation, D816V in exon 17 of c-Kit, has been well-studied 
while other mutations remain fairly uncharacterized in this respect. In this 
study, we show that the constitutive activity of the exon 11 mutant V560D is 
weaker than the D816V mutant. Phosphorylation of downstream signaling proteins 
induced by the ligand for c-Kit, stem cell factor, was stronger in c-Kit/V560D 
expressing cells than in cells expressing c-kit/D816V. Although cells expressing 
c-Kit/V560D showed increased ligand-independent proliferation and survival 
compared to wild-type c-Kit-expressing cells, these biological effects were 
weaker than in c-Kit/D816V-expressing cells. In contrast to cells expressing 
wild-type c-Kit, cells expressing c-Kit/V560D were independent of Src family 
kinases for downstream signaling. However, the independence of Src family 
kinases was not due to a Src-like kinase activity that c-Kit/D816V displayed. 
Point mutations that selectively block the association of PI3 kinase with 
c-Kit/V560D inhibited ligand-independent activation of the receptor, while 
inhibition of the kinase activity of PI3 kinase with pharmacological inhibitors 
did not affect the kinase activity of the receptor. This suggests a lipid 
kinase-independent key role of PI3 kinase in c-Kit/V560D-mediated oncogenic 
signal transduction. Thus, PI3 kinase is an attractive therapeutic target in 
malignancies induced by c-Kit mutations independent of its lipid kinase 
activity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-015-1944-9
PMCID: PMC11113438
PMID: 26040420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.