1. Nutr Clin Pract. 2015 Aug;30(4):502-10. doi: 10.1177/0884533615586201. Epub
2015  Jun 16.

Inherited Metabolic Disorders: Aspects of Chronic Nutrition Management.

Boyer SW(1), Barclay LJ(2), Burrage LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Texas Children's Hospital and 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas swboyer@texaschildrens.org.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.

The introduction of newborn screening and the development of new therapies have 
led to an expanding population of patients with inherited metabolic disorders, 
and these patients are now entering adulthood. Dietary therapy is the mainstay 
of treatment for many of these disorders, and thus, trained metabolic dietitians 
are critical members of the multidisciplinary team required for management of 
such patients. The main goals of dietary therapy in inborn errors of metabolism 
are the maintenance of normal growth and development while limiting offending 
metabolites and providing deficient products. Typically, the offending 
metabolite is either significantly reduced or removed completely from the diet 
and then reintroduced in small quantities until blood levels are within the 
normal range. Such treatment is required in infancy, childhood, and adulthood 
and requires careful monitoring of micronutrient and macronutrient intake 
throughout the life span. The goal of this review is to highlight the basic 
principles of chronic nutrition management of the inborn errors of protein, 
carbohydrate, and fat metabolism.

Â© 2015 American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1177/0884533615586201
PMCID: PMC4515158
PMID: 26079521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]