1. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Nov;98(5):859-74. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0315-107R. Epub 2015 
Jul 9.

A Cys-Gly-Cys triad in the dehydrogenase region of Nox2 plays a key role in the 
interaction with p67phox.

Dahan I(1), Smith SM(1), Pick E(2).

Author information:
(1)*The Julius Friedrich Cohnheim Laboratory of Phagocyte Research, Department 
of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Israel; and Department of Biology and Physics, College of Science 
and Mathematics, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia, USA.
(2)*The Julius Friedrich Cohnheim Laboratory of Phagocyte Research, Department 
of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Israel; and Department of Biology and Physics, College of Science 
and Mathematics, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia, USA 
epick@post.tau.ac.il.

p67(phox) is the paramount cytosolic regulator of the superoxide-generating Nox 
of phagocytes, by controlling the conformation of the catalytic component, Nox2. 
The initiating event of this process is a protein-protein interaction between 
p67(phox) and the part of Nox2 protruding into the cytosol, known as the 
dehydrogenase region. The aim of this study was to identify and characterize 
region(s) in Nox2 acting as binding site(s) for p67(phox). For this purpose, we 
measured the binding of recombinant p67(phox) to an array of 91 overlapping 
synthetic pentadecapeptides covering the length of the dehydrogenase region 
(residues 288-570). We found that: 1) p67(phox) binds to a site corresponding to 
residues 357-383, represented by a cluster of 5 peptides (Nos. 24-28); 2) 
maximal binding was to peptides 24 (357-371) and 28 (369-383); 3) these shared a 
(369)Cys-Gly-Cys(371) triad, found to be responsible for binding; 4) the 
Cys-Gly-Cys triad was present in Nox2 of mammals, birds, and amphibians but was 
absent in other Nox; 5) substituting a Nox4 or Nox1 sequence for the Nox2 
sequence in peptide 24 abolished binding; 6) replacing (369)Cys by Arg in 
peptide 24 (mimicking a mutation in chronic granulomatous disease) abolished 
binding; 7) the same replacement in peptide 28 did not affect binding, 
indicating the existence of an additional binding site. Our results reveal an 
essential role for the Cys-Gly-Cys triad in Nox2 in binding p67(phox), seconded 
by an additional binding region, comprising residues C terminal to Cys-Gly-Cys. 
The 2 regions interact with distinct partner sites in p67(phox).

Â© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.4A0315-107R
PMID: 26160850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]