1. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jul;10(1):502-508. doi: 10.3892/ol.2015.3173. Epub 2015 May
4.

Type II cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase inhibits Rac1 
activation in gastric cancer cells.

Wang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Wu M(1), Lan T(1), Wu Y(1), Li Y(1), Qian H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 
Jiangsu 212013, P.R. China.

Enhanced motility of cancer cells is a critical step in promoting tumor 
metastasis, which remains the major cause of gastric cancer-associated 
mortality. The small GTPase Rac1 is a key signaling component in the regulation 
of cell migration. Previous studies have demonstrated that Rac1 activity may be 
regulated by protein kinase G (PKG); however, the underlying mechanism is not 
yet clear. The current study aimed to investigate the effect of type II cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase (PKG II) on Rac1 
activity. The human gastric cancer cell line AGS was infected with adenoviral 
constructs encoding PKG II to increase the expression of this enzyme, and 
treated with a cGMP analog (8-pCPT-cGMP) to induce its activation. A Transwell 
assay was employed to measure cell migration, and the activity of Rac1 was 
assessed using a pull-down assay. Immunoprecipitation was used to isolate the 
Rac1 protein. Phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate 3 kinase 
(PI3K) and its downstream effecter protein kinase B (Akt) are associated with 
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)-induced motility/migration of cancer cells. 
Extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) is the major signaling molecule of 
the Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) mediated signaling pathway. ERK and 
its upstream activator MAPK kinase (MEK) are also involved in LPA-induced 
motility/migration of cancer cells. Phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK and 
enriched Rac1 were detected by western blotting. The results revealed that 
blocking the activation of Rac1 by ectopically expressing an inactive Rac1 
mutant (T17N) impeded LPA-induced cell migration. Increased PKG II activity 
inhibited LPA-induced migration and LPA-induced activation of Rac1; however, it 
had no effect on the phosphorylation of Rac1. PKG II also inhibited the 
activation of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated signaling, which is important for 
LPA-induced Rac1 activation. These results suggest that PKG II affects 
LPA-stimulated migration of AGS cells by blocking Rac1 activation, via 
inhibition of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK mediated signaling.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3173
PMCID: PMC4487129
PMID: 26171059