1. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;29(10):1522-30. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1195. Epub 2015 
Sep 4.

Novel Insertion Mutation in KCNJ5 Channel Produces Constitutive Aldosterone 
Release From H295R Cells.

Hardege I(1), Xu S(1), Gordon RD(1), Thompson AJ(1), Figg N(1), Stowasser M(1), 
Murrell-Lagnado R(1), O'Shaughnessy KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Experimental Medicine and Immunotherapeutics (I.H., K.M.O.) and 
Cardiovascular Medicine (N.F.), Department of Medicine, and Department of 
Pharmacology (A.J.T., R.M.-L.), University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, 
United Kingdom; and Endocrine Hypertension Research Centre (S.X., R.D.G., M.S.), 
University of Queensland School of Medicine, Greenslopes and Princess Alexandra 
Hospitals, Brisbane 4072, Australia.

Primary aldosteronism accounts for 5%-10% of hypertension and in a third of 
cases is caused by autonomous aldosterone production by adenomas (APA). Somatic 
mutations in the potassium channel encoded by KCNJ5 have been detected in 
surgically removed APAs. To better understand the role of these mutations, we 
resequenced the KCNJ5 channel in a large Australian primary aldosteronism 
cohort. KCNJ5 mutations were detected in 37 APAs (45% of the cohort), including 
previously reported E145Q (n = 3), G151R (n = 20), and L168R (n = 13) mutations. 
In addition, we found a novel 12-bp in-frame insertion mutation 
(c.414-425dupGCTTTCCTGTTC, A139_F142dup) that duplicates the AFLF sequence in 
the pore helix upstream of the selectivity filter. Expressed in Xenopus oocytes, 
the A139_F142dup mutation depolarized the oocytes and produced a 
G-protein-sensitive Na(+) current with altered K(+) selectivity and loss of 
inward rectification but retained Ba(2+) sensitivity. Transfected into H295R 
cells, A139_F142dup increased basal aldosterone release 2.3-fold over the wild 
type. This was not increased further by incubation with angiotensin II. Although 
the A139_F142dup mutant trafficked to the plasma membrane of H295R cells, it 
showed reduced tetramer stability and surface expression compared with the 
wild-type channel. This study confirms the frequency of somatic KCNJ5 mutations 
in APAs and the novel mutation identified (A139_F142dup) extend the phenotypic 
range of the known KCNJ5 APA mutations. Being located in the pore helix, it is 
upstream of the previously reported mutations and shares some features in common 
with selectivity filter mutants but additionally demonstrates insensitivity to 
angiotensin II and decreased channel stability.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2015-1195
PMCID: PMC5414677
PMID: 26340408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]