1. Viruses. 2015 Sep 14;7(9):4929-44. doi: 10.3390/v7092850.

Clinical Implications of Antiviral Resistance in Influenza.

Li TC(1), Chan MC(2), Lee N(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, 
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 9/F, Clinical Sciences 
Building, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. 
liman1986@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, 1/F, Clinical Sciences Building, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, 
Hong Kong, China. martin.chan@cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, 
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 9/F, Clinical Sciences 
Building, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. 
leelsn@cuhk.edu.hk.

Influenza is a major cause of severe respiratory infections leading to excessive 
hospitalizations and deaths globally; annual epidemics, pandemics, and 
sporadic/endemic avian virus infections occur as a result of rapid, continuous 
evolution of influenza viruses. Emergence of antiviral resistance is of great 
clinical and public health concern. Currently available antiviral treatments 
include four neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, zanamivir, peramivir, 
laninamivir), M2-inibitors (amantadine, rimantadine), and a polymerase inhibitor 
(favipiravir). In this review, we focus on resistance issues related to the use 
of neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs). Data on primary resistance, as well as 
secondary resistance related to NAI exposure will be presented. Their clinical 
implications, detection, and novel therapeutic options undergoing clinical 
trials are discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/v7092850
PMCID: PMC4584294
PMID: 26389935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]