1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0142250. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142250. 
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Insights into the Transmembrane Domain of the Thyrotropin Receptor.

Chantreau V(1), Taddese B(1), Munier M(1), Gourdin L(1)(2), Henrion D(1), Rodien 
P(1)(2), Chabbert M(1).

Author information:
(1)UMR CNRS 6214 -INSERM 1083, Laboratory of Integrated Neurovascular and 
Mitochondrial Biology, University of Angers, Angers, France.
(2)Reference Centre for the pathologies of hormonal receptivity, Department of 
Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Angers, Angers, France.

The thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is 
member of the leucine-rich repeat subfamily (LGR). In the absence of crystal 
structure, the success of rational design of ligands targeting the receptor 
internal cavity depends on the quality of the TSHR models built. In this 
subfamily, transmembrane helices (TM) 2 and 5 are characterized by the absence 
of proline compared to most receptors, raising the question of the structural 
conformation of these helices. To gain insight into the structural properties of 
these helices, we carried out bioinformatics and experimental studies. 
Evolutionary analysis of the LGR family revealed a deletion in TM5 but provided 
no information on TM2. Wild type residues at positions 2.58, 2.59 or 2.60 in TM2 
and/or at position 5.50 in TM5 were substituted to proline. Depending on the 
position of the proline substitution, different effects were observed on 
membrane expression, glycosylation, constitutive cAMP activity and responses to 
thyrotropin. Only proline substitution at position 2.59 maintained complex 
glycosylation and high membrane expression, supporting occurrence of a bulged 
TM2. The TSHR transmembrane domain was modeled by homology with the orexin 2 
receptor, using a protocol that forced the deletion of one residue in the TM5 
bulge of the template. The stability of the model was assessed by molecular 
dynamics simulations. TM5 straightened during the equilibration phase and was 
stable for the remainder of the simulations. Our data support a structural model 
of the TSHR transmembrane domain with a bulged TM2 and a straight TM5 that is 
specific of glycoprotein hormone receptors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142250
PMCID: PMC4636318
PMID: 26545118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.