1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2015 Oct 17;71(Pt 11):o848-9. doi: 
10.1107/S205698901501912X. eCollection 2015 Nov 1.

Crystal structure of a second triclinic polymorph of 2-methyl-pyridinium 
picrate.

Gomathi J(1), Kalaivani D(1).

Author information:
(1)PG and Research Department of Chemistry, Seethalakshmi Ramaswami College, 
Tiruchirappalli 620 002, Tamil Nadu, India.

The title mol-ecular salt, C6H8N(+)·C6H2N3O7 (-) (systematic name: 
2-methyl-pyridinium 2,4,6-tri-nitro-phenolate), crystallizes with two cations 
and two anions in the asymmetric unit. In the crystal, the cations are linked to 
the anions via bifurcated N-H⋯(O,O) hydrogen bonds, generating R 1 (2)(6) 
graph-set motifs. Numerous C-H⋯O hydrogen bonds are observed between these 
cation-anion pairs, which result in a three-dimensional network. In addition, 
weak aromatic π-π stacking between the 2-methyl-pyridinium rings [inter-centroid 
distance = 3.8334 (19) Å] and very weak stacking [inter-centroid distance = 
4.0281 (16) Å] between inversion-related pairs of picrate anions is observed. 
The title salt is a second triclinic polymorph of the structure (also with Z' = 
2) reported earlier [Anita et al. (2006). Acta Cryst. C62, o567-o570; Chan et 
al. (2014 ▸). CrystEngComm, 16, 4508-4538]. In the title compound, the cations 
and anions display a chequerboard arrangement when viewed down [100], whereas in 
the first polymorph, (010) layers of alternating cations and anions are apparent 
in a [100] view. It is inter-esting that the unit-cell lengths are almost 
identical for the two polymorphs, although the inter-axial angles are quite 
different.

DOI: 10.1107/S205698901501912X
PMCID: PMC4645006
PMID: 26594559