1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Jun;37(6):8197-207. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4684-4. Epub
2015  Dec 30.

Expression of cancer-associated fibroblast-related proteins in thyroid papillary 
carcinoma.

Sun WY(1), Jung WH(2), Koo JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, The Cathololic University 
of Korea College of Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Severance 
Hospital, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Severance 
Hospital, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea. 
kjs1976@yuhs.ac.

Comment in
    Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2023 Dec;51(1):233-244. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-023-06404-z.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the association between expression of 
cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF)-related proteins in papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC) and clinicopathologic factors. Using tissue microarray (TMA) 
constructed from 339 cases of PTC (303 classic type, 36 follicular variant), we 
performed immunohistochemical staining for podoplanin, prolyl 4-hydroxylase, 
FAPα, S100A4, PDGFRα, PDGFRβ, NG2, 5-meC, and BRAF V600E and evaluated the 
association with clinicopathologic parameters. We classified the stroma of PTC 
as desmoplastic type, sclerotic type, pauci type, or inflammatory type. The 
expression of prolyl 4-hydroxylase (p = 0.042), FAPα (p = 0.044), PDGFRα 
(p < 0.001), and 5-meC (p = 0.030) in cancer cells differed according to the 
histologic subtype, higher in classic type than follicular type. The expression 
of FAPα (p = 0.034) and 5-meC (p = 0.021) in stromal cells was higher in the 
classic type than follicular type. PTC with BRAF mutation showed higher 
expression of podoplanin (p < 0.001), prolyl 4-hydroxylase (p = 0.013), FAPα 
(p < 0.001), S100A4 (p < 0.001), PDGFRα (p < 0.001), and 5-meC (p < 0.001) in 
the tumor cell compartment and of FAPα (p = 0.004), S100A4 (p < 0.001), PDGFRα 
(p = 0.002), PDGFRβ (p < 0.001), and 5-meC (p < 0.001) in the stromal cell 
compartment. There was also a difference in the expression of CAF-related 
proteins according to stromal phenotype; the expression of FAPα, S100A4, and 
PDGFRα was higher in desmoplastic type than in other subtypes, whereas NG2 
expression was higher in inflammatory type (p < 0.001). Tumoral podoplanin 
negativity (p = 0.043) was associated with shorter DFS, and tumoral S100A4 
positivity (p = 0.044) and stromal PDGFRβ positivity (p = 0.035) were associated 
with shorter OS. In conclusion, the expression of CAF-related proteins in cancer 
cells and stromal cells of PTC was different according to histologic subtype, 
BRAF V600E mutation, and subtype of stroma, and was related to prognosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4684-4
PMID: 26715280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]