1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 26;291(9):4803-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.708586. Epub
2016  Jan 4.

Substitutions of Conserved Residues in the C-terminal Region of DnaC Cause 
Thermolability in Helicase Loading.

Felczak MM(1), Sage JM(1), Hupert-Kocurek K(1), Aykul S(1), Kaguni JM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1319.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1319 kaguni@msu.edu.

The DnaB-DnaC complex binds to the unwound DNA within the Escherichia coli 
replication origin in the helicase loading process, but the biochemical events 
that lead to its stable binding are uncertain. This study characterizes the 
function of specific C-terminal residues of DnaC. Genetic and biochemical 
characterization of proteins bearing F231S and W233L substitutions of DnaC 
reveals that their activity is thermolabile. Because the mutants remain able to 
form a complex with DnaB at 30 and 37 °C, their thermolability is not explained 
by an impaired interaction with DnaB. Photo-cross-linking experiments and 
biosensor analysis show an altered affinity of these mutants compared with wild 
type DnaC for single-stranded DNA, suggesting that the substitutions affect DNA 
binding. Despite this difference, their activity in DNA binding is not 
thermolabile. The substitutions also drastically reduce the affinity of DnaC for 
ATP as measured by the binding of a fluorescent ATP analogue (MANT-ATP) and by 
UV cross-linking of radiolabeled ATP. Experiments show that an elevated 
temperature substantially inhibits both mutants in their ability to load the 
DnaB-DnaC complex at a DnaA box. Because a decreased ATP concentration 
exacerbates their thermolabile behavior, we suggest that the F231S and W233L 
substitutions are thermolabile in ATP binding, which correlates with defective 
helicase loading at an elevated temperature.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.708586
PMCID: PMC4813501
PMID: 26728455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]