1. Nat Neurosci. 2016 Apr;19(4):596-604. doi: 10.1038/nn.4264. Epub 2016 Mar 7.

Hypothalamic control of male aggression-seeking behavior.

Falkner AL(1), Grosenick L(2), Davidson TJ(3), Deisseroth K(2)(4), Lin 
D(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Neuroscience Program, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering and CNC Program, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, USA.
(6)Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2016 Apr;19(4):532. doi: 10.1038/nn0416-532.

In many vertebrate species, certain individuals will seek out opportunities for 
aggression, even in the absence of threat-provoking cues. Although several brain 
areas have been implicated in the generation of attack in response to social 
threat, little is known about the neural mechanisms that promote self-initiated 
or 'voluntary' aggression-seeking when no threat is present. To explore this 
directly, we utilized an aggression-seeking task in which male mice 
self-initiated aggression trials to gain brief and repeated access to a weaker 
male that they could attack. In males that exhibited rapid task learning, we 
found that the ventrolateral part of the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMHvl), an 
area with a known role in attack, was essential for aggression-seeking. Using 
both single-unit electrophysiology and population optical recording, we found 
that VMHvl neurons became active during aggression-seeking and that their 
activity tracked changes in task learning and extinction. Inactivation of the 
VMHvl reduced aggression-seeking behavior, whereas optogenetic stimulation of 
the VMHvl accelerated moment-to-moment aggression-seeking and intensified future 
attack. These data demonstrate that the VMHvl can mediate both acute attack and 
flexible seeking actions that precede attack.

DOI: 10.1038/nn.4264
PMCID: PMC4853470
PMID: 26950005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]