1. Int J Fertil Steril. 2016 Jan-Mar;9(4):574-80. doi: 10.22074/ijfs.2015.4618. 
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

A Case of Bilateral Testicular Tumors Subsequently Diagnosed as Congenital 
Adrenal Hyperplasia Due to 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency.

Sha YK(1), Sha YW(2), Ding L(2), Liu WW(3), Song YQ(2), Lin J(2), He XM(2), Qiu 
PP(2), Zhang L(2), Li P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning Medical 
University, Jinzhou City 121000, Liaoning Province, China.
(2)Reproductive Medicine Center, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Xiamen 
City 361005, Xiamen City, Fujian Province, China.
(3)Department of Radiation, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun 
City 130041, Jilin Province, China.

21-hydroxylase deficiency (21-OHD) caused congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) 
is a group of autosomal recessive genetic disorders resulting from mutations in 
genes involved with cortisol (CO) synthesis in the adrenal glands. Testicular 
adrenal rest tumors (TARTs) are rarely the presenting symptoms of CAH. Here, we 
describe a case of simple virilizing CAH with TARTs, in a 15-year-old boy. The 
patient showed physical signs of precocious puberty. The levels of blood 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), urinary 17-ketone steroids (17-KS), 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), and serum progesterone (PRGE) were 
elevated, whereas those of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing 
hormone (LH), and CO were reduced. Computed tomography (CT) of the adrenal 
glands and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the testes showed a soft tissue 
density (more pronounced on the right side) and an irregularly swollen mass 
(more pronounced on the left side), respectively. Pathological examination of a 
specimen of the mass indicated polygonal/circular eosinophilic cytoplasm, 
cord-like arrangement of interstitial cells, and lipid pigment in the cytoplasm. 
Immunohistochemistry results precluded a diagnosis of Leydig cell tumors. DNA 
sequencing revealed a hackneyed homozygous mutation, I2g, on intron 2 of the 
CYP21A2 gene. The patient's symptoms improved after a three-month of 
dexamethasone therapy. Recent radiographic data showed reduced hyperplastic 
adrenal nodules and testicular tumors. A diagnosis of TART should be considered 
and prioritized in CAH patients with testicular tumors. Replacement therapy 
using a sufficient amount of dexamethasone in this case helps combat TART.

DOI: 10.22074/ijfs.2015.4618
PMCID: PMC4793180
PMID: 26985347