1. Database (Oxford). 2016 Mar 28;2016:baw038. doi: 10.1093/database/baw038.
Print  2016.

CoDNaS 2.0: a comprehensive database of protein conformational diversity in the 
native state.

Monzon AM(1), Rohr CO(2), Fornasari MS(1), Parisi G(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencia y Tecnología, Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, 
Bernal, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Ecología Genética y Evolución de Buenos Aires 
(IEGEBA)-Laboratorio de Genómica Médica y Evolución, Universidad Nacional de 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Departamento de Ciencia y Tecnología, Universidad Nacional de Quilmes, 
Bernal, Argentina gusparisi@gmail.com.

CoDNaS (conformational diversity of the native state) is a protein 
conformational diversity database. Conformational diversity describes structural 
differences between conformers that define the native state of proteins. It is a 
key concept to understand protein function and biological processes related to 
protein functions. CoDNaS offers a well curated database that is experimentally 
driven, thoroughly linked, and annotated. CoDNaS facilitates the extraction of 
key information on small structural differences based on protein movements. 
CoDNaS enables users to easily relate the degree of conformational diversity 
with physical, chemical and biological properties derived from experiments on 
protein structure and biological characteristics. The new version of CoDNaS 
includes ∼70% of all available protein structures, and new tools have been added 
that run sequence searches, display structural flexibility profiles and allow 
users to browse the database for different structural classes. These tools 
facilitate the exploration of protein conformational diversity and its role in 
protein function. Database URL:http://ufq.unq.edu.ar/codnas.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/database/baw038
PMCID: PMC4809262
PMID: 27022160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]