1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 25;17(4):449. doi: 10.3390/ijms17040449.

Fragment Screening of Human Aquaporin 1.

To J(1), Torres J(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore. yyto1@ntu.edu.sg.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang 
Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore. jtorres@ntu.edu.sg.

Aquaporins (AQPs) are membrane proteins that enable water transport across 
cellular plasma membranes in response to osmotic gradients. Phenotypic analyses 
have revealed important physiological roles for AQPs, and the potential for AQP 
water channel modulators in various disease states has been proposed. For 
example, AQP1 is overexpressed in tumor microvessels, and this correlates with 
higher metastatic potential and aggressiveness of the malignancy. Chemical 
modulators would help in identifying the precise contribution of water channel 
activity in these disease states. These inhibitors would also be important 
therapeutically, e.g., in anti-cancer treatment. This perceived importance 
contrasts with the lack of success of high-throughput screens (HTS) to identify 
effective and specific inhibitors of aquaporins. In this paper, we have screened 
a library of 1500 "fragments", i.e., smaller than molecules used in HTS, against 
human aquaporin (hAQP1) using a thermal shift assay and surface plasmon 
resonance. Although these fragments may not inhibit their protein target, they 
bound to and stabilized hAQP1 (sub mM binding affinities (KD), with an 
temperature of aggregation shift ΔTagg of +4 to +50 °C) in a 
concentration-dependent fashion. Chemically expanded versions of these fragments 
should follow the determination of their binding site on the aquaporin surface.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17040449
PMCID: PMC4848905
PMID: 27023529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]