1. Chem Biol Interact. 2016 Nov 25;259(Pt B):223-232. doi: 
10.1016/j.cbi.2016.04.007. Epub 2016 Apr 7.

Understanding the non-catalytic behavior of human butyrylcholinesterase silent 
variants: Comparison of wild-type enzyme, catalytically active Ala328Cys mutant, 
and silent Ala328Asp variant.

Lushchekina S(1), Nemukhin A(2), Varfolomeev S(2), Masson P(3).

Author information:
(1)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics of Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Emanuel Institute of Biochemical Physics of Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russia; Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, 
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Kazan Federal University, Laboratory of Neuropharmacology, Kazan, Russia. 
Electronic address: pym.masson@free.fr.

Conformational dynamics of wild-type human butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), two 
mutants of residue Ala328, the catalytically active Ala328Cys, and the 
catalytically inactive (silent) Ala328Asp, and their interactions with 
butyrylcholine were studied. The aim was to understand the molecular mechanisms 
by which point mutations may lead to silent BChE variant or alter catalytic 
activity. Importance of BChE natural variants is due to medical consequences, 
i.e. prolonged apnea, following administration of the myorelaxant esters, 
succinylcholine and mivacurium. Comparison of molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations for the three model systems showed that: 1) the active mutant 
Ala328Cys mutant has some changes in configuration of catalytic residues, which 
do not prevent binding of butyrylcholine to the active site; 2) in the 
naturally-occurring silent variant Ala328Asp, the Asp328 carboxylate may either 
form a salt bridge with Lys339 or a H-bond with His438. In the first case, the 
Ω-loop swings off the gorge, disrupting the π-cation binding site and the 
catalytic triad. In the second case, binding of cationic substrates in the 
catalytic center is also impaired. MD simulations carried out in 0.15 M NaCl, 
close to physiological ionic strength conditions, favored the second situation. 
It was seen that Asp328 forms a H-bond with the catalytic triad His438, which in 
turn disrupts the catalytic machinery. Therefore, we concluded that the 
Ala328Asp variant is not catalytically active because of that dramatic event. 
Computational results, consistent with in vitro biochemical data and clinical 
observations, validate our MD approach.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2016.04.007
PMID: 27062896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]