1. Am J Hum Genet. 2016 May 5;98(5):883-897. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.007.
Epub  2016 Apr 28.

Integrative Multi-omic Analysis of Human Platelet eQTLs Reveals Alternative 
Start Site in Mitofusin 2.

Simon LM(1), Chen ES(2), Edelstein LC(3), Kong X(3), Bhatlekar S(3), Rigoutsos 
I(4), Bray PF(5), Shaw CA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and 
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research and Department of Medicine, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(4)Computational Medicine Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA.
(5)Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research and Department of Medicine, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. Electronic address: 
paul.bray@jefferson.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, TX 
77251, USA. Electronic address: cashaw@bcm.edu.

Platelets play a central role in ischemic cardiovascular events. Cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) is a major cause of death worldwide. Numerous genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs) have identified loci associated with CVD risk. 
However, our understanding of how these variants contribute to disease is 
limited. Using data from the platelet RNA and expression 1 (PRAX1) study, we 
analyzed cis expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in platelets from 154 
normal human subjects. We confirmed these results in silico by performing 
allele-specific expression (ASE) analysis, which demonstrated that the allelic 
directionality of eQTLs and ASE patterns correlate significantly. Comparison of 
platelet eQTLs with data from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project 
revealed that a number of platelet eQTLs are platelet specific and that platelet 
eQTL peaks localize to the gene body at a higher rate than eQTLs from other 
tissues. Upon integration with data from previously published GWASs, we found 
that the trait-associated variant rs1474868 coincides with the eQTL peak for 
mitofusin 2 (MFN2). Additional experimental and computational analyses revealed 
that this eQTL is linked to an unannotated alternate MFN2 start site 
preferentially expressed in platelets. Integration of phenotype data from the 
PRAX1 study showed that MFN2 expression levels were significantly associated 
with platelet count. This study links the variant rs1474868 to a 
platelet-specific regulatory role for MFN2 and demonstrates the utility of 
integrating multi-omic data with eQTL analysis in disease-relevant tissues for 
interpreting GWAS results.

Copyright © 2016 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.03.007
PMCID: PMC4863560
PMID: 27132591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]