1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 26;7(30):48813-48831. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9281.

Physiological and pathological implications of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in 
diseases.

Liang J(1), Yang F(1), Zhao L(1), Bi C(1), Cai B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Harbin Medical University (The State-Province Key 
Laboratories of Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China), Harbin, China.
(2)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy and Medicine, Academics of Medical Sciences of 
Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, China.

Gene expression is the prerequisite of proteins. Diverse stimuli result in 
alteration of gene expression profile by base substitution for quite a long 
time. However, during the past decades, accumulating studies proved that bases 
modification is involved in this process. CpG islands (CGIs) are DNA fragments 
enriched in CpG repeats which mostly locate in promoters. They are frequently 
modified, methylated in most conditions, thereby suggesting a role of 
methylation in profiling gene expression. DNA methylation occurs in many 
conditions, such as cancer, embryogenesis, nervous system diseases etc. 
Recently, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), the product of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) 
demethylation, is emerging as a novel demethylation marker in many disorders. 
Consistently, conversion of 5mC to 5hmC has been proved in many studies. Here, 
we reviewed recent studies concerning demethylation via 5hmC conversion in 
several conditions and progress of therapeutics-associated with it in clinic. We 
aimed to unveil its physiological and pathological significance in diseases and 
to provide insight into its clinical application potential.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9281
PMCID: PMC5217052
PMID: 27183914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.