1. Hypertension. 2016 Jul;68(1):123-32. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07237. 
Epub 2016 May 23.

Activation of Human T Cells in Hypertension: Studies of Humanized Mice and 
Hypertensive Humans.

Itani HA(1), McMaster WG Jr(1), Saleh MA(1), Nazarewicz RR(1), Mikolajczyk 
TP(1), Kaszuba AM(1), Konior A(1), Prejbisz A(1), Januszewicz A(1), Norlander 
AE(1), Chen W(1), Bonami RH(1), Marshall AF(1), Poffenberger G(1), Weyand CM(1), 
Madhur MS(1), Moore DJ(1), Harrison DG(2), Guzik TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine (H.A.I., 
W.G.M., M.A.S., A.E.N., W.C., M.S.M., D.G.H.), General Surgery (W.G.M.), 
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine (R.H.B.), Division of 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics (A.F.M., D.J.M.), Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine (G.P.), Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt (M.A.S.); Divison of Immunology 
and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, CA (R.R.N., C.M.W.); Department of Internal and Agricultural Medicine, 
Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, Krakow, Poland (T.P.M., A.M.K., 
A.K., T.J.G.); Department of Hypertension, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, 
Poland (A.M.K., A.P., A.J.); and Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland (T.J.G.).
(2)From the Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine (H.A.I., 
W.G.M., M.A.S., A.E.N., W.C., M.S.M., D.G.H.), General Surgery (W.G.M.), 
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine (R.H.B.), Division of 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics (A.F.M., D.J.M.), Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine (G.P.), Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, TN; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt (M.A.S.); Divison of Immunology 
and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, CA (R.R.N., C.M.W.); Department of Internal and Agricultural Medicine, 
Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, Krakow, Poland (T.P.M., A.M.K., 
A.K., T.J.G.); Department of Hypertension, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, 
Poland (A.M.K., A.P., A.J.); and Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland (T.J.G.). 
david.g.harrison@vanderbilt.edu.

Emerging evidence supports an important role for T cells in the genesis of 
hypertension. Because this work has predominantly been performed in experimental 
animals, we sought to determine whether human T cells are activated in 
hypertension. We used a humanized mouse model in which the murine immune system 
is replaced by the human immune system. Angiotensin II increased systolic 
pressure to 162 versus 116 mm Hg for sham-treated animals. Flow cytometry of 
thoracic lymph nodes, thoracic aorta, and kidney revealed increased infiltration 
of human leukocytes (CD45(+)) and T lymphocytes (CD3(+) and CD4(+)) in response 
to angiotensin II infusion. Interestingly, there was also an increase in the 
memory T cells (CD3(+)/CD45RO(+)) in the aortas and lymph nodes. Prevention of 
hypertension using hydralazine and hydrochlorothiazide prevented the 
accumulation of T cells in these tissues. Studies of isolated human T cells and 
monocytes indicated that angiotensin II had no direct effect on cytokine 
production by T cells or the ability of dendritic cells to drive T-cell 
proliferation. We also observed an increase in circulating interleukin-17A 
producing CD4(+) T cells and both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells that produce 
interferon-γ in hypertensive compared with normotensive humans. Thus, human T 
cells become activated and invade critical end-organ tissues in response to 
hypertension in a humanized mouse model. This response likely reflects the 
hypertensive milieu encountered in vivo and is not a direct effect of the 
hormone angiotensin II.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07237
PMCID: PMC4900908
PMID: 27217403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict (s) of interest/disclosure (s) 
statement: The authors have no conflict of interests.