1. BMC Cell Biol. 2016 May 24;17 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):17. doi: 
10.1186/s12860-016-0092-x.

Connexinopathies: a structural and functional glimpse.

García IE(1), Prado P(1), Pupo A(1), Jara O(1), Rojas-Gómez D(1), Mujica P(1), 
Flores-Muñoz C(1), González-Casanova J(1), Soto-Riveros C(1), Pinto BI(1), 
Retamal MA(2), González C(1), Martínez AD(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Instituto de 
Neurociencia, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, 
Chile.
(2)Centro de Fisiología Celular e Integrativa, Facultad de Medicina, Clínica 
Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Instituto de 
Neurociencia, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valparaíso, Valparaíso, 
Chile. agustin.martinez@uv.cl.

Mutations in human connexin (Cx) genes have been related to diseases, which we 
termed connexinopathies. Such hereditary disorders include nonsyndromic or 
syndromic deafness (Cx26, Cx30), Charcot Marie Tooth disease (Cx32), 
occulodentodigital dysplasia and cardiopathies (Cx43), and cataracts (Cx46, 
Cx50). Despite the clinical phenotypes of connexinopathies have been well 
documented, their pathogenic molecular determinants remain elusive. The purpose 
of this work is to identify common/uncommon patterns in channels function among 
Cx mutations linked to human diseases. To this end, we compiled and discussed 
the effect of mutations associated to Cx26, Cx32, Cx43, and Cx50 over gap 
junction channels and hemichannels, highlighting the function of the structural 
channel domains in which mutations are located and their possible role affecting 
oligomerization, gating and perm/selectivity processes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12860-016-0092-x
PMCID: PMC4896260
PMID: 27228968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]