1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Sep 6;44(15):7441-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw552. Epub
2016  Jun 20.

eIF1A/eIF5B interaction network and its functions in translation initiation 
complex assembly and remodeling.

Nag N(1), Lin KY(1), Edmonds KA(2), Yu J(1), Nadkarni D(1), Marintcheva B(3), 
Marintchev A(4).

Author information:
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Department of Physiology and 
Biophysics, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
(2)Indiana University, Department of Chemistry, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(3)Bridgewater State University, Department of Biological Sciences, Bridgewater, 
MA 02325, USA.
(4)Boston University School of Medicine, Department of Physiology and 
Biophysics, Boston, MA 02118, USA amarint@bu.edu.

Eukaryotic translation initiation is a highly regulated process involving 
multiple steps, from 43S pre-initiation complex (PIC) assembly, to ribosomal 
subunit joining. Subunit joining is controlled by the G-protein eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor 5B (eIF5B). Another protein, eIF1A, is involved in 
virtually all steps, including subunit joining. The intrinsically disordered 
eIF1A C-terminal tail (eIF1A-CTT) binds to eIF5B Domain-4 (eIF5B-D4). The 
ribosomal complex undergoes conformational rearrangements at every step of 
translation initiation; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly 
understood. Here we report three novel interactions involving eIF5B and eIF1A: 
(i) a second binding interface between eIF5B and eIF1A; (ii) a dynamic 
intramolecular interaction in eIF1A between the folded domain and eIF1A-CTT; and 
(iii) an intramolecular interaction between eIF5B-D3 and -D4. The intramolecular 
interactions within eIF1A and eIF5B interfere with one or both eIF5B/eIF1A 
contact interfaces, but are disrupted on the ribosome at different stages of 
translation initiation. Therefore, our results indicate that the interactions 
between eIF1A and eIF5B are being continuously rearranged during translation 
initiation. We present a model how the dynamic eIF1A/eIF5B interaction network 
can promote remodeling of the translation initiation complexes, and the roles in 
the process played by intrinsically disordered protein segments.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw552
PMCID: PMC5009744
PMID: 27325746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]