1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 27;6:28700. doi: 10.1038/srep28700.

N-terminal tetrapeptide T/SPLH motifs contribute to multimodal activation of 
human TRPA1 channel.

Hynkova A(1), Marsakova L(1), Vaskova J(1), Vlachova V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Neurophysiology, Institute of Physiology of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

Human transient receptor potential ankyrin channel 1 (TRPA1) is a polymodal 
sensor implicated in pain, inflammation and itching. An important locus for 
TRPA1 regulation is the cytoplasmic N-terminal domain, through which various 
exogenous electrophilic compounds such as allyl-isothiocyanate from mustard oil 
or cinnamaldehyde from cinnamon activate primary afferent nociceptors. This 
major region is comprised of a tandem set of 17 ankyrin repeats (AR1-AR17), five 
of them contain a strictly conserved T/SPLH tetrapeptide motif, a hallmark of an 
important and evolutionarily conserved contribution to conformational stability. 
Here, we characterize the functional consequences of putatively stabilizing and 
destabilizing mutations in these important structural units and identify AR2, 
AR6, and AR11-13 to be distinctly involved in the allosteric activation of TRPA1 
by chemical irritants, cytoplasmic calcium, and membrane voltage. Considering 
the potential involvement of the T/SP motifs as putative phosphorylation sites, 
we also show that proline-directed Ser/Thr kinase CDK5 modulates the activity of 
TRPA1, and that T673 outside the AR-domain is its only possible target. Our data 
suggest that the most strictly conserved N-terminal ARs define the energetics of 
the TRPA1 channel gate and contribute to chemical-, calcium- and 
voltage-dependence.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28700
PMCID: PMC4922051
PMID: 27345869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]