1. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:9758729. doi: 10.1155/2016/9758729. Epub 2016 Jun
26.

Effect of Water-Glass Coating on HA and HA-TCP Samples for MSCs Adhesion, 
Proliferation, and Differentiation.

Bajpai I(1), Kim DY(1), Kyong-Jin J(2), Song IH(2), Kim S(1).

Author information:
(1)Materials Science and Engineering, Yeungnam University, 280 Daehak-Ro, 
Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk 712-749, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, 317-1 
Daemyung-Dong, Daegu 705-717, Republic of Korea.

Ca-P and silicon based materials have become very popular as bone tissue 
engineering materials. In this study, water-glass (also known as sodium silicate 
glass) was coated on sintered hydroxyapatite (HA) and HA-TCP (TCP stands for 
tricalcium phosphate) samples and subsequently heat-treated at 600°C for 2 hrs. 
X-rays diffraction showed the presence of β- and α-TCP phases along with HA in 
the HA-TCP samples. Samples without coating, with water-glass coating, and 
heat-treated after water-glass coating were used to observe the adhesion and 
proliferation response of bone marrow derived-mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). 
Cell culture was carried out for 4 hrs, 1 day, and 7 days. Interestingly, all 
samples showed similar response for cell adhesion and proliferation up to 7-day 
culture but fibronectin, E-cadherin, and osteogenic differentiation related 
genes (osteocalcin and osteopontin) were significantly induced in heat-treated 
water-glass coated HA-TCP samples. A water-glass coating on Ca-P samples was not 
found to influence the cell proliferation response significantly but activated 
some extracellular matrix genes and induced osteogenic differentiation in the 
MSCs.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9758729
PMCID: PMC4939182
PMID: 27429988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]