1. Cell Cycle. 2016 Oct 17;15(20):2827-41. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1222340.
Epub  2016 Sep 2.

Extracellular-signal regulated kinase 8 of Trypanosoma brucei uniquely 
phosphorylates its proliferating cell nuclear antigen homolog and reveals 
exploitable properties.

Valenciano AL(1), Knudsen GM(2), Mackey ZB(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Fralin Life Science Institute , Vector-Borne 
Disease Division, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University , 
Blacksburg , VA , USA.
(2)b Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , University of California San 
Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2016 Dec;15(23):3167-3168. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1232081.

The Trypanosoma brucei subspecies T. brucei gambiense and T. brucei rhodesiense 
are vector-borne pathogens that cause sleeping sickness also known as Human 
African Trypanosomiasis (HAT), which is fatal if left untreated. The drugs that 
treat HAT are ineffective and cause toxic side effects. One strategy for 
identifying safer and more effective HAT drugs is to therapeutically exploit 
essential gene targets in T. brucei. Genes that make up a basic 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) network are present in T. brucei. 
Tb927.10.5140 encodes an essential MAPK that is homologous to the human 
extracellular-signal regulated kinase 8 (HsERK8) which forms a tight complex 
with the replication factor proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) to 
stabilize intracellular PCNA levels. Here we demonstrate that (TbPCNA) is 
uniquely phos-phorylated on serine (S) and threonine (T) residues in T. brucei 
and that TbERK8 phosphorylates TbPCNA at each of these residues. The ability of 
an ERK8 homolog to phosphorylate a PCNA homolog is a novel biochemical property 
that is first demonstrated here in T. brucei and may be unique to this pathogen. 
We demonstrate that the potent HsERK8 inhibitor Ro318220, has an IC50 for TbERK8 
that is several hundred times higher than its reported IC50 for HsERK8. This 
indicated that the active sites of TbERK8 and HsERK8 can be selectively 
inhibited, which provides a rational basis for discovering inhibitors that 
specifically target this essential parasite MAPK to kill the parasite.

DOI: 10.1080/15384101.2016.1222340
PMCID: PMC5053586
PMID: 27589575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]