1. Fam Cancer. 2017 Jul;16(3):329-338. doi: 10.1007/s10689-016-9962-9.

Novel and reported pathogenic variants in exon 11 of BRCA2 gene in a cohort of 
Sri Lankan young breast cancer patients.

De Silva S(1), Tennekoon KH(2), Dissanayake A(3)(4), De Silva K(3), Jayasekara 
L(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of 
Colombo, 90, Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha, Colombo, 00300, Sri Lanka. 
sum@ibmbb.cmb.ac.lk.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of 
Colombo, 90, Cumaratunga Munidasa Mawatha, Colombo, 00300, Sri Lanka.
(3)National Cancer Research, Maharagama, Sri Lanka.
(4)Teaching Hospital Jaffna, Jaffna, Sri Lanka.

Women with breast carcinoma diagnosed before 40 years of age with a strong 
familial risk have a greater prevalence of germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 variants than 
late onset breast cancer. Previously germline variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes 
were characterized in a cohort of Sri Lankan breast cancer patients unselected 
for age of onset. This study focused on young breast cancer patients who were 
screened for previously identified hotspot regions in BRCA2 gene. A total of 48 
young breast cancer patients with family history of cancer and 25 healthy 
controls were studied. Direct sequencing was used to detect pathogenic and other 
sequence variants in the hotspot regions of BRCA2 gene. Thirty-six sequence 
variants including seven pathogenic (c.2411_2412delAA/p.Glu804Valfs*2, 
c.2500_2501insG/p.Leu834Cysfs*4, c.3881T>G/p.Leu1294*, c.4768A>T/p.Lys1590*, 
c.5645C>G/p.Ser1882*, c.5747delC/p.His1916Phefs*3, c.6728C>T/p.Ser2243Phe) and 
two likely pathogenic (c.1922C>T and c.3378A>T) variants, two intronic variants 
of unknown significance (c.1910-74T>C, c.1910-51G>T), two variants of uncertain 
significance (c.2324C>T c.5104C>T) and 23 benign variants were detected. Among 
them, seven were novel (pathogenic 5 and likely pathogenic 2). Prevalence of 
pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in the hotspots regions of BRCA2 was 
23 and 6.3 % respectively in this cohort. This justifies BRCA2 variant testing 
in young breast cancer patients with family history of cancer in Sri Lanka.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-016-9962-9
PMID: 28039656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]