1. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 23;7(1):375. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-00342-1.

Palmitoylethanolamide induces microglia changes associated with increased 
migration and phagocytic activity: involvement of the CB2 receptor.

Guida F(1)(2), Luongo L(1)(2), Boccella S(1), Giordano ME(1), Romano R(1), 
Bellini G(3), Manzo I(3), Furiano A(1), Rizzo A(4), Imperatore R(5)(6), Iannotti 
FA(5)(2), D'Aniello E(5)(2), Piscitelli F(5)(2), Sca Rossi F(3), Cristino 
L(5)(2), Di Marzo V(5)(2), de Novellis V(1)(2), Maione S(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology L. Donatelli, 
Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" (Ex SUN), 80138, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, C.N.R., 
Pozzuoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Women, Child and General and Specialistic Surgery, Università 
degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" (Ex SUN), 80138, Naples, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Microbiology and Clinical 
Microbiology, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" (Ex SUN), 
80138, Naples, Italy.
(5)Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Pozzuoli, Italy.
(6)Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology L. Donatelli, 
Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli" (Ex SUN), 80138, 
Naples, Italy. sabatino.maione@unina2.it.
(8)Endocannabinoid Research Group, Institute of Biomolecular Chemistry, C.N.R., 
Pozzuoli, Italy. sabatino.maione@unina2.it.

The endogenous fatty acid amide palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) has been shown to 
exert anti-inflammatory actions mainly through inhibition of the release of 
pro-inflammatory molecules from mast cells, monocytes and macrophages. Indirect 
activation of the endocannabinoid (eCB) system is among the several mechanisms 
of action that have been proposed to underlie the different effects of PEA in 
vivo. In this study, we used cultured rat microglia and human macrophages to 
evaluate whether PEA affects eCB signaling. PEA was found to increase CB2 mRNA 
and protein expression through peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α 
(PPAR-α) activation. This novel gene regulation mechanism was demonstrated 
through: (i) pharmacological PPAR-α manipulation, (ii) PPAR-α mRNA silencing, 
(iii) chromatin immunoprecipitation. Moreover, exposure to PEA induced 
morphological changes associated with a reactive microglial phenotype, including 
increased phagocytosis and migratory activity. Our findings suggest indirect 
regulation of microglial CB2R expression as a new possible mechanism underlying 
the effects of PEA. PEA can be explored as a useful tool for preventing/treating 
the symptoms associated with neuroinflammation in CNS disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-00342-1
PMCID: PMC5428303
PMID: 28336953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.