1. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2017 Jun 1;9(2):254-269. doi: 10.2741/s486.

Disparity in rates of HPV infection and cervical cancer in underserved US 
populations.

Karuri AR(1), Kashyap VK(1), Yallapu MM(1), Zafar N(2), Kedia SK(3), Jaggi M(1), 
Chauhan SC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Cancer Research Center, University 
of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA, 38163.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, Tennessee, USA, 38163.
(3)Division of Social and Behavioral Sciences, School of Public Health, 
University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, 38152.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Cancer Research Center, University 
of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA, 38163, 
schauha1@uthsc.edu.

There is a higher rate of HPV infection and cervical cancer incidence and 
mortality in underserved US population who reside in Appalachian mountain region 
compared to Northern Plains. Social and behavioral factors such as smoking and 
alcohol consumption are for such a high incidence. However, by and large, the 
reasons for these discrepancies lie in the reluctance of the underserved 
population to adopt preventive measures such as prophylactic Human papilloma 
virus (HPV) vaccines and Pap smear screening that have significantly reduced the 
incidence and mortality rate of cervical cancer in Caucasian women. Thus, it is 
clear that drastic change in social behavior and implementation of preventive 
measures is required to effectively reduce the incidence and mortality from 
cervical cancer in this underserved population.

DOI: 10.2741/s486
PMCID: PMC5935458
PMID: 28410118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]