1. Clin Immunol. 2017 Jul;180:100-105. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.05.009. Epub 2017
 May 10.

Genetic modifiers of multiple sclerosis progression, severity and onset.

Sadovnick AD(1), Traboulsee AL(2), Zhao Y(2), Bernales CQ(3), Encarnacion M(3), 
Ross JP(3), Yee IM(3), Criscuoli MG(3), Vilariño-Güell C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada; Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada. Electronic address: carles@can.ubc.ca.

The genetic contribution to clinical outcomes for multiple sclerosis (MS) has 
yet to be defined. We performed exome sequencing analysis in 100 MS patients 
presenting opposite extremes of clinical phenotype (discovery cohort), and 
genotyped variants of interest in 2016 MS patients (replication cohort). Linear 
and logistic regression analyses were used to identify significant associations 
with disease course, severity and onset. Our analysis of the discovery cohort 
nominated 38 variants in 21 genes. Replication analysis identified PSMG4 p.W99R 
and NLRP5 p.M459I to be associated with disease severity (p=0.002 and 0.008). 
CACNA1H p.R1871Q was found associated with patients presenting relapsing 
remitting MS at clinical onset (p=0.028) whereas NLRP5 p.M459I and EIF2AK1 
p.K558R were associated with primary progressive disease (p=0.031 and 0.023). In 
addition, PSMG4 p.W99R and NLRP5 p.R761L were found to correlate with an earlier 
age at MS clinical onset, and MC1R p.R160W with delayed onset of clinical 
symptoms (p=0.010-0.041).

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.05.009
PMID: 28501589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]