1. Neuropathology. 2017 Dec;37(6):575-581. doi: 10.1111/neup.12399. Epub 2017 Jul
 13.

An autopsy case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with a prion protein gene codon 180 
mutation presenting with pathological laughing and an exaggerated startle 
reaction.

Iwasaki Y(1), Mori K(2), Ito M(2), Akagi A(1), Mimuro M(1), Kitamoto T(3), 
Yoshida M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute for Medical Science of Aging, Aichi 
Medical University, Nagakute, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oyamada Memorial Spa Hospital, Yokkaichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurological Science, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

A 78-year-old Japanese woman presented with slow progressive disorientation and 
memory disturbances. Pathological laughing was observed at an early disease 
stage and continued for several months. Around the same time, the patient began 
to exhibit an exaggerated startle reaction and mild myoclonus. The pathological 
laughing and startle reaction disappeared before the patient reached an akinetic 
mutism state approximately 16 months after symptom onset. MRI showed extensive 
hyperintensity of the cerebral cortex and striatum on diffusion-weighted images, 
and swelling in the cerebral cortex on T2-weighted and fluid attenuated 
inversion recovery images. A prion protein (PrP) gene analysis revealed a V180I 
mutation with methionine homozygosity at codon 129. Neuropathological 
examination showed extensive spongiform changes with characteristic 
various-sized and non-confluent (VaSNoC) vacuoles in the cerebral neocortex and 
striatum. Gliosis and hypertrophic astrocytosis were generally mild in 
character. Neurons were relatively preserved in number. We believe that 
pathological laughing and an exaggerated startle reaction are possible 
pathognomonic findings of V180I genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Based on the 
pathological findings of the present case, the presence of the VaSNoC-type 
spongiform changes with relative preservation of the neurons in the cerebral 
cortex and a lack of apparent brainstem involvement are associated at least in 
part with the pathological laughing and startle reaction.

© 2017 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12399
PMID: 28703419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]