1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 3;7(1):7187. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-07000-6.

Mutations Driving Airborne Transmission of A/H5N1 Virus in Mammals Cause 
Substantial Attenuation in Chickens only when combined.

Richard M(1), Herfst S(2), van den Brand JMA(2), de Meulder D(2), Lexmond P(2), 
Bestebroer TM(2), Fouchier RAM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Postgraduate School Molecular Medicine, Erasmus 
MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.richard@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Viroscience, Postgraduate School Molecular Medicine, Erasmus 
MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

A/H5N1 influenza viruses pose a threat to human and animal health. A fully avian 
A/H5N1 influenza virus was previously shown to acquire airborne transmissibility 
between ferrets upon accumulation of five or six substitutions that affected 
three traits: polymerase activity, hemagglutinin stability and receptor binding. 
Here, the impact of these traits on A/H5N1 virus replication, tissue tropism, 
pathogenesis and transmission was investigated in chickens. The virus containing 
all substitutions associated with transmission in mammals was highly attenuated 
in chickens. However, single substitutions that affect polymerase activity, 
hemagglutinin stability and receptor binding generally had a small or negligible 
impact on virus replication, morbidity and mortality. A virus carrying two 
substitutions in the receptor-binding site was attenuated, although its tissue 
tropism in chickens was not affected. This data indicate that an A/H5N1 virus 
that is airborne-transmissible between mammals is unlikely to emerge in 
chickens, although individual mammalian adaptive substitutions have limited 
impact on viral fitness in chickens.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-07000-6
PMCID: PMC5543172
PMID: 28775271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.