1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 10;8:871. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00871. eCollection 
2017.

Beyond IgE-When Do IgE-Crosslinking and Effector Cell Activation Lead to 
Clinical Anaphylaxis?

Poulsen LK(1), Jensen BM(1), Esteban V(1)(2), Garvey LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Allergy Clinic, Copenhagen University Hospital at Gentofte, Hellerup, 
Denmark.
(2)Immuno-Allergy Laboratory, Department of Immunology, IIS Fundación Jiménez 
Díaz, Madrid, Spain.

Anaphylaxis in humans is inherently difficult to study due to the acuteness of 
symptoms and the lack of biomarkers serving as risk predictors. Most cases are 
related to IgE sensitizations to foods, insect venoms, and drugs with 
mastocytosis patients forming a smaller risk group. However, identifying the 
relatively small fraction of persons at risk has been exceedingly difficult. In 
this review, we propose to describe anaphylaxis in a broader context than 
defined by IgE sensitization alone. Exposure to a trigger, such as an allergen, 
may lead to anaphylaxis, but in particular, the internal dose sensed by the 
immune system needs to be established. Moreover, intrinsic patient factors as 
well as the specific circumstances of the exposure, i.e., the extrinsic factors, 
need to be thoroughly accounted for. More controversially, other triggers of 
anaphylaxis, such as increased sensitivity to or reduced catabolism of histamine 
("histamine intolerance") or mast cell activation syndrome also named mast cell 
activation disorder have been suggested, but still with very limited 
epidemiological evidence that a significant proportion of the observed reactions 
are caused by these alleged conditions. Thus, when all conditions are 
considered, it seems as if IgE-mediated reactions are responsible for the vast 
majority of anaphylactic conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00871
PMCID: PMC5554325
PMID: 28848540