1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2018 Jan;42(1):76-83. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000941.

Undifferentiated Endometrial Carcinomas Show Frequent Loss of Core 
Switch/Sucrose Nonfermentable Complex Proteins.

KÃ¶bel M(1), Hoang LN(2), Tessier-Cloutier B(2), Meng B(3), Soslow RA(4), Stewart 
CJR(5), Lee CH(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Calgary Laboratory Services 
and University of Calgary, Calgary.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver General Hospital.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY.
(5)Department of Histopathology, King Edward Memorial Hospital and School for 
Women's and Infants' Health, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Pathology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma is an aggressive type of endometrial 
carcinoma that typically presents with advanced stage disease and rapid clinical 
progression. In contrast to dedifferentiated endometrial carcinoma, 
undifferentiated carcinoma lacks a concurrent differentiated (typically 
low-grade endometrioid) carcinoma component, though the undifferentiated 
component of dedifferentiated carcinoma is similar histologically and 
immunophenotypically to pure undifferentiated carcinoma. We recently identified 
3 mutually exclusive mechanisms of switch/sucrose nonfermentable (SWI/SNF) 
complex inactivation (BRG1 inactivation, INI1 inactivation or ARID1A/ARID1B 
co-inactivation) that are associated with histologic dedifferentiation in the 
majority of dedifferentiated endometrial carcinoma. In the current study, we 
aimed to determine by immunohistochemistry whether these patterns of SWI/SNF 
inactivation also occur in undifferentiated endometrial carcinomas. Of the 34 
undifferentiated carcinomas examined, 17 (50%) exhibited SWI/SNF complex 
inactivation, with 11 tumors showing complete loss of both ARID1A and ARID1B, 5 
showing complete loss of BRG1 and 1 showing complete loss of INI1. Ten of the 
remaining 17 undifferentiated carcinomas showed the following alterations: 5 
tumors (15%) showed loss of ARID1A only with intact ARID1B, BRG1, and INI1 
expression, 4 tumors (12%) showed mutated patterns of p53 staining with intact 
SWI/SNF protein expression, and 1 tumor (3%) harbored a POLE exonuclease domain 
mutation (P286R). SWI/SNF complex-inactivated tumors presented more frequently 
with extrauterine disease spread than those with intact expression (88% vs. 41%, 
respectively). In addition, patients with SWI/SNF complex-inactivated tumors had 
a significantly worse disease-specific survival (P=0.02). The findings here 
demonstrate frequent SWI/SNF complex inactivation in undifferentiated 
endometrial carcinomas, which has future implications regarding therapies that 
target chromatin remodelling and epigenetic control.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000941
PMCID: PMC7995487
PMID: 28863077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The study authors have no conflicts 
of interest to declare.