1. J Bone Miner Res. 2018 Jan;33(1):54-62. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3240. Epub 2017 Sep 
20.

Diabetes and Deficits in Cortical Bone Density, Microarchitecture, and Bone 
Size: Framingham HR-pQCT Study.

Samelson EJ(1)(2)(3), Demissie S(4), Cupples LA(4)(5), Zhang X(1), Xu H(4), Liu 
CT(4), Boyd SK(6), McLean RR(1)(2)(3), Broe KE(1), Kiel DP(1)(2)(3), Bouxsein 
ML(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Aging Research, Hebrew SeniorLife, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Division of Gerontology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA.
(6)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
AB, Canada.
(7)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Center for Advanced Orthopedic Studies, 
Boston, MA, USA.

Older adults with type 2 diabetes (T2D) tend to have normal or greater areal 
bone mineral density (aBMD), as measured by DXA, than those who do not have 
diabetes (non-T2D). Yet risk of fracture is higher in T2D, including 40% to 50% 
increased hip fracture risk. We used HR-pQCT to investigate structural 
mechanisms underlying skeletal fragility in T2D. We compared cortical and 
trabecular bone microarchitecture, density, bone area, and strength in T2D and 
non-T2D. In secondary analyses we evaluated whether associations between T2D and 
bone measures differed according to prior fracture, sex, and obesity. 
Participants included 1069 members of the Framingham Study, who attended 
examinations in 2005 to 2008 and underwent HR-pQCT scanning in 2012 to 2015. 
Mean age was 64 ± 8 years (range, 40 to 87 years), and 12% (n = 129) had T2D. 
After adjustment for age, sex, weight, and height, T2D had lower cortical 
volumetric BMD (vBMD) (p < 0.01), higher cortical porosity (p = 0.02), and 
smaller cross-sectional area (p = 0.04) at the tibia, but not radius. Trabecular 
indices were similar or more favorable in T2D than non-T2D. Associations between 
T2D and bone measures did not differ according to sex or obesity status (all 
interaction p > 0.05); however, associations did differ in those with a prior 
fracture and those with no history of fracture. Specifically, cortical vBMD at 
the tibia and cortical thickness at the radius were lower in T2D than non-T2D, 
but only among those individuals with a prior fracture. Cortical porosity at the 
radius was higher in T2D than non-T2D, but only among those who did not have a 
prior fracture. Findings from this large, community-based study of older adults 
suggest that modest deterioration in cortical bone and reductions in bone area 
may characterize diabetic bone disease in older adults. Evaluation of these 
deficits as predictors of fracture in T2D is needed to develop prevention 
strategies in this rapidly increasing population of older adults. © 2017 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2017 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3240
PMCID: PMC5771832
PMID: 28929525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]