1. Open Biol. 2017 Oct;7(10):170058. doi: 10.1098/rsob.170058.

Casein kinase II phosphorylation of cyclin F at serine 621 regulates the 
Lys48-ubiquitylation E3 ligase activity of the SCF((cyclin F)) complex.

Lee A(1)(2), Rayner SL(3)(4), De Luca A(3), Gwee SSL(3), Morsch M(3), 
Sundaramoorthy V(3), Shahheydari H(3), Ragagnin A(3), Shi B(3), Yang S(3), 
Williams KL(3), Don EK(3), Walker AK(3), Zhang KY(3), Yerbury JJ(5), Cole NJ(3), 
Atkin JD(3)(6), Blair IP(3), Molloy MP(2)(4), Chung RS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Motor Neuron Disease Research, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, 2 Technology 
Place, North Ryde, NSW 2109, Australia albert.lee@mq.edu.au.
(2)Australian Proteome Analysis Facility, Research Park Drive, Macquarie 
University, North Ryde, NSW 2109, Australia.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Motor Neuron Disease Research, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, 2 Technology 
Place, North Ryde, NSW 2109, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Science and Engineering, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular 
Sciences, Research Park Drive, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109, 
Australia.
(5)Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, Wollongong, NSW 2522, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular 
Science, Victoria, Australia.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that 
is characterized by progressive weakness, paralysis and muscle loss often 
resulting in patient death within 3-5 years of diagnosis. Recently, we 
identified disease-linked mutations in the CCNF gene, which encodes the cyclin F 
protein, in cohorts of patients with familial and sporadic ALS and 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Williams KL et al 2016 Nat. Commun.7, 11253. 
(doi:10.1038/ncomms11253)). Cyclin F is a part of a Skp1-Cul-F-box (SCF) E3 
ubiquitin-protein ligase complex and is responsible for ubiquitylating proteins 
for degradation by the proteasome. In this study, we investigated the 
phosphorylation status of cyclin F and the effect of the serine to glycine 
substitution at site 621 (S621G) on E3 ligase activity. This specific mutation 
(S621G) was found in a multi-generational Australian family with ALS/FTD. We 
identified seven phosphorylation sites on cyclin F, of which five are newly 
reported including Ser621. These phosphorylation sites were mostly identified 
within the PEST (proline, glutamic acid, serine and threonine) sequence located 
at the C-terminus of cyclin F. Additionally, we determined that casein kinase II 
(CK2) can phosphorylate Ser621 and thereby regulate the E3 ligase activity of 
the SCF(cyclin F) complex. Furthermore, the S621G mutation in cyclin F prevents 
phosphorylation by CK2 and confers elevated Lys48-ubiquitylation activity, a 
hallmark of ALS/FTD pathology. These findings highlight the importance of 
phosphorylation in regulating the activity of the SCF(cyclin F) E3 ligase 
complex that can affect downstream processes and may lead to defective motor 
neuron development, neuron degeneration and ultimately ALS and FTD.

Â© 2017 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsob.170058
PMCID: PMC5666078
PMID: 29021214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interests.