1. Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2017 Sep 27;11(3):584-592. doi: 10.1159/000481160. 
eCollection 2017 Sep-Dec.

Renoportal Anastomosis in Left Lateral Lobe Living Donor Liver Transplantation: 
A Pediatric Case.

Ogasawara H(1), Nakanishi C(1), Miyagi S(1), Tokodai K(1), Hara Y(1), Nakanishi 
W(1), Miyazawa K(1), Shimizu K(1), Kumata H(1), Goto H(1), Goto M(2), Unno M(1), 
Kamei T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku University, 
Sendai, Japan.
(2)Division of Transplantation and Regenerative Medicine, Tohoku University, 
Sendai, Japan.

In adult liver transplantation, renoportal anastomosis (RPA) has been introduced 
as a useful technique for patients with grade 4 portal vein thrombosis and a 
splenorenal shunt. Here, we report a pediatric case in which RPA allowed a left 
lateral lobe living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) despite portal vein 
thrombosis and a large splenorenal shunt. At 36 days old, the patient underwent 
a Kasai operation for biliary atresia. At 17 months old, she underwent LDLT 
because of repetitive cholangitis. Pretransplant examinations revealed a large 
splenorenal shunt and portal vein thrombosis. Simple end-to-end portal 
reconstruction and clamping of the collateral route after removing the 
thrombosis were unsuccessful. Thus, RPA was performed using a donor superficial 
femoral vein as an interpositional graft. The portal vein pressure was 20 mm Hg 
after arterial reperfusion. Ligation of the splenic artery reduced the portal 
vein pressure. Although she developed severe acute cellular rejection and 
chylous ascites, there were no signs of portal vein complications. She was 
discharged 73 days after transplantation without any signs of renal dysfunction. 
The patient's condition was good at her last follow-up, 22 months after 
transplantation. To our knowledge, this is the youngest case of RPA in pediatric 
left lateral lobe LDLT. Additionally, this is the first case of RPA with splenic 
artery ligation and using the donor's superficial femoral vein as the venous 
graft for RPA. Although long-term follow-up is necessary, RPA could be a salvage 
option in LDLT in infants if other methods are unsuccessful.

DOI: 10.1159/000481160
PMCID: PMC5662992
PMID: 29118687