1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 Feb 2;9(2):153. doi: 10.1038/s41419-017-0244-8.

YAP triggers the Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway and promotes enterocyte 
self-renewal, regeneration and tumorigenesis after DSS-induced injury.

Deng F(1), Peng L(1)(2), Li Z(1), Tan G(1), Liang E(1), Chen S(1), Zhao X(1), 
Zhi F(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, Institute of Gastroenterology of Guangdong Province, Nanfang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510515, 
China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510120, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, Institute of Gastroenterology of Guangdong Province, Nanfang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510515, 
China. zhifc41532@163.com.

Impaired epithelial regeneration is a crucial pathophysiological feature of 
ulcerative colitis (UC). Yes-associated protein (YAP1) appears to control cell 
proliferation and differentiation. In this study, we sought to identify the 
roles of YAP in intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) self-renewal, regeneration and 
tumorigenesis. We first observed that YAP was significantly reduced in 62.5% 
(45/72) of human UC tissues and it was dramatically enhanced during epithelial 
regeneration in a murine colitis model. Using lentiviral infection, we 
established a YAP-overexpression (YAPWT) mouse model. We then found that after 
tissue injury, YAPWT mice had increased epithelial cell self-renewal capacity 
and drastically restored intestinal crypt structure. Strikingly, these mice were 
more susceptible to colitis-associated cancer (CAC) in chemically induced 
carcinoma. Mechanistically, YAP and β-catenin showed increased nuclear 
co-localization during regeneration after inflammation. Overexpressing YAP 
significantly improved IEC 'wound-healing' ability and increased the expression 
of both β-catenin and the transcriptional targets of Wnt signalling Lgr5 and 
cyclin D1, whereas silencing β-catenin in YAPWT cells attenuated this effect. 
Remarkably, we observed that YAP could directly interact with β-catenin in the 
nucleus and formed a transcriptional YAP/β-catenin/TCF4 complex; Lgr5 and cyclin 
D1 were confirmed to be the target genes of this complex. In contrast, cancer 
cell proliferation and tumour development were suppressed by the phospho-mimetic 
YAP mutant. In summary, nuclear YAP-driven IEC proliferation could control 
epithelial regeneration after inflammation and may serve as a potential 
therapeutic target in UC. However, excessive YAP activation promoted CAC 
development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-017-0244-8
PMCID: PMC5833613
PMID: 29396428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.