1. Sci Rep. 2018 May 16;8(1):7732. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-25717-w.

Heterologous mammalian Akt disrupts plasma membrane homeostasis by taking over 
TORC2 signaling in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Rodríguez-Escudero I(1), Fernández-Acero T(1), Cid VJ(2), Molina M(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigaciones 
Sanitarias, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigaciones 
Sanitarias, Madrid, Spain. vicjcid@ucm.es.

The Akt protein kinase is the main transducer of 
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns3,4,5P3) signaling in higher 
eukaryotes, controlling cell growth, motility, proliferation and survival. By 
co-expression of mammalian class I phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt 
in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae heterologous model, we previously described an 
inhibitory effect on yeast growth that relied on Akt kinase activity. Here we 
report that PI3K-Akt expression in yeast triggers the formation of large plasma 
membrane (PM) invaginations that were marked by actin patches, enriched in 
PtdIns4,5P2 and associated to abnormal intracellular cell wall deposits. These 
effects of Akt were mimicked by overproduction of the PtdIns4,5P2 effector Slm1, 
an adaptor of the Ypk1 and Ypk2 kinases in the TORC2 pathway. Although Slm1 was 
phosphorylated in vivo by Akt, TORC2-dependent Ypk1 activation did not occur. 
However, PI3K-activated Akt suppressed the lethality derived from inactivation 
of either TORC2 or Ypk protein kinases. Thus, heterologous co-expression of PI3K 
and Akt in yeast short-circuits PtdIns4,5P2- and TORC2-signaling at the level of 
the Slm-Ypk complex, overriding some of its functions. Our results underscore 
the importance of phosphoinositide-dependent kinases as key actors in the 
homeostasis and dynamics of the PM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-25717-w
PMCID: PMC5955888
PMID: 29769614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.