1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Jul 27;293(30):11746-11757. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002363. 
Epub 2018 Jun 5.

Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of a novel glycoside hydrolase 
family 113 β-1,4-mannanase from Amphibacillus xylanus.

You X(1), Qin Z(2), Yan Q(1), Yang S(3), Li Y(1), Jiang Z(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Food Nutrition and Human 
Health, College of Engineering, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100083.
(2)the School of Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, 
R&D Center of Separation and Extraction Technology in Fermentation Industry, 
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, and.
(3)the College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100083, China.
(4)the College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100083, China zhqjiang@cau.edu.cn.

β-1,4-Mannanase degrades β-1,4-mannan polymers into manno-oligosaccharides with 
a low degree of polymerization. To date, only one glycoside hydrolase (GH) 
family 113 β-1,4-mannanase, from Alicyclobacillus acidocaldarius (AaManA), has 
been structurally characterized, and no complex structure of 
enzyme-manno-oligosaccharides from this family has been reported. Here, crystal 
structures of a GH family 113 β-1,4-mannanase from Amphibacillus xylanus 
(AxMan113A) and its complexes with mannobiose, mannotriose, mannopentaose, and 
mannahexaose were solved. AxMan113A had higher affinity for -1 and +1 mannoses, 
which explains why the enzyme can hydrolyze mannobiose. At least six subsites 
(-4 to +2) exist in the groove, but mannose units preferentially occupied 
subsites -4 to -1 because of steric hindrance formed by Lys-238 and Trp-239. 
Based on the structural information and bioinformatics, rational design was 
implemented to enhance hydrolysis activity. Enzyme activity of AxMan113A mutants 
V139C, N237W, K238A, and W239Y was improved by 93.7, 63.4, 112.9, and 36.4%, 
respectively, compared with the WT. In addition, previously unreported 
surface-binding sites were observed. Site-directed mutagenesis studies and 
kinetic data indicated that key residues near the surface sites play important 
roles in substrate binding and recognition. These first GH family 113 
β-1,4-mannanase-manno-oligosaccharide complex structures may be useful in 
further studying the catalytic mechanism of GH family 113 members, and provide 
novel insight into protein engineering of GHs to improve their hydrolysis 
activity.

© 2018 You et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.002363
PMCID: PMC6066303
PMID: 29871927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article