1. Int J Mol Med. 2018 Sep;42(3):1283-1294. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3721. Epub
2018  Jun 7.

Telomerase reverse transcriptase interference synergistically promotes tumor 
necrosis factor‑related apoptosis‑inducing ligand‑induced oral squamous cell 
carcinoma apoptosis and suppresses proliferation in vitro and in vivo.

Zhao X(1), Zhang C(2), Le Z(3), Zeng S(4), Pan C(5), Shi J(1), Wang J(5), Zhao 
X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stomatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510150, P.R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Oral Medicine, Guangzhou Institute of Oral Disease, 
Stomatology Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 
510140, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510635, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Hefei Stomatological Hospital, Hefei, Anhui 
230001, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Sun Yat‑sen Memorial Hospital, 
Sun Yat‑sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, P.R. China.

Tumor necrosis factor‑related apoptosis‑inducing ligand (TRAIL) is known to 
induce cell apoptosis in many types of cancer cells. However, some malignant 
cells still exhibit anti‑apoptosis features induced by TRAIL; thus the 
underlying mechanisms that regulate sensitivity and resistance of tumor cells to 
TRAIL‑induced apoptosis remain unclear. Human telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(hTERT) is overexpressed in most types of human tumors and is mostly inactive in 
somatic cells. The present study aimed to investigate the endogenous effects and 
mechanisms of hTERT inhibition and TRAIL overexpression on TRAIL‑induced 
apoptosis of human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. The effects of 
adeno‑associated virus (AAV)‑mediated TRAIL and hTERT gene silencing by RNA 
interference were investigated on the proliferation and apoptosis of human OSCC 
cells in vitro and in vivo. The present results suggest that knockdown of hTERT 
expression accelerated TRAIL‑resistant OSCC cells to TRAIL‑induced apoptosis and 
impaired OSCC cell proliferation. In addition, this process is accompanied by 
the upregulation of caspase‑3, caspase‑8 and caspase‑9, and downregulation of B 
cell lymphoma‑2. Additionally, the possible mechanisms underlying the 
association between TRAIL expression and hTERT silencing were explored. The 
results demonstrated that TRAIL expression levels were elevated when the hTERT 
gene was silenced, and notable anti‑tumor effects were observed when TRAIL 
upregulation and hTERT gene silencing were carried out simultaneously. The 
present findings provide experimental evidence for the combined use of TRAIL and 
hTERT as a possible gene therapy strategy in oral cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3721
PMCID: PMC6089774
PMID: 29901096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]