1. Neurology. 2018 Jul 10;91(2 Suppl 1):S14-S20. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0000000000005788.

The biology of cutaneous neurofibromas: Consensus recommendations for setting 
research priorities.

Brosseau JP(1), Pichard DC(1), Legius EH(1), Wolkenstein P(1), Lavker RM(1), 
Blakeley JO(1), Riccardi VM(1), Verma SK(1), Brownell I(1), Le LQ(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Dermatology (J.P.B., L.Q.L.), UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX; Dermatology Branch (D.C.P., I.B.), Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Human Genetics 
Department (E.H.L.), University of Leuven, Belgium; Division Cancer Immunity 
Transplantation Infections (P.W.), Paris Est Créteil University, France; 
Department of Dermatology (R.M.L.), Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; 
Department of Neurology (J.O.B., S.K.V.), The Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic 
Acceleration Program, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD; and The NF Institute (V.M.R.), La Crescenta, CA.
(2)From the Department of Dermatology (J.P.B., L.Q.L.), UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX; Dermatology Branch (D.C.P., I.B.), Center for Cancer 
Research, National Cancer Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Human Genetics 
Department (E.H.L.), University of Leuven, Belgium; Division Cancer Immunity 
Transplantation Infections (P.W.), Paris Est Créteil University, France; 
Department of Dermatology (R.M.L.), Northwestern University, Chicago, IL; 
Department of Neurology (J.O.B., S.K.V.), The Neurofibromatosis Therapeutic 
Acceleration Program, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD; and The NF Institute (V.M.R.), La Crescenta, CA. 
lu.le@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Neurology. 91(2_Supplement_1):S1.
    Neurology. 91(2_Supplement_1):S5.
    Neurology. 91(2_Supplement_1):S21.
    Neurology. 91(2_Supplement_1):S31.

OBJECTIVE: A group of experts in dermatology, genetics, neuroscience, and 
regenerative medicine collaborated to summarize current knowledge on the defined 
factors contributing to cutaneous neurofibroma (cNF) development and to provide 
consensus recommendations for future research priorities to gain an improved 
understanding of the biology of cNF.
METHODS: The group members reviewed published and unpublished data on cNF and 
related diseases via literature search, defined a set of key topic areas deemed 
critical in cNF pathogenesis, and developed recommendations in a series of 
consensus meetings.
RESULTS: Five specific topic areas were identified as being relevant to 
providing an enhanced understanding of the biology of cNF: (1) defining the 
human cells of origin; (2) understanding the role of the microenvironment, 
focusing on neurons, mast cells, and fibroblasts; (3) defining the genetic and 
molecular differences between the cNFs, focusing on size and number; (4) 
understanding if sex hormones are critical for cNF development or progression; 
and (5) identifying challenges in establishing in vitro and in vivo models 
representing human cNF.
CONCLUSIONS: The complexity of cNF biology stems from its heterogeneity at 
multiple levels including genetic, spatial involvement, temporal development, 
and cellular composition. We propose a unified working model for cNF that builds 
a framework to address the key questions about cNF that, when answered, will 
provide the necessary understanding of cNF biology to allow meaningful 
development of therapies.

© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of the 
American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000005788
PMCID: PMC9703338
PMID: 29987131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]