1. F1000Res. 2016 Mar 1;5:251. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.8132.2. eCollection 
2016.

Mast cell activation is enhanced by Tim1:Tim4 interaction but not by Tim-1 
antibodies.

Phong B(1)(2), Kane LP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, USA.
(2)Immunology Graduate Program, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, USA.

Polymorphisms in the T cell (or transmembrane) immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 
( TIM-1) gene, particularly in the mucin domain, have been associated with atopy 
and allergic diseases in mice and human. Genetic- and antibody-mediated studies 
revealed that Tim-1 functions as a positive regulator of Th2 responses, while 
certain antibodies to Tim-1 can exacerbate or reduce allergic lung inflammation. 
Tim-1 can also positively regulate the function of B cells, NKT cells, dendritic 
cells and mast cells. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which Tim-1 
modulates immune cell function are currently unknown. In this study, we have 
focused on defining Tim-1-mediated signaling pathways that enhance mast cell 
activation through the high affinity IgE receptor (FceRI). Using a Tim-1 mouse 
model lacking the mucin domain (Tim-1 Dmucin), we show for the first time that 
the polymorphic Tim-1 mucin region is dispensable for normal mast cell 
activation. We further show that Tim-4 cross-linking of Tim-1 enhances select 
signaling pathways downstream of FceRI in mast cells, including mTOR-dependent 
signaling, leading to increased cytokine production but without affecting 
degranulation.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.8132.2
PMCID: PMC5584026
PMID: 30023044

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: No competing interests were 
disclosed.