1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2018 Oct;1863(10):1164-1178. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2018.07.004. Epub 2018 Jul 22.

Functional importance for developmental regulation of sterol biosynthesis in 
Acanthamoeba castellanii.

Zhou W(1), Warrilow AGS(2), Thomas CD(1), Ramos E(1), Parker JE(2), Price CL(2), 
Vanderloop BH(1), Fisher PM(1), Loftis MD(1), Kelly DE(2), Kelly SL(2), Nes 
WD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
United States of America.
(2)Center for Cytochrome P450 Biodiversity, Institute of Life Science, School of 
Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
United States of America. Electronic address: wdavid.nes@ttu.edu.

The sterol metabolome of Acanthamoeba castellanii (Ac) yielded 25 sterols. 
Substrate screening of cloned AcCYP51 revealed obtusifoliol as the natural 
substrate which converts to ∆8,14-sterol (<95%). The combination of 
[2H3-methyl]methionine incubation to intact cultures showing C28-ergosterol 
incorporates 2-2H atoms and C29-7-dehydroporiferasterol incorporates 5 2H-atoms, 
the natural distribution of sterols, CYP51 and previously published sterol 
methyltransferase (SMT) data indicate separate ∆24(28)- and ∆25(27)-olefin 
pathways to C28- and C29-sterol products from the protosterol cycloartenol. In 
cell-based culture, we observed a marked change in sterol compositions during 
the growth and encystment phases monitored microscopically and by trypan blue 
staining; trophozoites possess C28/C29-∆5,7-sterols, viable encysted cells 
(mature cyst) possess mostly C29-∆5-sterol and non-viable encysted cells possess 
C28/C29-∆5,7-sterols that turnover variably from stress to 6-methyl aromatic 
sterols associated with changed membrane fluidity affording lysis. An 
incompatible fit of steroidal aromatics in membranes was confirmed using the 
yeast sterol auxotroph GL7. Only viable cysts, including those treated with 
inhibitor, can excyst into trophozoites. 25-Azacycloartanol or voriconazole that 
target SMT and CYP51, respectively, are potent enzyme inhibitors in the 
nanomolar range against the cloned enzymes and amoeba cells. At minimum 
amoebicidal concentration of inhibitor amoeboid cells rapidly convert to 
encysted cells unable to excyst. The correlation between stage-specific sterol 
compositions and the physiological effects of ergosterol biosynthesis inhibitors 
suggests that amoeba fitness is controlled mainly by developmentally-regulated 
changes in the phytosterol B-ring; paired interference in the ∆5,7-sterol 
biosynthesis (to ∆5,7) - metabolism (to ∆5 or 6-methyl aromatic) congruence 
during cell proliferation and encystment could be a source of therapeutic 
intervention for Acanthamoeba infections.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2018.07.004
PMCID: PMC6180906
PMID: 30044954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]