1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Oct 12;46(18):9563-9577. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky774.

Repair protein persistence at DNA lesions characterizes XPF defect with Cockayne 
syndrome features.

Sabatella M(1)(2), Theil AF(1)(2), Ribeiro-Silva C(1)(2), Slyskova J(1)(2), 
Thijssen K(1)(2), Voskamp C(1), Lans H(1)(2), Vermeulen W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Erasmus Medical 
Center Rotterdam, 3000 CA, The Netherlands.
(2)Oncode Institute, Erasmus MC, University Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, 
3000 CA, The Netherlands.

The structure-specific ERCC1-XPF endonuclease plays a key role in DNA damage 
excision by nucleotide excision repair (NER) and interstrand crosslink repair. 
Mutations in this complex can either cause xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) or XP 
combined with Cockayne syndrome (XPCS-complex) or Fanconi anemia. However, most 
patients carry compound heterozygous mutations, which confounds the dissection 
of the phenotypic consequences for each of the identified XPF alleles. Here, we 
analyzed the functional impact of individual pathogenic XPF alleles on NER. We 
show that XP-causing mutations diminish XPF recruitment to DNA damage and only 
mildly affect global genome NER. In contrast, an XPCS-complex-specific mutation 
causes persistent recruitment of XPF and the upstream core NER machinery to DNA 
damage and severely impairs both global genome and transcription-coupled NER. 
Remarkably, persistence of NER factors at DNA damage appears to be a common 
feature of XPCS-complex cells, suggesting that this could be a determining 
factor contributing to the development of additional developmental and/or 
neurodegenerative features in XP patients.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky774
PMCID: PMC6182131
PMID: 30165384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]