1. F1000Res. 2018 Jun 1;7:691. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.14981.2. eCollection 
2018.

Using different methods to process forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 
(1)) data can impact on the interpretation of FEV (1) as an outcome measure to 
understand the performance of an adult cystic fibrosis centre: A retrospective 
chart review.

Hoo ZH(1)(2), El-Gheryani MSA(1)(2), Curley R(1)(2), Wildman MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Health and Related Research (ScHARR), University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, S1 4DP, UK.
(2)Sheffield Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Northern General Hospital NHS Trust, 
Sheffield, S5 7AU, UK.

Background: Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1) is an important 
cystic fibrosis (CF) prognostic marker and an established endpoint for CF 
clinical trials. FEV 1 is also used in observation studies, e.g. to compare 
different centre's outcomes. We wished to evaluate whether different methods of 
processing FEV 1 data can impact on centre outcome. Methods: This is a 
single-centre retrospective analysis of routinely collected data from 2013-2016 
among 208 adults. Year-to-year %FEV 1 change was calculated by subtracting best 
%FEV 1 at Year 1 from Year 2 (i.e. negative values indicate fall in %FEV 1), and 
compared using Friedman test. Three methods were used to process %FEV 1 data. 
First, %FEV 1 calculated with Knudson equation was extracted directly from 
spirometer machines. Second, FEV 1 volume were extracted then converted to %FEV 
1 using clean height data and Knudson equation. Third, FEV 1 volume were 
extracted then converted to %FEV 1 using clean height data and GLI equation. In 
addition, year-to-year variation in %FEV 1 calculated using GLI equation was 
adjusted for baseline %FEV 1 to understand the impact of case-mix adjustment. 
Results: Year-to-year fall in %FEV 1 reduced with all three data processing 
methods but the magnitude of this change differed. Median change in %FEV 1 for 
2013-2014, 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 was -2.0, -1.0 and 0.0 respectively using 
%FEV 1 in Knudson equation whereas the median change was -1.1, -0.9 and -0.3 
respectively using %FEV 1 in the GLI equation. A statistically significant 
p-value (0.016) was only obtained when using %FEV 1 in Knudson equation 
extracted directly from spirometer machines. Conclusions: Although the trend of 
reduced year-to-year fall in %FEV 1 was robust, different data processing 
methods yielded varying results when year-to-year variation in %FEV 1 was 
compared using a standard related group non-parametric statistical test. 
Observational studies with year-to-year variation in %FEV 1 as an outcome 
measure should carefully consider and clearly specify the data processing 
methods used.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.14981.2
PMCID: PMC6213785
PMID: 30443343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests were disclosed.