1. Biomater Sci. 2019 Jan 29;7(2):618-633. doi: 10.1039/c8bm01188e.

Macromolecular crowding tunes 3D collagen architecture and cell morphogenesis.

Ranamukhaarachchi SK (1), Modi RN , Han A , Velez DO , Kumar A , Engler AJ , 
Fraley SI .

Author information:
(1)Bioengineering, University of California San Diego Jacobs School of 
Engineering, La Jolla, California, USA. sifraley@ucsd.edu.

Collagen I is the primary extracellular matrix component of most solid tumors 
and influences metastatic progression. Collagen matrix engineering techniques 
are useful for understanding how this complex biomaterial regulates cancer cell 
behavior and for improving in vitro cancer models. Here, we establish an 
approach to tune collagen fibril architecture using PEG as an inert molecular 
crowding agent during gelation and cell embedding. We find that crowding 
produces matrices with tighter fibril networks that are less susceptible to 
proteinase mediated degradation, but does not significantly alter matrix 
stiffness. The resulting matrices have the effect of preventing cell spreading, 
confining cells, and reducing cell contractility. Matrix degradability and 
fibril length are identified as strong predictors of cell confinement. Further, 
the degree of confinement predicts whether breast cancer cells will ultimately 
undergo individual or collective behaviors. Highly confined breast cancer cells 
undergo morphogenesis to form either invasive networks reminiscent of aggressive 
tumors or gland and lobule structures reminiscent of normal breast epithelia. 
This morphological transition is accompanied by expression of cell-cell adhesion 
genes, including PECAM1 and ICAM1. Our study suggests that cell confinement, 
mediated by matrix architecture, is a design feature that tunes the 
transcriptional and morphogenic state of breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1039/c8bm01188e
PMCID: PMC6375559
PMID: 30515503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]