1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2018 Nov 30;64(14):72-78.

Investigation of association between CD40 current gene variants (rs4810485, 
rs1883832 and rs3765459) and serum CD154 protein levels in Iranian migraineurs.

Ramroodi N(1), Saboori H(2), Sanadgol N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(2)Department of Statistics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Zabol, Zabol, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Zabol, Zabol, Iran.

Migraine is a chronic neurological disease described by recurrent moderate to 
severe headaches often in association with neuro-inflammation. As cytokines are 
affect the immune response and migraine exacerbation, the current study aimed to 
investigate the possible associations between CD40 polymorphisms and level of 
soluble CD154 protein with migraine. In a prospective case-control study, we 
studied blood samples of 190 patients with migraine (migraineurs) and 200 
healthy controls (HCs) from southeast Iran. Genotyping for the CD40 
(rs4810485-intron, rs1883832-5´-UTR, and rs3765459-intron) gene variants were 
executed using PCR-RFLP and soluble CD154 protein levels were measured via ELISA 
method. Among CD40 gene variants, rs1883832 (TC genotype) was significantly 
associated with migraine (P = 0.007, OR = 2.326, 95% CI = 1.258-4.303).  No 
significant associations observed between the rs4810485 and rs3765459 SNPs with 
migraine. The most frequent genotypes for CD40 were GG in rs4810485 (51.5%) and 
rs3765459 (62.1%) as well as TC in rs1883832 (53.7%). There was no statistically 
relationship between these gene variants and different subclasses of migraine. 
Concentration of soluble CD40L among patients with rs1883832 (TC genotype) were 
significantly (P = 0.027, OR = 0.417, CI = 0.192-0.906) higher in compared to 
healthy controls. Our findings showed that in CD40 rs1883832, TC genotype may 
have a role in migraine susceptibility. Therefore, it suggested that in addition 
to other factors, CD40 rs1883832 (TC genotype) genetic variation may also play a 
critical role in the etiology of migraine.

PMID: 30511624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]