1. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2019 Aug;145:65-77. doi: 
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2018.12.005. Epub 2018 Dec 7.

Structural basis for renal cancer by the dynamics of pVHL-dependent JADE1 
stabilization and β-catenin regulation.

Shafique S(1), Rashid S(2).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.
(2)National Centre for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan. Electronic address: sajidrwp@yahoo.co.uk.

Renal cancer is the major cause of mortality due to abnormal functioning of von 
Hippel-Lindau (pVHL) and Jade Family PHD Finger 1 (JADE1) complex. E3 ubiquitin 
ligase JADE1 is stabilized by pVHL interaction through its plant homeodomains 
(PHDs). JADE1 acts as a renal tumor suppressor that promotes the ubiquitination 
and degradation of β-catenin by inhibiting canonical WNT signalling. Current 
study focuses on the structural characterization of reported missense mutations 
in pVHL through in silico approaches. The predicted 3-dimensional structures of 
pVHLWT, pVHLY98H, pVHLY112H, pVHLL118P and pVHLR167W were subjected to binding 
analysis against JADE1 through molecular docking and simulation assays. In all 
cases, JADE1 binding was observed at the β-domain, except pVHLL118P that 
exhibited binding with JADE1 through its α-domain. Our results signify that 
JADE1 stabilization is induced by pVHL α-domain, while β-domain is required for 
JADE1 binding. pVHL binding was mediated through β1 and β2-strands against the 
concave surface of the JADE1-PHD domain. The pVHL-JADE1 complex was evaluated to 
scrutinize the β-catenin-binding interface, which suggested the contribution of 
both α and β-domains of pVHL in β-catenin binding. The eleven-residue 
(Tyr30-Thr40) β-catenin segment exhibited association in a bipartite manner with 
pVHL-JADE1 complex. The presented model depicts a pVHL-JADE1 interface for the 
cooperative regulation of β-catenin binding. We propose that reduced JADE1 
stabilization in case of pVHLL118P and pVHLR167W may correlate with the 
increased activity of β-catenin that may lead to renal cancer through β-catenin 
de-repression. Overall, β-catenin targeting mechanism coupled with the 
structural knowledge of JADE1-pVHL complex will provide better understanding of 
renal cancer pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2018.12.005
PMID: 30528740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]