1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Dec;16(6):7175-7179. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.9521. Epub 2018 Sep
 28.

Role of miR-214 in modulating proliferation and invasion of human colon cancer 
SW620 cells.

Nie H(1), Nie D(2), Men L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin 130033, P.R. China.
(2)Jilin Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Changchun, Jilin 130062, 
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin 130033, P.R. China.

This study investigated the role of miR-214 in modulating proliferation and 
invasion of human colon cancer SW620 cells. Fifty-five patients with colon 
cancer who were treated in China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University from 
March 2014 to March 2015 were enrolled into this study. Their cancer and 
corresponding paracancerous tissues were collected and the expression levels of 
miR-214 were determined by RT-qPCR. A miR-214 expression vector was constructed. 
SW620 cells were transfected with the miR-214 expression vector and a blank 
vector. Cells transfected with the miR-214 expression vector were assigned to 
the miR-214 positive group and cells transfected with the blank vector were 
assigned to the miR-214 negative group. Cell proliferation, invasion and 
apoptosis were assessed by MTT assay, Transwell migration assay and TUNEL 
apoptosis assay, respectively. The RT-qPCR results showed that the expression 
level of miR-214 in colon cancer tissue, as well as in miR-214 negative cells, 
was significantly lower than that in paracancerous tissue (P<0.05 for both). In 
cell comparison, the expression level of miR-214 in the miR-214 positive group 
was significantly higher than that in the miR-214 negative group (0.483±0.001 
vs. 0.172±0.001; P<0.05). The proliferation level of SW620 cells in the miR-214 
positive group was lower than that in the miR-214 negative group (P<0.05). The 
Transwell migration assay indicated that there were less cells penetrating the 
membrane in the miR-214 positive group than in the miR-214 negative group 
(P<0.05). In addition, The apoptosis rate of cells in the miR-214 negative group 
was significantly lower than that in the miR-214 positive group (P<0.05). 
Finally, the low expression of miR-214 was found in colon cancer, indicating 
that miR-214 is a cancer suppressor playing an opposing role in colon cancer 
onset and progression. Therefore, miR-214 can promote apoptosis of colon cancer 
cells SW620 by inhibiting their proliferation and invasion.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.9521
PMCID: PMC6256325
PMID: 30546454