1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 18;9:2961. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02961.
eCollection  2018.

Advancement of the 5-Amino-1-(Carbamoylmethyl)-1H-1,2,3-Triazole-4-Carboxamide 
Scaffold to Disarm the Bacterial SOS Response.

Selwood T(1)(2), Larsen BJ(3), Mo CY(1)(2), Culyba MJ(1)(2), Hostetler ZM(1)(2), 
Kohli RM(1)(2), Reitz AB(3), Baugh SDP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United 
States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(3)Fox Chase Chemical Diversity Center, Inc., Doylestown, PA, United States.

Many antibiotics, either directly or indirectly, cause DNA damage thereby 
activating the bacterial DNA damage (SOS) response. SOS activation results in 
expression of genes involved in DNA repair and mutagenesis, and the regulation 
of the SOS response relies on two key proteins, LexA and RecA. Genetic studies 
have indicated that inactivating the regulatory proteins of this response 
sensitizes bacteria to antibiotics and slows the appearance of resistance. 
However, advancement of small molecule inhibitors of the SOS response has 
lagged, despite their clear promise in addressing the threat of antibiotic 
resistance. Previously, we had addressed this deficit by performing a high 
throughput screen of âˆ¼1.8 million compounds that monitored for inhibition of 
RecA-mediated auto-proteolysis of Escherichia coli LexA, the reaction that 
initiates the SOS response. In this report, the refinement of the 
5-amino-1-(carbamoylmethyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazole-4-carboxamide scaffold identified 
in the screen is detailed. After development of a modular synthesis, a survey of 
key activity determinants led to the identification of an analog with improved 
potency and increased breadth, targeting auto-proteolysis of LexA from both E. 
coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Comparison of the structure of this compound to 
those of others in the series suggests structural features that may be required 
for activity and cross-species breadth. In addition, the feasibility of small 
molecule modulation of the SOS response was demonstrated in vivo by the 
suppression of the appearance of resistance. These structure activity 
relationships thus represent an important step toward producing Drugs that 
Inhibit SOS Activation to Repress Mechanisms Enabling Resistance (DISARMERs).

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02961
PMCID: PMC6305444
PMID: 30619111