1. BMC Rheumatol. 2018 Mar 16;2:7. doi: 10.1186/s41927-018-0015-x. eCollection 
2018.

High prevalence of protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor N22 gene functional 
variant R620W in systemic lupus erythematosus patients from Kuwait: implications 
for disease susceptibility.

Al-Awadhi AM(1)(2), Haider MZ(3), Sukumaran J(3), Balakrishnan S(3).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Jabriya, 
Kuwait.
(2)2Rheumatic Disease Unit, Al-Amiri Hospital, Dasman, Kuwait.
(3)3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, P. O. Box 
24923, 13110 Safat, Kuwait.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune inflammatory 
disease which involves the loss of self-tolerance with hyperactivation of 
autoreactive T- and B-cells. Protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 
(PTPN22) encodes for lymphoid specific phosphatase (LYP) which is a key negative 
regulator of T lymphocyte activation. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the association between PTPN22 gene functional variant R620W and systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) by comparing its prevalence in Kuwaiti SLE patients and 
controls.
METHODS: The study included 134 SLE patients and 214 controls from Kuwait. The 
genotypes of PTPN22 gene functional variant R620W were determined by PCR-RFLP 
and confirmed by DNA sequence analysis in both SLE patients and the controls.
RESULTS: A relatively high prevalence of the variant 620 W (T-allele) of the 
PTPN22 gene was detected in the SLE patients from Kuwait. 35.7% of the SLE 
patients had at least one variant allele (T-allele) compared to 15.9% in the 
controls. A statistically significant difference was detected in the frequency 
of variant genotypes, TT and CT between SLE patients and the controls 
(p < 0.0001). No association was detected between the PTPN22 gene variant and 
the Raynaud's phenomenon, renal involvement and severity of the SLE.
CONCLUSIONS: The frequency of PTPN22 gene functional variant R620W reported in 
this study is amongst the highest compared to other world populations. A high 
prevalence of this variant in SLE patients in comparison to the healthy controls 
suggests its significant contribution in conferring susceptibility to SLE 
together with other factors.

DOI: 10.1186/s41927-018-0015-x
PMCID: PMC6390595
PMID: 30886958

Conflict of interest statement: This project was approved by the Committee for 
Protection of Human Subjects in Research by the Kuwait University, Faculty of 
Medicine (Ref. FOM/213–02). The study has been carried out strictly according to 
the guidelines of the Committee and as per Helsinki Declaration. Written 
informed consent was obtained from the study subjects for participation in this 
study.Not applicable.The authors declared that they have no competing 
interests.Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims 
in published maps and institutional affiliations.