1. ACS Synth Biol. 2019 Apr 19;8(4):884-901. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00017. Epub
 2019 Apr 2.

Systematic Evaluation of Genetic and Environmental Factors Affecting Performance 
of Translational Riboswitches.

Kent R(1), Dixon N(1).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, School of Chemistry , University of 
Manchester , Manchester M13 9PL , United Kingdom.

Since their discovery, riboswitches have been attractive tools for the 
user-controlled regulation of gene expression in bacterial systems. Riboswitches 
facilitate small molecule mediated fine-tuning of protein expression, making 
these tools of great use to the synthetic biology community. However, the use of 
riboswitches is often restricted due to context dependent performance and 
limited dynamic range. Here, we report the drastic improvement of a previously 
developed orthogonal riboswitch achieved through in vivo functional selection 
and optimization of flanking coding and noncoding sequences. The behavior of the 
derived riboswitches was mapped under a wide array of growth and induction 
conditions, using a structured Design of Experiments approach. This approach 
successfully improved the maximal protein expression levels 8.2-fold relative to 
the original riboswitches, and the dynamic range was improved to afford 
riboswitch dependent control of 80-fold. The optimized orthogonal riboswitch was 
then integrated downstream of four endogenous stress promoters, responsive to 
phosphate starvation, hyperosmotic stress, redox stress, and carbon starvation. 
These responsive stress promoter-riboswitch devices were demonstrated to allow 
for tuning of protein expression up to âˆ¼650-fold in response to both 
environmental and cellular stress responses and riboswitch dependent 
attenuation. We envisage that these riboswitch stress responsive devices will be 
useful tools for the construction of advanced genetic circuits, bioprocessing, 
and protein expression.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.9b00017
PMCID: PMC6492952
PMID: 30897329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.