1. Redox Biol. 2019 Jun;24:101226. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101226. Epub 2019
May  23.

Identification and quantification of sites of nitration and oxidation in the key 
matrix protein laminin and the structural consequences of these modifications.

Lorentzen LG(1), Chuang CY(1), Rogowska-Wrzesinska A(2), Davies MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and VILLUM Center for 
Bioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Electronic address: davies@sund.ku.dk.

Laminin is a major protein of the basement membrane (BM), a specialized 
extracellular matrix (ECM) of the artery wall. The potent oxidizing and 
nitrating agent peroxynitrous acid (ONOOH) is formed at sites of inflammation, 
and data implicate ONOOH in ECM damage and cardiovascular disease. 
Co-localization of 3-nitrotyrosine, a product of ONOOH-mediated tyrosine (Tyr) 
modification, and laminin has been reported in human atherosclerotic lesions. 
The sites and consequences of 3-nitrotyrosine (and related nitrated tryptophan) 
formation on laminin, it's self-assembly and cell interactions are poorly 
understood. In this study murine laminin-111 was exposed to ONOOH (1-500-fold 
molar excess). Nitration sites were mapped and quantified using LC-MS/MS. 
Mono-nitration was detected at 148 sites (126 Tyr, 22 Trp), and di-nitration at 
14 sites. Label-free quantification showed enhanced nitration with increasing 
oxidant doses. Tyr nitration was ∼10-fold greater than at Trp. CO2 modulated 
damage in a site-specific manner, with most sites less extensively nitrated. 119 
mono-nitration sites were identified with CO2 present, and no unique sites were 
detected. 23 di-nitration sites were detected, with 15 unique to the presence of 
CO2. Extensive modification was detected at sites involved in cell adhesion, 
protein-protein interactions and self-polymerization. Tyr-145 on the γ1 chain 
was extensively nitrated, and endothelial cells exhibited decreased adhesion to 
a nitrated peptide modelling this site. Modification of residues involved in 
self-polymerization interfered with the formation of ordered polymers as 
detected by scanning electron microscopy. These laminin modifications may 
contribute to endothelial cell dysfunction and modulate ECM structure and 
assembly, and thereby contribute to atherogenesis.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101226
PMCID: PMC6543125
PMID: 31154162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]