1. Biochemistry. 2019 Aug 6;58(31):3354-3364. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00327. 
Epub 2019 Jul 24.

Functional Characterization of YdjH, a Sugar Kinase of Unknown Specificity in 
Escherichia coli K12.

Huddleston JP(1), Raushel FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry , Texas A&M University , College Station , Texas 
77843 , United States.

The ydj gene cluster is annotated to catalyze the catabolism of an unknown 
carbohydrate. Previously, YdjI, a class II aldolase, was shown to catalyze the 
retro-aldol cleavage of l-glycero-l-galacto-octuluronate-1-phosphate into DHAP 
and l-arabinuronate. In this report, the functional characterization of YdjH is 
presented. YdjH catalyzes the phosphorylation of 2-keto-monosaccharides at the 
C1 hydroxyl group with a substrate profile significantly more stringent than 
that of YdjI. Similar to YdjI, YdjH shows a strong preference for higher-order 
monosaccharides (seven to nine carbons) with a carboxylate terminus. The best 
substrate was determined to be l-glycero-l-galacto-octuluronate, yielding 
l-glycero-l-galacto-octuluronate-1-phosphate with a kcat of 16 s-1 and a kcat/Km 
of 2.1 × 104 M-1 s-1. This is apparently the first reported example of kinase 
activity with eight-carbon monosaccharides. Two crystal structures of YdjH were 
previously determined to 2.15 and 1.8 Å resolution (Protein Data Bank entries 
3H49 and 3IN1 ). We present an analysis of the active site layout and use 
computational docking to identify potential key residues in the binding of 
l-glycero-l-galacto-octuluronate.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00327
PMCID: PMC6843993
PMID: 31314509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.