1. Cancer Res. 2019 Sep 15;79(18):4689-4702. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-0492. 
Epub 2019 Jul 16.

Metastasis Suppressors NME1 and NME2 Promote Dynamin 2 Oligomerization and 
Regulate Tumor Cell Endocytosis, Motility, and Metastasis.

Khan I(1), Gril B(2), Steeg PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Women's Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, Bethesda, 
Maryland. imran.khan@nih.gov.
(2)Women's Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, Bethesda, 
Maryland.

NM23 (NME) is a metastasis suppressor that significantly reduces metastasis 
without affecting primary tumor size, however, the precise molecular mechanisms 
are not completely understood. We examined the role of dynamin (DNM2), a GTPase 
regulating membrane scission of vesicles in endocytosis, in NME1 and NME2 
regulation of tumor cell motility and metastasis. Overexpression of NMEs in 
MDA-MB-231T and MDA-MB-435 cancer cell lines increased endocytosis of 
transferrin and EGF receptors (TfR and EGFR) concurrent with motility and 
migration suppression. The internalized vesicles, costained with Rab5, had AP2 
depleted from the cell surface and exhibited increased Rab5-GTP levels, 
consistent with endocytosis. Dynamin inhibitors Iminodyn-22 and Dynole-34-2, or 
shRNA-mediated downregulation of DNM2, impaired NME's ability to augment 
endocytosis or suppress tumor cell motility. In a lung metastasis assay, NME1 
overexpression failed to significantly suppress metastasis in the DNM2 knockdown 
MDA-MB-231T cells. Using the EGF-EGFR signaling axis as a model in MDA-MB-231T 
cells, NME1 decreased pEGFR and pAkt expression in a DNM2-dependent manner, 
indicating the relevance of this interaction for downstream signaling. NME-DNM2 
interaction was confirmed in two-way coimmunoprecipitations. Transfection of a 
NME1 site-directed mutant lacking histidine protein kinase activity but 
retaining nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK) activity showed that the NDPK 
activity of NME was insufficient to promote endocytosis or inhibit EGFR 
signaling. We show that addition of NME1 or NME2 to DNM2 facilitates DNM2 
oligomerization and increases GTPase activity, both required for vesicle 
scission. NME-DNM2 interaction may contribute to metastasis suppression by 
altering tumor endocytic and motility phenotypes. SIGNIFICANCE: NME1 suppresses 
metastasis via changes in tumor endocytosis and motility, mediated by dynamin 
(DNM2) GTPase activity.

Â©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-19-0492
PMCID: PMC8288561
PMID: 31311812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.