1. Hum Genome Var. 2018 Mar 15;5:18003. doi: 10.1038/hgv.2018.3. eCollection
2018.

Identification of mutations in HEXA and HEXB in Sandhoff and Tay-Sachs diseases: 
a new large deletion caused by Alu elements in HEXA.

Dastsooz H(1), Alipour M(1), Mohammadi S(1), Kamgarpour F(1), Dehghanian F(1), 
Fardaei M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Medical Genetic Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Medical Genetics Department, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.

GM2 gangliosides are a group of lysosomal lipid storage disorders that are due 
to mutations in HEXA, HEXB and GM2A. In our study, 10 patients with these 
diseases were enrolled, and Sanger sequencing was performed for the HEXA and 
HEXB genes. The results revealed one known splice site mutation (c.346+1G>A, 
IVS2+1G>A) and three novel mutations (a large deletion involving exons 6-10; one 
nucleotide deletion, c.622delG [p.D208Ifsx15]; and a missense mutation, c.919G>A 
[p.E307K]) in HEXA. In HEXB, one known mutation (c.1597C>T [p.R533C]) and one 
variant of uncertain significance (c.619A>G [p.I207V]) were identified. Five 
patients had c.1597C>T in HEXB, indicating a common mutation in south Iran. In 
this study, a unique large deletion in HEXA was identified as a homozygous 
state. To predict the cause of the large deletion in HEXA, RepeatMasker was used 
to investigate the Alu elements. In addition, to identify the breakpoint of this 
deletion, PCR was performed around these elements. Using Repeat masker, 
different Alu elements were identified across HEXA, mainly in intron 5 and 
intron 10 adjacent to the deleted exons. PCR around the Alu elements and Sanger 
sequencing revealed the start point of a large deletion in AluSz6 in the intron 
6 and the end of its breakpoint 73 nucleotides downstream of AluJo in intron 10. 
Our study showed that HEXA is an Alu-rich gene that predisposes individuals to 
disease-associated large deletions due to these elements.

DOI: 10.1038/hgv.2018.3
PMCID: PMC6694291
PMID: 31428437

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.