1. ACS Omega. 2017 Oct 30;2(10):7359-7374. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00739. 
eCollection 2017 Oct 31.

Characterization of Ionizable Groups' Environments in Proteins and 
Protein-Ligand Complexes through a Statistical Analysis of the Protein Data 
Bank.

Borrel A(1)(2), Camproux AC(1), Xhaard H(2).

Author information:
(1)Molécules Thérapeutiques in silico (MTi), INSERM UMRS-973, University Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology, 
University of Helsinki, Viikinkaari 5E, P.O. Box 56, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

We conduct a statistical analysis of the molecular environment of common 
ionizable functional groups in both protein-ligand complexes and inside proteins 
from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). In particular, we characterize the frequency, 
type, and density of the interacting atoms as well as the presence of a 
potential counterion. We found that for ligands, most guanidinium groups, half 
of primary and secondary amines, and one-fourth of imidazole neighbor a 
carboxylate group. Tertiary amines bind more rarely near carboxylate groups, 
which may be explained by a crowded neighborhood and hydrophobic character. In 
comparison to the environment seen by the ligands, inside proteins, an 
environment enriched in main-chain atoms is found, and the prevalence of direct 
charge neutralization by carboxylate groups is different. When the ionizable 
character of water molecules and phenolic or hydroxyl groups is accounted, 
considering a high-resolution dataset (less than 1.5 Å), charge neutralization 
could occur for well above 80% of the ligand functional groups considered, but 
for tertiary amines.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00739
PMCID: PMC6645025
PMID: 31457307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.