1. ACS Omega. 2019 Feb 18;4(2):3556-3564. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03488. 
eCollection 2019 Feb 28.

Computational Investigation on the Electronic Structure and Functionalities of a 
Thiophene-Based Covalent Triazine Framework.

Ball B(1), Chakravarty C(1), Mandal B(1), Sarkar P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan 731235, 
India.

Using the state-of-the-art theoretical method, we have investigated the 
electronic and optical properties of a thiophene-based covalent triazine 
framework (TBCTF). We have found that TBCTF is a direct band gap semiconductor. 
Our calculations reveal that constitutional isomerism is a tool for band gap 
tuning. The variation of band gap can be achieved by the bilayer TBCTF formation 
and further can be tuned by the z-axial strain. We have designed a new 
two-dimensional van der Waals heterostructure g-ZnO/TBCTF, which shows type-II 
band alignment, ensuring effective separation of photogenerated electron-hole 
pairs. This composite system also exhibits enhanced absorption in the visible 
range compared to that of individual g-ZnO and TBCTF monolayers. Therefore, this 
composite system may find potential application in photovoltaic devices. We have 
also investigated the hydrogen adsorption ability of TBCTF through Li atom 
doping. Our results indicate that the calculated hydrogen adsorption energies 
lie in the range, which is suitable for reversible hydrogen storage under 
ambient conditions. Therefore, the lithium-doped TBCTF may be a potential 
candidate for the hydrogen storage material.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03488
PMCID: PMC6648783
PMID: 31459570

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.