1. Med Hypothesis Discov Innov Ophthalmol. 2019 Fall;8(3):219-240.

Advances in Biomechanical Parameters for Screening of Refractive Surgery 
Candidates: A Review of the Literature, Part III.

Moshirfar M(1)(2), Motlagh MN(3), Murri MS(1), Momeni-Moghaddam H(4), Ronquillo 
YC(2), Hoopes PC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center, 
School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)HDR Research Center, Hoopes Vision, Draper, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Optometry, School of Paramedical Sciences, Mashhad University 
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Corneal biomechanical properties have garnered significant interest in their 
relation to the development of ectatic corneal disease. Alongside the advent of 
corneal tomography and Scheimpflug imaging such as Pentacam and Galilei, there 
have been advances in assessing the cornea based on its biomechanical 
characteristics. Though the aforementioned imaging systems are highly capable of 
identifying morphologic abnormalities, they cannot assess mechanical stability 
of the cornea. This article, in contrast to Parts I and II of this article 
series, will focus on in vivo corneal biomechanical imaging systems. The two 
most readily available commercial systems include the Corvis ST and the Ocular 
Response Analyzer. Both of these systems aimed to characterize corneal 
biomechanics via distinct measurements. While in Parts I and II of this article 
series the authors focused on elevation, pachymetric, and keratometric data, the 
purpose of this article was to summarize biomechanical parameters and their 
clinical use in screening refractive surgery candidates. Moreover, this article 
explores biomechanical decompensation and its role in the development of corneal 
ectasia and keratoconus. There is a focus on the diagnostic accuracy of 
biomechanical indices in the identification of diseases such as keratoconus that 
may preclude a patient from undergoing refractive surgery.

Â© 2019, Author(s).

PMCID: PMC6778467
PMID: 31598522

Conflict of interest statement: Ethical issues have been completely observed by 
the authors. All named authors meet the International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship of this manuscript, take 
responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given final 
approval for the version to be published. No conflict of interest has been 
presented.