1. J Comp Neurol. 2020 Apr 1;528(5):729-755. doi: 10.1002/cne.24784. Epub 2019
Oct  31.

Spatiotemporal gene expression patterns reveal molecular relatedness between 
retinal laminae.

Jiang D(1)(2), Burger CA(1)(2), Casasent AK(1)(2), Albrecht NE(1)(2), Li 
F(1)(2), Samuel MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

In several areas of the central nervous system, neurons are regionally organized 
into groups or layers that carry out specific activities. In this form of 
patterning, neurons of distinct types localize their cell bodies to just one or 
a few of the layers within a structure. However, little is known about whether 
diverse neuron types within a lamina share molecular features that coordinate 
their organization. To begin to identify such candidates, we used the laminated 
murine retina to screen 92 lacZ reporter lines available through the Knockout 
Mouse Project. Thirty-two of these displayed reporter expression in restricted 
subsets of inner retina neurons. We then identified the spatiotemporal 
expression patterns of these genes at key developmental stages. This uncovered 
several that were heavily enriched in development but reduced in adulthood, 
including the transcriptional regulator Hmga1. An additional set of genes 
displayed maturation associated laminar enrichment. Among these, we identified 
Bbox1 as a novel gene that specifically labels all neurons in the ganglion cell 
layer but is largely excluded from otherwise molecularly similar neurons in the 
inner retina. Finally, we established Dbn1 as a new marker enriched in amacrines 
and Fmnl3 as a marker for subsets of αRGCs. Together, these data provide a 
spatiotemporal map for laminae-specific molecules and suggest that diverse 
neuron types within a lamina share coordinating molecular features that may 
inform their fate or function.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.24784
PMCID: PMC7147688
PMID: 31609468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Financial Interests. The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.