1. Hepatology. 2020 Mar;71(3):820-834. doi: 10.1002/hep.31032. Epub 2020 Mar 5.

Patatin-Like Phospholipase Domain-Containing Protein 3 I148M and Liver Fat and 
Fibrosis Scores Predict Liver Disease Mortality in the U.S. Population.

Unalp-Arida A(1), Ruhl CE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Social & Scientific Systems, Inc., Silver Spring, MD.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2020 Mar;71(3):777-779. doi: 10.1002/hep.31113.
    Gastroenterology. 2020 May;158(6):1838-1840. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.03.022.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Fatty liver causes premature death worldwide and requires 
long-term health care. We examined relationships of liver disease markers, 
including patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 3 (PNPLA3) I148M, 
with mortality in the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 
1988-1994, with 27 years of linked mortality data.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We studied 13,298 viral hepatitis negative adults who 
fasted at least 4 hours using the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) liver 
fat score and NAFLD fibrosis score. PNPLA3 I148M was genotyped in a subgroup of 
participants from 1991 to 1994 (n = 5,640). Participants were passively followed 
for mortality, identified by death certificate underlying or contributing 
causes, by linkage to the National Death Index through 2015. During follow-up 
(median, 23.2 years), cumulative mortality was 33.2% overall and 1.1% with liver 
disease, including primary liver cancer. Increased liver disease mortality was 
associated with PNPLA3 I148M (hazard ratio [HR], 2.9; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 0.9-9.8) and 148M genotypes (HR, 18.2; 95% CI, 3.5-93.8), an intermediate 
(HR, 3.8; 95% CI, 1.3-10.7) or high (HR, 12.6; 95% CI, 4.3-36.3) NAFLD liver fat 
score, and a high NAFLD fibrosis score (HR, 12.2; 95% CI, 1.9-80.6) adjusted for 
risk factors. Survival curves suggest that increased mortality risk with two 
148M alleles was greatest beginning in the second decade of follow-up. Overall, 
but not cardiovascular disease, mortality was associated with the PNPLA3 148M 
allele, and both mortality outcomes were associated with higher fat and fibrosis 
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: In the U.S. population, PNPLA3 I148M and higher NAFLD liver fat and 
fibrosis scores were associated with increased liver disease mortality. Genetic 
variant PNPLA3 I148M may complement other liver disease markers for NAFLD 
surveillance.

Published 2019. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public 
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.31032
PMID: 31705824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]