1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Nov 29;7:316. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00316. 
eCollection 2019.

A Liver Model of Infantile-Onset Pompe Disease Using Patient-Specific Induced 
Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Yoshida T(1), Jonouchi T(2), Osafune K(2), Takita J(1), Sakurai H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

Infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) is a life-threatening multi-organ disease 
caused by an inborn defect of lysosomal acid α-glucosidase (GAA), which can 
degrade glycogen into glucose. Lack of GAA causes abnormal accumulation of 
glycogen in the lysosomes, particularly in the skeletal muscle, liver, and 
heart. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human GAA (rhGAA) is 
the only available treatment; however, its effect varies by organ. Thus, to 
fully understand the pathomechanism of IOPD, organ-specific disease models are 
necessary. We previously generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from 
three unrelated patients with IOPD and establish a skeletal muscle model of 
IOPD. Here, we used the same iPSC lines as the previous study and differentiated 
them into hepatocytes. As a result, hepatocytes differentiated from iPSC of IOPD 
patients showed abnormal accumulation of lysosomal glycogen, the hallmark of 
Pompe disease. Using this model, we also demonstrated that glycogen accumulation 
was dose-dependently restored by rhGAA treatment. In conclusion, we have 
successfully established an in vitro liver model of IOPD using patient-specific 
iPSCs. This model can be a platform to elucidate the underlying disease 
mechanism or to be applied to drug-screening. Moreover, our study also suggest 
that an iPSC-based approach is suitable for modeling of diseases that affect 
multiple organs like Pompe disease.

Copyright © 2019 Yoshida, Jonouchi, Osafune, Takita and Sakurai.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2019.00316
PMCID: PMC6895003
PMID: 31850350