1. Animals (Basel). 2019 Dec 18;10(1):2. doi: 10.3390/ani10010002.

Atmospheric Ammonia Affects Myofiber Development and Lipid Metabolism in Growing 
Pig Muscle.

Tang S(1), Xie J(1), Zhang S(2), Wu W(1), Yi B(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Science, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 10093, China.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Ammonia, an aerial pollutant in animal facilities, affects animal health. Recent 
studies showed that aerial ammonia negatively impacts meat quality but the 
mechanism remains unknown. To understand how ammonia drives its adverse effects 
on pig meat quality, 18 crossbred gilts were exposed to 0, 10 or 25 mg/m3 
ammonia for 25 days. Ammonia exposure increased fat content in the Longissimus 
dorsi muscle, and meat color got lighter after 25 mg/m3 ammonia exposure. 
Analysis of MyHC isoforms showed an increased MyHC IIx but decreased MyHC I 
after ammonia exposure. Besides, muscular glutamine decreased significantly as 
aerial ammonia increased. Although hyperammonemia was reported to upregulate 
MSTN and inhibit downstream mTOR pathway, no changes have been found in the mRNA 
expression level of MSTN and protein expression level of mTOR signal pathway 
after ammonia exposure. RNA-Seq showed that 10 mg/m3 ammonia exposure altered 
genes related to myofiber development (MyoD1, MyoG), whereas 25 mg/m3 ammonia 
affected genes associated with fatty acid synthesis and Î²-oxidation (SCD, FADS1, 
FASN, ACADL). Collectively, our findings showed aerial ammonia exposure appears 
to regulate myofiber development and lipid metabolism in the skeletal muscle, 
which results in the negative impacts on meat quality in pigs.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10010002
PMCID: PMC7022806
PMID: 31861338

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.