1. J Strength Cond Res. 2020 Apr;34(4):952-956. doi:
10.1519/JSC.0000000000003501.

ACTN3 R577X Genotype in Professional and Amateur Tennis Players.

Moreno-Pérez V(1)(2), Machar R(3), Sanz-Rivas D(4)(5), Del Coso J(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Surgery, Miguel Hernandez University, San Juan de 
Alicante, Spain.
(2)Sports Research Center, Miguel Hernandez University of Elche, Alicante, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Innovation, Tennis Australia, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Tennis Performance Research Group, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Royal Spanish Tennis Federation (RFET), Madrid, Spain; and.
(6)Center for Sport Studies, Rey Juan Carlos University, Fuenlabrada, Spain.

Moreno-Pérez, V, Machar, R, Sanz-Rivas, D, and Del Coso, J. ACTN3 R577X genotype 
in professional and amateur tennis players. J Strength Cond Res 34(4): 952-956, 
2020-Several investigations have concluded that the RR genotype in the ACTN3 
R577X polymorphism is overrepresented in elite athletes of strength- and 
power-based sports when compared with nonelite populations, suggesting a 
positive role of this genotype on physical performance. However, no 
investigation has been geared to determine the distribution of this polymorphism 
in elite tennis players. The aim of this study was to compare the frequency 
distribution of the ACTN3 R577X genotype in professional and nonprofessional 
tennis players to determine whether this polymorphism has an association with 
tennis performance. A total of 128 tennis players volunteered to participate in 
this study. From the total, 56 were professional tennis players (16 were top 10 
in Women Tennis Association/Association of Tennis Professionals [WTA/ATP] 
rankings, 22 were top 100 in WTA/ATP rankings, and 18 were ranked > top 100 in 
the WTA/ATP rankings), and the remaining 72 were categorized as nonprofessional. 
Chi-squared tests were used to assess differences in the distribution of RR, RX, 
and XX genotypes between the different performance categories. The distribution 
of the RR, RX, and XX genotypes was similar in professional (33.9, 48.2, and 
17.9%) and nonprofessional tennis players (37.5, 40.3, and 22.2%; p = 0.650). 
Furthermore, the distribution of the ACTN3 R577X polymorphism was not different 
in top 10 (25.0, 50.0, and 25.0%), top 100 (31.8, 50.0, and 18.2%), and 
WTA/ATP-ranked players (44.4, 44.4, and 11.2%; p = 0.847). These results 
indicate that the distribution of the ACTN3 R577X genotype is similar in tennis 
players of very different performance levels. This outcome suggests that the 
ACTN3 genotype was not associated with elite tennis performance.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000003501
PMID: 31917734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]