1. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2020 Dec;28(6):617-621. doi: 10.1037/pha0000348.
Epub  2020 Jan 27.

Association of SLC1A1 gene polymorphism with obsessive compulsive disorder in a 
sample from southern India.

Shukla T(1), Nadella RK(1), Taj M J RJ(2), Ganesh S(3), Nestadt G(4), 
Purushottam M(2), Jain S(1), Reddy YCJ(1), Viswanath B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences.
(2)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Behavioral Science and Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University.

The glutamate transporter gene SLC1A1 has been shown to have an association with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI) 
treatment response. One polymorphism (rs3056) in SLC1A1 has been associated with 
altered brain volumes in OCD. We investigated the association of this 
polymorphism with OCD and its relationship with various clinical parameters, 
including age of onset, disease severity, insight, factor analyzed symptom 
dimensions of OCD, and SRI treatment response. Three hundred seventy seven OCD 
patients (DSM-IV) aged between 18 to 60 years were recruited from a specialty 
OCD clinic. To study the association with SRI treatment response, we analyzed 
full responders (â‰¥35% reduction in the Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale 
[YBOCS] and the Clinical Global Impression-Improvement [CGI-I] score of 1 or 2) 
to any SRI (n = 187) and nonresponders (<25% reduction in the YBOCS and the 
CGI-I score >4) to adequate trials of at least two SRIs for a duration of 12 
weeks (n = 91). Healthy controls (n = 333) were recruited and evaluated using 
the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview-Plus (MINI-Plus). All subjects 
were from southern India, and were genotyped for the SLC1A1 polymorphism 
(rs3056). Genotype frequencies did not deviate significantly from the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Case-control association analysis revealed that the 
"GG" genotype was significantly more frequent in OCD cases than the controls (p 
= .04). No association was found with the age of onset, symptom severity, 
insight, and symptom dimensions. No significant association was found between 
genotype/allele frequencies with treatment response. To conclude, although there 
was a significant association between the SLC1A1 rs3056 polymorphism and OCD, 
there were no significant associations with other clinical parameters or 
treatment response. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2020 APA, all rights 
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/pha0000348
PMID: 31985241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]