1. Front Genet. 2020 Feb 27;10:1406. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01406. eCollection 
2019.

Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) Mining and Their Effect on the 
Tridimensional Protein Structure Prediction in a Set of Immunity-Related 
Expressed Sequence Tags (EST) in Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar).

Vallejos-Vidal E(1), Reyes-Cerpa S(2)(3), Rivas-Pardo JA(2)(3), Maisey K(4), 
Yáñez JM(5), Valenzuela H(4), Cea PA(6), Castro-Fernandez V(6), Tort L(1), 
Sandino AM(4), Imarai M(4), Reyes-López FE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of 
Biosciences, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Genómica y Bioinformática, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Mayor, 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Escuela de Biotecnología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Mayor, Santiago, 
Chile.
(4)Centro de Biotecnología Acuícola, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de 
Química y Biología, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias y Pecuarias, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(6)Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are single genetic code variations 
considered one of the most common forms of nucleotide modifications. Such SNPs 
can be located in genes associated to immune response and, therefore, they may 
have direct implications over the phenotype of susceptibility to infections 
affecting the productive sector. In this study, a set of immune-related genes 
(cc motif chemokine 19 precursor [ccl19], integrin β2 (itβ2, also named cd18), 
glutathione transferase omega-1 [gsto-1], heat shock 70 KDa protein [hsp70], 
major histocompatibility complex class I [mhc-I]) were analyzed to identify SNPs 
by data mining. These genes were chosen based on their previously reported 
expression on infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV)-infected Atlantic 
salmon phenotype. The available EST sequences for these genes were obtained from 
the Unigene database. Twenty-eight SNPs were found in the genes evaluated and 
identified most of them as transition base changes. The effect of the SNPs 
located on the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) or 3'-UTR upon transcription factor 
binding sites and alternative splicing regulatory motifs was assessed and ranked 
with a low-medium predicted FASTSNP score risk. Synonymous SNPs were found on 
itβ2 (c.2275G > A), gsto-1 (c.558G > A), and hsp70 (c.1950C > T) with low 
FASTSNP predicted score risk. The difference in the relative synonymous codon 
usage (RSCU) value between the variant codons and the wild-type codon (ΔRSCU) 
showed one negative (hsp70 c.1950C > T) and two positive ΔRSCU values (itβ2 
c.2275G > A; gsto-1 c.558G > A), suggesting that these synonymous SNPs (sSNPs) 
may be associated to differences in the local rate of elongation. Nonsynonymous 
SNPs (nsSNPs) in the gsto-1 translatable gene region were ranked, using SIFT and 
POLYPHEN web-tools, with the second highest (c.205A > G; c484T > C) and the 
highest (c.499T > C; c.769A > C) predicted score risk possible. Using homology 
modeling to predict the effect of these nonsynonymous SNPs, the most relevant 
nucleotide changes for gsto-1 were observed for the nsSNPs c.205A > G, c484T > 
C, and c.769A > C. Molecular dynamics was assessed to analyze if these GSTO-1 
variants have significant differences in their conformational dynamics, 
suggesting these SNPs could have allosteric effects modulating its catalysis. 
Altogether, these results suggest that candidate SNPs identified may play a 
crucial potential role in the immune response of Atlantic salmon.

Copyright © 2020 Vallejos-Vidal, Reyes-Cerpa, Rivas-Pardo, Maisey, Yáñez, 
Valenzuela, Cea, Castro-Fernandez, Tort, Sandino, Imarai and Reyes-López.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01406
PMCID: PMC7056891
PMID: 32174954