1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2020 Jul;177:113929. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2020.113929. Epub 
2020 Mar 23.

Rational development of a high-affinity secretin receptor antagonist.

Dong M(1), Harikumar KG(1), Raval SR(1), Milburn JE(1), Clark C(2), 
Alcala-Torano R(2), Mobarec JC(3), Reynolds CA(3), Ghirlanda G(2), Christopoulos 
A(4), Wootten D(4), Sexton PM(4), Miller LJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, United States.
(2)School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, 
United States.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, 
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK.
(4)Drug Discovery Biology and Department of Pharmacology, Monash Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville, 3052 Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo 
Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, United States. Electronic address: 
miller@mayo.edu.

The secretin receptor is a prototypic class B GPCR with substantial and broad 
pharmacologic importance. The aim of this project was to develop a high affinity 
selective antagonist as a new and important pharmacologic tool and to aid 
stabilization of this receptor in an inactive conformation for ultimate 
structural characterization. Amino-terminal truncation of the natural 27-residue 
ligand reduced biological activity, but also markedly reduced binding affinity. 
This was rationally and experimentally overcome with lactam stabilization of 
helical structure and with replacement of residues with natural and unnatural 
amino acids. A key new step in this effort was the replacement of peptide 
residue Leu22 with L-cyclohexylalanine (Cha) to enhance potential hydrophobic 
interactions with receptor residues Leu31, Val34, and Phe92 that were predicted 
from molecular modeling. Alanine-replacement mutagenesis of these residues 
markedly affected ligand binding and biological activity. The optimal antagonist 
ligand, (Y10,c[E16,K20],I17,Cha22,R25)sec(6-27), exhibited high binding affinity 
(4 nM), similar to natural secretin, and exhibited no demonstrable biological 
activity to stimulate cAMP accumulation, intracellular calcium mobilization, or 
β-arrestin-2 translocation. It acts as an orthosteric competitive antagonist, 
predicted to bind within the peptide-binding groove in the receptor 
extracellular domain. The analogous peptide that was one residue longer, 
retaining Thr5, exhibited partial agonist activity, while further truncation of 
even a single residue (Phe6) reduced binding affinity. This sec(6-27)-based 
peptide will be an important new tool for pharmacological and structural 
studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2020.113929
PMCID: PMC7299832
PMID: 32217097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none.