1. Lipids Health Dis. 2020 Apr 23;19(1):78. doi: 10.1186/s12944-020-01223-9.

Potential preventive and protective perspectives of different spice powders and 
their mixtures in rat model.

Hameed S(1), Arshad MS(1), Ahmad RS(1), Hussain G(2), Imran M(1), Arshad MU(1), 
Ahmed A(1), Imran M(3), Imran A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Home and Food Sciences, Faculty of Life Science, Government 
College University, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Government College 
University, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(3)Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, University Institute of Diet and 
Nutritional Sciences, The University of Lahore-Pakistan, Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)Institute of Home and Food Sciences, Faculty of Life Science, Government 
College University, Faisalabad, Pakistan. aliimran.ft@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The spices based dietary interventions are in lime light among the 
scientific community owing to their promising therapeutic perspective. The 
bioactive components in spices can be used to exert various health promoting 
functions in human body such as prompting weight loss, inhibit diet-induced 
obesity, hypercholesterolemia, hyperglycemia, allergies and various other 
maladies. In current study extraction and in vitro characterization of coriander 
seed (CS), black cumin seed (BCS) and fenugreek seed (FS) polyphenols was 
conducted for further development of dietary intervention against lipid and 
glycemia related abnormalities in experimental Sprague Dowley rats fed with 
control and different spice powder supplemented diets.
METHODS: Purposely, extraction of Coriander (CS), Black cumin (BCS) and 
Fenugreek seeds (FS) were carried out by using water and aqueous methanol 
(70:30 v/v). Afterwards, the resultant extracts were thoroughly investigated for 
their antioxidant potential through different indices like TPC, TFC, FRAP and β 
Carotene Bleaching Assay and ABTS. Furthermore, HPLC quantification were also 
conducted with special reference to thymoquinone, disogenin, chlorogenic acid, 
caffeic acid and kaempferol alongside in vitro pancreatic lipase inhibitory 
activity estimation. Bio-evaluation trial was consisting of three modules i.e. 
study-I (normal diet), study-II (high cholesterol diet) and study-III (high 
sucrose diet). Furthermore, rats were sub-divided in five groups in each module 
on the basis of diet provision including T0 (control), T1 (Diet containing CS), 
T2 (Diet containing BCS), T3 (Diet containing FS) and T4 (Diet containing 
CSP + BCSP + FSP). At the beginning of trial, some rats were dissected to 
evaluate the baseline values whilst rest of the rats was killed at the 
termination (56th day). Feed and drink intakes were quantified on daily bases 
whereas, body weight was calculated weekly. Cholesterol level, serum low density 
lipoproteins (LDL), high density lipoproteins (HDL), triglycerides, glucose 
concentration and insulin level of collected sera was measured by standard 
procedures.
RESULTS: The in vitro characterization showed better extraction of spices 
antioxidant through aqueous methanol as compared to water. Among the spices, 
Black cumin seed alone or in combination revealed highest antioxidant activity 
in T2 (BCS) followed by T4 (CS + BCS), T7 (CS + BCS + FS), T1 (CS), T6 
(BCS + FS), T5 (CS + FS) and lowest in T3 (FS). Likewise, the HPLC 
characterization showed the presence of thymoquinone in BCS, Dosignienin FGS and 
chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid and kaempferol in the other treatments. 
Furthermore, all the treatments showed dose dependent inhibition in Pancreatic 
lipase activity and order of inhibition was 
BCS > CS + BCS > CS + BCS + FS > CS > BCS + FC > CS + FS > FS. The maximum feed 
intake, drink intake and weight gain was observed in T0 (control) trailed by T1, 
T2, T3 and T4 group in experimental study I, II and III, respectively. The 
resultant diet T4 enhanced the high density lipoprotein from T0 (58.58 ± 2.51) 
to 61.71 ± 1.62 (T4) in hypercholesterolemia rats whereas in hyperglycaemia rats 
the HDL was varied from 38.77 ± 1.2 to 40.02 ± 0.99 in T0 and T4, respectively. 
Similarly, T2 significantly lowered the low density lipoprotein from 
62.53 ± 1.22 (T1) & 46.53 ± 0.99 to 54.88 ± 0.52 & 40.94 ± 1.99 (T2) in 
hypercholesteraemic and diabetic rats. Moreover, T4 treatment showed maximum 
reduction as 10.01 & 11.53% in respective studies.
CONCLUSIONS: The diet prepared from the different combination of spices has been 
proven effective against Oxidative stress related physiological malfunctioning.

DOI: 10.1186/s12944-020-01223-9
PMCID: PMC7178752
PMID: 32326942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.