1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 May 21;21(10):3642. doi: 10.3390/ijms21103642.

Structural Mechanisms of Store-Operated and Mitochondrial Calcium Regulation: 
Initiation Points for Drug Discovery.

Noble M(1), Lin QT(1), Sirko C(1), Houpt JA(2), Novello MJ(1), Stathopulos 
PB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A5C1, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The 
University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A5C1, Canada.

Calcium (Ca2+) is a universal signaling ion that is essential for the life and 
death processes of all eukaryotes. In humans, numerous cell stimulation pathways 
lead to the mobilization of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum (S/ER) stored Ca2+, 
resulting in the propagation of Ca2+ signals through the activation of 
processes, such as store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE). SOCE provides a sustained 
Ca2+ entry into the cytosol; moreover, the uptake of SOCE-mediated Ca2+ by 
mitochondria can shape cytosolic Ca2+ signals, function as a feedback signal for 
the SOCE molecular machinery, and drive numerous mitochondrial processes, 
including adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production and distinct cell death 
pathways. In recent years, tremendous progress has been made in identifying the 
proteins mediating these signaling pathways and elucidating molecular 
structures, invaluable for understanding the underlying mechanisms of function. 
Nevertheless, there remains a disconnect between using this accumulating protein 
structural knowledge and the design of new research tools and therapies. In this 
review, we provide an overview of the Ca2+ signaling pathways that are involved 
in mediating S/ER stored Ca2+ release, SOCE, and mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake, as 
well as pinpoint multiple levels of crosstalk between these pathways. Further, 
we highlight the significant protein structures elucidated in recent years 
controlling these Ca2+ signaling pathways. Finally, we describe a simple 
strategy that aimed at applying the protein structural data to initiating drug 
design.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21103642
PMCID: PMC7279490
PMID: 32455637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.