1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Jun 22;12(6):414. doi: 10.3390/toxins12060414.

Metabolic Traits of Bovine Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia Coli (STEC) Strains 
with Different Colonization Properties.

Barth SA(1), Weber M(1), Schaufler K(2)(3), Berens C(1), Geue L(1), Menge C(1).

Author information:
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut/Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, 
Institute of Molecular Pathogenesis, Naumburger Str. 96a, 07743 Jena, Germany.
(2)Free University Berlin, Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, 
Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13, 14163 Berlin, Germany.
(3)University of Greifswald, Pharmaceutical Microbiology, 
Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 17, 17489 Greifswald, Germany.

Cattle harbor Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) in their intestinal 
tract, thereby providing these microorganisms with an ecological niche, but 
without this colonization leading to any clinical signs. In a preceding study, 
genotypic characterization of bovine STEC isolates unveiled that their ability 
to colonize cattle persistently (STECper) or only sporadically (STECspo) is more 
closely associated with the overall composition of the accessory rather than the 
core genome. However, the colonization pattern could not be unequivocally linked 
to the possession of classical virulence genes. This study aimed at assessing, 
therefore, if the presence of certain phenotypic traits in the strains 
determines their colonization pattern and if these can be traced back to 
distinctive genetic features. STECspo strains produced significantly more 
biofilm than STECper when incubated at lower temperatures. Key substrates, the 
metabolism of which showed a significant association with colonization type, 
were glyoxylic acid and L-rhamnose, which were utilized by STECspo, but not or 
only by some STECper. Genomic sequences of the respective glc and rha operons 
contained mutations and frameshifts in uptake and/or regulatory genes, 
particularly in STECper. These findings suggest that STECspo conserved features 
leveraging survival in the environment, whereas the acquisition of a persistent 
colonization phenotype in the cattle reservoir was accompanied by the loss of 
metabolic properties and genomic mutations in the underlying genetic pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12060414
PMCID: PMC7354573
PMID: 32580365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.