1. Front Genet. 2020 Jun 24;11:542. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00542. eCollection 
2020.

Identification of Four Potential Biomarkers Associated With Coronary Artery 
Disease in Non-diabetic Patients by Gene Co-expression Network Analysis.

Jiao M(1), Li J(1), Zhang Q(1), Xu X(2), Li R(3), Dong P(1), Meng C(1), Li Y(1), 
Wang L(1), Qi W(1), Kang K(1), Wang H(4), Wang T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University, 
Weifang, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical University, 
Weifang, China.
(3)Graduate Program in Genetics, Genomics, and Bioinformatics, University of 
California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, United States.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a type of cardiovascular disease 
that greatly hurts the health of human beings. Diabetic status is one of the 
largest clinical factors affecting CAD-associated gene expression changes. Most 
of the studies focus on diabetic patients, whereas few have been done for 
non-diabetic patients. Since the pathophysiological processes may vary among 
these patients, we cannot simply follow the standard based on the data from 
diabetic patients. Therefore, the prognostic and predictive diagnostic 
biomarkers for CAD in non-diabetic patient need to be fully recognized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To screen out candidate genes associated with CAD in 
non-diabetic patients, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was 
constructed to conduct an analysis of microarray expression profiling in 
patients with CAD. First, the microarray data GSE20680 and GSE20681 were 
downloaded from NCBI. We constructed co-expression modules via WGCNA after 
excluding the diabetic patients. As a result, 18 co-expression modules were 
screened out, including 1,225 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that were 
obtained from 152 patients (luminal stenosis ≥50% in at least one major vessel) 
and 170 patients (stenosis of <50%). Subsequently, a Pearson's correlation 
analysis was conducted between the modules and clinical traits. Then, a 
functional enrichment analysis was conducted, and we used gene network analysis 
to reveal hub genes. Last, we validated the hub genes with peripheral blood 
samples in an independent patient cohort using RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: The results showed that the midnight blue module and the yellow module 
played vital roles in the pathogenesis of CAD in non-diabetic patients. 
Additionally, CD40, F11R, TNRC18, and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase type II gamma (CAMK2G) were screened out and validated using 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in an independent patient cohort and 
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining in an atherosclerosis mouse model.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that hub genes, CD40, F11R, TNRC18, and 
CAMK2G, are surrogate diagnostic biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets for CAD 
in non-diabetic patients and require deeper validation.

Copyright © 2020 Jiao, Li, Zhang, Xu, Li, Dong, Meng, Li, Wang, Qi, Kang, Wang 
and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00542
PMCID: PMC7344232
PMID: 32714363