1. Clin Cardiol. 2020 Nov;43(11):1223-1231. doi: 10.1002/clc.23434. Epub 2020 Jul
 29.

Diagnosis and treatment of transthyretin-related amyloidosis cardiomyopathy.

Teng C(1), Li P(2), Bae JY(1), Pan S(3), Dixon RAF(3), Liu Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale New Haven Health-Greenwich Hospital, Greenwich, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Saint Vincent Hospital, Worcester, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(3)Molecular Cardiology Research, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, Texas, USA.

Transthyretin-related amyloidosis (ATTR) is a subgroup of amyloidosis that 
results from extracellular misassembled and toxic amyloid deposits affecting 
multiple organ systems, and cardiac tissues in particular. Because ATTR often 
presents as heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), it has been 
largely underdiagnosed. Once considered incurable with a grave prognosis, ATTR 
cardiomyopathy has seen the development of promising alternatives for diagnosis 
and treatment, with early diagnosis and treatment of ATTR cardiomyopathy highly 
beneficial due to its high mortality rate. For instance, diagnosing ATTR 
cardiomyopathy previously required a cardiac biopsy, but new modalities, such as 
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging and radionuclide bone scans, show promise in 
accurately diagnosing ATTR cardiomyopathy. Ongoing research and clinical trials 
have focused on identifying new treatments which primarily target amyloid fiber 
formation by inhibiting TTR gene expression, stabilizing the TTR tetramer, 
preventing oligomer aggregation, or affecting degradation of amyloid fibers. In 
this review, we describe the advances made in the diagnosis and treatment of 
ATTR in order to increase awareness of the disease and encourage a lower 
threshold for ATTR workup. Our review also highlights the need for improving the 
screening, diagnosis, and treatment guidelines for ATTR cardiomyopathy.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Clinical Cardiology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/clc.23434
PMCID: PMC7661658
PMID: 32725834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no actual or potential conflict 
of interest in relation to this manuscript.