1. Bone. 2020 Nov;140:115549. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115549. Epub 2020 Jul 27.

Structural perspective of BMP ligands and signaling.

Gipson GR(1), Goebel EJ(1), Hart KN(2), Kappes EC(1), Kattamuri C(1), McCoy 
JC(1), Thompson TB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University 
of Cincinnati, Medical Sciences Building, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Physiology, University of Cincinnati, 
Medical Sciences Building, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University 
of Cincinnati, Medical Sciences Building, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic 
address: Tom.Thompson@uc.edu.

The Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) are the largest class signaling molecules 
within the greater Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGFβ) family, and are 
responsible for a wide array of biological functions, including dorsal-ventral 
patterning, skeletal development and maintenance, as well as cell homeostasis. 
As such, dysregulation of BMPs results in a number of diseases, including 
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) and pulmonary arterial hypertension 
(PAH). Therefore, understanding BMP signaling and regulation at the molecular 
level is essential for targeted therapeutic intervention. This review discusses 
the recent advances in the structural and biochemical characterization of BMPs, 
from canonical ligand-receptor interactions to co-receptors and antagonists. 
This work aims to highlight how BMPs differ from other members of the TGFβ 
family, and how that information can be used to further advance the field. 
Lastly, this review discusses several gaps in the current understanding of BMP 
structures, with the aim that discussion of these gaps will lead to advancements 
in the field.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115549
PMCID: PMC7502536
PMID: 32730927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The Authors 
declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript.