1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2020;171:57-84. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64239-4.00003-5.

Adaptations in autonomic nervous system regulation in normal and hypertensive 
pregnancy.

Brooks VL(1), Fu Q(2), Shi Z(3), Heesch CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, United States. Electronic address: brooksv@ohsu.edu.
(2)Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian 
Hospital Dallas, Dallas, TX, United States; Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, United States.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States.

There is an increase in basal sympathetic nerve activity (SNA) during normal 
pregnancy; this counteracts profound primary vasodilation. However, pregnancy 
also impairs baroreflex control of heart rate and SNA, contributing to increased 
mortality secondary to peripartum hemorrhage. Pregnancy-induced hypertensive 
disorders evoke even greater elevations in SNA, which likely contribute to the 
hypertension. Information concerning mechanisms is limited. In normal pregnancy, 
increased angiotensin II acts centrally to support elevated SNA. Hypothalamic 
sites, including the subfornical organ, paraventricular nucleus, and arcuate 
nucleus, are likely (but unproven) targets. Moreover, no definitive mechanisms 
for exaggerated sympathoexcitation in hypertensive pregnancy have been 
identified. In addition, normal pregnancy increases gamma aminobutyric acid 
inhibition of the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), a key brainstem site 
that transmits excitatory inputs to spinal sympathetic preganglionic neurons. 
Accumulated evidence supports a major role for locally increased production and 
actions of the neurosteroid allopregnanolone as one mechanism. A consequence is 
suppression of baroreflex function, but increased basal SNA indicates that 
excitatory influences predominate in the RVLM. However, many questions remain 
regarding other sites and factors that support increased SNA during normal 
pregnancy and, more importantly, the mechanisms underlying excessive 
sympathoexcitation in life-threatening hypertensive pregnancy disorders such as 
preeclampsia.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64239-4.00003-5
PMCID: PMC9261029
PMID: 32736759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]