1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2021 Jan;128(1):18-36. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.13478. 
Epub 2020 Sep 22.

Mesenchymal stem cell-derived small extracellular vesicles and bone 
regeneration.

Wang X(1), Thomsen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomaterials, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and MSC-derived small extracellular vesicles 
(sEVs) are promising candidates for cell-based and cell-free regenerative 
medicine, respectively. By virtue of their multiple lineage differentiation 
capacity, MSCs have been implicated as an ideal tool for bone and cartilage 
regeneration. However, later observations attributed such regenerative effects 
to MSC-secreted paracrine factors. Exosomes, endosomal originated sEVs carrying 
lipid, protein and nucleic acid cargoes, were identified as components of the 
MSC secretome and propagated the key regenerative and immunoregulatory 
characteristics of parental MSCs. Here, exosome biogenesis, the molecular 
composition of exosomes, sEV-cell interactions and the effects on key bone 
homeostasis cells are reviewed. MSC-derived sEVs show to promote 
neovascularization and bone and cartilage regeneration in preclinical disease 
models. The mechanisms include the transfer of molecules, including microRNAs, 
mRNAs and proteins, to other key cells. MSC-derived sEVs are interesting 
candidates as biopharmaceuticals for drug delivery and for the engineering of 
biologically functionalized materials. Although major exploratory efforts have 
been made for therapeutic development, the secretion, distribution and 
biological effects of MSC-derived sEVs in bone and cartilage regeneration are 
not fully understood. Moreover, techniques for high-yield production, purity and 
storage need to be optimized before effective and safe MSC-derived sEVs 
therapies are realized.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of NordicAssociation for the Publication of BCPT 
(former Nordic Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13478
PMCID: PMC7820981
PMID: 32780530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.