1. Cells. 2020 Aug 23;9(9):1947. doi: 10.3390/cells9091947.

Molecular and Mechanobiological Pathways Related to the Physiopathology of 
FPLD2.

Varlet AA(1), Helfer E(2), Badens C(1).

Author information:
(1)Marseille Medical Genetics (MMG), INSERM, Aix Marseille University, 13005 
Marseille, France.
(2)Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de Marseille (CINAM), CNRS, Aix 
Marseille University, 13009 Marseille, France.

Laminopathies are rare and heterogeneous diseases affecting one to almost all 
tissues, as in Progeria, and sharing certain features such as metabolic 
disorders and a predisposition to atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases. These 
two features are the main characteristics of the adipose tissue-specific 
laminopathy called familial partial lipodystrophy type 2 (FPLD2). The only gene 
that is involved in FPLD2 physiopathology is the LMNA gene, with at least 20 
mutations that are considered pathogenic. LMNA encodes the type V intermediate 
filament lamin A/C, which is incorporated into the lamina meshwork lining the 
inner membrane of the nuclear envelope. Lamin A/C is involved in the regulation 
of cellular mechanical properties through the control of nuclear rigidity and 
deformability, gene modulation and chromatin organization. While recent studies 
have described new potential signaling pathways dependent on lamin A/C and 
associated with FPLD2 physiopathology, the whole picture of how the syndrome 
develops remains unknown. In this review, we summarize the signaling pathways 
involving lamin A/C that are associated with the progression of FPLD2. We also 
explore the links between alterations of the cellular mechanical properties and 
FPLD2 physiopathology. Finally, we introduce potential tools based on the 
exploration of cellular mechanical properties that could be redirected for FPLD2 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9091947
PMCID: PMC7565540
PMID: 32842478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.