1. Nutrients. 2020 Aug 26;12(9):2588. doi: 10.3390/nu12092588.

Increased Risk of High Body Fat and Altered Lipid Metabolism Associated to 
Suboptimal Consumption of Vitamin A Is Modulated by Genetic Variants rs5888 
(SCARB1), rs1800629 (UCP1) and rs659366 (UCP2).

Galmés S(1)(2)(3)(4), Palou A(1)(2)(3), Serra F(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Nutrition and Biotechnology, NUO Group, 
Universitat de les Illes Balears, 07122 Palma, Spain.
(2)CIBER de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), 28029 Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Institut d'Investigació Sanitària Illes Balears (IdISBa), 07120 Palma, Spain.
(4)Alimentómica S.L., Spin-off n.1 of the University of the Balearic Islands, 
07121 Palma, Spain.

Obesity is characterized by an excessive body fat percentage (BF%). Animal and 
cell studies have shown benefits of vitamin A (VA) on BF% and lipid metabolism, 
but it is still controversial in humans. Furthermore, although some genetic 
variants may explain heterogeneity in VA plasma levels, their role in VA 
metabolic response is still scarcely characterized. This study was designed as a 
combination of an observational study involving 158 male subjects followed by a 
study with a well-balanced genotype-phenotype protocol, including in the design 
an ex vivo intervention study performed on isolated peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) of the 41 former males. This is a strategy to accurately identify 
the delivery of Precision Nutrition recommendations to targeted subjects. The 
study assesses the influence of rs5888 (SCARB1), rs659366 (UCP2), and rs1800629 
(UCP1) variants on higher BF% associated with suboptimal VA consumption and 
underlines the cellular mechanisms involved by analyzing basal and retinoic acid 
(RA) response on PBMC gene expression. Data show that male carriers with the 
major allele combinations and following suboptimal-VA diet show higher BF% 
(adjusted ANOVA test p-value = 0.006). Genotype-BF% interaction is observed on 
oxidative/inflammatory gene expression and also influences lipid related gene 
expression in response to RA. Data indicate that under suboptimal consumption of 
VA, carriers of VA responsive variants and with high-BF% show a gene expression 
profile consistent with an impaired basal metabolic state. The results show the 
relevance of consuming VA within the required amounts, its impact on metabolism 
and energy balance, and consequently, on men's adiposity with a clear influence 
of genetic variants SCARB1, UCP2 and UCP1.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12092588
PMCID: PMC7551832
PMID: 32858880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.