1. mBio. 2020 Sep 15;11(5):e01804-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01804-20.

ExPortal and the LiaFSR Regulatory System Coordinate the Response to Cell 
Membrane Stress in Streptococcus pyogenes.

Lin Y(1), Sanson MA(1), Vega LA(1), Shah B(1), Regmi S(1), Cubria MB(1), Flores 
AR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, 
USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, 
USA anthony.r.flores@uth.tmc.edu.
(3)Center for Antimicrobial Resistance and Microbial Genomics, McGovern Medical 
School, University of Texas Health Sciences Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, 
USA.

LiaFSR is a gene regulatory system important for response to cell membrane 
stress in Gram-positive bacteria but is minimally studied in the important human 
pathogen group A Streptococcus (GAS). Using immunofluorescence and immunogold 
electron microscopy, we discovered that LiaF (a membrane-bound repressor 
protein) and LiaS (a sensor kinase) reside within the GAS membrane microdomain 
(ExPortal). Cell envelope stress induced by antimicrobials resulted in ExPortal 
disruption and activation of the LiaFSR system. The only human antimicrobial 
peptide whose presence resulted in ExPortal disruption and LiaFSR activation was 
the alpha-defensin human neutrophil peptide 1 (hNP-1). Elimination of membrane 
cardiolipin through targeted gene deletion resulted in loss of LiaS 
colocalization with the GAS ExPortal and activation of LiaFSR, whereas LiaF 
membrane localization was unaffected. Isogenic mutants lacking either LiaF or 
LiaS revealed a critical role of LiaF in ExPortal integrity. Thus, LiaF and LiaS 
colocalize with the GAS ExPortal by distinct mechanisms, further supporting 
codependence. These are the first data identifying a multicomponent signal 
system within the ExPortal, thereby providing new insight into bacterial 
intramembrane signaling in GAS that may serve as a paradigm for Gram-positive 
bacteria.IMPORTANCE Bacterial two-component systems sense and induce 
transcriptional changes in response to environmental stressors, including 
antimicrobials and human antimicrobial peptides. Since the stresses imposed by 
the host's defensive responses may act as markers of specific temporal stages of 
disease progression or host compartments, pathogens often coordinately regulate 
stress response programs with virulence factor expression. The mechanism by 
which bacteria recognize these stresses and subsequently induce transcriptional 
responses remains not well understood. In this study, we showed that LiaFSR 
senses cell envelope stress through colocalization of LiaF and LiaS with the 
group A Streptococcus (GAS) ExPortal and is activated in direct response to 
ExPortal disruption by antimicrobials or human antimicrobial peptides. Our 
studies shed new light on the sensing of cell envelope stress in Gram-positive 
bacteria and may contribute to the development of therapies targeting these 
processes.

Copyright Â© 2020 Lin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01804-20
PMCID: PMC7492735
PMID: 32934083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]