1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Oct 5;21(19):7349. doi: 10.3390/ijms21197349.

The Best Peptidomimetic Strategies to Undercover Antibacterial Peptides.

Lachowicz JI(1), Szczepski K(2), Scano A(3), Casu C(3), Fais S(3), Orr√π G(3), 
Pisano B(1), Piras M(1), Jaremko M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences and Public Health, University of Cagliari, 
Cittadella Universitaria, 09042 Monserrato, Italy.
(2)Division of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Engineering (BESE), 
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Surgical Science, OBL Oral Biotechnology Laboratory, University 
of Cagliari, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.

Health-care systems that develop rapidly and efficiently may increase the 
lifespan of humans. Nevertheless, the older population is more fragile, and is 
at an increased risk of disease development. A concurrently growing number of 
surgeries and transplantations have caused antibiotics to be used much more 
frequently, and for much longer periods of time, which in turn increases 
microbial resistance. In 1945, Fleming warned against the abuse of antibiotics 
in his Nobel lecture: "The time may come when penicillin can be bought by anyone 
in the shops. Then there is the danger that the ignorant man may easily 
underdose himself and by exposing his microbes to non-lethal quantities of the 
drug make them resistant". After 70 years, we are witnessing the fulfilment of 
Fleming's prophecy, as more than 700,000 people die each year due to 
drug-resistant diseases. Naturally occurring antimicrobial peptides protect all 
living matter against bacteria, and now different peptidomimetic strategies to 
engineer innovative antibiotics are being developed to defend humans against 
bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21197349
PMCID: PMC7583890
PMID: 33027928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.