1. Transl Neurodegener. 2020 Nov 26;9(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s40035-020-00221-2.

Neuroinflammation in neurodegenerative disorders: the roles of microglia and 
astrocytes.

Kwon HS(1), Koh SH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. ksh213@hanyang.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Translational Medicine, Hanyang University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Science & Engineering, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
ksh213@hanyang.ac.kr.

Neuroinflammation is associated with neurodegenerative diseases, such as 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Microglia and astrocytes are key regulators of inflammatory responses in the 
central nervous system. The activation of microglia and astrocytes is 
heterogeneous and traditionally categorized as neurotoxic (M1-phenotype 
microglia and A1-phenotype astrocytes) or neuroprotective (M2-phenotype 
microglia and A2-phenotype astrocytes). However, this dichotomized 
classification may not reflect the various phenotypes of microglia and 
astrocytes. The relationship between these activated glial cells is also very 
complicated, and the phenotypic distribution can change, based on the 
progression of neurodegenerative diseases. A better understanding of the roles 
of microglia and astrocytes in neurodegenerative diseases is essential for 
developing effective therapies. In this review, we discuss the roles of 
inflammatory response in neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on the 
contributions of microglia and astrocytes and their relationship. In addition, 
we discuss biomarkers to measure neuroinflammation and studies on therapeutic 
drugs that can modulate neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-020-00221-2
PMCID: PMC7689983
PMID: 33239064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.