1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Nov 30;21(23):9135. doi: 10.3390/ijms21239135.

Functional Identification of Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase as a Key Gene 
Involved in Lysostaphin Resistance and Virulence Potential of Staphylococcus 
aureus Strains.

Batool N(1), Ko KS(2), Chaurasia AK(1), Kim KK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Precision Medicine, Institute for Antimicrobial Resistance 
Research and Therapeutics, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 
16419, Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 
16419, Korea.
(3)Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences and Technology (SAIHST), 
Samsung Medical Center (SMC), Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 
06351, Korea.

Gaining an insight into the mechanism underlying antimicrobial-resistance 
development in Staphylococcus aureus is crucial for identifying effective 
antimicrobials. We isolated S. aureus sequence type 72 from a patient in whom 
the S. aureus infection was highly resistant to various antibiotics and 
lysostaphin, but no known resistance mechanisms could explain the mechanism of 
lysostaphin resistance. Genome-sequencing followed by subtractive and functional 
genomics revealed that serine hydroxymethyltransferase (glyA or shmT gene) plays 
a key role in lysostaphin resistance. Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) is 
indispensable for the one-carbon metabolism of serine/glycine interconversion 
and is linked to folate metabolism. Functional studies revealed the involvement 
of SHMT in lysostaphin resistance, as ΔshmT was susceptible to the lysostaphin, 
while complementation of the knockout expressing shmT restored resistance 
against lysostaphin. In addition, the ΔshmT showed reduced virulence under in 
vitro (mammalian cell lines infection) and in vivo (wax-worm infection) models. 
The SHMT inhibitor, serine hydroxymethyltransferase inhibitor 1 (SHIN1), 
protected the 50% of the wax-worm infected with wild type S. aureus. These 
results suggest SHMT is relevant to the extreme susceptibility to lysostaphin 
and the host immune system. Thus, the current study established that SHMT plays 
a key role in lysostaphin resistance development and in determining the 
virulence potential of multiple drug-resistant S. aureus.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21239135
PMCID: PMC7731198
PMID: 33266291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.