1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2020 Oct 22;19:474-485. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2020.10.014. eCollection 2020 Dec 11.

Targeting the Root Cause of Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA with a New scAAV9 Gene 
Replacement Vector.

Bobo TA(1)(2), Samowitz PN(1), Robinson MI(1), Fu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

No treatment is available to address the unmet needs of mucopolysaccharidosis 
(MPS) IIIA patients. Targeting the root cause, we developed a new 
self-complementary adeno-associated virus 9 (scAAV9) vector to deliver the human 
N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase (hSGSH) gene driven by a miniature 
cytomegalovirus (mCMV) promoter. In pre-clinical studies, the vector was tested 
at varying doses by a single intravenous (i.v.) infusion into MPS IIIA mice at 
different ages. The vector treatments resulted in rapid and long-term expression 
of functional recombinant SGSH (rSGSH) enzyme and elimination of lysosomal 
storage pathology throughout the CNS and periphery in all tested animals. 
Importantly, MPS IIIA mice treated with the vector at up to 6 months of age 
showed significantly improved behavior performance in a hidden task in the 
Morris water maze, as well as extended lifespan, with most of the animals 
surviving within the normal range, indicating that the vector treatment can 
prevent and reverse MPS IIIA disease progression. Notably, 2.5 × 1012 vector 
genomes (vg)/kg was functionally effective. Furthermore, the vector treatment 
did not lead to detectable systemic toxicity or adverse events in MPS IIIA mice. 
These data demonstrate the development of a safe and effective new gene therapy 
product for treating MPS IIIA, which further support the extended clinical 
relevance of platform recombinant AAV9 (rAAV9 gene delivery for treating broad 
neurogenetic diseases.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2020.10.014
PMCID: PMC7704409
PMID: 33313335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.