1. Front Mol Biosci. 2020 Nov 20;7:599298. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2020.599298. 
eCollection 2020.

Known Evolutionary Paths Are Accessible to Engineered ß-Lactamases Having 
Altered Protein Motions at the Timescale of Catalytic Turnover.

Alejaldre L(1)(2)(3), Lemay-St-Denis C(1)(2)(3), Perez Lopez C(4), Sancho Jodar 
F(4), Guallar V(4)(5), Pelletier JN(1)(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Department, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)PROTEO, The Québec Network for Research on Protein, Function, Engineering and 
Applications, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(3)CGCC, Center in Green Chemistry and Catalysis, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(4)Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)ICREA: Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Chemistry Department, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

The evolution of new protein functions is dependent upon inherent biophysical 
features of proteins. Whereas, it has been shown that changes in protein 
dynamics can occur in the course of directed molecular evolution trajectories 
and contribute to new function, it is not known whether varying protein dynamics 
modify the course of evolution. We investigate this question using three related 
ß-lactamases displaying dynamics that differ broadly at the slow timescale that 
corresponds to catalytic turnover yet have similar fast dynamics, thermal 
stability, catalytic, and substrate recognition profiles. Introduction of 
substitutions E104K and G238S, that are known to have a synergistic effect on 
function in the parent ß-lactamase, showed similar increases in catalytic 
efficiency toward cefotaxime in the related ß-lactamases. Molecular simulations 
using Protein Energy Landscape Exploration reveal that this results from 
stabilizing the catalytically-productive conformations, demonstrating the 
dominance of the synergistic effect of the E014K and G238S substitutions in 
vitro in contexts that vary in terms of sequence and dynamics. Furthermore, 
three rounds of directed molecular evolution demonstrated that known 
cefotaximase-enhancing mutations were accessible regardless of the differences 
in dynamics. Interestingly, specific sequence differences between the related 
ß-lactamases were shown to have a higher effect in evolutionary outcomes than 
did differences in dynamics. Overall, these ß-lactamase models show tolerance to 
protein dynamics at the timescale of catalytic turnover in the evolution of a 
new function.

Copyright © 2020 Alejaldre, Lemay-St-Denis, Perez Lopez, Sancho Jodar, Guallar 
and Pelletier.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2020.599298
PMCID: PMC7716773
PMID: 33330628