1. Front Genet. 2020 Dec 21;11:597420. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.597420.
eCollection  2020.

Causal Evaluation of Laboratory Markers in Type 2 Diabetes on Cancer and 
Vascular Diseases Using Various Mendelian Randomization Tools.

Jin H(1)(2), Lee S(3), Won S(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Medical Research Collaborating Center, Seoul 
National University Boramae Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Medical Consilience, Graduate School, Dankook University, 
Yongin-si, South Korea.
(4)Institute of Health and Environment, Seoul National University, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(5)RexSoft Corp., Seoul, South Korea.

Multiple studies have demonstrated the effects of type 2 diabetes (T2D) on 
various human diseases; however, most of these were observational 
epidemiological studies that suffered from many potential biases including 
reported confounding and reverse causations. In this article, we investigated 
whether cancer and vascular disease can be affected by T2D-related traits, 
including fasting plasma glucose (FPG), 2-h postprandial glucose (2h-PG), and 
glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels, by using Mendelian randomization (MR). 
The summary statistics for FPG, 2h-PG, and HbA1c level were obtained through 
meta-analyses of large-scale genome-wide association studies that included data 
from 133,010 nondiabetic individuals from collaborating Meta-analysis of Glucose 
and Insulin Related Traits Consortium studies. Thereafter, based on the 
statistical assumptions for MR analyses, the most reliable approaches including 
inverse-variance-weighted (IVW), MR-Egger, MR-Egger with a simulation 
extrapolation (SIMEX), weighted median, and MR-pleiotropy residual sum and 
outlier (MR-PRESSO) methods were applied to identify traits affected by FPG, 
2h-PG, and HbAlc. We found that coronary artery disease is affected by FPG, as 
per the IVW [log odds ratio (logOR): 0.21; P = 0.012], MR-Egger (SIMEX) (logOR: 
0.22; P = 0.014), MR-PRESSO (logOR: 0.18; P = 0.045), and weighted median 
(logOR: 0.29; P < 0.001) methods but not as per the MR-Egger (logOR: 0.13; P = 
0.426) approach. Furthermore, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels are 
affected by HbA1c, as per the IVW [beta (B): 0.23; P = 0.015), MR-Egger (B: 
0.45; P = 0.046), MR-Egger (SIMEX) (B: 0.27; P = 0.007), MR-PRESSO (B; 0.14; P = 
0.010), and the weighted median (B: 0.15; P = 0.012] methods. Further studies of 
the associated biological mechanisms are required to validate and understand the 
disease-specific differences identified in the TD2-related causal effects of 
each trait.

Copyright Â© 2020 Jin, Lee and Won.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.597420
PMCID: PMC7780896
PMID: 33408737

Conflict of interest statement: SW was employed by the company, RexSoft. The 
remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest.