1. Exp Mol Med. 2021 Feb;53(2):281-290. doi: 10.1038/s12276-021-00562-6. Epub
2021  Feb 16.

Effects of innate immune receptor stimulation on extracellular α-synuclein 
uptake and degradation by brain resident cells.

Kim C(1), Kwon S(2), Iba M(2), Spencer B(3), Rockenstein E(3), Mante M(3), Adame 
A(3), Shin SJ(4), Fields JA(5), Rissman RA(3), Lee SJ(4), Masliah E(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. 
changyoun.kim@nih.gov.
(2)Molecular Neuropathology Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, University of California, La 
Jolla, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Neuroscience Research Institute, and 
Department of Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
03080, Korea.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of California, La 
Jolla, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(6)Molecular Neuropathology Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. 
eliezer.masliah@nih.gov.
(7)Division of Neuroscience, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. eliezer.masliah@nih.gov.

Synucleinopathies are age-related neurological disorders characterized by the 
progressive deposition of α-synuclein (α-syn) aggregates and include Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Although cell-to-cell α-syn 
transmission is thought to play a key role in the spread of α-syn pathology, the 
detailed mechanism is still unknown. Neuroinflammation is another key 
pathological feature of synucleinopathies. Previous studies have identified 
several immune receptors that mediate neuroinflammation in synucleinopathies, 
such as Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). However, the species of α-syn aggregates 
varies from study to study, and how different α-syn aggregate species interact 
with innate immune receptors has yet to be addressed. Therefore, we investigated 
whether innate immune receptors can facilitate the uptake of different species 
of α-syn aggregates. Here, we examined whether stimulation of TLRs could 
modulate the cellular uptake and degradation of α-syn fibrils despite a lack of 
direct interaction. We observed that stimulation of TLR2 in vitro accelerated 
α-syn fibril uptake in neurons and glia while delaying the degradation of α-syn 
in neurons and astrocytes. Internalized α-syn was rapidly degraded in microglia 
regardless of whether TLR2 was stimulated. However, cellular α-syn uptake and 
degradation kinetics were not altered by TLR4 stimulation. In addition, 
upregulation of TLR2 expression in a synucleinopathy mouse model increased the 
density of Lewy-body-like inclusions and induced morphological changes in 
microglia. Together, these results suggest that cell type-specific modulation of 
TLR2 may be a multifaceted and promising therapeutic strategy for 
synucleinopathies; inhibition of neuronal and astroglial TLR2 decreases 
pathogenic α-syn transmission, but activation of microglial TLR2 enhances 
microglial extracellular α-syn clearance.

DOI: 10.1038/s12276-021-00562-6
PMCID: PMC8080790
PMID: 33594256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.-J.L. is a founder and CEO of Neuramedy Co., 
Ltd.