1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2021 Feb 27;21:94-106. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2021.02.020. eCollection 2021 Jun 11.

Increased CFTR expression and function from an optimized lentiviral vector for 
cystic fibrosis gene therapy.

Marquez Loza LI(1)(2), Cooney AL(1)(2), Dong Q(1)(2), Randak CO(1)(2), Rivella 
S(3), Sinn PL(1)(2), McCray PB Jr(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA.
(2)Pappajohn Biomedical Institute and the Center for Gene Therapy, The 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Despite significant advances in cystic fibrosis (CF) treatments, a one-time 
treatment for this life-shortening disease remains elusive. Stable 
complementation of the disease-causing mutation with a normal copy of the CF 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene fulfills that goal. Integrating 
lentiviral vectors are well suited for this purpose, but widespread airway 
transduction in humans is limited by achievable titers and delivery barriers. 
Since airway epithelial cells are interconnected through gap junctions, small 
numbers of cells expressing supraphysiologic levels of CFTR could support 
sufficient channel function to rescue CF phenotypes. Here, we investigated 
promoter choice and CFTR codon optimization (coCFTR) as strategies to regulate 
CFTR expression. We evaluated two promoters-phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) and 
elongation factor 1-α (EF1α)-that have been safely used in clinical trials. We 
also compared the wild-type human CFTR sequence to three alternative coCFTR 
sequences generated by different algorithms. With the use of the CFTR-mediated 
anion current in primary human CF airway epithelia to quantify channel 
expression and function, we determined that EF1α produced greater currents than 
PGK and identified a coCFTR sequence that conferred significantly increased 
functional CFTR expression. Optimized promoter and CFTR sequences advance 
lentiviral vectors toward CF gene therapy clinical trials.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2021.02.020
PMCID: PMC7973238
PMID: 33768133

Conflict of interest statement: P.B.M. is on the Scientific Advisory Board and 
receives support for sponsored research from Spirovant Sciences, Inc.