1. PLoS Genet. 2021 Mar 29;17(3):e1009445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009445. 
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Characterization of C9orf72 haplotypes to evaluate the effects of normal and 
pathological variations on its expression and splicing.

Ben-Dor I(1), Pacut C(2), Nevo Y(3), Feldman EL(2), Reubinoff BE(1).

Author information:
(1)The Hadassah Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research Center, The Goldyne Savad 
Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, United States of America.
(3)Computation Center, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, 
Israel.

Expansion of the hexanucleotide repeat (HR) in the first intron of the C9orf72 
gene is the most common genetic cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) in Caucasians. All C9orf72-ALS/FTD patients share 
a common risk (R) haplotype. To study C9orf72 expression and splicing from the 
mutant R allele compared to the complementary normal allele in ALS/FTD patients, 
we initially created a detailed molecular map of the single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) signature and the HR length of the various C9orf72 haplotypes 
in Caucasians. We leveraged this map to determine the allelic origin of 
transcripts per patient, and decipher the effects of pathological and normal HR 
lengths on C9orf72 expression and splicing. In C9orf72 ALS patients' cells, the 
HR expanded allele, compared to non-R allele, was associated with decreased 
levels of a downstream initiated transcript variant and increased levels of 
transcripts initiated upstream of the HR. HR expanded R alleles correlated with 
high levels of unspliced intron 1 and activation of cryptic donor splice sites 
along intron 1. Retention of intron 1 was associated with sequential intron 2 
retention. The SNP signature of C9orf72 haplotypes described here enables 
allele-specific analysis of transcriptional products and may pave the way to 
allele-specific therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1009445
PMCID: PMC8031855
PMID: 33780440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.