1. J Adv Res. 2020 Oct 21;29:207-221. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.10.003.
eCollection  2021 Mar.

CRISPR/Cas: A powerful tool for gene function study and crop improvement.

Zhang D(1), Zhang Z(2), Unver T(3), Zhang B(4).

Author information:
(1)Henan Province Engineering Research Center for Forest Biomass Value-Added 
Products, College of Forestry, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan 
450002, China.
(2)Henan Collaborative Innovation Center of Modern Biological Breeding and Henan 
Key Laboratory for Molecular Ecology and Germplasm Innovation of Cotton and 
Wheat, Henan Institute of Science and Technology, Xinxiang, Henan 453003, China.
(3)Ficus Biotechnology, Ostim Teknopark, No: 1/1/76, 06378, Yenimahalle, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

BACKGROUND: It is a long-standing goal of scientists and breeders to precisely 
control a gene for studying its function as well as improving crop yield, 
quality, and tolerance to various environmental stresses. The discovery and 
modification of CRISPR/Cas system, a nature-occurred gene editing tool, opens an 
era for studying gene function and precision crop breeding.
AIM OF REVIEW: In this review, we first introduce the brief history of 
CRISPR/Cas discovery followed the mechanism and application of CRISPR/Cas system 
on gene function study and crop improvement. Currently, CRISPR/Cas genome 
editing has been becoming a mature cutting-edge biotechnological tool for crop 
improvement that already used in many different traits in crops, including 
pathogen resistance, abiotic tolerance, plant development and morphology and 
even secondary metabolism and fiber development. Finally, we point out the major 
issues associating with CRISPR/Cas system and the future research directions.Key 
Scientific Concepts of Review: CRISPR/Cas9 system is a robust and powerful 
biotechnological tool for targeting an individual DNA and RNA sequence in the 
genome. It can be used to target a sequence for gene knockin, knockout and 
replacement as well as monitoring and regulating gene expression at the genome 
and epigenome levels by binding a specific sequence. Agrobacterium-mediated 
method is still the major and efficient method for delivering CRISPR/Cas regents 
into targeted plant cells. However, other delivery methods, such as 
virus-mediated method, have been developed and enhanced the application 
potentials of CRISPR/Cas9-based crop improvement. PAM requirement offers the 
CRISPR/Cas9-targted genetic loci and also limits the application of CRISPR/Cas9. 
Discovering new Cas proteins and modifying current Cas enzymes play an important 
role in CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing. Developing a better CRISPR/Cas9 
system, including the delivery system and the methods eliminating off-target 
effects, and finding key/master genes for controlling crop growth and 
development is two major directions for CRISPR/Cas9-based crop improvement.

Â© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2020.10.003
PMCID: PMC8020163
PMID: 33842017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.