1. Viruses. 2021 May 13;13(5):905. doi: 10.3390/v13050905.

Dual R108K and G189D Mutations in the NS1 Protein of A/H1N1 Influenza Virus 
Counteract Host Innate Immune Responses.

Huang MT(1)(2), Zhang S(2), Wu YN(2), Li W(2), Li YC(2), Zhou CS(2), Kang XP(2), 
Jiang T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Academy of Milltary Medical Sciences, Beijing 
100071, China.

Influenza A viruses (IAV) modulate host antiviral responses to promote growth 
and pathogenicity. Here, we examined the multifunctional IAV nonstructural 
protein 1 (NS1) of influenza A virus to better understand factors that 
contribute to viral replication efficiency or pathogenicity. In 2009, a pandemic 
H1N1 IAV (A/California/07/2009 pH1N1) emerged in the human population from 
swine. Seasonal variants of this virus are still circulating in humans. Here, we 
compared the sequence of a seasonal variant of this H1N1 influenza virus 
(A/Urumqi/XJ49/2018(H1N1), first isolated in 2018) with the pandemic strain 
A/California/07/2009. The 2018 virus harbored amino acid mutations (I123V and 
N205S) in important functional sites; however, 108R and 189G were highly 
conserved between A/California/07/2009 and the 2018 variant. To better 
understand interactions between influenza viruses and the human innate immune 
system, we generated and rescued seasonal 2009 H1N1 IAV mutants expressing an 
NS1 protein harboring a dual mutation (R108K/G189D) at these conserved residues 
and then analyzed its biological characteristics. We found that the mutated NS1 
protein exhibited systematic and selective inhibition of cytokine responses via 
a mechanism that may not involve binding to cleavage and polyadenylation 
specificity factor 30 (CPSF30). These results highlight the complexity 
underlying host-influenza NS1 protein interactions.

DOI: 10.3390/v13050905
PMCID: PMC8153306
PMID: 34068322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.