1. AMB Express. 2021 Jun 24;11(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s13568-021-01253-1.

A GH89 human α-N-acetylglucosaminidase (hNAGLU) homologue from gut microbe 
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron capable of hydrolyzing heparosan oligosaccharides.

Yang X(1), Yang X(1), Yu H(1), Na L(1)(2), Ghosh T(1), McArthur JB(1)(3), Chou 
TF(4), Dickson P(5), Chen X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Rosalind Franklin Institute and University of Oxford, Harwell Campus, Didcot, 
OX11 0FA, UK.
(3)Integrated Micro-Chromatography Systems, Inc, Irmo, SC, 20963, USA.
(4)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of California, One Shields Avenue, Davis, 
CA, 95616, USA. xiichen@ucdavis.edu.

Carbohydrate-Active enZYme (CAZY) GH89 family enzymes catalyze the cleavage of 
terminal α-N-acetylglucosamine from glycans and glycoconjugates. Although 
structurally and mechanistically similar to the human lysosomal 
α-N-acetylglucosaminidase (hNAGLU) in GH89 which is involved in the degradation 
of heparan sulfate in the lysosome, the reported bacterial GH89 enzymes 
characterized so far have no or low activity toward 
α-N-acetylglucosamine-terminated heparosan oligosaccharides, the preferred 
substrates of hNAGLU. We cloned and expressed several soluble and active 
recombinant bacterial GH89 enzymes in Escherichia coli. Among these enzymes, a 
truncated recombinant α-N-acetylglucosaminidase from gut symbiotic bacterium 
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron ∆22Bt3590 was found to catalyze the cleavage of the 
terminal α1-4-linked N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from a heparosan disaccharide 
with high efficiency. Heparosan oligosaccharides with lengths up to 
decasaccharide were also suitable substrates. This bacterial 
α-N-acetylglucosaminidase could be a useful catalyst for heparan sulfate 
analysis.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-021-01253-1
PMCID: PMC8225759
PMID: 34165649

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.