1. J Diabetes Res. 2021 Jul 14;2021:5524313. doi: 10.1155/2021/5524313.
eCollection  2021.

Fasting Glucose of 6.1 mmol/L as a Possible Optimal Target for Type 2 Diabetic 
Patients with Insulin Glargine: A Randomized Clinical Trial.

Yuan L(1), Li F(1), Zhou Y(1)(2), Sun R(1), Gao G(1), Zhang Q(3), Tang Y(1), Dai 
L(1), Wu J(1), Ma J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The First People's Hospital of Huaian, Huaian, 
China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangning Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

To observe whether different insulin glargine titration algorithms based on 
fasting blood glucose (FBG) levels lead to different glycaemic variations (GVs) 
in type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients, a prospective, randomized, single-centre, 
comparative, three-arm parallel-group, open-label, treat-to-target, 24-week 
study was performed. A total of 71 uncontrolled T2D patients were recruited and 
randomized 1 : 3 : 3 into Groups 1, 2, and 3 (insulin titration goals of FBG ≤ 
5.6, ≤6.1, and ≤7.0) for this study. The initiated insulin glargine dose was 
recommended at 0.2 U/kg/day and was then titrated following the FBG target. 
Patients were subjected to two 3-day continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) at 
baseline and the endpoint, wherein the CGM data were analysed, and the study's 
primary endpoint was the difference in 24 hrs mean amplitude of glycaemic 
excursion (MAGE) among the three groups. We observed that patients in the three 
groups had similar MAGE levels at the endpoint; however, Group 2 achieved a 
significant decrease in the MAGE level from baseline to the endpoint as compared 
to Groups 1 and 3 (all p < 0.05). We also observed that these patients had 
significant glycated haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) value improvements as compared to 
the other two groups (all p < 0.05). Therefore, choosing an FBG level of 
6.1 mmol/L as an insulin titration target provided significant GVs and HbA1c 
value improvements in T2D patients. Moreover, our data indicated that an FBG of 
6.1 mmol/L could possibly be an insulin glargine titration target in T2D 
patients.

Copyright © 2021 Lu Yuan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/5524313
PMCID: PMC8294995
PMID: 34337072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.