1. Curr Protoc. 2021 Aug;1(8):e226. doi: 10.1002/cpz1.226.

PharmGKB, an Integrated Resource of Pharmacogenomic Knowledge.

Gong L(1), Whirl-Carrillo M(1), Klein TE(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biomedical Data Science and Medicine (BMIR), Stanford 
University, Stanford, California.

The Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) is an integrated online knowledge 
resource for the understanding of how genetic variation contributes to variation 
in drug response. Our focus includes not only pharmacogenomic information useful 
for clinical implementation (e.g., drug dosing guidelines and annotated drug 
labels), but also information to catalyze scientific research and drug discovery 
(e.g., variant-drug annotations and drug-centered pathways). As of April 2021, 
the annotated content of PharmGKB spans 715 drugs, 1761 genes, 227 diseases, 165 
clinical guidelines, and 784 drug labels. We have manually curated data from 
more than 9000 published papers to generate the content of PharmGKB. Recently, 
we have also implemented an automated natural language processing (NLP) tool to 
broaden our coverage of the pharmacogenomic literature. This article contains a 
basic protocol describing how to navigate the PharmGKB website to retrieve 
information on how genes and genetic variations affect drug efficacy and 
toxicity. It also includes a protocol on how to use PharmGKB to facilitate 
interpretation of findings for a pharmacogenomic variant genotype or metabolizer 
phenotype. PharmGKB is freely available at http://www.pharmgkb.org. © 2021 Wiley 
Periodicals LLC. Basic Protocol 1: Navigating the homepage of PharmGKB and 
searching by drug Basic Protocol 2: Using PharmGKB to facilitate interpretation 
of pharmacogenomic variant genotypes or metabolizer phenotypes.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cpz1.226
PMCID: PMC8650697
PMID: 34387941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.