1. Eur J Med Chem. 2021 Dec 5;225:113766. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2021.113766. Epub
 2021 Aug 12.

Design, synthesis and structure-activity relationship studies of 
4-indole-2-arylaminopyrimidine derivatives as anti-inflammatory agents for acute 
lung injury.

Chen T(1), Wei Y(2), Zhu G(1), Zhao H(2), Zhang X(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University of Technology, 
Hangzhou 310014, PR China.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311402, PR China.
(3)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University of Technology, 
Hangzhou 310014, PR China. Electronic address: zhangxx@zjut.edu.cn.

Acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS), a clinically 
high mortality disease, has not been effectively treated till now, and the 
development of anti-acute lung injury drugs is imminent. Acute lung injury was 
efficiently treated by inhibiting the cascade of inflammation, and reducing the 
inflammatory response in the lung. A series of novel compounds with highly 
efficient inhibiting the expression of inflammatory factors were designed by 
using 4-indolyl-2-aminopyrimidine as the core skeleton. Totally eleven 
4-indolyl-2-arylaminopyrimidine derivatives were designed and synthesized. As 
well, the related anti-ALI activity of these compounds was evaluated. Compounds 
6c and 6h showed a superior activity among these compounds, and the inhibition 
rate of IL-6 and IL-8 release ranged from 62% to 77%, and from 65% to 72%, 
respectively. Furthermore, most of compounds had no significant cytotoxicity in 
vitro. The infiltration of inflammatory cells into lung tissue significantly 
reduced by using compound 6h (20 mg/kg) in the ALI mice model, which achieved 
the effect of protecting lung tissue and improving ALI. In addition, the 
inflammatory response was inhibited by using compound 6h through inhibiting 
phosphorylation of p-38 and ERK in MAPK signaling pathway, and resulted in 
protective effect on ALI. These data indicated that compound 6h showed good 
anti-inflammatory activity in vitro and in vivo, which was expected to become a 
leading compound for the treatment of ALI.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2021.113766
PMCID: PMC8357485
PMID: 34425313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.