1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Aug 12;22(16):8678. doi: 10.3390/ijms22168678.

Research Advances in Heterotrimeric G-Protein α Subunits and Uncanonical 
G-Protein Coupled Receptors in Plants.

Liu Y(1), Wang X(1), Dong D(1), Guo L(1), Dong X(1), Leng J(1), Zhao B(1), Guo 
YD(1), Zhang N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vegetables, College of Horticulture, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China.

As crucial signal transducers, G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs) have attracted increasing attention in the field of signal transduction. 
Research on G-proteins and GPCRs has mainly focused on animals, while research 
on plants is relatively rare. The mode of action of G-proteins is quite 
different from that in animals. The G-protein α (Gα) subunit is the most 
essential member of the G-protein signal cycle in animals and plants. The 
G-protein is activated when Gα releases GDP and binds to GTP, and the 
relationships with the GPCR and the downstream signal are also achieved by Gα 
coupling. It is important to study the role of Gα in the signaling pathway to 
explore the regulatory mechanism of G-proteins. The existence of a 
self-activated Gα in plants makes it unnecessary for the canonical GPCR to 
activate the G-protein by exchanging GDP with GTP. However, putative GPCRs have 
been found and proven to play important roles in G-protein signal transduction. 
The unique mode of action of G-proteins and the function of putative GPCRs in 
plants suggest that the same definition used in animal research cannot be used 
to study uncanonical GPCRs in plants. This review focuses on the different 
functions of the Gα and the mode of action between plants and animals as well as 
the functions of the uncanonical GPCR. This review employs a new perspective to 
define uncanonical GPCRs in plants and emphasizes the role of uncanonical GPCRs 
and Gα subunits in plant stress resistance and agricultural production.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22168678
PMCID: PMC8395518
PMID: 34445383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.