1. Microbiol Spectr. 2021 Oct 31;9(2):e0101021. doi: 10.1128/Spectrum.01010-21. 
Epub 2021 Sep 15.

Tigecycline Heteroresistance and Resistance Mechanism in Clinical Isolates of 
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Jo J(1), Ko KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 
Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Tigecycline is regarded as a last-resort treatment for multidrug-resistant 
Acinetobacter baumannii. However, tigecycline resistance in A. baumannii has 
increased worldwide. In this study, we investigated tigecycline heteroresistance 
in A. baumannii isolates from South Korea. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was 
performed on 323 nonduplicated A. baumannii isolates. Among 260 and 37 
tigecycline-susceptible and -intermediate-resistant A. baumannii isolates, 146 
(56.2%) and 22 (59.5%) isolates were identified as heteroresistant to 
tigecycline through a disk diffusion assay and population analysis profiling. 
For selected isolates, an in vitro time-kill assay was performed, and survival 
rates were measured after preincubation with diverse concentrations of 
tigecycline. Heteroresistant isolates showed regrowth after 12 h of 2Ã— MIC of 
tigecycline treatment, and resistant subpopulations were selected by preexposure 
to tigecycline. Furthermore, genetic alterations in adeABC, adeRS, and rpsJ were 
assessed, and the relative mRNA expression levels of adeB and adeS were 
compared. The tigecycline resistance in subpopulations might be due to the 
insertion of ISAba1 in adeS, leading to the overexpression of the AdeABC efflux 
pump. However, the tigecycline resistance of subpopulations was not stable 
during serial passages in antibiotic-free medium. The reversion of tigecycline 
susceptibility by antibiotic-free passages might occur by additional insertions 
of ISAba10 in adeR and nucleotide alterations in adeS in some mutants. 
Tigecycline heteroresistance is prevalent in A. baumannii isolates, which 
results in treatment failure. Tigecycline resistance is mainly due to the 
overexpression of the AdeABC efflux pump, which is associated with genetic 
mutations, but this resistance could be reversed into susceptibility by 
additional mutations in antibiotic-free environments. IMPORTANCE The evidence 
that antibiotic heteroresistance is responsible for treatment failure in 
clinical settings is increasing. Thus, detection and characterization of 
heteroresistance would be important for appropriate therapeutic guidance to 
treat bacterial infections. However, data on tigecycline heteroresistance in 
Gram-negative bacteria is currently limited, although tigecycline is regarded as 
a last-line antibiotic against infections caused by antibiotic-resistant 
pathogens. In this study, we investigated the tigecycline heteroresistance in 
Acinetobacter baumannii, which has been listed by the WHO as a priority for 
research and development of new antibiotics. We found very high prevalence of 
tigecycline-heteroresistant A. baumannii clinical isolates, which may result in 
treatment failure due to the selection of resistant subpopulations. We also 
identified the main resistance mechanism in tigecycline-resistant 
subpopulations, that is, upregulation of AdeABC efflux pumps due to ISAba1 
insertion in adeS.

DOI: 10.1128/Spectrum.01010-21
PMCID: PMC8557860
PMID: 34523993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]