1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2021 Jan-Dec;27:1076029620967108. doi: 
10.1177/1076029620967108.

The Correlation Between FGB Promoter Polymorphism and Clotting Function in 
Patients With Idiopathic Lower Extremity Deep Venous Thrombosis.

Han S(1), Yang B(1), Feng Y(1), Zhao L(1), Feng Q(1), Guan H(1), Song D(1), Yin 
F(1), Zhuang L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Kunming 
Medical University, Kunming, China.
(2)Department of Palliative Medicine, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, the Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.

To explore the possible single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) sites in the 
promoter region of fibrinogen B β (FGB), and construct logistic regression model 
and haplotype model, so as to reveal the influence of FGB promoter SNPs on 
susceptibility, hemodynamics and coagulation function of lower extremity deep 
venous thrombosis (LEDVT) in the genetic background. LEDVT patients (120) and 
healthy people (120) were taken as case and control objects, respectively. SNPs 
and their genotypes of FGB promoter were detected by promoter sequencing and 
PCR-RFLP. The parameters of coagulation system were evaluated. There were 6 SNPs 
in FGB promoter, which were β-148C/T, β-249C/T, β-455G/A, β-854G/A, β-993C/T and 
β-1420G/A. The genotype and allele frequency of β-1420 G/A, β-455G/A, β-249c/T 
and β-148C/T were significantly different between the LEDVT group and the 
control group, but not β-993C/T and β-854G/A. In addition, we found that the 
higher the content of Fibrinogen (FG), the higher the risk of LEDVT. The risk of 
LEDVT increased by 4.579 times for every unit increase of fibrinogen. We also 
found that FG, PT and APTT in LEDVT group were higher than those in control 
group, while TT was lower than those in control group; Furthermore, there was no 
significant difference in all coagulation indexes among 6 SNP genotypes in LEDVT 
group, while a significant difference was found between the 2 genotypes of 
β-993C/T in the control group. β-993C/T may indirectly affect the susceptibility 
of LEDVT by improving the basic level of plasma FG.

DOI: 10.1177/1076029620967108
PMCID: PMC8485564
PMID: 34583575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.