1. J Genet. 2021;100:69.

A genomewide association study on individuals with occludable angles identifies 
potential risk loci for intraocular pressure.

Chakraborty S(1), Sharma A, Bagchi I, Pal S, Bhattacharyya C, Gupta V, Maitra A, 
Bhattacharjee S, Sharma A, Sihota R, Acharya M.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, P.O.: N.S.S, Kalyani 741 251, 
India ma1@nibmg.ac.in.

Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies and is one of the 
leading causes of irreversible blindness worldwide. Primary angle closure 
glaucoma (PACG) is a major subtype, prevalent mostly in east and south Asia, 
where occludable anterior chamber angle is considered as a primary risk factor, 
which in turn could be responsible for high intraocular pressure (IOP) and 
subsequent neurodegeneration of retinal ganglion cells. Clinically, IOP is 
considered as a major risk factor for glaucoma and viewed as an important 
endophenotype to promote the disease severity. To investigate the comprehensive 
genomic insights, we conducted a genomewide association study (GWAS) on IOP in 
individuals with occludable angle (<15 degrees), thus anatomically predisposed 
to PACG. After performing GWAS on IOP, we identified 25 genomewide suggestive 
significant loci (P<1e-05, n = 240) of which, six were in complete linkage 
disequilibrium with the ABCA4 genic region. We successfully replicated the most 
significant discovery, SNPs of ABCA4 (rs2065712) in a separate cohort of 89 
individuals (P =1.16e-09). We identified multiple SNPs in ABCA4 to be associated 
with IOP. Also, we obtained genes harbouring significantly associated SNPs, 
included in relevant biological pathways that could potentially be involved in 
IOP variation and glaucomatous neurodegeneration.

PMID: 34608871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]