1. Genes (Basel). 2021 Sep 23;12(10):1476. doi: 10.3390/genes12101476.

Chronic Granulomatous Disease and Myelodysplastic Syndrome in a Patient with a 
Novel Mutation in CYBB.

Reis BCS(1)(2), Cunha DP(1)(2), Bueno APS(3), Carvalho FAA(1)(2), Dutra J(1), 
Mello FV(3), Ribeiro MCM(3), Milito CB(4), da Costa ES(3)(4), Vasconcelos 
Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Fernandes Figueira (IFF/Fiocruz), Rio de Janeiro 22250-020, Brazil.
(2)Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro 22250-020, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira (IPPMG), Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro 21941-610, Brazil.
(4)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de 
Janeiro 21941-901, Brazil.

Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) is an inborn error of immunity characterized 
by impaired phagocyte function, recurrent fungal and bacterial infections and 
granuloma formation in multiple organs. Pediatric myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) 
is a rare hematological stem cell disease that leads to an ineffective 
hematopoiesis with variable risk of evolution to acute leukemias. Both disorders 
are rare and have distinct pathophysiologic mechanisms, with no known 
association. A 7-month-old boy presenting with recurrent infections and anemia 
at age 2 months underwent immunological, hematological and genetic investigation 
that culminated in the diagnosis of both CGD and MDS. Next generation sequencing 
was performed and identified a silent variant predicted as of Uncertain 
Significance, located in the splicing site at the end of exon 5 in CYBB. CYBB 
variants account for at least two thirds of CGD cases, but no previous 
descriptions of this variant were found in ClinVar or The Human Gene Mutation 
Database (HGMD) databases. We were able to demonstrate an exon 5 skipping on the 
proband's cDNA, which strongly suggests the disruption of the NADPH oxidase 
complex, abrogating the formation of reactive oxygen species from neutrophils. 
Moreover, erythroid cell lineage could be also affected by NADPH oxidase complex 
damages. Further investigation is needed to evaluate the potential effect of 
CYBB gene alterations in hematopoiesis, as well as in MDS and CGD association.

DOI: 10.3390/genes12101476
PMCID: PMC8535487
PMID: 34680870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.