1. Natl Sci Rev. 2019 Nov;6(6):1223-1238. doi: 10.1093/nsr/nwz124. Epub 2019 Aug 
28.

High-resolution mapping of brain vasculature and its impairment in the 
hippocampus of Alzheimer's disease mice.

Zhang X(1)(2), Yin X(2), Zhang J(2), Li A(3)(4), Gong H(3)(4), Luo Q(3)(4), 
Zhang H(2), Gao Z(2), Jiang H(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 
200237, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia 
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.
(3)Britton Chance Center for Biomedical Photonics, Wuhan National Laboratory for 
Optoelectronics-Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, 
China.
(4)MoE Key Laboratory for Biomedical Photonics, School of Engineering Sciences, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.
(5)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Immunochemical Studies, and School of Life 
Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China.

Accumulating evidence indicates the critical importance of cerebrovascular 
dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, systematic 
comparative studies on the precise brain vasculature of wild-type and AD model 
mice are still rare. Using an image-optimization method for analysing 
Micro-Optical Sectioning Tomography (MOST) data, we generated cross-scale 
whole-brain 3D atlases that cover the entire vascular system from large vessels 
down to smallest capillaries at submicron resolution, for both wild-type mice 
and a transgenic (APP/PS1) mouse model of AD. In addition to distinct vascular 
patterns in different brain regions, we found that the main vessels of the 
molecular layer of the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG-ml) undergo abrupt changes 
in both diameter and branch angle, spreading a unique comb-like pattern of 
capillaries. By using a quantitative analysis workflow, we identified in the 
hippocampus of AD mice an overall reduction of the mean vascular diameter, 
volume fraction and branch angle, with most significant impairment in the DG-ml. 
In addition, virtual endoscopy revealed irregular morphological features in the 
vessel lumen of the AD mice, potentially contributing to the impairment of blood 
flow. Our results demonstrate the capability of high-resolution cross-scale 
evaluation of brain vasculature and underscore the importance of studying 
hippocampal microcirculation for understanding AD pathogenesis.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of China 
Science Publishing & Media Ltd.

DOI: 10.1093/nsr/nwz124
PMCID: PMC8291402
PMID: 34692000