1. TH Open. 2021 Nov 9;5(4):e513-e520. doi: 10.1055/s-0041-1739293. eCollection 
2021 Oct.

VEGFA rs3025020 Polymorphism Contributes to CALR -Mutation Susceptibility and Is 
Associated with Low Risk of Deep Vein Thrombosis in Primary Myelofibrosis.

Villani L(1), Rosti V(1), Massa M(2), Campanelli R(1), Catarsi P(1), Carolei 
A(1), Abbà C(1), de Silvstri A(3), Gale RP(4), Barosi G(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis, Laboratory of Biochemistry, 
Biotechnology and Advanced Diagnostics, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Biotechnology and Advanced Diagnostics, Istituto 
di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, 
Pavia, Italy.
(3)Biometry & Clinical Epidemiology, Scientific Direction, Istituto di Ricovero 
e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Immunology and Inflammation, Centre for Haematology Research, 
Imperial College London, London SW7 2BU, United Kingdom.

Background  Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in vascular endothelial 
growth factor A ( VEGFA ) are associated with susceptibility to several diseases 
including cancer. Correlations between VEGFA rs3025020 genotypes with clinical 
and laboratory features of primary myelofibrosis (PMF) are unstudied. Methods 
 DNA was analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction for VEGFA rs3025020 
genotypes in a cohort of 844 subjects with PMF and in two cohorts of normal 
subjects ( N  = 247 and N  = 107). Results  Frequency of rs3025020 minor allele 
(T) was not significantly different in subjects with PMF compared with normals; 
however, the T-allele was more frequent in PMF subjects with a calreticulin ( 
CALR )-mutated genotype compared with normals (35 vs. 27%; OR = 1.47 [95% CI, 
1.09, 1.98] p  = 0.011), especially in subjects with a CALR- type 2/type 2-like 
mutation (43 vs. 27%; OR = 2.01 [1.25, 3.24] p  = 0.004). CALR mutants with the 
rs3025020 TT genotype had higher CXCR4 expression on CD34-positive blood cells, 
and those who carried CT/TT genotypes had lower platelet concentrations compared 
with other genotypes at diagnosis. Overall, subjects with the rs3025020 CT/TT 
genotype had a lower cumulative incidence of deep vein thrombosis in typical 
sites (1.6 vs. 4.2%; OR = 0.37 [0.15, 0.90] p  = 0.029) and longer interval from 
diagnosis to first thrombosis (HR = 0.37 [0.14, 0.95] p  = 0.039). Conclusion 
 Persons with PMF and the VEGFA rs3025020 minor T-allele are more likely to have 
a CALR mutation compared with other somatic driver mutations and lower 
cumulative incidence and hazard for deep vein thrombosis in typical sites.

The Author(s). This is an open access article published by Thieme under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, permitting unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction so long as the original work is properly cited. ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).

DOI: 10.1055/s-0041-1739293
PMCID: PMC8577885
PMID: 34778698

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.