1. Sci Adv. 2021 Nov 19;7(47):eabi5514. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abi5514. Epub 2021
Nov  17.

Tracking the ATP-binding response in adenylate kinase in real time.

Orädd F(1), Ravishankar H(1), Goodman J(1), Rogne P(1), Backman L(1), Duelli 
A(2), Nors Pedersen M(3), Levantino M(3), Wulff M(3), Wolf-Watz M(1), Andersson 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, Linnaeus Väg 10, 901 87 Umeå, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, 
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)ESRF-The European Synchrotron, 71 Avenue des Martyrs, CS40220, 38043 
Grenoble, Cedex 9, France.

The biological function of proteins is critically dependent on dynamics inherent 
to the native structure. Such structural dynamics obey a predefined order and 
temporal timing to execute the specific reaction. Determination of the 
cooperativity of key structural rearrangements requires monitoring protein 
reactions in real time. In this work, we used time-resolved x-ray solution 
scattering (TR-XSS) to visualize structural changes in the Escherichia coli 
adenylate kinase (AdK) enzyme upon laser-induced activation of a protected ATP 
substrate. A 4.3-ms transient intermediate showed partial closing of both the 
ATP- and AMP-binding domains, which indicates a cooperative closing mechanism. 
The ATP-binding domain also showed local unfolding and breaking of an 
Arg131-Asp146 salt bridge. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy data 
identified similar unfolding in an Arg131Ala AdK mutant, which refolded in a 
closed, substrate-binding conformation. The observed structural dynamics agree 
with a “cracking mechanism” proposed to underlie global structural 
transformation, such as allostery, in proteins.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.abi5514
PMCID: PMC8597995
PMID: 34788091