1. EClinicalMedicine. 2021 Nov 6;42:101185. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.101185. 
eCollection 2021 Dec.

Safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the glucokinase 
activator PB-201 and its effects on the glucose excursion profile in drug-naïve 
Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomised controlled, crossover, 
single-centre phase 1 trial.

Liu D(1), Du Y(2), Yao X(1), Wei Y(1), Zhu J(1), Cui C(1), Zhou H(2), Xu M(2), 
Li H(1), Ji L(3).

Author information:
(1)Drug Clinical Trial Center, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)PegBio Co., Ltd, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, 
China.

BACKGROUND: PB-201, a partial, pancreas/liver-dual glucokinase activator, showed 
good tolerance and glycaemic effects in multinational studies. This study 
determined its optimal dose, safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics in 
Chinese patients with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: In this double-blind, randomised, four-period, crossover, phase 1 trial 
in China, conducted at the Peking University Third Hospital, adult patients with 
drug-naive type 2 diabetes were randomised (1:1:1:1) to four sequence groups 
using a computer-generated randomisation table. In each period, they received 
oral placebo or PB-201 (50+50, 100+50, or 100+100 mg split doses) for 7 days. 
Investigators and patients were masked to treatment assignment. The primary 
endpoints were safety and pharmacokinetics. Continuous glucose monitoring was 
used to delineate the glucose excursion profile. Trial registration number: 
NCT03973515.
FINDINGS: Between August 27, 2019 and December 19, 2019, 16 patients were 
randomised. PB-201 showed a dose-proportional pharmacokinetic profile without 
apparent accumulation in the body and induced dose-dependent lowering of blood 
glucose. PB-201 at 50+50, 100+50, and 100+100 mg increased mean time in range 
(49·210% [standard deviation 27], 56·130% [25], and 63·330% [20] with three 
doses, respectively) versus placebo (49·380% [27]) and reduced estimated 
glycated haemoglobin from baseline (-0·5445% [1·654], -1·063% [1·236], and 
-1·888% [1·381] vs -0·581% [1·200]). Fifteen patients (93·8%) had 
treatment-emergent adverse events, which were mild. No patients had 
hypoglycaemia with venous/capillary glucose <3·9 mmol/L or nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia.
INTERPRETATION: PB-201 100 mg twice daily is identified as the optimal dose, 
which shows promising glucose-lowering effects and low risks of hypoglycaemia 
and other side effects. Further investigation of PB-201 100 mg twice daily in 
confirmatory trials is warranted.
FUNDING: PegBio.

© 2021 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.101185
PMCID: PMC8585621
PMID: 34805810

Conflict of interest statement: YD and MX are employees of PegBio, and HZ is an 
ex-employee of PegBio. LJ has received fees for lecture presentations from 
AstraZeneca, Merck, Novartis, Lilly, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis and Takeda; 
consulting fees from AstraZeneca, Merck, Novartis, Lilly, Roche, Sanofi-Aventis 
and Takeda; and grants/research support from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Merck, Novartis and Sanofi-Aventis. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.