1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021 Nov 23;9:775312. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2021.775312. 
eCollection 2021.

The Basally Expressed p53-Mediated Homeostatic Function.

Nagpal I(1), Yuan ZM(1).

Author information:
(1)John B. Little Center for Radiation Sciences, Harvard T. H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, United States.

Apart from mutations in the p53 gene, p53 functions can be alternatively 
compromised by a decrease in nuclear p53 protein levels or activities. In 
accordance, enhanced p53 protein turnover due to elevated expression of the 
critical p53 E3 ligase MDM2 or MDM2/MDMX is found in many human cancers. 
Likewise, the HPV viral E6 protein-mediated p53 degradation critically 
contributes to the tumorigenesis of cervical cancer. In addition, 
growth-promoting signaling-induced cell proliferation is accompanied by p53 
downregulation. Animal studies have also shown that loss of p53 is essential for 
oncogenes to drive malignant transformation. The close association between p53 
downregulation and carcinogenesis implicates a critical role of basally 
expressed p53. In accordance, available evidence indicates that a reduced level 
of basal p53 is usually associated with disruption of homeostasis, suggesting a 
homeostatic function mediated by basal p53. However, basally expressed p53 under 
non-stress conditions is maintained at a relatively low abundance with little 
transcriptional activity, raising the question of how basal p53 could protect 
homeostasis. In this review, we summarize the findings pertinent to basal 
p53-mediated activities in the hope of developing a model in which basally 
expressed p53 functions as a barrier to anabolic metabolism to preserve 
homeostasis. Future investigation is necessary to characterize basal p53 
functionally and to obtain an improved understanding of p53 homeostatic 
function, which would offer novel insight into the role of p53 in tumor 
suppression.

Copyright Â© 2021 Nagpal and Yuan.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2021.775312
PMCID: PMC8650216
PMID: 34888311

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.