1. World J Hepatol. 2021 Nov 27;13(11):1534-1551. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i11.1534.

Liver involvement in inflammatory bowel disease: What should the clinician know?

Losurdo G(1), Brescia IV(2), Lillo C(2), Mezzapesa M(2), Barone M(2), Principi 
M(2), Ierardi E(2), Di Leo A(2), Rendina M(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Emergency and Organ 
Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. giuseppelos@alice.it.
(2)Section of Gastroenterology, Department of Emergency and Organ 
Transplantation, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) may show a wide range of extraintestinal 
manifestations. In this context, liver involvement is a focal point for both an 
adequate management of the disease and its prognosis, due to possible serious 
comorbidity. The association between IBD and primary sclerosing cholangitis is 
the most known example. This association is relevant because it implies an 
increased risk of both colorectal cancer and cholangiocarcinoma. Additionally, 
drugs such as thiopurines or biologic agents can cause drug-induced liver 
damage; therefore, this event should be considered when planning IBD treatment. 
Additionally, particular consideration should be given to the evidence that IBD 
patients may have concomitant chronic viral hepatitis, such as hepatitis B and 
hepatitis C. Chronic immunosuppressive regimens may cause a hepatitis flare or 
reactivation of a healthy carrier state, therefore careful monitoring of these 
patients is necessary. Finally, the spread of obesity has involved even IBD 
patients, thus increasing the risk of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, which 
has already proven to be more common in IBD patients than in the non-IBD 
population. This phenomenon is considered an emerging issue, as it will become 
the leading cause of liver cirrhosis.

Â©The Author(s) 2021. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.4254/wjh.v13.i11.1534
PMCID: PMC8637677
PMID: 34904028

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.