1. Cells. 2021 Dec 8;10(12):3460. doi: 10.3390/cells10123460.

Unlocking the Complexity of Mitochondrial DNA: A Key to Understanding 
Neurodegenerative Disease Caused by Injury.

Singh LN(1), Kao SH(2), Wallace DC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mitochondrial and Epigenomic Medicine, Division of Human Genetics, 
The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Resuscitation Science Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Neurodegenerative disorders that are triggered by injury typically have variable 
and unpredictable outcomes due to the complex and multifactorial cascade of 
events following the injury and during recovery. Hence, several factors beyond 
the initial injury likely contribute to the disease progression and pathology, 
and among these are genetic factors. Genetics is a recognized factor in 
determining the outcome of common neurodegenerative diseases. The role of 
mitochondrial genetics and function in traditional neurodegenerative diseases, 
such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, is well-established. Much less is 
known about mitochondrial genetics, however, regarding neurodegenerative 
diseases that result from injuries such as traumatic brain injury and ischaemic 
stroke. We discuss the potential role of mitochondrial DNA genetics in the 
progression and outcome of injury-related neurodegenerative diseases. We present 
a guide for understanding mitochondrial genetic variation, along with the 
nuances of quantifying mitochondrial DNA variation. Evidence supporting a role 
for mitochondrial DNA as a risk factor for neurodegenerative disease is also 
reviewed and examined. Further research into the impact of mitochondrial DNA on 
neurodegenerative disease resulting from injury will likely offer key insights 
into the genetic factors that determine the outcome of these diseases together 
with potential targets for treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cells10123460
PMCID: PMC8715673
PMID: 34943968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.