1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Jan 31;14:780396. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.780396. 
eCollection 2021.

Sexually Dimorphic Neurotransmitter Release at the Neuromuscular Junction in 
Adult Caenorhabditis elegans.

Yan Z(1), Cheng X(1), Li Y(1), Su Z(1), Zhou Y(1), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash 
Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Sexually dimorphic differentiation of sex-shared behaviors is observed across 
the animal world, but the underlying neurobiological mechanisms are not fully 
understood. Here we report sexual dimorphism in neurotransmitter release at the 
neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) of adult Caenorhabditis elegans. Studying worm 
locomotion confirms sex differences in spontaneous locomotion of adult animals, 
and quantitative fluorescence analysis shows that excitatory cholinergic 
synapses, but not inhibitory GABAergic synapses exhibit the adult-specific 
difference in synaptic vesicles between males and hermaphrodites. 
Electrophysiological recording from the NMJ of C. elegans not only reveals an 
enhanced neurotransmitter release but also demonstrates increased sensitivity of 
synaptic exocytosis to extracellular calcium concentration in adult males. 
Furthermore, the cholinergic synapses in adult males are characterized with 
weaker synaptic depression but faster vesicle replenishment than that in 
hermaphrodites. Interestingly, T-type calcium channels/CCA-1 play a 
male-specific role in acetylcholine release at the NMJs in adult animals. Taken 
together, our results demonstrate sexually dimorphic differentiation of synaptic 
mechanisms at the C. elegans NMJs, and thus provide a new mechanistic insight 
into how biological sex shapes animal behaviors through sex-shared neurons and 
circuits.

Copyright Â© 2022 Yan, Cheng, Li, Su, Zhou and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2021.780396
PMCID: PMC8841764
PMID: 35173578

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a 
past co-authorship with one of the author JL.