1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2022 Feb 10;15:835448. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.835448. 
eCollection 2022.

The Mechanotransduction Channel and Organic Cation Transporter Are Critical for 
Cisplatin Ototoxicity in Murine Hair Cells.

Li J(1), Liu C(1), Kaefer S(1), Youssef M(1), Zhao B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.

Cisplatin is one of the most widely used chemotherapeutic drugs across the 
world. However, the serious ototoxic effects, leading to permanent hair cell 
death and hearing loss, significantly limit the utility of cisplatin. In 
zebrafish, the functional mechanotransduction channel is required for cisplatin 
ototoxicity. However, it is still unclear the extent to which the 
mechanotransduction channel is involved in cisplatin uptake and ototoxicity in 
mammalian hair cells. Herein, we show that genetically disrupting 
mechanotransduction in mouse partially protects hair cells from 
cisplatin-induced hair cell death. Using a fluorescent-dye conjugated cisplatin, 
we monitored cisplatin uptake in cochlear explants and found that functional 
mechanotransduction is required for the uptake of cisplatin in murine hair 
cells. In addition, cimetidine, an inhibitor of the organic cation transporter, 
also partially protects hair cells from cisplatin ototoxicity. Notably, the 
otoprotective effects of cimetidine do not require mechanotransduction. These 
findings suggest that both the mechanotransduction channel and the organic 
cation transporter are critical for cisplatin ototoxicity in murine hair cells.

Copyright Â© 2022 Li, Liu, Kaefer, Youssef and Zhao.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2022.835448
PMCID: PMC8866953
PMID: 35221917

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.