1. ACS Omega. 2022 Feb 9;7(7):6393-6402. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.1c07055.
eCollection  2022 Feb 22.

Computational Analysis of Histone Deacetylase 10 Mechanism by the ONIOM Method: 
A Complementary Approach to X-ray and Kinetics Studies.

Yildiz I(1), Yildiz BS(2).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Department, Khalifa University, P.O. Box 127788, Abu Dhabi, United 
Arab Emirates.
(2)CIVE Department, Khalifa University, P.O. Box 127788, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates.

Histone deacetylase 10 (HDAC 10) catalyzes deacetylation of N8-acetylspermidine 
into spermidine in the cytosolic region of eukaryotic cells. Inhibition of HDAC 
10 has clinical importance in certain types of cancers. Recently, X-ray crystal 
structures corresponding to the substrate-bound, tetrahedral intermediate-bound, 
and product-bound enzymes have been resolved using variant forms of humanized 
HDAC 10. Based on these structures, it was proposed that Y307 residue polarizes 
the carbonyl of the acetyl group in N8-acetylspermidine together with a zinc 
atom, which is coordinated by D174, H176, D267, and an H2O molecule. The H2O 
molecule undergoes nucleophilic addition to the carbonyl carbon of 
N8-acetylspermidine to form the tetrahedral intermediate. During this process, 
it is suggested that H136 acts as a general base to deprotonate the H2O 
molecule. It is further proposed that the protonation of the amide N atom of the 
tetrahedral intermediate by H137 causes the deacetylation forming the final 
products, spermidine and acetate ion. In this study, computational models based 
on the ONIOM method were employed to study the proposed mechanism for the two 
steps of the deacetylation process based on the crystal structure of the 
substrate-bound enzyme. The energy profiles of each step as well as the roles of 
the active site residues were investigated for the catalysis. The calculated 
activation barrier is in good agreement with the reported kcat value.

Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.1c07055
PMCID: PMC8868106
PMID: 35224400

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.