1. Mol Med Rep. 2022 May;25(5):150. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12666. Epub 2022 Mar 4.

Lidocaine attenuates hypoxia/reoxygenation‑induced inflammation, apoptosis and 
ferroptosis in lung epithelial cells by regulating the p38 MAPK pathway.

Ma X(1), Yan W(2), He N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, 
Shandong 266003, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical 
University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia 010000, P.R. China.

Lung ischemia‑reperfusion (I/R) injury poses a serious threat to human health, 
worldwide. The current study aimed to determine the role of lidocaine in 
A549 cells, in addition to the involvement of the p38 MAPK pathway. Oxygen 
deprivation/reoxygenation‑induced A549 cells were utilized to simulate I/R 
injury in vitro. Cell viability and apoptosis were detected using MTT and TUNEL 
assays, respectively. The levels of IL‑6, IL‑8, TNF‑α, malondialdehyde (MDA), 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase, iron and reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) were measured using corresponding commercial kits. The 
corresponding protein expression levels were also measured using western 
blotting. Moreover, a monolayer cell paracellular permeability assay was 
performed to determine the permeability of A549 cells. The results demonstrated 
that, whilst lidocaine had no influence on untreated A549 cells, it 
significantly increased the viability of hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R)‑induced 
A549 cells. A549 cell apoptosis and the release of inflammatory cytokines in the 
H/R group were decreased after the addition of lidocaine. When compared with the 
H/R group, increased MDA level and decreased SOD level were observed in 
H/R‑induced A549 cells following lidocaine treatment. In addition, the 
permeability of H/R‑induced A549 cells was markedly decreased following 
lidocaine treatment. Compared with the H/R group, the expression levels of tight 
junction and ferroptosis‑related proteins were significantly upregulated by 
lidocaine, whereas the expression of transferrin was downregulated. However, 
p79350, an agonist of p38, reversed the effects of lidocaine on H/R‑induced 
A549 cells. In conclusion, lidocaine exerted a protective role in HR‑induced 
lung epithelial cell injury, which may serve as a potential agent for the 
treatment of patients with lung I/R injury.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2022.12666
PMCID: PMC8941375
PMID: 35244190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.