1. Physiol Rep. 2022 Mar;10(5):e15217. doi: 10.14814/phy2.15217.

miRNAs as markers for the development of individualized training regimens: A 
pilot study.

Widmann M(1)(2), Mattioni Maturana F(1)(2), Burgstahler C(1)(2), Erz G(1)(2), 
Schellhorn P(1)(2), Fragasso A(1)(2), Schmitt A(1)(2), Nieß AM(1)(2), Munz 
B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(2)Interfaculty Research Institute for Sports and Physical Activity, Eberhard 
Karls University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Small, non-coding RNAs (microRNAs) have been shown to regulate gene expression 
in response to exercise in various tissues and organs, thus possibly 
coordinating their adaptive response. Thus, it is likely that differential 
microRNA expression might be one of the factors that are responsible for 
different training responses of different individuals. Consequently, determining 
microRNA patterns might be a promising approach toward the development of 
individualized training strategies. However, little is known on (1) microRNA 
patterns and their regulation by different exercise regimens and (2) possible 
correlations between these patterns and individual training adaptation. Here, we 
present microarray data on skeletal muscle microRNA patterns in six young, 
female subjects before and after six weeks of either moderate-intensity 
continuous or high-intensity interval training on a bicycle ergometer. Our data 
show that n = 36 different microRNA species were regulated more than twofold in 
this cohort (n = 28 upregulated and n = 8 downregulated). In addition, we 
correlated baseline microRNA patterns with individual changes in VO2 max and 
identified some specific microRNAs that might be promising candidates for 
further testing and evaluation in the future, which might eventually lead to the 
establishment of microRNA marker panels that will allow individual 
recommendations for specific exercise regimens.

© 2022 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.15217
PMCID: PMC8915711
PMID: 35274816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.