1. J Biol Chem. 2022 May;298(5):101820. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101820. Epub 2022
 Mar 10.

The CLIP-170 N-terminal domain binds directly to both F-actin and microtubules 
in a mutually exclusive manner.

Wu YO(1), Miller RA(2), Alberico EO(2), Huang YAP(1), Bryant AT(1), Nelson 
NT(2), Jonasson EM(2), Goodson HV(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, Indiana, USA; Integrated Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University 
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, Indiana, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, Indiana, USA; Integrated Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, University 
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA. Electronic address: 
hgoodson@nd.edu.

The cooperation between the actin and microtubule (MT) cytoskeletons is 
important for cellular processes such as cell migration and muscle cell 
development. However, a full understanding of how this cooperation occurs has 
yet to be sufficiently developed. The MT plus-end tracking protein CLIP-170 has 
been implicated in this actin-MT coordination by associating with the 
actin-binding signaling protein IQGAP1 and by promoting actin polymerization 
through binding with formins. Thus far, the interactions of CLIP-170 with actin 
were assumed to be indirect. Here, we demonstrate using high-speed 
cosedimentation assays that CLIP-170 can bind to filamentous actin (F-actin) 
directly. We found that the affinity of this binding is relatively weak but 
strong enough to be significant in the actin-rich cortex, where actin 
concentrations can be extremely high. Using CLIP-170 fragments and mutants, we 
show that the direct CLIP-170-F-actin interaction is independent of the FEED 
domain, the region that mediates formin-dependent actin polymerization, and that 
the CLIP-170 F-actin-binding region overlaps with the MT-binding region. 
Consistent with these observations, in vitro competition assays indicate that 
CLIP-170-F-actin and CLIP-170-MT interactions are mutually exclusive. Taken 
together, these observations lead us to speculate that direct CLIP-170-F-actin 
interactions may function to reduce the stability of MTs in actin-rich regions 
of the cell, as previously proposed for MT end-binding protein 1.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2022.101820
PMCID: PMC9062740
PMID: 35283190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.