1. Transl Psychiatry. 2022 Mar 16;12(1):109. doi: 10.1038/s41398-022-01864-7.

Corticosterone induces discrete epigenetic signatures in the dorsal and ventral 
hippocampus that depend upon sex and genotype: focus on methylated Nr3c1 gene.

Caradonna SG(1), Einhorn NR(1), Saudagar V(2), Khalil H(3), Petty GH(4), Lihagen 
A(5), LeFloch C(1), Lee FS(6), Akil H(3), Guidotti A(2), McEwen BS(1), Gatta 
E(2), Marrocco J(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Center for Alcohol Research in Epigenetics, 
Psychiatric Institute, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Michigan Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(5)The Health Center Vadstena, Vadstena, Sweden.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, 
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
USA. jmarrocco@rockefeller.edu.

The genomic effects of circulating glucocorticoids are particularly relevant in 
cortico-limbic structures, which express a high concentration of steroid hormone 
receptors. To date, no studies have investigated genomic differences in 
hippocampal subregions, namely the dorsal (dHPC) and ventral (vHPC) hippocampus, 
in preclinical models treated with exogenous glucocorticoids. Chronic oral 
corticosterone (CORT) in mouse is a pharmacological approach that disrupts the 
activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, increases affective 
behavior, and induces genomic changes after stress in the HPC of wildtype (WT) 
mice and mice heterozygous for the gene coding for brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor Val66Met (hMet), a variant associated with genetic susceptibility to 
stress. Using RNA-sequencing, we investigated the genomic signatures of oral 
CORT in the dHPC and vHPC of WT and hMet male and female mice, and examined sex 
and genotype differences in response to oral CORT. Males under CORT showed lower 
glycemia and increased anxiety- and depression-like behavior compared to females 
that showed instead opposite affective behavior in response to CORT. 
Rank-rank-hypergeometric overlap (RRHO) was used to identify genes from a 
continuous gradient of significancy that were concordant across groups. RRHO 
showed that CORT-induced differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in WT mice and 
hMet mice converged in the dHPC of males and females, while in the vHPC, DEGs 
converged in males and diverged in females. The vHPC showed a higher number of 
DEGs compared to the dHPC and exhibited sex differences related to 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-binding genes and epigenetic modifiers. 
Methyl-DNA-immunoprecipitation in the vHPC revealed differential methylation of 
the exons 1C and 1F of the GR gene (Nr3c1) in hMet females. Together, we report 
behavioral and endocrinological sex differences in response to CORT, as well as 
epigenetic signatures that i) differ in the dHPC and vHPC,ii) are distinct in 
males and females, and iii) implicate differential methylation of Nr3c1 
selectively in hMet females.

Â© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-022-01864-7
PMCID: PMC8927334
PMID: 35296634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.