1. Exp Anim. 2022 Aug 5;71(3):264-280. doi: 10.1538/expanim.21-0120. Epub 2022
Mar  18.

Morris water maze: a versatile and pertinent tool for assessing spatial learning 
and memory.

Othman MZ(1), Hassan Z(2), Che Has AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medical Sciences Universiti Sains 
Malaysia, Kampus Kesihatan, Kubang Kerian, 16150 Kota Bharu, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(2)Centre for Drug Research, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800, Penang, Malaysia.

Since its development about 40 years ago (1981-2021), Morris water maze has 
turned into a very popular tool for assessing spatial learning and memory. Its 
many advantages have ensured its pertinence to date. These include its 
effectiveness in evaluating hippocampal-dependent learning and memory, exemption 
from motivational differences across diverse experimental manipulations, 
reliability in various cross-species studies, and adaptability to many 
experimental conditions with various test protocols. Nonetheless, throughout its 
establishment, several experimental and analysis loopholes have galvanized 
researchers to assess ways in which it could be improved and adapted to fill 
this gap. Therefore, in this review, we briefly summarize these developments 
since the early years of its establishment through to the most recent 
advancements in computerized analysis, offering more comprehensive analysis 
paradigms. In addition, we discuss the adaptability of the Morris water maze 
across different test versions and analysis paradigms, providing suggestions 
with regard to the best paradigms for particular experimental conditions. Hence, 
the proper selection of the experimental protocols, analysis paradigms, and 
consideration of the assay's limitations should be carefully considered. Given 
that appropriate measures are taken, with various adaptations made, the Morris 
water maze will likely remain a relevant tool to assess the mechanisms of 
spatial learning and memory.

DOI: 10.1538/expanim.21-0120
PMCID: PMC9388345
PMID: 35314563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]