1. Front Genet. 2022 Mar 24;13:851496. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.851496.
eCollection  2022.

Novel Genetic Signatures Associated With Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Logan R(1)(2), Dubel-Haag J(1), Schcolnicov N(1), Miller SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Pluripotent Diagnostics Corp, Colorado Springs, CO, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Eastern Nazarene College, Quincy, MA, United States.

Expression of concern in
    Front Genet. 2022 May 25;13:946214. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.946214.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a complex polygenetic neurodegenerative 
disorder. Establishing a diagnosis for ALS is a challenging and lengthy process. 
By the time a diagnosis is made, the lifespan prognosis is only about two to 
5 years. Genetic testing can be critical in assessing a patient's risk for ALS, 
provided they have one of the known familial genes. However, the vast majority 
of ALS cases are sporadic and have no known associated genetic signatures. Our 
analysis of the whole genome sequencing data from ALS patients and healthy 
controls from the Answer ALS Consortium has uncovered twenty-three novel 
mutations in twenty-two protein-coding genes associated with sporadic ALS cases. 
The results show the majority of patients with the sporadic form of ALS have at 
least one or more mutation(s) in the 22 genes we have identified with 
probabilities of developing ALS ranging from 25-99%, depending on the number of 
mutations a patient has among the identified genes. Moreover, we have identified 
a subset of the ALS cohort that has >17 mutations in the 22 identified. In this 
case, a patient with this mutation profile has a 99% chance of developing ALS 
and could be classified as being at high risk for the disease. These genetic 
biomarkers can be used as an early ALS disease diagnostic tool with a rapid and 
non-invasive technique.

Copyright © 2022 Logan, Dubel-Haag, Schcolnicov and Miller.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.851496
PMCID: PMC8986983
PMID: 35401706

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are employed by Pluripotent 
Diagnostics Corp, Colorado Springs, CO, United States.