1. Cell Tissue Res. 2022 Jul;389(1):85-98. doi: 10.1007/s00441-021-03538-0. Epub 
2022 Apr 27.

Allergic airway inflammation induces upregulation of the expression of IL-23R by 
macrophages and not in CD3 + T cells and CD11c(+)F4/80(-) dendritic cells of the 
lung.

Leitner M(1), Heck S(1), Nguyen K(1), Nguyen PQ(1), Harfoush S(1), Rosenkranz 
E(1), Bals R(1), Dinh QT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine V, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine V, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg, 
Germany. Thai.Dinh@uniklinikum-saarland.de.

Interleukin 23 and the interleukin 23 receptor (IL-23-IL23R) are described as 
the major enhancing factors for Interleukin 17 (IL-17) in allergic airway 
inflammation. IL-17 is considered to induce neutrophilic inflammation in the 
lung, which is often observed in severe, steroid-resistant asthma-phenotypes. 
For that reason, understanding of IL-23 and IL-17 axis is very important for 
future therapy strategies, targeting neutrophil pathway of bronchial asthma.This 
study aimed to investigate the distribution and expression of IL-23R under 
physiological and inflammatory conditions. Therefore, a house dust mite (HDM) 
model of allergic airway inflammation was performed by treating mice with HDM 
intranasally. Immunofluorescence staining with panel of antibodies was performed 
in lung tissues to examine the macrophage, dendritic cell, and T cell 
subpopulations. The allergic airway inflammation was quantified by 
histopathological analysis, ELISA measurements, and airway function.HDM-treated 
mice exhibited a significant allergic airway inflammation including higher 
amounts of NE+ cells in lung parenchyma. We found only a small amount of IL-23R 
positives, out of total CD3+T cells, and no upregulation in HDM-treated animals. 
In contrast, the populations of F4/80+ macrophages and CD11c+F4/80- dendritic 
cells (DCs) with IL-23R expression were found to be higher. But HDM treatment 
leads to a significant increase of IL-23R+ macrophages, only. IL-23R was 
expressed by every examined macrophage subpopulation, whereas only Mϕ1 and 
hybrids between Mϕ1 and Mϕ2 phenotype and not Mϕ2 were found to upregulate 
IL-23R. Co-localization of IL-23R and IL-17 was only observed in F4/80+ 
macrophages, suggesting F4/80+ macrophages express IL-23R along with IL-17 in 
lung tissue.The study revealed that macrophages involving the IL-23 and IL-17 
pathway may provide a potential interesting therapeutic target in neutrophilic 
bronchial asthma.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00441-021-03538-0
PMCID: PMC9200692
PMID: 35475923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.