1. Anal Methods. 2022 May 19;14(19):1913-1921. doi: 10.1039/d2ay00319h.

A dual identification strategy based on padlock ligation and CRISPR/Cas14a for 
highly specific detection of BRAF V600E mutation in clinical samples.

Shi W(1), Gong Y(1), Zhang D(1), Yang T(1), Yi M(1), Tan J(1), Ding S(2), Cheng 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Clinical Molecular Medical Detection, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, PR China. 
chengwei@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of Clinical Laboratory Diagnostics (Ministry of Education), 
College of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400016, 
China.

BRAF V600E mutation is a single-nucleotide variation (SNV) that is widely found 
in various cancers and has been demonstrated to have a strong association with 
the prognosis and development of some diseases. Thus, we developed a strategy 
based on rolling circle amplification (RCA) and CRISPR/Cas14a to meet the great 
need for detecting highly specific BRAF V600E mutation in fine-needle biopsy 
samples. In this study, a padlock probe was designed to recognize and trigger 
subsequent ligase chain reactions (LCR). And due to the Taq DNA ligase, a great 
number of ligated annular padlock probes were generated in the presence of BRAF 
V600E mutation, subsequently generating long repeated single-strand DNA by RCA. 
The obtained amplicons were activators triggering the trans-cleavage of 
CRISPR/Cas14a. CRISPR/Cas14a shows outstanding performance in identifying ssDNA 
with single base mutation, which significantly increases the specificity of 
mutation discrimination. Under the optimal conditions, our strategy can identify 
BRAF V600E mutation down to 0.307 fM with a wide linear range from 1 fM to 10 
pM. On the other hand, the dual identification strategy endows the method with 
terrific specificity for the detection of SNV. Furthermore, our method has been 
successfully employed to identify BRAF V600E mutation in clinical fine-needle 
aspiration samples, proving great potential for ultra-specific identification of 
low abundance BRAF V600E mutation and providing a novel method for diagnosis and 
treatment of cancer.

DOI: 10.1039/d2ay00319h
PMID: 35522948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]