1. Immunol Invest. 2022 Aug;51(6):1883-1894. doi: 10.1080/08820139.2022.2072736. 
Epub 2022 May 12.

Recurrent Infections and Immunodeficiency Caused by Severe Pancytopenia 
Associated with a Novel Life-Threatening Mutation in Hypoxia-Upregulated Protein 
1.

Jafari Khamirani H(1)(2), Dianatpour M(1)(3), Zoghi S(4), Mohammadi S(2), Habib 
A(4), Dastgheib SA(1), Tabei SMB(1)(5), Molayemat M(4), Shirazi Yeganeh B(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Comprehensive Medical Genetic Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Stem Cells Technology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Student Research Committee, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(5)Medicine Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical 
SciencesMaternal-fetal, Shiraz, Iran.
(6)Department of Pathology, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

HYOU1 encodes a protein from the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone proteins, 
expressed to protect cellular mechanisms from stress such as hypoxia, 
insufficient energy and excessive or insufficient substances, and to restore 
cell homeostasis. In this study, we report a novel pathogenic variant in HYOU1. 
The proband, the second patient with pathogenic variant in HYOU1, was a female 
born to consanguineous parents. A novel homozygous pathogenic variant in HYOU1 
(NM_001130991.3: c.1456C>T; p.Arg486Cys) was identified, causing anemia, 
thrombocytopenia and severe panleukopenia and immunodeficiency in the second 
month of age, leading to consistent high-grade fever, regression of brain 
functions and recurrent infections; ultimately resulting in the patient expiring 
at three and half months of age. Both parents are heterozygous for this variant 
and have no issues related to this study.

DOI: 10.1080/08820139.2022.2072736
PMID: 35549617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]