1. PLoS One. 2022 May 24;17(5):e0266015. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266015. 
eCollection 2022.

The SARS-CoV-2 main protease doesn't induce cell death in human cells in vitro.

Komissarov A(1), Karaseva M(1), Roschina M(1), Kostrov S(1), Demidyuk I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre Kurchatov 
Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the cause of 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which has extremely rapidly spread 
worldwide. In order to develop the effective antiviral therapies, it is required 
to understand the molecular mechanisms of the SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. The main 
protease, or 3C-like protease (3CLpro), plays the essential role in the 
coronavirus replication that makes the enzyme a promising therapeutic target. 
Viral enzymes are known to be multifunctional. Particularly, 3CLpro of SARS-CoV 
was shown to induce apoptosis in addition to its main function. In the present 
study we analyzed the cytotoxicity of active SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro and its 
inactivated form upon their individual expression in four human cell lines. For 
this purpose, we constructed a protein biosensor which allows to detect the 
proteolytic activity of SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro and confirmed the expression of the 
active protease in all cell lines used. We studied viability and morphology of 
the cells and found that both active and inactivated enzyme variants induce no 
cell death in contrast to the homologous 3CL protease of SARS-CoV. These results 
indicate that SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro is unlikely contribute to the cytopathic effect 
observed during viral infection directly.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0266015
PMCID: PMC9129031
PMID: 35609027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.