1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2022 Jul 12;18(7):4515-4528. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jctc.2c00291. Epub 2022 Jun 6.

Studying the Dynamics of a Complex G-Quadruplex System: Insights into the 
Comparison of MD and NMR Data.

Castelli M(1), Doria F(1), Freccero M(1), Colombo G(1)(2), Moroni E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Pavia, V.le Taramelli 12, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy.
(2)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Technologies SCITEC-CNR, Via Mario Bianco, 
9, 20131 Milano, Italy.

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are coming of age in the study of nucleic 
acids, including specific tertiary structures such as G-quadruplexes. While 
being precious for providing structural and dynamic information inaccessible to 
experiments at the atomistic level of resolution, MD simulations in this field 
may still be limited by several factors. These include the force fields used, 
different models for ion parameters, ionic strengths, and water models. We 
address various aspects of this problem by analyzing and comparing 
microsecond-long atomistic simulations of the G-quadruplex structure formed by 
the human immunodeficiency virus long terminal repeat (HIV LTR)-III sequence for 
which nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structures are available. The system is 
studied in different conditions, systematically varying the ionic strengths, ion 
numbers, and water models. We comparatively analyze the dynamic behavior of the 
G-quadruplex motif in various conditions and assess the ability of each 
simulation to satisfy the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)-derived experimental 
constraints and structural parameters. The conditions taking into account 
K+-ions to neutralize the system charge, mimicking the intracellular ionic 
strength, and using the four-atom water model are found to be the best in 
reproducing the experimental NMR constraints and data. Our analysis also reveals 
that in all of the simulated environments residues belonging to the duplex 
moiety of HIV LTR-III exhibit the highest flexibility.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.2c00291
PMCID: PMC9281369
PMID: 35666124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.