1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 May 27;13:871583. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.871583. 
eCollection 2022.

p53/NF-kB Balance in SARS-CoV-2 Infection: From OMICs, Genomics and 
Pharmacogenomics Insights to Tailored Therapeutic Perspectives (COVIDomics).

Milani D(1), Caruso L(2), Zauli E(1), Al Owaifeer AM(3)(4), Secchiero P(1), 
Zauli G(3), Gemmati D(1)(5), Tisato V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Department of Environmental and Prevention Sciences, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Research, King Khaled Eye Specialistic Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(4)Ophthalmology Unit, Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Faisal 
University, Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Centre Haemostasis and Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

SARS-CoV-2 infection affects different organs and tissues, including the upper 
and lower airways, the lung, the gut, the olfactory system and the eye, which 
may represent one of the gates to the central nervous system. Key 
transcriptional factors, such as p53 and NF-kB and their reciprocal balance, are 
altered upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, as well as other key molecules such as the 
virus host cell entry mediator ACE2, member of the RAS-pathway. These changes 
are thought to play a central role in the impaired immune response, as well as 
in the massive cytokine release, the so-called cytokine storm that represents a 
hallmark of the most severe form of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Host genetics 
susceptibility is an additional key side to consider in a complex disease as 
COVID-19 characterized by such a wide range of clinical phenotypes. In this 
review, we underline some molecular mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 modulates p53 
and NF-kB expression and activity in order to maximize viral replication into 
the host cells. We also face the RAS-pathway unbalance triggered by virus-ACE2 
interaction to discuss potential pharmacological and pharmacogenomics approaches 
aimed at restoring p53/NF-kB and ACE1/ACE2 balance to counteract the most severe 
forms of SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Copyright Â© 2022 Milani, Caruso, Zauli, Al Owaifeer, Secchiero, Zauli, Gemmati 
and Tisato.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.871583
PMCID: PMC9201997
PMID: 35721196

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.