1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jul 2;23(13):7377. doi: 10.3390/ijms23137377.

Ca(2+) Signalling and Hypoxia/Acidic Tumour Microenvironment Interplay in Tumour 
Progression.

Audero MM(1)(2), Prevarskaya N(1), Fiorio Pla A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)U1003-PHYCEL-Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire, Inserm, University of 
Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, 59000 Lille, France.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Angiogenesis, Department of Life 
Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, 10123 Turin, Italy.

Solid tumours are characterised by an altered microenvironment (TME) from the 
physicochemical point of view, displaying a highly hypoxic and acidic 
interstitial fluid. Hypoxia results from uncontrolled proliferation, aberrant 
vascularization and altered cancer cell metabolism. Tumour cellular apparatus 
adapts to hypoxia by altering its metabolism and behaviour, increasing its 
migratory and metastatic abilities by the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype 
and selection of aggressive tumour cell clones. Extracellular acidosis is 
considered a cancer hallmark, acting as a driver of cancer aggressiveness by 
promoting tumour metastasis and chemoresistance via the selection of more 
aggressive cell phenotypes, although the underlying mechanism is still not 
clear. In this context, Ca2+ channels represent good target candidates due to 
their ability to integrate signals from the TME. Ca2+ channels are pH and 
hypoxia sensors and alterations in Ca2+ homeostasis in cancer progression and 
vascularization have been extensively reported. In the present review, we 
present an up-to-date and critical view on Ca2+ permeable ion channels, with a 
major focus on TRPs, SOCs and PIEZO channels, which are modulated by tumour 
hypoxia and acidosis, as well as the consequent role of the altered Ca2+ signals 
on cancer progression hallmarks. We believe that a deeper comprehension of the 
Ca2+ signalling and acidic pH/hypoxia interplay will break new ground for the 
discovery of alternative and attractive therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23137377
PMCID: PMC9266881
PMID: 35806388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.