1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jun 17;13:891041. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.891041. 
eCollection 2022.

Screening of Hydrocarbon-Stapled Peptides for Inhibition of Calcium-Triggered 
Exocytosis.

Lai Y(1), Tuvim MJ(2), Leitz J(1), Peters J(1), Pfuetzner RA(1)(3), Esquivies 
L(1)(3), Zhou Q(1), Czako B(4), Cross JB(4), Jones P(4), Dickey BF(2), Brunger 
AT(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of 
Texas, Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United 
States.
(4)Institute for Applied Cancer Science, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University 
of Texas, Houston, TX, United States.

The so-called primary interface between the SNARE complex and synaptotagmin-1 
(Syt1) is essential for Ca2+-triggered neurotransmitter release in neuronal 
synapses. The interacting residues of the primary interface are conserved across 
different species for synaptotagmins (Syt1, Syt2, Syt9), SNAP-25, and 
syntaxin-1A homologs involved in fast synchronous release. This Ca2+-independent 
interface forms prior to Ca2+-triggering and plays a role in synaptic vesicle 
priming. This primary interface is also conserved in the fusion machinery that 
is responsible for mucin granule membrane fusion. Ca2+-stimulated mucin 
secretion is mediated by the SNAREs syntaxin-3, SNAP-23, VAMP8, Syt2, and other 
proteins. Here, we designed and screened a series of hydrocarbon-stapled 
peptides consisting of SNAP-25 fragments that included some of the key residues 
involved in the primary interface as observed in high-resolution crystal 
structures. We selected a subset of four stapled peptides that were highly 
α-helical as assessed by circular dichroism and that inhibited both 
Ca2+-independent and Ca2+-triggered ensemble lipid-mixing with neuronal SNAREs 
and Syt1. In a single-vesicle content-mixing assay with reconstituted neuronal 
SNAREs and Syt1 or with reconstituted airway SNAREs and Syt2, the selected 
peptides also suppressed Ca2+-triggered fusion. Taken together, 
hydrocarbon-stapled peptides that interfere with the primary interface 
consequently inhibit Ca2+-triggered exocytosis. Our inhibitor screen suggests 
that these compounds may be useful to combat mucus hypersecretion, which is a 
major cause of airway obstruction in the pathophysiology of COPD, asthma, and 
cystic fibrosis.

Copyright © 2022 Lai, Tuvim, Leitz, Peters, Pfuetzner, Esquivies, Zhou, Czako, 
Cross, Jones, Dickey and Brunger.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.891041
PMCID: PMC9258623
PMID: 35814209

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.