1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Jul 19;11(14):e025246. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.025246.
Epub  2022 Jul 8.

Utility of Provocative Testing in the Diagnosis and Genotyping of Congenital 
Long QT Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Yang Y(1), Lv TT(2), Li SY(2), Liu P(1), Gao QG(1), Zhang P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine Tsinghua University Beijing China.
(2)Department of Cardiology School of Clinical Medicine Beijing Tsinghua 
Changgung HospitalTsinghua University Beijing China.

Background Diagnosis is particularly challenging in concealed or asymptomatic 
long QT syndrome (LQTS). Provocative testing, unmasking the characterization of 
LQTS, is a promising alternative method for the diagnosis of LQTS, but without 
uniform standards. Methods and Results A comprehensive search was conducted in 
PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Library through October 14, 2021. The fixed 
effects model was used to assess the effect of the provocative testing on QTc 
interval. A total of 22 studies with 1137 patients with LQTS were included. At 
baseline, QTc interval was 40 ms longer in patients with LQTS than in controls 
(mean difference [MD], 40.54 [95% CI, 37.43-43.65]; P<0.001). Compared with the 
control group, patients with LQTS had 28 ms longer ΔQTc upon standing (MD, 28.82 
[95% CI, 23.05-34.58]; P<0.001), nearly 30 ms longer both at peak exercise (MD, 
27.31 [95% CI, 21.51-33.11]; P<0.001) and recovery 4 to 5 minutes (MD, 29.85 
[95% CI, 24.36-35.35]; P<0.001). With epinephrine infusion, QTc interval was 
prolonged both in controls and patients with QTS, most obviously in LQT1 (MD, 
68.26 [95% CI, 58.91-77.60]; P<0.001) and LQT2 (MD, 60.17 [95% CI, 50.18-70.16]; 
P<0.001). Subgroup analysis showed QTc interval response to abrupt stand testing 
and exercise testing varied between LQT1, LQT2, and LQT3, named Type Ⅰ, Type Ⅱ, 
and Type Ⅲ. Conclusions QTc trend Type Ⅰ and Type Ⅲ during abrupt stand testing 
and exercise testing can be used to propose a prospective evaluation of LQT1 and 
LQT3, respectively. Type Ⅱ QTc trend combined epinephrine infusion testing could 
distinguish LQT2 from control. A preliminary diagnostic workflow was proposed 
but deserves further evaluation.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.122.025246
PMCID: PMC9707831
PMID: 35861842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]