1. Aging (Albany NY). 2022 Jul 25;14(14):5699-5709. doi: 10.18632/aging.204159. 
Epub 2022 Jul 25.

Increased cytochrome C threonine 50 phosphorylation in aging heart as a novel 
defensive signaling against hypoxia/reoxygenation induced apoptosis.

Li F(1), Sun H(1), Lin X(1), Li Q(1), Zhao D(1), Cheng Z(1), Liu J(1), Fan Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing An Zhen Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, and Beijing Institute of Heart, Lung, and Blood Vessel Disease, 
Beijing, China.

Previous studies have shown that aging promotes myocardial apoptosis. However, 
the detailed mechanisms remain unclear. Our recent studies revealed that aging 
not only activates apoptosis, but also activates some anti-apoptotic factors. By 
quantitative phosphoproteomics, here we demonstrated that aging increases 
cytochrome c (Cytc) phosphorylation at threonine 50 (T50), a post-translational 
modification with unknown functional impact. With point mutation and lentivirus 
transfection, cardiomyocytes were divided into four groups: empty vector group, 
WT (wild type), T50E (as a phosphomimic variant), and T50A 
(non-phosphorylatable). TUNEL staining and flow cytometry were used to determine 
the apoptosis ratio in different groups after hypoxic/reoxygenated (H/R) 
treatment. The results showed that T50-phosphorylated Cytc suppressed myocardial 
apoptosis induced by H/R. Furthermore, Western Blot and ELISA measurements 
revealed that Cytc T50 phosphorylation inhibited caspase-9 and caspase-3 
activity without altering caspase-8, BCL-2, BCL-XL, and Bax expression. In our 
study, we demonstrated that aging increases phosphorylation Cytc at T50 and this 
aging-increasing phosphorylation site can suppress H/R-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.204159
PMCID: PMC9365549
PMID: 35896004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article.