1. Front Neurol. 2022 Jul 12;13:899849. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2022.899849.
eCollection  2022.

Leukocyte as an Independent Predictor of Lower-Extremity Deep Venous Thrombosis 
in Elderly Patients With Primary Intracerebral Hemorrhage.

Wang G(1)(2), Zhao W(3), Zhao Z(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Bai R(1)(2), 
Hou B(1)(2), Ren H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, Lanzhou, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Neurology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Department of Health Management Center, Lanzhou University Second Hospital, 
Lanzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Due to the interaction of leukocytes with platelets and coagulation 
factors, they may in turn play a role in hemostasis or the formation of thrombi. 
This study aimed to investigate the association of leukocytosis on admission 
with an increased risk of acute lower-extremity deep venous thrombosis (LEDVT) 
in elderly patients with primary intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).
METHODS: This was a single-center, retrospective observational study of 
consecutive patients observed with spontaneous ICH aged 60 years or above at 
Lanzhou University Second Hospital from January 2017 to September 2021. Clinical 
data and demographic information were collected and analyzed. Univariate and 
multivariate analyses were conducted to identify independent risk factors of 
acute LEDVT. One-to-one matching was implemented to balance important patient 
characteristics by the groups' propensity score matching (PSM) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 371 elderly patients with primary ICH fulfilled requirements 
for inclusion and exclusion, of whom 33 (8.89%) experienced LEDVT. Leukocyte 
counts were statistically higher in the LEDVT group compared to the non-LEDVT 
group [12.89 (8.80-14.61) × 109 cells/L vs. 8.31 (6.60-10.75) × 109 cells /L, p 
< 0.001]. Multivariate logistic regression models adjusted for several potential 
confounding factors were performed, and leukocytes were consistently a 
significant independent predictor of LEDVT. The optimal cut-off value of 
leukocyte counts calculated from the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve to predict LEDVT was 10.22 × 109 cells /L (area under the curve:0.714, 
95%CI 0.665-0.759; the sensitivity was 72.73%; the specificity was 71.01%) in 
elderly patients with primary ICH. After one-to-one PSM, compared to the matched 
non-LEDVT group, the matched LEDVT group had significantly higher leukocyte 
counts [11.98 (8.40-13.94) × 109 cells/L vs. 6.12 (4.68-12.00) × 109 cells/L, p 
= 0.003]. After PSM, the ROC curve was plotted for leukocytes as a predictor of 
LEDVT, with an AUC of 0.722 (95%CI 0.593-0.828, p = 0.001; the sensitivity was 
87.10%, and the specificity was 61.29%). Elevated leukocytes remained 
independently significant as predictors of LEDVT in elderly patients with 
primary ICH.
CONCLUSION: Leukocyte at admission is an independent risk factor of LEDVT in 
elderly patients with primary ICH.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Zhao, Zhao, Wang, Wang, Bai, Hou and Ren.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2022.899849
PMCID: PMC9314880
PMID: 35903126

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.