1. Front Mol Biosci. 2022 Jul 14;9:960806. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.960806. 
eCollection 2022.

Regulation of TIA-1 Condensates: Zn(2+) and RGG Motifs Promote Nucleic Acid 
Driven LLPS and Inhibit Irreversible Aggregation.

West DL(1), Loughlin FE(1), Rivero-Rodríguez F(2), Vankadari N(1), 
Velázquez-Cruz A(2), Corrales-Guerrero L(2), Díaz-Moreno I(2), Wilce JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(2)Institute for Chemical Research, University of Seville-CSIC, Seville, Spain.

Stress granules are non-membrane bound RNA-protein granules essential for 
survival during acute cellular stress. TIA-1 is a key protein in the formation 
of stress granules that undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation by association 
with specific RNAs and protein-protein interactions. However, the fundamental 
properties of the TIA-1 protein that enable phase-separation also render TIA-1 
susceptible to the formation of irreversible fibrillar aggregates. Despite this, 
within physiological stress granules, TIA-1 is not present as fibrils, pointing 
to additional factors within the cell that prevent TIA-1 aggregation. Here we 
show that heterotypic interactions with stress granule co-factors Zn2+ and 
RGG-rich regions from FUS each act together with nucleic acid to induce the 
liquid-liquid phase separation of TIA-1. In contrast, these co-factors do not 
enhance nucleic acid induced fibril formation of TIA-1, but rather robustly 
inhibit the process. NMR titration experiments revealed specific interactions 
between Zn2+ and H94 and H96 in RRM2 of TIA-1. Strikingly, this interaction 
promotes multimerization of TIA-1 independently of the prion-like domain. Thus, 
through different molecular mechanisms, these stress granule co-factors promote 
TIA-1 liquid-liquid phase separation and suppress fibrillar aggregates, 
potentially contributing to the dynamic nature of stress granules and the 
cellular protection that they provide.

Copyright © 2022 West, Loughlin, Rivero-Rodríguez, Vankadari, Velázquez-Cruz, 
Corrales-Guerrero, Díaz-Moreno and Wilce.

DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2022.960806
PMCID: PMC9329571
PMID: 35911965

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.