1. FEBS J. 2023 Feb;290(4):988-1007. doi: 10.1111/febs.16618. Epub 2022 Sep 27.

Identification of DDX5 as an indispensable activator of the glucocorticoid 
receptor in adipocyte differentiation.

Hokimoto S(1), Funakoshi-Tago M(1), Tago K(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hygienic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Division of Structural Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry, Jichi 
Medical University, Shimotsuke-shi, Japan.

The expression of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family members and 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPAR γ) is essential for the 
differentiation of pre-adipocyte 3T3-L1 cells into mature adipocytes induced by 
a combined stimulation with dexamethasone, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 
insulin (DMI). We herein demonstrated that the RNA helicase DDX5, the expression 
of which was induced by DMI, played an important role in the adipocyte 
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells. The DMI-induced accumulation of lipid droplets 
and expression of adipocyte markers in 3T3-L1 cells were significantly inhibited 
by the knockdown of DDX5. The knockdown of DDX5 interfered with the expressional 
induction of C/EBPδ, which was the first to be induced in the transcription 
factor cascade, and inhibited the subsequent expression of the other 
transcription factors, C/EBPβ, PPARγ and C/EBPα. DDX5 interacted with the 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which induced the expression of C/EBPδ. The 
knockdown of DDX5 failed to induce the nuclear translocation of GR, suggesting 
the essential role of DDX5 in the early stage of adipocyte differentiation. 
Furthermore, the reconstitution of DDX5, but not the DDX5 mutant (K144N) lacking 
RNA helicase activity, restored DMI-induced GR activation and adipocyte 
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells in which DDX5 was knocked down, confirming that 
the RNA helicase activity of DDX5 is essential for adipogenesis. Collectively, 
these results revealed for the first time that DDX5 is necessary for GR 
activation and plays an essential role in early adipocyte differentiation.

© 2022 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.16618
PMID: 36071319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]