1. Front Immunol. 2022 Sep 2;13:942768. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.942768.
eCollection  2022.

Integrated multi-omics reveals the activated retinal microglia with 
intracellular metabolic reprogramming contributes to inflammation in STZ-induced 
early diabetic retinopathy.

Lv K(1)(2)(3)(4), Ying H(1)(2)(3)(4), Hu G(1)(2)(3)(4), Hu J(1)(2)(3)(4), Jian 
Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang F(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai General 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Fundus Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and Photomedicine, Shanghai 
General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and Treatment of Eye 
Diseases, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the leading cause of visual impairment and 
blindness among working-age people. Inflammation is recognized as a critical 
driver of the DR process. However, the main retina-specific cell type producing 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and its mechanism underlying DR are still unclear. 
Here, we used single-cell sequencing to identify microglia with metabolic 
pathway alterations that were the main source of IL-1β in STZ-induced DR mice. 
To profile the full extent of local metabolic shifts in activated microglia and 
to reveal the metabolic microenvironment contributing to immune mechanisms, we 
performed integrated metabolomics, lipidomics, and RNA profiling analyses in 
microglia cell line samples representative of the DR microenvironment. The 
results showed that activated microglia with IL-1β increase exhibited a 
metabolic bias favoring glycolysis, purine metabolism, and triacylglycerol 
synthesis, but less Tricarboxylic acid (TCA). In addition, some of these 
especially glycolysis was necessary to facilitate their pro-inflammation. These 
findings suggest that activated microglia with intracellular metabolic 
reprogramming in retina may contribute to pro-inflammation in the early DR.

Copyright © 2022 Lv, Ying, Hu, Hu, Jian and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.942768
PMCID: PMC9479211
PMID: 36119084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.