1. Clin Chim Acta. 2022 Nov 1;536:70-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.09.005. Epub
2022  Sep 18.

Creatine Deficiency Syndromes: Comparison of Screening Methods and 
Characterization of Four Novel Intronic Variants.

Mustafa NM(1), Elabd NE(2), Selim LA(3), Abdou DM(2), Griffin JL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK; 
Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt. 
Electronic address: naira.mustafa@kasralainy.edu.eg.
(2)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo University, 
Egypt.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Neurology and Metabolic Division, Faculty of 
Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt; Inherited Metabolic Disease Unit, Centre of 
Social and Preventive Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK; 
Biomolecular Medicine, Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, 
Imperial College, London, UK; The Rowett Institute, Foresterhill Campus, 
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS) are disorders 
affecting creatine synthesis or transport. Several methods have been developed 
to measure creatine and guanidinoacetate (GAA) in different body fluids 
including methods based on gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and 
High-pressure liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS). The diagnosis 
of CCDS is then confirmed by sequencing of creatine biosynthesis genes 
guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) and Arginine: glycine 
amidinotransferase (GATM) and creatine transporter gene solute carrier family 6 
member 8 (SLC6A8) or by functional enzymatic assay. The aim of the current study 
was to find the most reliable and accurate screening method for CCDS by 
comparing methods using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy (NMR), GC-MS and 
HPLC-MS. Additionally, this study was performed to estimate the prevalence of 
CCDS in a cohort of Egyptian patients and potentially to discover novel 
variants.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study was conducted on 150 subjects with clinical 
signs and symptoms consistent with CCDS. Metabolic profiling of urine samples 
was performed using three techniques: 1) GC-MS 2) Ultra high-pressure (or 
performance) liquid chromatography - Tandem Mass Spectrometry (UHPLC- MS/MS) and 
3) NMR.
RESULTS: The linearity of peak areas for creatine and GAA by UHPLC-MS/MS and NMR 
covered and exceeded the ranges normally found in urine. The limit of 
quantification and the inter-day precision results for creatine and GAA were 
more robust by UHPLC-MS/MS than NMR. Ten cases were identified as being positive 
for CCDS by our analytical approaches and underwent next generation sequencing 
(NGS) for GAMT, GATM and SLC6A8 genes. NGS was performed and confirmed one 
patient with one likely Pathogenic variant in GAMT gene: 
(NC_000019.10:g.1401317C > G, NP_000147.1:p.Ala54Pro). Additionally, we describe 
four novel intronic variants in the GATM gene: c.1043-357del and 
c.1043-357_1043-356insT, and were predicted to activate cryptic acceptor site 
with potential alteration of splicing, c.979-227G > A was found to significantly 
alter the Exon Splice Enhancer (ESE) xon Splice Silencer (ESS) motifs ratio and 
c.1042 + 262del which was found to have no implications on splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: Both UHPLC-MS/MS and NMR spectroscopy are comparable to GC-MS in 
screening for CCDS. Nonetheless, the UHPLC-MS/MS method had better performance 
than NMR spectroscopy. Additionally, Sequencing of the full length of GATM, 
GAMT, and SLC6A8 genes is needed to identify intronic variants that could cause 
CCDS via affecting splice sites.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2022.09.005
PMID: 36130657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.