1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Sep 8;14(18):4365. doi: 10.3390/cancers14184365.

NBN, RAD51 and XRCC3 Polymorphisms as Potential Predictive Biomarkers of 
Adjuvant Radiotherapy Toxicity in Early HER2-Positive Breast Cancer.

Goričar K(1), Dugar F(2), Dolžan V(1), Marinko T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Radiotherapy (RT) for breast cancer significantly impacts patient survival and 
causes adverse events. Double-strand breaks are the most harmful type of DNA 
damage associated with RT, which is repaired through homologous recombination 
(HRR). As genetic variability of DNA repair genes could affect response to RT, 
we aimed to evaluate the association of polymorphisms in HRR genes with tumor 
characteristics and the occurrence of RT adverse events in early HER2-positive 
breast cancer. Our study included 101 breast cancer patients treated with 
adjuvant RT and trastuzumab. All patients were genotyped for eight single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in NBN, RAD51 and XRCC3 using competitive 
allele-specific PCR. Carriers of XRCC3 rs1799794 GG genotype were less likely to 
have higher tumor differentiation grade (OR = 0.05, 95% CI = 0.01-0.44, p = 
0.007). Carriers of RAD51 rs1801321 TT genotype were more likely to have higher 
NYHA class in univariable (OR = 10.0; 95% CI = 1.63-61.33; p = 0.013) and 
multivariable (OR = 9.27; 95% CI = 1.28-67.02; p = 0.027) analysis. Carriers of 
RAD51 rs12593359 GG genotype were less likely to have higher NYHA class in 
univariable (OR = 0.09; 95% CI = 0.01-0.79; p = 0.030) and multivariable (OR = 
0.07; 95% CI = 0.01-0.81; p = 0.034) analysis. Carriers of XRCC3 rs1799794 GG 
genotypes experienced more skin adverse events based on LENT-SOMA scale in 
univariable (OR = 5.83; 95% CI = 1.22-28.00; p = 0.028) and multivariable (OR = 
10.90; 95% CI = 1.61-73.72; p = 0.014) analysis. In conclusion, XRCC3 and RAD51 
polymorphisms might contribute to RT adverse events in early HER2-positive 
breast cancer patients.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14184365
PMCID: PMC9496855
PMID: 36139526

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.