1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2022 Oct 20;19(20):13611. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph192013611.

Perspective: Might Maternal Dietary Monosodium Glutamate (MSG) Consumption 
Impact Pre- and Peri-Implantation Embryos and Their Subsequent Development?

Van Winkle LJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Midwestern University, Downers Grove, IL 60515, 
USA.
(2)Department of Medical Humanities, Rocky Vista University, 8401 S. Chambers 
Road, Parker, CO 80112, USA.

MSG alters metabolism, especially in the brain, when administered to 
experimental animals via gavage or similar means. Such administration is, 
however, not applicable to humans. More recently, though, MSG was shown to have 
these effects even when added to the food of mammals. Moreover, the levels of 
MSG in food needed to cause these metabolic changes are the same as those needed 
for optimum flavor enhancement. Near physiological concentrations of glutamate 
also cause mammalian blastocysts to develop with fewer cells, especially in 
their inner cell masses, when these embryos are cultured with this amino acid. 
We propose that consumption of MSG in food may overwhelm the otherwise 
well-regulated glutamate signaling needed for optimal development by pre- and 
peri-implantation mammalian embryos. In addition to immediate changes in 
cellular proliferation and differentiation as embryos develop, MSG ingestion 
during early pregnancy might result in undesirable conditions, including 
metabolic syndrome, in adults. Since these conditions are often the result of 
epigenetic changes, they could become transgenerational. In light of these 
possibilities, we suggest several studies to test the merit of our hypothesis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph192013611
PMCID: PMC9602898
PMID: 36294193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no potential conflict of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.