1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2023 Jan 1;1869(1):166595. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2022.166595. Epub 2022 Nov 3.

A novel splicing mutation of ANK1 is associated with phenotypic heterogeneity of 
hereditary spherocytosis in a Chinese family.

Xu L(1), Wei X(1), Liang G(1), Zhu D(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Shang X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(2)Department of Basic medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China; Innovation Center for Diagnostics 
and Treatment of Thalassemia, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China; Experimental Education and Administration Center, School of 
Basic Medical Science, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Single Cell Technology and Application, Guangzhou, 
China. Electronic address: shang80@smu.edu.cn.

Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is a common hematological genetic disorder that 
results in anemia, jaundice and splenomegaly. It is caused by mutations in the 
ANK1, SPTA, SPTB, SLC4A1 and EPB42 genes, which encode red blood cell membrane 
and skeletal proteins. Patients show high heterogeneity in phenotype and 
genotype and the genotype-phenotype correlation still requires clarification. 
Here, a novel splicing mutation (ANK1: c.4391-2 A>C) was identified by 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) and Sanger sequencing in a Chinese boy who 
exhibited a moderately severe HS phenotype. However, his father exhibited a mild 
phenotype, despite carrying the same HS-causing mutation. The function of the 
mutant ANK1 protein was analyzed by both bioinformatics and experimental 
analysis. The mutant protein (p.N1463Kfs*4) showed a different 3D-structure and 
altered subcellular localization, when compared with the wild-type ANK1 protein. 
These changes disrupted the normal cell membrane structure and resulted in 
spheroidized red blood cells. Amplification of cDNA from the son and his father 
revealed a difference in expression of the abnormal transcript produced by the 
splicing mutation. We proposed that the lower expression of the mutant allele 
may have contributed to the relatively mild symptoms of the father. Our study 
verified ANK1 c. c.4391-2 A>C as a novel pathogenic mutation that causes HS. We 
have also provided new insights into the interpretation of phenotypic 
variability within families, which could greatly improve the clinical diagnosis 
and genetic counseling of HS.

Copyright Â© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2022.166595
PMID: 36336297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.