1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 31;23(21):13237. doi: 10.3390/ijms232113237.

LMNA Reduced Acquired Resistance to Erlotinib in NSCLC by Reversing the 
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition via the FGFR/MAPK/c-fos Signaling Pathway.

Hu C(1)(2), Zhou A(1), Hu X(1), Xiang Y(1), Huang M(1), Huang J(3), Yang D(3), 
Tang Y(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy (International Academy of Targeted Therapeutics and 
Innovation), Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, Chongqing 402160, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Chongqing University, Chongqing 401331, China.
(3)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Targeted and Innovative 
Therapeutics, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, Chongqing 402160, 
China.

For patients exhibiting non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with activating 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, epidermal growth factor 
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) are a first-line treatment. 
However, most patients who initially responded to EGFR-TKIs eventually developed 
acquired resistance, limiting the effectiveness of therapy. It has long been 
known that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) leads to acquired resistance 
to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC. However, the mechanisms underlying the resistance 
dependent on EMT are unknown. This research aimed to reveal the effects of LMNA 
in the regulation of acquired resistance to erlotinib by EMT in NSCLC. The 
acquired erlotinib-resistant cells (HCC827/ER) were induced by gradual increase 
of concentrations of erlotinib in erlotinib-sensitive HCC827 cells. RNA 
sequencing and bioinformatics analysis were performed to uncover the involvement 
of LMNA in the EMT process that induced acquired resistance to erlotinib. The 
effect of LMNA on cell proliferation and migration was measured by 
clone-formation, wound-healing, and transwell assays, respectively. The 
EMT-related protein, nuclear shape and volume, and cytoskeleton changes were 
examined by immunofluorescence. Western blot was used to identify the underlying 
molecular mechanism of LMNA regulation of EMT. HCC827/ER cells with acquired 
resistance to erlotinib underwent EMT and exhibited lower LMNA expression 
compared to parental sensitive cells. LMNA negatively regulated the expression 
of EMT markers; HCC827/ER cells showed a significant up-regulation of 
mesenchymal markers, such as CDH2, SNAI2, VIM, ZEB1, and TWIST1. The 
overexpression of LMNA in HCC827/ER cells significantly inhibited EMT and cell 
proliferation, and this inhibitory effect of LMNA was enhanced in the presence 
of 2.5 Î¼M erlotinib. Furthermore, a decrease in LMNA expression resulted in a 
higher nuclear deformability and cytoskeletal changes. In HCC827/ER cells, AKT, 
FGFR, ERK1/2, and c-fos phosphorylation levels were higher than those in HCC827 
cells; Furthermore, overexpression of LMNA in HCC827/ER cells reduced the 
phosphorylation of AKT, ERK1/2, c-fos, and FGFR. In conclusion, our findings 
first demonstrated that downregulation of LMNA promotes acquired EGFR-TKI 
resistance in NSCLC with EGFR mutations by EMT. LMNA inhibits cell proliferation 
and migration of erlotinib-resistant cells via inhibition of the FGFR/MAPK/c-fos 
signaling pathway. These findings indicated LMNA as a driver of acquired 
resistance to erlotinib and provided important information about the development 
of resistance to erlotinib treatment in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232113237
PMCID: PMC9658955
PMID: 36362025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.