1. Thorac Cancer. 2023 Jan;14(1):85-88. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.14738. Epub 2022
Nov  20.

Rapid and reliable collection of tumor tissue for successful gene panel in a 
patient with advanced stage lung cancer: A case report.

Kunimasa K(1), Inoue T(1), Kai Y(2), Kanzaki R(3), Kawagishi S(3), Yoshida 
KI(4), Honma K(4), Tamiya M(1), Kawamura T(1), Nishino K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Osaka International Cancer Institute, Osaka, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, Osaka International 
Cancer Institute, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Osaka International Cancer Institute, 
Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Pathology and Cytology, Osaka International Cancer 
Institute, Osaka, Japan.

Rapid and reliable identification of targetable driver mutations in patients 
with advanced stage lung cancer is essential. Adequate amount of tumor tissue 
biopsies (i.e., genomic biopsies) are required to successfully analyze the gene 
panel. In the present case, we performed three pleural fluid investigations, 
including transbronchial biopsy of the primary tumor, transesophageal endoscopic 
ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) of lymph node metastasis, and 
thoracoscopic biopsy of the pleural seeding sites. Among the three 
investigations, thoracoscopic biopsy alone successfully obtained a sufficient 
amount of tissue. Thus, it is important to determine the technique and site of 
biopsy, as multiple biopsies are not only burdensome to the patient, but also 
lead to significant delays in therapy induction.

© 2022 The Authors. Thoracic Cancer published by China Lung Oncology Group and 
John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.14738
PMCID: PMC9807439
PMID: 36404408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Kunimasa reports honoraria for a lecture from 
AstraZeneca, Chugai Pharma and Novartis, Pfizer Merck and Ono Pharmaceutical, Dr 
Inoue reports honoraria for a lecture from AstraZeneca, Dr Tamiya reports a 
grant from Ono Pharmaceutical, Bristol‐Myers Squibb and Boehringer Ingelheim and 
honoraria for a lecture from AstraZeneca, Chugai Pharma, Novartis, Taiho 
Pharmaceutical, Eli Lilly, Asahi Kasei Pharmaceutical, MSD, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Ono Pharmaceutical and Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Dr Nishino reports a 
grant from Boehringer Ingelheim and honoraria for a lecture from Chugai Pharma, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Roche Diagnostics, Novartis, 
Pfizer Merk and others have no disclosure of conflict.