1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2022 Nov 9;30:451-464. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2022.10.022.  eCollection 2022 Dec 13.

Testis electroporation coupled with autophagy inhibitor to treat non-obstructive 
azoospermia.

Wang L(1)(2), Liu C(1)(2), Wei H(1)(2), Ouyang Y(2), Dong M(2), Zhang R(2), Wang 
L(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Ma Y(1)(2), Guo M(1)(2), Yu Y(1)(4)(5), Sun QY(6), Li 
W(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproductive Health and Perinatology, Guangzhou Women and 
Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510623, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, P.R. China.
(3)Respiratory Department, Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, China National Clinical Research Center of Respiratory Diseases, 
National Center for Children's Health, Beijing 100045, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of RNA Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, P.R. China.
(5)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, P.R. China.
(6)Fertility Preservation Lab, Guangdong-Hong Kong Metabolism & Reproduction 
Joint Laboratory, Reproductive Medicine Center, Guangdong Second Provincial 
General Hospital, Guangzhou 510317, China.

Infertility affects 10%-20% of the population in most countries, with 
approximately half of those cases resulting from male infertility. Although 
millions of infertile men are able to have children with the assistance of 
reproductive technology, individuals with non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) 
syndrome are unable to do so because they lack functional sperm. Therefore, some 
other strategies for infertile NOA men are still urgently needed. Our current 
study uses an NOA-like mouse model to optimize microinjection and a subsequent 
electroporation method to test potential treatment strategies. We showed that 
the spermatogenetic process could be partially rescued in young Stra8-Rnf20 -/- 
mice with microinjection and subsequent electroporation of Rnf20 plasmids into 
the testes. All meiotic prophase I stages could be identified, and programmed 
DNA double-strand break repair factors could successfully be recruited to 
Stra8-Rnf20 -/- spermatocytes after electroporation. Moreover, by including an 
autophagy inhibitor in the treatment, electroporation significantly improved the 
spermatogenetic rescue efficiency of adult Stra8-Rnf20 -/- mice. Most 
importantly, infertility caused by Rnf20 depletions could be overcome by 
electroporation coupled with intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Our studies 
establish a relative safe and efficient testis electroporation system and 
provide a promising therapeutic strategy for patients with NOA.

Â© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2022.10.022
PMCID: PMC9672891
PMID: 36420210

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.