1. mBio. 2023 Feb 28;14(1):e0220222. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02202-22. Epub 2022 Dec
21.

Suppressor Mutations in LptF Bypass Essentiality of LptC by Forming a 
Six-Protein Transenvelope Bridge That Efficiently Transports Lipopolysaccharide.

Falchi FA(#)(1), Taylor RJ(#)(2), Rowe SJ(#)(2), Moura ECCM(#)(1), Baeta 
T(#)(3), Laguri C(3), Simorre JP(3), Kahne DE(2)(4), Polissi A(1), Sperandeo 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari, Universit√† degli 
Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)University of Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble, France.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an essential component of the outer membrane (OM) of 
many Gram-negative bacteria, providing a barrier against the entry of toxic 
molecules. In Escherichia coli, LPS is exported to the cell surface by seven 
essential proteins (LptA-G) that form a transenvelope complex. At the inner 
membrane, the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter LptB2FG associates with 
LptC to power LPS extraction from the membrane and transfer to the periplasmic 
LptA protein, which is in complex with the OM translocon LptDE. LptC interacts 
both with LptB2FG and LptADE to mediate the formation of the transenvelope 
bridge and regulates the ATPase activity of LptB2FG. A genetic screen has 
previously identified suppressor mutants at a residue (R212) of LptF that are 
viable in the absence of LptC. Here, we present in vivo evidence that the LptF 
R212G mutant assembles a six-protein transenvelope complex in which LptA 
mediates interactions with LptF and LptD in the absence of LptC. Furthermore, we 
present in vitro evidence that the mutant LptB2FG complexes restore the 
regulation of ATP hydrolysis as it occurs in the LptB2FGC complex to achieve 
wild-type efficient coupling of ATP hydrolysis and LPS movement. We also show 
the suppressor mutations restore the wild-type levels of LPS transport both in 
vivo and in vitro, but remarkably, without restoring the affinity of the inner 
membrane complex for LptA. Based on the sensitivity of lptF suppressor mutants 
to selected stress conditions relative to wild-type cells, we show that there 
are additional regulatory functions of LptF and LptC that had not been 
identified. IMPORTANCE The presence of an external LPS layer in the outer 
membrane makes Gram-negative bacteria intrinsically resistant to many 
antibiotics. Millions of LPS molecules are transported to the cell surface per 
generation by the Lpt molecular machine made, in E. coli, by seven essential 
proteins. LptC is the unconventional regulatory subunit of the LptB2FGC ABC 
transporter, involved in coordinating energy production and LPS transport. 
Surprisingly, despite being essential for bacterial growth, LptC can be deleted, 
provided that a specific residue in the periplasmic domain of LptF is mutated 
and LptA is overexpressed. Here, we apply biochemical techniques to investigate 
the suppression mechanism. The data produced in this work disclose an unknown 
regulatory function of LptF in the transporter that not only expands the 
knowledge about the Lpt complex but can also be targeted by novel LPS biogenesis 
inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02202-22
PMCID: PMC9972910
PMID: 36541759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.