1. Cells. 2022 Dec 16;11(24):4094. doi: 10.3390/cells11244094.

Metformin Improves Burn Wound Healing by Modulating Microenvironmental 
Fibroblasts and Macrophages.

Shi L(1), Jiang Z(1), Li J(1), Lin H(1), Xu B(1), Liao X(1), Fu Z(1), Ao H(2), 
Guo G(1), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Center of Burn Plastic and Wound Repair, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, China.
(2)Jiangxi Key Laboratory of Nanobiomaterials, Institute of Advanced Materials, 
East China Jiaotong University, Nanchang 330013, China.

Metformin, a biguanide, exerts different functions through various signaling 
pathways. In order to investigate the function and mechanism of metformin in 
burn wounds, we established burn rat models, subcutaneously injected metformin 
to treat the wounds, and observed the morphologies and the expression of 
collagen I, collagen III, fibronectin, and pro-inflammatory markers. In vitro 
experiments were performed to investigate the effects of metformin on the 
proliferation, migration, and collagen I synthesis of the mouse embryonic 
fibroblast (NIH 3T3) cell line and on the proliferation, apoptosis, and immune 
response of the mouse mononuclear macrophage (RAW 264.7) cell line. Finally, we 
studied the regulatory effects of metformin on a co-culture of RAW 264.7/NIH 3T3 
cells. We found that 100 mM of metformin reduced dermal thickness, collagen I 
deposition, and mRNA expression of IL1β and CCL2 in rat burn wounds. In vitro 
experiments revealed that metformin inhibited the proliferation of NIH 3T3 and 
RAW 264.7 cells. Metformin attenuated NIH 3T3 cell migration via the AMPK/mTOR 
pathway and attenuated collagen I synthesis through the TGFβ1/Smad3 pathway. 
Metformin inhibited the apoptosis of RAW 264.7 cells induced by 10 μg/mL LPS. 
Metformin downregulated the mRNA expression of IL1β and CCL2 in RAW 264.7 cells 
under 1 μg/mL LPS induction by inhibiting NF-κB p65 phosphorylation. In a RAW 
264.7/NIH 3T3 co-culture, metformin attenuated collagen I synthesis in NIH 3T3 
cells by inhibiting RAW 264.7 paracrine secretion of TGF-β1. This provides new 
evidence related to the development of metformin for potentially improving burn 
wound healing.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11244094
PMCID: PMC9777269
PMID: 36552856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.