1. Ann Transl Med. 2022 Dec;10(23):1283. doi: 10.21037/atm-2022-56.

Emerging therapies for non-small cell lung cancer harboring EGFR exon 20 
insertion mutations: narrative review.

Watanabe N(1), Horio Y(1), Fujiwara Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 20 
insertion mutations (ex20ins) are uncommon in non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC). These mutations are generally resistant to first-generation EGFR 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, unlike common EGFR mutations, including exon 19 
deletions or exon 21 L858R point mutation. The development of effective targeted 
therapies for NSCLC harboring EGFR ex20ins has been eagerly anticipated over the 
years. Recently, the therapeutic landscape of this subgroup of EGFR-mutant NSCLC 
patients has rapidly evolved due to the emergence of new drugs. In 2021, several 
novel agents, such as amivantamab and mobocertinib, have been approved by the US 
Food and Drug Administration for patients with advanced platinum-resistant NSCLC 
harboring EGFR ex20ins. In this review, we mainly focus on emerging therapies 
targeting NSCLC with EGFR ex20ins, as well as important ongoing clinical trials.
METHODS: Searches were conducted in PubMed and supplemented with recent 
conference proceedings in November 30th, 2021.
KEY CONTENT AND FINDINGS: Several novel emerging therapies showed favorable 
safety profile and promising anti-tumor activity in NSCLC patients with EGFR 
ex20ins in recent several clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: There is still room for improvement in the treatment results of 
NSCLC harboring EGFR ex20ins. Future research should focus on the molecular 
heterogeneity in the size and location of distinct EGFR ex20ins, the mechanisms 
of acquired resistance to novel EGFR inhibitors, effective treatment that have 
good central nervous system penetrance, and the potential role of combination 
strategy.

2022 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-2022-56
PMCID: PMC9816854
PMID: 36618815

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have 
completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at 
https://atm.amegroups.com/article/view/10.21037/atm-2022-56/coif). NW reports 
research funding from Janssen Oncology, ONO Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, and Dizal 
Pharma outside the submitted work. YH reports research funding from Abbvie and 
Eli Lilly, outside the submitted work. YF reports personal fees for advisory 
boards and personal fees for honoraria from Astra Zeneca, personal fees for 
advisory board and honoraria from Daiichi Sankyo, personal fees for advisory 
board from ONO Pharmaceutical, personal fees for advisory board from Otsuka 
Pharmaceutical, research funding and personal fees for honoraria from Chugai 
Pharmaceutical, personal fees for honoraria from Novartis, personal fees for 
honoraria from Yakult, research funding and personal fees for honoraria from 
BMS, personal fees for honoraria from Pfizer, outside the submitted work. The 
authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.