1. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2022 Dec 25;55(1):11-22. doi: 
10.3724/abbs.2022192.

Phytochemical activators of Nrf2: a review of therapeutic strategies in 
diabetes.

Qin S(1)(2), Chen Z(1), Wen Y(1), Yi Y(1), Lv C(2), Zeng C(1), Chen L(3), Shi 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Lab of Food Function and Nutrigenomics, College of Food Science and 
Technology, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha 410128, China.
(2)College of Biological Science and Technology, Hunan Agricultural University, 
Changsha 410128, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Quality and Safety Risk Assessment for Aquatic Products on 
Storage and Preservation (Shanghai), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs 
of the People's Republic of China, College of Food Science and Technology, 
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 201306, China.

Insulin resistance (IR) is fundamental to the development of type 2 diabetes 
(T2D), and altered mitochondrial function and abnormal lipid distribution are 
closely associated with IR or T2D. Excess oxidative stress-induced mitochondrial 
damage leads to an imbalance in redox homeostasis, which is considered the major 
contributor to the progression of diabetes. A key cellular defense mechanism, 
namely, the nuclear factor-E2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-antioxidant response 
element (ARE) pathway, plays an essential protective role in combating excess 
oxidative stress. A series of phytochemicals are reported to improve IR and 
restore mitochondrial function against excess oxidative stress by activating the 
Nrf2-ARE signaling pathway to maintain cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
homeostasis. The present review focuses on key knowledge gaps in the Nrf2-ARE 
system targeted by phytochemicals and its correlation to diabetes both in the in 
vitro and in vivo models and recent achievements in human clinical trials to 
evaluate its efficiency and safety. In addition, we provide an overview of 
recent research progress in nutrigenomics, precision nutrition and the 
interactions occurring in gut microbiota associated with the Nrf2-ARE signaling 
pathway and diabetes chemoprevention by phytochemicals and finally propose a 
future research strategy for regulating redox and microbiota balance via the 
Nrf2-ARE pathway. The present review aims to help us comprehensively understand 
the critical chemopreventive role of the Nrf2-ARE pathway targeted by 
phytochemicals in diabetes.

DOI: 10.3724/abbs.2022192
PMCID: PMC10157632
PMID: 36647719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.