1. Biochemistry. 2023 Feb 7;62(3):835-850. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00696. Epub
 2023 Jan 27.

Compound I Formation and Reactivity in Dimeric Chlorite Dismutase: Impact of pH 
and the Dynamics of the Catalytic Arginine.

Schmidt D(1), Falb N(1), Serra I(2), Bellei M(3), Pfanzagl V(1), Hofbauer S(1), 
Van Doorslaer S(2), Battistuzzi G(4), Furtm√ºller PG(1), Obinger C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, University of Natural 
Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Muthgasse 18, A-1190Vienna, Austria.
(2)BIMEF Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp, 
2000Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 
41100Modena, Italy.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Geology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 
41100Modena, Italy.

The heme enzyme chlorite dismutase (Cld) catalyzes the degradation of chlorite 
to chloride and dioxygen. Many questions about the molecular reaction mechanism 
of this iron protein have remained unanswered, including the electronic nature 
of the catalytically relevant oxoiron(IV) intermediate and its interaction with 
the distal, flexible, and catalytically active arginine. Here, we have 
investigated the dimeric Cld from Cyanothece sp. PCC7425 (CCld) and two variants 
having the catalytic arginine R127 (i) hydrogen-bonded to glutamine Q74 
(wild-type CCld), (ii) arrested in a salt bridge with a glutamate (Q74E), or 
(iii) being fully flexible (Q74V). Presented stopped-flow spectroscopic studies 
demonstrate the initial and transient appearance of Compound I in the reaction 
between CCld and chlorite at pH 5.0 and 7.0 and the dominance of spectral 
features of an oxoiron(IV) species (418, 528, and 551 nm) during most of the 
chlorite degradation period at neutral and alkaline pH. Arresting the R127 in a 
salt bridge delays chlorite decomposition, whereas increased flexibility 
accelerates the reaction. The dynamics of R127 does not affect the formation of 
Compound I mediated by hypochlorite but has an influence on Compound I 
stability, which decreases rapidly with increasing pH. The decrease in activity 
is accompanied by the formation of protein-based amino acid radicals. Compound I 
is demonstrated to oxidize iodide, chlorite, and serotonin but not hypochlorite. 
Serotonin is able to dampen oxidative damage and inactivation of CCld at neutral 
and alkaline pH. Presented data are discussed with respect to the molecular 
mechanism of Cld and the pronounced pH dependence of chlorite degradation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.2c00696
PMCID: PMC9910045
PMID: 36706455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.