1. J Thromb Haemost. 2023 Jun;21(6):1529-1543. doi: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.01.034. 
Epub 2023 Feb 4.

Systematic mapping of the conformational landscape and dynamism of soluble 
fibrinogen.

Pinelo JEE(1), Manandhar P(1), Popovic G(2), Ray K(2), Tasdelen MF(3), Nguyen 
Q(4), Iavarone AT(5), Offenbacher AR(2), Hudson NE(6), Sen M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, East Carolina University, Greenville, North 
Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Mathematics, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)QB3/Chemistry/Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, USA.
(6)Department of Physics, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina, 
USA.
(7)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, 
Texas, USA. Electronic address: msen2@cougarnet.uh.edu.

Comment in
    J Thromb Haemost. 2023 Jun;21(6):1423-1425. doi: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.02.009.

BACKGROUND: Fibrinogen is a soluble, multisubunit, and multidomain dimeric 
protein, which, upon its proteolytic cleavage by thrombin, is converted to 
insoluble fibrin, initiating polymerization that substantially contributes to 
clot growth. Fibrinogen contains numerous, transiently accessible "cryptic" 
epitopes for hemostatic and immunologic proteins, suggesting that fibrinogen 
exhibits conformational flexibility, which may play functional roles in its 
temporal and spatial interactions. Hitherto, there have been limited integrative 
approaches characterizing the solution structure and internal flexibility of 
fibrinogen.
METHODS: Here, utilizing a multipronged, biophysical approach involving 2 
solution-based techniques, temperature-dependent hydrogen-deuterium exchange 
mass spectrometry and small angle X-ray scattering, corroborated by negative 
stain electron microscopy, we present a holistic, conformationally dynamic model 
of human fibrinogen in solution.
RESULTS: Our data reveal 4 major and distinct conformations of fibrinogen 
accommodated by a high degree of internal protein flexibility along its central 
scaffold. We propose that the fibrinogen structure in the solution consists of a 
complex, conformational landscape with multiple local minima. This is further 
supported by the location of numerous point mutations that are linked to 
dysfibrinogenemia and posttranslational modifications, residing near the 
identified fibrinogen flexions.
CONCLUSION: This work provides a molecular basis for the structural "dynamism" 
of fibrinogen that is expected to influence the broad swath of its functionally 
diverse macromolecular interactions and fine-tune the structural and mechanical 
properties of blood clots.

Copyright Â© 2023 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtha.2023.01.034
PMCID: PMC10407912
PMID: 36746319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration Of Competing Interests There are no 
competing interests to disclose.