1. Virus Evol. 2023 Jan 17;9(1):vead003. doi: 10.1093/ve/vead003. eCollection
2023.

Virus-induced interference as a means for accelerating fitness-based selection 
of cyprinid herpesvirus 3 single-nucleotide variants in vitro and in vivo.

Gao Y(1), Sridhar A(1), Bernard N(1), He B(1), Zhang H(1), Pirotte S(1), 
Desmecht S(2), Vancsok C(1), Boutier M(1), Suárez NM(3), Davison AJ(3), Donohoe 
O(1)(4), Vanderplasschen AFC(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology-Vaccinology, Department of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, 
Fundamental and Applied Research for Animals & Health (FARAH), Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liège B-4000, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Animal Genomics, GIGA-Medical Genomics, GIGA-Institute, 
University of Liège, Liège B-4000, Belgium.
(3)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK.
(4)Bioscience Research Institute, Technological University of the Shannon, 
Midlands Midwest, Athlone, Co. Westmeath N37HD68, Ireland.

Cyprinid herpesvirus 3 (CyHV-3) is the archetype of fish alloherpesviruses and 
is advantageous to research because, unlike many herpesviruses, it can be 
studied in the laboratory by infection of the natural host (common and koi 
carp). Previous studies have reported a negative correlation among CyHV-3 
strains between viral growth in vitro (in cell culture) and virulence in vivo 
(in fish). This suggests the existence of genovariants conferring enhanced 
fitness in vitro but reduced fitness in vivo and vice versa. Here, we identified 
the syncytial plaque formation in vitro as a common trait of CyHV-3 strains 
adapted to cell culture. A comparison of the sequences of virion transmembrane 
protein genes in CyHV-3 strains, and the use of various recombinant viruses, 
demonstrated that this trait is linked to a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
in the open reading frame (ORF) 131 coding sequence (C225791T mutation) that 
results in codon 183 encoding either an alanine (183A) or a threonine (183T) 
residue. In experiments involving infections with recombinant viruses differing 
only by this SNP, the 183A genovariant associated with syncytial plaque 
formation was the more fit in vitro but the less fit in vivo. In experiments 
involving coinfection with both viruses, the more fit genovariant contributed to 
the purifying selection of the less fit genovariant by outcompeting it. In 
addition, this process appeared to be accelerated by viral stimulation of 
interference at a cellular level and stimulation of resistance to superinfection 
at a host level. Collectively, this study illustrates how the fundamental 
biological properties of some viruses and their hosts may have a profound impact 
on the degree of diversity that arises within viral populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/vead003
PMCID: PMC9936792
PMID: 36816049