1. Ann Hematol. 2023 May;102(5):1029-1036. doi: 10.1007/s00277-023-05152-2. Epub 
2023 Mar 9.

Targeted next-generation sequencing identifies eighteen novel mutations 
expanding the molecular and clinical spectrum of PKLR gene disorders in the 
Indian population.

Dongerdiye R(1), Bokde M(1), More TA(1), Saptarshi A(1), Devendra R(1), 
Chiddarwar A(1), Warang P(1), Kedar P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematogenetics, ICMR-National Institute of Immunohematology, 
13th Floor, NMS Building, King Edward Memorial (KEM) Hospital Campus, Parel, 
400012, Mumbai, India.
(2)Department of Haematogenetics, ICMR-National Institute of Immunohematology, 
13th Floor, NMS Building, King Edward Memorial (KEM) Hospital Campus, Parel, 
400012, Mumbai, India. kedarps2002@yahoo.com.

Pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is an autosomal recessive condition, caused due 
to homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PKLR gene resulting in 
non-spherocytic hereditary hemolytic anemia. Clinical manifestations in PKD 
patients vary from moderate to severe lifelong hemolytic anemia either requiring 
neonatal exchange transfusion or blood transfusion support. Measuring PK enzyme 
activity is the gold standard approach for diagnosis but residual activity must 
be related to the increased reticulocyte count. The confirmatory diagnosis is 
provided by PKLR gene sequencing by conventional as well as targeted 
next-generation sequencing involving genes associated with enzymopathies, 
membranopathies, hemoglobinopathies, and bone marrow failure disorders. In this 
study, we report the mutational landscape of 45 unrelated PK deficiency cases 
from India. The genetic sequencing of PKLR revealed 40 variants comprising 34 
Missense Mutations (MM), 2 Nonsense Mutations (NM), 1 Splice site, 1 Intronic, 1 
Insertion, and 1 Large Base Deletion. The 17 novel variants identified in this 
study are A115E, R116P, A423G, K313I, E315G, E318K, L327P, M377L, A423E, R449G, 
H507Q, E538K, G563S, c.507 + 1 G > C, c.801_802 ins A (p.Asp268ArgfsTer48), 
IVS9dsA-T + 3, and one large base deletion. In combination with previous reports 
on PK deficiency, we suggest c.880G > A, c.943G > A, c.994G > A, c.1456C > T, 
c.1529G > A are the most frequently observed mutations in India. This study 
expands the phenotypic and molecular spectrum of PKLR gene disorders and also 
emphasizes the importance of combining both targeted next-generation sequencing 
with bioinformatics analysis and detailed clinical evaluation to elaborate a 
more accurate diagnosis and correct diagnosis for transfusion dependant 
hemolytic anemia in a cohort of the Indian population.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-023-05152-2
PMID: 36892591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]