1. PLoS One. 2023 Mar 30;18(3):e0283698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283698. 
eCollection 2023.

Impact of the yeast S0/uS2-cluster ribosomal protein rpS21/eS21 on rRNA folding 
and the architecture of small ribosomal subunit precursors.

Pöll G(1), Griesenbeck J(1), Tschochner H(1), Milkereit P(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Biochemistry III, Regensburg Center for Biochemistry, University of 
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

RpS0/uS2, rpS2/uS5, and rpS21/eS21 form a cluster of ribosomal proteins 
(S0-cluster) at the head-body junction near the central pseudoknot of eukaryotic 
small ribosomal subunits (SSU). Previous work in yeast indicated that S0-cluster 
assembly is required for the stabilisation and maturation of SSU precursors at 
specific post-nucleolar stages. Here, we analysed the role of S0-cluster 
formation for rRNA folding. Structures of SSU precursors isolated from yeast 
S0-cluster expression mutants or control strains were analysed by cryogenic 
electron microscopy. The obtained resolution was sufficient to detect individual 
2'-O-methyl RNA modifications using an unbiased scoring approach. The data show 
how S0-cluster formation enables the initial recruitment of the pre-rRNA 
processing factor Nob1 in yeast. Furthermore, they reveal hierarchical effects 
on the pre-rRNA folding pathway, including the final maturation of the central 
pseudoknot. Based on these structural insights we discuss how formation of the 
S0-cluster determines at this early cytoplasmic assembly checkpoint if SSU 
precursors further mature or are degraded.

Copyright: © 2023 Pöll et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283698
PMCID: PMC10062582
PMID: 36996028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.