1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 4;24(7):6710. doi: 10.3390/ijms24076710.

The Efficacy of Tumor Mutation Burden as a Biomarker of Response to Immune 
Checkpoint Inhibitors.

Moeckel C(1), Bakhl K(1), Georgakopoulos-Soares I(1), Zaravinos A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Personalized 
Medicine, The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 
17033, USA.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, European University Cyprus, Diogenis Str., 6, 
Nicosia 2404, Cyprus.
(3)Cancer Genetics, Genomics and Systems Biology Laboratory, Basic and 
Translational Cancer Research Center (BTCRC), Nicosia 1516, Cyprus.

Cancer is one of the leading causes of death in the world; therefore, extensive 
research has been dedicated to exploring potential therapeutics, including 
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Initially, programmed-death ligand-1 was 
the biomarker utilized to predict the efficacy of ICIs. However, its 
heterogeneous expression in the tumor microenvironment, which is critical to 
cancer progression, promoted the exploration of the tumor mutation burden (TMB). 
Research in various cancers, such as melanoma and lung cancer, has shown an 
association between high TMB and response to ICIs, increasing its predictive 
value. However, the TMB has failed to predict ICI response in numerous other 
cancers. Therefore, future research is needed to analyze the variations between 
cancer types and establish TMB cutoffs in order to create a more standardized 
methodology for using the TMB clinically. In this review, we aim to explore 
current research on the efficacy of the TMB as a biomarker, discuss current 
approaches to overcoming immunoresistance to ICIs, and highlight new trends in 
the field such as liquid biopsies, next generation sequencing, chimeric antigen 
receptor T-cell therapy, and personalized tumor vaccines.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24076710
PMCID: PMC10095310
PMID: 37047684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.