1. Biomacromolecules. 2023 May 8;24(5):2380-2391. doi:
10.1021/acs.biomac.3c00239.  Epub 2023 Apr 24.

Efficient Self-Immolative RAFT End Group Modification for Macromolecular 
Immunodrug Delivery.

Scherger M(1), Pilger YA(2), Stickdorn J(1), Komforth P(1), Schmitt S(1), Koynov 
K(1), Räder HJ(1), Nuhn L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, 
Germany.
(2)Chair of Macromolecular Chemistry, Julius-Maximilians-University Würzburg, 
Röntgenring 11, 97070 Würzburg, Germany.

The reversible addition-fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization 
provides access to a broad variety of biocompatible and functional 
macromolecules for diverse polymer-drug conjugates. Due to thiocarbonylthio 
groups at the ends of each growing polymer chain, they can straightforwardly be 
converted into disufilde-containing self-immolative motives for reversible drug 
conjugation by traceless linkers. This may be relevant for RAFT-polymerized 
poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) (pDMA), which has been demonstrated to provide 
similar properties as poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) in terms of improving the 
drug's poor pharmacokinetic profile or enhancing its bioavailability. For that 
purpose, we established a highly efficient one-pot reaction procedure for 
introducing various functionalities including both primary and secondary amines 
and primary alcohols and demonstrated their reversible conjugation and traceless 
release from pDMA's polymer chain end. Next, a first polymer-drug conjugate with 
a Toll-like receptor agonist exhibited significantly increased activity in vitro 
compared to conventional irreversibly covalently fixed variants. Finally, 
α-ω-bifunctional dye or drug conjugates could be generated by a 
cholesterol-modified RAFT chain-transfer agent. It facilitated the polymer-drug 
conjugate's internalization at the cellular level monitored by flow cytometry 
and confocal imaging. This approach provides the basis for a variety of 
potentially impactful polymer-drug conjugates by combining versatile small 
molecular drugs with a plethora of available RAFT polymers through 
reductive-responsive self-immolative linkers.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.3c00239
PMCID: PMC10170519
PMID: 37093222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.