1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 May 7;24(9):8403. doi: 10.3390/ijms24098403.

Salmonella Type III Secretion Effector SrfJ: A Glucosylceramidase Affecting the 
Lipidome and the Transcriptome of Mammalian Host Cells.

Aguilera-Herce J(1), Panadero-Medianero C(1), Sánchez-Romero MA(2), Balbontín 
R(1), Bernal-Bayard J(1), Ramos-Morales F(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, Avda 
Reina Mercedes, 6, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, 
Universidad de Sevilla, Avda Reina Mercedes, 6, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.

Type III secretion systems are found in many Gram-negative pathogens and 
symbionts of animals and plants. Salmonella enterica has two type III secretion 
systems associated with virulence, one involved in the invasion of host cells 
and another involved in maintaining an appropriate intracellular niche. SrfJ is 
an effector of the second type III secretion system. In this study, we explored 
the biochemical function of SrfJ and the consequences for mammalian host cells 
of the expression of this S. enterica effector. Our experiments suggest that 
SrfJ is a glucosylceramidase that alters the lipidome and the transcriptome of 
host cells, both when expressed alone in epithelial cells and when translocated 
into macrophages in the context of Salmonella infection. We were able to 
identify seventeen lipids with higher levels and six lipids with lower levels in 
the presence of SrfJ. Analysis of the forty-five genes, the expression of which 
is significantly altered by SrfJ with a fold-change threshold of two, suggests 
that this effector may be involved in protecting Salmonella from host immune 
defenses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24098403
PMCID: PMC10179164
PMID: 37176110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the work.