1. Nat Cardiovasc Res. 2022;1(3):238-245. doi: 10.1038/s44161-022-00022-y. Epub 
2022 Mar 3.

Cholesterol efflux mechanism revealed by structural analysis of human ABCA1 
conformational states.

Sun Y(1), Li X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) utilizes energy derived from ATP 
hydrolysis to export cholesterol and phospholipids from macrophages. ABCA1 plays 
a central role in the biosynthesis of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), which 
mediates reverse cholesterol transport and prevents detrimental lipid 
deposition. Mutations in ABCA1 cause Tangier disease characterized by a 
remarkable reduction in the amount of HDL in blood. Here we present 
cryo-electron microscopy structures of human ABCA1 in ATP-bound and 
nucleotide-free states. Structural comparison reveals that ATP molecules pull 
the nucleotide-binding domains together, inducing movements of transmembrane 
helices 1, 2, 7 and 8 through a series of salt-bridge interactions. 
Subsequently, extracellular domains (ECDs) undergo a rotation and introduce 
conformational changes in the ECD-transmembrane interface. In addition, while we 
observe a sterol-like molecule in ECDs, no such density was observed in the 
structure of an HDL-deficiency mutant ABCA1Y482C, demonstrating the 
physiological importance of ECDs and a putative interaction mode between ABCA1 
and its lipid acceptors. Thus, these structures, along with cholesterol efflux 
assays, advance the understanding ABCA1-mediated reverse cholesterol transport.

DOI: 10.1038/s44161-022-00022-y
PMCID: PMC10181854
PMID: 37181814

Conflict of interest statement: Reporting Summary. Further information on 
research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to 
this article. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.