1. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2023 Dec;44(4):255-270. doi: 
10.1007/s10974-023-09649-1. Epub 2023 May 31.

Molecular insights into titin's A-band.

Fleming JR(1), Müller I(#)(1), Zacharchenko T(#)(2)(3), Diederichs K(1), Mayans 
O(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, 78457, Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 
7ZB, UK.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, 78457, Konstanz, Germany. 
Olga.Mayans@uni-konstanz.de.
(#)Contributed equally

The thick filament-associated A-band region of titin is a highly repetitive 
component of the titin chain with important scaffolding properties that support 
thick filament assembly. It also has a demonstrated link to human disease. 
Despite its functional significance, it remains a largely uncharacterized part 
of the titin protein. Here, we have performed an analysis of sequence and 
structure conservation of A-band titin, with emphasis on poly-FnIII tandem 
components. Specifically, we have applied multi-dimensional sequence pairwise 
similarity analysis to FnIII domains and complemented this with the 
crystallographic elucidation of the 3D-structure of the FnIII-triplet A84-A86 
from the fourth long super-repeat in the C-zone (C4). Structural models serve 
here as templates to map sequence conservation onto super-repeat C4, which we 
show is a prototypical representative of titin's C-zone. This templating 
identifies positionally conserved residue clusters in C super-repeats with the 
potential of mediating interactions to thick-filament components. Conservation 
localizes to two super-repeat positions: Ig domains in position 1 and FnIII 
domains in position 7. The analysis also allows conclusions to be drawn on the 
conserved architecture of titin's A-band, as well as revisiting and expanding 
the evolutionary model of titin's A-band.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10974-023-09649-1
PMCID: PMC10665226
PMID: 37258982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflicts of interest.