1. Brain Sci. 2023 Jun 7;13(6):922. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13060922.

Electroacupuncture Relieves Visceral Hypersensitivity via Balancing PAR2 and 
PAR4 in the Descending Pain Modulatory System of Goats.

Guo P(1), Zhang Q(1), Nan S(1), Wang H(1), Ma N(1), Kiani FA(1)(2), Ding M(1), 
Chen J(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agriculture University, Wuhan 
430070, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Bahauddin 
Zakariyah University, Multan 60000, Pakistan.

Electroacupuncture (EA) is an efficient treatment for visceral hypersensitivity 
(VH). However, the mechanism underlying VH remains obscure. This study aimed to 
examine the effect of EA at Housanli acupoint on PAR2 and PAR4 expression in the 
periaqueductal gray (PAG), rostral ventromedial medulla (RVM), and spinal cord 
dorsal horn (SCDH) axes, as well as on expression of the proinflammatory 
cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α, COX-2 enzyme, c-Fos, and the neuropeptides CGRP and 
SP in the same areas of the descending pain modulatory system. To induce VH in 
male goats, a 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene-sulfonic acid (TNBS)-ethanol solution was 
administered to the ileal wall. The visceromotor response (VMR) and nociceptive 
response at different colorectal distension pressures were measured to evaluate 
VH. Goats in the TNBS group displayed significantly increased VMR and 
nociceptive response scores, and elevated protein and mRNA levels of PAR2 and 
PAR4 in the descending pain modulatory system compared to those in the control 
group. EA alleviated VMR and nociceptive responses, decreased the protein and 
mRNA expression levels of PAR2, and elevated those of PAR4 in the descending 
pain modulatory system. EA may relieve VH by reducing PAR2 expression and 
increasing PAR4 expression in the descending pain modulatory system.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci13060922
PMCID: PMC10296180
PMID: 37371401

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.