1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Jun 26;14:1212149. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1212149. 
eCollection 2023.

Slipped-strand mispairing within a polycytidine tract in transcriptional 
regulator mga leads to M protein phase variation and Mga length polymorphism in 
Group A Streptococcus.

Lei B(1), Hanks TS(1), Bao Y(2), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Montana State University, 
Bozeman, MT, United States.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life 
Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

The M protein, a major virulence factor of Group A Streptococcus (GAS), is 
regulated by the multigene regulator Mga. An unexplained phenomena frequently 
occurring with in vitro genetic manipulation or culturing of M1T1 GAS strains is 
the loss of M protein production. This study was aimed at elucidating the basis 
for the loss of M protein production. The majority of M protein-negative (M-) 
variants had one C deletion at a tract of 8 cytidines starting at base 1,571 of 
the M1 mga gene, which is designated as c.1571C[8]. The C deletion led to a 
c.1571C[7] mga variant that has an open reading frame shift and encodes a Mga-M 
protein fusion protein. Transformation with a plasmid containing wild-type mga 
restored the production of the M protein in the c.1571C[7] mga variant. Isolates 
producing M protein (M+) were recovered following growth of the c.1571C[7] M 
protein-negative variant subcutaneously in mice. The majority of the recovered 
isolates with reestablished M protein production had reverted back from 
c.1571C[7] to c.1571C[8] tract and some M+ isolates lost another C in the 
c.1571C[7] tract, leading to a c.1571C[6] variant that encodes a functional Mga 
with 13 extra amino acid residues at the C-terminus compared with wild-type Mga. 
The nonfunctional c.1571C[7] and functional c.1571C[6] variants are present in 
M1, M12, M14, and M23 strains in NCBI genome databases, and a G-to-A nonsense 
mutation at base 1,657 of M12 c.1574C[7] mga leads to a functional 
c.1574C[7]/1657A mga variant and is common in clinical M12 isolates. The numbers 
of the C repeats in this polycytidine tract and the polymorphism at base 1,657 
lead to polymorphism in the size of Mga among clinical isolates. These findings 
demonstrate the slipped-strand mispairing within the c.1574C[8] tract of mga as 
a reversible switch controlling M protein production phase variation in multiple 
GAS common M types.

Copyright Â© 2023 Lei, Hanks, Bao and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1212149
PMCID: PMC10330708
PMID: 37434706

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
performed in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.