1. PLoS One. 2023 Jul 20;18(7):e0283400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283400. 
eCollection 2023.

SARS-CoV-2 protein structure and sequence mutations: Evolutionary analysis and 
effects on virus variants.

Lomoio U(1), Puccio B(1), Tradigo G(2), Guzzi PH(1), Veltri P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical and Medical Sciences, University of Catanzaro, 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)e-Campus University, Novedrate, Italy.
(3)DIMES, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy.

The structure and sequence of proteins strongly influence their biological 
functions. New models and algorithms can help researchers in understanding how 
the evolution of sequences and structures is related to changes in functions. 
Recently, studies of SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) protein structures have been performed 
to predict binding receptors and infection activity in COVID-19, hence the 
scientific interest in the effects of virus mutations due to sequence, structure 
and vaccination arises. However, there is the need for models and tools to study 
the links between the evolution of S protein sequence, structure and functions, 
and virus transmissibility and the effects of vaccination. As studies on S 
protein have been generated a large amount of relevant information, we propose 
in this work to use Protein Contact Networks (PCNs) to relate protein structures 
with biological properties by means of network topology properties. Topological 
properties are used to compare the structural changes with sequence changes. We 
find that both node centrality and community extraction analysis can be used to 
relate protein stability and functionality with sequence mutations. Starting 
from this we compare structural evolution to sequence changes and study 
mutations from a temporal perspective focusing on virus variants. Finally by 
applying our model to the Omicron variant we report a timeline correlation 
between Omicron and the vaccination campaign.

Copyright: Â© 2023 Lomoio et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0283400
PMCID: PMC10358949
PMID: 37471335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.