1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 22;24(14):11788. doi: 10.3390/ijms241411788.

α5-GABAA Receptor Modulation Reverses Behavioral and Neurophysiological 
Correlates of Psychosis in Rats with Ventral Hippocampal Alzheimer's 
Disease-like Pathology.

Eassa NE(1)(2), Perez SM(1)(2), Boley AM(1)(2), Elam HB(1)(2), Sharmin D(3), 
Cook JM(3), Lodge DJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Biomedical Neuroscience, UT Health 
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
(2)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, Audie L. Murphy Division, San 
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Milwaukee Institute of Drug 
Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53211, USA.

Of the 35 million people in the world suffering from Alzheimer's Disease (AD), 
up to half experience comorbid psychosis. Antipsychotics, used to treat 
psychosis, are contraindicated in elderly patients because they increase the 
risk of premature death. Reports indicate that the hippocampus is hyperactive in 
patients with psychosis and those with AD. Preclinical studies have demonstrated 
that the ventral hippocampus (vHipp) can regulate dopamine system function, 
which is thought to underlie symptoms of psychosis. A viral-mediated approach 
was used to express mutated human genes known to contribute to AD pathology: the 
Swedish (K670N, M671L), Florida (I716V), and London (V717I) mutations of amyloid 
precursor protein and two mutations (M146L and L286V) of presenilin 1 
specifically in the vHipp, to investigate the selective contribution of AD-like 
pathology in this region. We observed a significant increase in dopamine neuron 
population activity and behavioral deficits in this AD-AAV model that mimics 
observations in rodent models with psychosis-like symptomatologies. Further, 
systemic administration of MP-III-022 (α5-GABAA receptor selective positive 
allosteric modulator) was able to reverse aberrant dopamine system function in 
AD-AAV rats. This study provides evidence for the development of drugs that 
target α5-GABAA receptors for patients with AD and comorbid psychosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241411788
PMCID: PMC10380527
PMID: 37511546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: J.M.C. is a coinventor or listed on U.S. patent 
applications that cover GABAergic ligands and their use in brain disorders. 
D.J.L. has an active collaboration with Sosei-Heptares; these are both unrelated 
to the work described in the current article. All other authors report no 
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.