1. Cell Rep Methods. 2023 Jul 7;3(7):100522. doi: 10.1016/j.crmeth.2023.100522. 
eCollection 2023 Jul 24.

TRAPnSeq allows high-throughput profiling of antigen-specific antibody-secreting 
cells.

Asrat S(1), Devlin JC(1), Vecchione A(1), Klotz B(1), Setliff I(1), Srivastava 
D(1), Limnander A(1), Rafique A(1), Adler C(1), Porter S(1), Murphy AJ(1), Atwal 
GS(1), Sleeman MA(1), Lim WK(1), Orengo JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY 10591, USA.

Following activation by cognate antigen, B cells undergo fine-tuning of their 
antigen receptors and may ultimately differentiate into antibody-secreting cells 
(ASCs). While antigen-specific B cells that express surface receptors (B cell 
receptors [BCRs]) can be readily cloned and sequenced following flow sorting, 
antigen-specific ASCs that lack surface BCRs cannot be easily profiled. Here, we 
report an approach, TRAPnSeq (antigen specificity mapping through immunoglobulin 
[Ig] secretion TRAP and Sequencing), that allows capture of secreted antibodies 
on the surface of ASCs, which in turn enables high-throughput screening of 
single ASCs against large antigen panels. This approach incorporates flow 
cytometry, standard microfluidic platforms, and DNA-barcoding technologies to 
characterize antigen-specific ASCs through single-cell V(D)J, RNA, and antigen 
barcode sequencing. We show the utility of TRAPnSeq by profiling 
antigen-specific IgG and IgE ASCs from both mice and humans and highlight its 
capacity to accelerate therapeutic antibody discovery from ASCs.

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmeth.2023.100522
PMCID: PMC10391570
PMID: 37533642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was sponsored by Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. All authors are current or former employees of Regeneron 
and may hold stock options in the company. S.A., J.C.D., A.V., B.K., I.S., 
G.S.A., M.A.S., W.K.L., and J.M.O. are inventors on a pending US patent 
application on TRAPnSeq (“Methods of Mapping Antigen Specificity to 
Antibody-Secreting Cells”). A.J.M. is an inventor on a pending US patent 
application (#16/363,774; “Humanized Rodents for Testing Therapeutic Agents”).