1. Cell Commun Signal. 2023 Aug 23;21(1):218. doi: 10.1186/s12964-023-01244-8.

Regulation and clinical potential of telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(TERT/hTERT) in breast cancer.

Yang R(#)(1), Han Y(#)(1), Guan X(1), Hong Y(1), Meng J(1), Ding S(2), Long 
Q(3), Yi W(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, 410011, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, 410011, China. dingsr@csu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of General Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, 410011, China. 
dr_longqian@csu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of General Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, 410011, China. 
yiwenjun@csu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT/hTERT) serves as the pivotal catalytic 
subunit of telomerase, a crucial enzyme responsible for telomere maintenance and 
human genome stability. The high activation of hTERT, observed in over 90% of 
tumors, plays a significant role in tumor initiation and progression. An 
in-depth exploration of hTERT activation mechanisms in cancer holds promise for 
advancing our understanding of the disease and developing more effective 
treatment strategies. In breast cancer, the expression of hTERT is regulated by 
epigenetic, transcriptional, post-translational modification mechanisms and DNA 
variation. Besides its canonical function in telomere maintenance, hTERT exerts 
non-canonical roles that contribute to disease progression through 
telomerase-independent mechanisms. This comprehensive review summarizes the 
regulatory mechanisms governing hTERT in breast cancer and elucidates the 
functional implications of its activation. Given the overexpression of hTERT in 
most breast cancer cells, the detection of hTERT and its associated molecules 
are potential for enhancing early screening and prognostic evaluation of breast 
cancer. Although still in its early stages, therapeutic approaches targeting 
hTERT and its regulatory molecules show promise as viable strategies for breast 
cancer treatment. These methods are also discussed in this paper. Video 
Abstract.

Â© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-023-01244-8
PMCID: PMC10463831
PMID: 37612721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.