1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Jul 25;14(8):1519. doi: 10.3390/genes14081519.

Prenatal Chromosomal Microarray Analysis: Does Increased Resolution Equal 
Increased Yield?

Mitrakos A(1), Kosma K(1), Makrythanasis P(1), Tzetis M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, St. Sophia's Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece.

Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is considered a first-tier test for 
patients with developmental disabilities and congenital anomalies and is also 
routinely applied in prenatal diagnosis. The current consensus size cut-off for 
reporting copy number variants (CNVs) in the prenatal setting ranges from 200 Kb 
to 400 Kb, with the intention of minimizing the impact of variants of uncertain 
significance (VUS). Very limited data are currently available on the application 
of higher resolution platforms prenatally. The aim of this study is to 
investigate the feasibility and impact of applying high-resolution CMA in the 
prenatal setting. To that end, we report on the outcomes of applying CMA with a 
size cut-off of 20 Kb in 250 prenatal samples and discuss the findings and 
diagnostic yield and also provide follow-up for cases with variants of uncertain 
significance. Overall, 19.6% (49) showed one or more chromosomal abnormalities, 
with the findings classified as Pathogenic (P) or Likely Pathogenic (LP) in 
15.6% and as VUS in 4%. When excluding the cases with known familial 
aberrations, the diagnostic yield was 12%. The smallest aberration detected was 
a 32 Kb duplication of the 16p11.2 region. In conclusion, this study 
demonstrates that prenatal diagnosis with a high-resolution aCGH platform can 
reliably detect smaller CNVs that are often associated with neurodevelopmental 
phenotypes while providing an increased diagnostic yield, regardless of the 
indication for testing, with only a marginal increase in the VUS incidence. 
Thus, it can be an important tool in the prenatal setting.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14081519
PMCID: PMC10454647
PMID: 37628571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.