1. Biology (Basel). 2023 Aug 2;12(8):1079. doi: 10.3390/biology12081079.

The Role and Regulation of the NKG2D/NKG2D Ligand System in Cancer.

Tan G(1), Spillane KM(2), Maher J(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)CAR Mechanics Group, Guy's Cancer Centre, School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, King's College London, Great Maze Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(2)Department of Physics, King's College, London WC2R 2LS, UK.
(3)Department of Immunology, Eastbourne Hospital, Kings Drive, Eastbourne BN21 
2UD, UK.
(4)Leucid Bio Ltd., Guy's Hospital, Great Maze Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK.

The family of human NKG2D ligands (NKG2DL) consists of eight stress-induced 
molecules. Over 80% of human cancers express these ligands on the surface of 
tumour cells and/or associated stromal elements. In mice, NKG2D deficiency 
increases susceptibility to some types of cancer, implicating this system in 
immune surveillance for malignancy. However, NKG2DL can also be shed, released 
via exosomes and trapped intracellularly, leading to immunosuppressive effects. 
Moreover, NKG2D can enhance chronic inflammatory processes which themselves can 
increase cancer risk and progression. Indeed, tumours commonly deploy a range of 
countermeasures that can neutralise or even corrupt this surveillance system, 
tipping the balance away from immune control towards tumour progression. 
Consequently, the prognostic impact of NKG2DL expression in human cancer is 
variable. In this review, we consider the underlying biology and regulation of 
the NKG2D/NKG2DL system and its expression and role in a range of cancer types. 
We also consider the opportunities for pharmacological modulation of NKG2DL 
expression while cautioning that such interventions need to be carefully 
calibrated according to the biology of the specific cancer type.

DOI: 10.3390/biology12081079
PMCID: PMC10452210
PMID: 37626965

Conflict of interest statement: J.M. is a founding scientist, the Chief 
Scientific Officer and a shareholder of Leucid Bio. G.T. and K.M.S. have no 
conflicts to declare.