1. Aging Cell. 2023 Oct;22(10):e13965. doi: 10.1111/acel.13965. Epub 2023 Aug 28.

Fingerstick blood assay maps real-world NAD(+) disparity across gender and age.

Wang P(1), Chen M(1), Hou Y(2), Luan J(3), Liu R(2), Chen L(1), Hu M(3), Yu 
Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Sino-European Center of Biomedicine and Health, Shenzhen Key Laboratory for 
the Intelligent Microbial Manufacturing of Medicines, Shenzhen Institute of 
Advanced Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Celfull (China) Operation and Research Center, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Sports Medicine, Guangzhou Sport University, Guangzhou, China.

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+ ) level has been associated with various 
age-related diseases and its pharmacological modulation emerges as a potential 
approach for aging intervention. But human NAD+ landscape exhibits large 
heterogeneity. The lack of rapid, low-cost assays limits the establishment of 
whole-blood NAD+ baseline and the development of personalized therapies, 
especially for those with poor responses towards conventional NAD+ 
supplementations. Here, we developed an automated NAD+ analyzer for the rapid 
measurement of NAD+ with 5 μL of capillary blood using recombinant 
bioluminescent sensor protein and automated optical reader. The minimal 
invasiveness of the assay allowed a frequent and decentralized mapping of 
real-world NAD+ dynamics. We showed that aerobic sport and NMN supplementation 
increased whole-blood NAD+ and that male on average has higher NAD+ than female 
before the age of 50. We further revealed the long-term stability of human NAD+ 
baseline over 100 days and identified major real-world NAD+ -modulating 
behaviors.

© 2023 The Authors. Aging Cell published by Anatomical Society and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.13965
PMCID: PMC10577551
PMID: 37641521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no competing interests.