1. Biol Open. 2023 Sep 15;12(9):bio059984. doi: 10.1242/bio.059984. Epub 2023 Sep
 21.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of the ubiquitin variant UbKEKS reveals a role in 
regulating nucleolar structures and composition.

Frion J(1), Meller A(1), Marbach G(1), Lévesque D(1), Roucou X(2), Boisvert 
FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 4K8, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, QC, J1E 4K8, Canada.

Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification responsible for one of the 
most complex multilayered communication and regulation systems in the cell. Over 
the past decades, new ubiquitin variants and ubiquitin-like proteins arose to 
further enrich this mechanism. Recently discovered ubiquitin variant UbKEKS can 
specifically target several proteins and yet, functional consequences of this 
new modification remain unknown. Depletion of UbKEKS induces accumulation of 
lamin A in the nucleoli, highlighting the need for deeper investigations about 
protein composition and functions regulation of this highly dynamic and 
membrane-less compartment. Using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry 
and microscopy, we show that despite not impacting protein stability, UbKEKS is 
required to maintain a normal nucleolar organization. The absence of UbKEKS 
increases nucleoli's size and accentuate their circularity while disrupting 
dense fibrillar component and fibrillar centre structures. Moreover, depletion 
of UbKEKS leads to distinct changes in nucleolar composition. Lack of UbKEKS 
favours nucleolar sequestration of known apoptotic regulators such as IFI16 or 
p14ARF, resulting in an increase of apoptosis observed by flow cytometry and 
real-time monitoring. Overall, these results identify the first cellular 
functions of the UbKEKS variant and lay the foundation stone to establish UbKEKS 
as a new universal layer of regulation in the ubiquitination system.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.059984
PMCID: PMC10537958
PMID: 37670689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.