1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2023 Aug 30;2023:4871135. doi: 10.1155/2023/4871135. 
eCollection 2023.

MC1R Gene Variants and Their Relationship with Coat Color in South American 
Camelids.

Melo Rojas C(1), Bravo Matheus PW(1), Zapata Coacalla C(2), Lopez Durand V(1), 
Melo Anccasi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Genetica, Escuela Profesional de Medicina Veterinaria Canchis, 
National University of Saint Anthony the Abbot in Cuzco, Cusco, Peru.
(2)Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y Zootecnia, Universidad Nacional del 
Altiplano, Puno, Peru.

In domestic camelids, fleece color is an essential characteristic because it 
defines the direction of production. Variants were determined in the MC1R gene 
that showed a relationship with coat color in alpacas and llamas at the level of 
the coding region. This report sequenced the MC1R gene from 290 alpacas (142 
white, 84 black, 50 brown, and 14 light fawn), five brown llamas, nine vicuñas, 
and three guanacos to analyze the association between coat color and the MC1R 
gene among South American camelids. A total of nineteen polymorphisms were 
identified. Seven polymorphisms were significant; three of them were of 
nonsynonymous type (c.82A > G, c.376G > A, and c.901C > T), two were of 
synonymous type (c.126 T > C and c.933G > A), one was in the promoter region 
(-42C > G), and one was in the 3' UTR (+5T > C). More polymorphisms were found 
in domestic camelids than in wild camelids. Besides polymorphism, the 
association of polymorphisms might cause white and dark pigmentation in the 
fleece of South American camelids. In addition, the MC1R protein would answer 
the pigmentation in alpacas.

Copyright © 2023 Carola Melo Rojas et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2023/4871135
PMCID: PMC10541998
PMID: 37786645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.