1. Lupus Sci Med. 2023 Oct;10(2):e000977. doi: 10.1136/lupus-2023-000977.

Relationship between retinal microvascular impairment and subclinical 
atherosclerosis in SLE.

Ferrigno S(#)(1), Conigliaro P(#)(2), Rizza S(3), Longo S(3), Nesi C(4), 
Carlucci F(4), Bergamini A(2), Mancino R(4), Nucci C(4), Federici M(3), Chimenti 
MS(#)(2), Cesareo M(#)(4).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of 'Medicina 
dei Sistemi', University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy 
sara.ferrigno16@gmail.com.
(2)Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of 'Medicina 
dei Sistemi', University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of 'Medicina dei Sistemi', University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Ophtalmology, Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, University of 
Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Patients with SLE have higher cardiovascular (CV) risk compared with 
healthy controls (HC) and are characterised by accelerated atherosclerosis; 
intima media thickness (IMT), marker of subclinical atherosclerosis, is higher 
in patients with SLE than in HCs. Retinal microvascular impairment detected 
through optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) was investigated as a 
marker of systemic vascular involvement in SLE.The aim of the study was to 
evaluate the relationship between retinal vascular impairment and IMT in SLE.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study recruiting patients with SLE and HCs. Data of the 
study population were collected. CV risk was evaluated through the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines, 
Framingham and QRESEARCH risk estimator V.3 (QRISK3) scores. Both groups 
underwent OCTA and carotid ultrasound with IMT assessment.Statistical analysis 
was accomplished using Pearson/Spearman, t-test/Mann-Whitney or χ2 test. 
Variables statistically significant at univariate regression analysis were 
tested in an age-corrected and sex-corrected multivariate regression model.
RESULTS: 43 patients with SLE and 34 HCs were recruited. Patients with SLE 
showed higher triglycerides (p=0.019), Triglycerides-Glucose (TyG) Index 
(p=0.035), ACC/AHA guidelines (p=0.001), Framingham Risk Scores (p=0.008) and a 
reduced superficial (p<0.001) and deep (p=0.005) whole retinal vessel density 
(VD) compared with HCs.In SLE univariate analysis, deep whole VD showed a 
negative correlation with IMT (p=0.027), age (p=0.001), systolic blood pressure 
(p=0.011), QRISK3 Score (p<0.001), Systemic Lupus International Collaborating 
Clinics Damage Index (p=0.006) and apolipoprotein B (p=0.021), while a positive 
correlation was found with female sex (p=0.029). Age-adjusted and sex-adjusted 
multivariate analysis confirmed QRISK3 Score (p=0.049) and IMT (p=0.039) to be 
independent risk factors for reduced retinal VD.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with SLE showed lower retinal VD and higher CV risk 
indicators compared with HCs. Among patients with SLE, QRISK3 Score and IMT were 
found to be independent risk factors for retinal vascular impairment, suggesting 
a role of OCTA in evaluating preclinical CV involvement in SLE. Moreover, TyG 
Index could represent a biomarker of CV risk in patients with SLE compared with 
HCs.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/lupus-2023-000977
PMCID: PMC10603324
PMID: 37852671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.