1. J Gen Physiol. 2023 Dec 4;155(12):e202313414. doi: 10.1085/jgp.202313414. Epub
 2023 Oct 23.

Myosin and tropomyosin-troponin complementarily regulate thermal activation of 
muscles.

Ishii S(#)(1)(2), Oyama K(#)(1)(2), Kobirumaki-Shimozawa F(2), Nakanishi 
T(2)(3), Nakahara N(4), Suzuki M(5), Ishiwata S(6), Fukuda N(2).

Author information:
(1)Foundational Quantum Technology Research Directorate, National Institutes for 
Quantum Science and Technology , Gunma, Japan.
(2)Department of Cell Physiology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University , Osaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Contraction of striated muscles is initiated by an increase in cytosolic Ca2+ 
concentration, which is regulated by tropomyosin and troponin acting on actin 
filaments at the sarcomere level. Namely, Ca2+-binding to troponin C shifts the 
"on-off" equilibrium of the thin filament state toward the "on" state, promoting 
actomyosin interaction; likewise, an increase in temperature to within the body 
temperature range shifts the equilibrium to the on state, even in the absence of 
Ca2+. Here, we investigated the temperature dependence of sarcomere shortening 
along isolated fast skeletal myofibrils using optical heating microscopy. Rapid 
heating (25 to 41.5°C) within 2 s induced reversible sarcomere shortening in 
relaxing solution. Further, we investigated the temperature-dependence of the 
sliding velocity of reconstituted fast skeletal or cardiac thin filaments on 
fast skeletal or β-cardiac myosin in an in vitro motility assay within the body 
temperature range. We found that (a) with fast skeletal thin filaments on fast 
skeletal myosin, the temperature dependence was comparable to that obtained for 
sarcomere shortening in fast skeletal myofibrils (Q10 ∼8), (b) both types of 
thin filaments started to slide at lower temperatures on fast skeletal myosin 
than on β-cardiac myosin, and (c) cardiac thin filaments slid at lower 
temperatures compared with fast skeletal thin filaments on either type of 
myosin. Therefore, the mammalian striated muscle may be fine-tuned to contract 
efficiently via complementary regulation of myosin and tropomyosin-troponin 
within the body temperature range, depending on the physiological demands of 
various circumstances.

© 2023 Ishii et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.202313414
PMCID: PMC10591409
PMID: 37870863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no competing 
interests exist.