1. Front Genet. 2023 Oct 12;14:1283611. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1283611. 
eCollection 2023.

Reclassification of variants of tumor suppressor genes based on Sanger RNA 
sequencing without NMD inhibition.

Ha C(1), Jang JH(1), Kim YG(#)(1), Kim JW(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Introduction: RNA sequence analysis can be effectively used to identify aberrant 
splicing, and tumor suppressor genes are adequate targets considering their 
loss-of-function mechanisms. Sanger sequencing is the simplest method for RNA 
sequence analysis; however, because of its insufficient sensitivity in cases 
with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), the use of cultured specimens with NMD 
inhibition has been recommended, hindering its wide adoption. Method: The 
results of Sanger sequencing of peripheral blood RNA without NMD inhibition 
performed on potential splicing variants of tumor suppressor genes were 
retrospectively reviewed. For negative cases, in which no change was identified 
in the transcript, the possibility of false negativity caused by NMD was 
assessed through a review of the up-to-date literature. Results: Eleven 
potential splice variants of various tumor suppressor genes were reviewed. Six 
variants were classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic based on the 
nullifying effect identified by Sanger RNA sequencing. Four variants remained as 
variants of uncertain significance because of identified in-frame changes or 
normal expression of both alleles. The result of one variant was suspected to be 
a false negative caused by NMD after reviewing a recent study that reported the 
same variant as causing a nullifying effect on the affected transcript. 
Conclusion: Although RNA changes found in the majority of cases were expected to 
undergo NMD by canonical rules, most cases (10/11) were interpretable by Sanger 
RNA sequencing without NMD inhibition due to incomplete NMD efficiency or 
allele-specific expression despite highly efficient NMD.

Copyright Â© 2023 Ha, Jang, Kim and Kim.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1283611
PMCID: PMC10602670
PMID: 37900184

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.