1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 3;270(5):2284-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.5.2284.

Tetrazole and carboxylate groups of angiotensin receptor antagonists bind to the 
same subsite by different mechanisms.

Noda K(1), Saad Y, Kinoshita A, Boyle TP, Graham RM, Husain A, Karnik SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 
44195-5069.

To identify specific interactions between either the tetrazole or carboxylate 
pharmacophores of non-peptide antagonists and the rat AT1 receptor, 6 basic 
residues were examined by site-directed mutagenesis. Three of the mutants 
(H183Q, H256Q, and H272Q) appeared to be like wild type. Lys102 and Arg167 
mutants displayed reduced binding of the non-peptide antagonist losartan. 
Examination of their properties employing group-specific angiotensin II 
analogues indicated that their effects on binding were indirect. Interestingly, 
the affinity of losartan was not altered by a K199Q mutation, but the same 
mutation reduced the affinity of angiotensin II, the antagonist 
[Sar1,Ile8]angiotensin II, and several carboxylate analogues of losartan. An 
Ala199 substitution reduced the affinity of peptide analogues to a larger extent 
as compared to the affinity of losartan. Thus, the crucial acidic pharmacophores 
of angiotensin and losartan appear to occupy the same space within the receptor 
pocket, but the protonated amino group of Lys199 is not essential for binding 
the tetrazole anion. The binding of the tetrazole moiety with the AT1 receptor 
involves multiple contacts with residues such as Lys199 and His256 that 
constitute the same subsite of the ligand binding pocket. However, this 
interaction does not involve a conventional salt bridge, but rather an unusual 
lysine-aromatic interaction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.5.2284
PMID: 7530721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]