1. Diabetologia. 1993 Feb;36(2):172-4. doi: 10.1007/BF00400701.

Patients with lipodystrophic diabetes mellitus of the Seip-Berardinelli type, 
express normal insulin receptors.

van der Vorm ER(1), Kuipers A, Bonenkamp JW, Kleijer WJ, Van Maldergem L, Herwig 
J, Maassen JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Sylvius Laboratories, State University, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Lipodystrophic diabetes mellitus of the Seip-Berardinelli type is a syndrome 
associated with insulin resistance and recessive inheritance. We have examined 
whether mutations in the insulin receptor are pathogenetic factors in this 
syndrome. Fibroblasts from three different patients with Seip-Berardinelli's 
lipodystrophy were tested for insulin binding, and insulin-stimulated receptor 
autophosphorylation. In addition, the coding region of both alleles of the 
iinsulin receptor gene was sequenced. No abnormalities in the number of high 
affinity insulin binding sites, and insulin-stimulated receptor 
autophosphorylation were detected. The insulin receptor related insulin-like 
growth factor I receptor also showed no functional changes. DNA sequence 
analysis of the amplified exons of the insulin receptor gene showed a silent 
mutation in patient 1 at codon Ser339, changing AGT to AGC. In patient 2 a 
heterozygous Met for Val substitution at position 985 was detected, which is a 
rare polymorphism. In patient 3 no mutations, other than described 
polymorphisms, were observed. These findings demonstrate that the primary 
genetic lesion in Seip-Berardinelli's lipodystrophy is outside the insulin 
receptor gene and that an involvement of the insulin-like growth factor I 
receptor is also unlikely.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00400701
PMID: 8458533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]