1. Biochemistry. 1996 Apr 2;35(13):3963-9. doi: 10.1021/bi9524575.

Direct determination of the substrate specificity of the alpha-active site in 
heterodimeric beta-hexosaminidase A.

Hou Y(1), Tse R, Mahuran DJ.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The beta-hexosaminidase isozymes are produced through the combination of alpha 
and beta subunits to form any one of three active dimers (monomeric subunits are 
not functional). Heterodimeric hexosaminidase A (alpha beta) is the only isozyme 
that can hydrolyze GM2 ganglioside in vivo, requiring the presence of the GM2 
activator protein. Hexosaminidase S (alpha alpha) exists but is not considered a 
physiological isozyme. Although hexosaminidase B (beta beta) is present in 
normal human tissues, it has no known unique function in vivo. However, a unique 
function for the beta-active site present in both hexosaminidase A and B has 
been indicated in a previous study of the various substrate specificities of the 
homodimeric forms of hexosaminidase (S and B). It was concluded that the 
alpha-active site is only able to efficiently hydrolyze negatively charged 
substrates, and the beta-active site is only able to hydrolyze neutral 
substrates. When this model of nonoverlapping alpha- and beta-substrates is 
extrapolated to heterodimeric hexosaminidase A, it has a major effect on the 
interpretation of recent results relating to the mode of action of the GM2 
activator protein. In this report, we directly examine these substrate 
specificities using a novel form of hexosaminidase A containing an inactive beta 
subunit, produced in permanently transfected CHO cells. We demonstrate that, 
whereas the beta-active site has the same substrate specificities in either its 
A-heterodimeric or B-homodimeric forms, the alpha-active site in the 
A-heterodimer has different kinetic parameters than the alpha-active site in the 
S-homodimer. We conclude that the alpha and beta subunits in hexosaminidase A 
participate equally in the hydrolysis of neutral substrates.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9524575
PMID: 8672428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]