1. Diabetologia. 1997 Apr;40(4):469-72. doi: 10.1007/s001250050702.

A mutation of the beta 3-adrenergic receptor is associated with visceral obesity 
but decreased serum triglyceride.

Kim-Motoyama H(1), Yasuda K, Yamaguchi T, Yamada N, Katakura T, Shuldiner AR, 
Akanuma Y, Ohashi Y, Yazaki Y, Kadowaki T.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The Trp64Arg mutation of the beta 3-adrenergic receptor (beta 3AR) is prevalent 
in several ethnic groups and is associated with weight gain, and some features 
of syndrome X such as insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia. Nevertheless, it is 
not known at present whether this mutation is associated with visceral obesity, 
which is an important risk factor for the development of hypertension, 
dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and 
atherosclerosis. To investigate whether this mutation may contribute to visceral 
obesity, we studied the relationships between beta 3AR genotypes and clinical 
phenotypes. The Trp64Arg allele of beta 3AR was examined in 278 Japanese men 
with respect to variables relating to visceral obesity assessed by computerised 
tomography. To detect the Trp64Arg mutation, polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis using Bst NI 
digestion was performed. This mutation was more frequently observed in subjects 
with higher body mass index (BMI) (p = 0.02). Moreover, in 120 subjects with a 
moderate degree of obesity (22 < or = BMI < 26.4 kg/m2), the mutation 
(homozygotes and heterozygotes) was associated with visceral obesity (higher 
ratio of visceral to subcutaneous fat area; V/S) (p = 0.03). Furthermore, the 
Trp64Arg allele was more frequent in subjects with lower serum triglyceride 
levels (p = 0.02) and the Trp64Arg homozygotes, but not heterozygotes, exhibited 
lower triglyceride levels. Thus, this mutation appears to be associated with 
visceral obesity but with lower serum triglyceride. It is suggested that those 
with the mutation may describe a subset of subjects characterized by decreased 
lipolysis in visceral adipose tissue.

DOI: 10.1007/s001250050702
PMID: 9112025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]