1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Aug 11;138(3):547-57. doi: 10.1083/jcb.138.3.547.

Regulation of calreticulin gene expression by calcium.

Waser M(1), Mesaeli N, Spencer C, Michalak M.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Molecular Biology of Membranes, Department 
of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2S2.

We have isolated and characterized a 12-kb mouse genomic DNA fragment containing 
the entire calreticulin gene and 2.14 kb of the promoter region. The mouse 
calreticulin gene consists of nine exons and eight introns, and it spans 4.2 kb 
of genomic DNA. A 1.8-kb fragment of the calreticulin promoter was subcloned 
into a reporter gene plasmid containing chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. This 
construct was then used in transient and stable transfection of NIH/ 3T3 cells. 
Treatment of transfected cells either with the Ca2+ ionophore A23187, or with 
the ER Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, resulted in a five- to sevenfold 
increase of the expression of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase protein. 
Transactivation of the calreticulin promoter was also increased by fourfold in 
NIH/3T3 cells treated with bradykinin, a hormone that induces Ca2+ release from 
the intracellular Ca2+ stores. Analysis of the promoter deletion constructs 
revealed that A23187- and thapsigargin-responsive regions are confined to two 
regions (-115 to -260 and -685 to -1,763) in the calreticulin promoter that 
contain the CCAAT nucleotide sequences. Northern blot analysis of cells treated 
with A23187, or with thapsigargin, revealed a fivefold increase in calreticulin 
mRNA levels. Thapsigargin also induced a fourfold increase in calreticulun 
protein levels. Importantly, we show by nuclear run-on transcription analysis 
that calreticulin gene transcription is increased in NIH/3T3 cells treated with 
A23187 and thapsigargin in vivo. This increase in gene expression required over 
4 h of continuous incubation with the drugs and was also sensitive to treatment 
with cycloheximide, suggesting that it is dependent on protein synthesis. 
Changes in the concentration of extracellular and cytoplasmic Ca2+ did not 
affect the increased expression of the calreticulin gene. These studies suggest 
that stress response to the depletion of intracellular Ca2+ stores induces 
expression of the calreticulin gene in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.138.3.547
PMCID: PMC2141645
PMID: 9245785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]