1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Aug 15;1341(1):35-48. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4838(97)00058-7.

Identification of critical amino acid residues of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase: definition of the ATP site involved in 
carboxy-phosphate formation.

Zheng W(1), Lim AL, Powers-Lee SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Carbamoyl-phosphate synthetases (CPSases) utilize two molecules of ATP at two 
homologous domains, B and C, with ATP(B) used to form the enzyme-bound 
intermediate carboxy-phosphate and ATP(C) used to phosphorylate the carbamate 
intermediate. To further define the role of one CPSase peptide suggested by 
affinity labeling studies to be near the ATP(B) site, we have carried out 
site-directed mutagenic analysis of peptide 234-242 of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae arginine-specific CPSase. Mutants E234A, E234D, E236A, E236D and 
E238A were unable to complement the CPSase-deficient yeast strain LPL26 whereas 
mutants Y237A, E238D, R241K, R241E and R241P supported LPL26 growth as well as 
wild-type CPSase. Kinetic analysis of E234A and Y237A indicated impaired 
utilization of ATP(B) but not of ATP(C). D242A, a temperature-sensitive mutant, 
retained no detectable activity when assayed in vitro. These findings, together 
with the affinity labeling data and primary sequence analysis, strongly suggest 
that the yeast CPSase peptide 234-242 is located at the ATP(B) site and that 
some of its residues are important for functioning of the enzyme. D242 appears 
to occupy a critical structural position and E234, E236 and E238 appear to be 
critical for function, with the spatial arrangement of the carboxyl side chain 
also critical for E234 and E236.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4838(97)00058-7
PMID: 9300807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]