1. J Cell Biol. 1997 Nov 3;139(3):589-99. doi: 10.1083/jcb.139.3.589.

Targeting of NH2-terminal-processed microsomal protein to mitochondria: a novel 
pathway for the biogenesis of hepatic mitochondrial P450MT2.

Addya S(1), Anandatheerthavarada HK, Biswas G, Bhagwat SV, Mullick J, Avadhani 
NG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, Department of Animal Biology, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

Cytochrome P4501A1 is a hepatic, microsomal membrane-bound enzyme that is highly 
induced by various xenobiotic agents. Two NH2-terminal truncated forms of this 
P450, termed P450MT2a and MT2b, are also found localized in mitochondria from 
beta-naphthoflavone-induced livers. In this paper, we demonstrate that P4501A1 
has a chimeric NH2-terminal signal that facilitates the targeting of the protein 
to both the ER and mitochondria. The NH2-terminal 30-amino acid stretch of 
P4501A1 is thought to provide signals for ER membrane insertion and also stop 
transfer. The present study provides evidence that a sequence motif immediately 
COOH-terminal (residues 33-44) to the transmembrane domain functions as a 
mitochondrial targeting signal under both in vivo and in vitro conditions, and 
that the positively charged residues at positions 34 and 39 are critical for 
mitochondrial targeting. Results suggest that 25% of P4501A1 nascent chains, 
which escape ER membrane insertion, are processed by a liver cytosolic 
endoprotease. We postulate that the NH2-terminal proteolytic cleavage activates 
a cryptic mitochondrial targeting signal. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed 
that a portion of transiently expressed P4501A1 is colocalized with the 
mitochondrial-specific marker protein cytochrome oxidase subunit I. The 
mitochondrial-associated MT2a and MT2b are localized within the inner membrane 
compartment, as tested by resistance to limited proteolysis in both intact 
mitochondria and mitoplasts. Our results therefore describe a novel mechanism 
whereby proteins with chimeric signal sequence are targeted to the ER as well as 
to the mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.139.3.589
PMCID: PMC2141697
PMID: 9348277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]