1. Pediatr Res. 1999 Feb;45(2):187-90. doi: 10.1203/00006450-199902000-00005.

Bilateral Wilms tumor in a boy with severe hypospadias and cryptochidism due to 
a heterozygous mutation in the WT1 gene.

Köhler B(1), Schumacher V, Schulte-Overberg U, Biewald W, Lennert T, l'Allemand 
D, Royer-Pokora B, Grüters A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, 
Germany.

Mutations in the WT1 gene causing Wilms tumors were first reported in WAGR 
syndrome (Wilms tumor, Aniridia, Genitourinary malformation, mental Retardation) 
and Denys Drash syndrome (pseudohermaphroditism, Wilms tumor, nephropathy), but 
only in a few patients with hypospadias and cryptorchidism without other signs 
of Denys Drash (DDS) or WAGR syndrome WT1 mutations were identified. We report a 
boy, who was born in 1989 with hypospadias and bilateral cryptorchidism. 
Previous karyotyping and endocrine studies had ruled out any known cause of male 
pseudohermaphroditism. Subsequently, he developed a bilateral Wilms tumor, which 
was detected by palpation at the age of 15 months during a routine visit by the 
general pediatrician. Because of its extensive size, surgery and chemotherapy 
were needed for treatment. Analysis of the WT1 gene was performed 5 y after 
diagnosis and revealed a C to T transition in one allele generating a stop codon 
at codon 362 and subsequently leading to a truncated protein with loss of its 
ability to bind to DNA. No signs of DDS or WAGR syndrome are present in the boy. 
The work up of this patient and the so far known few comparable cases from the 
literature lead to the conclusion that in newborns with severe urogenital 
malformations not due to known chromosomal or endocrine disorders mutational 
screening of the WT1 gene should be performed, to evaluate the high risk of 
developing a Wilms tumor. We favor mutational screening in these patients as an 
easy tool for investigation, because in the future it will probably decrease the 
necessity of frequent control visits in patients without a WT1 mutation.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-199902000-00005
PMID: 10022588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]