1. Recent Results Cancer Res. 1998;154:265-70. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-46870-4_17.

Thyroid carcinomas in RET/PTC transgenic mice.

Jhiang SM(1), Cho JY, Furminger TL, Sagartz JE, Tong Q, Capen CC, Mazzaferri EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

The RET/PTC oncogene, a rearranged form of the RET proto-oncogene, has been 
found to be associated with human papillary thyroid carcinomas. To investigate 
whether RET/PTC causes papillary thyroid carcinoma, we generated a transgenic 
mouse model of papillary thyroid carcinoma with targeted expression of RET/PTC1 
in the thyroid gland. Thyroid tumors in these RET/PTC1 transgenic mice are 
characterized by a slow growth rate, thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH)-responsive tumor progression, and loss of radioiodide-concentrating 
activity despite continued expression of thyroglobulin (Tg). The time of tumor 
onset appears to be dependent on the expression level of RET/PTC1 in these 
transgenic mice. In high-copy RET/PTC1 transgenic mice, cellular abnormalities, 
including a slightly increased proliferation rate, aberrant follicle formation, 
and loss of radioiodide-concentrating activity, can be readily identified at 
embryological day 18. To identify which signaling pathway or pathways perturbed 
by RET/PTC1 are essential for RET/PTC1 to induce tumor development, we generated 
transgenic mice carrying a thyroid-targeted RET/PTC1 triple mutant, which 
contains tyrosine to phenylalanine mutations at tyrosine residues 294, 404, and 
451. Initial characterization of the thyroid glands of these RET/PTC1 
triple-mutant transgenic mice showed no change in follicular morphology or 
radioiodide-concentrating activity. This finding suggests that signaling 
pathways mediated by one or more of these three phosphotyrosine binding sites 
are essential for RET/PTC1 to induce thyroid tumor development. Finally, in 
order to investigate whether tumors induced by RET/PTC3 are more aggressive than 
those tumors induced by RET/PTC1, we also generated thyroid-targeted RET/PTC3 
transgenic mice.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-46870-4_17
PMID: 10027006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]