1. Biochemistry. 1999 Feb 23;38(8):2395-402. doi: 10.1021/bi982040+.

Electrostatic mutations in iberiotoxin as a unique tool for probing the 
electrostatic structure of the maxi-K channel outer vestibule.

Mullmann TJ(1), Munujos P, Garcia ML, Giangiacomo KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Iberiotoxin (IbTX or alpha-KTx 1.3), a selective, high-affinity blocker of the 
large-conductance, calcium-activated (maxi-K) channel, exhibits a unique, 
asymmetric distribution of charge. To test how these charges control kinetics of 
IbTX binding, we generated five mutants at two positions, K27 and R34, that are 
highly conserved among other isotoxins. The dissociation and association rate 
constants, koff and kon, were determined from toxin-blocked and -unblocked 
durations of single maxi-K channels incorporated into planar lipid bilayers. 
Equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) values were calculated from koff/kon. The 
IbTX mutants K27N, K27Q, and R34N caused large increases in Kd values compared 
to wild-type, suggesting that the IbTX interaction surface encompasses these 
residues. A well-established pore-blocking mechanism for IbTX predicts a voltage 
dependence of toxin-blocked times following occupancy of a potassium binding 
site in the channel pore. Time constants for block by K27R were approximately 
5-fold slower at -20 mV versus +40 mV, while neutralization of K27 relieved the 
voltage dependence of block. This suggests that K27 in IbTX interacts with a 
potassium binding site in the pore. Neutralized mutants of K27 and R34, with 
zero net charge, displayed toxin association rate constants approximately 
10-fold slower than wild-type. Association rates for R34N diminished 
approximately 19-fold when external potassium was increased from 30 to 300 mM. 
These findings suggest that simple net charge and diffusional processes do not 
control ingress of IbTX into the channel vestibule.

DOI: 10.1021/bi982040+
PMID: 10029533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]