1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Mar 1;363(1):68-80. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1998.1074.

Upregulation of macrophage plasma membrane and nuclear phospholipase D activity 
on ligation of the alpha2-macroglobulin signaling receptor: involvement of 
heterotrimeric and monomeric G proteins.

Misra UK(1), Pizzo SV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

The effect of ligating the alpha2-macroglobulin signaling receptor (alpha2MSR) 
with receptor-recognized forms of alpha2M (alpha2M*) was studied with respect to 
phospholipase D (PLD) activity in murine macrophages, their plasma membranes, 
and nuclei. PLD activity in plasma membranes and nuclei increased linearly up to 
a ligand concentration of about 100 pM of either alpha2M* or a cloned and 
expressed receptor binding fragment (RBF). The RBF binding site mutant K1370A, 
which binds with high affinity to alpha2MSR, also increased nuclear PLD activity 
comparable to RBF and alpha2M*. Phorbol dibutyrate caused a two- to threefold 
stimulation of membrane and nuclear PLD activity, whereas PLD activity was 
nearly abolished by downregulation of protein kinase C; prior treatment with 
staurosporin, genestein, cyclosporin A, actinomycin D; or chelation of 
intracellular Ca2+. In permeabilized macrophages, isolated plasma membranes, and 
nuclei, GTP-gamma-S increased alpha2M*-stimulated PLD activity via a pertussis 
toxin-insensitive G protein and this effect was abolished on preincubation with 
GDP-beta-S. Incubation of plasma membranes with polyclonal antibody against 
sARFII, or the addition of cytosol which was immunoprecipitated with antibody 
against sARFII, greatly reduced alpha2M*-stimulated PLD activity in the presence 
of GTP-gamma-S. Preincubation of plasma membranes with GDP-beta-S prior to the 
addition of GTP-gamma-S and recombinant ARF1 significantly inhibited 
alpha2M*-stimulation of PLD activity. Nuclear PLD activity was maximally 
stimulated in the presence of both GTP-gamma-S and rARF1, whereas plasma 
membrane PLD activity was maximally stimulated in the presence of rARF1, 
GTP-gamma-S, RhoA, and ATP. In contrast, nuclear PLD activity was not affected 
by RhoA either alone or in combination with GTP-gamma-S or ATP.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1998.1074
PMID: 10049500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]