1. Hum Gene Ther. 1999 Mar 1;10(4):545-57. doi: 10.1089/10430349950018625.

Targeting retroviral vectors to CD34-expressing cells: binding to CD34 does not 
catalyze virus-cell fusion.

Benedict CA(1), Tun RY, Rubinstein DB, Guillaume T, Cannon PM, Anderson WF.

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Laboratories, Norris Cancer Center, University of Southern 
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

We have attempted to engineer murine leukemia virus (MuLV)-based retroviral 
vectors to specifically transduce cells expressing human CD34, an antigen 
present on the surface of undifferentiated hematopoietic stem cells. A number of 
chimeric ecotropic MuLV envelope (Env) proteins were constructed that contained 
anti-CD34 single-chain antibody variable fragments (scFvs). The scFv-Env 
proteins were generated either by replacing the receptor-binding domain of Env 
with the scFv or by inserting the scFv into the N terminus of the Env protein. 
Only chimeric Env proteins with scFv insertions between amino acids 6 and 7 were 
incorporated into viral particles, and coexpression of native MuLV Env did not 
rescue incorporation-defective proteins. In addition, the efficiency of 
incorporation varied with the specific anti-CD34 scFv that was used. Retroviral 
vectors containing the scFv-Env proteins bound to CD34+ cells and transduced NIH 
3T3 cells expressing human CD34 (3T3-CD34 cells) at approximately twice the 
efficiency of the parental NIH 3T3 cells. However, the introduction of the 
mutation D84K, which prevents binding to the ecotropic MuLV receptor mcat-1, 
prevented transduction of both NIH 3T3 and 3T3-CD34 cells. Complementation 
cell-cell fusion assays [Zhao et al. (1997). J. Virol. 71, 6967-6972] in 
3T3-CD34 cells revealed that although the scFv-Env proteins could contribute 
postbinding entry functions when bound to mcat-1, they were unable to do so when 
bound to CD34. Taken together, these data suggest that although the interaction 
with CD34 effectively increased the concentration of virus on 3T3-CD34 cells, 
entry could occur only through an interaction with mcat-1; CD34 alone was not 
capable of triggering the appropriate postbinding changes that lead to viral 
entry.

DOI: 10.1089/10430349950018625
PMID: 10094198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]