1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 9;274(15):10235-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.15.10235.

Photocross-linking of the homing endonuclease PI-SceI to its recognition 
sequence.

Pingoud V(1), Thole H, Christ F, Grindl W, Wende W, Pingoud A.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Fachbereich Biologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität, 
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58, D-35392 Giessen, Germany. 
vera.pingoud@chemie.bio.uni-giessen.de

PI-SceI is an intein-encoded protein that belongs to the LAGLIDADG family of 
homing endonucleases. According to the crystal structure and mutational studies, 
this endonuclease consists of two domains, one responsible for protein splicing, 
the other for DNA cleavage, and both presumably for DNA binding. To define the 
DNA binding site of PI-SceI, photocross-linking was used to identify amino acid 
residues in contact with DNA. Sixty-three double-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides 
comprising the minimal recognition sequence and containing single 
5-iodopyrimidine substitutions in almost all positions of the recognition 
sequence were synthesized and irradiated in the presence of PI-SceI with a 
helium/cadmium laser (325 nm). The best cross-linking yield (approximately 30%) 
was obtained with an oligodeoxynucleotide with a 5-iododeoxyuridine at position 
+9 in the bottom strand. The subsequent analysis showed that cross-linking had 
occurred with amino acid His-333, 6 amino acids after the second LAGLIDADG 
motif. With the H333A variant of PI-SceI or in the presence of excess unmodified 
oligodeoxynucleotide, no cross-linking was observed, indicating the specificity 
of the cross-linking reaction. Chemical modification of His residues in PI-SceI 
by diethylpyrocarbonate leads to a substantial reduction in the binding and 
cleavage activity of PI-SceI. This inactivation can be suppressed by substrate 
binding. This result further supports the finding that at least one His residue 
is in close contact to the DNA. Based on these and published results, 
conclusions are drawn regarding the DNA binding site of PI-SceI.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.15.10235
PMID: 10187809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]