1. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):4042-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.73.5.4042-4051.1999.

Immunotyping of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV): an approach to 
immunologic classification of HIV.

Zolla-Pazner S(1), Gorny MK, Nyambi PN, VanCott TC, NÃ¡das A.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, New York, New York 10010, USA. 
Zollas01@mcrcr6.med.nyu.edu

Because immunologic classification of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV) 
might be more relevant than genotypic classification for designing polyvalent 
vaccines, studies were undertaken to determine whether immunologically defined 
groups of HIV ("immunotypes") could be identified. For these experiments, the V3 
region of the 120-kDa envelope glycoprotein (gp120) was chosen for study. 
Although antibodies (Abs) to V3 may not play a major protective role in 
preventing HIV infection, identification of a limited number of immunologically 
defined structures in this extremely variable region would set a precedent 
supporting the hypothesis that, despite its diversity, the HIV family, like the 
V3 region, might be divisible into immunotypes. Consequently, the immunochemical 
reactivities of 1,176 combinations of human anti-V3 monoclonal Abs (MAbs) and V3 
peptides, derived from viruses of several clades, were studied. Extensive 
cross-clade reactivity was observed. The patterns of reactivities of 21 MAbs 
with 50 peptides from clades A through H were then analyzed by a multivariate 
statistical technique. To test the validity of the mathematical approach, a 
cluster analysis of the 21 MAbs was performed. Five groups were identified, and 
these MAb clusters corresponded to classifications of these same MAbs based on 
the epitopes which they recognize. The concordance between the MAb clusters 
identified by mathematical analysis and by their specificities supports the 
validity of the mathematical approach. Therefore, the same mathematical 
technique was used to identify clusters within the 50 peptides. Seven groups of 
peptides, each containing peptides from more than one clade, were defined. 
Inspection of the amino acid sequences of the peptides in each of the 
mathematically defined peptide clusters revealed unique "signature sequences" 
that suggest structural motifs characteristic of each V3-based immunotype. The 
results suggest that cluster analysis of immunologic data can define immunotypes 
of HIV. These immunotypes are distinct from genotypic classifications. The 
methods described pave the way for identification of immunotypes defined by 
immunochemical and neutralization data generated with anti-HIV Env MAbs and 
intact, viable HIV virions.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.73.5.4042-4051.1999
PMCID: PMC104183
PMID: 10196300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]