1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12017-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.17.12017.

The beta3-adrenergic receptor activates mitogen-activated protein kinase in 
adipocytes through a Gi-dependent mechanism.

Soeder KJ(1), Snedden SK, Cao W, Della Rocca GJ, Daniel KW, Luttrell LM, Collins 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Promiscuous coupling between G protein-coupled receptors and multiple species of 
heterotrimeric G proteins provides a potential mechanism for expanding the 
diversity of G protein-coupled receptor signaling. We have examined the 
mechanism and functional consequences of dual Gs/Gi protein coupling of the 
beta3-adrenergic receptor (beta3AR) in 3T3-F442A adipocytes. The beta3AR 
selective agonist disodium (R, 
R)-5-[2[[2-(3-chlorophenyl)-2-hydroxyethyl]-amino]propyl]-1, 
3-benzodioxole-2,2-dicarboxylate (CL316,243) stimulated a dose-dependent 
increase in cAMP production in adipocyte plasma membrane preparations, and 
pretreatment of cells with pertussis toxin resulted in a further 2-fold increase 
in cAMP production by CL316,243. CL316,243 (5 microM) stimulated the 
incorporation of 8-azido-[32P]GTP into Galphas (1.57 +/- 0.12; n = 3) and 
Galphai (1. 68 +/- 0.13; n = 4) in adipocyte plasma membranes, directly 
demonstrating that beta3AR stimulation results in Gi-GTP exchange. The 
beta3AR-stimulated increase in 8-azido-[32P]GTP labeling of Galphai was 
equivalent to that obtained with the A1-adenosine receptor agonist 
N6-cyclopentyladenosine (1.56 +/- 0.07; n = 4), whereas inclusion of unlabeled 
GTP (100 microM) eliminated all binding. Stimulation of the beta3AR in 3T3-F442A 
adipocytes led to a 2-3-fold activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase, as measured by extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 (ERK1/2) 
phosphorylation. Pretreatment of cells with pertussis toxin (PTX) eliminated MAP 
kinase activation by beta3AR, demonstrating that this response required receptor 
coupling to Gi. Expression of the human beta3AR in HEK-293 cells reconstituted 
the PTX-sensitive stimulation of MAP kinase, demonstrating that this phenomenon 
is not exclusive to adipocytes or to the rodent beta3AR. ERK1/2 activation by 
the beta3AR was insensitive to the cAMP-dependent protein kinase inhibitor H-89 
but was abolished by genistein and AG1478. These data indicate that constitutive 
beta3AR coupling to Gi proteins serves both to restrain Gs-mediated activation 
of adenylyl cyclase and to initiate additional signal transduction pathways, 
including the ERK1/2 MAP kinase cascade.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.17.12017
PMID: 10207024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]