1. Hum Mutat. 1998;11(4):331. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)11:4<331::AID-HUMU12>3.0.CO;2-3.

A novel frameshift mutation 840delA and a novel polymorphism D203A in the 
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene in a Japanese patient with 
congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. Mutations in brief no. 117. Online.

Katsumata N(1), Tanae A, Shinagawa T, Nagashima-Miyokawa A, Shimizu M, Yasunaga 
T, Tanaka T, Hibi I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Children's Medical 
Research Center, Tokyo 154, Japan.

Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (CLAH) is an autosomalrecessive disorder 
characterized by impaired production of all steroids including glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids and sexsteriods. It has recently been reported that mutations 
in the steriodogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene cause CLAH. We 
analyzed the StAR gene in a Japanese patient with CLAH. The patient was revealed 
to be a compound heterozygote bearing a nonsense mutation Q258X, changing codon 
258 (CAG) encoding Gln to the stop codon TAG, and a novel framshift mutation 
840delA resulting from deletion of one of the three adenosines normally present 
in codon 238 (AAA), thus leading to a frameshift after codon 237 (Thr) in the 
StAR gene. The patient was also revealed to be homozygous for a novel missense 
point mutation D203A, changing codon 203 (GAC) encoding Asp to GCC encoding Ala 
in the StAR gene. To elucidate the significance of the D203A mutation, we 
analyzed the StAR gene sequence in twenty normal subjects, and found that all of 
them were homozygous for the D203A mutation, indicating that the D203A mutation 
is an innocent polymorphism. In conclusion, we have identified a novel 
frameshift mutation 840delA which seems to cause 840delA and the first 
polymorphism D203A in the human StAR gene.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(1998)11:4<331::AID-HUMU12>3.0.CO;2-3
PMID: 10215405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]