1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12848-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12848.

Induction of erythroid differentiation by altered Galpha16 activity as detected 
by a reporter gene assay in MB-02 cells.

Ghose S(1), Porzig H, Baltensperger K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, Postfach 51, Friedb√ºhlstrasse 
49, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Heterotrimeric G proteins may assume modulatory roles in cellular proliferation 
and differentiation. The G protein alpha-subunit Galpha16, which is specifically 
expressed in hematopoietic cells, is highly regulated during differentiation of 
normal and leukemic cells. In human erythroleukemia cells, suppression of 
Galpha16 inhibited cellular growth rates. A reporter gene system was established 
to assess the role of Galpha16 on erythroid differentiation of MB-02 
erythroleukemia cells. It is based on transient transfection with a plasmid that 
expresses green fluorescent protein under the control of the beta-globin 
promoter. Expression of Galpha16 led to a significant increase in green 
fluorescent protein-positive cells, as did transfection with a Galpha16 
antisense plasmid (154 and 156% of controls, respectively). The 
GTPase-deficient, constitutively active mutant of Galpha16, Galpha16R186C, 
further stimulated differentiation to 195% of control values. Because the effect 
of Galpha16 is triggered most efficiently by the GTP-bound protein, an indirect 
action through interference of overexpressed Galpha16 with G protein 
betagamma-subunits can be excluded. The corresponding mutant of Galphaq 
(GalphaqR182C), the phylogenetically closest family member of Galpha16, had no 
effect. The data define a specific role for Galpha16-dependent signal 
transduction in cellular differentiation: deviations from optimal levels of 
Galpha16 functional activity lead to reduced growth rates and promote 
differentiation in hematopoietic cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.18.12848
PMID: 10212272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]