1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 7;274(19):13403-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.19.13403.

Yeast methionine aminopeptidase I. Alteration of substrate specificity by 
site-directed mutagenesis.

Walker KW(1), Bradshaw RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1999 Sep 17;274(38):27338.

In eukaryotes, two isozymes (I and II) of methionine aminopeptidase (MetAP) 
catalyze the removal of the initiator methionine if the penultimate residue has 
a small radius of gyration (glycine, alanine, serine, threonine, proline, 
valine, and cysteine). Using site-directed mutagenesis, recombinant yeast MetAP 
I derivatives that are able to cleave N-terminal methionine from substrates that 
have larger penultimate residues have been expressed. A Met to Ala change at 329 
(Met206 in Escherichia coli enzyme) produces an average catalytic efficiency 
1.5-fold higher than the native enzyme on normal substrates and cleaves 
substrates containing penultimate asparagine, glutamine, isoleucine, leucine, 
methionine, and phenylalanine. Interestingly, the native enzyme also has 
significant activity with the asparagine peptide not previously identified as a 
substrate. Mutation of Gln356 (Gln233 in E. coli MetAP) to alanine results in a 
catalytic efficiency about one-third that of native with normal substrates but 
which can cleave methionine from substrates with penultimate histidine, 
asparagine, glutamine, leucine, methionine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan. 
Mutation of Ser195 to alanine had no effect on substrate specificity. None of 
the altered enzymes produced cleaved substrates with a fully charged residue 
(lysine, arginine, aspartic acid, or glutamic acid) or tyrosine in the 
penultimate position.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.19.13403
PMID: 10224104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]