1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):14067-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.14067.

Transmodulation of epidermal growth factor receptor function by cyclic 
AMP-dependent protein kinase.

Barbier AJ(1), Poppleton HM, Yigzaw Y, Mullenix JB, Wiepz GJ, Bertics PJ, Patel 
TB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Tennessee, Memphis, The Health 
Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

Binding of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to its receptor (EGFR) augments the 
tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor and autophosphorylation. Exposure of 
some tissues and cells to EGF also stimulates adenylyl cyclase activity and 
results in an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels. Because cAMP activates the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), we investigated the effect of PKA on the 
EGFR. The purified catalytic subunit of PKA (PKAc) stoichiometrically 
phosphorylated the purified full-length wild type (WT) and kinase negative 
(K721M) forms of the EGFR. PKAc phosphorylated both WT-EGFR as well as a mutant 
truncated form of EGFR (Delta1022-1186) exclusively on serine residues. 
Moreover, PKAc also phosphorylated the cytosolic domain of the EGFR (EGFRKD). 
Phosphorylation of the purified WT as well as EGFRDelta1022-1186 and EGFRKD was 
accompanied by decreased autophosphorylation and diminished tyrosine kinase 
activity. Pretreatment of REF-52 cells with the nonhydrolyzable cAMP analog, 
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)-cAMP, decreased EGF-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of 
cellular proteins as well as activation of the WT-EGFR. Similar effects were 
also observed in B82L cells transfected to express the Delta1022-1186 form of 
EGFR. Furthermore, activation of PKAc in intact cells resulted in serine 
phosphorylation of the EGFR. The decreased phosphorylation of cellular proteins 
and diminished activation of the EGFR in cells treated with the cAMP analog was 
not the result of altered binding of EGF to its receptors or changes in receptor 
internalization. Therefore, we conclude that PKA phosphorylates the EGFR on Ser 
residues and decreases its tyrosine kinase activity and signal transduction both 
in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.14067
PMID: 10318821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]