1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1999 May;116(2):214-9. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2249.1999.00873.x.

Induction in transgenic mice of HLA-A2.1-restricted cytotoxic T cells specific 
for a peptide sequence from a mutated p21ras protein.

Escobar P(1), Yu Z, Terskikh A, Holmes N, Corradin G, Mach JP, Healy F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer 
Research, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

Cytotoxic T cells (CTL) recognize short peptides that are derived from the 
proteolysis of endogenous cellular proteins and presented on the cell surface as 
a complex with MHC class I molecules. CTL can recognize single amino acid 
substitutions in proteins, including those involved in malignant transformation. 
The mutated sequence of an oncogene may be presented on the cell surface as a 
peptide, and thus represents a potential target antigen for tumour therapy. The 
p21ras gene is mutated in a wide variety of tumours and since the transforming 
mutations result in amino acid substitutions at positions 12, 13 and 61 of the 
protein, a limited number of ras peptides could potentially be used in the 
treatment of a wide variety of malignancies. A common substitution is Val for 
Gly at position 12 of p21ras. In this study, we show that the peptide sequence 
from position 5 to position 14 with Val at position 12-ras p5-14 (Val-12)-has a 
motif which allows it to bind to HLA-A2.1. HLA-A2.1-restricted ras p5-14 
(Val-12)-specific CTL were induced in mice transgenic for both HLA-A2.1 and 
human beta2-microglobulin after in vivo priming with the peptide. The murine CTL 
could recognize the ras p5-14 (Val-12) peptide when they were presented on both 
murine and human target cells bearing HLA-A2.1. No cross-reactivity was observed 
with the native peptide ras p5-14 (Gly-12), and this peptide was not immunogenic 
in HLA-A2.1 transgenic mice. This represents an interesting model for the study 
of an HLA-restricted CD8 cytotoxic T cell response to a defined tumour antigen 
in vivo.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2249.1999.00873.x
PMCID: PMC1905280
PMID: 10337009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]