1. Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol. 1998 Nov-Dec;11(6):374-80. doi: 
10.1159/000029859.

Acute intermittent porphyria: mutation analysis and identification of gene 
carriers in a German kindred by PCR-DGGE analysis.

Petrides PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine II, Charit√©, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. 
petrides@charite.de

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is the most frequent acute porphyria. 
Symptomatic patients and asymptomatic gene carriers are characterized by a 
reduction of their porphobilinogen-deaminase (PBG-D) activity to 50%, which is 
sufficient for porphyrin biosynthesis. PBG-D is encoded by two different mRNAs 
which are expressed in a tissue-specific manner. In classical AIP, the enzyme 
activity is reduced in erythroblasts and all other heme-forming body cells, 
whereas in the variant form of AIP, the PBG-D activity in erythroid tissues 
remains normal. Acute porphyria attacks can occur in gene carriers when the 
biosynthesis of heme is increased by drugs, low calorie intake, alcohol 
consumption or infections. Under these conditions, PBG-D cannot convert the 
precursors adequately so that PBG and delta-aminolevulinate accumulate. This may 
lead to neurovisceral symptoms and other neurological complications which are 
potentially life threatening. In patients with AIP, mutation analysis by 
PCR-DGGE (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis) is becoming increasingly 
important since it also permits rapid identification of their presymptomatic 
relatives. Using this technique, more than 120 mutations have been identified in 
the PBG-D gene. When identified, the family members are informed about their 
genetic predisposition and are taught how to prevent porphyric attacks. Here, I 
illustrate this preventive strategy by describing a German kindred of an 
affected patient with the variant form of AIP with 17 family members.

DOI: 10.1159/000029859
PMID: 10343207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]