1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1999 May;63(1):83-91. doi: 
10.1016/s0091-3057(98)00236-6.

Characterization of the effects of adenosine kinase inhibitors on acute thermal 
nociception in mice.

Kowaluk EA(1), Kohlhaas KL, Bannon A, Gunther K, Lynch JJ 3rd, Jarvis MF.

Author information:
(1)Neurological and Urological Diseases Research, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott 
Park, IL 60064-3500, USA.

Adenosine (ADO) is an inhibitory neuromodulator that can increase the 
nociceptive threshold in animals exposed to a variety of noxious stimuli. 
Inhibition of the ADO-metabolizing enzyme, ADO kinase (AK), provides a means of 
locally enhancing extracellular ADO concentrations. In the present study, the AK 
inhibitors 5'-amino,5'-deoxy-ADO (NH2dADO), 5-iodotubercidin (5-IT), and 
5'-deoxy,5-iodotubercidin (5'd-5IT) were examined for their analgesic efficacy 
in the hot-plate model of acute somatic nociception. Control and drug-treated 
adult male mice were placed on a 55 degrees C hot plate and the latency to the 
10th jump was recorded via a computer driven infrared-beam photosensor. All 
three AK inhibitors were found to significantly increase jump latencies in a 
dose-dependent fashion. 5'd-5IT was the most potent AK inhibitor (approx. ED50 
value = 1 micromol/kg, IP), followed by 5-IT (ED50 value = 10 micromol/kg, IP), 
and NH2dADO (ED50 value = 100 micromol/kg, IP). 5'd-5IT was found to be more 
potent and equally efficacious to morphine (ED50 value = 5.2 micromol/kg, IP) in 
this assay. In a model of persistent chemical pain, the phenyl-p-quinone-induced 
abdominal constriction assay, 5'd-5IT (ED50 value = 1.5 micromol/kg, SC) and 
morphine (ED50 value = 3.0 micromol/kg, SC) dose dependently reduced 
nociception. Pretreatment of mice with either the nonselective ADO receptor 
antagonist, theophylline (56 micromol/kg, IP), but not the peripherally acting 
antagonist, 8-(p-sulfophenyl)-theophylline (8-PST, 200 micromol/kg, IP) 
significantly attenuated the antinociceptive effects of 5'd-5IT in the hot-plate 
assay. Furthermore, the antinociceptive effects of 5'd-5IT were completely 
blocked by an ADO A1 receptor selective antagonist, DPCPX, while an ADO A2A 
receptor selective antagonist, ZM 241385, showed markedly less antagonist 
activity. The analgesic effects of 5'd-5IT were not blocked by the opioid 
receptor antagonist naloxone; however, 5'd-5IT could produce additive analgesic 
effects with morphine when both compounds were administered in combination. The 
apparent efficacy of 2.5 micromol/kg, IP, of 5'd-5IT was not significantly 
altered following the repeated administration of this dose twice daily for 4 
days. The present data provide evidence for an antinociceptive action of AK 
inhibitors in the hot-plate test, which, at least for 5'd-5IT, is mediated by an 
enhancement of ADO's actions at the ADO A1 receptor subtype, is nonopioid in 
nature, and which does not exhibit tolerance following repeated administration.

DOI: 10.1016/s0091-3057(98)00236-6
PMID: 10340527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]