1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1999 Apr 29;371(2-3):137-45. doi: 
10.1016/s0014-2999(99)00132-6.

Effects of adenosine receptor agonists and antagonists on audiogenic 
seizure-sensible DBA/2 mice.

De Sarro G(1), De Sarro A, Di Paola ED, Bertorelli R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Catanzaro, Italy. desarro@unicz.it

We have studied the effects of selective and non-selective adenosine receptor 
agonists and antagonists in audiogenic-seizure-sensitive DBA/2 mice, an animal 
model of generalized reflex epilepsy. With the exception of the adenosine A3 
receptor agonist, N6-(3-iodobenzyl)-5'-N-methylcarboxamidoadenosine (IB-MECA), 
all the agonists studied prevented the development of audiogenic seizures in a 
dose-dependent manner. The ED50 values against the clonic phase of the 
audiogenic seizures were low, that is: 0.06 mg/kg, i.p., for the adenosine A1 
receptor agonist, 2-chloro-N6-cyclopentyladenosine (CCPA), 0.02 and 0.03 mg/kg, 
i.p., for the adenosine A2A receptor agonists, 
2-(4-(2-carboxyethyl)-phenylamino)-5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (CGS 21680) 
and 2-hexynyl-5'-N-ethyl-carboxamidoadenosine (2-HE-NECA), and 0.7 mg/kg, i.p., 
for the adenosine A1/A3 receptor agonist, N6-2-(4-aminophenyl)ethyladenosine 
(APNEA). Conversely, the non-selective agonist, N-ethyl-carboxamidoadenosine 
(NECA), was highly potent, the ED50 being 0.0005 mg/kg, i.p. In the absence of 
auditory stimulation, the adenosine receptor antagonists increased the incidence 
of both clonic and tonic seizures in DBA/2 mice. The ED50 values were: for 
caffeine, 207.5 mg/kg, i.p., for the adenosine A1 receptor antagonist, 
8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX), 327.8 mg/kg i.p., for the adenosine 
A2A receptor antagonists, 3,7-dimethyl-1-propylxanthine (DPMX), 86.7 mg/kg i.p., 
for the (E,18%-Z,82%)7-methyl-8-(3,4-dimethoxystyryl)-1,3-dipropylxanthine (KF 
17837), 69.1 mg/kg i.p., and 
5-amino-7-(2-phenylethyl)-2-(2-furyl)-pyrazolo-(4,3-c)1,2,4-triazolo(1,5 
-c)-pyrimidine (SCH 58261), 321.8 mg/kg i.p. The rank order of convulsant 
potency in our epileptic model, following intracerebroventricular 
administration, was DPCPX > DMPX > 1,3,7-trimethyl-8-(3-chlorostyryl)xanthine 
(CSC) > KF 17837 > Caffeine > SCH 58261 > 
5-amino-9-chloro-2-(2-furyl)-1,2,4-triazolo(1,5-c)quinazoline (CGS 15943). 
Following a subconvulsant audiogenic stimulus of 83 dB, all adenosine receptor 
antagonists induced both tonic and clonic seizures. The ED50 values for such 
proconvulsant effects were: for caffeine 0.04 mg/kg, i.p., for the adenosine A 
receptor antagonist, DPCPX, 5.84 mg/kg, i.p., for the adenosine A2A receptor 
antagonists, DMPX, 0.02 mg/kg, i.p., CGS 15943, 0.29 mg/kg i.p., KF 17837, 0.57 
mg/kg, i.p., CSC 0.12 mg/kg, i.p. and SCH 58261 0.07 mg/kg, i.p., respectively. 
These data suggest that stimulation of adenosine A1 and A2A receptors is 
involved in the suppression of seizures.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(99)00132-6
PMID: 10357250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]