1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 May 31;1454(1):49-56. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00019-8.

Identification of a novel substitution in the constant region of a gene coding 
for an amyloidogenic kappa1 light chain.

Wally J(1), Kica G, Zhang Y, Ericsson T, Connors LH, Benson MD, Liepnieks JJ, 
Murray J, Skinner M, Comenzo RL.

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center and Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Current concepts regarding the association between immunoglobulin (Ig) light 
chain structure and AL amyloidosis (AL) emphasize Ig variable region amino acid 
substitutions because the majority of light chain amyloid fibrils that have been 
sequenced contain amino termini of the variable region with only small amounts 
of the constant region. In this report, we describe a patient with rapidly 
progressive AL whose amyloid deposits contained primarily monoclonal kappa light 
chain constant region fragments. We sequenced and analyzed this AL protein, 
determining that it was an O18-O8 kappa1 variant and that the constant region 
possessed an unusual Ser-->Asn substitution at position 177. Using pre-mortem 
bone marrow cells, we cloned and sequenced the cDNA for this AL protein (HCAK1) 
and, using DNA from post-mortem somatic tissue, we cloned and sequenced the 
patient's kappa germline O18-O8 donor and kappa constant region (Ckappa) gene 
segments. The cDNA that coded for HCAK1 contained a variable region that was 
derived from O18-O8, showing 96.1% homology to germline, and a Ckappa that had a 
nucleotide substitution (AGC to AAC), resulting in the 177Ser-->Asn replacement. 
Two Ckappa genes were cloned from somatic tissue DNA, one identical to a known 
Ckappa sequence and another containing this substitution which likely is a new 
Ckappa allotype. Our findings indicate that further investigation is warranted 
into the contributions genetic polymorphisms and light chain constant regions 
may make to amyloidogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00019-8
PMID: 10354514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]