1. J Mol Biol. 1999 Jun 18;289(4):799-813. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2777.

Global structure and flexibility of hairpin ribozymes with extended terminal 
helices.

Porschke D(1), Burke JM, Walter NG.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Göttingen, D-37077, Germany. 
dpoersc@gwdg.de

Global structure and flexibility of three different hairpin ribozyme constructs 
have been analyzed by measuring their electric dichroism decay in various 
buffers at temperatures between 2 and 30 degrees C. The hairpin ribozyme is 
characterized by two independently folding domains A and B that are connected 
through a hinge and have to interact to enable catalysis. The analyzed 
constructs feature extended terminal helices 1 and 4 with 27 and 25 bp, 
respectively, to increase the sensitivity of the molecular rotational diffusion 
time constants with respect to the interdomain bending angle. Constructs HP1 and 
HP2 cannot cleave because of a G+1A change at the 3'-side of the cleavage site; 
in HP1 the helices 2 and 3 that flank the hinge form a continuous double helical 
segment; in HP2 and HP3, a six nucleotide bulge confers flexibility to the 
expected bending site; HP3 is a cleavable form of HP2 with a G+1-base. For 
comparison, a standard RNA double helix with 72 bp was included in our analysis. 
The dichroism decay curves of the hairpin constructs after pulses of low 
electric field strengths can be fitted to single exponentials taus, whereas the 
curves after pulses of high field strengths require two exponentials. In all 
cases, time constants increase with RNA concentration, indicating intermolecular 
interactions. Extrapolation of the tausvalues measured in standard buffer (50 mM 
Tris (pH 7.5) and 12 mM MgCl2) to zero RNA concentration provide values of 112, 
93, and 73 ns for HP1, HP2 and HP3, respectively, at 30 degrees C, indicating 
increasingly compact structures. The 72 bp RNA reference under corresponding 
conditions did not show a dependence of its decay time constant on the RNA 
concentration nor on the field strength; its time constant is 175 ns (standard 
buffer, 30 degrees C). The observation of two relaxation processes for the 
hairpin constructs at high field strengths indicates stretching to a more 
elongated state; the fast process with a time constant of the order of 50 ns is 
assigned to reversion of stretching, the slow process to overall rotation. The 
overall rotational time of the stretched state at 20 degrees C is close to that 
for a completely stretched rigid state; at 30 degrees C the experimental values 
are around 70 % of that expected for a completely stretched rigid state, 
indicating flexibility and/or residual bending. Bead models were constructed to 
simulate dichroism decay curves. The time constants observed for the 72 bp RNA 
are as expected for a rigid rod with a rise of 2.8 A per base-pair. Based on 
this rise per base-pair for models of a V and a Y-shape, we estimate average 
bending angles of 80(+/-20) degrees and 105 (+/-25) degrees, respectively, for 
the catalytically active hairpin ribozyme HP3. The energy required for 
stretching is of the order of the thermal energy.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.1999.2777
PMID: 10369762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]