1. Med Clin (Barc). 1999 May 1;112(15):561-4.

[Genetic polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin system and essential 
hypertension].

[Article in Spanish]

Fernández-Llama P(1), Poch E, Oriola J, Botey A, de la Sierra A, Revert L, 
Rivera F, Darnell A.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, Hospital Clínic i Provincial, Barcelona.

BACKGROUND: The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays an important role in blood 
pressure (BP) regulation. A number of RAS polymorphisms have been linked to 
essential hypertension (EH), but there is uncertainty about this association in 
other studies. We examined whether the insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism of 
the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene, and the M235T and T174M 
polymorphisms of the angiotensinogen (AGT) gene are associated with EH in a 
Spanish sample of hypertensive patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We studied 75 patients with EH (BP > 160/100 mmHg), aged 
55 (8.5) years, 30 males, systolic BP (SBP) 182 +/- (22.1) mmHg, diastolic BP 
(DBP) 109 +/- (9.9) mmHg (mean [SD]) and a strong family history of the disease. 
As a control group, 75 healthy subjects with no family history of cardiovascular 
disease were studied. The polymorphisms were determined by PCR amplification of 
genomic DNA, followed by enzyme digestion for the AGT gene polymorphisms.
RESULTS: The genotype distribution and the frequencies of the alleles of the 
three RAS polymorphisms were similar in hypertensive and control subjects. In 
addition, we did not find any compound effect of the I/D ACE gene and M235T AGT 
gene polymorphisms on BP levels in hypertensive and control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: In this sample, the contribution of the ACE I/D polymorphism and 
the AGT M235T and T174M polymorphisms in the development of EH seems to be less 
important than previously estimated.

PMID: 10365380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]