1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jun 8;38(23):7524-31. doi: 10.1021/bi990076b.

Acidic residues involved in cation and substrate interactions in the 
Na+/dicarboxylate cotransporter, NaDC-1.

Griffith DA(1), Pajor AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston 77555-0641, USA.

The role of acidic amino acid residues in cation recognition and selectivity by 
the Na+/dicarboxylate cotransporter, NaDC-1, was investigated by site-directed 
mutagenesis and expression in Xenopus oocytes. Four of the residues tested, 
Asp-52, Glu-74, Glu-101, and Glu-332, were found to be unimportant for transport 
activity. However, substitutions of Asp-373 and Glu-475, conserved residues 
found in transmembrane domains M8 and M9, respectively, altered transport 
kinetics. Replacements of Asp-373 with Ala, Glu, Asn, and Gln resulted in 
changes in sodium affinity and cation selectivity in NaDC-1, indicating that the 
carbonyl oxygen at this position may play a role in the topological organization 
of the cation-binding site. In contrast, substitutions of Glu-475 led to 
dramatic reductions in transport activity and changes in transport kinetics. 
Substitution with Gln led to a transporter with increased substrate and sodium 
affinity, while the E475D mutant was inactive. The E475A mutant appeared to have 
poor sodium binding. Substrate-induced currents in the E475A mutant exhibited a 
strong voltage dependence, and a reversal of the current was seen at -30 mV. The 
results suggest that Glu-475 may play a role in cation binding and possibly also 
in mediating anion channel activity. Remarkably, mutations of both Asp-373 and 
Glu-475 affected the Km for succinate in NaDC-1, suggesting dual roles for these 
residues in determining the affinity for substrate and cations. We propose that 
at least one of the cation-binding sites and the substrate-binding site are 
close together in the carboxy-terminal portion of NaDC-1, and thus transmembrane 
domains M8 and M9 are candidate structures for the formation of the 
translocation pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/bi990076b
PMID: 10360950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]