1. Am J Physiol. 1999 Jul;277(1):F66-74. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.1999.277.1.F66.

Endopeptidases (kininases) are able to hydrolyze kinins in tubular fluid along 
the rat nephron.

Casarini DE(1), Boim MA, Stella RC, Schor N.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista 
de Medicina, São Paulo, SP, CEP 04023-900, Brazil.

The activities of serine endopeptidase, prolyl endopeptidase and neutral 
endopeptidase were determined in tubular fluid collected from several portions 
of the rat nephron as well as in urine. The enzyme activities were measured by 
HPLC using bradykinin (BK) as substrate. Free residual peptides of BK obtained 
by the action of these enzymes on the locally produced BK were also determined. 
The endopeptidase activities were found to be present throughout the nephron. 
Equimolar fragments of BK were detected in the early proximal tubule 
(Arg(1)-Pro(7), Phe(8)-Arg(9), Arg(1)-Gly(4), Phe(5)-Arg(9), and BK), late 
proximal tubule (Arg(1)-Phe(5), Arg(1)-Pro(7), Gly(4)-Pro(7), Gly(4)-Arg(9), and 
BK), late distal tubule (Arg(1)-Gly(4), Phe(5)-Arg(9), Arg(1)-Phe(5), 
Ser(6)-Arg(9), Gly(4)-Arg(9), BK, and [des-Arg(9)]BK) and urine (Phe(8)-Arg(9), 
Phe(5)-Arg(9), Arg(1)-Phe(5), Ser(6)-Arg(9), Arg(1)-Pro(7), Gly(4)-Pro(7), 
Gly(4)-Arg(9), BK, and [des-Arg(9)]BK). Our data suggest that the endopeptidases 
and exopeptidases are secreted by the nephron. Early proximal tubules secrete 
angiotensin converting enzyme and neutral endopeptidase, differing from late 
distal tubules that produce prolyl endopeptidase, serine endopeptidase, 
carboxypeptidase, and also neutral endopeptidase. All enzymes detected along the 
rat nephron were found in the urine. The existence of endopeptidases and 
carboxypeptidase in the distal nephron may have a potential physiological role 
in the inactivation of the kinins formed by kallikrein in the kidney and also in 
the inactivation of additional peptides other than BK.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.1999.277.1.F66
PMID: 10409299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]