1. Br J Cancer. 1999 May;80(3-4):458-67. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6690379.

Alteration of p16 and p15 genes in human uterine tumours.

Nakashima R(1), Fujita M, Enomoto T, Haba T, Yoshino K, Wada H, Kurachi H, 
Sasaki M, Wakasa K, Inoue M, Buzard G, Murata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Faculty of 
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

The roles of the p16 and p15 inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase tumour 
suppressor genes were examined in human uterine cervical and endometrial 
cancers. p16 mRNA, examined by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR), was significantly reduced in five of 19 (26%) cervical and four of 25 
(16%) endometrial tumours. Reduced expression of p16 protein, detected by 
immunohistochemistry, occurred even more frequently, in nine of 33 (27%) 
cervical and seven of 37 (19%) endometrial tumours. Hypermethylation of a site 
within the 5'-CpG island of the p16 gene was detected in only one of 32 (3%) 
cervical tumours and none of 26 endometrial tumours. Homozygous p16 gene 
deletion, evaluated by differential PCR analysis, was found in four of 40 (10%) 
cervical tumours and one of 38 (3%) endometrial tumours. Homozygous deletion of 
p15 was found in three of 40 (8%) cervical tumours and one of 38 (3%) 
endometrial tumours. PCR-SSCP (single-strand conformation polymorphism) analysis 
detected point mutations in the p16 gene in six (8%) of 78 uterine tumours (four 
of 40 (10%) cervical tumours and two of 38 (5%) endometrial tumours). Three were 
mis-sense mutations, one in codon 74 (CTG-->ATG) and one in codon 129 
(ACC-->ATC), both in cervical carcinomas, and the other was in codon 127 
(GGG-->GAG) in an endometrial carcinoma. There was one non-sense mutation, in 
codon 50 (CGA-->TGA), in an endometrial carcinoma. The remaining two were silent 
somatic cell mutations, both in cervical carcinomas, resulting in no amino acid 
change. These observations suggest that inactivation of the p16 gene, either by 
homologous deletion, mutation or loss of expression, occurs in a subset of 
uterine tumours.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6690379
PMCID: PMC2362344
PMID: 10408854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]