1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1999 Mar;54(2):101-7. doi: 10.1023/a:1006100929670.

The additionally glycosylated variant of human sex hormone-binding globulin 
(SHBG) is linked to estrogen-dependence of breast cancer.

Becchis M(1), Frairia R, Ferrera P, Fazzari A, Ondei S, Alfarano A, Coluccia C, 
Biglia N, Sismondi P, Fortunati N.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Endocrinologia, Dip. Fisiopatologia Clinica & II UOADU 
Medicina Generale, Azienda Ospedaliera S. Giovanni Battista, Italy.

Sex Hormone-Binding Globulin (SHBG), the plasma carrier for androgens and 
estradiol, inhibits the estradiol-induced proliferation of breast cancer cells 
through its membrane receptor, cAMP, and PKA. In addition, the SHBG membrane 
receptor is preferentially expressed in estrogen-dependent (ER+/PR+) breast 
cancers which are also characterized by a lower proliferative rate than tumors 
negative for the SHBG receptor. A variant SHBG with a point mutation in exon 8, 
causing an aminoacid substitution (Asp 327-->Asn) and thus, the introduction of 
an additional N-glycosylation site, has been reported. In this work, the 
distribution of the SHBG variant was studied in 255 breast cancer patients, 32 
benign mammary disease patients, and 120 healthy women. The presence of the SHBG 
mutation was evaluated with PCR amplification of SHBG exon 8 and Hinf I 
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) procedure. This technique 
allowed us to identify 54 SHBG variants (53 W/v and 1 v/v) in breast cancer 
patients (21.2%), 5 variants (4 W/v and 1 v/v) in benign mammary disease 
patients (15.6%), and 14 variants (W/v) in the control group (11.6%). The 
results of PCR and RFLP were confirmed both by nucleotide sequence of SHBG exon 
8 and western blot of the plasma SHBG. No differences in the mean plasma level 
of the protein were observed in the three populations. The frequency of the SHBG 
variant was significantly higher in ER+/PR+ tumors and in tumors diagnosed in 
patients over 50 years of age than in the control group. This observation 
suggests the existence of a close link between the estrogen-dependence of breast 
cancer and the additionally glycosylated SHBG, further supporting a critical 
role of the protein in the neoplasm.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006100929670
PMID: 10424400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]