1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):750-5. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.1047.

Loss of cytoplasmic retention ability of mutant LKB1 found in Peutz-Jeghers 
syndrome patients.

Nezu J(1), Oku A, Shimane M.

Author information:
(1)Chugai Research Institute for Molecular Medicine Inc., 153-2 Nagai Niihari, 
Ibaraki, 300-4101, Japan. nezuj@cimmed.com

LKB1 Serine/Threonine (ST) kinase (also called STK11) originally identified in 
our novel protein kinase search project has recently been recognized as a 
susceptibility gene of Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS; MIM 175200). PJS is a 
dominantly inherited human disorder which is characterized by gastrointestinal 
hamartomatous polyposis and mucocutaneous melanin pigmentation. Since PJS 
patients also show a predisposition to a wide spectrum of cancers, it is 
speculated that LKB1 has a tumor suppressor function. In the present study we 
have characterized the basic biochemical property of LKB1. In the analysis of 
mutant LKB1 identified in PJS patients, it was found that one of the mutants, 
SL26, does not lose its kinase function, but alters its subcellular distribution 
to accumulate in the nucleus only, whereas wild type LKB1 shows both nuclear and 
cytoplasmic localization. Domain mapping of the nuclear targeting signal of LKB1 
assigned it to its amino terminal side. Furthermore, it was shown that LKB1 also 
has a cytoplasmic retention ability which is considered defective and pathogenic 
in the SL26 mutant. It is speculated that subcellular distribution of LKB1 is 
regulated in the balance of these two forces, importation into the nucleus and 
retention within the cytoplasm; and the cytoplasmic retention ability is 
necessary for LKB1 to fulfil its normal function.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.1047
PMID: 10441497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]