1. Pediatr Nephrol. 1999 May;13(4):278-83. doi: 10.1007/s004670050608.

A familial syndrome due to Arg648Stop mutation in the X-linked renal chloride 
channel gene.

Bosio M(1), Bianchi ML, Lloyd SE, Thakker RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Magenta Hospital, Italy.

Comment in
    Pediatr Nephrol. 2000 Feb;14(2):179-82.

We describe a familial syndrome in two brothers who were investigated after the 
casual discovery of tubular proteinuria in their 1st month of life. During a 
follow-up of 20 and 11 years, respectively, the two children grew well and were 
asymptomatic, but developed the same biochemical abnormalities, i.e., tubular 
proteinuria and hyperphosphaturia, progressive decrease in serum phosphorus 
below the normal values for age, and an increase in serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D levels over normal values. Moreover, hyperabsorptive hypercalciuria and 
systemic osteopenia developed and progressively worsened. In both children, at a 
different age, medullary nephrocalcinosis appeared. The oldest boy suffered a 
progressive decrease in urinary concentration ability and in glomerular 
filtration rate. Oral phosphate supplementation led to reversal of all 
biochemical abnormalities, with the exception of decreased phosphate tubular 
reabsorption and tubular proteinuria. With long-term phosphate supplementation, 
a normal bone mass was reached, while progression of nephrocalcinosis was 
arrested and impairment of renal function was slowed down. In a family study 
(siblings and parents), the only detectable abnormality was microglobinuria in 
the mother, thus suggesting a X-linked inheritance of this disorder. In the two 
probands a mutation within the renal chloride channel gene (CLCN5) was 
discovered.

DOI: 10.1007/s004670050608
PMID: 10454773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]