1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Mar;24(3):207-12. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1098-2264(199903)24:3<207::aid-gcc5>3.0.co;2-3.

A somatic BRCA2 mutation in RER+ endometrial carcinomas that specifically 
deletes the amino-terminal transactivation domain.

Koul A(1), Nilbert M, Borg A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
anjila.koul@onk.lu.se

Comment in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Dec;26(4):381-2. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1098-2264(199912)26:4<381::aid-gcc14>3.0.co;2-n.

Mismatch repair deficiency and replication errors (RERs) occur in approximately 
20% of sporadic endometrial carcinomas. Frameshift mutations in several cancer 
predisposing genes, especially in their mononucleotide repeats, are seen in RER+ 
tumors. In a survey of hereditary breast cancer genes in gynecological cancer, 
we analyzed the entire coding sequence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in 51 endometrial 
tumors, of which 12 were RER+. Seven somatic mutations were identified in six 
(50%) of the RER+ tumors, but none in RER- tumors. A novel base pair deletion at 
a (T)10 tract in BRCA2 intron 2, causing an in-frame splice deletion of exon 3, 
was observed in four tumors, one of which contained a second, truncating BRCA2 
mutation. Two tumors exhibited frameshift mutations at polyA tracts in BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 exon 11, both predicted to result in premature translation termination. 
Whereas most mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are known to affect the more 
carboxy-terminal regions interacting with RAD51, and the transactivating BRCT 
domains of BRCA1, this is the first demonstration of a recurrent BRCA2 mutation 
that specifically deletes the amino-terminal transactivation domain. Moreover, 
our results suggest that somatic mutations in BRCA2(and to some extent BRCA1) 
may confer a growth advantage in RER+ endometrial carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1098-2264(199903)24:3<207::aid-gcc5>3.0.co;2-3
PMID: 10451700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]