1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 3;274(36):25308-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.36.25308.

Insulin activates protein kinases C-zeta and C-lambda by an 
autophosphorylation-dependent mechanism and stimulates their translocation to 
GLUT4 vesicles and other membrane fractions in rat adipocytes.

Standaert ML(1), Bandyopadhyay G, Perez L, Price D, Galloway L, Poklepovic A, 
Sajan MP, Cenni V, Sirri A, Moscat J, Toker A, Farese RV.

Author information:
(1)J. A. Haley Veterans' Hospital Research Service and the Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, 
Florida 33612, USA.

In rat adipocytes, insulin provoked rapid increases in (a) endogenous 
immunoprecipitable combined protein kinase C (PKC)-zeta/lambda activity in 
plasma membranes and microsomes and (b) immunoreactive PKC-zeta and PKC-lambda 
in GLUT4 vesicles. Activity and autophosphorylation of immunoprecipitable 
epitope-tagged PKC-zeta and PKC-lambda were also increased by insulin in situ 
and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-(PO(4))(3) (PIP(3)) in vitro. Because 
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK-1) is required for phosphorylation of 
activation loops of PKC-zeta and protein kinase B, we compared their activation. 
Both RO 31-8220 and myristoylated PKC-zeta pseudosubstrate blocked 
insulin-induced activation and autophosphorylation of PKC-zeta/lambda but did 
not inhibit PDK-1-dependent (a) protein kinase B phosphorylation/activation or 
(b) threonine 410 phosphorylation in the activation loop of PKC-zeta. Also, 
insulin in situ and PIP(3) in vitro activated and stimulated autophosphorylation 
of a PKC-zeta mutant, in which threonine 410 is replaced by glutamate (but not 
by an inactivating alanine) and cannot be activated by PDK-1. Surprisingly, 
insulin activated a truncated PKC-zeta that lacks the regulatory (presumably 
PIP(3)-binding) domain; this may reflect PIP(3) effects on PDK-1 or 
transphosphorylation by endogenous full-length PKC-zeta. Our findings suggest 
that insulin activates both PKC-zeta and PKC-lambda in plasma membranes, 
microsomes, and GLUT4 vesicles by a mechanism requiring increases in PIP(3), 
PDK-1-dependent phosphorylation of activation loop sites in PKC-zeta and lambda, 
and subsequent autophosphorylation and/or transphosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.36.25308
PMID: 10464256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]