1. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Oct;65(4):1007-20. doi: 10.1086/302582.

Cysteine substitutions in epidermal growth factor-like domains of fibrillin-1: 
distinct effects on biochemical and clinical phenotypes.

Schrijver I(1), Liu W, Brenn T, Furthmayr H, Francke U.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305-5323, USA.

Fibrillin-1 (FBN1) contains 47 epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains 
characterized by six conserved cysteine residues. Cysteine substitutions that 
disrupt one of the three disulfide bonds are frequent causes of Marfan syndrome 
(MFS). We identified 19 new substitutions involving cysteine residues in each of 
the six positions of EGF-like domains. Allele-specific mRNA assays revealed 
equal abundance of mutant and normal FBN1 transcripts in all 10 individuals 
studied. Quantitative pulse-chase analysis of fibrillin protein was performed on 
25 mutant fibroblast strains with substitutions of 22 different cysteine 
residues in 18 different EGF-like domains spanning the entire gene. Normal 
synthesis and stability of mutant fibrillin molecules was seen in 20/25 
individuals, 11 of whom showed delayed intracellular processing and/or 
secretion. In the remaining five cases, the mutant protein was apparently 
unstable. In four of these five cases, the second or third disulfide bond of 
EGF-like domains immediately preceding an 8-cysteine or hybrid domain was 
affected. All but two mutations caused severe reduction of matrix deposition, 
which was attributed to a dominant-negative effect of mutant molecules. For 
genotype/phenotype comparisons, clinical data on 25 probands and 19 
mutation-positive family members were analyzed. Ocular manifestations were among 
the most consistent features (ectopia lentis in 86%, myopia in 80%). Nine 
mutations encoded by exons 26-32 resulted in early-onset classic MFS and, in one 
case, neonatal-lethal MFS. Mutations outside this region were associated with 
variable clinical phenotypes, including individuals with fibrillinopathies not 
meeting diagnostic criteria for MFS.

DOI: 10.1086/302582
PMCID: PMC1288233
PMID: 10486319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]