1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1999 Sep;66(3):224-31. doi:
10.1016/S0009-9236(99)70029-9.

Failure of erythromycin breath test to correlate with midazolam clearance as a 
probe of cytochrome P4503A.

Kinirons MT(1), O'Shea D, Kim RB, Groopman JD, Thummel KE, Wood AJ, Wilkinson 
GR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn, 
USA.

Comment in
    Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2000 May;67(5):577-8. doi: 
10.1016/S0009-9236(01)90133-X.

BACKGROUND: Cytochrome P4503A (CYP3A) activity exhibits considerable 
interindividual variability, and an in vivo probe to measure such differences 
would serve several purposes. The erythromycin breath test (ERBT) is an 
established approach that has proven useful in this regard, but it has several 
limitations. More recently, the hydroxylation of midazolam has been suggested as 
an alternative in vivo probe approach, because it is possible to estimate CYP3A 
activity in the intestinal epithelium as well as in the liver. The purpose of 
this study was to investigate the relationship, if any, between the ERBT and 
midazolam's CYP3A-mediated metabolism.
METHODS: Twenty healthy, medication-free young (24 to 46 years) European 
Americans (10 women) each received on separate days, in random order, either 3 
microCi [14C-N-methyl]-erythromycin intravenously, 1 mg midazolam intravenously, 
or 2 mg midazolam orally. An ERBT value was determined 60 minutes after 
administration, and clearances were estimated after midazolam administration. In 
addition, an endogenous 0- to 4-hour urinary 6beta-hydroxycortisol/cortisol 
ratio was measured.
RESULTS: All three measured drug trait values varied approximately threefold to 
fivefold, whereas the endogenous phenotype measure exhibited far greater 
variability (>100-fold). No statistically significant (P < .05) correlations 
existed between any of the trait values, including the ERBT value, obtained 
after intravenous administration of the radiolabeled probe and the systemic 
clearance of midazolam, expressed in terms of either total or unbound drug, or 
on an absolute or a body weight-corrected basis (r = 0.03 to r = 0.24; P = .08 
to P = .90). Substratification according to sex generally did not improve such 
relationships.
CONCLUSION: Although both erythromycin N-demethylation and the metabolism of 
midazolam by hydroxylation are mediated by CYP3A, the phenotypic trait measures 
associated with these two in vivo probe drugs do not provide the same 
information about the catalytic activity of the enzyme. An indirect measure such 
as the ERBT may reflect CYP3A activity and be useful for some purposes, but the 
estimation of the oral and intravenous clearance of midazolam has additional 
advantages, and they may be more applicable and have broader usefulness as 
quantitative estimates of CYP3A activity.

DOI: 10.1016/S0009-9236(99)70029-9
PMID: 10511057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]