1. Biochemistry. 1999 Oct 19;38(42):13810-9. doi: 10.1021/bi991040m.

Roles of active site aromatic residues in catalysis by ketosteroid isomerase 
from Pseudomonas putida biotype B.

Kim DH(1), Nam GH, Jang DS, Choi G, Joo S, Kim JS, Oh BH, Choi KY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Center for Biofunctional Molecules, Pohang 
University of Science and Technology, South Korea.

The aromatic residues Phe-54, Phe-82, and Trp-116 in the hydrophobic 
substrate-binding pocket of Delta(5)-3-ketosteroid isomerase from Pseudomonas 
putida biotype B have been characterized in their roles in steroid binding and 
catalysis. Kinetic and equilibrium binding analyses were carried out for the 
mutant enzymes with the substitutions Phe-54 --> Ala or Leu, Phe-82 --> Ala or 
Leu, and Trp-116 --> Ala, Phe, or Tyr. The removal of their bulky, aromatic side 
chains at any of these three positions results in reduced k(cat), particularly 
when Phe-82 or Trp-116 is replaced by Ala. The results are consistent with the 
binding interactions of the aromatic residues with the bound steroid 
contributing to catalysis. All the mutations except the F82A mutation increase 
K(m); the F82A mutation decreases K(m) by ca. 3-fold, suggesting a possibility 
that the phenyl ring at position 82 might be unfavorable for substrate binding. 
The K(D) values for d-equilenin, an intermediate analogue, suggest that a 
space-filling hydrophobic side chain at position 54, a phenyl ring at position 
82, and a nonpolar aromatic or small side chain at position 116 might be 
favorable for binding the reaction intermediate. In contrast to the increased 
K(D) for equilenin, the enzymes with any substitutions at positions 54 and 116 
display a decreased K(D) for 19-nortestosterone, a product analogue, indicating 
that Phe-54 and Trp-116 might be unfavorable for product binding. The crystal 
structure of F82A determined to 2.1-A resolution reveals that Phe-82 is 
important for maintaining the active site geometry. Taken together, our results 
demonstrate that Phe-54, Phe-82, and Trp-116 contribute differentially to the 
stabilization of steroid species including substrate, intermediate, and product.

DOI: 10.1021/bi991040m
PMID: 10529226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]