1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 1999 Oct;8(10):901-5.

Association between a CYP3A4 genetic variant and clinical presentation in 
African-American prostate cancer patients.

Paris PL(1), Kupelian PA, Hall JM, Williams TL, Levin H, Klein EA, Casey G, 
Witte JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA. 
parisp@ccf.org

Prostate cancer incidence, clinical presentation, and mortality rates vary among 
different ethnic groups. A genetic variant of CYP3A4, a gene involved in the 
oxidative deactivation of testosterone, has been associated recently with 
prostate cancer development in Caucasians. To further investigate this variant, 
we evaluated its genotype frequencies in different ethnic groups and its 
association with clinical presentation of prostate cancer in African Americans. 
CYP3A4 genotypes were assayed in healthy male Caucasian (n = 117), Hispanic (n = 
121), African-American (n = 116), Chinese (n = 46), and Japanese (n = 34) 
volunteers using the TaqMan assay. The association between CYP3A4 genotype and 
prostate cancer presentation was determined in 174 affected African-American 
men. Genotype frequency of the CYP3A4 variant differed substantially across 
ethnic groups, with African Americans much more likely to carry one or two 
copies than any other group (two-sided P < 0.0001). Among African Americans, 46% 
(80 of 174) of men with prostate cancer were homozygous for the CYP3A4 variant, 
whereas only 28% (32 of 116) of African-American healthy volunteers were 
homozygous (two-sided P < 0.005). A consistent positive association was observed 
between being homozygous for the CYP3A4 variant in African-American prostate 
cancer patients and clinical characteristics. Men homozygous for the CYP3A4 
variant were more likely to present with higher grade and stage of prostate 
cancer in a recessive model [odds ratio (OR), 1.7; 95% confidence interval (CI), 
0.9-3.4]. This association was even stronger for men who were >65 years of age 
at diagnosis (n = 103; OR, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.1-5.4). In summary, the CYP3A4 
genotype frequency in different ethnic groups broadly followed trends in 
prostate cancer incidence, presentation, and mortality in the United States. 
African-American prostate cancer patients had a higher frequency of being 
homozygous for the CYP3A4 variant than healthy African-American volunteers who 
were matched solely based on ethnicity. Among the patients, those who were 
homozygous for the CYP3A4 variant were more likely to present with clinically 
more advanced prostate cancer.

PMID: 10548319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]