1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32333-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.45.32333.

p42/44 MAP kinase-dependent and -independent signaling pathways regulate 
caveolin-1 gene expression. Activation of Ras-MAP kinase and protein kinase a 
signaling cascades transcriptionally down-regulates caveolin-1 promoter 
activity.

Engelman JA(1), Zhang XL, Razani B, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Caveolin-1 is a principal component of caveolae membranes in vivo. Caveolin-1 
mRNA and protein expression are down-regulated in NIH 3T3 cells in response to 
transformation by activated oncogenes, such as H-Ras(G12V) and v-Abl. The 
mechanisms governing this down-regulation event remain unknown. Here, we show 
that caveolin-1 gene expression is directly regulated by activation of the 
Ras-p42/44 MAP kinase cascade. Down regulation of caveolin-1 protein expression 
by Ras is independent of (i) the type of activating mutation (G12V versus Q61L) 
and (ii) the form of activated Ras transfected (H-Ras versus K-Ras versus 
N-Ras). Treatment of Ras or Raf-transformed NIH 3T3 cells with a well 
characterized MEK inhibitor (PD 98059) restores caveolin-1 protein expression. 
In contrast, treatment of v-Src and v-Abl transformed NIH 3T3 cells with PD 
98059 does not restore caveolin-1 expression. Thus, there must be at least two 
pathways for down-regulating caveolin-1 expression: one that is p42/44 MAP 
kinase-dependent and another that is p42/44 MAP kinase-independent. We focused 
our efforts on the p42/44 MAP kinase-dependent pathway. The activity of a panel 
of caveolin-1 promoter constructs was evaluated using transient expression in 
H-Ras(G12V) transformed NIH 3T3 cells. We show that caveolin-1 promoter activity 
is up-regulated approximately 5-fold by inhibition of the p42/44 MAP kinase 
cascade. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays we provide evidence that 
the caveolin-1 promoter (from -156 to -561) is differentially bound by 
transcription factors in normal and H-Ras(G12V)-transformed cells. We also show 
that activation of protein kinase A (PKA) signaling is sufficient to 
down-regulate caveolin-1 protein expression and promoter activity. Thus, we have 
identified two signaling pathways (Ras-p42/44 MAP kinase and PKA) that 
transcriptionally down-regulate caveolin-1 gene expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.45.32333
PMID: 10542274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]