1. Nat Genet. 1999 Nov;23(3):319-22. doi: 10.1038/15496.

CACP, encoding a secreted proteoglycan, is mutated in 
camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome.

Marcelino J(1), Carpten JD, Suwairi WM, Gutierrez OM, Schwartz S, Robbins C, 
Sood R, Makalowska I, Baxevanis A, Johnstone B, Laxer RM, Zemel L, Kim CA, Herd 
JK, Ihle J, Williams C, Johnson M, Raman V, Alonso LG, Brunoni D, Gerstein A, 
Papadopoulos N, Bahabri SA, Trent JM, Warman ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Human Genetics, Case Western Reserve 
University and University Hospitals of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Altered growth and function of synoviocytes, the intimal cells which line joint 
cavities and tendon sheaths, occur in a number of skeletal diseases. Hyperplasia 
of synoviocytes is found in both rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, 
despite differences in the underlying aetiologies of the two disorders. We have 
studied the autosomal recessive disorder camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa 
vara-pericarditis syndrome (CACP; MIM 208250) to identify biological pathways 
that lead to synoviocyte hyperplasia, the principal pathological feature of this 
syndrome. Using a positional-candidate approach, we identified mutations in a 
gene (CACP) encoding a secreted proteoglycan as the cause of CACP. The CACP 
protein, which has previously been identified as both 'megakaryocyte stimulating 
factor precursor' and 'superficial zone protein', contains domains that have 
homology to somatomedin B, heparin-binding proteins, mucins and haemopexins. In 
addition to expression in joint synovium and cartilage, CACP is expressed in 
non-skeletal tissues including liver and pericardium. The similarity of CACP 
sequence to that of other protein families and the expression of CACP in 
non-skeletal tissues suggest it may have diverse biological activities.

DOI: 10.1038/15496
PMID: 10545950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]