1. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 15;344 Pt 1(Pt 1):159-66.

Identification of residues essential for a two-step reaction by malonyl-CoA 
synthetase from Rhizobium trifolii.

An JH(1), Lee GY, Jung JW, Lee W, Kim YS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science, Bioproducts Research Centre, 
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Malonyl-CoA synthetase (MCS) catalyses the formation of malonyl-CoA in a 
two-step reaction consisting of the adenylation of malonate with ATP followed by 
malonyl transfer from malonyl-AMP to CoA. In order to identify amino acid 
residues essential for each step of the enzyme, catalysis based on chemical 
modification and database analysis, Arg-168, Lys-170, and His-206 were selected 
for site-directed mutagenesis. Glutathione-S-transferase-fused enzyme (GST-MCS) 
was constructed and mutagenized to make R168G, K170M, R168G/K170M and H206L 
mutants, respectively. The MCS activity of soluble form GST-MCS was the same as 
that of wild-type MCS. Circular dichroism spectra for the four mutant enzymes 
were nearly identical to that for the GST-MCS, indicating that Arg-168, Lys-170 
and His-206 are not important for conformation but presumably for substrate 
binding and/or catalysis. HPLC analysis of products revealed that the 
intermediate malonyl-AMP is not accumulated during MCS catalysis and that none 
of the mutant enzymes accumulated it either. Kinetic analysis of the mutants 
revealed that Lys-170 and His-206 play a critical role for ATP binding and the 
formation of malonyl-AMP, whereas Arg-168 is critical for formation of 
malonyl-CoA and specificity for malonyl-AMP. Molecular modelling based on the 
crystal structures of luciferase and gramicidin S synthetase 1 provided MCS 
structure which could fully explain all these biochemical data even though the 
MCS model was generated by comparative modelling.

PMCID: PMC1220626
PMID: 10548546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]