1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 12;274(46):32943-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32943.

The tetrameric protein transthyretin dissociates to a non-native monomer in 
solution. A novel model for amyloidogenesis.

Quintas A(1), Saraiva MJ, Brito RM.

Author information:
(1)Centro de NeurociÃªncias de Coimbra, Universidade de Coimbra, 3004-517 
Coimbra, Portugal.

In amyloidosis, normally innocuous soluble proteins polymerize to form insoluble 
fibrils. Amyloid fibril formation and deposition have been associated with a 
wide range of diseases, including spongiform encephalopathies, Alzheimer's 
disease, and familial amyloid polyneuropathies (FAP). In certain forms of FAP, 
the amyloid fibrils are mostly constituted by variants of transthyretin (TTR), a 
homotetrameric plasma protein implicated in the transport of thyroxine and 
retinol. The most common amyloidogenic TTR variant is V30M-TTR, and L55P-TTR is 
the variant associated with the most aggressive form of FAP. Recently, we 
reported that TTR dissociates to a monomeric species at pH 7.0 and nearly 
physiological ionic strengths (Quintas, A., Saraiva, M. J., and Brito, R. M. 
(1997) FEBS Lett. 418, 297-300). Here, we show that the tetramer dissociation is 
apparently irreversible; and based on intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and 
fluorescence quenching experiments, we show that the monomeric species formed 
upon tetramer dissociation is non-native. We also show, based on 
1-anilino-8-naph-thalenesulfonate binding studies, that this monomeric species 
appears not to behave like a molten globule. These data allowed us to propose a 
model for TTR amyloidogenesis based on tetramer dissociation occurring naturally 
under commonly observed physiological solution conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.46.32943
PMID: 10551861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]