1. Endocrinology. 1999 Dec;140(12):5736-45. doi: 10.1210/endo.140.12.7211.

Anatomical distribution of prolactin-releasing peptide and its receptor suggests 
additional functions in the central nervous system and periphery.

Roland BL(1), Sutton SW, Wilson SJ, Luo L, Pyati J, Huvar R, Erlander MG, 
Lovenberg TW.

Author information:
(1)R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute, San Diego, California 92121, 
USA. broland@prius.jnj.com

A recently identified neuropeptide with PRL-releasing capabilities binds to and 
activates a previously known orphan G protein-coupled receptor, GPR10. We 
initiated a study to define the pharmacology of the peptide/receptor interaction 
and to identify the distribution of the peptide and its receptor in the central 
nervous system to elucidate sites of action of the peptide. The PRL-releasing 
peptide (PrRP) is a C-terminally amidated, 31-amino acid peptide derived from a 
98-amino acid precursor. Radioiodinated PrRP-(1-31) binds to its receptor with 
high affinity (1 nM) and stimulates calcium mobilization in CHOK1 cells stably 
transfected with the receptor. A series of N-terminal deletions reveals that the 
PrRP-(12-31) amino acid is equipotent to PrRP-(1-31). Further N-terminal 
deletions reduce the affinity of the ligand considerably, although PrRP-(25-31) 
is still able to compete for binding and behaves as an agonist. The arginine 
residues at position 26 and 30 are critical for binding, as substitution with 
either lysine or citrulline reduces the affinity substantially. In situ 
hybridization reveals a distinct tissue distribution for both the peptide and 
receptor messenger RNAs. The receptor is expressed abundantly in the reticular 
thalamic nucleus, periventricular hypothalamus, dorsomedial hypothalamus, 
nucleus of the solitary tract, area postrema, anterior pituitary, and adrenal 
medulla. The peptide messenger RNA is expressed in the dorsomedial hypothalamus, 
nucleus of the solitary tract, ventrolateral reticular nucleus, and intestine. 
This tissue distribution suggests an alternative function of PrRP than its 
purported hypophysiotropic function, such as a potential role for PrRP in the 
central feedback control of neuroendocrine and autonomic homeostasis. Further 
work using selective agonists and antagonists should help define additional 
physiological roles of this novel mammalian neuropeptide.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.140.12.7211
PMID: 10579339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]