1. J Bacteriol. 1999 Dec;181(23):7235-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.181.23.7235-7242.1999.

Overexpression of a dominant-negative allele of SEC4 inhibits growth and protein 
secretion in Candida albicans.

Mao Y(1), Kalb VF, Wong B.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Candida albicans SEC4 was cloned by complementing the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
sec4-8 mutation, and its deduced protein product (Sec4p) was 63% identical to S. 
cerevisiae Sec4p. One chromosomal SEC4 allele in C. albicans CAI4 was readily 
disrupted by homologous gene targeting, but efforts to disrupt the second allele 
yielded no viable null mutants. Although this suggested that C. albicans SEC4 
was essential, it provided no information about this gene's functions. 
Therefore, we constructed a mutant sec4 allele encoding an amino acid 
substitution (Ser-28-->Asn) analogous to the Ser-17-->Asn substitution in a 
trans-dominant inhibitor of mammalian Ras protein. GAL1-regulated expression 
plasmids carrying the mutant sec4 allele (pS28N) had minimal effects in 
glucose-incubated C. albicans transformants, but six of nine transformants 
tested grew very slowly in galactose. Incubation of pS28N transformants in 
galactose also inhibited secretion of aspartyl protease (Sap) and caused 90-nm 
secretory vesicles to accumulate intracellularly, and plasmid curing restored 
growth and Sap secretion to wild-type levels. These results imply that C. 
albicans SEC4 is required for growth and protein secretion and that it functions 
at a later step in the protein secretion pathway than formation of post-Golgi 
secretory vesicles. They also demonstrate the feasibility of using inducible 
dominant-negative alleles to define the functions of essential genes in C. 
albicans.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.181.23.7235-7242.1999
PMCID: PMC103685
PMID: 10572126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]