1. Biochemistry. 1999 Oct 26;38(43):14125-30. doi: 10.1021/bi991876p.

Fatty acid amide hydrolase competitively degrades bioactive amides and esters 
through a nonconventional catalytic mechanism.

Patricelli MP(1), Cravatt BF.

Author information:
(1)The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, Department of Cell Biology, The 
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The greater reactivity of esters relative to amides has typically been reflected 
in their faster rates of both solvolysis and enzymatic hydrolysis. In contrast 
to this general principle, the serine hydrolytic enzyme fatty acid amide 
hydrolase (FAAH) was found to degrade amides and esters with equivalent 
catalytic efficiencies. Mutation of a single lysine residue (K142) to alanine 
(K142A) abolished this property, generating a catalytically compromised enzyme 
that hydrolyzed esters more than 500-fold faster than amides. Conversion of this 
same lysine residue to glutamic acid (K142E) produced an enzyme that also 
displayed severely diminished catalytic activity, but one that now maintained 
FAAH's ability to react with amides and esters at competitive rates. The 
significant catalytic defects exhibited by both the K142A and K142E mutants, in 
conjunction with their altered pH-rate profiles, support a role for lysine 142 
as a general base involved in the activation of FAAH's serine nucleophile. 
Moreover, the dramatically different amide versus ester selectivities observed 
for the K142A and K142E mutants reveal that FAAH's catalytic efficiency and 
catalytic selectivity depend on distinguishable properties of the same residue, 
with the former relying on a strong catalytic base and the latter requiring 
coupled general acid-base catalysis. We hypothesize that FAAH's unusual 
catalytic properties may empower the enzyme to function effectively as both an 
amidase and esterase in vivo.

DOI: 10.1021/bi991876p
PMID: 10571985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]