1. Biochimie. 1999 Aug-Sep;81(8-9):847-57. doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(99)00211-4.

Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis PriA proteins essential for 
recombination-dependent DNA replication: involvement of ATPase/helicase activity 
of PriA for inducible stable DNA replication.

Masai H(1), Deneke J, Furui Y, Tanaka T, Arai KI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical 
Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan.

The E. coli PriA protein, a DEXH-type DNA helicase with unique zinc finger-like 
motifs interrupting the helicase domains, is an essential component of the 
phiX174-type primosome and plays critical roles in RecA-dependent inducible and 
constitutive stable DNA replication (iSDR and cSDR, respectively) as well as in 
recombination-dependent repair of double-stranded DNA breaks. B. subtilis PriA 
(BsPriA) protein contains the conserved helicase domains as well as zinc 
finger-like motifs with 34% overall identity with the E. coli counterpart. We 
overexpressed and purified BsPriA and examined its biochemical properties. 
BsPriA binds specifically to both n'-pas (primosome assembly site) and D-loop 
and hydrolyzes ATP in the presence of n'-pas albeit with a specific activity 
about 30% of that of E. coli PriA. However, it is not capable of supporting 
n'-pas-dependent replication in vitro, nor is it able to support ColE1-type 
plasmid replication in vivo which requires the function of the phiX174-type 
primosome. We also show that a zinc finger mutant is not able to support 
recombination-dependent DNA replication, as measured by the level of iSDR after 
a period of thymine starvation, nor wild-type level of growth, cell morphology 
and UV resistance. Unexpectedly, we discovered that an ATPase-deficient mutant 
(K230D) is not able to support iSDR to a full extent, although it can restore 
normal growth rate and UV resistance as well as non-filamentous morphology in 
priA1::kan mutant. K230D was previously reported to be fully functional in 
assembly of the phiX174-type primosome at a single-stranded n'-pas. Our results 
indicate that ATP hydrolysis/ helicase activity of PriA may be specifically 
required for DNA replication from recombination intermediates in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-9084(99)00211-4
PMID: 10572298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]