1. J Physiol. 1999 Dec 1;521 Pt 2(Pt 2):517-27. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00517.x.

Sensitization of visceral afferents to bradykinin in rat jejunum in vitro.

Brunsden AM(1), Grundy D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, 
Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. a.brunsden@sheffield.ac.uk

1. We have investigated the effects of inflammatory mediators on visceral 
afferent discharge and afferent responses to bradykinin (BK) in rat jejunum 
using a novel in vitro technique. 2. Prostaglandin E2 (1 microM) augmented 
responses to BK without affecting basal firing, while histamine (100 microM) and 
adenosine (100 microM) activated basal discharge and enhanced BK responses. In 
contrast, 5-HT (100 microM) increased basal discharge without influencing 
responses to BK. 3. Afferent discharge induced by histamine was inhibited by 
both H1 (pyrilamine) and H3 (thioperamide) but not H2 (ranitidine) receptor 
antagonists at 10 microM. In contrast, sensitization to BK induced by histamine 
was inhibited by ranitidine (10 microM). 4. Afferent discharge induced by 
adenosine was blocked by the A1 receptor antagonist DPCPX (10 microM) but 
remained unaffected by A2A receptor blockade with ZM241385 (10 microM). In 
contrast, sensitization of BK responses by adenosine was unaffected by both 
antagonists. Basal discharge and BK-induced responses were unaffected by the A3 
receptor agonist IB-MECA (1 microM). While involvement of A2B receptors is not 
excluded, adenosine may activate afferent discharge through A1 receptors, while 
sensitization to BK could involve a receptor other than A1, A2A or A3, possibly 
the A2B receptor. 5. Inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase with naproxen (10 microM) 
prevented sensitization after histamine but not adenosine. 6. Sensitization was 
mimicked by dibutyryl cAMP. This occurred without changes in basal firing and 
was unaffected by naproxen. 7. In conclusion, afferent discharge induced by BK 
is augmented by histamine, adenosine and PGE2, but not by 5-HT. Evidence 
suggests that sensitization involves separate mechanisms from afferent 
activation. Sensitization may be mediated by increases in cAMP following direct 
activation by mediators at the nerve terminal or through indirect pathways such 
as the release of prostaglandins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00517.x
PMCID: PMC2269676
PMID: 10581320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]