1. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Jan 3;90(1):12-6. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(20000103)90:1<12::aid-ajmg3>3.0.co;2-h.

Role of amniotic fluid homocysteine level and of fetal 5, 
10-methylenetetrahydrafolate reductase genotype in the etiology of neural tube 
defects.

Wenstrom KD(1), Johanning GL, Owen J, Johnston KE, Acton S, Tamura T.

Author information:
(1)The Center for Obstetric Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35233-7333, USA.

A mutation in the gene 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), leading 
to altered homocysteine metabolism, has been identified in parents and fetuses 
with fetal neural tube defects. We sought to determine which is of greater 
importance in fetal neural tube defect formation: the fetal MTHFR mutation or 
elevated amniotic fluid homocysteine level. We retrieved stored amniotic fluid 
from cases of isolated fetal neural tube defect diagnosed from 1988 to 1998 (n = 
80), and from normal controls matched for race, month and year of amniocentesis, 
and maternal age. The presence or absence of the 677C-->T mutation of MTHFR was 
determined and homocysteine levels were measured; cases and controls were 
compared. Significantly more cases than controls were heterozygous or homozygous 
for the 677C-->T MTHFR mutation (44% vs 17%, P < or = 0.001). Cases were also 
significantly more likely than controls to have an amniotic fluid homocysteine 
level above the 90th centile (>1.85 micromol per liter); 27% vs 10%, P = 0.02. 
Thirty one cases and 12 controls had an abnormal genotype; however, amniotic 
fluid homocysteine levels were not significantly different between these two 
groups (6/31, or 19% of cases had an elevated homocysteine compared to 1/12, or 
8% of controls; P = 0.65). In contrast, 40 cases and 60 controls had a normal 
genotype; the neural tube defect cases had significantly higher homocysteine 
levels (13/40, or 32% of cases had an elevated homocysteine level compared to 
only 6/60, or 10% of controls; P = 0.008). Although both abnormal fetal MTHFR 
genotype and abnormal amniotic fluid homocysteine concentration are 
significantly associated with neural tube defects, the association with amniotic 
fluid homocysteine concentration is significant regardless of the fetal MTHFR 
genotype. The relationship between maternal and fetal homocysteine metabolism is 
complex.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(20000103)90:1<12::aid-ajmg3>3.0.co;2-h
PMID: 10602111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]