1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):769-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.2.769.

Biochemical and genetic evidence for three transmembrane domains in the class I 
holin, lambda S.

Gründling A(1), Bläsi U, Young R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

lambda S, the prototype class I holin gene, encodes three potential 
transmembrane domains in its 107 codons, whereas 21 S, the class II prototype 
spans only 71 codons and encodes two transmembrane domains. Many holin genes, 
including lambda S and 21 S, have the "dual-start" regulatory motif at the N 
terminus, suggesting that class I and II holins have the same topology. The 
primary structure of 21 S strongly suggests a bitopic "helical-hairpin" 
topology, with N and C termini on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. However, 
lambda S chimeras with an N-terminal signal sequence show Lep-dependent 
function, indicating that the N-terminal domain of S requires export. Here the 
signal sequence chimera is shown to be sensitive to the missense change A52V, 
which blocks normal S function. Moreover, cysteine-modification studies in 
isolated membranes using a collection of S variants with single-cysteine 
substitutions show that the positions in the core of the 3 putative 
transmembrane domains of lambda S are protected. Also, S proteins with 
single-cysteine substitutions in the predicted cytoplasmic and periplasmic loops 
are more efficiently labeled in inverted membrane vesicles and whole cells, 
respectively. These data constitute direct evidence that the holin S(lambda) has 
three transmembrane domains and indicate that class I and class II holins have 
different topologies, despite regulatory and functional homology.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.2.769
PMID: 10625606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]