1. Biochemistry. 2000 Jan 11;39(1):86-91. doi: 10.1021/bi991903b.

Inhibitory region of troponin I: Ca(2+)-dependent structural and environmental 
changes in the troponin-tropomyosin complex and in reconstituted thin filaments.

Kobayashi T(1), Kobayashi M, Gryczynski Z, Lakowicz JR, Collins JH.

Author information:
(1)Medical Biotechnology Center, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, 
Baltimore 21201, USA.

In muscle thin filaments, the inhibitory region (residues 96-117) of troponin I 
(TnI) is thought to interact with troponin C (TnC) in the presence of Ca(2+) and 
with actin in the absence of Ca(2+). To better understand these interactions, we 
prepared mutant TnIs which contained a single Cys-96 or Cys-117 and labeled them 
with the thiol-specific fluorescent probe 
N-(iodoacetyl)-N'-(1-sulfo-5-naphthyl)ethylenediamine (IAEDANS). We 
characterized the microenvironments of the AEDANS labels on TnI in the presence 
and absence of Ca(2+) by measuring the extent of acrylamide quenching of 
fluorescence and lifetime-resolved anisotropy. In the troponin-tropomyosin 
(Tn-Tm) complex, the AEDANS labels on both Cys-96 and Cys-117 were less 
accessible to solvent and less flexible in the presence of Ca(2+), reflecting 
closer interactions with TnC under these conditions. In reconstituted thin 
filaments, the environment of the AEDANS on Cys-96 was not greatly affected by 
Ca(2+), while the AEDANS on Cys-117 was more accessible but significantly less 
flexible as it moved away from actin and interacted strongly with TnC in the 
presence of Ca(2+). We used fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) to 
measure distances between AEDANS on TnI Cys-96 or Cys-117 and 
4-¿[(dimethylamino)phenyl]azo¿phenyl-4'-maleimide (DABmal) on actin Cys-374 in 
reconstituted thin filaments. In the absence of Ca(2+), the mean distances were 
40.2 A for Cys-96 and 35.2 A for Cys-117. In the presence of Ca(2+), Cys-96 
moved away from actin Cys-374 by approximately 3.6 A, while Cys-117 moved away 
by approximately 8 A. This suggests the existence of a flexible "hinge" region 
near the middle of TnI, allowing amino acid residues in the N-terminal half of 
TnI to interact with TnC in a Ca(2+)-independent manner, while the C-terminal 
half of TnI binds to actin in the absence of Ca(2+) or to TnC in the presence of 
Ca(2+). This is the first report to demonstrate structural movement of the 
inhibitory region of TnI in the thin filament.

DOI: 10.1021/bi991903b
PMCID: PMC7001381
PMID: 10625482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]