1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):29-34. doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.1.6263.

Associations between the leptin receptor gene and adiposity in middle-aged 
Caucasian males from the HERITAGE family study.

Chagnon YC(1), Wilmore JH, Borecki IB, Gagnon J, Pérusse L, Chagnon M, Collier 
GR, Leon AS, Skinner JS, Rao DC, Bouchard C.

Author information:
(1)Physical Activity Sciences Laboratory, Laval University, Ste-Foy, Québec, 
Canada. yvon.chagnon@kin.msp.ulaval.ca

Linkage and association studies between three exonic polymorphisms in the leptin 
receptor gene and body composition variables in the HERITAGE Family Study were 
undertaken. Polymorphisms K109R, Q223R, and K656N have been analyzed with body 
mass index (BMI), sum of height skinfolds (SF8), fat mass (FM), percent body fat 
(%FAT), fat free mass, and plasma leptin level. Single-point linkage analysis 
and covariance analysis across genotypes were performed, by race, on phenotypes 
adjusted for age and sex. Blacks (88 parents; 231 adult offspring) from 115 
nuclear families (72-119 sibpairs) and Caucasians (192 parents; 330 adult 
offspring) from 99 nuclear families (319-364 sibpairs) were used for these 
analyses. In Caucasians, BMI and FM showed suggestive linkages with K109R (P = 
0.02 and P = 0.05, respectively) and associations with Q223R (P = 0.005 and P = 
0.03, respectively). In blacks, no statistically significant linkage or 
association was observed. In Caucasians, associations with Q223R were observed 
in parents, but not in offspring, for BMI, FM, and %FAT (0.04< or =P< or 
=0.0001). Males, not females, showed differences across genotypes for the same 
phenotypes plus SF8 and leptin (0.03< or = P< or =0.0002). Carriers of the R223 
allele showed higher values than noncarriers for BMI (+4 U, P = 0.0001), SF8 
(+30 mm, P = 0.01), FM (+7 kg, P = 0.0004), %FAT (+5%, P = 0.0002), and leptin 
(+4 ng/mL, P = 0.0006). These results indicate a significant effect of leptin 
receptor on adiposity in middle-aged Caucasian males.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.85.1.6263
PMID: 10634359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]