1. Int J Cardiol. 2000 Jan 15;72(2):151-61. doi: 10.1016/s0167-5273(99)00184-9.

Synergistic effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme and angiotensinogen gene on 
cardiac hypertrophy.

Kim HS(1), Lee MM, Oh BH, Kim KI, Han KH, Park SK, Sohn DW, Yoo KY, Park YB, 
Choi YS, Lee YW.

Author information:
(1)Heart Research Institute and Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, South Korea.

AIMS: There are controversies concerning the association of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism with 
left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), and the unclear association between 
angiotensinogen (ATG) M235T polymorphism and LVH. We investigated both the 
separate and interactive effects of these two genes on LVH in patients (N=396) 
with cardiovascular disease and normal healthy volunteers (N=133).
RESULTS: Frequency of DD genotype of ACE gene was significantly (P<0.05) higher 
in patients with LVH than patients without LVH or normal controls. Frequency of 
IT genotype of ATG gene in patients with LVH was significantly (P<0.01) greater 
than that in normal controls or marginally (P=0.1) higher than that in patients 
without LVH. These findings were also observed in normotensive patients and 
normal controls after excluding hypertensive patients. Only in patient group, 
the frequency of DD genotype in the highest quartile of LVMI was significantly 
greater than that in the lowest quartile (P<0.05). The higher tendency of TT 
genotype in the highest quartile patients compared with that in the lowest, did 
not reach statistical significance. In combined genotype analysis, there was a 
remarkable difference in LVMI between the two extreme double homozygotes only in 
patient group (156+/-25 versus 109+/-25 g/m2 for TT+DD versus MM+II) (P<0.01). 
In ANCOVA, the interaction term composed of ACE and ATG genotype was a 
significant independent variable for LVMI only in the male patient group 
(P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The D-allele of ACE and T-allele of ATG gene exert a synergistic 
effect on cardiac hypertrophy in male patients with cardiovascular diseases, but 
not in normal healthy population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-5273(99)00184-9
PMID: 10646957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]