1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Feb 24;268(3):804-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2000.2227.

A two-hit model for development of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B by RET 
mutations.

Iwashita T(1), Murakami H, Kurokawa K, Kawai K, Miyauchi A, Futami H, Qiao S, 
Ichihara M, Takahashi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65 
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2B mutations have been reported at 
methionine 918 or alanine 883 in the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET 
proto-oncogene. Recently, a new combination of two germline missense mutations 
at valine 804 and tyrosine 806 was identified in a patient with MEN 2B-like 
clinical phenotypes including medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal neuroma, and 
marfanoid habitus. In this case, valine 804 and tyrosine 806 were replaced with 
methionine and cysteine, respectively. In the present study, biological 
activities of RET with these new mutations were compared with those with known 
MEN 2A or MEN 2B mutations. The transforming activity of RET with the 
V804M/Y806C mutation was about 8- to 13-fold higher than that of RET with a 
single V804M or Y806C mutation. Like RET with the M918T or A883F MEN 2B 
mutation, the transforming activity of RET with the V804M/Y806C mutation was not 
affected by substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine 905 that abolished the 
activity of RET with the MEN 2A mutation. On the other hand, substitution of 
phenylalanine for tyrosines 864 and 952 drastically diminished the activity of 
RET with the V804M/Y806C, M918T or A883F mutation, suggesting that these three 
mutant proteins have similar biological properties.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.2227
PMID: 10679286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]