1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 29;97(5):2168-73. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.040554597.

Oral administration of a dual analog of two myasthenogenic T cell epitopes 
down-regulates experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis in mice.

Paas-Rozner M(1), Dayan M, Paas Y, Changeux JP, Wirguin I, Sela M, Mozes E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, 
Israel.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) and experimental autoimmune MG (EAMG) are T 
cell-regulated, antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases. The major autoantigen in 
MG is the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR). Two peptides, representing 
sequences of the human AChR alpha-subunit, p195-212 and p259-271, were 
previously shown to be immunodominant T cell epitopes in MG patients as well as, 
respectively, in SJL and BALB/c mice. A dual analog (termed Lys-262-Ala-207) 
composed of the tandemly arranged two single amino acid analogs of p195-212 and 
p259-271 was shown to inhibit, in vitro and in vivo, MG-associated autoimmune 
responses. Furthermore, the dual analog could down-regulate myasthenogenic 
manifestations in mice with EAMG that was induced by inoculation of a pathogenic 
T cell line. In the present study, the ability of the dual analog to treat EAMG 
induced in susceptible C57BL/6 mice by native Torpedo AChR was evaluated. Mice 
that were diagnosed to have clinical symptoms of EAMG were treated with the dual 
analog by oral administration, 500 microg per mouse three times a week for 5-8 
weeks. Treatment with the dual analog down-regulated the clinical manifestations 
of the ongoing disease as assessed by the clinical score, grip strength 
(measured by a grip strength meter), and electromyography. The effects on the 
clinical EAMG correlated with a reduced production of anti-AChR antibody as well 
as a decrease in the secretion of interleukin-2 and, more dramatically, 
interferon-gamma, in response to AChR triggering. Thus, the dual analog is an 
efficient immunomodulator of EAMG in mice and might be of specific therapeutic 
potential for MG.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.040554597
PMCID: PMC15772
PMID: 10681457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]