1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 10;275(10):7117-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7117.

The yeast mitochondrial citrate transport protein. Probing the roles of 
cysteines, Arg(181), and Arg(189) in transporter function.

Xu Y(1), Kakhniashvili DA, Gremse DA, Wood DO, Mayor JA, Walters DE, Kaplan RS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, University of South Alabama College of Medicine, 
Mobile, Alabama 36688, USA.

Utilizing site-directed mutagenesis in combination with chemical modification of 
mutated residues, we have studied the roles of cysteine and arginine residues in 
the mitochondrial citrate transport protein (CTP) from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Our strategy consisted of the sequential replacement of each of the four 
endogenous cysteine residues with Ser or in the case of Cys(73) with Val. 
Wild-type and mutated forms of the CTP were overexpressed in Escherichia coli, 
purified, and reconstituted in phospholipid vesicles. During the sequential 
replacement of each Cys, the effects of both hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
sulfhydryl reagents were examined. The data indicate that Cys(73) and Cys(256) 
are primarily responsible for inhibition of the wild-type CTP by hydrophilic 
sulfhydryl reagents. Experiments conducted with triple Cys replacement mutants 
(i.e. Cys(192) being the only remaining Cys) indicated that sulfhydryl reagents 
no longer inhibit but in fact stimulate CTP function 2-3-fold. Following the 
simultaneous replacement of all four endogenous Cys, the functional properties 
of the resulting Cys-less CTP were shown to be quite similar to those of the 
wild-type protein. Finally, utilizing the Cys-less CTP as a template, the roles 
of Arg(181) and Arg(189), two positively charged residues located within 
transmembrane domain IV, in CTP function were examined. Replacement of either 
residue with a Cys abolishes function, whereas replacement with a Lys or a Cys 
that is subsequently covalently modified with (2-aminoethyl)methanethiosulfonate 
hydrobromide, a reagent that restores positive charge at this site, supports CTP 
function. The results clearly show that positive charge at these two positions 
is essential for CTP function, although the chemistry of the guanidinium residue 
is not. Finally, these studies: (i) definitely demonstrate that Cys residues do 
not play an important role in the mechanism of the CTP; (ii) prove the utility 
of the Cys-less CTP for studying structure/function relationships within this 
metabolically important protein; and (iii) have led to the hypothesis that the 
polar face of alpha-helical transmembrane domain IV, within which Arg(181), 
Arg(189), and Cys(192) are located, constitutes an essential portion of the 
citrate translocation pathway through the membrane.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.10.7117
PMID: 10702279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]