1. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(2):76-83. doi: 10.1007/s100380050015.

Y chromosomal DNA variation in east Asian populations and its potential for 
inferring the peopling of Korea.

Kim W(1), Shin DJ, Harihara S, Kim YJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Dankook University, Cheonan, Choong-Nam, Republic of 
Korea. wookkim@ansco.dankook.ac.kr

We have examined variations of five polymorphic loci (DYS287, DXYS5Y, SRY465, 
DYS19, and DXYS156Y) on the Y chromosome in samples from a total of 1260 males 
in eight ethnic groups of East Asia. We found four unique haplotypes constructed 
from three biallelic markers in these samples of East Asians. The Japanese 
population was characterized by a relatively high frequency of either the 
haplotype I-2b (-/Y2/T) or II-1 (+/Y1/C). These dual patterns of the 
distribution of Y chromosomes (I-2b/II-1) were also found in Korea, although 
they were present at relatively low frequencies. The haplotype II-1 was present 
in Northeast Asian populations (Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and Mongolians) 
only, except for one male from the Thai population among the Southeast Asian 
populations (Indonesians, Philippines, Thais, and Vietnamese). The Japanese were 
revealed to have the highest frequency of this haplotype (27.5%), followed by 
Koreans (2.9%), Mongolians (2.6%), and mainland Chinese (2.2%). In contrast, the 
frequency of the haplotype I-2b was found to be 17.1% in the Japanese, 9.5% in 
Indonesian, 6.3% in Korean, 3.8% in Vietnamese, and 2.7% in Thai samples. These 
findings suggested that the chromosomes of haplotype I-2b were likely derived 
from certain areas of Northeast Asia, the region closest to Southeast Asia. 
Phylogenetic analysis using the neighbor-joining tree also reflected a general 
distinction between Southeast and Northeast Asian populations. The phylogeny 
revealed a closer genetic relationship between Japanese and Koreans than to the 
other surveyed Asian populations. Based on the result of the dual patterns of 
the haplotype distribution, it is more likely that the population structure of 
Koreans may not have evolved from a single ancient population derived from 
Northeast Asians, but through dual infusions of Y chromosomes entering Korea 
from two different waves of East Asians.

DOI: 10.1007/s100380050015
PMID: 10721667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]