1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 23;275(25):19389-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000426200.

Autophosphorylation of type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase regulates 
its lipid kinase activity.

Itoh T(1), Ishihara H, Shibasaki Y, Oka Y, Takenawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases (PIPKs) have important roles in the 
production of various phosphoinositides. For type I PIP5Ks (PIP5KI), a broad 
substrate specificity is known. They phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol 
4-phosphate most effectively but also phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol (PI), 
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, and phosphatidylinositol (3,4)-bisphosphate 
(PI(3, 4)P(2)), resulting in the production of phosphatidylinositol (4, 
5)-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2)), phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, 
phosphatidylinositol (3,4)-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P(2)), phosphatidylinositol 
(3,5)-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P(2)), and phosphatidylinositol 
(3,4,5)-trisphosphate. We show here that PIP5KIs have also protein kinase 
activities. When each isozyme of PIP5KI (PIP5KIalpha, -beta, and -gamma) was 
subjected to in vitro kinase assay, autophosphorylation occurred. The lipid 
kinase-negative mutant of PIP5KIalpha (K138A) lost the protein kinase activity, 
suggesting the same catalytic mechanism for the lipid and the protein kinase 
activities. PIP5KIbeta expressed in Escherichia coli also retains this protein 
kinase activity, thus confirming that no co-immunoprecipitated protein kinase is 
involved. In addition, the autophosphorylation of PIP5KI is markedly enhanced by 
the addition of PI. No other phosphoinositides such as phosphatidylinositol 
phosphate, phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate, or phosphatidylinositol 
trisphosphate have such an effect. We also found that the PI-dependent 
autophosphorylation strongly suppresses the lipid kinase activity of PIP5KI. The 
lipid kinase activity of PIP5KI was decreased to one-tenth upon PI-dependent 
autophosphorylation. All these results indicate that the lipid kinase activity 
of PIP5KI that acts predominantly for PI(4,5)P(2) synthesis is regulated by 
PI-dependent autophosphorylation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M000426200
PMID: 10777481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]