1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 21;275(29):21836-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M909861199.

Minimization of parathyroid hormone. Novel amino-terminal parathyroid hormone 
fragments with enhanced potency in activating the type-1 parathyroid hormone 
receptor.

Shimizu M(1), Potts JT Jr, Gardella TJ.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal portions of the 1-34 fragment of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) contain the major determinants of receptor activation 
and receptor binding, respectively. We investigated how the amino-terminal 
signaling portion of PTH interacts with the receptor by utilizing analogs of the 
weakly active fragment, rat (r) PTH(1-14)NH(2), and cells transfected with the 
wild-type human PTH-1 receptor (hP1R-WT) or a truncated PTH-1 receptor which 
lacked most of the amino-terminal extracellular domain (hP1R-delNt). Of 132 
mono-substituted PTH(1-14) analogs, most having substitutions in the (1-9) 
region were inactive in assays of cAMP formation in LLC-PK1 cells stably 
expressing hP1R-WT, whereas most having substitutions in the (10-14) region were 
active. Several substitutions (e.g. Ser(3) --> Ala, Asn(10) --> Ala or Gln, 
Leu(11) --> Arg, Gly(12) --> Ala, His(14) --> Trp) enhanced activity 2-10-fold. 
These effects were additive, as [Ala(3),(10,12),Arg(11), Trp(14)] 
rPTH(1-14)NH(2) was 220-fold more potent than rPTH(1-14)NH(2) (EC(50) = 0.6 +/- 
0.1 and 133 +/- 16 micrometer, respectively). Native rPTH(1-11) was inactive, 
but [Ala(3,10), Arg(11)]rPTH(1-11)NH(2) achieved maximal cAMP stimulation 
(EC(50) = 17 micrometer). The modified PTH fragments induced cAMP formation with 
hP1R-delNt in COS-7 cells as potently as they did with hP1R-WT; PTH(1-34) was 
6,000-fold weaker with hP1R-delNt than with hP1R-WT. The most potent analog, 
[Ala(3,10,12),Arg(11), Trp(14)]rPTH(1-14)NH(2), stimulated inositol phosphate 
production with hP1R-WT. The results show that short NH(2)-terminal peptides of 
PTH can be optimized for considerable gains in signaling potency through 
modification of interactions involving the regions of the receptor containing 
the transmembrane domains and extracellular loops.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M909861199
PMID: 10777513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]