1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 28;275(30):22942-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001760200.

Elements of the primary structure of thrombomodulin required for efficient 
thrombin-activable fibrinolysis inhibitor activation.

Wang W(1), Nagashima M, Schneider M, Morser J, Nesheim M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, 
Canada.

Deletion and point mutants of soluble thrombomodulin were used to compare and 
contrast elements of primary structure required for the activation of 
thrombin-activable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) and protein C. The smallest 
mutant capable of efficiently promoting TAFI activation contained residues 
including the c-loop of epidermal growth factor-3 (EGF3) through EGF6. This 
mutant is 13 residues longer than the smallest mutant that functioned well with 
protein C; the latter consisted of residues from the interdomain loop connecting 
EGF3 and EGF4 through EGF6. Alanine point mutants showed no loss of function in 
protein C activation for mutations within the c-loop of EGF3. In TAFI 
activation, however, alanine mutations cause a 50% reduction at Tyr-337, 67% 
reductions at Asp-338 and Leu-339, and 90% or greater reductions at Val-340, 
Asp-341, and Glu-343. A mutation at Asp-349 in the peptide connecting EGF3 to 
EGF4 eliminated activity against both TAFI and protein C. Oxidation of Met-388 
in the peptide connecting EGF5 to EGF6 reduced the rate of protein C activation 
by 80% but marginally, if at all, affected the rate of TAFI activation. Mutation 
at Phe-376 severely reduced protein C activation but only marginally influenced 
that of TAFI. A Q387P mutation, however, severely reduced both activities. TAFI 
activation was shown to be Ca(2+)-dependent. The response, unlike that of 
protein C, was monotonic and was half-maximal at 0.25 mm Ca(2+). Like protein C 
activation, TAFI activation was eliminated by a monoclonal antibody directed at 
the thrombin-binding domain (EGF5) but was not affected by one directed at EGF2. 
Thus, elements of structure in the thrombin-binding domain are needed for the 
activation of both protein C and TAFI, but more of the primary structure is 
needed for TAFI activation. In addition, some residues are needed for one of the 
reactions but not the other.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001760200
PMID: 10801821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]