1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 May 22;9(9):1351-5. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.9.1351.

KRIT1 is mutated in hyperkeratotic cutaneous capillary-venous malformation 
associated with cerebral capillary malformation.

Eerola I(1), Plate KH, Spiegel R, Boon LM, Mulliken JB, Vikkula M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Cellular Pathology (ICP) 
and UniversitÃ© Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Avenue Hippocrate 75+4, B-1200 
Brussels, Belgium,

Hyperkeratotic capillary-venous malformations (HCCVMs) are rare cutaneous 
lesions that occur in a small subgroup of patients with cerebral capillary 
malformation (CCM). CCMs cause neurological problems that range from headaches 
to life-threatening intracranial bleeding. CCMs and HCCVMs have a similar 
histopathological appearance of dilated capillary-venous channels. Genetic 
linkage of inherited CCMs has been established to three chromosomal loci, 3q25. 
2-27, 7p13-15 and 7q21-22. The first mutations were identified in the CCM1 gene 
(located on 7q21-22), which encodes KRIT1 protein (KREV1 interaction trapped 1), 
presumably a membrane-bound protein with signalling activity. Although KRIT1 is 
known to interact with KREV1/RAP1A, a Ras-family GTPase, the exact function of 
KRIT1 in the formation of cerebral capillaries and veins is poorly understood. 
In this study, we screened five families with CCM for mutations in the KRIT1 
gene. In one of the families, CCMs co-segregated with HCCVMs. We identified a 
KRIT1Delta(G103)mutation in this family, suggesting that this rare form of the 
condition is also caused by mutations in the CCM1 gene and that KRIT1 is 
probably important for cutaneous vasculature. Interestingly, this deletion 
introduces the earliest stop codon among identified mutations, suggesting a 
possible correlation between the molecular alteration and the cutaneous 
phenotype. Another novel mutation, KRIT1(IVS2+2(T-->C)), was found in a family 
with only cerebral capillary-venous malformations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.9.1351
PMID: 10814716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]