1. Eur J Immunol. 2000 May;30(5):1281-9. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(200005)30:5<1281::AID-IMMU1281>3.0.CO;2-D.

Thymic selection is influenced by subtle structural variation involving the p4 
residue of an MHC class I-bound peptide.

Sasada T(1), Ghendler Y, Wang JH, Reinherz EL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

The T lineage repertoire is shaped by opposing processes of positive and 
negative selection. To probe the specificity of selection, N15 TCR-transgenic 
(tg) recombinase-activating gene (RAG)-2(- / -) H-2(b) mice recognizing the VSV8 
octapeptide RGYVYQGL bound to K(b) were utilized in conjunction with VSV8 
variants differing only at the central p4 position. The V4I mutant octamer, like 
VSV8, induces negative selection of immature double-positive thymocytes on the 
beta(2)-microglobulin (beta(2)M)(+ / +) background and is a strong agonist for 
mature N15 T cells. In contrast, V4L or V4norvaline octamers promote positive 
selection in N15tg RAG-2(-/-) beta(2)M(-/-) H-2(b) fetal thymic organ culture 
and are weak agonists for N15 T cells. Hence, the absence of a p4 side chain 
Cbeta-methyl group results in positive selection of the N15 TCR. Hydrophobicity 
of the p4 residues also modulates thymocyte fate: the positively selecting 
norvaline and leucine variants have one and two Cgamma-methyl groups, 
respectively, while the weakly selecting gamma-methylleucine p4 contains three 
Cgamma-methyl groups. Moreover, the most hydrophobic octamer containing p4 
cyclohexylglycine substitution fails to select. Thus, for N15 and presumably 
other MHC class I-restricted TCR, there is a high degree of structural 
specificity to peptide-dependent thymic selection processes.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(200005)30:5<1281::AID-IMMU1281>3.0.CO;2-D
PMID: 10820373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]