1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 11;275(32):24590-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000314200.

Arrestin binding to the G protein-coupled N-formyl peptide receptor is regulated 
by the conserved "DRY" sequence.

Bennett TA(1), Maestas DC, Prossnitz ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of New Mexico Health 
Science Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.

Following activation by ligand, the N-formyl peptide receptor (FPR) undergoes 
processing events initiated by phosphorylation that lead to receptor 
desensitization and internalization. Our previous results have shown that FPR 
internalization can occur in the absence of receptor desensitization, suggesting 
that FPR desensitization and internalization are controlled by distinct 
mechanisms. More recently, we have provided evidence that internalization of the 
FPR occurs via a mechanism that is independent of the actions of arrestin, 
dynamin, and clathrin. In the present report, we demonstrate that stimulation of 
the FPR with agonist leads to a significant translocation of arrestin-2 from the 
cytosol to the membrane. Fluorescence microscopy revealed that the translocated 
arrestin-2 is highly colocalized with the ligand-bound FPR. A D71A mutant FPR, 
which does not undergo activation or phosphorylation in response to ligand, did 
not colocalize with arrestin-2. Surprisingly, an R123G mutant FPR, which does 
not bind G protein but does become phosphorylated and subsequently internalized, 
also did not bind arrestin. These results indicate that arrestin binding is not 
required for FPR internalization and demonstrate for the first time that a 
common motif, the conserved "DRY" domain of G protein-coupled receptors, is 
essential for phosphorylation-dependent arrestin binding, as well as G protein 
activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000314200
PMID: 10823817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]