1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):25900-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M002672200.

The human homolog of Escherichia coli Orn degrades small single-stranded RNA and 
DNA oligomers.

Nguyen LH(1), Erzberger JP, Root J, Wilson DM 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Structural Biology Division, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, California 94551, USA.

We report here the identification of human homologues to the essential 
Escherichia coli Orn protein and the related yeast mitochondrial DNA-escape 
pathway regulatory factor Ynt20. The human proteins appear to arise from 
alternatively spliced transcripts, and are thus identical, except the human 
Ynt20 equivalent contains an NH(2)-terminal extension that possesses a predicted 
mitochondrial protease cleavage signal. In vitro analysis revealed that the 
smaller human protein exhibits a 3' to 5' exonuclease activity for small 
(primarily </=5 nucleotides in length) single-stranded RNA and DNA oligomers. We 
have named this human protein Sfn for small fragment nuclease to reflect its 
broad substrate range, and have termed the longer protein hSfnalpha. Sfn prefers 
Mn(2+) as a metal cofactor and displays a temperature-resistant (to 50 degrees 
C) nuclease activity. Kinetic analysis indicates that Sfn exhibits a similar 
affinity for small RNAs and DNAs (K(m) of approximately 1.5 micrometer), but 
degrades small RNAs approximately 4-fold more efficiently than DNA. Mutation of 
a conserved aspartate (Asp(136)) to alanine abolishes both nuclease activities 
of Sfn. Northern blot analysis revealed that a 1-kilobase transcript 
corresponding to SFN and/or SFNalpha (these mRNAs differ by only two 
nucleotides) is expressed at varying levels in all fetal and adult human tissues 
examined. Expressed tag sequence clone analysis found that the two splice 
variants, SFN to SFNalpha, are present at a ratio of roughly 4 to 1, 
respectively. The results presented within suggest a role for human Sfn in 
cellular nucleotide recycling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M002672200
PMID: 10851236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]