1. Diabetes. 2000 Jun;49(6):992-8. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.49.6.992.

Insulin signaling and action in cultured skeletal muscle cells from lean healthy 
humans with high and low insulin sensitivity.

Kr체tzfeldt J(1), Kausch C, Volk A, Klein HH, Rett K, H채ring HU, Stumvoll M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Eberhard-Karls-Universit채t T체bingen, Germany.

The aim of these studies was to investigate whether insulin resistance is 
primary to skeletal muscle. Myoblasts were isolated from muscle biopsies of 8 
lean insulin-resistant and 8 carefully matched insulin-sensitive subjects 
(metabolic clearance rates as determined by euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamp: 
5.8 +/- 0.5 vs. 12.3 +/- 1.7 ml x kg(-1) x min(-1), respectively; P < or = 0.05) 
and differentiated to myotubes. In these cells, insulin stimulation of glucose 
uptake, glycogen synthesis, insulin receptor (IR) kinase activity, and insulin 
receptor substrate 1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) 
activity were measured. Furthermore, insulin activation of protein kinase B 
(PKB) was compared with immunoblotting of serine residues at position 473. Basal 
glucose uptake (1.05 +/- 0.07 vs. 0.95 +/- 0.07 relative units, respectively; P 
= 0.49) and basal glycogen synthesis (1.02 +/- 0.11 vs. 0.98 +/- 0.11 relative 
units, respectively; P = 0.89) were not different in myotubes from 
insulin-resistant and insulin-sensitive subjects. Maximal insulin responsiveness 
of glucose uptake (1.35 +/- 0.03-fold vs. 1.41 +/- 0.05-fold over basal for 
insulin-resistant and insulin-sensitive subjects, respectively; P = 0.43) and 
glycogen synthesis (2.00 +/- 0.13-fold vs. 2.10 +/- 0.16-fold over basal for 
insulin-resistant and insulin-sensitive subjects, respectively; P = 0.66) were 
also not different. Insulin stimulation (1 nmol/l) of IR kinase and PI 3-kinase 
were maximal within 5 min (approximately 8- and 5-fold over basal, 
respectively), and insulin activation of PKB was maximal within 15 min 
(approximately 3.5-fold over basal). These time kinetics were not significantly 
different between groups. In summary, our data show that insulin action and 
signaling in cultured skeletal muscle cells from normoglycemic lean 
insulin-resistant subjects is not different from that in cells from 
insulin-sensitive subjects. This suggests an important role of environmental 
factors in the development of insulin resistance in skeletal muscle.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.49.6.992
PMID: 10866052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]