1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jul;267(13):3937-45. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01401.x.

The effect of tryptophanyl substitution on folding and structure of myoglobin.

Sirangelo I(1), Tavassi S, Martelli PL, Casadio R, Irace G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biofisica, Seconda UniversitÃ  di Napoli, Italy.

Mammalian myoglobins contain two tryptophanyl residues at the invariant 
positions 7 (A-5) and 14 (A-12) in the N-terminal region (A helix) of the 
protein molecule. The crucial role of tryptophanyl residues has been 
investigated by site-directed mutagenesis and molecular dynamics simulation. The 
apomyoglobin mutants with a double W-->F substitution were found to be not 
correctly folded and therefore not expressed as holoprotein. The introduction of 
a tyrosyl residue at position 7, that is, W7YW14F, resulted in the expression of 
a correctly folded myoglobin. Not correctly folded apomyoglobins were found with 
the following mutants: W7FW14Y, W7EW14F, W7FW14E, W7KW14F, W7FW14K. Moreover, in 
all these cases, very low levels of expression were observed. The acid-induced 
denaturation curves of wild-type and folded mutant W7YW14F, obtained following 
the fluorescence variation of the extrinsic fluorophore 
1-anilino-8-naphthalenesulfonate, revealed that the stability of the native 
state of mutant apoprotein is decreased, thus indicating that the replacement 
W-->Y in position 7 is able to restore a correct folding but not the same 
stability. Molecular dynamics simulation indicated that both tryptophans are 
involved in forming favorable, specific tertiary interactions in the native 
apomyoglobin structure. The lack of some of these interactions caused by 
tryptophanyl replacement affects the overall protein structure and may provide 
an explanation for the observed stability decrease. In the case of the double 
W-->F substitution, the simulated structure shows conclusively the domain formed 
by helices A, G and H to be not correctly folded. This effect is attenuated if 
at least one of the two residues is conserved or a tyrosyl residue replaces W7.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01401.x
PMID: 10866792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]