1. Gene. 2000 Jun 13;251(1):63-71. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00188-8.

Characterization of the Fugu rubripes NLK and FN5 genes flanking the NF1 
(Neurofibromatosis type 1) gene in the 5' direction and mapping of the human 
counterparts.

Kehrer-Sawatzki H(1), Moschgath E, Maier C, Legius E, Elgar G, Krone W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany. 
hildegard.kehrer-sawatzki@medizin.uni-ulm.de

To complete the analysis of the Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) gene region in 
Fugu rubripes, we characterized the upstream flanking region of the NF1 gene and 
identified the FN5 (flanking the Fugu NF1 gene in 5' direction) gene and the NLK 
(Nemo-like kinase) gene as its flanking genes. The FN5 gene spans 3807bp and 
encompasses four exons, three of which belong to the expanded 5' UTR. Only 11% 
of the FN5 transcript is protein-coding. The function of the FN5 protein 
spanning 59 amino acids is unknown. We also characterized the human and the 
mouse FN5 transcripts and found 85% and 83% similarity of deduced amino acid 
sequences compared with Fugu. Two copies of the human FN5 gene were identified, 
one on chromosome 17q21.3-q22 several megabases distal to the NF1 gene at 
17q11.2. The second copy of the FN5 gene was mapped to 11q13.3-q23.3. In Fugu, 
the FN5 gene is flanked by the NLK gene, which spans 4513bp from the translation 
start to the stop codon and encompasses 11 exons. Comparing the deduced amino 
acid sequences, 82% overall similarity was observed between Fugu and mouse or 
human NLK and 67% similarity between the Fugu NLK and the highly related LIT-1 
kinase of Caenorhabditis elegans, which has been shown, like the vertebrate 
counterpart, to be involved in the Wnt signalling pathway. We mapped the human 
NLK gene to 17q11.2 between markers D17S935 and D17S120, more than 1Mb proximal 
to the NF1 gene. The characterization of the 5' flanking region presented here, 
together with that of the 3' region, demonstrates the profound differences 
between Fugu and human considering the gene content within the region flanking 
the NF1 gene.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(00)00188-8
PMID: 10863097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]