1. Oncogene. 2000 Jun 22;19(27):3095-100. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203663.

Identification of a tumor-derived p53 mutant with novel transactivating 
selectivity.

Pan Y(1), Haines DS.

Author information:
(1)The Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple 
University School of Medicine, 3307 N. Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
PA 19140, USA.

MDM2 is a p53-responsive molecule that when overexpressed, can alter growth 
control pathways via p53-dependent and independent mechanisms. We have 
identified a mutant p53 containing line that expresses high levels of 
transcripts that are regulated by the p53-responsive promoter of the MDM2 gene. 
Analysis of cloned product obtained from these tumor cells revealed that they 
harbor a mutant p53 protein (possessing an Arg to Gln substitution at codon 213) 
that is a potent transactivator of MDM2 expression. Consistent with this 
activity, the R213Q mutant was found to have the ability to interact with DNA 
sequences located within the MDM2 promoter. In contrast to previously described 
tumor-derived p53 mutants which retain MDM2 transactivation function and possess 
partial growth suppressive activity, the R213Q mutant is severely compromised in 
its ability to induce p53-regulated transcripts that encode for proteins 
involved in cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. The R213Q mutant can also be 
expressed at high levels in stably transfected cells and cells that harbor this 
mutant possess elevated levels of MDM2 protein. The R213Q mutant was also found 
to be able to up-regulate MDM2 during a genotoxic stress response. R213Q is the 
first described tumor-derived p53 mutant that is deficient at up-regulating both 
cell cycle arrest and apoptotic factors, but is highly proficient at inducing 
the growth-promoting molecule MDM2.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203663
PMID: 10871862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]