1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):27917-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M909832199.

Evolution of C4 phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in Flaveria, a conserved serine 
residue in the carboxyl-terminal part of the enzyme is a major determinant for 
C4-specific characteristics.

Bläsing OE(1), Westhoff P, Svensson P.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs und Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen, 
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

C4 phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylases have evolved from ancestral C3 isoforms 
during the evolution of angiosperms and gained distinct kinetic and regulatory 
properties compared with the C3 isozymes. To identify amino acid residues and/or 
domains responsible for these C4-specific properties the C4 phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxylase of Flaveria trinervia (C4) was compared with its orthologue in the 
closely related C3 plant Flaveria pringlei. Reciprocal enzyme chimera were 
constructed and the kinetic constants, K(0.5) and k(cat), as well as the Hill 
coefficient, h, were determined for the substrate phosphoenolpyruvate both in 
the presence and absence of the activator glucose 6-phosphate. By this approach 
two regions were identified which determined most of the kinetic differences of 
the C4 and C3 ppcA phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylases with respect to the 
substrate PEP. In addition, the experiments suggest that the two regions do not 
act additively but interact with each other. The region between amino acids 296 
and 437 is essential for activation by glucose 6-phosphate. The 
carboxyl-terminal segment between amino acids 645 and 966 contains a C4 
conserved serine or a C3 invariant alanine at position 774 in the respective 
enzyme isoform. Site-directed mutagenesis shows that this position is a key 
determinant for the kinetic properties of the two isozymes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M909832199
PMID: 10871630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]