1. J Physiol. 2000 Jul 1;526 Pt 1(Pt 1):27-34. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.00027.x.

Evidence for cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator-dependent 
sodium reabsorption in kidney, using Cftr(tm2cam) mice.

Kibble JD(1), Neal AM, Colledge WH, Green R, Taylor CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, 
UK. j.kibble@sheffield.ac.uk

The aims of this study were to investigate (a) if renal Na(+) handling was 
normal in Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 cystic fibrosis mice, (b) whether adaptation 
to dietary salt depletion was preserved and (c) whether Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 
mice exhibited enhanced amiloride-sensitive Na(+) absorption. In Na(+)-replete 
animals (maintained on a 0.32 % NaCl diet) given a 150 mM NaCl i.v. maintenance 
infusion, there was no difference in fractional Na(+) excretion (FE(Na)) between 
wild-type (0. 42 +/- 0.06 %, n = 12) and Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 mice (0.47 +/- 
0.13 %, n = 7). Amiloride infusion significantly increased FE(Na) in both 
wild-type (3.14 +/- 0.83 %, n = 6) and Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 mice (3. 47 +/- 
0.63 %, n = 9), though with no significant difference between genotypes. A 14 
day dietary salt restriction (animals maintained on a 0.03 % NaCl diet) and 
maintenance infusion with a 15 mM NaCl vehicle caused a reduction in FE(Na) to 
0.14 +/- 0.05 %, n = 8 in wild-type mice and 0.14 +/- 0.04 %, n = 8 in 
Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 mice. No significant difference in the ability to adapt 
to low salt conditions was apparent comparing the two genotypes. Treatment of 
salt-restricted mice with amiloride resulted in a blunted natriuresis in both 
wild-type mice (FE(Na) = 1.10 +/- 0.16 %, n = 7) and Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 
mice (FE(Na) = 1.97 +/- 0.29 %, n = 9). The natriuresis induced by amiloride was 
significantly greater in Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 mice than in wild-type 
controls. In conclusion, Cftr(tm2cam) delta F508 mice exhibit normal renal salt 
excretion when either salt replete or salt restricted. Enhanced 
amiloride-sensitive FE(Na) is consistent with increased Na(+) absorption via the 
amiloride-sensitive sodium channel ENaC, in cystic fibrosis kidney, but this was 
only observed during salt restriction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.00027.x
PMCID: PMC2269995
PMID: 10878096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]