1. J Neurosci. 2000 Jul 15;20(14):5245-53. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-14-05245.2000.

Modulation of Kv1.5 currents by Src tyrosine phosphorylation: potential role in 
the differentiation of astrocytes.

MacFarlane SN(1), Sontheimer H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0021, USA.

Using biophysical techniques, we previously have implicated outwardly rectifying 
potassium currents in the proliferation of cultured spinal cord astrocytes and 
have demonstrated that delayed rectifier potassium currents (I(Kd)), in 
particular, are upregulated on entry into the cell cycle and downregulated with 
cell cycle exit and differentiation. In the present study, using specific 
antibodies and antisense oligodeoxynucleotides, we show that this 
proliferation-dependent potassium current is mediated by the Shaker potassium 
channel Kv1.5. Downregulation of Kv1.5 protein by antisense 
oligodeoxynucleotides reduces astrocyte proliferation by approximately 50%, 
although no observed changes occur in Kv1.5 protein expression during 
spontaneous differentiation in culture. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Kv1.5, 
however, is downregulated markedly in differentiated cells but unaltered on cell 
cycle arrest. Using immunoprecipitation, we show that Kv1.5 is associated with 
Src family protein tyrosine kinases and that this association does not change 
with cell differentiation. Inhibition of kinase activity with the Src-specific 
inhibitor PP2 decreases Kv1.5 phosphorylation, reduces I(Kd), and inhibits 
astrocyte proliferation, specifically in the G(0)/G(1) phase of cell cycle. 
Conversely, I(Kd) are potentiated when active Src is present in the pipette. 
Transfection of quiescent astrocytes with constitutively active Src (Src Y529F) 
causes marked upregulation of astrocyte proliferation. These data suggest that 
Kv1. 5 is phosphorylated constitutively by Src kinases during growth and that 
downregulation of Src activity may underlie both astrocyte differentiation and 
the accompanying changes in delayed rectifier potassium channel activity.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-14-05245.2000
PMCID: PMC6772320
PMID: 10884308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]