1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(15):5653-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.15.5653-5664.2000.

Mutations in conserved regions of the predicted RAG2 kelch repeats block 
initiation of V(D)J recombination and result in primary immunodeficiencies.

Gomez CA(1), Ptaszek LM, Villa A, Bozzi F, Sobacchi C, Brooks EG, Notarangelo 
LD, Spanopoulou E, Pan ZQ, Vezzoni P, Cortes P, Santagata S.

Author information:
(1)Ruttenberg Cancer Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of New York 
University, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The V(D)J recombination reaction is composed of multiple nucleolytic processing 
steps mediated by the recombination-activating proteins RAG1 and RAG2. Sequence 
analysis has suggested that RAG2 contains six kelch repeat motifs that are 
predicted to form a six-bladed beta-propeller structure, with the second 
beta-strand of each repeat demonstrating marked conservation both within and 
between kelch repeat-containing proteins. Here we demonstrate that mutations 
G95R and DeltaI273 within the predicted second beta-strand of repeats 2 and 5 of 
RAG2 lead to immunodeficiency in patients P1 and P2. Green fluorescent protein 
fusions with the mutant proteins reveal appropriate localization to the nucleus. 
However, both mutations reduce the capacity of RAG2 to interact with RAG1 and 
block recombination signal cleavage, therefore implicating a defect in the early 
steps of the recombination reaction as the basis of the clinical phenotype. The 
present experiments, performed with an extensive panel of site-directed 
mutations within each of the six kelch motifs, further support the critical role 
of both hydrophobic and glycine-rich regions within the second beta-strand for 
RAG1-RAG2 interaction and recombination signal recognition and cleavage. In 
contrast, multiple mutations within the variable-loop regions of the kelch 
repeats had either mild or no effects on RAG1-RAG2 interaction and hence on the 
ability to mediate recombination. In all, the data demonstrate a critical role 
of the RAG2 kelch repeats for V(D)J recombination and highlight the importance 
of the conserved elements of the kelch motif.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.15.5653-5664.2000
PMCID: PMC86034
PMID: 10891502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]