1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Jul;20(7):1800-6. doi: 
10.1161/01.atv.20.7.1800.

Apolipoprotein E2 (Lys146-->Gln) causes hypertriglyceridemia due to an 
apolipoprotein E variant-specific inhibition of lipolysis of very low density 
lipoproteins-triglycerides.

de Beer F(1), van Dijk KW, Jong MC, van Vark LC, van der Zee A, Hofker MH, 
Fallaux FJ, Hoeben RC, Smelt AH, Havekes LM.

Author information:
(1)TNO-Prevention and Health, Gaubius Laboratory, Leiden, the Netherlands.

The apolipoprotein E2 (Lys146-->Gln) variant is associated with a dominant form 
of familial dysbetalipoproteinemia. Heterozygous carriers of this variant have 
elevated levels of plasma triglycerides, cholesterol, and apolipoprotein E 
(apoE). It was hypothesized that the high amounts of triglycerides in the very 
low density lipoprotein (VLDL) fraction are due to a disturbed lipolysis of 
VLDL. To test this hypothesis, apoE knockout mice were injected with an 
adenovirus containing the human APOE*2 (Lys146-->Gln) gene, Ad-E2(146), under 
the control of the cytomegalovirus promoter. ApoE knockout mice injected with an 
adenovirus vector encoding human apoE3 (Ad-E3) were used as controls. Five days 
after adenovirus injection, plasma cholesterol levels of mice injected with a 
high dose of Ad-E2(146) (2x10(9) plaque-forming units) were not changed compared 
with preinjection levels, whereas in the group who received a low dose of 
Ad-E2(146) (5x10(8) plaque-forming units) and in the groups injected with a low 
or a high dose of Ad-E3, plasma cholesterol levels were decreased 5-, 6-, and 
12-fold, respectively. Plasma triglycerides were not affected in mice injected 
with Ad-E3. In contrast, a 7-fold increase in plasma triglycerides was observed 
in mice injected with the low dose of Ad-E2(146) compared with mice injected 
with Ad-E3. Injection with the high dose of Ad-E2(146) resulted in a dramatic 
increase of plasma triglycerides (50-fold compared with Ad-E3 injection). In 
vitro lipolysis experiments showed that the lipolysis rate of VLDLs containing 
normal amounts of apoE2 (Lys146-->Gln) was decreased by 54% compared with that 
of VLDLs containing comparable amounts of apoE3. The in vivo VLDL-triglyceride 
production rate of Ad-E2(146)-injected mice was not significantly different from 
that of Ad-E3-injected mice. These results demonstrate that expression of apoE2 
(Lys146-->Gln) causes hypertriglyceridemia due to an apoE variant-specific 
inhibition of the hydrolysis of VLDL-triglycerides.

DOI: 10.1161/01.atv.20.7.1800
PMID: 10894820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]