1. Mutat Res. 2000 Jul 20;452(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/s0027-5107(00)00062-2.

The role of human O(6)-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase in promoting 
1,2-dibromoethane-induced genotoxicity in Escherichia coli.

Liu H(1), Xu-Welliver M, Pegg AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Milton S. Hershey Medical 
Center, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, 17033-0850, USA.

The expression of the DNA repair protein human O(6)-alkylguanine-DNA 
alkyltransferase (AGT) in Escherichia coli strains GWR109 or TRG8 that lack 
endogenous AGT greatly increased the toxicity and mutagenicity of 
1,2-dibromoethane (DBE). Pretreatment of strain TRG8 expressing human AGT, which 
is permeable to exogenous drugs, with the AGT inhibitor O(6)-benzylguanine (BG) 
abolished the lethal and mutagenic effects of DBE, indicating that an active AGT 
is required for promoting DBE genotoxicity. This was confirmed by the 
observation that E. coli expressing either the C145A AGT mutant, which is 
inactive due to loss of the alkyl acceptor site, or mutants Y114E and R128A, 
which are inactive due to alteration of the DNA binding domain, did not enhance 
the action of DBE. However, the AGT mutant protein P138M/V139L/P140K, which is 
active in repairing methylated DNA but is totally resistant to inactivation by 
BG due to alterations in the active site pocket, was unable to enhance the 
genotoxicity of DBE. Similarly, other mutants, G156P, Y158H and K165R that are 
strongly resistant to BG, were much less effective than wild type AGT in 
mediating the genotoxicity of DBE. Mutant P140A, which is moderately resistant 
to BG, did increase mutations in response to DBE but was less active than wild 
type. These results suggest that human AGT is able to interact with a DNA lesion 
produced by DBE but, instead of repairing it, converts it to a more genotoxic 
adduct. This interaction is prevented by mutations that modify the active site 
of AGT to exclude BG.

DOI: 10.1016/s0027-5107(00)00062-2
PMID: 10894884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]