1. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Jul 10;258(1):204-14. doi: 10.1006/excr.2000.4925.

Analysis of the subcellular distribution of protein kinase Calpha using PKC-GFP 
fusion proteins.

Wagner S(1), Harteneck C, Hucho F, Buchner K.

Author information:
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Chemie, Biochemie, Germany.

One important factor for the determination of the specific functions of protein 
kinase C (PKC) isoforms is their specific subcellular localization. In NIH 3T3 
fibroblasts phorbol esters induce translocation of PKCalpha to the plasma 
membrane and the nucleus. In order to investigate PKCalpha's subcellular 
distribution and especially its nuclear accumulation in more detail we used 
fusion proteins consisting of PKCalpha and the green fluorescent protein (GFP). 
Purified GFP-PKCalpha from baculovirus-infected insect cells undergoes nuclear 
accumulation without any further stimuli in digitonin-permeabilized cells. 
Interestingly, permeabilization appears to be a trigger for PKCalpha's nuclear 
translocation, since the fusion protein also translocates to the nucleus in 
transiently transfected cells following permeabilization. This suggests that 
PKCalpha has a high nuclear binding capacity even in the case of large protein 
amounts. In contrast to endogenous PKCalpha, overexpressed GFP-PKCalpha as well 
as overexpressed PKCalpha itself translocates mainly to the plasma membrane and 
only to a smaller extent to the nucleus following stimulation with phorbol 
ester. Use of fusion proteins of GFP and different mutants of PKCalpha enabled 
determination of motifs involved PKCalpha's subcellular distribution: A25E and 
K368R point mutations of PKCalpha showed enhanced affinity for the plasma 
membrane, whereas sequences within the regulatory domain probably confer 
PKCalpha's nuclear accumulation.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.2000.4925
PMID: 10912802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]