1. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):8791-802. doi: 10.1021/bi000926j.

Molecular structure of Escherichia coli PurT-encoded glycinamide ribonucleotide 
transformylase.

Thoden JB(1), Firestine S, Nixon A, Benkovic SJ, Holden HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53705, USA.

In Escherichia coli, the PurT-encoded glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase, 
or PurT transformylase, catalyzes an alternative formylation of glycinamide 
ribonucleotide (GAR) in the de novo pathway for purine biosynthesis. On the 
basis of amino acid sequence analyses, it is known that the PurT transformylase 
belongs to the ATP-grasp superfamily of proteins. The common theme among members 
of this superfamily is a catalytic reaction mechanism that requires ATP and 
proceeds through an acyl phosphate intermediate. All of the enzymes belonging to 
the ATP-grasp superfamily are composed of three structural motifs, termed the 
A-, B-, and C-domains, and in each case, the ATP is wedged between the B- and 
C-domains. Here we describe two high-resolution X-ray crystallographic 
structures of PurT transformylase from E. coli: one form complexed with the 
nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMPPNP and the second with bound AMPPNP and GAR. 
The latter structure is of special significance because it represents the first 
ternary complex to be determined for a member of the ATP-grasp superfamily 
involved in purine biosynthesis and as such provides new information about the 
active site region involved in ribonucleotide binding. Specifically in PurT 
transformylase, the GAR substrate is anchored to the protein via Glu 82, Asp 
286, Lys 355, Arg 362, and Arg 363. Key amino acid side chains involved in 
binding the AMPPNP to the enzyme include Arg 114, Lys 155, Glu 195, Glu 203, and 
Glu 267. Strikingly, the amino group of GAR that is formylated during the 
reaction lies at 2.8 A from one of the gamma-phosphoryl oxygens of the AMPPNP.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000926j
PMID: 10913290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]