1. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 8;39(31):9201-12. doi: 10.1021/bi0009441.

Characterization of recombinant wild type and site-directed mutations of 
apolipoprotein C-III: lipid binding, displacement of ApoE, and inhibition of 
lipoprotein lipase.

Liu H(1), Talmud PJ, Lins L, Brasseur R, Olivecrona G, Peelman F, Vandekerckhove 
J, Rosseneu M, Labeur C.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, Royal Free and 
University College, London Medical School.

The physicochemical properties of recombinant wild type and three site-directed 
mutants of apolipoprotein C-III (apoC-III), designed by molecular modeling to 
alter specific amino acid residues implicated in lipid binding (L9T/T20L, 
F64A/W65A) or LPL inhibition (K21A), were compared. Relative lipid binding 
efficiencies to dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC) were L9T/T20L > WT >K21A > 
F64A/W65A with an inverse correlation with size of the discoidal complexes 
formed. Physicochemical analysis (Trp fluorescence, circular dichroism, and 
GdnHCl denaturation) suggests that L9T/T20L forms tighter and more stable lipid 
complexes with phospholipids, while F64A/W65A associates less tightly. Lipid 
displacement properties were tested by gel-filtrating 
apoE:dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) discoidal complexes mixed with the 
various apoC-III variants. All apoC-III proteins bound to the apoE:DPPC 
complexes; the amount of apoE displaced from the complex was dependent on the 
apoC-III lipid binding affinity. All apoC-III proteins inhibited LPL in the 
presence or absence of apoC-II, with F64A/W65A displaying the most inhibition, 
suggesting that apoC-III inhibition of LPL is independent of lipid binding and 
therefore of apoC-II displacement. Taken together. these data suggest that the 
hydrophobic residues F64 and W65 are crucial for the lipid binding properties of 
apoC-III and that redistribution of the N-terminal helix of apoC-III (L9T/T20L) 
enhances the stability of the lipid-bound protein, while LPL inhibition by 
apoC-III is likely to be due to protein:protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0009441
PMID: 10924113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]