1. Hum Mutat. 2000;16(2):166-74. doi: 
10.1002/1098-1004(200008)16:2<166::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-4.

Screening the 3' region of the polycystic kidney disease 1 (PKD1) gene in 41 
Bulgarian and Australian kindreds reveals a prevalence of protein truncating 
mutations.

Bogdanova N(1), McCluskey M, Sikmann K, Markoff A, Todorov V, Dimitrakov D, 
Schiavello T, Thomas M, Kalaydjieva L, Dworniczak B, Horst J.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, 
Münster, Germany.

Screening for disease-causing mutations in the unique region of the polycystic 
kidney disease 1 (PKD1) gene was performed in 41 unrelated individuals with 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Exons 34-41 and 43-46 were assayed 
using PCR amplification and SSCP analysis followed by direct sequencing of 
amplicons presenting variant SSCP patterns. We have identified seven 
disease-causing mutations of which five are novel [c.10634-10656del; 
c.11587delG; IVS37-10C>A; c.11669-11674del; c.13069-13070ins39] and two have 
been reported previously [Q4010X; Q4041X]. Defects in this part of the gene thus 
account for 17% of our group of patients. Five of the seven sequence alterations 
detected are protein-truncating which is in agreement with mutation screening 
data for this part of the gene by other groups. The two other mutations are 
in-frame deletions or insertions which could destroy important functional 
properties of polycystin 1. These findings suggest that the first step toward 
cyst formation in PKD1 patients is the loss of one functional copy of polycystin 
1, which indirectly supports the "two-hit" model of cystogenesis where a second 
somatic mutation inactivating the normal allele is necessary to occur for 
development of the disease condition.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1098-1004(200008)16:2<166::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-4
PMID: 10923038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]