1. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6021-9. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-16-06021.2000.

Neuropathology in mice expressing human alpha-synuclein.

van der Putten H(1), Wiederhold KH, Probst A, Barbieri S, Mistl C, Danner S, 
Kauffmann S, Hofele K, Spooren WP, Ruegg MA, Lin S, Caroni P, Sommer B, Tolnay 
M, Bilbe G.

Author information:
(1)Nervous System Research, Novartis Pharma Inc., CH 4002 Basel, Switzerland. 
p_herman.van_der_putten@pharma.novartis.com

The presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein is a prime suspect for contributing to 
Lewy pathology and clinical aspects of diseases, including Parkinson's disease, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and a Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's disease. 
alpha-Synuclein accumulates in Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, and two missense 
mutations (A53T and A30P) in the alpha-synuclein gene are genetically linked to 
rare familial forms of Parkinson's disease. Under control of mouse Thy1 
regulatory sequences, expression of A53T mutant human alpha-synuclein in the 
nervous system of transgenic mice generated animals with neuronal 
alpha-synucleinopathy, features strikingly similar to those observed in human 
brains with Lewy pathology, neuronal degeneration, and motor defects, despite a 
lack of transgene expression in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra 
pars compacta. Neurons in brainstem and motor neurons appeared particularly 
vulnerable. Motor neuron pathology included axonal damage and denervation of 
neuromuscular junctions in several muscles examined, suggesting that 
alpha-synuclein interfered with a universal mechanism of synapse maintenance. 
Thy1 transgene expression of wild-type human alpha-synuclein resulted in similar 
pathological changes, thus supporting a central role for mutant and wild-type 
alpha-synuclein in familial and idiotypic forms of diseases with neuronal 
alpha-synucleinopathy and Lewy pathology. These mouse models provide a means to 
address fundamental aspects of alpha-synucleinopathy and test therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-16-06021.2000
PMCID: PMC6772584
PMID: 10934251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]