1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000 Aug;20(8):691-700. doi: 
10.1089/10799900050116390.

Crystal structure of recombinant native SDF-1alpha with additional mutagenesis 
studies: an attempt at a more comprehensive interpretation of accumulated 
structure-activity relationship data.

Ohnishi Y(1), Senda T, Nandhagopal N, Sugimoto K, Shioda T, Nagal Y, Mitsui Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viral Infection, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Crystal structures, forms 1 and 2, of recombinant native stromal cell-derived 
factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha), expressed using the Sendai virus expression vector 
system, have been determined by x-ray crystallography at 2.0 A resolution. The 
crystal of form 1 is almost isomorphous with that used in the previous crystal 
structure analysis of the synthetic [N33A] mutant of SDF-1alpha (Dealwis, C., et 
al. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1998;95, 6941-6946). However, the present 
structure analysis led to considerably better refinement statistics, revealing 
an error in the structural assignment of N-terminal residues in the previous 
report. Comparison of the solution structure, as previously determined by 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, and the present structure, with 
two monomers in the asymmetric unit, reveals several local conformational 
differences. Alanine scan mutagenesis studies for each residue in the so-called 
RFFESH motif revealed that only the first residue, Arg12, is effective in 
enhancing receptor binding (and successive activation). A new notion that steric 
restraint between Arg8 and Arg12 is favorable (if not vital) for retaining SDF 
activities appears to explain more consistently the structure-activity 
relationship data accumulated to date. Four guiding principles are presented 
that may be useful for designing potent therapeutic compounds interfering with 
HIV-1 infection through competition at the CXCR4 coreceptor.

DOI: 10.1089/10799900050116390
PMID: 10954912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]