1. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 1998;3(2):117-24.

Expression pattern of the peripheral myelin protein 22kDa (PMP22) in neural and 
non-neural tissue types of adult wildtype and Trembler mice--a comparative 
study.

Rautenstrauss B(1), Zechner U, Hameister H, Grehl H, Liehr T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

The Trembler mouse was the first animal model for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
type 1 (CMT1), one of the most frequent inherited peripheral neuropathies in 
man. In Trembler mouse a Gly150Asp amino acid exchange in the peripheral myelin 
protein 22kDa (PMP22) gene was identified as causative reason for this 
hypertrophic neuropathy. For most of the CMT patients suffering from the subtype 
1A a duplication of the PMP22 gene is found (gene dosage effect); but several 
PMP22 point mutations, such as that determining the TremblerJ mouse, have also 
been described. Since PMP22 is expressed in neural, as well as in non-neural 
tissues, the expression pattern of PMP22 in different tissues seems to be of 
highest interest for a better understanding of the hypothesized dual function of 
this protein. We studied different wildtype (wt) and Trembler (Tr) mouse tissues 
for PMP22 expression by means of radioactive in situ hybridization (RISH) and 
immunohistochemistry. A PMP22 expression was found in some of the non-neural and 
in all neural tissue types studied. Our in situ study clearly demonstrated, that 
PMP22 mRNA expression in non-neural tissues is not due to peripheral 
innervation. In non-neural tissues no difference in the expression pattern or 
intensity between wt and Tr mice was detectable, whereas PMP22 expression in the 
peripheral nervous system (PNS) of the Tr mouse was extremely reduced. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of sciatic nerve sections revealed the same 
maldistribution of PMP22 in Tr mice as in sural nerve biopsies of CMT1 patients.

PMID: 10959245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]