1. Mamm Genome. 2000 Sep;11(9):736-40. doi: 10.1007/s003350010157.

Molecular analysis and chromosomal assignment of the canine CALC-I/alpha-CGRP 
gene.

Wende S(1), Krempler A, Breen M, Brunnberg L, Brenig B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, University of Göttingen, Groner Landstrasse 
2, 37073 Göttingen, Germany.

We have isolated a recombinant phage harboring the canine CALC-I/alpha-CGRP 
gene. The gene spans a region of approx. 5.3 kb and consists of six exons with 
sizes ranging from 95 bp (exon 2) and 494 bp (exon 4). By alternative splicing, 
two transcripts with ORFs of 390 and 384 nt are generated. These encode either 
the 32-amino acid-long hormone calcitonin (CALC) or the neurotransmitter 
calcitonin gene-related peptide (alpha-CGRP) with a length of 37 amino acids 
after proteolytic processing of precursor molecules. The canine calcitonin 
precursor consists of 130 amino acids with a molecular mass of 14.05 kDa and a 
statistical pI of 8.0, whereas the deduced alpha-CGRP precursor harbors 128 
amino acids with a molecular mass of 13.87 kDa and a statistical pI of 8.6. Both 
polypeptides have a common N-terminal region of 76 amino acids that is encoded 
by exons 2 and 3 and separated by different eight (CALC) or six (alpha-CGRP) 
amino acid spacers from the biologically active polypeptide. The 
CALC-I/alpha-CGRP gene is a member of the calcitonin gene family and was 
assigned to chromosome CFA 16q25.1. A comparative analysis of different dog 
breeds revealed a breed-specific allelic d(CAGGAG)-hexanucleotide expansion in 
exon 3. This expansion results in an elongation of the common N-terminal region 
by two amino acids (glutamine-glutamic acid) and alters the molecular mass to 
14.31 kDa (pI 7.9) and 14.13 kDa (pI 8.5) of the calcitonin and alpha-CGRP 
precursor, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/s003350010157
PMID: 10967131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]