1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2001 Jan;25(1):11-24. doi: 10.1016/s0145-305x(00)00039-2.

Cloning and structure of three rainbow trout C3 molecules: a plausible 
explanation for their functional diversity.

Zarkadis IK(1), Sarrias MR, Sfyroera G, Sunyer JO, Lambris JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Patras, Greece.

We have previously identified and characterized three distinct trout C3 proteins 
(C3-1, C3-3 and C3-4) that differ in their electrophoretic mobility, 
glycosylation patterns, reactivity with monospecific C3 antibodies, partial 
amino acid sequence and binding to various complement activators. To study the 
structural elements that determine the observed functional differences, we have 
cloned and sequenced the three C3 isoforms. Comparison of the deduced amino acid 
sequences showed that the sequence identity/similarity of C3-3 to C3-4 is 
76/81%, whereas those of C3-3 and C3-4 to C3-1 are 55/67% and 54/67%, 
respectively. It is interesting that the beta-chain of C3-4 contains two 
insertions of 65 (residues 504-569) and 23 amino acids (residues 123-146), while 
the beta-chain of C3-1 contains a 14-amino acid insertion (residues 143-157). 
The C3 convertase cleavage site (Arg-Ser) is conserved in the three trout 
isoforms; however, the factor I cleavage sites are Arg-Ala (for C3-1 and C3-4) 
and Arg-Thr (C3-3) instead of Arg-Ser at position 1281 of human C3, and Arg-Thr 
(C3-1, C3-3) instead of Arg-Ser for C3-4 at position 1298 of human C3. Of 
special interest is the absence of the His(1126) and Glu(1128) (human C3 
numbering) from C3-4 and of Glu(1128) from C3-3. These residues are thought to 
play an important role in determining the binding specificity of the 
thioester-containing proteins. Accordingly, we postulate that the distinct 
binding reactions of the trout C3 isoforms with various complement activators 
could be due at least in part to the observed changes in the His and Glu 
residues.

DOI: 10.1016/s0145-305x(00)00039-2
PMID: 10980316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]