1. Biochemistry. 2000 Sep 19;39(37):11330-9. doi: 10.1021/bi0010524.

Mutational analysis of metallo-beta-lactamase CcrA from Bacteroides fragilis.

Yanchak MP(1), Taylor RA, Crowder MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 112 Hughes Hall, Miami University, 
Oxford, Ohio 45056, USA.

In an effort to evaluate the roles of Lys184, Asn193, and Asp103 in the binding 
and catalysis of metallo-beta-lactamase CcrA from Bacteroides fragilis, 
site-directed mutants of CcrA were generated and characterized using metal 
analyses, CD spectroscopy, and kinetic studies. Three Lys184 mutants were 
generated where the lysine was replaced with alanine, leucine, and glutamate, 
and the analysis of these mutants indicates that Lys184 is not greatly involved 
in binding of cephalosporins to CcrA; however, this residue does have a 
significant role in binding of penicillin G. Three Asn193 mutants were generated 
where the asparagine was replaced with alanine, leucine, and aspartate, and 
these mutants exhibited <4-fold decrease in k(cat), suggesting that Asn193 does 
not play a large role in catalysis. However, stopped-flow visible kinetic 
studies showed that the Asn193 mutants exhibit a slower substrate decay rate and 
no change in the product formation rate as compared with wild-type CcrA. These 
results support the proposed role of Asn193 in interacting with and activating 
substrate during catalysis. Two Asp103 mutants were generated where the 
aspartate was replaced with serine and cysteine. The D103C and D103S mutants 
bind the same amount of Zn(II) as wild-type CcrA and exhibited a 10(2)-fold and 
10(5)-fold decrease in activity, respectively. Results from solvent isotope, 
proton inventory, and rapid-scanning visible studies suggest that Asp103 plays a 
role in generating the enzyme intermediate but does not donate a proton to the 
enzyme intermediate during the rate-limiting step of the catalytic mechanism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0010524
PMID: 10985778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]