1. Electrophoresis. 2000 Aug;21(14):3016-9. doi: 
10.1002/1522-2683(20000801)21:14<3016::AID-ELPS3016>3.0.CO;2-D.

Analysis of hemoglobin and globin chain variants by a commonly used capillary 
isoelectric focusing method.

Sugano M(1), Hidaka H, Yamauchi K, Nakabayashi T, Higuchi Y, Fujita K, Okumura 
N, Ushiyama Y, Tozuka M, Katsuyama T.

Author information:
(1)Central Clinical Laboratories, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.

To analyze both hemoglobin (Hb) and globin chain variants, we modified a 
commonly used method, capillary isoelectric focusing (CIEF), with detection at 
280 nm. The samples were hemolysates prepared from red blood cells, and globin 
chains obtained from the hemolysates by treatment with cold acidified acetone. 
When the migration time for the internal reference, carbonic anhydrase I 
(isoelectric point, pI 6.60), was taken as 1.0, the migration ratio for Hb A0 in 
normal human blood was 0.877 +/- 0.004 (mean +/- SD, n = 9), and those of the 
alpha- and beta-globin chains were 0.673 +/- 0.004 and 0.847 +/- 0.005 (mean +/- 
SD, n = 4), respectively. The ratio of peak heights between the beta- and 
alpha-globin chains (beta/alpha) in the normal Hbs obtained from four subjects 
was almost constant at 2.5 +/- 0.1 (mean +/- SD). This ratio indicates which of 
the globin chains includes a mutation (if one exists). When an Hb variant, Hb 
Hoshida (in which Gln is substituted for Glu at residue 43 in the beta-globin 
chain), was analyzed by this method, two main peaks were observed (migration 
ratios 0.836 and 0.877, corresponding to an abnormal and the normal Hb, 
respectively). An additional peak with an abnormal migration ratio of 0.788 was 
also detected in the globin chain profiles. The ratio of peak heights between 
normal beta- and alpha-globin chains was 1.57, indicating that a mutation exists 
in the beta-globin chain. We thus established a convenient system using CIEF 
that provides a rapid and reproducible method for the random analysis of both Hb 
and globin chain variants.

DOI: 10.1002/1522-2683(20000801)21:14<3016::AID-ELPS3016>3.0.CO;2-D
PMID: 11001318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]