1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2000 Aug;8(8):1903-9. doi: 10.1016/s0968-0896(00)00134-6.

Treatment of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) induced by guinea pig 
myelin basic protein epitope 72-85 with a human MBP(87-99) analogue and effects 
of cyclic peptides.

Tselios T(1), Daliani I, Probert L, Deraos S, Matsoukas E, Roy S, Pires J, Moore 
G, Matsoukas J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Patras, Greece.

Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an inflammatory and 
demyelinating disease of the central nervous system and is an animal model of 
multiple sclerosis (MS). In the present report, a linear analogue and a series 
of cyclic semi-mimetic peptides were designed and synthesized based on the human 
myelin basic protein (MBP(87-99)) epitope 
(Val87-His-Phe-Phe-Lys-Asn-Ile-Val-Thr-Pro-Arg-Thr-Pro90) and on Copolymer I (a 
mixture of random polymers of Ala, Gln, Lys and Tyr used to treat MS). These 
analogues were designed looking for suppressors of EAE induced by guinea pig 
MBP(72-85) epitope (Gln-Lys-Ser-Gln-Arg-Ser-Gln-Asp-Glu-Asn-Pro-Val) in Lewis 
rats. The linear analogue [Arg91,Ala96]MBP(87-99), in which Arg substitutes 
Lys91 and Ala substitutes Pro96, was found to be a strong inhibitor which when 
administered to Lewis rats together with the encephalitogenic agonist MBP(72-85) 
completely prevented the induction of EAE. In contrast, three N- and C-termini 
amide-linked cyclic semi-mimetic peptides, 
[cyclo-Phe-Arg-Asn-Ile-Val-Thr-Ala-Acp (1), cyclo-Phe-Ala-Arg-Gln-Acp (2), 
cyclo-Tyr-Ala-Lys-Gln-Acp (3)] as well as a Lys side chain and C-terminous 
cyclic semi mimetic peptide cyclo(Lys, Acp)-Phe-Lys-Asn-Ile-Val-Thr-Ala-Acp (4) 
which contain segments of MBP(87-99) or are constituted from immunophoric 
residues of copolymer 1, were ineffective in inducing or inhibiting EAE in Lewis 
rats. However co-injection of cyclic analogues with MBP(72-85) delayed the onset 
of EAE indicating a modulatory effect on the EAE activity of MBP(72-85). These 
findings suggest that molecule length, size of cyclic moiety and backbone 
conformation are important elements for immunogenic activity. Moreover blockade 
of MBP(72-85) induced EAE by the unrelated peptide [Arg91,Ala56]MBP(87-99) could 
indicate that the mechanism of inhibition is not due to binding competition but 
rather due to the delivery of a negative signal by the antagonist which 
overcomes the agonist response possibly through the activation of antigen 
specific regulatory T cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0968-0896(00)00134-6
PMID: 11003134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]