1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1110-20. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62941-3.
Epub  2000 Sep 29.

Cloning of the gene encoding a novel integral membrane protein, mucolipidin-and 
identification of the two major founder mutations causing mucolipidosis type IV.

Bassi MT(1), Manzoni M, Monti E, Pizzo MT, Ballabio A, Borsani G.

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 Napoli, Italy.

Mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage 
disorder characterized by severe psychomotor retardation and ophthalmologic 
abnormalities, including corneal opacity, retinal degeneration, and strabismus. 
Unlike the situation in other lysosomal disorders, the accumulation of 
heterogeneous storage material observed in MLIV does not result from a block in 
the catabolic pathways but is due to an ill-defined transport defect in the late 
steps of endocytosis. With the aim of cloning the MLIV gene, we searched in the 
19p13.2-13.3 region, where the locus previously had been assigned by linkage 
mapping. In this region, we have identified a novel gene that is mutated in all 
patients with MLIV who were enrolled in our study. One patient was homozygous 
for the splice-acceptor mutation, and another was homozygous for a deletion 
removing the first six exons of the gene. In addition, four compound 
heterozygotes for these two mutations were identified. Haplotype analysis 
indicates that we have identified the two major founder mutations, which account 
for >95% of MLIV chromosomes in Ashkenazi Jewish patients. The gene, ML4, 
encodes a protein named "mucolipidin, " which localizes on the plasma membrane 
and, in the carboxy-terminal region, shows homologies to polycystin-2, the 
product of the polycystic kidney disease 2 gene (PKD2) and to the family of 
transient receptor potential Ca(2+) channels. Mucolipidin is likely to play an 
important role in endocytosis.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9297(07)62941-3
PMCID: PMC1288553
PMID: 11013137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]