1. Microbiology (Reading). 2000 Oct;146 ( Pt 10):2655-2663. doi: 
10.1099/00221287-146-10-2655.

A mutation which affects both the specificity of PtsG sugar transport and the 
regulation of ptsG expression by Mlc in Escherichia coli.

Plumbridge J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-chimique (UPR9073), 13 rue Pierre et Marie 
Curie, 75005 Paris, France1.

Normally glucosamine (GlcN) is not a substrate for EIICB(Glc) of the glucose 
phosphotransferase system (PTS), encoded by ptsG, but it is transported by the 
mannose (Man) PTS, encoded by manXYZ. A mutation, umgC, has been described in 
Escherichia coli which allows a strain mutated in the Man PTS to grow on GlcN. 
The umgC mutation was mapped to the ptsG region and was proposed to make ptsG 
expression constitutive. Transcription of ptsG is regulated by the repressor Mlc 
so that mutations in mlc enhance the expression of ptsG. An mlc mutation, 
however, is not sufficient to allow good growth on GlcN, unlike the umgC 
mutation. The umgC mutation is shown to enhance expression of ptsG even in the 
absence of any PTS sugar transport, but the increase is greater in the presence 
of GlcN or Man. The umgC mutation also increases expression of the ptsHI and 
manXYZ operons, which are both regulated by Mlc. The umgC mutation was sequenced 
and two mutations were found: one, G176D, within the IIC membrane domain and the 
second, E472K, within the soluble IIB domain of PtsG. The cloned UmgC allele 
shows the enhanced transport and regulatory characteristics of the chromosomal 
mutation. Analysis of the two mutations present individually on plasmids shows 
that the IIC mutation is responsible for both the effect on sugar specificity 
and regulation.

DOI: 10.1099/00221287-146-10-2655
PMID: 11021940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]