1. J Bacteriol. 2000 Nov;182(21):5954-61. doi: 10.1128/JB.182.21.5954-5961.2000.

Sequence changes in the ton box region of BtuB affect its transport activities 
and interaction with TonB protein.

Cadieux N(1), Bradbeer C, Kadner RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908-0734, USA.

Uptake of cobalamins by the transporter protein BtuB in the outer membrane of 
Escherichia coli requires the proton motive force and the transperiplasmic 
protein TonB. The Ton box sequence near the amino terminus of BtuB is conserved 
among all TonB-dependent transporters and is the only known site of mutations 
that confer a transport-defective phenotype which can be suppressed by certain 
substitutions at residue 160 in TonB. The crystallographic structures of the 
TonB-dependent transporter FhuA revealed that the region near the Ton box, which 
itself was not resolved, is exposed to the periplasmic space and undergoes an 
extensive shift in position upon binding of substrate. Site-directed disulfide 
bonding in intact cells has been used to show that the Ton box of BtuB and 
residues around position 160 of TonB approach each other in a highly oriented 
and specific manner to form BtuB-TonB heterodimers that are stimulated by the 
presence of transport substrate. Here, replacement of Ton box residues with 
proline or cysteine revealed that residue side chain recognition is not 
important for function, although replacement with proline at four of the seven 
Ton box positions impaired cobalamin transport. The defect in cobalamin 
utilization resulting from the L8P substitution was suppressed by cysteine 
substitutions in adjacent residues in BtuB or in TonB. This suppression did not 
restore active transport of cobalamins but may allow each transporter to 
function at most once. The uncoupled proline substitutions in BtuB markedly 
affected the pattern of disulfide bonding to TonB, both increasing the extent of 
cross-linking and shifting the pairs of residues that can be joined. 
Cross-linking of BtuB and TonB in the presence of the BtuB V10P substitution 
became independent of the presence of substrate, indicating an additional 
distortion of the exposure of the Ton box in the periplasmic space. TonB action 
thus requires a specific orientation for functional contact with the Ton box, 
and changes in the conformation of this region block transport by preventing 
substrate release and repeated transport cycles.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.21.5954-5961.2000
PMCID: PMC94727
PMID: 11029413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]