1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 23;276(8):5427-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M002819200. Epub
2000  Oct 23.

Human glutathione transferase T2-2 discloses some evolutionary strategies for 
optimization of substrate binding to the active site of glutathione 
transferases.

Caccuri AM(1), Antonini G, Board PG, Flanagan J, Parker MW, Paolesse R, Turella 
P, Federici G, Lo Bello M, Ricci G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata," 00133 Rome, Italy.

Rapid kinetic, spectroscopic, and potentiometric studies have been performed on 
human Theta class glutathione transferase T2-2 to dissect the mechanism of 
interaction of this enzyme with its natural substrate GSH. Theta class 
glutathione transferases are considered to be older than Alpha, Pi, and Mu 
classes in the evolutionary pathway. As in the more recently evolved GSTs, the 
activation of GSH in the human Theta enzyme proceeds by a forced deprotonation 
of the sulfhydryl group (pK(a) = 6.1). The thiol proton is released 
quantitatively in solution, but above pH 6.5, a protein residue acts as an 
internal base. Unlike Alpha, Mu, and Pi class isoenzymes, the GSH-binding 
mechanism occurs via a simple bimolecular reaction with k(on) and k(off) values 
at least hundred times lower (k(on) = (2.7 +/- 0.8) x 10(4) M(-1) s(-1), k(off) 
= 36 +/- 9 s(-1), at 37 degrees C). Replacement of Arg-107 by alanine, using 
site-directed mutagenesis, remarkably increases the pK(a) value of the bound GSH 
and modifies the substrate binding modality. Y107A mutant enzyme displays a 
mechanism and rate constants for GSH binding approaching those of Alpha, Mu, and 
Pi isoenzymes. Comparison of available crystallographic data for all these GSTs 
reveals an unexpected evolutionary trend in terms of flexibility, which provides 
a basis for understanding our experimental results.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M002819200
PMID: 11044442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]