1. Acta Neuropathol. 2000 Nov;100(5):490-505. doi: 10.1007/s004010000226.

Advanced glycation endproduct-modified superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1)-positive 
inclusions are common to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with 
SOD1 gene mutations and transgenic mice expressing human SOD1 with a G85R 
mutation.

Kato S(1), Horiuchi S, Liu J, Cleveland DW, Shibata N, Nakashima K, Nagai R, 
Hirano A, Takikawa M, Kato M, Nakano I, Ohama E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

To clarify the biological significance of the neuronal Lewy body-like hyaline 
inclusions and astrocytic hyaline inclusions characteristically found in 
patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with superoxide dismutase-1 
(SOD1) gene mutations and in transgenic mice expressing human SOD1 with G85R 
mutation, the detailed protein composition in both types of inclusions was 
immunohistochemically analyzed using 45 different antibodies. Both types of 
inclusions had very strong immunoreactivity for SOD1. The SOD1-positive 
inclusions in both cell types were also immunoreactive for the insoluble 
advanced glycation endproducts (AGEs) such as Nepsilon-(carboxymethyl)lysine 
(CML), pyrraline and pentosidine: both inclusions in both conditions were 
ultrastructurally composed of the granule-coated fibrils that had 
immunoreactivities to CML and pyrraline. Both types of inclusions were negative 
for stress-response proteins (SRPs), 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), acrolein, nitric 
oxide synthases (NOSs) and nitrotyrosine as representative markers of oxidative 
stress. The neurons and astrocytes of the normal individuals and non-transgenic 
mice showed no significant immunoreactivity for SOD1, AGEs, SRPs, HNE, acrolein, 
NOSs or nitrotyrosine. Our results suggest that a portion of the SOD1 composing 
both type of inclusions, probably toxic mutant SOD1, is modified by the AGEs, 
and that the formation of the AGE-modified SOD1 is one of the mechanisms 
responsible for the aggregation involving no significant oxidative mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010000226
PMID: 11045671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]