1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 9;276(6):4261-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M006279200. Epub 2000 
Oct 26.

The steroidogenic acute regulatory protein homolog MLN64, a late endosomal 
cholesterol-binding protein.

Alpy F(1), Stoeckel ME, Dierich A, Escola JM, Wendling C, Chenard MP, Vanier MT, 
Gruenberg J, Tomasetto C, Rio MC.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UPR 6520 
CNRS/U184 INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch, C.U. de 
Strasbourg, France.

MLN64 is a transmembrane protein that shares homology with the cholesterol 
binding domain (START domain) of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. The 
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein is located in the inner membrane of 
mitochondria, where it facilitates cholesterol import into the mitochondria. 
Crystallographic analysis showed that the START domain of MLN64 is a 
cholesterol-binding domain. The present work was undertaken to determine which 
step of the intracellular cholesterol pathway MLN64 participates in. Using 
immunocytofluorescence, MLN64 colocalizes with LBPA, a lipid found specifically 
in late endosomes. Electron microscopy indicates that MLN64 is restricted to the 
limiting membrane of late endosomes. Microinjection or endocytosis of specific 
antibodies shows that the START domain of MLN64 is cytoplasmic. Deletion and 
mutagenesis experiments demonstrate that the amino-terminal part of MLN64 is 
responsible for its addressing. Although this domain does not contain 
conventional dileucine- or tyrosine-based targeting signals, we show that a 
dileucine motif (Leu(66)-Leu(67)) and a tyrosine residue (Tyr(89)) are critical 
for the targeting or the proper folding of the molecule. Finally, MLN64 
colocalizes with cholesterol and Niemann Pick C1 protein in late endosomes. 
However, complementation assays show that MLN64 is not involved in the Niemann 
Pick C2 disease which, results in cholesterol lysosomal accumulation. Together, 
our results show that MLN64 plays a role at the surface of the late endosomes, 
where it might shuttle cholesterol from the limiting membrane to cytoplasmic 
acceptor(s).

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M006279200
PMID: 11053434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]