1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2000 Sep;74(1-2):11-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0960-0760(00)00083-2.

NADPH- and hydroperoxide-supported 17beta-estradiol hydroxylation catalyzed by a 
variant form (432L, 453S) of human cytochrome P450 1B1.

Spink DC(1), Spink BC, Zhuo X, Hussain MM, Gierthy JF, Ding X.

Author information:
(1)New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth Center, 12201-0509, Albany, 
NY, USA. spink@wadsworth.org

Human cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) catalyzes the hydroxylation of 
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) at C-4, with a lesser activity at C-2. The E(2) 
4-hydroxylase activity of human CYP1B1 was first observed in studies of MCF-7 
breast cancer cells. Sequencing of polymerase chain reaction products revealed 
that CYP1B1 expressed in MCF-7 cells was not the previously characterized enzyme 
but a polymorphic form with leucine substituted for valine at position 432 and 
serine substituted for asparagine at position 453. To investigate the NADPH- and 
organic hydroperoxide-supported E(2) hydroxylase activities of the 432L, 453S 
form of human CYP1B1, the MCF-7 CYP1B1 cDNA was cloned and the enzyme was 
expressed in Sf9 insect cells. In microsomal assays supplemented with human 
NADPH:cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase, the expressed 432L, 453S form catalyzed 
NADPH-supported E(2) hydroxylation with a similar preference for 4-hydroxylation 
as the 432V, 453N form, with maximal rates of 1.97 and 0.37 nmol (min)(-1)(nmol 
cytochrome P450)(-1) for 4- and 2-hydroxylation, respectively. Cumeme 
hydroperoxide efficiently supported E(2) hydroxylation by both the 432V, 453N 
and 432L, 453S forms at several-fold higher rates than the NADPH-supported 
activities and with a lesser preference for E(2) 4- versus 2-hydroxylation 
(2:1). The hydroperoxide-supported activities of both forms were potently 
inhibited by the CYP1B1 inhibitor, 3,3',4, 4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl. These 
results indicate that the 432V, 453N and 432L, 453S forms of CYP1B1 have similar 
catalytic properties for E(2) hydroxylation, and that human CYP1B1 is very 
efficient in catalyzing the hydroperoxide-dependent formation of 
catecholestrogens.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-0760(00)00083-2
PMID: 11074351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]