1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2000 Oct;11(7):669-72. doi: 
10.1097/00001721-200010000-00012.

Prevalence of the prothrombin G20210A mutation in the Irish populations: use of 
a novel polymerase chain reaction approach.

Keenan C(1), Livingstone WJ, White B, Mynett-Johnson L, Cusack S, Lawler M, 
Smith OP.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Inherited Coagulation Disorders, St James's Hospital and 
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.

The prothrombin G20210A polymorphism is associated with a threefold-increased 
risk of venous thrombosis. There is considerable variation in the reported 
prevalence of this polymorphism within normal populations, ranging from 0 to 
6.5%. The prevalence within the Irish population has not been determined. A 
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)-based assay is commonly used for 
the detection of the prothrombin 20210A allele. This assay does not include a 
control restriction digest fragment and, consequently, failure of the enzyme 
activity or lack of addition of enzyme to the sample cannot be distinguished 
from wild-type prothrombin. We developed a RFLP-based assay, which incorporates 
an invariant digest site, resulting in the generation of a control digest 
fragment. Furthermore, we developed a nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
method for the amplification and digestion of poor-quality or low-concentration 
DNA. In the Irish population studied, five of 385 (1.29%) were heterozygous and 
one patient was homozygous for the prothrombin 20210A polymorphism. This is the 
first reported data on an Irish or Celtic population and suggests that the 
allele frequency is similar to Anglo-Saxon populations. The nested PCR method 
successfully amplified and digested 100/100 (100%) of the archived samples; none 
of these samples could be analyzed by the standard single-round PCR method. In 
conclusion, nested PCR should be considered in the analysis of archived samples. 
Single-round PCR is appropriate for recently collected samples; however, an 
invariant control digest site should be incorporated in RFLP-based assays to 
validate the integrity of the digestion enzyme and limit the risk of 
false-negative results.

DOI: 10.1097/00001721-200010000-00012
PMID: 11085288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]