1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 23;276(8):6009-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007062200. Epub
2000  Nov 21.

A 7-kDa prion protein (PrP) fragment, an integral component of the PrP region 
required for infectivity, is the major amyloid protein in 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease A117V.

Tagliavini F(1), Lievens PM, Tranchant C, Warter JM, Mohr M, Giaccone G, Perini 
F, Rossi G, Salmona M, Piccardo P, Ghetti B, Beavis RC, Bugiani O, Frangione B, 
Prelli F.

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale Neurologico Carlo Besta, 20133 Milano, Italy. 
ftagliavini@istituto-besta.it

Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) is a cerebral amyloidosis 
associated with mutations in the prion protein (PrP) gene (PRNP). The aim of 
this study was to characterize amyloid peptides purified from brain tissue of a 
patient with the A117V mutation who was Met/Val heterozygous at codon 129, 
Val(129) being in coupling phase with mutant Val117. The major peptide extracted 
from amyloid fibrils was a approximately 7-kDa PrP fragment. Sequence analysis 
and mass spectrometry showed that this fragment had ragged N and C termini, 
starting mainly at Gly88 and Gly90 and ending with Arg148, Glu152, or Asn153. 
Only Val was present at positions 117 and 129, indicating that the amyloid 
protein originated from mutant PrP molecules. In addition to the approximately 
7-kDa peptides, the amyloid fraction contained N- and C-terminal PrP fragments 
corresponding to residues 23-41, 191-205, and 217-228. Fibrillogenesis in vitro 
with synthetic peptides corresponding to PrP fragments extracted from brain 
tissue showed that peptide PrP-(85-148) readily assembled into amyloid fibrils. 
Peptide PrP-(191-205) also formed fibrillary structures although with different 
morphology, whereas peptides PrP-(23-41) and PrP-(217-228) did not. These 
findings suggest that the processing of mutant PrP isoforms associated with 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease may occur extracellularly. It is 
conceivable that full-length PrP and/or large PrP peptides are deposited in the 
extracellular compartment, partially degraded by proteases and further digested 
by tissue endopeptidases, originating a approximately 7-kDa protease-resistant 
core that is similar in patients with different mutations. Furthermore, the 
present data suggest that C-terminal fragments of PrP may participate in amyloid 
formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M007062200
PMID: 11087738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]