1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):8475-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009805200. Epub
2000  Dec 7.

Identification of a phosphorylation site in the hinge region of the human 
progesterone receptor and additional amino-terminal phosphorylation sites.

Knotts TA(1), Orkiszewski RS, Cook RG, Edwards DP, Weigel NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Protein Chemistry Core 
Laboratory, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We have previously reported the identification of seven in vivo phosphorylation 
sites in the amino-terminal region of the human progesterone receptor (PR). From 
our previous in vivo studies, it was evident that several phosphopeptides 
remained unidentified. In particular, we wished to determine whether human PR 
contains a phosphorylation site in the hinge region, as do other steroid 
receptors including chicken PR, human androgen receptor, and mouse estrogen 
receptor. Previously, problematic trypsin cleavage sites hampered our ability to 
detect phosphorylation sites in large incomplete tryptic peptides. Using a 
combination of mass spectrometry and in vitro phosphorylation, we have 
identified six previously unidentified phosphorylation sites in human PR. Using 
nanoelectrospray ionization mass spectrometry, we have identified two new in 
vivo phosphorylation sites, Ser(20) and Ser(676), in baculovirus-expressed human 
PR. Ser(676) is analogous to the hinge site identified in other steroid 
receptors. Additionally, precursor ion scans identified another phosphopeptide 
that contains Ser(130)-Pro(131), a likely candidate for phosphorylation. In 
vitro phosphorylation of PR with Cdk2 has revealed five additional in vitro Cdk2 
phosphorylation sites: Ser(25), Ser(213), Thr(430), Ser(554), and Ser(676). At 
least two of these, Ser(213) and Ser(676), are authentic in vivo sites. We 
confirmed the presence of the Cdk2-phosphorylated peptide containing Ser(213) in 
PR from in vivo labeled T47D cells, indicating that this is an in vivo site. Our 
combined studies indicate that most, if not all, of the Ser-Pro motifs in human 
PR are sites for phosphorylation. Taken together, these data indicate that the 
phosphorylation of PR is highly complex, with at least 14 phosphorylation sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009805200
PMID: 11110801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]