1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 19;97(26):14206-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.260503997.

RbcS suppressor mutations improve the thermal stability and CO2/O2 specificity 
of rbcL- mutant ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase.

Du YC(1), Hong S, Spreitzer RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68588, USA.

In the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a Leu(290)-to-Phe (L290F) 
substitution in the large subunit of ribulose-1, 5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco), which is coded by the chloroplast rbcL gene, 
was previously found to be suppressed by second-site Ala(222)-to-Thr and 
Val(262)-to-Leu substitutions. These substitutions complement the photosynthesis 
deficiency of the L290F mutant by restoring the decreased thermal stability, 
catalytic efficiency, and CO(2)/O(2) specificity of the mutant enzyme back to 
wild-type values. Because residues 222, 262, and 290 interact with the loop 
between beta strands A and B of the Rubisco small subunit, which is coded by 
RbcS1 and RbcS2 nuclear genes, it seemed possible that substitutions in this 
loop might also suppress L290F. A mutation in a nuclear gene, Rbc-1, was 
previously found to suppress the biochemical defects of the L290F enzyme at a 
posttranslational step, but the nature of this gene and its product remains 
unknown. In the present study, three nuclear-gene suppressors were found to be 
linked to each other but not to the Rbc-1 locus. DNA sequencing revealed that 
the RbcS2 genes of these suppressor strains have mutations that cause either 
Asn(54)-to-Ser or Ala(57)-to-Val substitutions in the small-subunit betaA/betaB 
loop. When present in otherwise wild-type cells, with or without the resident 
RbcS1 gene, the mutant small subunits improve the thermal stability of wild-type 
Rubisco. These results indicate that the betaA/betaB loop, which is unique to 
eukaryotic Rubisco, contributes to holoenzyme thermal stability, catalytic 
efficiency, and CO(2)/O(2) specificity. The small subunit may be a fruitful 
target for engineering improved Rubisco.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.260503997
PMCID: PMC18896
PMID: 11114203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]