1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Dec 19;97(26):14467-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.97.26.14467.

Genetic restriction of HIV-1 pathogenesis to AIDS by promoter alleles of IL10.

Shin HD(1), Winkler C, Stephens JC, Bream J, Young H, Goedert JJ, O'Brien TR, 
Vlahov D, Buchbinder S, Giorgi J, Rinaldo C, Donfield S, Willoughby A, O'Brien 
SJ, Smith MW.

Author information:
(1)Science Applications International Corporation Frederick, National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.

IL10 is a powerful TH-2 cell cytokine produced by lymphoid cells that limits 
HIV-1 replication in vivo, ostensibly by inhibiting macrophage/monocyte and 
T-cell lymphocyte replication and secretion of inflammatory cytokines (IL1, 
TNFalpha, IL6, IL8, and IL12). A genetic epidemiological scan of patients 
enrolled in AIDS cohorts for candidate gene-linked short tandem repeat 
polymorphisms revealed significant genotype associations for HIV-1 infection and 
progression to AIDS with markers adjacent to and tracking (by linkage 
disequilibrium) common single nucleotide polymorphic variants in the IL10 
promoter region. Individuals carrying the IL10-5'-592A (IL10-5'A) promoter 
allele possibly were at increased risk for HIV-1 infection, and once infected 
they progressed to AIDS more rapidly than homozygotes for the alternative 
IL10-5'-592 C/C (IL10-+/+) genotype, particularly in the later stages of HIV-1 
infection. An estimated 25-30% of long-term nonprogressors (who avoid clinical 
AIDS for 10 or more years after HIV-1 infection) can be attributed to their 
IL10-+/+ promoter genotype. Alternative IL10 promoter alleles are functionally 
distinct in relative IL10 production, in retention of an avian erythroblastosis 
virus transcription factor recognition sequence and in binding to specific 
putative nuclear transcription factors, suggesting a potential mechanism whereby 
IL10-5'A down-regulation of inhibitory IL10 facilitates HIV-1 replication in 
vivo, accelerating the onset of AIDS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.26.14467
PMCID: PMC18942
PMID: 11121048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]