1. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Dec;115(6):981-5. doi:
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00154.x.

Xeroderma pigmentosum variant heterozygotes show reduced levels of recovery of 
replicative DNA synthesis in the presence of caffeine after ultraviolet 
irradiation.

Itoh T(1), Linn S, Kamide R, Tokushige H, Katori N, Hosaka Y, Yamaizumi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Division of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-3206, 
USA. toshiki@uclink4.berkeley.edu

Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum variant show clinical photosensitivity, skin 
neoplasias induced by ultraviolet light, and defective postreplication repair, 
but normal nucleotide excision repair. We recently reported an alternative, 
simple method for the diagnosis of xeroderma pigmentosum variant that measures 
by autoradiography three cellular markers for DNA repair after ultraviolet 
irradiation: unscheduled DNA synthesis, recovery of RNA synthesis, and recovery 
of replicative DNA synthesis. Among hereditary photosensitive disorders, 
including other xeroderma pigmentosum groups, Cockayne syndrome, and a newly 
established ultraviolet-sensitive syndrome, only xeroderma pigmentosum variant 
cells exhibited normal unscheduled DNA synthesis, normal recovery of RNA 
synthesis, but reduced recovery of replicative DNA synthesis (51 +/- 6% the rate 
relative to normal controls). This reduction of recovery of replicative DNA 
synthesis was enhanced in the presence of a nontoxic level of caffeine to 36 +/- 
5%. In this study we assess the cellular markers in two independent families 
that included two photosensitive patients that were identified as xeroderma 
pigmentosum variant. Cells from heterozygotic parents showed normal levels of 
unscheduled DNA synthesis, recovery of RNA synthesis, and recovery of 
replicative DNA synthesis, but reduced rates of recovery of replicative DNA 
synthesis in the presence of 1 mM caffeine (53 +/- 8% relative to the normal 
control). Furthermore, with a colony-forming assay, the cells showed normal 
survival by ultraviolet without caffeine, but slightly reduced survival by 
ultraviolet with 1 mM caffeine present. In one family, we confirmed inheritance 
of two heterozygous mis-sense mutations. One mutation is an A-->G transition at 
nucleotide 1840 that generates a K535E mis-sense mutation. Another mutation is 
an A-->C transversion at nucleotide 2003 that generates a K589 mis-sense 
mutation. Each of these mutations were absent in 52 unrelated Japanese 
individuals. These results suggest that xeroderma pigmentosum variant 
heterozygotes can be identified by their sensitivity to ultraviolet irradiation 
in the presence of nontoxic levels of caffeine.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00154.x
PMID: 11121129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]