1. Blood. 2001 Jan 1;97(1):175-82. doi: 10.1182/blood.v97.1.175.

Ligand binding to integrin alpha(v)beta(3) requires tyrosine 178 in the alpha(v) 
subunit.

Honda S(1), Tomiyama Y, Pampori N, Kashiwagi H, Kiyoi T, Kosugi S, Tadokoro S, 
Kurata Y, Shattil SJ, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Integrin alpha(v)beta(3) has been implicated in angiogenesis and other 
biological processes. However, the ligand-binding sites in alpha(v), a 
non-I-domain alpha subunit, remain to be identified. Recently in alpha(IIb), the 
other partner of the beta(3) subunit, several discontinuous residues important 
for ligand binding were identified in the predicted loops between repeats 2 and 
3 (W3 4-1 loop) and within repeat 3 (W3 2-3 loop). Based on these findings, 
alanine-scanning mutagenesis in 293 cells was used to investigate the role of 
these loops (cysteine [C]142-C155 and glycine [G]172-G181) of alpha(v) in ligand 
binding. Wild-type alpha(v)beta(3) was able to bind soluble fibrinogen following 
integrin activation either by 0.5 mM manganese dichloride (MnCl(2)) or a 
mutation of beta(3) threonine (T)562 to asparagine. However, mutation of 
tyrosine (Y)178 to alanine in the predicted G172-G181 loop of alpha(v) abolished 
fibrinogen binding, and alanine (A) substitutions at adjacent residues 
phenylalanine (F)177 and tryptophan (W)179 had a similar effect. Cells 
expressing Y178Aalpha(v) also failed to bind to immobilized fibrinogen. 
Moreover, the Y178A mutation abolished the binding of WOW-1 Fab, a monovalent 
ligand-mimetic anti-alpha(v)beta(3) antibody, and the expression of beta(3) 
ligand-induced binding sites (LIBS) induced by arginine-glycine-aspartic 
acid-tryptophan (RGDW). In sharp contrast to the data obtained with alpha(IIb), 
none of the mutations in the predicted W3 4-1 loop in alpha(v) impaired ligand 
binding. These results implicate alpha(v) Y178 in ligand binding to 
alpha(v)beta(3), and they suggest that there are key structural differences in 
the adhesive ligand-binding sites of alpha(v)beta(3) and alpha(IIb)beta(3).

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v97.1.175
PMID: 11133758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]