1. J Cell Biol. 2000 Dec 25;151(7):1561-74. doi: 10.1083/jcb.151.7.1561.

In vivo analysis of Cajal body movement, separation, and joining in live human 
cells.

Platani M(1), Goldberg I, Swedlow JR, Lamond AI.

Author information:
(1)MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland.

Cajal bodies (also known as coiled bodies) are subnuclear organelles that 
contain specific nuclear antigens, including splicing small nuclear 
ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) and a subset of nucleolar proteins. Cajal bodies are 
localized in the nucleoplasm and are often found at the nucleolar periphery. We 
have constructed a stable HeLa cell line, HeLa(GFP-coilin), that expresses the 
Cajal body marker protein, p80 coilin, fused to the green fluorescent protein 
(GFP-coilin). The localization pattern and biochemical properties of the 
GFP-coilin fusion protein are identical to the endogenous p80 coilin. Time-lapse 
recordings on 63 nuclei of HeLa(GFP-coilin) cells showed that all Cajal bodies 
move within the nucleoplasm. Movements included translocations through the 
nucleoplasm, joining of bodies to form larger structures, and separation of 
smaller bodies from larger Cajal bodies. Also, we observed Cajal bodies moving 
to and from nucleoli. The data suggest that there may be at least two classes of 
Cajal bodies that differ in their size, antigen composition, and dynamic 
behavior. The smaller size class shows more frequent and faster rates of 
movement, up to 0.9 microm/min. The GFP-coilin protein is dynamically associated 
with Cajal bodies as shown by changes in their fluorescence intensity over time. 
This study reveals an unexpectedly high level of movement and interactions of 
nuclear bodies in human cells and suggests that these movements may be driven, 
at least in part, by regulated mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.151.7.1561
PMCID: PMC2150679
PMID: 11134083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]