1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10539-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007190200. Epub 
2001 Jan 2.

Identification of a basolateral sorting signal for the M3 muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptor in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells.

Nadler LS(1), Kumar G, Nathanson NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington 98195-7750, USA.

Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) can be differentially localized in 
polarized cells. To identify potential sorting signals that mediate mAChR 
targeting, we examined the sorting of mAChRs in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells, 
a widely used model system. Expression of FLAG-tagged mAChRs in polarized 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells demonstrated that the M(2) subtype is sorted 
apically, whereas M(3) is targeted basolaterally. Expression of M(2)/M(3) 
receptor chimeras revealed that a 21-residue sequence, Ser(271)-Ser(291), from 
the M(3) third intracellular loop contains a basolateral sorting signal. 
Substitution of sequences containing the M(3) sorting signal into the homologous 
regions of M(2) was sufficient to confer basolateral localization to this apical 
receptor. Sequences containing the M(3) sorting signal also conferred 
basolateral targeting to M(2) when added to either the third intracellular loop 
or the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail. Furthermore, addition of a sequence 
containing the M(3) basolateral sorting signal to the cytoplasmic tail of the 
interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain caused significant basolateral targeting of 
this heterologous apical protein. The results indicate that the M(3) basolateral 
sorting signal is dominant over apical signals in M(2) and acts in a 
position-independent manner. The M(3) sorting signal represents a novel 
basolateral targeting motif for G protein-coupled receptors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M007190200
PMID: 11136723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]