1. Pediatrics. 2001 Jan;107(1):1-13. doi: 10.1542/peds.107.1.1.

Early diagnosis of cystic fibrosis through neonatal screening prevents severe 
malnutrition and improves long-term growth. Wisconsin Cystic Fibrosis Neonatal 
Screening Study Group.

Farrell PM(1), Kosorok MR, Rock MJ, Laxova A, Zeng L, Lai HC, Hoffman G, Laessig 
RH, Splaingard ML.

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 
pmfarrel@facstaff.wisc.edu

Comment in
    Pediatrics. 2001 Jun;107(6):1492. doi: 10.1542/peds.107.6.1492.
    Pediatrics. 2004 Aug;114(2):515-6. doi: 10.1542/peds.114.2.515.

OBJECTIVE: Despite its relative frequency among autosomal recessive diseases and 
the availability of the sweat test, cystic fibrosis (CF) has been difficult to 
diagnose in early childhood, and delays can lead to severe malnutrition, lung 
disease, or even death. The Wisconsin CF Neonatal Screening Project was designed 
as a randomized clinical trial to assess the benefits and risks of early 
diagnosis through screening. In addition, the incidence of CF was determined, 
and the validity of our randomization method assessed by comparing 16 
demographic variables.
METHODOLOGY: Immunoreactive trypsinogen analysis was applied to dried newborn 
blood specimens for recognition of CF risk from 1985 to 1991 and was coupled to 
DNA-based detection of the DeltaF508 mutation from 1991 to 1994. Randomization 
of 650 341 newborns occurred when their blood specimens reached the Wisconsin 
screening laboratory. This created 2 groups-an early diagnosis, screened cohort 
and a standard diagnosis or control group. To avoid selection bias, we devised a 
unique unblinding method with a surveillance program to completely identify the 
control subjects. Because sequential analysis of nutritional outcome measures 
revealed significantly better growth in screened patients during 1996, we 
accelerated the unblinding and completely identified the control group by April 
1998. Having each member of this cohort enrolled and evaluated for at least 1 
year and having completed a comprehensive surveillance program, we performed 
another statistical analysis of anthropometric evaluated indices that includes 
all CF patients without meconium ileus.
RESULTS: The incidence of classical CF, ie, patients diagnosed in this trial 
with a sweat chloride of 60 mEq/L greater, was 1:4189. By incorporating other CF 
patients born during the randomization period, including 2 autopsy diagnosed 
patients and 8 probable patients, we calculate a maximum incidence of 1:3938 
(95% confidence interval: 3402-4611). Although there were group differences in 
the proportion of patients with DeltaF508 genotypes and with pancreatic 
insufficiency, validity of the randomization plan was demonstrated by analyzing 
16 demographic variables and finding no significant difference after adjustment 
for multiple comparisons. Focusing on patients without meconium ileus, we found 
a marked difference in the mean +/- standard deviation age of diagnosis for 
screened patients (13 +/- 37 weeks), compared with the standard diagnosis group 
(100 +/- 117). Anthropometric indices of nutritional status were significantly 
higher at diagnosis in the screened group, including length/height, weight, and 
head circumference. During 13 years of study, despite similar nutritional 
therapy and the inherently better pancreatic status of the control group, 
analysis of nutritional outcomes revealed significantly greater growth 
associated with early diagnosis. Most impressively, the screened group had a 
much lower proportion of patients with weight and height data below the 10th 
percentile throughout childhood.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the screened group had a higher proportion of patients 
with pancreatic insufficiency, their growth indices were significantly better 
than those of the control group during the 13-year follow-up evaluation and, 
therefore, this randomized clinical trial of early CF diagnosis must be 
interpreted as unequivocally positive. Our conclusions did not change when the 
height and weight data before 4 years of age for the controls detected by 
unblinding were included in the analysis. Also, comparison of growth outcomes 
after 4 years of age in all subjects showed persistence of the significant 
differences. Therefore, selection bias has been eliminated as a potential 
explanation. In addition, the results show that severe malnutrition persists 
after delayed diagnosis of CF and that catch-up may not be possible. We conclude 
that early diagnosis of CF through neonatal screening combined with aggressive 
nutritional therapy can result

DOI: 10.1542/peds.107.1.1
PMID: 11134427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]