1. Diabetologia. 2000 Dec;43(12):1540-3. doi: 10.1007/s001250051566.

Polymorphisms of human paraoxonase 1 gene (PON1) and susceptibility to diabetic 
nephropathy in type I diabetes mellitus.

Araki S(1), Makita Y, Canani L, Ng D, Warram JH, Krolewski AS.

Author information:
(1)Section on Genetics and Epidemiology, Research Division, Joslin Diabetes 
Center, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Oxidative stress is a putative mechanism in the development of 
diabetic nephropathy. Paraoxonase gene 1 is an HDL-bound enzyme that protects 
tissues against oxidative damage. Three common polymorphisms of paraoxonase gene 
1, T-107C in the promoter, Leu54Met and Gln192Arg, that modify paraoxonase 
activity have been associated with cardiovascular disease. This study aimed to 
find whether these polymorphisms also contribute to the development of diabetic 
nephropathy.
METHODS: The association between diabetic nephropathy and these three 
polymorphisms was examined in a case-control study. For this purpose, genomic 
DNA was collected from 188 patients with Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes 
mellitus and diabetic nephropathy and from 179 unrelated patients with Type I 
diabetes but without diabetic nephropathy despite the duration of diabetes of 15 
or more years.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele frequencies for each of the three polymorphisms 
(T-107C, Leu54Met and Gln192Arg) were similar in cases and control subjects.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The three polymorphisms in paraoxonase gene 1 that 
have been associated with serum levels of paraoxonase are not associated with 
diabetic nephropathy. We show that this genetically determined component of the 
antioxidant capacity of HDL does not play a critical part in the development of 
diabetic nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s001250051566
PMID: 11151764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]