1. J Lipid Res. 2001 Jan;42(1):31-40.

Three arginine residues in apolipoprotein A-I are critical for activation of 
lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase.

Roosbeek S(1), Vanloo B, Duverger N, Caster H, Breyne J, De Beun I, Patel H, 
Vandekerckhove J, Shoulders C, Rosseneu M, Peelman F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Lipoprotein Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry, Ghent 
University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Previous studies have suggested that the helical repeat formed by residues 
143;-164 of apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) contributes to lecithin:cholesterol 
acyltransferase (LCAT) activation. To identify specific polar residues involved 
in this process, we examined residue conservation and topology of apoA-I from 
all known species. We observed that the hydrophobic/hydrophilic interface of 
helix 143;-164 contains a cluster of three strictly conserved arginine residues 
(R149, R153, and R160), and that these residues create the only significant 
positive electrostatic potential around apoA-I. To test the importance of R149, 
R153, and R160 in LCAT activation, we generated a series of mutant proteins. 
These had fluorescence emission, secondary structure, and lipid-binding 
properties comparable to those of wild-type apoA-I. Mutation of conserved 
residues R149, R153, and R160 drastically decreased LCAT activity on 
lipid-protein complexes, whereas control mutations (E146Q, D150N, D157N, R171Q, 
and A175R) did not decrease LCAT activity by more than 55%. The markedly 
decreased activities of mutants R149, R153, and R160 resulted from a decrease in 
the maximal reaction velocity V(max) because the apparent Michaelis-Menten 
constant K(m) values were similar for the mutant and wild-type apoA-I proteins. 
These data suggest that R149, R153, and R160 participate in apoA-I-mediated 
activation of LCAT, and support the "belt" model for discoidal rHDL. In this 
model, residues R149, R153, and R160 do not form salt bridges with the 
antiparallel apoA-I monomer, but instead are pointing toward the surface of the 
disc, enabling interactions with LCAT. - Roosbeek, S., B. Vanloo, N. Duverger, 
H. Caster, J. Breyne, I. De Beun, H. Patel, J. Vandekerckhove, C. Shoulders, M. 
Rosseneu, and F. Peelman. Three arginine residues in apolipoportein A-I are 
critical for activation of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase J. Lipid Res. 
2001. 42: 31;-40.

PMID: 11160363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]