1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;68(3):700-10. doi: 10.1086/318787. Epub 2001 Feb 15.

Prevalence and penetrance of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population 
series of 649 women with ovarian cancer.

Risch HA(1), McLaughlin JR, Cole DE, Rosen B, Bradley L, Kwan E, Jack E, 
Vesprini DJ, Kuperstein G, Abrahamson JL, Fan I, Wong B, Narod SA.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Epidemiology and Public 
Health, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA. harvey.risch@yale.edu

A population-based series of 649 unselected incident cases of ovarian cancer 
diagnosed in Ontario, Canada, during 1995-96 was screened for germline mutations 
in BRCA1 and BRCA2. We specifically tested for 11 of the most commonly reported 
mutations in the two genes. Then, cases were assessed with the 
protein-truncation test (PTT) for exon 11 of BRCA1, with denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis for the remainder of BRCA1, and with PTT for exons 10 and 11 of 
BRCA2. No mutations were found in all 134 women with tumors of borderline 
histology. Among the 515 women with invasive cancers, we identified 60 
mutations, 39 in BRCA1 and 21 in BRCA2. The total mutation frequency among women 
with invasive cancers, 11.7% (95% confidence interval [95%CI] 9.2%-14.8%), is 
higher than previous estimates. Hereditary ovarian cancers diagnosed at age <50 
years were mostly (83%) due to BRCA1, whereas the majority (60%) of those 
diagnosed at age >60 years were due to BRCA2. Mutations were found in 19% of 
women reporting first-degree relatives with breast or ovarian cancer and in 6.5% 
of women with no affected first-degree relatives. Risks of ovarian, breast, and 
stomach cancers and leukemias/lymphomas were increased nine-, five-, six- and 
threefold, respectively, among first-degree relatives of cases carrying BRCA1 
mutations, compared with relatives of noncarriers, and risk of colorectal cancer 
was increased threefold for relatives of cases carrying BRCA2 mutations. For 
carriers of BRCA1 mutations, the estimated penetrance by age 80 years was 36% 
for ovarian cancer and 68% for breast cancer. In breast-cancer risk for 
first-degree relatives, there was a strong trend according to mutation location 
along the coding sequence of BRCA1, with little evidence of increased risk for 
mutations in the 5' fifth, but 8.8-fold increased risk for mutations in the 3' 
fifth (95%CI 3.6-22.0), corresponding to a carrier penetrance of essentially 
100%. Ovarian, colorectal, stomach, pancreatic, and prostate cancer occurred 
among first-degree relatives of carriers of BRCA2 mutations only when mutations 
were in the ovarian cancer-cluster region (OCCR) of exon 11, whereas an excess 
of breast cancer was seen when mutations were outside the OCCR. For cancers of 
all sites combined, the estimated penetrance of BRCA2 mutations was greater for 
males than for females, 53% versus 38%. Past studies may have underestimated the 
contribution of BRCA2 to ovarian cancer, because mutations in this gene cause 
predominantly late-onset cancer, and previous work has focused more on 
early-onset disease. If confirmed in future studies, the trend in breast-cancer 
penetrance, according to mutation location along the BRCA1 coding sequence, may 
have significant impact on treatment decisions for carriers of BRCA1-mutations. 
As well, BRCA2 mutations may prove to be a greater cause of cancer in male 
carriers than previously has been thought.

DOI: 10.1086/318787
PMCID: PMC1274482
PMID: 11179017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]