1. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Feb;268(4):997-1005. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.01958.x.

A comparison of kinetic and regulatory properties of the tetrameric and dimeric 
forms of wild-type and Thr427-->Pro mutant human phenylalanine hydroxylase: 
contribution of the flexible hinge region Asp425-Gln429 to the tetramerization 
and cooperative substrate binding.

Bjørgo E(1), de Carvalho RM, Flatmark T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, 
Norway.

Recombinant human phenylalanine hydroxylase (hPAH, phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase 
EC 1.14.16.1) is catalytically active both as a tetramer and a dimer [Knappskog, 
P.M., Flatmark, T., Aarden, J.M., Haavik, J. and Martínez, A. (1996) Eur. J. 
Biochem. 242, 813-821]. In the present study we have further characterized the 
differences in kinetic and regulatory properties of the two oligomeric forms 
when expressed in Escherichia coli. The positive cooperativity of L-Phe binding 
to the tetrameric form both in enzyme kinetic studies (h = 1.6) and intrinsic 
tryptophan fluorescence measurements (h = 2.3) was abolished in the dimer, which 
also revealed a catalytic efficiency (Vmax/[S]0.5) of only 35% of the tetramer. 
Whereas the catalytic activity of the tetramer was activated fivefold to sixfold 
by preincubation with L-Phe, the dimer revealed only a 1.6-fold activation. The 
crystal structure has identified a five-residue flexible hinge region 
(Asp425-Gln429) that links the beta-strand Tbeta2 (Ile421-Leu424) and the 24 
residue amphipathic alpha-helix Talpha1 (Gln428-Lys452) at the C-terminus which 
forms an antiparallel coiled-coil structure in the center of the tetramer 
[Fusetti, F., Erlandsen, H., Flatmark, T. & Stevens, R.C. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 
273, 16962-16967]. The potential role of this flexible hinge in the 
tetramerization and the conformational transition of wt-hPAH on the cooperative 
binding of L-Phe was examined by site-specific mutagenesis. Substitution of 
Thr427 by a Pro (as in tyrosine hydroxylase) resulted in a mutant protein which 
was isolated mainly (about 95%) as a dimer. The isolated tetramer of T427P 
revealed no kinetic cooperativity of L-Phe binding, the catalytic efficiency 
(Vmax/[S]0.5) was decreased to about 39% of the wild-type tetramer and it was 
not activated by L-Phe preincubation. The dimeric forms of T427P and wt-hPAH 
revealed rather similar kinetic properties. The lack of kinetic cooperativity of 
the T427P tetramer was associated with a corresponding change in the binding 
isotherm for L-Phe as studied by intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence measurements. 
Protein stability was also reduced both for the E. coli expressed and the in 
vitro synthesized mutant enzyme. Collectively, these results indicate that the 
positive cooperativity of L-Phe binding to wt-hPAH requires a tetrameric enzyme 
with a C-terminal flexible hinge region (Asp425-Gln429) which has a structural 
role in the formation of the enzyme tetramer. Furthermore, this hinge region 
represents a motif in the PAH structure that is involved in the conformational 
change transmitted through the protein on the cooperative binding of L-Phe to 
tetrameric wt-hPAH. This conclusion is further supported by studies on two 
disease (phenylketonuria)-associated mutant forms.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2001.01958.x
PMID: 11179966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]