1. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;68(3):765-71. doi: 10.1086/318806. Epub 2001 Feb 8.

Atypical forms of incontinentia pigmenti in male individuals result from 
mutations of a cytosine tract in exon 10 of NEMO (IKK-gamma).

Aradhya S(1), Courtois G, Rajkovic A, Lewis RA, Levy M, IsraÃ«l A, Nelson DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Sep;69(3):664-6. doi: 10.1086/323003.

Familial incontinentia pigmenti (IP [MIM 308310]), or Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome, 
is an X-linked dominant and male-lethal disorder. We recently demonstrated that 
mutations in NEMO (IKK-gamma), which encodes a critical component of the 
NF-kappaB signaling pathway, were responsible for IP. Virtually all mutations 
eliminate the production of NEMO, causing the typical skewing of X inactivation 
in female individuals and lethality in male individuals, possibly through 
enhanced sensitivity to apoptosis. Most mutations also give rise to classic 
signs of IP, but, in this report, we describe two mutations in families with 
atypical phenotypes. Remarkably, each family included a male individual with 
unusual signs, including postnatal survival and either immune dysfunction or 
hematopoietic disturbance. We found two duplication mutations in these families, 
at a cytosine tract in exon 10 of NEMO, both of which remove the zinc (Zn) 
finger at the C-terminus of the protein. Two deletion mutations were also 
identified in the same tract in additional families. However, only the 
duplication mutations allowed male individuals to survive, and affected female 
individuals with duplication mutations demonstrated random or slight skewing of 
X inactivation. Similarly, NF-kappaB activation was diminished in the presence 
of duplication mutations and was completely absent in cells with deletion 
mutations. These results strongly indicate that male individuals can also suffer 
from IP caused by NEMO mutations, and we therefore urge a reevaluation of the 
diagnostic criteria.

DOI: 10.1086/318806
PMCID: PMC1274488
PMID: 11179023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]