1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2001 Jan;144(1):59-62. doi: 10.1530/eje.0.1440059.

Aldosterone synthase deficiency type I with no documented homozygous mutations 
in the CYP11B2 gene.

Wasniewska M(1), De Luca F, Valenzise M, Lombardo F, De Luca F.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Clinica Pediatrica, Policlinico Universitario, 98123 Messina, 
Italy.

This case report concerns a girl born from non-consanguineous parents and 
hospitalized in another hospital at the age of 14 days because of a severe 
salt-losing syndrome (Na=125, K=8.6 mEq/l). In spite of normal genitalia, 
diagnosis of 21-hydroxylase deficiency was assessed on the basis of a slightly 
increased 17-OH-progesterone serum level (6.4 ng/ml). The onset of both 
hydrocortisone and 9alpha-fluorohydrocortisone therapy was followed by a 
resolution of the clinical picture. At the age of 60 days she was admitted to 
our clinic for a re-evaluation of the diagnosis. Steroid hormone serum levels 
were measured after withdrawal of therapy and diagnosis of corticosterone methyl 
oxidase (CMO) deficiency type I was definitely established in the light of the 
biochemical results: i.e. very low 18-hydroxycorticosterone (18-OH-B) serum 
levels (20 pg/ml), an abnormally high corticosterone/18-OH-B serum ratio (306.5) 
and an abnormally low 18-OH-B/aldosterone serum ratio (2.1). This autosomal 
recessively inherited disorder can be differentiated from CMO type II and other 
salt-wasting syndromes only on the basis of the serum steroid hormone pattern. 
After establishing the diagnosis of CMO I deficiency, hydrocortisone therapy was 
withdrawn whilst treatment with 9alpha-fluorohydrocortisone was begun again, 
with a satisfactory clinical and metabolic impact. Direct sequences of the 
patient's DNA were able to identify only a (heterozygous) amino acid 
substitution in exon 7 of that gene, which is known to have only a small effect 
on enzyme activity and cannot be the only cause of the patient's phenotype: 
valine-386-alanine (V386A) GTG-->GcG. No homozygous mutations in the CYP11B2 
gene were observed. This is the first report of a patient with CMO type I who 
does not carry any homozygous mutation in the entire CYP11B2 alleles, whereas 
some cases with no mutations in this gene have already been reported in CMO II. 
The present study seems to be inconsistent with the previously reported 
correlation of the phenotype and genotype in CMO type I. A reasonable question 
that might be raised on the basis of our findings in this case report is whether 
other genes, apart from CYP11B2, are involved in the regulation of terminal 
aldosterone synthesis.

DOI: 10.1530/eje.0.1440059
PMID: 11174838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]