1. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;91(1-4):261-6. doi: 10.1159/000056855.

Mutagen sensitivity of human lymphoblastoid cells with a BRCA1 mutation in 
comparison to ataxia telangiectasia heterozygote cells.

Speit G(1), Trenz K, Schütz P, Bendix R, Dörk T.

Author information:
(1)Abt. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
guenter.speit@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Our previous results indicated a close relationship between the presence of a 
BRCA1 mutation in lymphocytes and hypersensitivity for the induction of 
micronuclei by gamma irradiation and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)). Comparative 
investigations with the comet assay (single-cell gel electrophoresis) suggested 
a normal rate of damage removal and pointed to a disturbed fidelity of DNA 
repair as a direct or indirect consequence of a BRCA1 mutation. We now wanted to 
see whether similar results could be obtained with lymphoblastoid cell lines 
(LCLs) and whether such permanent cells are suitable as a model for the 
investigation of mechanisms involved in mutagen sensitivity. Our results show 
that LCLs with a BRCA1 mutation are also hypersensitive to the 
chromosome-damaging effects of gamma irradiation or H(2)O(2), as revealed by the 
micronucleus test. Interestingly, LCLs heterozygous for an ataxia telangiectasia 
(AT) mutation have similar characteristics as BRCA1 cells with respect to the 
induction and repair of DNA damage induced by either gamma irradiation or 
H(2)O(2). However, caffeine enhanced the induction of micronuclei by gamma 
irradiation only in normal and heterozygous AT cells but not in BRCA1 cells, 
thus indicating a difference in the pathways leading to mutagen sensitivity in 
cells with a BRCA1 or an AT mutation. Our results suggest that caffeine could be 
useful in discriminating AT heterozygotes from carriers of a BRCA1 mutation, as 
well as BRCA1 mutation carriers from normal individuals.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000056855
PMID: 11173867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]