1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2000;78(10):562-8. doi: 10.1007/s001090000154.

A prospective study of genetic markers of susceptibility to infection and 
inflammation, and the severity, progression, and regression of coronary 
atherosclerosis and its response to therapy.

Elghannam H(1), Tavackoli S, Ferlic L, Gotto AM Jr, Ballantyne CM, Marian AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2000;78(10):539-40. doi: 10.1007/s001090000171.

Inflammation plays a key role in susceptibility to coronary atherosclerosis and 
response to therapy. A diverse array of factors modulates inflammation, 
including interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and 
CD14 receptors on the surface of macrophages. Genes encoding for inflammatory 
markers have variants that regulate their expression and are potential risk 
factors for atherosclerosis. We prospectively analyzed the possible association 
of CD14 -260C/T, TNF-alpha -308G/A, and IL-6 -174G/C variants, located in the 
promoter regions, with the severity, progression, and response to therapy of 
coronary atherosclerosis in a well-characterized cohort. We studied 375 subjects 
enrolled in the Lipoprotein and Coronary Atherosclerosis Study (LCAS). Genotypes 
were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction mapping. 
Fasting plasma lipids and quantitative coronary angiograms were obtained at 
baseline and 2.5 years following randomization to fluvastatin or placebo. 
Distributions of genotypes were--for CD14: 100 CC, 184 CT, and 86 TT; IL-6: 152 
GG, 153 GC, and 62 CC; and TNF-alpha: 244 GG, 110 GA, and 17 AA. The CD14 CC 
genotype was associated with incidence of new coronary occlusion (P=0.026); 
TNF-alpha AA genotype with history of myocardial infarction (MI, P=0.04), and A 
allele with total occlusions at baseline (P=0.027), and systolic blood pressure 
(P=0.046); and IL-6-174 CC genotype with baseline minimum lumen diameter 
(P=0.043) and reduction in lipoprotein(a) with fluvastatin (P=0.03). Otherwise, 
no association between the genotypes and the biochemical, angiographic, and 
clinical phenotypes was detected, and neither were genotype-treatment 
interactions. Functional variants of CD14 -260C/T, TNF-alpha -308G/A, and IL-6 
-174G/C, implicated in the susceptibility to infection, are unlikely to confer 
major risk for susceptibility to coronary atherosclerosis and its progression or 
response to therapy in the LCAS population.

DOI: 10.1007/s001090000154
PMID: 11199329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]