1. J Med Assoc Thai. 2000 Nov;83 Suppl 2:S66-73.

Screening for mutations in exon 4 of the LDL receptor gene in Thai subjects with 
primary hypercholesterolemia: detection of a novel mutation D151Y by PCR-CFLP.

Pongrapeeporn KU(1), Sutthikhum V, Likidlilid A, Poldee S, Futrakul A, Yamwong 
P, Amornrattana A, Ong-Ajyooth S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

A mutation in low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene causes an autosomal 
codominant disorder namely familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Mutations in the 
LDL receptor gene are very heterogeneous at the DNA levels, occurring in all 18 
exons of the gene. However, exon 4 has been found to be the hot spot for 
mutational events. In this study DNA from 45 Thai subjects with primary 
hypercholesterolemia was screened for mutations in the hot spot exon 4. The DNA 
samples were amplified by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and screened for 
mutation by Cleavase Fragment Length Polymorphism (CFLP) technique. 
Identification of mutation was performed by direct sequencing of PCR product. 
From this screening, one female patient was found to be heterozygous for a novel 
mutation which was due to a G to T transversion at nucleotide 514. This 
transversion would change the species-conserved amino acid at codon 151 from 
charged R group aspatic (GAC) to uncharged R group tyrosine (TAC), termed D151Y. 
From the same screening strategy, we found that this mutation was absent in 33 
healthy normolipidemic subjects. In this index subject, Arg 3500 Gln mutation in 
apo B-100 gene, causing hypercholesterolemia namely familial defective apo B-100 
(FDB), was not found. Therefore, hypercholesterolemia in this index subject was 
possibly caused by the D151Y mutation in the LDL receptor gene.

PMID: 11194025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]