1. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 1;166(5):3377-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.5.3377.

Soluble CD16 inhibits CR3 (CD11b/CD18)-mediated infection of 
monocytes/macrophages by opsonized primary R5 HIV-1.

Bouhlal H(1), Galon J, Kazatchkine MD, Fridman WH, Sautès-Fridman C, Haeffner 
Cavaillon N.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 430, Hôpital 
Broussais, Paris, France.

We demonstrate that soluble CD16 (sCD16; soluble Fc gamma RIII), a natural 
ligand of CR3, inhibits the infection of monocytes by primary R5 HIV-1 strain 
opsonized with serum of seronegative individuals. Inhibition of monocyte 
infection by sCD16 was similar to that observed with anti-CR3 mAbs, indicating 
that opsonized HIV may use a CR3-dependent pathway for entry in monocytic cells. 
Cultured human monocytes express both CR3 (CD11b/CD18) and CCR5 receptors. 
RANTES, the natural ligand of CCR5, inhibited infection of monocytes with 
unopsonized HIV particles and partially that of monocytes infected with HIV 
particles opsonized with complement-derived fragments. Although HIV-infected 
monocytes from homozygous CCR5 Delta 32/Delta 32 (CCR5(-/-)) individuals produce 
low levels of p24, cells infected with opsonized particles produced higher 
levels of p24 than cells infected with unopsonized particles. Our results thus 
suggest that CR3 may represent an alternative coreceptor to CCR5 of opsonized 
primary R5 virus entry into monocytes/macrophages. We also observed that the 
concentration of sCD16 is greatly decreased in sera of HIV-infected patients 
with low lymphocyte CD4(+) counts. Taken together, our findings suggest that 
sCD16, present in plasma, may play an important role in controlling HIV-1 
spread.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.5.3377
PMID: 11207294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]