1. Eur J Cancer. 2001 Feb;37(3):340-6. doi: 10.1016/s0959-8049(00)00388-9.

Genetic changes of hOGG1 and the activity of oh8Gua glycosylase in colon cancer.

Park YJ(1), Choi EY, Choi JY, Park JG, You HJ, Chung MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, 110-744, Seoul, South Korea.

oh8Gua glycosylase repairs DNA by removing oh8Gua, a highly mutagenic oxidative 
DNA adduct. Recently, the gene for human oh8Gua glycosylase (hOGG1) was cloned 
and several mutational types have been reported. However, the implications of 
such mutations in human cancer have not been clearly demonstrated. To test the 
involvement of hOGG1 mutation in colon carcinogenesis, we analysed the genetic 
changes of hOGG1 and the activity of oh8Gua glycosylase in 15 paired normal and 
tumorous colon specimens. The activity of antioxidant enzymes (catalase and 
superoxide dismutase (SOD)) and extent of oxidative cellular damage (oh8Gua and 
malondialdehyde) were also assessed to compare the oxidative status of normal 
and tumour tissues. An Arg 154 to His mutation was detected in two tumour 
samples, but not in the corresponding normal tissues. A Ser 326 to Cys mutation 
(polymorphism) was found in both the normal and tumour tissues of 3 patients. 
However, neither the Arg 154 to His mutation nor the polymorphism at codon 326 
significantly decreased the oh8Gua glycosylase activity. The mean activity of 
oh8Gua glycosylase was significantly higher in the tumours than in normal 
tissues (P=0.022). Antioxidant enzyme activities were decreased (catalase; 
P=0.004 and SOD; P=0.002), and the extent of oxidative damage correspondingly 
increased in the tumour tissues (oh8Gua; P=0.007 and malondialdehyde; P=0.046). 
Although the sample size was limited, these results suggest that the somatic 
mutation or the polymorphism of hOGG1 is less likely to be involved in colon 
carcinogenesis. Nevertheless, the greater oxidative DNA damage in the tumour 
tissues, as a possible result of impaired antioxidant activity, implies an 
important role for oxygen free-radicals in colon carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0959-8049(00)00388-9
PMID: 11239755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]