1. Mol Genet Metab. 2001 Mar;72(3):209-17. doi: 10.1006/mgme.2000.3144.

A sequence variation in the mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
gene is associated with increased plasma glycerol and free fatty acid 
concentrations among French Canadians.

St-Pierre J(1), Vohl MC, Brisson D, Perron P, Despr√©s JP, Hudson TJ, Gaudet D.

Author information:
(1)Dyslipidemia, Diabetes and Atherosclerosis Research Group, Chicoutimi 
Hospital, Quebec, Canada.

FAD-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mGPD) enzyme is located in the 
mitochondrial inner membrane where it catalyzes irreversible oxidation 
reactions. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a multifactorial disorder associated 
with physiological abnormalities in the glycerol and free fatty acids (FFA) 
metabolic pathways. In the present study, we have evaluated the association 
among the mGPD H264R sequence variation and postabsorptive plasma FFA and 
glycerol concentrations in a sample of French Canadians with and without type 2 
DM. A sample of 81 recently diagnosed type 2 DM and 318 nondiabetic, nonobese, 
normotriglyceridemic French Canadians were screened for the presence of the mGPD 
H264R genetic variant using a PCR-RFLP-based method. The 318 nondiabetic 
subjects were free of known type 2 DM covariates (fasting glucose <7.0 mmol/L, 
body mass index <29 kg/m(2), fasting glycerol <2.0 mmol/L and absence of the 
N288D sequence variation in the glycerol kinase gene, fasting triglyceride <2.5 
mmol/L). The association of mGPD H264R sequence variation with plasma FFA and 
glycerol concentrations was assessed in different regression models. Among 
non-DM individuals, the R allele (HR and RR genotypes) was associated with 
increased plasma FFA and glycerol concentrations (P < 0.05). However, the mean 
plasma FFA and glycerol concentrations were not affected by the H264R genotype 
in the type 2 DM sample. Overall, mean plasma FFA concentrations in non-DM RR 
homozygotes reached values that were similar to those achieved in patients with 
type 2 diabetes (0.87 +/- 0.63 vs 0.90 +/- 0.48 mmol/L). After controlling for 
age, gender, body mass index, fasting glucose, and fasting triglyceride 
concentrations, the relative odds of having fasting plasma FFA levels above the 
90th percentile (0.9 mmol/L) in the absence of DM was increased by twofold in 
H264R heterozygotes (P = 0.04) and fourfold among R264 homozygotes (P = 0.009) 
compared to noncarriers. In the absence of DM, the mGPD R allele was also 
associated with higher plasma glycerol concentrations (P < 0.05). Results in 
non-DM individuals suggest that the mGPD R allele is associated with DM 
intermediate phenotypes. The absence of a relation between mGPD genotype and DM 
is in accordance with the view that DM is a complex phenotype in which increased 
plasma FFA or glycerol concentrations result from metabolic alterations which 
might obscure the effect of the mGPD polymorphism.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/mgme.2000.3144
PMID: 11243726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]