1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 4;276(18):14634-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011116200. Epub
2001  Jan 29.

Phosphorylation regulates intracellular trafficking of beta-secretase.

Walter J(1), Fluhrer R, Hartung B, Willem M, Kaether C, Capell A, Lammich S, 
Multhaup G, Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Adolf Butenandt-Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Laboratory for 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 44 
Schillerstrasse, 80336 Munich, Germany. jwalter@pbm.med.uni-muenchen.de

beta-Secretase (BACE) is a transmembrane aspartyl protease, which generates the 
N terminus of Alzheimer's disease amyloid beta-peptide. Here, we report that 
BACE can be phosphorylated within its cytoplasmic domain at serine residue 498 
by casein kinase 1. Phosphorylation exclusively occurs after full maturation of 
BACE by propeptide cleavage and complex N-glycosylation. 
Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation affects the subcellular localization of BACE. 
BACE wild type and an S498D mutant that mimics phosphorylated BACE are 
predominantly located within juxtanuclear Golgi compartments and endosomes, 
whereas nonphosphorylatable BACE S498A accumulates in peripheral EEA1-positive 
endosomes. Antibody uptake assays revealed that reinternalization of BACE from 
the cell surface is independent of its phosphorylation state. After 
reinternalization, BACE wild type as well as BACE S498D are efficiently 
retrieved from early endosomal compartments and further targeted to later 
endosomal compartments and/or the trans-Golgi network. In contrast, 
nonphosphorylatable BACE S498A is retained within early endosomes. Our results 
therefore demonstrate regulated trafficking of BACE within the secretory and 
endocytic pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M011116200
PMID: 11278841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]