1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):21017-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100136200. Epub 
2001 Apr 4.

Tuberin phosphorylation regulates its interaction with hamartin. Two proteins 
involved in tuberous sclerosis.

Aicher LD(1), Campbell JS, Yeung RS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA.

Hamartin and tuberin are products of the tumor suppressor genes, TSC1 and TSC2, 
respectively. When mutated, a characteristic spectrum of tumor-like growths 
develop resulting in the syndrome of tuberous sclerosis complex. The phenotypes 
associated with TSC1 and TSC2 mutations are largely indistinguishable suggesting 
a common biochemical pathway. Indeed, hamartin and tuberin have been shown to 
interact stably in vitro and in vivo. Factors that regulate their interaction 
are likely critical to the understanding of disease pathogenesis. In this study, 
we showed that tuberin is phosphorylated at serine and tyrosine residues in 
response to serum and other factors, and it undergoes serial phosphorylation 
that can be detected by differences in electrophoretic mobilities. A 
disease-related TSC2 mutation (Y1571H) nearly abolished tuberin phosphorylation 
when stimulated with pervanadate. Expression of this mutant tuberin caused a 
marked reduction in TSC1-TSC2 interaction compared with wild-type protein and 
significantly curtailed the growth inhibitory effects of tuberin when 
overexpressed in COS1 cells, consistent with a loss of function mutation. 
Examination of a second pathologic mutation, P1675L, revealed a similar 
relationship between limited phosphorylation and reduced interaction with 
hamartin. Our data show for the first time that 1) tuberin is phosphorylated at 
tyrosine and serine residues, 2) TSC1-TSC2 interaction is regulated by tuberin 
phosphorylation, and 3) defective phosphorylation of tuberin is associated with 
loss of its tumor suppressor activity. These findings suggest that 
phosphorylation may be a key regulatory mechanism controlling TSC1-TSC2 
function.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C100136200
PMID: 11290735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]