1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Apr;86(4):1778-81. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.4.7391.

Macroorchidism due to autonomous hyperfunction of Sertoli cells and G(s)alpha 
gene mutation: an unusual expression of McCune-Albright syndrome in a 
prepubertal boy.

Coutant R(1), Lumbroso S, Rey R, Lahlou N, Venara M, Rouleau S, Sultan C, Limal 
JM.

Author information:
(1)Département de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, 49000 Angers, 
France. recoutant@chu-angers.fr

We report an unusual observation of a 3.8-yr-old boy with McCune-Albright 
syndrome (MAS) associated with abnormal prepubertal testis enlargement and no 
sexual precocity. Physical examination showed café-au-lait skin lesions, 
enlarged testes, prepubertal sized penis, and no pubic or axillary hair. 
Skeletal radiography disclosed fibrous dysplasia. The serum testosterone level 
was 0.58 nmol/L and remained below 1.4 nmol/L during the 4-yr follow-up. By 
contrast, serum inhibin B and anti-Mullerian hormone concentrations were 
abnormally increased up to 255 pg/mL (childhood range, 35--180) and 792 pmol/L 
(childhood range, 309--566), respectively. The LH response to a GnRH test was in 
the prepubertal range, whereas the FSH response was blunted. This abnormal 
hormone concentration profile indicates autonomous hyperfunction of Sertoli 
cells, with no evidence of Leydig cell activation. Testicular histology showed 
tubules with marked Sertoli cell hyperplasia and very rare germinal cells, and 
interstitial tissue containing mesenchymal cells but no mature Leydig cells. DNA 
sequence analysis from bone and testis tissues detected the known activating 
mutation in MAS that results in replacement of Arg by His at codon 201 of the 
G(s)alpha protein. Other endocrine tests showed excessive GH secretion and 
moderate adrenal androgen hypersecretion. These findings are consistent with the 
occurrence of an activating mutation of the G(s)alpha gene mainly expressed in 
Sertoli cells and weakly expressed or absent in Leydig cells. Abnormal 
prepubertal testicular enlargement extends the clinical spectrum of MAS, 
suggesting that determination of serum inhibin B and anti-Mullerian hormone 
should be considered in boys with this syndrome. This observation demonstrates 
the usefulness of detailed molecular and biological investigations in atypical 
cases of MAS.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.4.7391
PMID: 11297617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]