1. Biochemistry. 2001 Apr 24;40(16):4949-56. doi: 10.1021/bi0100182.

Contribution of the active site histidine residues of ribonuclease A to nucleic 
acid binding.

Park C(1), Schultz LW, Raines RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, 53706, USA.

His12 and His119 are critical for catalysis of RNA cleavage by ribonuclease A 
(RNase A). Substitution of either residue with an alanine decreases the value of 
k(cat)/K(M) by more than 10(4)-fold. His12 and His119 are proximal to the 
scissile phosphoryl group of an RNA substrate in enzyme-substrate complexes. 
Here, the role of these active site histidines in RNA binding was investigated 
by monitoring the effect of mutagenesis and pH on the stability of 
enzyme-nucleic acid complexes. X-ray diffraction analysis of the H12A and H119A 
variants at a resolution of 1.7 and 1.8 A, respectively, shows that the amino 
acid substitutions do not perturb the overall structure of the variants. 
Isothermal titration calorimetric studies on the complexation of wild-type RNase 
A and the variants with 3'-UMP at pH 6.0 show that His12 and His119 contribute 
1.4 and 1.1 kcal/mol to complex stability, respectively. Determination of the 
stability of the complex of wild-type RNase A and 6-carboxyfluorescein 
approximately d(AUAA) at varying pHs by fluorescence anisotropy shows that the 
stability increases by 2.4 kcal/mol as the pH decreases from 8.0 to 4.0. At pH 
4.0, replacing His12 with an alanine residue decreases the stability of the 
complex with 6-carboxyfluorescein approximately d(AUAA) by 2.3 kcal/mol. 
Together, these structural and thermodynamic data provide the first thorough 
analysis of the contribution of histidine residues to nucleic acid binding.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0100182
PMID: 11305910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]