1. Clin Lab Haematol. 2000 Dec;22(6):329-36. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-2257.2000.00319.x.

Coinheritance of two alpha-spectrin gene defects in a recessive spherocytosis 
family.

Dhermy D(1), Steen-Johnsen J, Bournier O, Hetet G, Cynober T, Tchernia G, 
Grandchamp B.

Author information:
(1)Telemark County Hospital, Skien, Norway; INSERM U409, Association Claude 
Bernard, Facult√© X. Bichat, Paris, France. dhermy@bichat.inserm.fr

We studied a recessive hereditary spherocytosis (HS) family from Norway in which 
all four children had haemolytic spherocytosis while spectrin (Sp) deficiency 
was detected in the proband. Molecular analysis demonstrated that all affected 
children had inherited the low expression alpha-Sp allele LEPRA (Low Expressed 
PRAgue) from the father. Haplotyping with a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat for 
the alpha-Sp gene (alphaVNTR) located in the 3' untranslated region of mRNA 
showed that all recessive children had inherited the same maternal 
alpha-spectrin allele. The paternal Sp-alphaLEPRA allele was found in cis of the 
polymorphic alpha-Sp Bughill allele (alphaBH) characterized by the A970D point 
mutation in the Sp alpha-chain. This mutation was identified on two-dimensional 
electrophoresis of Sp tryptic digests as an acidic shift of the alphaII tryptic 
domains (spots alphaIIa). Analyses of the relative expression of the paternal 
alpha-Sp Bughill polymorphism in the proband showed that the product of the 
maternal alpha-Sp gene is almost completely absent from the mature erythrocyte 
membrane. Comparative analysis between alphaVNTR PCR-amplified from genomic DNA 
and from cDNA showed that the maternal low expression alpha-Sp allele is 
associated with a decreased amount of mRNA. Results from molecular and 
biochemical studies showed that all the affected children of this family are 
compound heterozygous for two different low expression alpha-Sp alleles: an 
uncharacterized defective alpha-Sp allele on the maternal side and an alphaLEPRA 
allele tagged by the alphaIIa polymorphism on the paternal side.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2257.2000.00319.x
PMID: 11318798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]