1. Biochem J. 2001 May 15;356(Pt 1):277-86. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3560277.

Cation-dependent structural features of beta-casein-(1-25).

Cross KJ(1), Huq NL, Bicknell W, Reynolds EC.

Author information:
(1)School of Dental Science, The University of Melbourne, 711 Elizabeth Street, 
Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.

Complete sequence-specific, proton-resonance assignments have been determined 
for the calcium phosphate-stabilizing tryptic peptide beta-casein-(1-25) 
containing the phosphorylated sequence motif 
Ser(P)(17)-Ser(P)-Ser(P)-Glu-Glu(21). Spectra of the peptide have been recorded, 
in separate experiments, in the presence of excess ammonium ions, sodium ions 
and calcium ions, and of the dephosphorylated peptide in the presence of excess 
sodium ions. We observed significant changes to chemical shifts for backbone and 
side-chain resonances that were dependent upon the nature of the cation present. 
Medium-range nuclear Overhauser effect (nOe) enhancements, characteristic of 
small structured regions in the peptide, were observed and also found to be 
cation dependent. The secondary structure of the peptide was characterized by 
sequential and medium-range (i, i+2/3/4, which denotes an interaction between 
residue i and residue i+2, i+3 or i+4 in the peptide) nOe connectivities, and 
Halpha chemical shifts. Four structured regions were identified in the 
calcium-bound peptide: residues Arg(1) to Glu(4) were involved in a loop-type 
structure, and residues Val(8) to Glu(11), Ser(P)(17) to Glu(20) and Glu(21) to 
Thr(24) were implicated in beta-turn conformations. Comparison of the patterns 
of medium-range nOe connectivities in beta-casein-(1-25) with those in 
alpha(S1)-casein-(59-79) suggest that the two peptides have distinctly different 
conformations in the presence of calcium ions, despite having a high degree of 
sequential and functional similarity.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3560277
PMCID: PMC1221837
PMID: 11336661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]