1. Blood. 2001 May 15;97(10):2979-82. doi: 10.1182/blood.v97.10.2979.

Polymorphisms of clotting factors modify the risk for primary intracranial 
hemorrhage.

Corral J(1), Iniesta JA, González-Conejero R, Villalón M, Vicente V.

Author information:
(1)The Neurology Division and the Hematology and Medical Oncology Service, 
Hospital General Universitario, Murcia, Spain.

Comment in
    Blood. 2001 Nov 1;98(9):2875. doi: 10.1182/blood.v98.9.2875.

Intracranial hemorrhage is the third most frequent cause of cerebrovascular 
disease, but few genetic risk factors have been associated with its development. 
Recently, it has been reported that some polymorphisms that affect clotting 
factors increase the risk for thrombosis. However, reports have analyzed the 
effect of polymorphisms influencing the hemostatic state in bleeding disorders 
insufficiently. A case-control study was conducted of 201 patients with 
spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage and 201 control subjects matched for age, 
race, sex, and selected risk factors (hypertension, smoking, and alcohol 
consumption). Genomic polymerase chain reaction was used to analyze the 
prevalence of 4 polymorphisms: factor V Leiden, prothrombin 20210A, factor 
VII-323 Del/Ins of a decanucleotide, and factor XIII V34L. Subjects with factor 
V Leiden had decreased risk for spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage (odds ratio, 
0.19; 95% confidence interval, 0.03-0.95). The frequency of the prothrombin 
20210A/G genotype was also lower among patients than controls (1.5% vs 3%, 
respectively). Moreover, carriers of the -323 Ins allele of factor VII had a 
1.54-fold risk for intracranial hemorrhage (95% CI, 1.03-2.72). Finally, no 
significant differences were observed in the prevalence of factor XIII V34L 
polymorphism between patients and controls. Therefore, new genetic factors 
affecting the risk for spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage were identified. 
These data, together with the relevance of these polymorphisms in thrombotic 
diseases, support the idea that a polymorphism may play opposite roles in 
thrombosis and hemorrhage, suggesting an explanation for the high frequency of 
these polymorphisms in the general population.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.v97.10.2979
PMID: 11342420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]