1. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Jun;59(6):1360-8. doi: 10.1124/mol.59.6.1360.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of the mu-opioid receptor regulates agonist intrinsic 
efficacy.

McLaughlin JP(1), Chavkin C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98185-7280, 
USA.

The mu-opioid receptor (MOR) contains four highly conserved cytoplasmic tyrosine 
residues that may serve to regulate receptor activity. For Xenopus laevis 
oocytes coexpressing the rat MOR and the heteromultimeric potassium channel, 
K(IR)3.1/3.2, pretreatment with insulin produced both a 40% suppression in the 
basal channel conductance and potentiation of response to the mu-opioid agonist 
[D-Ala(2),methyl-Phe(4),Gly(5)-ol]enkephalin (DAMGO) to 155% of matched, 
untreated control cells. Insulin-induced potentiation of the DAMGO response was 
concentration-dependent and reversed after 1 h. Insulin pretreatment increased 
the maximal effect of DAMGO, but did not change its EC(50) value. Potentiation 
of the DAMGO response did not result from a recruitment of MOR to the cell 
surface, as measured by specific binding of the opioid peptide antagonist 
[(3)H]d-Phe((3)H)-Cys-Tyr-d-Trp-Arg-Thr-Pen-Thr-NH(2) (cyclic) to whole-oocytes, 
but instead the potentiation was probably caused by an increase in intrinsic 
efficacy of G protein coupling. The involvement of tyrosine residues on the 
putative intracellular loops of the MOR was demonstrated with four point-mutated 
receptors, replacing tyrosine with phenylalanine to create MOR(Y96F), 
MOR(Y106F), MOR(Y166F), and MOR(Y336F). None of these mutations significantly 
altered the EC(50) value for DAMGO compared with wild-type MOR, and insulin 
pretreatment still potentiated the effect of 1 microM DAMGO in oocytes 
containing either MOR(Y96F) or MOR(Y336F) to 137 +/- 10 and 124 +/- 8%, 
respectively. However, insulin did not significantly potentiate the DAMGO 
response with oocytes containing either MOR(Y106F) or MOR(Y166F), suggesting 
that these two sites were responsible for the insulin-induced opioid 
potentiation. The tyrosine-kinase inhibitors genistein (100 microM) or K-252a 
(20 microM) did not block the insulin-induced potentiation of the DAMGO 
response, but coincubation of insulin with either the MAP kinase inhibitor 
PD98,059 (20 microM) or phosphatase inhibitor orthovanadate (30 microM) 
completely blocked the potentiation. The results suggest the hypothesis that the 
potentiation was caused by dephosphorylation of the two tyrosines in MOR. To 
test this hypothesis, we measured the recovery rates after insulin treatment. As 
predicted, tyrosine kinase inhibition by K-252a significantly slowed the 
reversal and phosphatase inhibition by orthovanadate significantly accelerated 
the recovery. These findings support a rapid modulatory role for insulin on 
opioid signal transduction, possibly through the dephosphorylation of the MOR at 
tyrosines 106 and 166 by an insulin-activated MAP kinase/protein tyrosine 
phosphatase cascade. We conclude that tyrosine phosphorylation of the mu-opioid 
receptor regulates receptor-G protein coupling efficacy.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.59.6.1360
PMID: 11353794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]