1. J Cell Biol. 2001 May 14;153(4):851-64. doi: 10.1083/jcb.153.4.851.

Intracellular aggregation of polypeptides with expanded polyglutamine domain is 
stimulated by stress-activated kinase MEKK1.

Meriin AB(1), Mabuchi K, Gabai VL, Yaglom JA, Kazantsev A, Sherman MY.

Author information:
(1)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 Grove St., Watertown, MA 02472, USA.

Abnormal proteins, which escape chaperone-mediated refolding or 
proteasome-dependent degradation, aggregate and form inclusion bodies (IBs). In 
several neurodegenerative diseases, such IBs can be formed by proteins with 
expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) domains (e.g., huntingtin). This work studies the 
regulation of intracellular IB formation using an NH(2)-terminal fragment of 
huntingtin with expanded polyQ domain. We demonstrate that the active form of 
MEKK1, a protein kinase that regulates several stress-activated signaling 
cascades, stimulates formation of the IBs. This function of MEKK1 requires 
kinase activity, as the kinase-dead mutant of MEKK1 cannot stimulate this 
process. Exposure of cells to UV irradiation or cisplatin, both of which 
activate MEKK1, also augmented the formation of IBs. The polyQ-containing 
huntingtin fragment exists in cells in two distinct forms: (a) in a discrete 
soluble complex, and (b) in association with insoluble fraction. MEKK1 strongly 
stimulated recruitment of polyQ polypeptides into the particulate fraction. 
Notably, a large portion of the active form of MEKK1 was associated with the 
insoluble fraction, concentrating in discrete sites, and polyQ-containing IBs 
always colocalized with them. We suggest that MEKK1 is involved in a process of 
IB nucleation. MEKK1 also stimulated formation of IBs with two abnormal 
polypeptides lacking the polyQ domain, indicating that this kinase has a general 
effect on protein aggregation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.153.4.851
PMCID: PMC2192371
PMID: 11352944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]