1. J Bacteriol. 2001 Jun;183(12):3636-41. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.12.3636-3641.2001.

Functional analysis of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens T-DNA transport pore 
protein VirB8.

Kumar RB(1), Das A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota 55108, USA.

The VirB8 protein of Agrobacterium tumefaciens is essential for DNA transfer to 
plants. VirB8, a 237-residue polypeptide, is an integral membrane protein with a 
short N-terminal cytoplasmic domain. It interacts with two transport pore 
proteins, VirB9 and VirB10, in addition to itself. To study the role of these 
interactions in DNA transfer and to identify essential amino acids of VirB8, we 
introduced random mutations in virB8 by the mutagenic PCR method. The putative 
mutants were tested for VirB8 function by the ability to complement a virB8 
deletion mutant in tumor formation assays. After multiple rounds of screening 13 
mutants that failed to complement the virB8 deletion mutation were identified. 
Analysis of the mutant strains by DNA sequence analysis, Western blot assays, 
and reconstruction of new point mutations led to the identification of five 
amino acid residues that are essential for VirB8 function. The substitution of 
glycine-78 to serine, serine-87 to leucine, alanine-100 to valine, arginine-107 
to proline or alanine, and threonine-192 to methionine led to the loss of VirB8 
activity. When introduced into the wild-type strain, virB8(S87L) partially 
suppressed the tumor forming ability of the wild-type protein. Analysis of 
protein-protein interaction by the yeast two-hybrid assay indicated that 
VirB8(R107P) is defective in interactions with both VirB9 and VirB10. A second 
mutant VirB8(S87L) is defective in interaction with VirB9.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.12.3636-3641.2001
PMCID: PMC95241
PMID: 11371528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]