1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2001;27(2):143-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2001-14073.

Multivariate analysis of genetic and acquired factors; T235 variant of the 
angiotensinogen gene is a potent independent risk factor for preeclampsia.

Kobashi G(1), Shido K, Hata A, Yamada H, Kato EH, Kanamori M, Fujimoto S, Kondo 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. genkoba@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Preeclampsia is known to be a multifactorial disease. Recently, the 
angiotensinogen gene has been shown to be a candidate gene that could be related 
to preeclampsia, and acquired factors such as lifestyle during pregnancy have 
also been considered to be risk factors. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the interrelations among the angiotensinogen gene and various 
acquired risk factors in preeclampsia. Fifty-eight primiparous patients with 
pre-eclampsia were compared with 164 normal primiparous controls. A variant of 
the angiotensinogen gene (M235T) was analyzed along with the acquired factors 
obtained from both medical records and a questionnaire consisting of 98 
questions. Univariate analysis disclosed 11 factors that were significantly 
associated with preeclampsia (P < .05). Multivariate analysis revealed four 
significant independent factors: "prepregnancy high body mass (body mass index > 
or = 24)," "T235 homozygotes of the angiotensinogen gene," "mentally stressful 
condition during pregnancy," and "salty dishes preferred during pregnancy." The 
odds ratios of the four factors were 6.2, 2.5, 3.0 and 2.6, respectively, in a 
multiple logistic model. Our results support the concept that T235 of the 
angiotensinogen gene is a potent, independent risk factor for preeclampsia, as 
well as other lifestyle-related risk factors.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2001-14073
PMID: 11372768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]