1. Prenat Diagn. 2001 Jun;21(6):490-7. doi: 10.1002/pd.109.

A comparison of different lysis buffers to assess allele dropout from single 
cells for preimplantation genetic diagnosis.

Thornhill AR(1), McGrath JA, Eady RA, Braude PR, Handyside AH.

Author information:
(1)Guy's and St Thomas' Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, London SE1 
7EH, UK. thornhill.alan@mayo.edu

Single cell polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis (PGD) requires high efficiency and accuracy. Allele dropout (ADO), the 
random amplification failure of one of the two parental alleles, remains the 
most significant problem in PCR-based PGD testing since it can result in serious 
misdiagnosis for compound heterozygous or autosomal dominant conditions. A 
number of different strategies (including the use of lysis buffers to break down 
the cell and make the DNA accessible) have been employed to combat ADO with 
varying degrees of success, yet there is still no consensus among PGD centres 
over which lysis buffer should be used (ESHRE PGD Consortium, 1999). To address 
this issue, PCR amplification of three genes (CFTR, LAMA3 and PKP1) at different 
chromosomal loci was investigated. Single lymphocytes from individuals 
heterozygous for mutations within each of the three genes were collected and 
lysed in either alkaline lysis buffer (ALB) or proteinase K/SDS lysis buffer 
(PK). PCR amplification efficiencies were comparable between alkaline lysis and 
proteinase K lysis for PCR products spanning each of the three mutated loci 
(DeltaF508 in CFTR 90% vs 88%; R650X in LAMA3 82% vs 78%; and Y71X in PKP1 91% 
vs 87%). While there was no appreciable difference between ADO rates between the 
two lysis buffers for the LAMA3 PCR product (25% vs 26%), there were significant 
differences in ADO rates between ALB and PK for the CFTR PCR product (0% vs 23%) 
and the PKP1 PCR product (8% vs 56%). Based on these results, we are currently 
using ALB in preference to PK/SDS buffer for the lysis of cells in clinical PGD.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.109
PMID: 11438956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]