1. Pest Manag Sci. 2001 Jan;57(1):25-32. doi: 
10.1002/1526-4998(200101)57:1<25::AID-PS272>3.0.CO;2-I.

Insecticidal activity of glufosinate through glutamine depletion in a 
caterpillar.

Kutlesa NJ(1), Caveney S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 
5B7, Canada.

The herbicide glufosinate-ammonium (GLA) is a competitive inhibitor of glutamine 
synthetase (GS), an enzyme converting glutamate to glutamine in both plants and 
animals. Because GS is essential for ammonia detoxification in plants, GLA 
treatment disrupts photorespiration by causing a build-up of ammonia and a loss 
of glutamine in plant tissues. This study reports that GLA applied to leaf 
surfaces is also toxic to 5th-instar caterpillars of the skipper butterfly 
Calpodes ethlius (LD50 = 400 mg kg-1). After ingesting GLA, caterpillars stopped 
feeding and became dehydrated through a loss of rectal function. Caterpillars 
showed symptoms of neurotoxicity, such as proleg tremors, body convulsions and 
complete paralysis before death. Incubation of several tissues isolated from 
normal feeding-stage caterpillars with the GS substrates glutamate and ammonium 
showed that GLA inhibited GS activity in vitro. Within 24 h of ingesting GLA, 
caterpillars had a greatly reduced glutamine content and the ammonium ion levels 
had more than doubled. Injection of ammonium chloride into non-GLA-treated 
caterpillars had no deleterious effect, suggesting that glutamine depletion, and 
not a rise in body ammonium, was the primary cause of GLA toxicity following GS 
inhibition. This was supported by the observation that the onset of the symptoms 
of GLA poisoning could be postponed by giving GLA-fed caterpillars several 
subsequent daily injections of glutamine. The effective GLA dose fed to 
5th-instar caterpillars in this study was comparable to the amount that might 
realistically by acquired from feeding on GLA-treated crops.

DOI: 10.1002/1526-4998(200101)57:1<25::AID-PS272>3.0.CO;2-I
PMID: 11455628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]