1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2001 Jul;79(7):390-8. doi: 10.1007/s001090100235.

Gender- and age-dependent relationships between the E-selectin S128R 
polymorphism and coronary artery calcification.

Ellsworth DL(1), Bielak LF, Turner ST, Sheedy PF 2nd, Boerwinkle E, Peyser PA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Clinical Applications, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 6701 Rockledge Drive MSC 7934, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-7934, USA. ellsworth@nih.gov

Development and progression of atherosclerosis involves recruitment and binding 
of circulating leukocytes to areas of inflammation within the vascular 
endothelium mediated by a diverse array of cellular adhesion molecules. A 
polymorphism in the endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (E-selectin) gene 
has been implicated in early-onset, angiographically defined, severe 
atherosclerotic disease because it profoundly affects ligand recognition and 
binding specificity, resulting in a significant increase in cellular adhesion. 
Relationships between the E-selectin S128R polymorphism and coronary artery 
calcification (CAC), a marker of atherosclerosis detected with noninvasive 
electron beam computed tomography, were examined in 294 asymptomatic women aged 
40--88 years and 314 asymptomatic men aged 30--80 years from the Epidemiology of 
Coronary Artery Calcification Study. The E-selectin polymorphism was not 
associated with presence of CAC in men of any age or in women over age 50. In 
women 50 years of age or younger the E-selectin polymorphism was significantly 
associated with presence of CAC after adjustment for age, body mass index, 
systolic blood pressure, ratio of total cholesterol to high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and smoking. The significant association between E-selectin and CAC 
in women 50 years of age or younger may suggest that the 128R allele is a risk 
factor for coronary atherosclerosis in younger asymptomatic women, who typically 
have lower levels of traditional risk factors and reduced adhesion molecule 
expression due to the presence of higher levels of endogenous hormones.

DOI: 10.1007/s001090100235
PMID: 11466561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]