1. J Cell Biol. 2001 Aug 6;154(3):573-84. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200103097.

Expression of alpha-catenin in alpha-catenin-deficient cells increases 
resistance to sphingosine-induced apoptosis.

Matsubara S(1), Ozawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima University, 
Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan. shmlmcbd@m.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

Alpha-catenin, an intracellular protein, associates with the COOH-terminal 
region of cadherin cell adhesion molecules through interactions with either 
beta-catenin or gamma-catenin (plakoglobin). The full activity of cadherins 
requires a linkage to the actin cytoskeleton mediated by catenins. We 
transfected alpha-catenin-deficient colon carcinoma cells with a series of 
alpha-catenin constructs to determine that alpha-catenin expression increases 
the resistance to apoptosis induced by sphingosine. Two groups of constructs, 
containing deletions in either the middle segment of the molecule or the COOH 
terminus, induced morphological changes, cell compaction, and decreases in cell 
death. In alpha-catenin-expressing cells, inhibition of cadherin cell adhesion 
by treatment with anti-E-cadherin antibodies did not decrease the cells 
viability. alpha-Catenin expression partially suppressed the downregulation of 
Bcl-xL and the activation of caspase 3. Expression of p27kip1 protein, an 
inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases, was increased by alpha-catenin expression 
in low density cell cultures. The increased levels of p27kip1 correlated with 
both increased resistance to cell death and morphological changes in 
transfectants containing deletion mutants. Transfection-mediated upregulation of 
p27kip1 decreases sphingosine-induced cell death in alpha-catenin-deficient 
cells. We postulate that alpha-catenin mediates transduction of signals from the 
cadherin-catenin complex to regulate the apoptotic cascade via p27kip1.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200103097
PMCID: PMC2196424
PMID: 11489917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]