1. Biochemistry. 2001 Aug 21;40(33):9836-45. doi: 10.1021/bi0105577.

beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein] synthase I of Escherichia coli: aspects of 
the condensation mechanism revealed by analyses of mutations in the active site 
pocket.

McGuire KA(1), Siggaard-Andersen M, Bangera MG, Olsen JG, von Wettstein-Knowles 
P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Molecular Biology, University of 
Copenhagen, Ã˜ster Farimagsgade 2A, DK-1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark.

beta-Ketoacyl-[acyl carrier protein (ACP)] synthase forms new carbon-carbon 
bonds in three steps: transfer of an acyl primer from ACP to the enzyme, 
decarboxylation of the elongating substrate and its condensation with the acyl 
primer substrate. Six residues of Escherichia coli beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase I 
(KAS I) implicated in these reactions were subjected to site-directed 
mutagenesis. Analyses of the abilities of C163A, C163S, H298A, D306A, E309A, 
K328A, and H333A to carry out the three reactions lead to the following 
conclusions. The active site Cys-163 is not required for decarboxylation, 
whereas His-298 and His-333 are indispensable. Neither of the histidines is 
essential for increasing the nucleophilicity of Cys-163 to enable transfer of 
the acyl primer substrate. Maintenance of the structural integrity of the active 
site by Asp-306 and Glu-309 is required for decarboxylation but not for 
transfer. One function of Lys-328 occurs very early in catalysis, potentially 
before transfer. These results in conjunction with structural analyses of 
substrate complexes have led to a model for KAS I catalysis [Olsen, J. G., 
Kadziola, A., von Wettstein-Knowles, P., Siggaard-Andersen, M., and Larsen, S. 
(2001) Structure 9, 233-243]. Another facet of catalysis revealed by the mutant 
analyses is that the acyl primer transfer activity of beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase 
I is inhibited by free ACP at physiological concentrations. Differences in the 
inhibitory response by individual mutant proteins indicate that interaction of 
free ACP with Cys-163, Asp-306, Glu-309, Lys-328, and His-333 might form a 
sensitive regulatory mechanism for the transfer of acyl primers.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0105577
PMID: 11502177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]