1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 2;276(44):41255-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106060200. Epub
2001  Aug 16.

Interaction between Ran and Mog1 is required for efficient nuclear protein 
import.

Baker RP(1), Harreman MT, Eccleston JF, Corbett AH, Stewart M.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United 
Kingdom.

Mog1 is a nuclear protein that interacts with Ran, the Ras family GTPase that 
confers directionality to nuclear import and export pathways. Deletion of MOG1 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Deltamog1) causes temperature-sensitive growth and 
defects in nuclear protein import. Mog1 has previously been shown to stimulate 
GTP release from Ran and we demonstrate here that addition of Mog1 to either 
Ran-GTP or Ran-GDP results in nucleotide release and formation of a stable 
complex between Mog1 and nucleotide-free Ran. Moreover, MOG1 shows synthetic 
lethality with PRP20, the Ran guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RanGEF) that 
also binds nucleotide-free Ran. To probe the functional role of the Mog1-Ran 
interaction, we engineered mutants of yeast Mog1 and Ran that specifically 
disrupt their interaction both in vitro and in vivo. These mutants indicate that 
the interaction interface involves conserved Mog1p residues Asp(62) and Glu(65), 
and residue Lys(136) in yeast Ran. Mutations at these residues decrease the 
ability of Mog1 to bind and release nucleotide from Ran. Furthermore, the 
E65K-Mog1 and K136E-Ran mutations in yeast cause temperature sensitivity and 
mislocalization of a nuclear import reporter protein, similar to the phenotype 
observed for the Deltamog1 strain. Our results indicate that a primary function 
of Mog1 requires binding to Ran and that the Mog1-Ran interaction is necessary 
for efficient nuclear protein import in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106060200
PMID: 11509570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]