1. Biochemistry. 2001 Aug 28;40(34):10038-46. doi: 10.1021/bi010712h.

Crystal structure of thrombin-ecotin reveals conformational changes and extended 
interactions.

Wang SX(1), Esmon CT, Fletterick RJ.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Chemistry and Chemical Biology, University of California, 
San Francisco, California 94143-0446, USA.

The protease inhibitor ecotin fails to inhibit thrombin despite its broad 
specificity against serine proteases. A point mutation (M84R) in ecotin results 
in a 1.5 nM affinity for thrombin, 10(4) times stronger than that of wild-type 
ecotin. The crystal structure of bovine thrombin is determined in complex with 
ecotin M84R mutant at 2.5 A resolution. Surface loops surrounding the active 
site cleft of thrombin have undergone significant structural changes to permit 
inhibitor binding. Particularly, the insertion loops at residues 60 and 148 in 
thrombin, which likely mediate the interactions with macromolecules, are 
displaced when the complex forms. Thrombin and ecotin M84R interact in two 
distinct surfaces. The loop at residue 99 and the C-terminus of thrombin contact 
ecotin through mixed polar and nonpolar interactions. The active site of 
thrombin is filled with eight consecutive amino acids of ecotin and demonstrates 
thrombin's preference for specific features that are compatible with the 
thrombin cleavage site: negatively 
charged-Pro-Val-X-Pro-Arg-hydrophobic-positively charged (P1 Arg is in bold 
letters). The preference for a Val at P4 is clearly defined. The insertion at 
residue 60 may further affect substrate binding by moving its adjacent loops 
that are part of the substrate recognition sites.

DOI: 10.1021/bi010712h
PMID: 11513582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]