1. Biol Chem. 2001 Jul;382(7):1039-47. doi: 10.1515/BC.2001.130.

Analysis of structural signals conferring localisation of pig OST48 to the 
endoplasmic reticulum.

Hardt B(1), Aparicio R, Breuer W, Bause E.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Universität Bonn, Germany.

Pig liver oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) is a heterooligomeric protein complex 
responsible for the co-translational transfer of GlcNAc2-Man9-Glc3 from Dol-PP 
onto specific asparagine residues in the nascent polypeptide. OST48, one of the 
catalytic subunits in this complex, exerts a typical type I membrane topology, 
containing a large luminal domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain and a 
short cytosolic peptide tail. Because OST48 is found within the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) when overexpressed in COS-1 cells, we carried out experiments to 
identify structural signals potentially capable of directing ER-targeting, using 
OST48 mutants and hybrid proteins consisting of individual OST48 domains and 
Man9-mannosidase. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that OST48 mutants in 
which the C-terminal lysine-3 or lysine-5, but not lysine-7, had been replaced 
by leucine (OST48AK) could be detected on the cell surface. This indicates that 
these two lysine residues are sufficient for conferring ER-residency on OST48. 
The double-lysine motif operates only when exposed cytosolically, where it acts 
as a relocation signal rather than causing retention. OST48AK-3, when 
co-expressed in COS-1 cells together with myc-tagged ribophorin 1, was 
quantitatively retained in the ER. By contrast, co-expression in the presence of 
ribophorin I resulted in no reduction of cell surface fluorescence for the 
OMOdeltaK-5 chimera containing the cytosolic and transmembrane domain of OST48 
attached to the C-terminus of the Man9-mannosidase luminal domain. Thus 
ER-localisation of OST48 is probably brought about by complex formation with 
ribophorin I and this most likely involves the luminal domains of both proteins. 
Consequently, the double-lysine motif in the cytosolic domain of OST48 is 
unlikely to have a primary function except being involved in re-capture of 
molecules which have escaped from the ER.

DOI: 10.1515/BC.2001.130
PMID: 11530934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]