1. AIDS. 2001 Sep 7;15(13):1613-26. doi: 10.1097/00002030-200109070-00003.

Evidence for a post-entry barrier to R5 HIV-1 infection of CD4 memory T cells.

Vyakarnam A(1), Eyeson J, Teo I, Zuckerman M, Babaahmady K, Schuitemaker H, 
Shaunak S, Rostron T, Rowland-Jones S, Simmons G, Clapham P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, GKT School of Medicine and Dentistry, The Rayne 
Institute, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 strains R5 and X4 can infect CD4 memory T cells in vivo. 
Anti-CD3/28 stimulation induces beta-chemokines and CCR5 down-regulation and 
renders these cells resistant to R5 HIV-1 infection. Here we describe an 
additional cellular mechanism that blocks productive R5 HIV-1 infection of CD4 
memory T cells.
METHODS: Blood-derived CD4 memory T cells and CD4 T-cell clones were infected 
with primary R5 and X4 HIV-1 strains. Virus replication was correlated with CCR5 
expression and beta-chemokine production. Virus entry and infectivity were 
measured by PCR for early and late products of HIV reverse transcription 
respectively.
RESULTS: R5 strains were up to 1000-fold less infectious than X4 viruses for CD4 
memory T cells. This resistance was independent of CCR5 levels and of the 
Delta-32 mutation and the CCR2-V64I/CCR5-59653T linked mutations. Blocking 
endogenous beta-chemokines relieved minimally this restriction. At the single 
cell level, CD4 memory cells were either permissive or non-permissive for R5 
HIV-1 infection. R5 HIV titre was up to 10-fold lower than X4 virus titre even 
in a permissive clone. However, R5 viruses replicated as efficiently as X4 
viruses in the permissive clone when neutralizing anti-beta chemokine antibodies 
were added. Non-permissive cells blocked a post-entry step of the virus 
life-cycle and expressed early but not late HIV transcripts. Neutralizing 
anti-beta chemokine antibodies promoted R5 virus replication marginally in the 
non-permissive clone.
CONCLUSION: Some blood memory CD4 T cells retard R5 HIV-1 replication via 
endogenous beta-chemokines whereas others block productive R5 HIV-1 infection by 
an additional mechanism that interferes with a post-entry step of the virus life 
cycle. These natural barriers might contribute to lower pathogenicity of R5 
HIV-1 strains for CD4 memory T cells than X4 viruses that emerge late in 
disease.

DOI: 10.1097/00002030-200109070-00003
PMID: 11546935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]