1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):42692-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106215200. Epub
2001  Sep 11.

Identification of determinants of inverse agonism in a constitutively active 
parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptide receptor by 
photoaffinity cross-linking and mutational analysis.

Gensure RC(1), Carter PH, Petroni BD, JÃ¼ppner H, Gardella TJ.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit and Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114.

We have investigated receptor structural components responsible for 
ligand-dependent inverse agonism in a constitutively active mutant of the human 
parathyroid hormone (PTH)/parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) receptor 
type 1 (hP1R). This mutant receptor, hP1R-H223R (hP1R(CAM-HR)), was originally 
identified in Jansen's chondrodysplasia and is altered in transmembrane domain 
(TM) 2. We utilized the PTHrP analog, 
[Bpa(2),Ile(5),Trp(23),Tyr(36)]PTHrP-(1-36)-amide (Bpa(2)-PTHrP-(1-36)), which 
has valine 2 replaced by p-benzoyl-l-phenylalanine (Bpa); this substitution 
renders the peptide a photoreactive inverse agonist at hP1R(CAM-HR). This analog 
cross-linked to hP1R(CAM-HR) at two contiguous receptor regions as follows: the 
principal cross-link site (site A) was between receptor residues 
Pro(415)-Met(441), spanning the TM6/extracellular loop three boundary; the 
second cross-link site (site B) was within the TM4/TM5 region. Within the site A 
interval, substitution of Met(425) to Leu converted Bpa(2)-PTHrP-(1-36) from an 
inverse agonist to a weak partial agonist; this conversion was accompanied by a 
relative shift of cross-linking from site A to site B. The functional effect of 
the M425L mutation was specific for Bpa(2)-containing analogs, as inverse 
agonism of Bpa(2)-PTH-(1-34) was similarly eliminated, whereas inverse agonism 
of [Leu(11),d-Trp(12)]PTHrP-(5-36) was not affected. Overall, our data indicate 
that interactions between residue 2 of the ligand and the extracellular end of 
TM6 of the hP1R play an important role in modulating the conversion between 
active and inactive receptor states.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106215200
PMID: 11553625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]