1. Am J Hematol. 2001 Sep;68(1):16-22. doi: 10.1002/ajh.1143.

Spectrum of beta-thalassemia in Jordan: identification of two novel mutations.

Sadiq MF(1), Eigel A, Horst J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Yarmouk University, Irbid, Jordan. 
may@yu.edu.jo

Two hundred and forty-four beta-thalassemia alleles were identified from 135 
unrelated occasionally and periodically transfusion dependent beta- and 
S/beta-thalassemia patients from all regions of Jordan. Allele identification 
was achieved by PCR amplification of beta-globin genes, dot-blotting the 
amplified DNA, hybridization with allele specific synthetic probes, and direct 
sequencing of amplified genomic DNA. A total of 19 different mutations were 
detected, eight of them constituted about 86% of the Jordanian thalassemic 
chromosomes. These mutations were IVS1-110 (G>A) (25%), IVS2-1 (G>A) (15%), 
IVS2-745 (C>G) (14.2%), IVS1-1 (G>A) (10%), IVS1-6 (T>C) (8.3%), codon 37 (G>A) 
(6.3%), codon 39 (C>T) (4.6%), and codon 5 (-C) (3.8%). The remaining eleven 
mutations were rare, presented with frequencies ranging between 0.4% and 1.6%. 
These included two novel mutations and four others detected in Jordan for the 
first time. The novel mutations were the frame shift (-C) at codon 49 and the 
substitution (A>C) at position -29 in the TATA box. Four alleles (1.6%) remained 
unidentified; having no abnormalities in their beta-globin gene sequences and 
therefore, constituted additional defects causing beta-thalassemia in the 
Jordanian population. These unknown alleles are expected to be candidates for 
upstream or downstream mutations affecting the expression of beta-globin gene. 
The results provided the essential foundation for planning a national preventive 
program for thalassemia in Jordan and will help improving the medical services 
for the patients and their families by helping their clinicians and genetic 
counselors in evaluating their variants and designing their treatment regimens.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.1143
PMID: 11559932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]