1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2001 Sep;70(1):43-54. doi: 
10.1016/s0091-3057(01)00581-0.

Dopamine D3 receptors are involved in amphetamine-induced contralateral rotation 
in 6-OHDA lesioned rats.

Robinet PM(1), Bardo MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Colby College, Waterville, ME 04901, USA. 
probinet@colby.edu

The aim of the present experiment was to investigate the possibility that 
alterations in dopamine D3 receptors have a role in the normalization of 
function that occurs following a unilateral lesion of the medial forebrain 
bundle induced by 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). Unilateral lesions result in an 
enhanced rotational response to dopamine agonists that appears to be due to an 
increase in stimulatory D2 receptors on the lesioned side that occurs by about 1 
week postlesion. The present experiment assessed the involvement of D3 receptors 
in rotational behavior by testing the animals at 48 h postlesion. At this time 
interval, D2 receptors have not become up-regulated. In contrast, D3 receptors 
have been shown to be down-regulated. Rats with > or = 98% dopamine depletion 
induced by 6-OHDA exhibited mostly ipsilateral rotation in response to an 
injection of amphetamine. This rotation was not affected by pretreatment with 
the D3 antagonist U-99194A. Rats with 80-97% dopamine depletion exhibited mostly 
contralateral rotation in response to amphetamine and this rotation was blocked 
by pretreatment with U-99194A. In addition, a decrease in D3 receptor binding 
was observed by 48 h postlesion. These results support the hypothesis that the 
decrease in D3 receptors seen following denervation is involved in the 
compensatory response of the system. This may have important clinical relevance 
in the treatment of disorders such as Parkinson's disease and drug abuse.

DOI: 10.1016/s0091-3057(01)00581-0
PMID: 11566141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]