1. Anesthesiology. 2001 Sep;95(3):716-25. doi: 10.1097/00000542-200109000-00026.

Autosomal dominant canine malignant hyperthermia is caused by a mutation in the 
gene encoding the skeletal muscle calcium release channel (RYR1).

Roberts MC(1), Mickelson JR, Patterson EE, Nelson TE, Armstrong PJ, Brunson DB, 
Hogan K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an inherited disorder of skeletal 
muscle characterized by hypercarbia, rhabdomyolysis, generalized skeletal muscle 
contracture, cardiac dysrhythmia, and renal failure, that develops on exposure 
to succinylcholine or volatile anesthetic agents. All swine and up to 50% of 
human MH events are thought to be associated with mutations in the calcium 
release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, also known as the ryanodine 
receptor (RYR1). Events resembling MH have been reported in other species, but 
none have undergone genetic investigation to date.
METHODS: To determine the molecular basis of canine MH, a breeding colony was 
established with a male, mixed-breed, MH-susceptible (MHS) dog that survived an 
in vivo halothane-succinylcholine challenge. He was mated to three unaffected 
females to produce four litters and back-crossed to an affected daughter to 
produce one litter. One of his MHS sons was mated to an unaffected female to 
produce an additional litter. Forty-seven dogs were phenotyped with an in vitro 
contracture test and diagnosed as MHS or MH normal based on the North American 
in vitro contracture test protocol. Nine microsatellite markers in the vicinity 
of RYR1 on canine chromosome 1 (CFA01) were tested for linkage to the MHS 
phenotype. Mutational analysis in two MHS and two MH-normal dogs was performed 
with direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction products and of cloned 
fragments that represent frequently mutated human RYR1 regions. A restriction 
fragment length polymorphism was chosen to detect the candidate mutation in the 
pedigree at large.
RESULTS: Pedigree inspection revealed that MHS in this colony is transmitted as 
an autosomal dominant trait. FH2294, the marker closest to RYR1, is linked to 
MHS at a theta = 0.03 with a LOD score of 9.24. A T1640C mutation gives rise to 
an alanine for valine substitution of amino acid 547 in the RYR1 protein, 
generating a maximum LOD score of 12.29 at theta = 0.00. All dogs diagnosed as 
MHS by in vitro contracture test were heterozygous for the mutation, and all 
MH-normal dogs were homozygous for the T1640 allele.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that autosomal dominant canine MH is caused 
by a mutation in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle calcium release channel 
and that the MHS trait in this pedigree of mixed-breed dogs is in perfect 
cosegregation with the RYR1 V547A mutation.

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-200109000-00026
PMID: 11575546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]