1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47474-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106747200. Epub 
2001 Oct 1.

Mechanism of product chain length determination and the role of a flexible loop 
in Escherichia coli undecaprenyl-pyrophosphate synthase catalysis.

Ko TP(1), Chen YK, Robinson H, Tsai PC, Gao YG, Chen AP, Wang AH, Liang PH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

The Escherichia coli undecaprayl-pyrophosphate synthase (UPPs) structure has 
been solved using the single wavelength anomalous diffraction method. The 
putative substrate-binding site is located near the end of the betaA-strand with 
Asp-26 playing a critical catalytic role. In both subunits, an elongated 
hydrophobic tunnel is found, surrounded by four beta-strands 
(betaA-betaB-betaD-betaC) and two helices (alpha2 and alpha3) and lined at the 
bottom with large residues Ile-62, Leu-137, Val-105, and His-103. The product 
distributions formed by the use of the I62A, V105A, and H103A mutants are 
similar to those observed for wild-type UPPs. Catalysis by the L137A UPPs, on 
the other hand, results in predominantly the formation of the C(70) polymer 
rather than the C(55) polymer. Ala-69 and Ala-143 are located near the top of 
the tunnel. In contrast to the A143V reaction, the C(30) intermediate is formed 
to a greater extent and is longer lived in the process catalyzed by the A69L 
mutant. These findings suggest that the small side chain of Ala-69 is required 
for rapid elongation to the C(55) product, whereas the large hydrophobic side 
chain of Leu-137 is required to limit the elongation to the C(55) product. The 
roles of residues located on a flexible loop were investigated. The S71A, N74A, 
or R77A mutants displayed 25-200-fold decrease in k(cat) values. W75A showed an 
8-fold increase of the FPP K(m) value, and 22-33-fold increases in the IPP K(m) 
values were observed for E81A and S71A. The loop may function to bridge the 
interaction of IPP with FPP, needed to initiate the condensation reaction and 
serve as a hinge to control the substrate binding and product release.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106747200
PMID: 11581264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]