1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47690-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109307200. Epub
2001  Oct 9.

Lipoprotein sorting signals evaluated as the LolA-dependent release of 
lipoproteins from the cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia coli.

Terada M(1), Kuroda T, Matsuyama SI, Tokuda H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Escherichia coli lipoproteins are anchored to either the inner or outer membrane 
through fatty acyl chains covalently attached to an N-terminal cysteine. 
Aspartate at position 2 functions to retain lipoproteins in the inner membrane, 
although the retention is perturbed depending on the residue at position 3. We 
previously revealed that LolCDE and LolA play critical roles in this lipoprotein 
sorting. To clarify the sorting signals, the LolA-dependent release of 
lipoprotein derivatives having various residues at positions 2 and 3 was 
examined in spheroplasts. When the residue at position 3 was serine, only 
aspartate at position 2 caused the retention of lipoproteins in spheroplasts. We 
then examined the release of derivatives having aspartate at position 2 and 
various residues at position 3. Strong inner membrane retention occurred with a 
limited number of species of residues at position 3. These residues were present 
at position 3 of native lipoproteins having aspartate at position 2, whereas 
residues that inhibited the retention were not. It was also found that a strong 
inner membrane retention signal having residues other than aspartate at position 
2 could be formed through the combination of the residues at positions 2 and 3. 
These results indicate that the inner membrane localization of native 
lipoproteins is ensured by the use of a limited number of strong inner membrane 
retention signals.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109307200
PMID: 11592971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]