1. Biophys J. 2001 Nov;81(5):2908-18. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(01)75931-0.

Calcium-dependent stabilization of the central sequence between Met(76) and 
Ser(81) in vertebrate calmodulin.

Qin Z(1), Squier TC.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Biophysics Section, Department of Molecular Biosciences, 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA.

Spin-label electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) provides optimal resolution of 
dynamic and conformational heterogeneity on the nanosecond time-scale and was 
used to assess the structure of the sequence between Met(76) and Ser(81) in 
vertebrate calmodulin (CaM). Previous fluorescence resonance energy transfer and 
anisotropy measurements indicate that the opposing domains of CaM are 
structurally coupled and the interconnecting central sequence adopts 
conformationally distinct structures in the apo-form and following calcium 
activation. In contrast, NMR data suggest that the opposing domains of CaM 
undergo independent rotational dynamics and that the sequence between Met(76) 
and Ser(81) in the central sequence functions as a flexible linker that connects 
two structurally independent domains. However, these latter measurements also 
resolve weak internuclear interactions that suggest the formation of transient 
helical structures that are stable on the nanosecond time-scale within the 
sequence between Met(76) and Asp(80) in apo-CaM (H. Kuboniwa, N. Tjandra, S. 
Grzekiek, H. Ren, C. B. Klee, and A. Bax, 1995, Nat. Struct. Biol. 2:768-776). 
This reported conformational heterogeneity was resolved using site-directed 
mutagenesis and spin-label EPR, which detects two component spectra for 
1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrroline-3-methyl)-methanethiosulfonate spin labels 
(MTSSL) bound to CaM mutants T79C and S81C that include a motionally restricted 
component. In comparison to MTSSL bound within stable helical regions, the 
fractional contribution of the immobilized component at these positions is 
enhanced upon the addition of small amounts of the helicogenic solvent 
trifluoroethanol (TFE). These results suggest that the immobilized component 
reflects the formation of stable secondary structures. Similar spectral changes 
are observed upon calcium activation, suggesting a calcium-dependent 
stabilization of the secondary structure. No corresponding changes are observed 
in either the solvent accessibility to molecular oxygen or the maximal hyperfine 
splitting. In contrast, more complex spectral changes in the line-shape and 
maximal hyperfine splitting are observed for spin labels bound to sites that 
undergo tertiary contact interactions. These results suggest that spin labels at 
solvent-exposed positions within the central sequence are primarily sensitive to 
backbone fluctuations and that either TFE or calcium binding stabilizes the 
secondary structure of the sequence between Met(76) and Ser(81) and modulates 
the structural coupling between the opposing domains of CaM.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3495(01)75931-0
PMCID: PMC1301755
PMID: 11606301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]