1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46099-103. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100496200. Epub 
2001 Oct 18.

A constitutively active form of the protein kinase p90Rsk1 is sufficient to 
trigger the G2/M transition in Xenopus oocytes.

Gross SD(1), Lewellyn AL, Maller JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

The protein kinase p90(Rsk) has previously been implicated as a key target of 
the MAPK pathway during M phase of meiosis II in Xenopus oocytes. To determine 
whether Rsk is a mediator of MAPK for stimulation of the G(2)/M transition early 
in meiosis I, we sought to generate a form of Rsk that would be constitutively 
active in resting, G(2) phase oocytes. Initial studies revealed that an 
N-terminal truncation of 43 amino acids conferred enhanced specific activity on 
the enzyme in G(2) phase, and stability was highest if the C terminus was not 
truncated. The full-length enzyme is known to be activated by phosphorylation at 
five sites. Two of these sites and flanking residues were replaced with either 
aspartic or glutamic acid, and Tyr(699) was mutated to alanine. The resulting 
construct, termed fully activated (FA) Rsk, had constitutive activity in G(2) 
phase, with a specific activity equivalent to that of wild type Rsk in M phase. 
In eight independent experiments approximately 45% of oocytes expressing FA-Rsk 
underwent germinal vesicle breakdown (GVBD, the G(2)/M transition) in the 
absence of progesterone, and this effect could be observed even in the presence 
of the MAPK kinase inhibitor U0126. Moreover, the specific activity of FA-Rsk in 
vivo was unaffected by U0126. In oocytes that did not undergo GVBD with FA-Rsk 
expression, subsequent treatment with progesterone resulted in a very rapid rate 
of GVBD even in the presence of U0126 to inhibit the endogenous MAPK/Rsk 
pathway. These results indicate that Rsk is the mediator of MAPK effects for the 
G(2)/M transition in meiosis I and in a subpopulation of oocytes Rsk is 
sufficient to trigger the G(2)/M transition.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C100496200
PMID: 11641391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]