1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Nov 1;95(1-2):172-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0169-328x(01)00242-x.

Cytokine upregulation in a murine model of familial amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Elliott JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. jellio@mednet.swmed.edu

Although pronounced changes in astrocytes and microglia accompany the neuronal 
degeneration observed in a murine model of familial amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, the significance of non-neuronal cell contribution to the disease 
process remains unclear. Activated astrocytes and microglia are capable of 
secreting numerous cytokines, some of which may have potentially harmful effects 
on neuron survival. For this reason we wished to determine the expression 
pattern of various cytokines in the spinal cords of transgenic mice expressing a 
Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase mutation (Tgn G93A SOD1) by using semi-quantitative 
RT-PCR. Three different patterns of cytokine expression were observed in G93A 
SOD1 transgenic mice. For most cytokines, we were unable to detect mRNA 
expression in Tgn G93A SOD1 mouse spinal cords at any age, yet message was 
readily detected in spleen or activated splenocytes. A second pattern, typified 
by TNF-alpha, was characterized by mRNA expression prior to the onset of motor 
deficits and increasing until the terminal stages of the disease. For other 
cytokines, including TGF-beta1 and M-CSF, mRNA expression was detected in young 
presymptomatic Tgn G93A SOD1 mice (as well as wild-type and transgenic mice 
expressing wild-type SOD1 (Tgn SOD1)), with upregulation later occurring only in 
G93A SOD1 transgenic mice. These results indicate a temporal correlation between 
the expression of certain cytokines and the onset of motor dysfunction in Tgn 
G93A SOD1 mice and suggest a potential role for these molecules in the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0169-328x(01)00242-x
PMID: 11687290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]