1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):5849-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109699200. Epub
2001  Nov 2.

Bactericidal properties of human and murine groups I, II, V, X, and XII secreted 
phospholipases A(2).

Koduri RS(1), GrÃ¶nroos JO, Laine VJ, Le Calvez C, Lambeau G, Nevalainen TJ, Gelb 
MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA.

Group IIA secreted phospholipase A(2) (sPLA2) is known to display potent 
Gram-positive bactericidal activity in vitro and in vivo. We have analyzed the 
bactericidal activity of the full set of recombinant murine and human groups I, 
II, V, X, and XII sPLA2s on Listeria monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, and 
Escherichia coli. The rank order potency among human sPLA2s against 
Gram-positive bacteria is group IIA > X > V > XII > IIE > IB, IIF (for murine 
sPLA2s: IIA > IID > V > IIE > IIC, X > IB, IIF), and only human group XII 
displays detectable bactericidal activity against the Gram-negative bacterium E. 
coli. These studies show that highly basic sPLA2s display potent bactericidal 
activity with the exception of the ability of the acidic human group X sPLA2 to 
kill Gram-positive bacteria. By studying the Bacillus subtilis and S. aureus 
bactericidal potencies of a large panel of human group IIA mutants in which 
basic residues were mutated to acidic residues, it was found that: 1) the 
overall positive charge of the sPLA2 is the dominant factor in dictating 
bactericidal potency; 2) basic residues on the putative membrane binding surface 
of the sPLA2 are modestly more important for bactericidal activity than are 
other basic residues; 3) relative bactericidal potency tracks well with the 
ability of these mutants to degrade phospholipids in the bacterial membrane; and 
4) exposure of the bacterial membrane of Gram-positive bacteria by disruption of 
the cell wall dramatically reduces the negative effect of charge reversal 
mutagenesis on bactericidal potency.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109699200
PMID: 11694541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]