1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2505-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109154200. Epub
2001  Nov 7.

Transport activity and surface expression of the Na+-Ca2+ exchanger NCX1 are 
inhibited by the immunosuppressive agent cyclosporin A and by the 
nonimmunosuppressive agent PSC833.

Kimchi-Sarfaty C(1), Kasir J, Ambudkar SV, Rahamimoff H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

Cyclosporin A (CsA) treatment of HEK 293 cells expressing the rat heart RHE-1 
(NCX1.1, EMBL accession number ) or the rat brain RBE-2 (NCX1.5, GenBank(TM) 
accession number ) Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger inhibited their transport activity in 
a concentration-dependent manner. The inhibition was detectable at 2 microm CsA, 
and exposure of the cells to 20 microm CsA resulted in a decrease of the 
Na(+)-dependent Ca(2+) uptake to about 20% relative to that of untreated cells. 
Determination of the surface expression of the exchanger protein revealed a 
parallel concentration-dependent reduction in the amount of the immunoreactive 
protein. No reduction was detected in the amount of total immunoreactive 
exchanger protein in CsA-treated cells relative to untreated ones. Among the 
different drugs tested, only PSC833, an analog of cyclosporin D, mimicked the 
effects of CsA. Exposure of the transfected cells to the chemically related 
cyclosporin D and macrolide drugs (FK506 or rapamycin) had no effect on the 
transport activity or the surface expression of the Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger. 
Co-expression of the human multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein (of which both 
drugs are modulators) with the cloned Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger revealed that 
transport activity and surface expression of each transporter in the 
co-transfected system were similar to those of each transporter alone in both 
the presence and absence of CsA or PSC833. CsA and PSC833 inhibited the surface 
expression of the NCX1 protein but did not alter the surface expression of 
P-glycoprotein. Unlike some P-glycoprotein endoplasmic reticulum-retained 
mutants (Loo, T. W., and Clarke, D. M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 709-712), CsA 
did not rescue RBE-2/F913-->Stop, an endoplasmic reticulum-retained 
function-competent mutant of the Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger (Kasir, J., Ren, X., 
Furman, I., and Rahamimoff, H. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 24873-24880) and did 
not induce its kinesis to the surface membrane, further demonstrating molecular 
differences between P-glycoprotein and NCX1 mutants for interaction with CsA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109154200
PMID: 11700317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]