1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Nov;86(11):5372-8. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.11.7999.

Micropenis and the AR Gene: mutation and CAG repeat-length analysis.

Ishii T(1), Sato S, Kosaki K, Sasaki G, Muroya K, Ogata T, Matsuo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan.

Various mutations of the AR gene and expanded CAG repeats at exon 1 of that gene 
have been reported in patients with hypospadias or genital ambiguity. However, 
the role of the AR gene has not been systemically studied in those with isolated 
micropenis lacking hypospadias or genital ambiguity. We studied 64 Japanese boys 
with isolated micropenis (age, 0-14 yr; median, 7 yr), whose stretched penile 
lengths were between -2.5 and -2.0 SD (borderline micropenis) in 31 patients 
(age, 0-13 yr; median, 8 yr) and below -2.5 SD (definite micropenis) in 33 
patients (age, 0-14 yr; median, 6 yr). Mutation analysis of the AR gene was 
performed for exons 1-8 and their flanking introns, except for the CAG and GGC 
repeat regions at exon 1, by denaturing HPLC and direct sequencing, identifying 
a substitution of cytosine to thymine at a position -3 in the 3' splice site of 
intron 1 in a patient with definite micropenis. CAG repeat length at exon 1 was 
determined by electrophoresis with internal size markers and direct sequencing, 
revealing no statistically significant difference in the distribution of CAG 
repeat lengths [median (range) and mean +/- SE: total patients with isolated 
micropenis, 24 (14-34) and 23.5 +/- 0.38; patients with borderline micropenis, 
24 (15-29) and 23.5 +/- 0.53; patients with definite micropenis, 23 (14-34) and 
23.5 +/- 0.56; and 100 control males, 23 (16-32) and 23.5 +/- 0.29] or in the 
frequency of long CAG repeats (percentage of CAG repeats > or =26 and > or =28: 
total patients with isolated micropenis, 17.2 and 4.7%; patients with borderline 
micropenis, 19.4 and 6.5%; patients with definite micropenis, 15.2 and 3.0%; and 
100 control males, 21.0 and 10.0%). These results suggest that an AR gene 
mutation is rare and that CAG repeat length is not expanded in children with 
isolated micropenis.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.11.7999
PMID: 11701709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]