1. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 1;21(23):9246-54. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-23-09246.2001.

Rats expressing human cytosolic copper-zinc superoxide dismutase transgenes with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: associated mutations develop motor neuron 
disease.

Nagai M(1), Aoki M, Miyoshi I, Kato M, Pasinelli P, Kasai N, Brown RH Jr, 
Itoyama Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Division of Neurology, Institute for Experimental 
Animals, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

Some cases of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are caused by 
mutations in the gene encoding cytosolic, copper-zinc superoxide dismutase 
(SOD1). We report here that rats that express a human SOD1 transgene with two 
different ALS-associated mutations (G93A and H46R) develop striking motor neuron 
degeneration and paralysis. As in the human disease and transgenic ALS mice, 
pathological analysis demonstrates selective loss of motor neurons in the spinal 
cords of these transgenic rats. In spinal cord tissues, this is accompanied by 
activation of apoptotic genes known to be activated by mutant SOD1 protein in 
vitro and in vivo. These animals provide additional support for the proposition 
that motor neuron death in SOD1-related ALS reflects one or more acquired, 
neurotoxic properties of the mutant SOD1 protein. The larger size of this rat 
model as compared with the ALS mice will facilitate studies involving 
manipulations of spinal fluid (implantation of intrathecal catheters for chronic 
therapeutic studies; CSF sampling) and spinal cord (e.g., direct administration 
of viral- and cell-mediated therapies).

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-23-09246.2001
PMCID: PMC6763929
PMID: 11717358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]