1. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 2001 Aug;14(4):220-4.

Lack of association between hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene and common 
forms of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Fujisawa T, Hotta M, Ueda H, Shintani M, Nojima K, 
Kawabata Y, Ono M, Nishino M, Itoi-Babaya M, Taniguchi H, Noso S, Horiki M, 
Yamada K, Kawaguchi Y, Fukuda M, Ogihara T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) gene have been 
shown to be a cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We studied 
the contribution of the HNF-1beta gene to susceptibility to common forms of Type 
2 diabetes in the genetically homogeneous Japanese population, by investigating 
the allelic association of Type 2 diabetes with two markers in the HNF-1beta 
region. The frequency of a nonsense mutation, R177X, which was previously 
reported in a Japanese family, was also studied by the polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method using a 
mismatch primer. A total of 200 subjects were studied. There was no significant 
difference in allele frequencies of either of the two polymorphisms studied 
between patients with Type 2 diabetes and control subjects, or between subgroups 
of patients subdivided by the presence of mild or severe diabetic nephropathy. 
None of the subjects studied had R177X mutation, giving a frequency of less than 
1.1% in common forms of Type 2 diabetes in Japan. These results suggest that 
mutations in the HNF-1beta gene derived from a limited number of founders are 
not a major cause of common forms of Type 2 diabetes, even in the genetically 
homogeneous Japanese population.

PMID: 11716293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]