1. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Nov;42(3):717-27. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02623.x.

Roles of the two ClpC ATP binding sites in the regulation of competence and the 
stress response.

Turgay K(1), Persuh M, Hahn J, Dubnau D.

Author information:
(1)Public Health Research Institute, 455 First Ave., New York, NY 10016, USA.

MecA targets the competence transcription factor ComK to ClpC. As a consequence, 
this factor is degraded by the ClpC/ClpP protease. ClpC is a member of the 
Clp/HSP100 family of ATPases and possesses two ATP binding sites. We have 
individually modified the Walker A motifs of these two sites and have also 
deleted a putative substrate recognition domain of ClpC at the C-terminus. The 
effects of these mutations were studied in vitro and in vivo. Deletion of the 
C-terminal domain resulted in a decreased binding affinity for MecA, a decreased 
ATPase activity in response to MecA addition and decreased degradative activity 
in vitro. In vivo, this deletion resulted in a failure to degrade ComK and in a 
decrease in thermal resistance for growth. Mutation of the N-terminal Walker A 
box (K214Q) caused a drastically decreased ATPase activity in vitro, but did not 
interfere with MecA binding. In vivo, this mutation had no effect on thermal 
resistance, but had a clpC null phenotype with respect to competence. Mutation 
of the C-terminal Walker A motif (K551Q) caused essentially the reverse 
phenotype both in vivo and in vitro. Although binding to MecA was only 
moderately impaired with 2 mM ATP, this mutant protein displayed no response to 
0.2 mM ATP, unlike the wild-type ClpC and the K214Q mutant protein. The ATPase 
activity of the K551Q mutant protein, induced by the addition of MecA plus ComS, 
was decreased about 10-fold but was not eliminated. In vivo, the K551Q mutation 
showed a partial defect with respect to competence and a profound loss of 
thermal resistance. Sporulation was reduced drastically by the K551Q and less so 
by the K214Q mutation, but remained unaffected by deletion of the C-terminal 
domain. Although the evidence suggests that the functions of the two ATP-binding 
domains overlap, it appears that the N-terminal nucleotide-binding domain of 
ClpC is particularly concerned with MecA-related functions, whereas the 
C-terminal domain plays a more general role in the activities of ClpC.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2001.02623.x
PMID: 11722737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]