1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2001 Dec;18(6):497-502. doi: 
10.1016/s0924-8579(01)00455-1.

Epidemiological aspects of antibiotic resistance in respiratory pathogens.

Mlynarczyk G(1), Mlynarczyk A, Jeljaszewicz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, 5 
Chalubinskiego, 02-004, Warsaw, Poland.

Respiratory infections are the most frequent reason for primary health care 
consultation. The main causes of respiratory tract infections in children are 
viruses and the most common types are upper respiratory tract infections: common 
cold, pharyngitis, otitis media and sinusitis. Pneumonia is much more serious. 
As well as viruses, bacteria are often involved in respiratory tract infections. 
Three bacterial species are most commonly isolated: Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
non-encapsulated Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis. 
The most common bacterial cause of pharyngitis is Streptococcus pyogenes. 
Bacteria isolated from community-acquired infection usually are sensitive to the 
majority of suitable drugs, but during the past two decades, significant 
antibiotic resistance has emerged. Resistance to penicillins has spread among H. 
influenzae and S. pneumoniae. The mechanism of penicillin resistance in H. 
influenzae is mainly by production of beta-lactamases TEM-1 and ROB-1, whereas 
in S. pneumoniae resistance is an effect of the changes in penicillin binding 
proteins. Among respiratory pathogens, resistance to tetracyclines, macrolides, 
trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones has also appeared. Several 
mechanisms depending on changes in target, active efflux and modifying enzymes 
are involved.

DOI: 10.1016/s0924-8579(01)00455-1
PMCID: PMC7173210
PMID: 11738335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]