1. Pharmacogenetics. 2001 Dec;11(9):815-24. doi:
10.1097/00008571-200112000-00010.

Functional polymorphism in the alcohol dehydrogenase 3 (ADH3) promoter.

Hedberg JJ(1), Backlund M, Strömberg P, Lönn S, Dahl ML, Ingelman-Sundberg M, 
Höög JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The ADH3 gene encodes alcohol dehydrogenase 3 (ADH3)/glutathione-dependent 
formaldehyde dehydrogenase, the ancestral and most conserved form of alcohol 
dehydrogenase. ADH3 is expressed in all tissues examined and the enzyme is 
essential for formaldehyde scavenging. We have screened the promoter region 
including exon 1 and exons 5, 6 and 7 of the ADH3 gene for allelic variants. 
Using 80 samples of genomic DNA from Swedes as template, the various parts of 
the gene were PCR amplified and subsequently analyzed on single strand 
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) gels. No abnormal migration patterns could be 
detected by SSCP analysis of exons 5, 6 and 7 while for the promoter region, a 
large number of the samples displayed differences in SSCP gel migration 
patterns. Cloning and sequence analysis revealed four possible base pair 
exchanges in the promoter region. Two transitions were found at position -197 
and -196, GG --> AA, one at position -79, G --> A and finally, close to the 
transcription start site, a fourth transition was found at position +9, C --> T. 
An allele specific PCR method was developed and allele frequencies were 
determined in three populations: Chinese, Spanish and Swedish. GG-197,-196 and 
AA-197,-196 alleles were common in all three populations, G-79 and A-79 were 
common in Swedes and Spaniards but only A-79 was found among Chinese. T+9 was 
the most rare allele with an allele frequency of 1.5% in Swedes. Finally, 
promoter activity assessments and electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
demonstrated that the C+9 --> T+9 exchange resulted in a significant 
transcriptional decrease in HeLa cells and a decreased binding of nuclear 
proteins. These base pair exchanges may have an effect on the expression of the 
enzyme and thereby influence the capacity of certain individuals to metabolize 
formaldehyde.

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-200112000-00010
PMID: 11740346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]