1. Oncogene. 2001 Nov 22;20(53):7699-709. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204939.

L552S, an alternatively spliced isoform of XAGE-1, is over-expressed in lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Wang T(1), Fan L, Watanabe Y, McNeill P, Fanger GR, Persing DH, Reed SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Antigen Discovery, Corixa Corporation, 1124 Columbia 
Street, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. wang@corixa.com

Using a combination of cDNA subtraction and microarray analysis, we report here 
the identification and characterization of L552S, an over-expressed, 
alternatively spliced isoform of XAGE-1 in lung adenocarcinoma. Real-time RT-PCR 
analysis shows that L552S is expressed at levels greater than 10-fold in 12 of 
25 lung adenocarcinoma tumors compared with the highest expression level found 
in all normal tissues tested. L552S is expressed in both early and late stages 
of lung adenocarcinoma, but it was not detected in large cell carcinoma, small 
cell carcinoma, or atypical lung neuroendocrine carcinoid. The full-length cDNA 
for L552S comprises 770 bp and encodes a polypeptide of 160 amino acids. 
C-terminal 94 amino acids of L552S are identical to a cancer testis antigen, 
XAGE-1, found in Ewing's sarcoma. Genomic sequence analysis has revealed that 
L552S and XAGE-1 are alternatively spliced isoforms, and expression of both 
L552S and XAGE-1 isoforms are present in lung adenocarcinoma. 
Immunohistochemistry analysis using affinity purified L552S polyclonal 
antibodies demonstrated specific nuclear staining in 10 of 12 lung 
adenocarcinoma samples. Furthermore, antibody responses to recombinant L552S 
protein were observed in seven of 17 lung pleural effusion fluids of lung cancer 
patients. These results strongly imply that L552S protein is immunogenic and 
suggest that it might have use as a vaccine target for lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204939
PMID: 11753648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]