1. Am J Psychiatry. 2002 Jan;159(1):23-9. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.1.23.

Catechol o-methyltransferase, serotonin transporter, and tryptophan hydroxylase 
gene polymorphisms in bipolar disorder patients with and without comorbid panic 
disorder.

Rotondo A(1), Mazzanti C, Dell'Osso L, Rucci P, Sullivan P, Bouanani S, Gonnelli 
C, Goldman D, Cassano GB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pisa, Italy. a.rotondo@med.unipi.it

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2002 Jan;159(1):3-4. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.1.3.
    Am J Psychiatry. 2002 Dec;159(12):2115-6; author reply 2116. doi: 
10.1176/appi.ajp.159.12.2115-b.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic epidemiologic and clinical data suggest that comorbid panic 
disorder may define a subtype of bipolar disorder. Comorbid panic disorder might 
thereby influence the strength of association between bipolar disorder and genes 
that have been implicated in bipolar disorder on the basis of their function in 
monoamine neurotransmission and previously reported linkage results. Polymorphic 
markers at catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), serotonin transporter (5-HTT), 
and tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) genes were analyzed in a case-control 
association study of bipolar disorder patients with or without lifetime panic 
disorder.
METHOD: Unrelated subjects of Italian descent meeting DSM-III-R criteria for 
lifetime bipolar disorder (N=111), with (N=49) or without (N=62) comorbid 
lifetime panic disorder, were compared to 127 healthy subjects. DNA was 
extracted from blood leukocytes. The frequencies of COMT Val158Met, 5-HTTLPR, 
and TPH IVS7+218C>A polymorphisms were determined. Genotype and allele frequency 
comparisons between affected (bipolar disorder, bipolar disorder without panic 
disorder, or bipolar disorder with panic disorder) and unaffected individuals 
were carried out with chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests.
RESULTS: Relative to the comparison subjects, subjects with bipolar disorder 
without panic disorder, but not those with comorbid bipolar disorder and panic 
disorder, showed significantly higher frequencies of the COMT Met158 and the 
short 5-HTTLPR alleles and genotypes. The differences in the frequencies of the 
TPH IVS7+218A alleles and genotypes approached statistical significance.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings support the hypothesis that comorbid panic disorder 
identifies a genetic subtype of bipolar disorder and suggest a role for COMT and 
5-HTT in vulnerability to these disorders.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.1.23
PMID: 11772685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]