1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):9904-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110182200. Epub
2002  Jan 10.

Modifications in the C terminus of the synaptosome-associated protein of 25 kDa 
(SNAP-25) and in the complementary region of synaptobrevin affect the final 
steps of exocytosis.

Gil A(1), Gutiérrez LM, Carrasco-Serrano C, Alonso MT, Viniegra S, Criado M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Instituto de 
Neurociencias, Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Cientificas, 03550 San Juan, Alicante, Spain.

Fusion proteins made of green fluorescent protein coupled to SNAP-25 or 
synaptobrevin were overexpressed in bovine chromaffin cells in order to study 
the role of critical protein domains in exocytosis. Point mutations in the 
C-terminal domain of SNAP-25 (K201E and L203E) produced a marked inhibition of 
secretion, whereas single (Q174K, Q53K) and double mutants (Q174K/Q53K) of amino 
acids from the so-called zero layer only produced a moderate alteration in 
secretion. The importance of the SNAP-25 C-terminal domain in exocytosis was 
also confirmed by the similar effect on secretion of mutations in analogous 
residues of synaptobrevin (A82D, L84E). The effects on the initial rate and 
magnitude of secretion correlated with the alteration of single vesicle fusion 
kinetics since the amperometric spikes from cells expressing SNAP-25 L203E and 
K201E and synaptobrevin A82D and L84E mutants had lower amplitudes and larger 
half-width values than the ones from controls, suggesting slower 
neurotransmitter release kinetics than that found in cells expressing the 
wild-type proteins or zero layer mutants of SNAP-25. We conclude that a small 
domain of the SNAP-25 C terminus and its counterpart in synaptobrevin play an 
essential role in the final membrane fusion step of exocytosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110182200
PMID: 11786540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]