1. Hum Genet. 2002 Jan;110(1):8-14. doi: 10.1007/s00439-001-0650-x. Epub 2001 Dec
 4.

Familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (Fahr's disease) without 
neurological, cognitive and psychiatric symptoms is not linked to the IBGC1 
locus on chromosome 14q.

Brodaty H(1), Mitchell P, Luscombe G, Kwok JJ, Badenhop RF, McKenzie R, 
Schofield PR.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 
h.brodaty@unsw.edu.au

Idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (IBGC) is characterised by radiological, 
neurological, cognitive and psychiatric abnormalities. The associations between 
these abnormal phenotypes and abnormal genes remain unclear despite the recent 
mapping to chromosome 14q of a susceptibility locus for IBGC ( IBGC1). We 
identified two siblings, from a large multigenerational pedigree, who had both 
been diagnosed with radiological IBGC, dementia, bipolar affective disorder and 
Parkinsonism. We assessed (1) other family members to determine whether these 
four phenotypes were co-segregating as symptoms of IBGC, and (2) possible IBGC 
linkage to the IBGC1 locus on chromosome 14q or to any known or potential 
dementia genes. Nine second-generation and 21 third-generation members received 
radiological, neurological, neuropsychological and psychiatric assessments. We 
genotyped all family members for microsatellite markers at the IBGC1 locus and 
polymorphisms of the ApoE, VLDL, alpha1-ACT, BChE-K, APP, PS1, PS2 and tau genes 
and tested these for linkage to IBGC, dementia and bipolar disorder. Of the ten 
family members with radiological intracranial calcification, all except the two 
index cases were normal. There was no significant association between IBGC 
status and severe cognitive impairment or dementia ( P=0.335) or bipolar 
affective disorder or Parkinsonism ( P=1.0). Linkage to the IBGC1 locus was 
excluded. Of the eight dementia gene markers tested, the only positive LOD score 
was for the ApoE epsilon4 polymorphism and dementia/severe cognitive impairment. 
We have identified a form of IBGC in which calcification is inherited 
independently of neurological, cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. This may 
represent a second locus for this disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-001-0650-x
PMID: 11810290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]