1. Acta Diabetol. 2001;38(3):123-7. doi: 10.1007/s005920170008.

Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is not a common cause of MODY and 
early-onset type 2 diabetes in Korea.

Lee HJ(1), Ahn CW, Kim SJ, Song YD, Lim SK, Kim KR, Lee HC, Huh KB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Sudaemungu, Seoul, Korea.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 with a mutation in hepatocyte 
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha has been identified in most races, but the 
prevalence of Korean MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes with a mutation in 
this gene is unknown. To determine the prevalence of MODY and early-onset type 2 
diabetes with the mutation of HNF-1alpha gene in Korea, we analyzed this gene in 
69 Korean early-onset type 2 diabetics and in 35 healthy persons using the 
single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. 
We identified one mutation in exon 4 (C900A) in only one of the 69 Korean 
subjects with early-onset type 2 diabetes; this mutation was silent and did not 
change the amino acid (Pro300). Additionally, we identified four polymorphisms: 
S487N, AAC-->AGC, intron 2 (nt -23), intron 7: (nt +7) and intron 9 (nt -24). 
However, there was no significant difference in frequencies of the four 
polymorphisms between the type 2 diabetes and control groups. Among type 2 
diabetics, codon 487 variant showed no relationship to age at onset, body mass 
index, fasting blood glucose, HbA1c, lipid profile, basal C-peptide and 2 hour 
C-peptide. We concluded that this genetic mutation in HNF-1alpha gene may not be 
a common contributor to MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes susceptibility in 
Korea.

DOI: 10.1007/s005920170008
PMID: 11827432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]