1. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Feb;269(4):1136-44. doi: 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02740.x.

A novel gain-of-function mutation of the integrin alpha2 VWFA domain.

Aquilina A(1), Korda M, Bergelson JM, Humphries MJ, Farndale RW, Tuckwell D.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Integrin alpha2beta1 is the major receptor for collagens in human tissues, being 
involved in cell adhesion and the control of collagen and collagenase gene 
expression. The collagen binding site of alpha2beta1 has been localized to the 
alpha2 von Willebrand Factor type A (VWFA) domain (A-domain or I-domain) and the 
residues responsible for the interaction with collagen have been mapped. We 
report a study of alpha2 VWFA domain in which residue E318, which lies outside 
the collagen binding site, is mutated to tryptophan, showing that this is a 
gain-of-function mutation. Recombinant alpha2-E318W VWFA domain showed elevated 
and specific binding to collagen I compared with the wild-type. Side chain 
hydrophobicity was important for the gain-of-function as elevated binding was 
seen with E318I and E318Y, but not with E318R. The E318W mutation had additional 
effects on VWFA domain properties as alpha2-E318W VWFA domain differed from the 
wild-type in its cation preferences for ligand binding and in binding to 
monoclonal antibody JA203, which bound at a site distal to E318. The 
gain-of-function effect was not restricted to binding to collagen I as 
alpha2-E318W also showed elevated binding to collagen IV, collagen I 
C-propeptide, laminin and E-cadherin. Binding to these ligands was inhibited by 
collagen peptide containing the GFOGER motif, indicating that these bound to the 
VWFA domain by a similar mechanism to collagen I. These data indicate that 
residue E318 plays a novel and important role in modulating alpha2 VWFA 
domain--ligand binding and may be involved in the conformational changes 
associated with its regulation.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0014-2956.2001.02740.x
PMID: 11856343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]