1. Diabetes. 2002 Mar;51(3):863-6. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.51.3.863.

Systematic search for single nucleotide polymorphisms in the resistin gene: the 
absence of evidence for the association of three identified single nucleotide 
polymorphisms with Japanese type 2 diabetes.

Osawa H(1), Onuma H, Murakami A, Ochi M, Nishimiya T, Kato K, Shimizu I, Fujii 
Y, Ohashi J, Makino H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine, 
Ehime, Japan. harosawa@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Resistin is a novel polypeptide specifically secreted from adipocytes, and its 
serum levels are increased in obese diabetic mice. Resistin antagonizes insulin 
and could account for insulin resistance. To determine whether there are single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the resistin gene associated with type 2 
diabetes, sequences for 24 Japanese type 2 diabetic patients were initially 
analyzed using PCR direct sequencing. Three SNPs were found in the introns, but 
none were present in the coding regions. The allele frequencies of genomic 
-167C>T, +157C>T, and +299G>A in 99 Japanese control subjects were determined to 
be 3.5, 6.6, and 39.4%, respectively. In each pair of these SNPs, linkage 
disequilibria were found between either -167C>T and +299G>A or +157C>T and 
+299G>A. A linkage disequilibrium was also detected among -167C>T, +157C>T, and 
+299G>A, and only four of the eight possible haplotypes defined by these SNPs 
were found. A comparison of the frequencies of these SNPs and haplotypes between 
99 type 2 diabetes and 99 control subjects revealed no evidence for any 
association. These identified SNPs, which were in linkage disequilibrium, 
represent potentially useful tools for searching for their association with 
specific phenotypes of diabetes.

DOI: 10.2337/diabetes.51.3.863
PMID: 11872693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]