1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21740-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108418200. Epub
2002  Mar 4.

Identification of a substrate recognition site on Ubc9.

Lin D(1), Tatham MH, Yu B, Kim S, Hay RT, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Human Ubc9 is homologous to ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. However, instead of 
conjugating ubiquitin, it conjugates a ubiquitin homologue, small ubiquitin-like 
modifier 1 (SUMO-1), also known as UBL1, GMP1, SMTP3, PIC1, and sentrin. The 
SUMO-1 conjugation pathway is very similar to that of ubiquitin with regard to 
the primary sequences of the ubiquitin-activating enzymes (E1), the 
three-dimensional structures of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2), and the 
chemistry of the overall conjugation pathway. The interaction of substrates with 
Ubc9 has been studied using NMR spectroscopy. Peptides with sequences that 
correspond to those of the SUMO-1 conjugation sites from p53 and c-Jun both bind 
to a surface adjacent to the active site Cys93 of human Ubc9, which has been 
previously shown to include residues that demonstrate the most significant 
dynamics on the microsecond to millisecond time scale. Mutations in this region, 
Q126A, Q130A, A131D, E132A, Y134A, and T135A, were constructed to evaluate the 
role of these residues in SUMO-1 conjugation. These alterations have significant 
effects on the conjugation of SUMO-1 with the target proteins p53, E1B, and 
promyelocytic leukemia protein and define a substrate binding site on Ubc9. 
Furthermore, the SUMO-1 conjugation site of p53 does not form any defined 
secondary structure when either free or bound to Ubc9. This suggests that a 
defined secondary structure at SUMO-1 conjugation sites in target proteins is 
not necessary for recognition and conjugation by the SUMO-1 pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108418200
PMID: 11877416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]