1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21576-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112103200. Epub 
2002 Mar 6.

The effects of mutations in helices 4 and 6 of ApoA-I on scavenger receptor 
class B type I (SR-BI)-mediated cholesterol efflux suggest that formation of a 
productive complex between reconstituted high density lipoprotein and SR-BI is 
required for efficient lipid transport.

Liu T(1), Krieger M, Kan HY, Zannis VI.

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics, Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Department 
of Medicine and Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

We have studied the effects of mutations in apoA-I on reconstituted high density 
lipoprotein (HDL) particle (rHDL(apoA-I)) binding to and cholesterol efflux from 
wild-type (WT) and mutant forms of the HDL receptor SR-BI expressed by ldlA-7 
cells. Mutations in helix 4 or helix 6 of the apoA-I reduced efflux by 79 and 
51%, respectively, without substantially altering receptor binding (apparent 
K(d) values of 1.1-4.4 microg of protein/ml). SR-BI with an M158R mutation bound 
poorly to rHDL with WT and helix 4 mutant apoA-I; the helix 6 mutant restored 
tight binding to SR-BI(M158R) (K(d) values of 48, 60, and 7 microg of 
protein/ml, respectively). SR-BI(M158R)-mediated cholesterol efflux rates, 
normalized for binding, were high for all three rHDLs (71-111% of control). In 
contrast, absolute (12-19%) and binding-corrected (24-47%) efflux rates for all 
three rHDLs mediated by SR-BI with Q402R/Q418R mutations were very low. We 
propose that formation of a productive complex between apoA-I in rHDL and SR-BI, 
in which the lipoprotein and the receptor must either be precisely aligned or 
have the capacity to undergo appropriate conformational changes, is required for 
efficient SR-BI-mediated cholesterol efflux. Some mutations in apoA-I and/or 
SR-BI can result in high affinity, but non-productive, binding that does not 
permit efficient cholesterol efflux.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112103200
PMID: 11882653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]