1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 15;125(3):328-39. doi: 10.1006/gcen.2001.7727.

Isolation and characterization of a homologue of mammalian prolactin-releasing 
peptide from the tilapia brain and its effect on prolactin release from the 
tilapia pituitary.

Seale AP(1), Itoh T, Moriyama S, Takahashi A, Kawauchi H, Sakamoto T, Fujimoto 
M, Riley LG, Hirano T, Grau EG.

Author information:
(1)Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawaii, Kaneohe, Hawaii 
96744, USA.

In the tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus), as in many teleosts, prolactin (PRL) 
plays a major role in osmoregulation in freshwater. Recently, PRL-releasing 
peptides (PrRPs) have been characterized in mammals. Independently, a novel 
C-terminal RF (arginine-phenylalanine) amide peptide (Carrasius RF amide; 
C-RFa), which is structurally related to mammalian PrRPs, has been isolated from 
the brain of the Japanese crucian carp. The putative PrRP was purified from an 
acid extract of tilapia brain by affinity chromatography with antibody against 
synthetic C-RFa and HPLC on a reverse-phase ODS-120 column. The tilapia PrRP 
cDNA was subsequently cloned by polymerase chain reaction. The cDNA consists of 
619 bp encoding a preprohormone of 117 amino acids. Sequence comparison of the 
isolated peptide and the preprohormone revealed that tilapia PrRP contains 20 
amino acids and is identical to C-RFa. Incubation of the tilapia pituitary with 
synthetic C-RFa (100 nM) significantly stimulated the release of two forms of 
tilapia PRL (PRL188 and PRL177). However, the effect of C-RFa was less 
pronounced than the marked increase in PRL release in response to hyposmotic 
medium. The ability of C-RFa to stimulate PRL release appears to be specific, 
since C-RFa failed to stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary in 
organ culture. In contrast, rat and human PrRPs had no effect on PRL release. 
C-RFa was equipotent with chicken GnRH in stimulating PRL release in the 
pituitary preincubated with estradiol 17beta. Circulating levels of PRL were 
significantly increased 1 h after intraperitoneal injection of 0.1 microg/g of 
C-RFa in female tilapia in freshwater but not in males. These results suggest 
that C-RFa is physiologically involved in the control of PRL secretion in 
tilapia.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

DOI: 10.1006/gcen.2001.7727
PMID: 11884078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]