1. Kidney Int. 2002 Apr;61(4):1270-5. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00275.x.

Role of the alpha-adducin genotype on renal disease progression.

Nicod J(1), Frey BM, Frey FJ, Ferrari P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Inselspital, University of Berne, 
Berne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: A genetic susceptibility to hypertension may predispose to the 
development of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and promote a more rapid loss of 
renal function in patients with renal diseases. The alpha-adducin (ADD) gene, 
alone or in combination with the angiotensinogen (AGT) and the 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), is a candidate for abnormal blood pressure 
regulation and thus for increased susceptibility or faster progression to ESRD.
METHODS: Genotyping for the G460W-ADD, M235T-AGT and the insertion/deletion 
(I/D)-ACE gene polymorphisms was performed in 260 control subjects and 260 ESRD 
patients using polymerase chain reaction, gel analysis and appropriate 
restriction digest.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the ADD, AGT and ACE genotypes in ESRD patients did 
not differ from observed frequencies in control subjects. The average (+/-SE) 
time from diagnosis to the onset of ESRD tended to be shorter in the presence of 
the ADD-460WW (5.1 +/- 1.1 years, N = 10) than with the GW (9.9 +/- 0.7 years, N 
= 81) and GG (11.3 +/- 1.0 years, N = 164) genotypes (F-ratio=2.71, P = 0.068; 
WW vs. GW P < 0.06 and vs. GG <0.03). In the 167 patients homozygous for the 
ADD-G allele, a more rapid progression with the ACE-DD genotype as compared to 
ACE-DI and II was found (P < 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The ADD genotype is predictive of the course of renal function loss 
in an unselected renal population and influences the effect of the ACE genotype 
to modulate the rate of progression to ESRD. Thus, the ADD genotype may play a 
role for the understanding of interindividual differences in the course of renal 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2002.00275.x
PMID: 11918733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]