1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Apr;118(4):626-30. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.01715.x.

Partial revertant mosaicism of keratin 14 in a patient with recessive 
epidermolysis bullosa simplex.

Schuilenga-Hut PH(1), Scheffer H, Pas HH, Nijenhuis M, Buys CH, Jonkman MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.

A patient with recessive epidermolysis bullosa simplex due to a previously 
described homozygous KRT14 1842-2A-->C splice-site mutation was re-examined, 
because we unexpectedly found signs of revertant mosaicism. The germline 
mutation resulted in different aberrant transcripts containing premature 
termination codons, all leading to truncated keratin 14 proteins. Basal 
keratinocytes in skin and in culture completely lacked keratin 14 and 
intermediate filaments. From this keratin 14-/- patient we started cultures from 
a new skin biopsy and here, we serendipitously found keratinocytes that 
spontaneously expressed keratin 14. This biopsy had been taken from an area of 
skin that was clinically affected, because blisters could simply be evoked by 
gentle rubbing. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy of additional 
biopsies from this skin area revealed a mosaic expression of keratin 14 and 
reappearance of intermediate filaments in basal keratinocytes. Immunoblotting 
showed a revertant keratin 14 polypeptide with seemingly normal molecular 
weight. DNA analysis of exon 2 and its flanking intron borders showed no 
additional mutations in the genomic KRT14 sequence. Analysis of mRNA isolated 
from mosaic skin keratinocytes revealed an additional in-frame transcript 
(1844T-->G, 1845Delta6) that codes for an abnormal keratin 14 polypeptide with a 
two residue deletion and one amino acid change. The re-expression of a 
revertant, albeit abnormal, keratin 14 polypeptide, so-called partial revertant 
mosaicism, accounts for the antibody staining pattern and for the reappearance 
of intermediate filaments, which however, are semifunctional and not able to 
revert the clinical phenotype. The combination of a keratin 14-positive and a 
keratin 14-negative cell population in epidermis as well as in cultured 
keratinocytes suggests that the cellular reversion might be caused by an 
endogenous factor. We hypothesize that a second somatic modulating factor in the 
genome that affects the processing of the mutant KRT14 pre-mRNA may underlie 
this phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.01715.x
PMID: 11918708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]