1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Apr 5;292(3):756-60. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2002.6705.

Loops within the CD11c I domain critical for specific recognition of fibrinogen.

Choi J(1), Nham SU.

Author information:
(1)Division of Science Education, Kangwon National University, Choonchun, 
Kangwon 200-701, Korea.

The I domains of CD11 are responsible for the binding of ligands and have a 
unique structure with 6-7 alpha helices and 6 beta sheets with interconnecting 
loops. To determine loops recognizing fibrinogen in CD11c I domain, five 
oligopeptides corresponding to CD11c loops were used to prevent fibrinogen 
binding to isolated CD11c I domain. The results of the inhibition experiment 
indicated that all of the loops except the one between E-beta sheet and 6-alpha 
helix were involved in the binding to fibrinogen. The peptide beta D alpha 5 and 
alpha 3 alpha 4 showed higher inhibitory activity than others, and the 
combination of four peptides blocked fibrinogen binding to the I domain 
completely. These peptides (beta A alpha 1, alpha 3 alpha 4, beta D alpha 5 and 
beta F alpha 7) could block THP-1 cell binding to fibrinogen coated surface as 
well. Alanine substitution of amino acids on the I domain such as Y249A and 
Q201A (which are on the loops beta D-alpha 5 and alpha 3-alpha 4 respectively) 
abolished fibrinogen binding, while mutation on the loop beta E-alpha 6 (Q273A) 
had no effect on fibrinogen binding. Taken together, the results from this study 
suggest that the loops on the top of CD11c I domain such as loop beta A-alpha 1, 
alpha 3-alpha 4, beta D-alpha 5 and beta F-alpha 7 are involved in fibrinogen 
binding, and two loops (alpha 3-alpha 4 and beta D-alpha 5) are more important 
than others for the recognition of fibrinogen.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2002.6705
PMID: 11922630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]