1. Prenat Diagn. 2002 Mar;22(3):235-40. doi: 10.1002/pd.296.

Prenatal diagnosis in two families with autosomal, p47(phox)-deficient chronic 
granulomatous disease due to a novel point mutation in NCF1.

de Boer M(1), Singh V, Dekker J, Di Rocco M, Goldblatt D, Roos D.

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory of the Netherlands Blood Transfusion Service (CLB), and 
Laboratory for Experimental and Clinical Immunology, Academic Medical Centre, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Prenatal diagnosis was required in two unrelated families with 
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) patients who lacked expression of p47(phox) 
protein; thus a search for mutations in NCF1 was undertaken.
METHODS: Gene scanning was applied to establish the relative number of coding 
and pseudo-NCF1 genes. PCRs specific for coding NCF1 cDNA and coding NCF1 exon-7 
genomic DNA were devised.
RESULTS: The normal 1:2 ratio of coding and pseudo-NCF1 genes was found in the 
patients. Sequencing of the RT-PCR product specific for mRNA from the coding 
NCF1 genes revealed a novel homozygous G579A mutation in both patients, changing 
the TGG codon for Trp193 into the TAG stop codon. This mutation was confirmed in 
genomic DNA. The parents of both patients were found to be heterozygotes for 
this mutation. In the chorionic villus DNA of the first family a heterozygous 
G579A mutation was found. Postpartum, functional NADPH oxidase tests were 
normal. In the second family, this mutation was present in homozygous form in 
the chorionic villus DNA. Following termination of the pregnancy, the diagnosis 
of p47(phox)-deficient CGD was confirmed on DNA extracted from fetal blood.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of prenatal diagnosis in 
p47(phox)-deficient CGD.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.296
PMID: 11920901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]