1. Biochemistry. 2002 Apr 16;41(15):4809-18. doi: 10.1021/bi015814m.

Unraveling the substrate-metal binding site of ferrochelatase: an X-ray 
absorption spectroscopic study.

Ferreira GC(1), Franco R, Mangravita A, George GN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, 
Institute for Biomolecular Science and H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA. 
gferreir@hsc.usf.edu

Ferrochelatase (EC 4.99.1.1), the terminal enzyme of the heme biosynthetic 
pathway, catalyzes the insertion of ferrous iron into the protoporphyrin IX 
ring. Ferrochelatases can be arbitrarily divided into two broad categories: 
those with and those without a [2Fe-2S] center. In this work we have used X-ray 
absorption spectroscopy to investigate the metal ion binding sites of murine and 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) ferrochelatases, which are representatives of 
the former and latter categories, respectively. Co(2+) and Zn(2+) complexes of 
both enzymes were studied, but the Fe(2+) complex was only studied for yeast 
ferrochelatase because the [2Fe-2S] center of the murine enzyme interferes with 
the analysis. Co(2+) and Zn(2+) binding to site-directed mutants of the murine 
enzyme were also studied, in which the highly conserved and potentially 
metal-coordinating residues H207 and Y220 were substituted by residues that 
should not coordinate metal (i.e., H207N, H207A, and Y220F). Our experiments 
indicate four-coordinate zinc with Zn(N/O)(3)(S/Cl)(1) coordination for the 
yeast and Zn(N/O)(2)(S/Cl)(2) coordination for the wild-type murine enzyme. In 
contrast to zinc, a six-coordinate site for Co(2+) coordinated with oxygen or 
nitrogen was present in both the yeast and murine (wild-type and mutated) 
enzymes, with evidence of two histidine ligands in both. Like Co(2+), Fe(2+) 
bound to yeast ferrochelatase was coordinated by approximately six oxygen or 
nitrogen ligands, again with evidence of two histidine ligands. For the murine 
enzyme, mutation of both H207 and Y220 significantly changed the spectra, 
indicating a likely role for these residues in metal ion substrate binding. This 
is in marked disagreement with the conclusions from X-ray crystallographic 
studies of the human enzyme, and possible reasons for this are discussed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi015814m
PMID: 11939775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]