1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2002 May;86(1-2):31-41. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-2427(02)00008-9.

CpG-oligodinucleotides as an effective adjuvant in pigs for intramuscular 
immunizations.

Van der Stede Y(1), Verdonck F, Vancaeneghem S, Cox E, Goddeeris BM.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Laboratory of Veterinary Immunology, Ghent 
University, Salisburylaan 133, B-9820, Merelbeke, Belgium. 
yves.vanderstede@rug.ac.be

In this study, the effect of two oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) sequences 
5'GCT-AGA-CGT-TAG-CGT-3' (CpG-ODN) and 5'-GCT-AGA-GCT-TAG-GCT-3' (GpC-ODN) on 
the antigen-specific antibody and cellular immune response after intramuscular 
immunizations with OVA was analyzed in pigs. Pigs immunized with OVA 
supplemented with these ODNs showed a significantly enhanced primary antibody 
response in comparison with the control group which received OVA without ODN. 
This enhanced primary antibody response appeared ODN-sequence-independent as 
similar effects were seen in both ODN-groups. The OVA-specific antibody titers 
obtained after a single injection of antigen combined with either of both ODNs 
were as high as the titers in the control group after two injections. 
Furthermore, the ODN-supplemented animals showed significantly higher 
OVA-specific IgA antibodies in their saliva and nasal secretions at some time 
points after the first immunization. Proliferation assays showed that CpG- as 
well as GpC-ODN significantly enhanced the antigen-specific as well as the 
mitogen-induced proliferation in different lymphoid tissues. Furthermore, 48h 
after the third immunization the CpG-group showed a significantly decreased IL-6 
mRNA expression in cells of the local draining lymph node but no significant 
difference in TGF-beta (Th3-like) and IL-10 (Th2-like). The ODN injected animals 
showed the tendency to have higher IFN-gamma (Th1-like) mRNA-expression in 
comparison with the control group. To our knowledge, these are the first in vivo 
studies in pigs, which demonstrate the appropriateness of CpG-ODN as 
immunostimulating adjuvants in vaccines for farm animals.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2427(02)00008-9
PMID: 11943328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]