1. Atherosclerosis. 2002 Jun;162(2):269-76. doi: 10.1016/s0021-9150(01)00716-x.

Determinants of HDL particle size in patients with the null (P207L) or defective 
(D9N) mutation in the lipoprotein lipase gene: the Québec LipD Study.

Ruel IL(1), Gaudet D, Perron P, Pascot A, Després JP, Bergeron J, Julien P, 
Lamarche B.

Author information:
(1)Lipid Research Center, Laval University Hospital Research Center, CHUQ, 
Pavillon CHUL, 2705 Laurier Blvd., Qué., GIV 4G2, Sainte-Foy, Canada.

The aim of the present study was to examine the impact of the defective D9N and 
the null P207L mutations in the lipoprotein lipase (LPL) gene on high density 
lipoprotein (HDL) particle size in relation to specific environmental factors 
such as obesity, gender and menopausal status. Analyses were carried out in 118 
heterozygous carriers of the D9N mutation and 88 heterozygous for the P207L 
mutation. HDL particle size was measured on whole plasma by non-denaturing 4-30% 
polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis. Although carriers of the P207L 
mutation presented a more deteriorated lipoprotein-lipid profile compared with 
carriers of the D9N mutation, there was no difference in HDL particle size 
between the P207L and D9N carriers (81.9+/-4.5 vs. 82.7+/-4.4 A, respectively, 
P=0.2). Multivariate analyses indicated that waist circumference (P=0.001) and 
HDL cholesterol levels (P<0.001) were independent predictors of HDL particle 
size among carriers of the defective D9N mutation. On the other hand, gender 
(P=0.03), plasma cholesterol (P=0.01) and TG (P=0.04) levels were significant 
predictors of HDL particle size among carriers of the null P207L mutation in 
multivariate analyses. These results suggest that the nature of the mutation in 
the LPL gene modifies the relationship of HDL particle size to other metabolic 
variables and secondary factors such as abdominal obesity and gender.

DOI: 10.1016/s0021-9150(01)00716-x
PMID: 11996946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]