1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27733-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202663200. Epub
2002  May 16.

Characterization of the p90 ribosomal S6 kinase 2 carboxyl-terminal domain as a 
protein kinase.

Chrestensen CA(1), Sturgill TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Cell Signaling, University of Virginia 
Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

The carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the p90 ribosomal S6 kinases (RSKs) is an 
important regulatory domain in RSK and a model for kinase regulation of 
FXXFXF(Y) motifs in AGC kinases. Its properties had not been studied. We 
reconstituted activation of the CTD in Escherichia coli by co-expression with 
active ERK2 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). GST-RSK2-(aa373-740) was 
phosphorylated in the P-loop (Thr(577)) by MAPK, accompanied by increased 
phosphorylation on the hydrophobic motif site, Ser(386). Activated 
GST-RSK2-(aa373-740) phosphorylates synthetic peptides based on Ser(386). The 
peptide RRQLFRGFSFVAK, which was termed CTDtide, was phosphorylated with K(m) 
and V(max) values of approximately 140 microm and approximately 1 
micromol/min/mg, respectively. Residues Leu at p -5 and Arg at p -3 are 
important for substrate recognition, but a hydrophobic residue at p +4 is not. 
RSK2 CTD is a much more selective peptide kinase than MAPK-activated protein 
kinase 2. CTDtide was used to probe regulation of hemagglutinin-tagged RSK 
proteins immunopurified from epidermal growth factor-stimulated BHK-21 cells. 
K100A but not K451A RSK2 phosphorylates CTDtide, indicating a requirement for 
the CTD. RSK2-(aa1-389) phosphorylates the S6 peptide, and this activity is 
inactivated by S386A mutation, but RSK2-(aa1-389) does not phosphorylate 
CTDtide. In contrast, RSK2-(aa373-740) containing only the CTD phosphorylates 
CTDtide robustly. Thus, CTDtide is phosphorylated by the CTD but not the 
NH(2)-terminal domain (NTD). Epidermal growth factor activates the CTD and NTD 
in parallel. Activity of the CTD for peptide phosphorylation correlates with 
Thr(577) phosphorylation. CTDtide activity is constrained in full-length RSK2. 
Interestingly, mutation of the conserved lysine in the ATP-binding site of the 
NTD completely eliminates S6 kinase activity, but a similar mutation of the CTD 
does not completely ablate kinase activity for intramolecular phosphorylation of 
Ser(386), even though it greatly reduces CTDtide activity. The standard lysine 
mutation used routinely to study kinase functions in vivo may be unsatisfactory 
when the substrate is intramolecular or in a tight complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M202663200
PMID: 12016217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]