1. BMC Pharmacol. 2002 May 13;2:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2210-2-13.

Selective alteration of gene expression in response to natural and synthetic 
retinoids.

Brand C(1), Ségard P, Plouvier P, Formstecher P, Danzé PM, Lefebvre P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 459 and Ligue nationale contre le Cancer, Faculté de Médecine Henri 
Warembourg, 1, place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France. brand@lille.inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Retinoids are very potent inducers of cellular differentiation and 
apoptosis, and are efficient anti-tumoral agents. Synthetic retinoids are 
designed to restrict their toxicity and side effects, mostly by increasing their 
selectivity toward each isotype of retinoic acids receptors (RARalpha,beta, 
gamma and RXRalpha, beta, gamma). We however previously showed that retinoids 
displayed very different abilities to activate retinoid-inducible reporter 
genes, and that these differential properties were correlated to the ability of 
a given ligand to promote SRC-1 recruitment by DNA-bound RXR:RAR heterodimers. 
This suggested that gene-selective modulation could be achieved by structurally 
distinct retinoids.
RESULTS: Using the differential display mRNA technique, we identified several 
genes on the basis of their differential induction by natural or synthetic 
retinoids in human cervix adenocarcinoma cells. Furthermore, this differential 
ability to regulate promoter activities was also observed in murine P19 cells 
for the RARbeta2 and CRABPII gene, showing conclusively that retinoid structure 
has a dramatic impact on the regulation of endogenous genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings therefore show that some degree of selective induction 
or repression of gene expression may be achieved when using appropriately 
designed ligands for retinoic acid receptors, extending the concept of selective 
modulators from estrogen and peroxisome proliferator activated receptors to the 
class of retinoid receptors.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2210-2-13
PMCID: PMC113761
PMID: 12019025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]