1. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 May 15;11(11):1327-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.11.1327.

CGH-targeted linkage analysis reveals a possible BRCA1 modifier locus on 
chromosome 5q.

Nathanson KL(1), Shugart YY, Omaruddin R, Szabo C, Goldgar D, Rebbeck TR, Weber 
BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Women with germline mutations in BRCA1 have a greatly elevated risk of breast 
and ovarian cancer. However, considerable variation in the degree of breast 
cancer risk associated with a BRCA1 mutation has been observed, suggesting that 
modifiers of BRCA1 penetrance may exist. We hypothesized that the modifier genes 
might be located in regions of allelic imbalance in the tumors of BRCA1 mutation 
carriers, as have been reported on chromosomes 4p, 4q and 5q. In order to 
determine whether novel genetic modifiers of BRCA1-associated breast cancer 
penetrance in these regions exist, we used non-parametric linkage analysis 
methods to determine whether allele sharing of chromosomes 4p, 4q and 5q was 
observed preferentially within BRCA1 mutation families in women with BRCA1 
mutations and breast cancer. No significant linkage on chromosome 4p or 4q was 
observed associated with breast cancer risk in BRCA1 mutation carriers. However, 
we observed a significant linkage signal at D5S1471 on chromosome 5q (P = 0.009) 
in all the families analyzed together. The significance of this observation 
increased in the subset of families with an average of breast cancer diagnosis 
less than 45 years (P = 0.003). These results suggest the presence of one or 
more genes on chromosome 5q33-34 that modify breast cancer risk in BRCA1 
mutation carriers. The approach described here may be utilized to identify 
penetrance modifiers in other autosomal dominant syndromes.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/11.11.1327
PMID: 12019214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]