1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Mar;23(3):117-20.

[Identification of two novel mutation in two Chinese hereditary coagulation 
factor XIII deficiency families].

[Article in Chinese]

Duan B(1), Wang H, Chu H, Wang X, Qu B, Li D, Wang H, Yin J, Kang W, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical 
University, Shanghai 200025, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore gene defect of hereditary coagulation factor XIII 
deficiency.
METHODS: PCR and gene sequencing or ARMS-PCR were used to detect the FXIIIA gene 
of peripheral white blood cell (PBC) from two Chinese hereditary coagulation 
factor XIII deficiency family members and 60 normal subjects respectively. The 
level of FXIIIA gene mRNA was tested by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: (1) Nucleotide sequence analysis of the two probands' and their family 
members' DNA revealed that all of the three patients had homozygous missense 
mutation in FXIII A subunit gene. Proband 1 had a C to G transition at 
nucleotide (nt) 1 241 in exon 10 and proband 2 and his sister a C to T 
transition at nt 232 in exon 3 of FXIII A gene, which resulted in the 
substitution of Ser413 with Trp and Arg 77 with Cys, respectively. Family study 
showed that the two mutations were inherited from the parents who were 
correspondingly heterozygotes at nt 1 241 or nt 232. (2) The two mutations were 
not found in the normal subjects. (3) The FXIIIA gene mRNA level in the two 
probands was a little decreasing.
CONCLUSION: It is the two novel mutations that results in FXIIIA deficiency. The 
two mutations of FXIIIA gene may affect its function or alter protein folding. 
The defective FXIII which is unstable and degraded rapidly in cytoplasm may be 
the main cause of FXIII deficiency.

PMID: 12015062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]