1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27109-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200354200. Epub 
2002 May 17.

Identification of the disulfide bonds in the recombinant somatomedin B domain of 
human vitronectin.

Kamikubo Y(1), Okumura Y, Loskutoff DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Division of Vascular Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The NH(2)-terminal somatomedin B (SMB) domain (residues 1-44) of human 
vitronectin contains eight Cys residues organized into four disulfide bonds and 
is required for the binding of type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1). 
In the present study, we map the four disulfide bonds in recombinant SMB (rSMB) 
and evaluate their functional importance. Active rSMB was purified from 
transformed Escherichia coli by immunoaffinity chromatography using a monoclonal 
antibody that recognizes a conformational epitope in SMB (monoclonal antibody 
153). Plasmon surface resonance (BIAcore) and competitive enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays demonstrate that the purified rSMB domain and intact 
urea-activated vitronectin have similar PAI-1 binding activities. The individual 
disulfide linkages present in active rSMB were investigated by CNBr cleavage, 
partial reduction and S-alkylation, mass spectrometry, and protein sequencing. 
Two pairs of disulfide bonds at the NH(2)-terminal portion of active rSMB were 
identified as Cys(5)-Cys(9) and Cys(19)-Cys(21). Selective 
reduction/S-alkylation of these two disulfide linkages caused the complete loss 
of PAI-1 binding activity. The other two pairs of disulfide bonds in the 
COOH-terminal portion of rSMB were identified as Cys(25)-Cys(31) and 
Cys(32)-Cys(39) by protease-generated peptide mapping of partially reduced and 
S-alkylated rSMB. These results suggest a linear uncrossed pattern for the 
disulfide bond topology of rSMB that is distinct from the crossed pattern 
present in most small disulfide bond-rich proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200354200
PMID: 12019263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]