1. Biochemistry. 2002 Jun 4;41(22):7021-9. doi: 10.1021/bi012108c.

Tryptophan 80 and leucine 143 are critical for the hydride transfer step of 
thymidylate synthase by controlling active site access.

Fritz TA(1), Liu L, Finer-Moore JS, Stroud RM.

Author information:
(1)Macromolecular Structure Group, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
The University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California 
94143-0448, USA.

Mutant forms of thymidylate synthase (TS) with substitutions at the conserved 
active site residue, Trp 80, are deficient in the hydride transfer step of the 
TS reaction. These mutants produce a beta-mercaptoethanol (beta-ME) adduct of 
the 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate (dUMP) exocyclic methylene intermediate. 
Trp 80 has been proposed to assist hydride transfer by stabilizing a 
5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate (THF) radical cation intermediate [Barrett, J. E., 
Lucero, C. M., and Schultz, P. G. (1999) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 7965-7966.] 
formed after THF changes its binding from the cofactor pocket to a putative 
alternate site. To understand the molecular basis of hydride transfer deficiency 
in a mutant in which Trp 80 was changed to Gly, we determined the X-ray 
structures of this mutant Escherichia coli TS complexed with dUMP and the folate 
analogue 10-propargyl-5,8-dideazafolate (CB3717) and of the wild-type enzyme 
complexed with dUMP and THF. The mutant enzyme has a cavity in the active site 
continuous with bulk solvent. This cavity, sealed from bulk solvent in wild-type 
TS by Leu 143, would allow nucleophilic attack of beta-ME on the dUMP C5 
exocyclic methylene. The structure of the wild-type enzyme/dUMP/THF complex 
shows that THF is bound in the cofactor binding pocket and is well positioned to 
transfer hydride to the dUMP exocyclic methylene. Together, these results 
suggest that THF does not reorient during hydride transfer and indicate that the 
role of Trp 80 may be to orient Leu 143 to shield the active site from bulk 
solvent and to optimally position the cofactor for hydride transfer.

DOI: 10.1021/bi012108c
PMID: 12033935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]