1. Clin Genet. 2002 Apr;61(4):299-304. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2002.610410.x.

Cognitive function in Coffin-Lowry syndrome.

Simensen RJ(1), Abidi F, Collins JS, Schwartz CE, Stevenson RE.

Author information:
(1)J. C. Self Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, SC 
29646, USA. simensen@ggc.org

Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked disorder associated with mental 
retardation, distinctive facies and hands, hypotonia, and skeletal 
abnormalities. The syndrome results from mutations in the RSK2 gene located in 
Xp22.2. Although the syndrome has been elucidated clinically, few, if any, 
studies have focused on the cognitive deficits of the affected males or carrier 
females. The subjects of the present study were selected from two 
African-American families who have the same missense mutation (C340T) in RSK2. 
The subjects included six affected males, seven carrier females, three normal 
males and three non-carrier (normal) females. Normal family members served as 
contrast/comparison cohorts to control for socio-economic, sociocultural and 
genetic variables which would impinge on intellectual abilities. Analysis of 
cognitive function, as measured by the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 4th 
edn, demonstrated a distinct hierarchy of abilities from normal to carrier to 
affected patients. The mean composite IQs of the cohorts were 90.8, 65.0 and 
43.2 for normal, carrier and affected individuals, respectively. These findings 
lend support to the clinical concept of negative intellectual effects in 
carriers of certain X-linked mental retardation conditions. X-inactivation 
studies showed that carrier females had mild to significant skewing. Normal 
females in the family did not demonstrate skewing. The correlation coefficient 
between IQ and X-inactivation status among carriers was not significant.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2002.610410.x
PMID: 12030896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]