1. Metabolism. 2002 Jun;51(6):724-32. doi: 10.1053/meta.2002.32729.

Estrogen replacement therapy, thrombophilia, and atherothrombosis.

Glueck CJ(1), Wang P, Fontaine RN, Sieve-Smith L, Lang JE.

Author information:
(1)Cholesterol Center, Jewish Hospital, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

In a consecutive case series, cross-sectional study of 401 women referred for 
hyperlipidemia therapy, (110 [27%] on estrogen replacement therapy [ERT]), we 
assessed whether ERT-mediated thrombophilia and heritable thrombophilia (20210 
G-->A prothrombin gene [PTG], Factor V Leiden gene mutation [FV]) interacted as 
risk factors for atherothrombotic cardiovascular disease (ATCVD). Thirty-eight 
percent of women (152/401) had > or = 1 ATCVD event, 57 (14%) had > or = 2 ATCVD 
events. Fifteen women (3.7%) were PTG heterozygotes, 24 (6.0%) were FV 
heterozygotes, (there was 1 double heterozygote [0.25%]); 363 (91%) were 
wild-type normal for both genes. Of the 152 women with > or = 1 ATCVD event, 21 
(14%) had > or = 1 thrombophilic gene mutation, versus 17/249 (7%) without 
events (X(2) = 5.4, P =.02). In women on ERT and with both genes wild-type 
normal, 23 of 96 (24%) had > or = 1 ATCVD event versus 8 of 14 (57%) on ERT and 
with > or = 1 thrombophilic mutation, X(2) = 6.6, P =.01. By stepwise logistic 
regression, in 401 women (152 with > or = 1 ATCVD event, 249 no events), 
positive explanatory variables for ATCVD included FV and/or PTG (risk odds 
ratio, 2.59, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.26 to 5.36, P =.01) and a PTG*ERT 
interaction term (risk odds ratio, 2.27, 95% CI 1.36 to 3.79, P =.0017). After 
deleting 23 FV heterozygotes and 14 PTG heterozygotes and 1 double heterozygote 
from the 401 women, ERT was protective against ATCVD events, with a risk odds 
ratio of 0.50 and 95% CI of 0.29 to 0.87 P =.014. PTG and FV may increase risk 
for ATCVD, particularly in the presence of ERT, whereas ERT may be protective 
against ATCVD when PTG and FV are absent.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/meta.2002.32729
PMID: 12037725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]