1. Metabolism. 2002 Jun;51(6):801-5. doi: 10.1053/meta.2002.32781.

No effect of the Trp64Arg beta(3)-adrenoceptor gene variant on weight loss, body 
composition, or energy expenditure in obese, caucasian postmenopausal women.

Rawson ES(1), Nolan A, Silver K, Shuldiner AR, Poehlman ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.

The Trp64Arg polymorphism in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor gene has been associated 
with increased prevalence of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and low rates of energy 
expenditure, although these findings are not unanimous. It is currently unknown 
if the presence of the Trp64Arg gene variant impedes the loss of body weight in 
obese, postmenopausal women via a reducing effect on energy expenditure. The 
objective of this study was to compare body composition and energy expenditure 
in carriers and noncarriers of the Trp64Arg variant in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor 
before and after weight loss. We measured body composition, total daily energy 
expenditure (TEE), resting metabolic rate (RMR), physical activity energy 
expenditure (PAEE), thermic effect of feeding (TEF), and respiratory quotient 
(RQ) in 34 obese, postmenopausal women (19 carriers and 15 noncarriers for the 
Trp64Arg variant) before and after a weight loss intervention. There were no 
differences in body composition or daily energy expenditure and its components 
between the 2 groups at baseline. There were significant reductions in body 
mass, body mass index (BMI), percent body fat, fat-free mass, and fat mass (main 
effect, all P <.0001) when analyzed with the 2 genotypes combined, but no 
significant differences between carriers and noncarriers with respect to change 
in these variables (group x time interaction term, all P >.05). Total energy 
expenditure tended to be reduced (490 kJ x d(-1), P =.13) in both groups 
following weight loss, but there was no significant group x time interaction 
term (P =.78), indicating no difference in the response of the 2 genotypes. 
There was a 9% reduction in RMR (611 kJ x d(-1), P <.001) when both groups were 
considered together, but no significant group x time interaction term (P =.84), 
suggesting that both groups responded in a similar manner to the weight loss 
intervention. PAEE and the TEF were not different following weight loss (both P 
>.60). There was a trend for RQ to be reduced after weight loss (P =.07), but 
there was no difference between carriers or noncarriers of the Trp64Arg variant 
(P =.58). In summary, we found that obese postmenopausal women who carry the 
Trp64Arg variant in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor had similar changes in body 
composition and energy expenditure to noncarriers of the variant in response to 
prolonged caloric restriction. These results suggest that the presence of the 
Trp64Arg variant in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor should not be a hindrance to weight 
reduction.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/meta.2002.32781
PMID: 12037740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]