1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002 Jun 5;94(11):844-51. doi: 10.1093/jnci/94.11.844.

Pretest prediction of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation by risk counselors and the 
computer model BRCAPRO.

Euhus DM(1), Smith KC, Robinson L, Stucky A, Olopade OI, Cummings S, Garber JE, 
Chittenden A, Mills GB, Rieger P, Esserman L, Crawford B, Hughes KS, Roche CA, 
Ganz PA, Seldon J, Fabian CJ, Klemp J, Tomlinson G.

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75390-9155, 
USA. david.euhus@UTSouthwestern.edu

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002 Oct 16;94(20):1582-3; author reply 1583-4. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/94.20.1582.

BACKGROUND: Because BRCA gene mutation testing is costly, occasionally 
uninformative, and frequently associated with ethical and legal issues, careful 
patient selection is required prior to testing. Estimation of BRCA gene mutation 
probability is an important component of pretest counseling, but the accuracy of 
these estimates is currently unknown. We measured the performance of eight 
cancer risk counselors and of a computer model, BRCAPRO, at identifying families 
likely to carry a BRCA gene mutation.
METHODS: Eight cancer risk counselors and the computer model BRCAPRO estimated 
BRCA gene mutation probabilities for 148 pedigrees selected from an initial 
sample of 272 pedigrees. The final sample was limited to pedigrees with a 
proband affected by breast or ovarian cancer and BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene sequencing 
results unequivocally reported as negative or positive for a deleterious 
mutation. Sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value, positive 
predictive value, and areas under receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curves 
were calculated for each risk counselor and for BRCAPRO. All statistical tests 
were two sided.
RESULTS: Using a greater-than-10% BRCA gene mutation probability threshold, the 
median sensitivity for identifying mutation carriers was 94% (range = 81% to 
98%) for the eight risk counselors and 92% (range = 91% to 92%) for BRCAPRO. 
Median specificity at this threshold was 16% (range = 6% to 34%) for the risk 
counselors and 32% (range = 30% to 34%) for BRCAPRO (P =.04). Median area under 
the ROC curves was 0.671 for the risk counselors (range = 0.620 to 0.717) and 
0.712 (range = 0.706 to 0.720) for BRCAPRO (P =.04). There was a slight, but not 
statistically significant, improvement in all counselor performance measures 
when BRCAPRO-assigned gene mutation probability information was included with 
the pedigrees.
CONCLUSIONS: Sensitivity for identifying BRCA gene mutation carriers is similar 
for experienced risk counselors and the computer model BRCAPRO. Because the 
computer model consistently demonstrated superior specificity, overall 
discrimination between BRCA gene mutation carriers and BRCA gene mutation 
noncarriers was slightly better for BRCAPRO.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/94.11.844
PMID: 12048272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]