1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 16;277(33):30368-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203993200. Epub 
2002 May 31.

Mutagenesis of p22(phox) histidine 94. A histidine in this position is not 
required for flavocytochrome b558 function.

Biberstine-Kinkade KJ(1), Yu L, Stull N, LeRoy B, Bennett S, Cross A, Dinauer 
MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics (Hematology/Oncology), Herman B. Wells Center for 
Pediatric Research, Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5225, USA.

The NADPH oxidase is a multicomponent enzyme that transfers electrons from NADPH 
to O2 to generate superoxide (O2*-), the precursor of microbicidal oxygen 
species that play an important role in host defense. Flavocytochrome b558, a 
heterodimeric oxidoreductase comprised of gp91(phox) and p22(phox) subunits, 
contains two nonidentical, bis-histidine-ligated heme groups imbedded within the 
membrane. Four histidine residues that appear to serve as noncovalent axial heme 
ligands reside within the hydrophobic N terminus of gp91(phox), but the role of 
p22(phox) in heme binding is unclear. We compared biochemical and functional 
features of wild type flavocytochrome b558 with those in cells co-expressing 
gp91(phox) with p22(phox) harboring amino acid substitutions at histidine 94, 
the only invariant histidine residue within the p22(phox) subunit. Substitution 
with leucine, tyrosine, or methionine did not affect heterodimer formation or 
flavocytochrome b558 function. The heme spectrum in purified preparations of 
flavocytochrome b558 containing the p22(phox) derivative was unaffected. In 
contrast, substitution of histidine 94 with arginine appeared to disrupt the 
intrinsic stability of p22(phox) and, secondarily, the stability of mature 
gp91(phox) and abrogated O2*- production. These findings demonstrate that His94 
p22(phox) is not required for heme binding or function of flavocytochrome b558 
in the NADPH oxidase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203993200
PMID: 12042318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]