1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2002 Mar-Apr;28(2):249-59. doi: 10.1006/bcmd.2002.0505.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in Portugal: biochemical and 
mutational profiles, heterogeneity, and haplotype association.

Rodrigues MO(1), Freire AP, Martins G, Pereira J, Martins MD, Monteiro C.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Av Padre Cruz, Lisbon, 
P-1649-016, Portugal. odete.rodrigues@insa.min-saude.pt

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is the most common human 
enzymopathy. This deficiency in erythrocytes has a prevalence of 0.51 +/- 0.109 
in the Caucasoid male population of Portugal. The frequency for 
deficiency-conferring genes is 0.39% in the Portuguese population. In the herein 
study populations males from areas of Portugal presenting with the highest 
prevalence of G6PD deficiency (Castelo Branco, Setúbal, Faro, and Lisbon) as 
well as similar subjects located in the border Center/North area of the country 
(Viseu) have been analyzed for biochemical parameters and screened for mutations 
and haplotype-associated mutations commensurate with G6PD deficiency. Six 
intragenic restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) were studied: exon 
5, nt 376 A -->G, FokI; intron 5, nt 611 C--> G, PvuII; intron 8, nt 163 C--> T, 
BspHI; exon 10, nt 116 G --> A, PstI; exon 11, nt 1311 C--> T, BclI; and intron 
11, nt 93 T -->C, NlaIII. New haplotypes were constructed with the inclusion of 
intron 11, nt 93 T--> C, NlaIII, and only 5 of 64 possible haplotypes were found 
to show a marked linkage disequilibrium for several RFLPs and also for mutations 
and specific haplotypes. The control population (n = 168 males) presented the 
G6PD B variant and corresponded to haplotypes I (- - + + - -), Ia (- - + + - +), 
and VIIa (- - + + + +), in 91.8, 2.3, and 5.9%, respectively. The PCR and 
sequencing analysis of extracted DNAs from the deficient G6PD group showed 48.6% 
(16/33) of individuals with the G6PD A- mutation, corresponding to haplotype VIa 
(+ + - + - +); 9% (3/33) with the Betica mutation and 18% (6/33) with the Santa 
Maria mutation, both of them associated with haplotype IVa (+ - - + \- +); 6.1% 
(2/33) with the Mediterranean mutation associated with haplotype VIIa; 12.3% 
(4/33) with the Seattle mutation, 3.0% (1/33) with Gaohe mutation; and a new 
mutation, 3.0% (1/33), which we designated by G6PD Flores, all of them 
associated with haplotype I.

DOI: 10.1006/bcmd.2002.0505
PMID: 12064920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]