1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2002 Jul;71(1):26-35. doi: 10.1007/s00223-001-2081-z. Epub 
2002 Jun 20.

Investigation of the genetic influence of the OPG, VDR (Fok1), and COLIA1 Sp1 
polymorphisms on BMD in the Irish population.

Wynne F(1), Drummond F, O'Sullivan K, Daly M, Shanahan F, Molloy MG, Quane KA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Rheumatology, University College, Cork, Ireland.

Low bone mineral density (BMD) is a major risk factor for the development of 
osteoporosis and there is strong evidence to suggest that the procurement and 
preservation of peak BMD is genetically determined. In an effort to identify 
factors responsible for susceptibility to low BMD in the Irish population, we 
investigated its possible association with polymorphisms in the Osteoprotegerin 
(OPG) gene, Type I collagen alpha 1 (COLIA1) Sp1 binding site and vitamin D 
receptor (VDR) start codon. Following a systematic screening of the regulatory 
and coding regions of the OPG gene, we identified a novel G1181C polymorphism in 
exon 1 and a T950C polymorphism in the promoter region of the OPG gene. 
Participants were recruited from the Bone Densitometry Unit of Cork University 
Hospital, including 381 postmenopausal women aged 61.26 +/- 8.50 (mean +/- SD) 
and 130 premenopausal women aged 46.30 +/- 6.50 (mean +/- SD). Following 
association analysis using both the premenopausal and postmenopausal cohorts we 
found that postmenopausal women carrying one or more C alleles of the G1181C 
polymorphism had 14.8% lower BMD (P = 0.05) at the lumbar spine and 14.4% lower 
BMD (P = 0.04) at the FN. However, both were nonsignificant when the Bonferroni 
correction factor (0.01 significance level) was applied to correct for multiple 
hypothesis testing. We found no association between alleles of the T950C OPG 
polymorphism and BMD. Similarly, we have found a lack of association between the 
VDR (fok1) polymorphism or COLIA1 Sp1 polymorphism and low BMD in either 
postmenopausal or premenopausal women in this population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-001-2081-z
PMID: 12073153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]