1. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2002 Jun;93(6):636-43. doi: 
10.1111/j.1349-7006.2002.tb01301.x.

Identification of genes associated with dedifferentiation of hepatocellular 
carcinoma with expression profiling analysis.

Midorikawa Y(1), Tsutsumi S, Taniguchi H, Ishii M, Kobune Y, Kodama T, Makuuchi 
M, Aburatani H.

Author information:
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904.

To identify the genes associated with dedifferentiation of hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC), gene expression profiles of HCCs of well-and moderately 
differentiated grades were compared by means of oligonucleotide arrays. One 
tumor showed a nodule-in-nodule appearance (NIN), which is occasionally observed 
in the course of progression of HCC from well to less differentiated grade, when 
an inner, moderately differentiated tumor (MD) develops sequentially from the 
outer, well-differentiated tumor (WD). Seventy-six genes were identified to be 
up-regulated more than 3-fold and 33 genes were down-regulated in the inner 
nodule in NIN. By statistical analysis of the profiles from 10 individual 
additional liver tumors, 5 WDs and 5 MDs, we were able to identify 12 genes, 
LAMA3, PPIB, ADAR, PSMD4, NDUFS8, D9SVA, CCT3, GBAP, ARD1, RDBP, CSRP2, and 
TLE1, with significantly elevated expression, and 4 genes, CP, IL7R, CD48, and 
PLGL, with decreased expression in MD. These selected genes were further 
validated using another 12 tumors, 5 WDs and 7 MDs, with semi-quantitative 
RT-PCR. We also applied neighborhood analysis to list the genes with high 
predictability values as most closely correlated with WD-MD distinction. Seven 
genes, ADAR, PSMD4, D9SVA, CCT3, GBAP, RDBP, and CSRP2, whose expression was 
elevated and one gene, IL7R, whose expression was decreased, were included among 
the top 50 predictor genes. These genes are likely to be associated with 
dedifferentiation of HCC and their identification may help to elucidate the 
mechanism of liver cancer progression.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2002.tb01301.x
PMCID: PMC5927043
PMID: 12079511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]