1. Haematologica. 2002 Jul;87(7):751-6; discussion 756.

Methionine synthase polymorphism A2756G is associated with susceptibility for 
thromboembolic events and altered B vitamin/thiol metabolism.

Yates Z(1), Lucock M.

Author information:
(1)University of Leeds, West Yorkshire, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Vitamin B12 dependent methionine synthase (MS) 
regulates de novo production of methionine from homocysteine (Hcy). Since 
moderate elevations in Hcy are considered vasculotoxic, we examined a common 
variant (A2756G-MS) of the gene coding for this enzyme as a risk for 
thromboembolism.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated A2756G-MS and folate/thiol status in 51 
individuals who had experienced a thromboembolic event (TE) and 95 subjects 
being treated for non-thromboembolic (NTE) vascular problems.
RESULTS: The prevalence of the mutant G allele was lower in TE subjects than in 
controls, indicating a protective role for this base substitution (OR 0.39; 
95%CI 0.20-0.78; p=0.010). Consistent with an advantage conferred by this 
allele, heterozygotes had generally lower levels of Hcy and glutathione (GSH), 
and higher levels of B-vitamins than wildtypes. The OR for the wildtype having 
an increased risk for TE was 2.32 (95%CI 1.06-5.08). Additionally, as might be 
predicted, TE-wildtypes had elevated GSH levels compared to corresponding 
NTE-wildtypes (p=0.004) - a likely response to oxidative stress. NTE subjects 
showed a dramatic reduction in Hcy between wildtype and heterozygote (p=0.017), 
and again between recessive and heterozygote genotypes (p=0.002). The same 
pattern, although not significant, occurred in TE subjects. The similarity in 
Hcy between clinical groups for each genotype raises questions on the 
etiological role of Hcy in TE. The functional relationship between enzyme 
variant and its B12-cofactor may be of more interest, since the polymorphic site 
occurs near the B12-binding domain, and our results indicate wildtype-TE 
subjects have a much lower level of vitamin B12 than heterozygote-TE subjects 
(p=0.0019). This effect is attenuated in NTE subjects.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: . A2756G-MS may protect against a thromboembolic 
event. The role of Hcy remains unclear.

PMID: 12091127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]