1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jul;87(7):3344-50. doi: 10.1210/jcem.87.7.8674.

Novel mutations responsible for autosomal recessive multisystem 
pseudohypoaldosteronism and sequence variants in epithelial sodium channel 
alpha-, beta-, and gamma-subunit genes.

Saxena A(1), Hanukoglu I, Saxena D, Thompson RJ, Gardiner RM, Hanukoglu A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, The College of Judea 
and Samaria, Ariel 44837, Israel.

Multisystem pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA), is a syndrome of unresponsiveness to 
aldosterone with autosomal recessive inheritance. Previously we showed that 
mutations in the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) alpha-, beta-, and 
gamma-subunits are responsible for PHA. In this study we examined four 
independent probands with multisystem PHA, three of whom were born to 
consanguineous parents. In our search for mutations we also determined the 
complete coding sequences of each of the three genes encoding alpha-, beta-, and 
gamma-subunits in individuals representing different ethnic groups. Our analyses 
revealed the following homozygous mutations in three probands: 1) insertion of a 
T in exon 8 of the alpha ENaC gene that causes a frameshift error at Tyr(447) 
and leads to a premature stop codon at K459 in a Pakistani patient; 2) R508stop 
mutation in exon 11 of the alpha ENaC gene in an Indian patient; and 3) a splice 
site mutation in intron 12 of the beta ENaC gene (1669 + 1 g-->a) in a Scottish 
patient. The parents were heterozygous for the latter two mutations. The second 
mutation was previously observed in an Iranian Jewish patient. Our sequencing of 
the alpha-, beta-, and gamma-coding sequences revealed some sequence variants, 
some of which may represent single nucleotide polymorphisms. The gamma-subunit 
protein sequence was completely conserved in the six subjects examined. The 
homozygous mutations identified in the alpha and beta ENaC genes should result 
in reduced or abolished ENaC activity in PHA patients, explaining the disease 
symptoms.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.87.7.8674
PMID: 12107247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]