1. Hum Genet. 2002 Jun;110(6):568-77. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0729-z. Epub 2002
Apr  20.

Allelic and locus heterogeneity in autosomal recessive gelatinous drop-like 
corneal dystrophy.

Ren Z(1), Lin PY, Klintworth GK, Iwata F, Munier FL, Schorderet DF, El Matri L, 
Theendakara V, Basti S, Reddy M, Hejtmancik JF.

Author information:
(1)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. 
20892-1860, USA.

Gelatinous drop-like corneal dystrophy (GDLD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disease characterized by the deposition of amyloid beneath the corneal 
epithelium and by severely impaired visual acuity leading to blindness. Although 
gelatinous corneal dystrophy has previously been mapped to chromosome 1p and 
seems to be associated with mutations in the M1S1 gene, molecular genetic 
studies have been limited to Japanese patients. To investigate the cause of GDLD 
in patients with diverse ethnic backgrounds, we performed linkage analyses in 
eight unrelated GDLD families from India, USA, Europe, and Tunisia. In seven of 
these families, the disease locus mapped to a 16-cM interval on the short arm of 
chromosome 1 between markers D1S519 and D1S2835, a region including the M1S1 
gene. In addition, a 1.2-kb fragment containing the entire coding region of M1S1 
gene was sequenced in affected individuals. Seven novel mutations (M1R, 8-bp 
ins., Q118 E, V194 E, C119 S, 870delC, and 1117delA) were identified in six 
families and two unrelated individuals. No sequence abnormalities were detected 
in a single family in which the GDLD locus was also excluded from the M1S1 
region by linkage analysis. These findings demonstrate allelic and locus 
heterogeneity for GDLD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-002-0729-z
PMID: 12107443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]