1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):33220-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204624200. Epub
2002  Jun 24.

Prediction of novel Bag-1 homologs based on structure/function analysis 
identifies Snl1p as an Hsp70 co-chaperone in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Sondermann H(1), Ho AK, Listenberger LL, Siegers K, Moarefi I, Wente SR, Hartl 
FU, Young JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Biochemie, 
D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Polypeptide binding by the chaperone Hsp70 is regulated by its ATPase activity, 
which is itself regulated by co-chaperones including the Bag domain nucleotide 
exchange factors. Here, we tested the functional contribution of residues in the 
Bag domain of Bag-1M that contact Hsp70. Two point mutations, E212A and E219A, 
partially reduced co-chaperone activity, whereas the point mutation R237A 
completely abolished activity in vitro. Based on the strict positional 
conservation of the Arg-237 residue, several Bag domain proteins were predicted 
from various eukaryotic genomes. One candidate, Snl1p from Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, was confirmed as a Bag domain co-chaperone. Snl1p bound specifically 
to the Ssa and Ssb forms of yeast cytosolic Hsp70, as revealed by two-hybrid 
screening and co-precipitations from yeast lysate. In vitro, Snl1p also 
recognized mammalian Hsp70 and regulated the Hsp70 ATPase activity identically 
to Bag-1M. Point mutations in Snl1p that disrupted the conserved residues 
Glu-112 and Arg-141, equivalent to Glu-212 and Arg-237 in Bag-1M, abolished the 
interaction with Hsp70 proteins. In live yeast, mutated Snl1p could not 
substitute for wild-type Snl1p in suppressing the lethal defect caused by 
truncation of the Nup116p nuclear pore component. Thus, Snl1p is the first Bag 
domain protein identified in S. cerevisiae, and its interaction with Hsp70 is 
essential for biological activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204624200
PMID: 12105220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]