1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;34(10):1268-78. doi: 
10.1016/s1357-2725(02)00060-2.

Structural characterization and phylogenetic relationships of myotoxin II from 
Atropoides (Bothrops) nummifer snake venom, a Lys49 phospholipase A(2) 
homologue.

Angulo Y(1), Olamendi-Portugal T, Alape-Girón A, Possani LD, Lomonte B.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Clodomiro Picado, Facultad de Microbiología, Universidad de Costa 
Rica, San José, Costa Rica.

In order to analyze its structure-function relationships, the complete amino 
acid sequence of myotoxin II from Atropoides (Bothrops) nummifer from Costa Rica 
was determined. This toxin is a Lys49-type phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) 
homologue, devoid of catalytic activity, structurally belonging to class IIA. In 
addition to the Asp49 --> Lys change in the (inactive) catalytic center, 
substitutions in the calcium-binding loop suggest that its lack of enzymatic 
activity is due to the loss of ability to bind Ca(2+). The toxin occurs as a 
homodimer of basic subunits of 121 residues. Its sequence has highest similarity 
to Lys49 PLA(2)s from Cerrophidion, Trimeresurus, Bothrops and Agkistrodon 
species, which form a subfamily of proteins that diverged early from Asp49 
PLA(2)s present in the same species, as shown by phylogenetic analysis. The 
tertiary structure of the toxin was modeled, based on the coordinates of 
Cerrophidion godmani myotoxin II. Its exposed C-terminal region 115-129 shows 
several differences in comparison to the homologous sequences of other Lys49 
PLA(2)s, i.e. from Agkistrodon p. piscivorus and Bothrops asper. Region 115-129 
of the latter two proteins has been implicated in myotoxic activity, on the 
basis of the direct membrane-damaging of their corresponding synthetic peptides. 
However, peptide 115-129 of A. nummifer myotoxin II did not exert toxicity upon 
cultured skeletal muscle cells or mature muscle in vivo. Differences in several 
amino acid residues, either critical for toxicity, or influencing the 
conformation of free peptide 115-129 from A. nummifer myotoxin II, may account 
for its lack of direct membrane-damaging properties.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/s1357-2725(02)00060-2
PMID: 12127577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]