1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002 Aug;302(2):751-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.102.033746.

Wild-type and A328W mutant human butyrylcholinesterase tetramers expressed in 
Chinese hamster ovary cells have a 16-hour half-life in the circulation and 
protect mice from cocaine toxicity.

Duysen EG(1), Bartels CF, Lockridge O.

Author information:
(1)Eppley Institute, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 986806 Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6805, USA.

Human butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) hydrolyzes cocaine to inactive metabolites. A 
mutant of human BChE, A328W, hydrolyzed cocaine 15-fold faster compared with 
wild-type BChE. Although the catalytic properties of human BChE secreted by 
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are identical to those of native BChE, a major 
difference became evident when the recombinant BChE was injected into rats and 
mice. Recombinant BChE disappeared from the circulation within minutes, whereas 
native BChE stayed in the blood for a week. Nondenaturing gel electrophoresis 
showed that the recombinant BChE consisted mainly of monomers and dimers. In 
contrast, native BChE is a tetramer. The problem of the short residence time was 
solved by finding a method to assemble the recombinant BChE into tetramers. 
Coexpression in CHO cells of BChE and 45 residues from the N terminus of the 
COLQ protein yielded 70% tetrameric BChE. The resulting purified recombinant 
BChE tetramers had a half-life of 16 h in the circulation of rats and mice. The 
16-h half-life was achieved without modifying the carbohydrate content of 
recombinant BChE. The protective effect of recombinant wild-type and A328W 
mutant BChE against cocaine toxicity was tested by measuring locomotor activity 
in mice. Pretreatment with wild-type BChE or A328W tetramers at a dose of 2.8 
units/g i.p. reduced cocaine-induced locomotor activity by 50 and 80%. These 
results indicate that recombinant human BChE could be useful for treating 
cocaine toxicity in humans.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.102.033746
PMID: 12130740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]