1. Br J Haematol. 2002 Aug;118(2):610-4. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.2002.03624.x.

Prothrombin A19911G and G20210A polymorphisms' role in thrombosis.

Pérez-Ceballos E(1), Corral J, Alberca I, Vayá A, Llamas P, Montes R, 
González-Conejero R, Vicente V.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Services, Hospital General Universitario, Murcia, Spain.

The prothrombin G20210A polymorphism, which correlates with the plasmatic 
prothombin levels, is the second genetic risk factor for deep venous thrombosis 
(DVT), although its prothrombotic role is mild. Recently, the prothrombin 
A19911G polymorphism, also associated with slight variations of the prothrombin 
level, has been suggested to modulate the thrombotic risk of the G20210A 
polymorphism in a preliminary study including few patients and controls. Our 
study evaluated the effect of the A19911G polymorphism in the arterial and 
venous thrombotic risk of the prothrombin 20210G/A genotype, analysing 204 
consecutive DVT patients and 204 matched controls. Moreover, we analysed 213 
carriers of the 20210G/A genotype (152 with DVT, 26 with arterial thrombosis and 
35 healthy subjects) and 10 homozygous 20210 A/A carriers. We developed a simple 
method to simultaneously determine the genotype of both polymorphisms. In 
accordance with our case/control study, the A19911G polymorphism did not play a 
significant role in the development of DVT. Analysis of 120 20210 A alleles 
demonstrated a complete linkage disequilibrium with the 19911 A allele. These 
polymorphisms (alone or combined) did not modify the risk of arterial 
thrombosis. However, the 19911A/G genotype slightly increased the risk of 
developing DVT in carriers of the 20210G/A genotype (OR 3.34 vs 5.86), 
supporting that the prothrombin 19911 polymorphism could modulate the risk of 
the G20210A polymorphism in developing DVT.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2141.2002.03624.x
PMID: 12139755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]