1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5835-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.16.5835-5845.2002.

Regulation of estrogen receptor nuclear export by ligand-induced and 
p38-mediated receptor phosphorylation.

Lee H(1), Bai W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of South Florida College of Medicine, and 
Program of Molecular Oncology and Drug Discovery, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, 
Tampa, Florida 33612-4799, USA.

Estrogen receptors are phosphoproteins which can be activated by ligands, kinase 
activators, or phosphatase inhibitors. Our previous study showed that p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase was involved in estrogen receptor activation by 
estrogens and MEKK1. Here, we report estrogen receptor-dependent p38 activation 
by estrogens in endometrial adenocarcinoma cells and in vitro and in vivo 
phosphorylation of the estrogen receptor alpha mediated through p38. The 
phosphorylation site was identified as threonine-311 (Thr(311)), located in 
helix 1 of the hormone-binding domain. The mutation of threonine-311 to alanine 
did not affect estrogen binding of the receptor but compromised its interaction 
with coactivators. Suppression of p38 activity or mutation of the site inhibited 
the estrogen-induced receptor nuclear localization as well as its 
transcriptional activation by estrogens and MEKK1. The inhibition of the p38 
signal pathway by a specific chemical inhibitor blocked the biological 
activities of estrogens in regulating endogenous gene expression as well as 
endometrial cancer cell growth. Our studies demonstrate the role of estrogen 
receptor phosphorylation induced by the natural ligand in estrogen receptor's 
cellular distribution and its significant contribution to the growth-stimulating 
activity of estrogens in endometrial cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.16.5835-5845.2002
PMCID: PMC133965
PMID: 12138194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]