1. Oncogene. 2002 Aug 8;21(34):5346-55. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205670.

Repression of c-Cbl leads to enhanced G-CSF Jak-STAT signaling without increased 
cell proliferation.

Wang L(1), Rudert WA, Loutaev I, Roginskaya V, Corey SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Engagement of the Granulocyte-Colony-Stimulating Factor (G-CSF) receptor 
activates non-receptor protein tyrosine kinases Lyn and Jak2. We found that 
Lyn-deficient DT40 cells that express the G-CSF receptor (DT40GR) do not 
demonstrate G-CSF-induced mitogenic signaling. Lyn associates with and 
phosphorylates a small set of molecules, including c-Cbl. c-Cbl is an adaptor 
involved in cell growth and cytoskeletal reorganization, predominantly in 
hematopoietic cells. Using yeast two-hybrid analysis, we found that c-Cbl 
directly couples Lyn to PI 3-kinase. We also found that expression of the 
c-CblY731F mutant, which uncouples PI 3-kinase, resulted in the inhibition of 
G-CSF-induced proliferative signaling in DT40GR cells. As a complementary 
strategy, we sought to analyse the effects of c-Cbl deficiency in DT40GR cells. 
We isolated, cloned and sequenced the full-length cDNA for chicken c-Cbl and 
constructed antisense vectors. Antisense inhibition of c-Cbl expression in 
DT40GR cells led to enhanced Jak-STAT activation following G-CSF stimulation. 
Yet, this enhancement of Jak-STAT activation was associated with decreased 
G-CSF-induced PI 3-kinase activity and DNA synthesis. PI 3-kinase activity 
correlated with DNA synthesis and physiological levels of c-Cbl. Together, these 
data suggest that physiologic level of c-Cbl provides a growth stimulatory 
pathway for G-CSF and that enhanced Jak-STAT activation is not sufficient for 
G-CSF-induced growth.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205670
PMID: 12149655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]