1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Aug;87(8):3735-9. doi: 10.1210/jcem.87.8.8728.

Unlike type 2 diabetes, type 1 does not interact with the codon 54 polymorphism 
of the fatty acid binding protein 2 gene.

Georgopoulos A(1), Aras O, Noutsou M, Tsai MY.

Author information:
(1)Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Department of Medicine, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55417, USA. georg003@tc.umn.edu

In type 2 diabetes, the threonine (Thr) for alanine (Ala) codon 54 polymorphism 
of the fatty acid binding protein 2 gene is associated with elevated fasting and 
postprandial triglycerides and dyslipidemia when compared with the wild type 
(Ala-54/Ala-54). To assess whether this is the case in patients with type 1 
diabetes, who usually do not manifest the metabolic syndrome, we screened 181 
patients with similar glycemic control as the type 2 patients. Thirty percent 
were heterozygous, and 9% were homozygous for the polymorphism. Mean (+/-SEM) 
fasting plasma triglyceride levels in patients with the wild type (n = 84), 
those heterozygous for Ala-54/Thr-54 (n = 44), and those homozygous for the 
Thr-54 (n = 13) were 1.0 +/- 0.07, 1.1 +/- 0.17, and 1.2 +/- 0.23 mmol/liter, 
respectively. In addition, there were no differences in total, low-density 
lipoprotein, high-density lipoprotein, and non-high density lipoprotein 
cholesterol among the three groups. After a fat load, the postprandial area 
under the curve of triglyceride in plasma, chylomicrons, and very low-density 
lipoprotein were similar between the wild type (n = 18) and the Thr-54 
homozygotes (n = 12). In conclusion, in contrast to type 2, type 1 diabetes does 
not interact with the codon 54 polymorphism of the fatty acid binding protein 2 
gene to cause hypertriglyceridemia/dyslipidemia. Insulin resistance could 
account possibly for this difference.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.87.8.8728
PMID: 12161503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]