1. J Neurol Sci. 2002 Sep 15;201(1-2):33-7. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00187-9.

Diagnosis and molecular analysis of three male patients with thiamine-responsive 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency.

Naito E(1), Ito M, Yokota I, Saijo T, Ogawa Y, Kuroda Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, 
Kuramoto Cho 3, 770-8503, Tokushima, Japan. enaito@clin.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) deficiency is a major cause of congenital 
lactic acidemia in children. PDHC catalyzes the thiamine-dependent 
decarboxylation of pyruvate. Thiamine treatment was effective for some patients 
with PDHC deficiency. We reexamined 30 patients with congenital lactic acidemia 
of unknown origin who had normal PDHC activity in their cultured fibroblasts 
using a routine assay with a high (0.4 mM) thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) 
concentration. We measured the activity of PDHC in the presence of a low 
(1x10(-4) mM) TPP concentration, and analyzed for mutations in the E1alpha 
subunit gene. Three males had low PDHC activity in the presence of 1x10(-4) mM 
TPP. The DNA sequence of these three patients' X-linked E1alpha subunit revealed 
a substitution of alanine for valine at position 71 (V71A) in exon 3, 
phenylalanine for cysteine at position 101 (C101F) in exon 4, and glycine for 
arginine at position 263 (R263G) in exon 8, respectively. Thiamine treatment was 
effective in these three patients. Therefore, they had a thiamine-responsive 
PDHC deficiency due to a point mutation in the E1alpha subunit gene. PDHC 
activity should be measured at a low TPP concentration to detect 
thiamine-responsive PDHC deficiency so that thiamine treatment can be initiated 
as soon as possible.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00187-9
PMID: 12163191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]