1. Biochemistry. 2002 Sep 3;41(35):10787-93. doi: 10.1021/bi020205f.

Locking the hydrophobic loop 262-274 to G-actin surface by a disulfide bridge 
prevents filament formation.

Shvetsov A(1), Musib R, Phillips M, Rubenstein PA, Reisler E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Institute, 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Models of F-actin structure predict the importance of hydrophobic loop 262-274 
at the interface of subdomains 3 and 4 to interstrand interactions in filaments. 
If this premise is correct, prevention of the loop conformational change--its 
swinging motion--should abort filament formation. To test this hypothesis, we 
used site-directed mutagenesis to create yeast actin triple mutant (LC)2CA 
(L180C/L269C/C374A). This mutation places two cysteine residues in positions 
potentially enabling the locking of loop 262-274 to the monomer surface via 
disulfide formation. Exposure of the purified mutant to oxidation catalysts 
resulted in an increased electrophoretic mobility of actin on SDS PAGE and a 
loss of two cysteines by DTNB titrations, consistent with disulfide formation. 
The polymerization of un-cross-linked mutant actin by MgCl2 was inhibited 
strongly but could be restored to wild type actin levels by phalloidin and 
improved greatly through copolymerization with the wild-type actin. Light 
scattering measurements revealed nonspecific aggregation of the cross-linked 
actin under the same conditions. Electron microscopy confirmed the absence of 
filaments and the presence of amorphous aggregates in the cross-linked actin 
samples. Reduction of the disulfide bond by DTT restored normal actin 
polymerization in the presence of MgCl2 and phalloidin. These observations 
provide strong experimental support for a critical role of the hydrophobic loop 
262-274 in the polymerization of actin into filaments.

DOI: 10.1021/bi020205f
PMID: 12196017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]