1. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Sep;269(17):4342-50. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03132.x.

Sendai virus N-terminal fusion peptide consists of two similar repeats, both of 
which contribute to membrane fusion.

Peisajovich SG(1), Epand RF, Epand RM, Shai Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

The N-terminal fusion peptide of Sendai virus F1 envelope glycoprotein is a 
stretch of 14 amino acids, most of which are hydrophobic. Following this region, 
we detected a segment of 11 residues that are strikingly similar to the 
N-terminal fusion peptide. We found that, when anchored to the membrane by 
palmitoylation of its N-terminus, this segment (WT-palm-19-33) induces membrane 
fusion of large unilamellar liposomes to almost the same extent as a segment 
that includes the N-terminal fusion peptide. The activity of WT-palm-19-33 was 
dependent on its specific sequence, as a palmitoylated peptide with the same 
amino-acid composition but a scrambled sequence was inactive. Interestingly, two 
mutations (G7A and G12A) known to increase F1- induced cell-cell fusion, also 
increased the homology between the N-terminal fusion peptide and WT-palm-19-33. 
The role of the amino-acid sequence on the fusogenicity, secondary structure, 
and mechanism of membrane fusion was analyzed by comparing a peptide comprising 
both homologous segments (WT 1-33), a G12A mutant (G12A 1-33), a G7A-G12A double 
mutant (G7A-G12A 1-33), and a peptide with a scrambled sequence (SC 1-33). Based 
on these experiments, we postulate that replacement of Gly 7 and Gly12 by Ala 
increases the alpha helical content of the N-terminal region, with a concomitant 
increase in its fusogenic activity. Furthermore, the dissimilar abilities of the 
different peptides to induce membrane negative curvature as well as to promote 
isotropic 31P NMR signals, suggest that these mutations might also alter the 
extent of membrane penetration of the 33-residue peptide. Interestingly, our 
results serve to explain the effect of the G7A and G12A mutations on the 
fusogenic activity of the parent F1 protein in vivo.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03132.x
PMID: 12199713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]