1. Neuropediatrics. 2002 Jun;33(3):113-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-33673.

Clinical and laboratory findings in twins with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy 
mimicking aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency.

Br√§utigam C(1), Hyland K, Wevers R, Sharma R, Wagner L, Stock GJ, Heitmann F, 
Hoffmann GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics I, University Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) is a vitamin B 6 requiring enzyme 
involved in the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitters dopamine (DA) and 
serotonin. Lack of AADC leads to a combined deficiency of the catecholamines DA, 
norepinephrine (NE), epinephrine (E) as well as of serotonin. Here we describe 
premature twins who presented with severe seizures, myoclonus, rotatory eye 
movements and sudden clonic contractions. The patients showed an improvement of 
the clonic contractions under vitamin B 6 supplementation but died in the third 
week of life. In CSF and urine a biochemical pattern indicative of AADC 
deficiency was revealed. Concentrations of homovanillic acid (HVA), 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) 
were decreased, in association with increased concentrations of 
3-ortho-methyldopa (3-OMD) in CSF and significantly increased vanillactic acid 
in urine. The AADC enzyme substrates L-dopa and 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) were 
elevated in CSF. Elevated concentrations of threonine as well as of an 
unidentified compound in CSF rounded off the biochemical pattern. AADC activity 
was found to be increased in plasma and deficient in the liver. Molecular 
studies effectively ruled out a genetic defect in the AADC gene. The basis for 
the epileptic encephalopathy in the twins may be located in the metabolism of 
vitamin B 6 and remains to be defined.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2002-33673
PMID: 12200739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]