1. Protein Sci. 2002 Oct;11(10):2326-34. doi: 10.1110/ps.0213402.

The SPOT technique as a tool for studying protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate 
specificities.

Espanel X(1), Huguenin-Reggiani M, Hooft van Huijsduijnen R.

Author information:
(1)Serono Pharmaceutical Research Institute, 14, chemin des Aulx, 1228 
Plan-Les-Ouates, Geneva, Switzerland.

The activity of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) is restricted by their 
substrate specificities. The analysis of PTP specificity was greatly helped by 
the discovery that "substrate-trapping" PTP mutants, such as PTP-1B D181A, 
stably and specifically bind their substrates. We have set up a PTP substrate 
specificity assay based on the SPOT technique, which involves the microsynthesis 
of (phospho)peptides on membranes. To validate this approach, substrate trapping 
PTP-1B was tested on its cognate ligand, the autophosphorylated insulin receptor 
(IR). On SPOT membranes, IR peptides with phosphotyrosine 1163 were efficiently 
bound by PTP1B D181A, and dephosphorylated by PTP-1B. Phosphotyrosine 1163 was 
preferred over the neighboring 1158 and 1162 phosphotyrosines. PTP-1B also 
recognized IR-like motifs in Trk autophosphorylation domains, and STAT 5 
phosphopeptides. Using a gridded 20-by-20 SPOT library, we show that peptides 
with the YZM motif (Z: phosphotyrosine) are the strongest ligands for PTP-1B 
D181A, but not the optimal substrates for dephosphorylation by wild-type PTP1B. 
In addition we show that PTP-1B and PTP-beta dephosphorylation efficiency is 
strongly modulated by the introduction of phospho-serine or phospho-threonine in 
their cognate phospho-tyrosine substrates. Altogether our data illustrate that 
the SPOT technique is a highly efficient tool for the study of PTP substrate 
specificity.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.0213402
PMCID: PMC2373693
PMID: 12237455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]