1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;81(8):437-47. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00264.

Targeting of carbonic anhydrase IV to plasma membranes is altered in cultured 
human pancreatic duct cells expressing a mutated (deltaF508) CFTR.

Fanjul M(1), Salvador C, Alvarez L, Cantet S, Hollande E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire des Epithéliums, Université 
Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

Human pancreatic duct cells secrete HCO3- ions mediated by a Cl-/HCO3- exchanger 
and a HCO3- channel that may be a carbonic anhydrase IV (CA IV) in a 
channel-like conformation. This secretion is regulated by CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis 
Transmembrane conductance Regulator). In CF cells homozygous for the deltaF508 
mutation, the defect in targeting of CFTR to plasma membranes leads to a 
disruption in the secretion of Cl- and HCO3 ions along with a defective 
targeting of other proteins. In this study, we analyzed the targeting of 
membrane CA IV in the human pancreatic duct cell line CFPAC-1, which expresses a 
deltaF508 CFTR, and in the same cells transfected with the wild-type CFTR 
(CFPAC-PLJ-CFTR6) or with the vector alone (CFPAC-PLJ6). The experiments were 
conducted on cells in the stationary phase the polarized state of which was 
checked by the distribution of occludin and actin. We show that both cell lines 
express a 35-kDa CA IV at comparable levels. Analysis of fractions of plasma 
membranes purified on a Percoll gradient evidenced lower levels of CA IV 
(8-fold) in the CFPAC-1 than in the CFPAC-PLJ-CFTR6 cells. Quantitative analyses 
showed that 6- to 10-fold fewer cells in the CFPAC-1 cell line exhibited 
membrane CA IV-immunoreactivity than in the CFPAC-PLJ-CFTR6 cell line. Taken 
together, these results suggest that the targeting of CA IV to apical plasma 
membranes is impaired in CFPAC-1 cells. CA IV/gamma-adaptin double labeling 
demonstrated the presence of CA IV in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) of numerous 
CFPAC-1 cells, indicating that trafficking was disrupted on the exit face of the 
TGN. The retargeting of CA IV observed in CFPAC-PLJ-CFTR6 cells points to a 
relationship between the traffic of CFTR and CA IV. On the basis of these 
observations, we propose that the absence of CA IV in apical plasma membranes 
due to the impairment in targeting in cells expressing a deltaAF508 CFTR largely 
contributes to the disruption in HCO3- secretion in CF epithelia.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00264
PMID: 12234015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]