1. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 1;112(4):361-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.10630.

Clinical study and haplotype analysis in two brothers with Partington syndrome.

Frints SG(1), Borghgraef M, Froyen G, Marynen P, Fryns JP.

Author information:
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for 
Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

Partington et al. [1988] described a three-generation family (MRXS1, MIM 
*309510, PRTS) with a syndromic form of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR). The 
clinical features in 10 affected males included mild to moderate MR, dystonic 
movements of the hands, and dysarthria. After refinement, the PRTS locus was 
mapped to marker DXS989 (with maximum LOD score of 3.1) with flanking markers 
DXS365 and DXS28. Since then, no other patients with a similar phenotype have 
been described. We present a detailed description of the neurological symptoms 
and the disease history of two brothers with the clinical features of PRTS. 
Psychomotor development was delayed in both, and neurological features included 
mild to moderate mental retardation, dysarthria, facial muscle weakness, severe 
dysdiadochokinesis, slow dystonic movements, and mild spasticity of the hands, 
without ataxia or spasticity of the legs. The symptoms were nonprogressive and 
extrapyramidal, and without cerebellar involvement. In general, behavior of the 
two brothers was friendly and quiet, although the elder brother had periods of 
depressed mood and outbursts of anger. Karyotypes and subsequent investigation 
of the subtelomeres as well as DNA analysis of the FMR1 gene, the androgen 
receptor gene, and the DM locus did not reveal a genetic abnormality. Haplotype 
analysis showed that the affected brothers share the PRTS region at Xp22.1. 
Mutation screening of the PDH-E1alpha gene did not reveal a pathogenic mutation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.10630
PMID: 12376938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]