1. J Clin Invest. 2002 Oct;110(7):1029-35. doi: 10.1172/JCI15658.

Clinical and molecular analysis of patients with defects in micro heavy chain 
gene.

Lopez Granados E(1), Porpiglia AS, Hogan MB, Matamoros N, Krasovec S, Pignata C, 
Smith CI, Hammarstrom L, Bjorkander J, Belohradsky BH, Casariego GF, Garcia 
Rodriguez MC, Conley ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
Tennessee 38101, USA.

Autosomal recessive disorders of B cell development are rare and heterogeneous. 
To determine the proportion of affected patients who have defects in the micro 
heavy chain (IGHM) gene, we used single-stranded conformational polymorphism 
analysis to screen genomic DNA from 40 unrelated patients with early onset 
infections, profound hypogammaglobulinemia, and absent B cells. All of the 
patients were genotypically normal in BTK, the gene that underlies X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia. Eight different mutations in the micro heavy chain were 
identified in 19 members of 12 unrelated families. Four of the mutations were 
large deletions that removed more than 40 kb of DNA in the IGHM locus. In six of 
the 12 families, the affected patients had an identical single base pair 
substitution, a G-->A, at the -1 position of the alternative splice site. 
Immunoglobulin haplotype analysis showed that this mutation occurred on at least 
three different haplotypes, indicating that this is a hot spot for mutations. 
Compared with patients with mutations in Btk, patients with defects in the micro 
heavy chain had an earlier onset of disease and more complications. Our study 
indicates that at least 20-30% of patients with autosomal recessive defects in B 
cell development have mutations in the micro heavy chain.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI15658
PMCID: PMC151150
PMID: 12370281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]