1. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 22;41(42):12813-20. doi: 10.1021/bi0262451.

Activation of glucuronidation through reduction of a disulfide bond in rat 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6.

Ikushiro S(1), Emi Y, Iyanagi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Science, Himeji Institute of 
Technology, Harima Science Garden City, Hyogo 678-1297, Japan. 
ikushiro@sci.himeji-tech.ac.jp

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase- (UGT-) dependent glucuronidation is an important 
detoxification process for many endogenous and exogenous compounds in mammals. 
Treatment of rat hepatic microsomes with the reducing reagent dithiothreitol 
(DTT) resulted in a significant increase in p-nitrophenol (p-NP) glucuronidation 
in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. The DTT-dependent activation of 
glucuronidation was specific for planar phenols but not for bilirubin or 
testosterone without membrane perturbation of the microsomes. p-NP 
glucuronidation in Gunn rat hepatic microsomes lacking UGT1 isozymes was not 
affected by DTT, indicating that UGT1A6 in the microsomes is mainly involved in 
the activation. The DTT-dependent activation was inhibited by 
1,6-bis(maleimido)hexane (BMH) but not by N-ethylmaleimide, indicating that 
cross-linking between cysteine residues in UGT1A6 is responsible for the 
activation. Immunoblot analysis of rat hepatic microsomes on nonreducing 
SDS-PAGE gels revealed that most of the UGT1A6 migrated as a monomer, suggesting 
that DTT could affect an intramolecular disulfide bond in the UGT1A6 that may be 
responsible for the activation. To identify which of the ten cysteines in UGT1A6 
are involved in the disulfide bond, rat UGT1A6 wild type and a set of mutants, 
each with a cysteine to serine substitution, were constructed and expressed in 
COS cells. Treatment of COS microsomes with DTT had no effect on the activity of 
the wild type but BMH showed significant inhibition, suggesting that UGT1A6 
expressed in COS cells may be in the reduced and activated state. Replacement of 
either Cys 121 or Cys 125 with serine showed insensitivity to the BMH-dependent 
inhibition. These results demonstrate that both Cys 121 and Cys 125 are 
responsible for the activation of the activity through the disulfide bond in rat 
UGT1A6.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0262451
PMID: 12379124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]