1. Hum Genet. 2002 Oct;111(4-5):331-8. doi: 10.1007/s00439-002-0808-1. Epub 2002 
Sep 7.

Evidence for a founder effect for pseudoxanthoma elasticum in the Afrikaner 
population of South Africa.

Le Saux O(1), Beck K, Sachsinger C, Treiber C, GÃ¶ring HH, Curry K, Johnson EW, 
Bercovitch L, Marais AS, Terry SF, Viljoen DL, Boyd CD.

Author information:
(1)Pacific Biomedical Research Center, University of Hawai'i, Honolulu, Hawaii, 
USA.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a heritable elastic tissue disorder recently 
shown to be attributable to mutations in the ABCC6 ( MRP6) gene. Whereas PXE has 
been identified in all ethnic groups studied to date, the prevalence of this 
disease in various populations is uncertain, although often assumed to be 
similar. A notable exception however is the prevalence of PXE among South 
African Afrikaners. A previous report has suggested that a founder effect may 
explain the higher prevalence of PXE in Afrikaners, a European-derived 
population that first settled in South Africa in the 17th century. To 
investigate this hypothesis, we performed haplotype and mutational analysis of 
DNA from 24 South African families of Afrikaner, British and Indian descent. 
Among the 17 Afrikaner families studied, three common haplotypes and six 
different disease-causing variants were identified. Three of these mutant 
alleles were missense variants, two were nonsense mutations and one was a single 
base-pair insertion. The most common variant accounted for 53% of the PXE 
alleles, whereas other mutant alleles appeared at lower frequencies ranging from 
3% to 12%. Haplotype analysis of the Afrikaner families showed that the three 
most frequent mutations were identical-by-descent, indicating a founder origin 
of PXE in this population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-002-0808-1
PMID: 12384774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]