1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 Sep 30;105(1-2):115-25. doi: 
10.1016/s0169-328x(02)00399-6.

Differential expression of nerve growth factor transcripts in glia and neurons 
and their regulation by transforming growth factor-beta1.

Yu G(1), Fahnestock M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, 
1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) influences neuronal development, function, and 
response to injury. Using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, we 
find that mouse and rat cortex and spinal cord, and both neurons and glia in 
culture, express NGF mRNA. In the mouse, NGF is regulated by at least two 
promoters that govern synthesis of four different transcripts, A through D, that 
are all expressed in the mouse tissues and cells examined. In contrast, rat NGF 
expression varies with tissue and with cell type: transcript C is expressed 
strongly in brain but weakly in spinal cord, and transcript D is undetectable in 
rat central nervous system (CNS). In addition to species- and tissue-specific 
expression, NGF transcripts also exhibit cell type-specific expression: 
transcripts B, C and D are expressed in rat astrocytes but poorly or not at all 
in rat neurons, identifying glia as an important source of NGF in rat. NGF 
increases sharply after injury. TGF-beta1, which also increases immediately 
after injury, induces NGF mRNA and protein in rat and mouse glia but not in 
neurons. Furthermore, transcripts A, B and D, but not C, are upregulated by 
TGF-beta1 in mouse glia, whereas in rat glia, the major responsive transcript is 
C. Thus, there may be multiple TGF-beta1-responsive elements in the NGF 
promoters located upstream of exons 1 and 3 that may differ between mouse and 
rat. Moreover, NGF transcripts are differentially expressed in a species-, cell 
type-, and inducer-specific manner. These results have implications for the use 
of mice versus rats as models for the study of NGF regulation following CNS 
injury.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0169-328x(02)00399-6
PMID: 12399114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]