1. Blood. 2003 Jan 1;101(1):173-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-06-1928. Epub 2002 Aug
 15.

Arg2074Cys missense mutation in the C2 domain of factor V causing moderately 
severe factor V deficiency: molecular characterization by expression of the 
recombinant protein.

Duga S(1), Montefusco MC, Asselta R, Malcovati M, Peyvandi F, Santagostino E, 
Mannucci PM, Tenchini ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, 
Italy.

Factor V (FV) deficiency is a rare bleeding disorder whose genetic basis has 
been described in a relatively small number of cases. Among a total of 12 
genetic defects reported in severely or moderately severe deficient patients, 3 
were missense mutations and in no case was the mechanism underlying the 
deficiency explored at the molecular level. In this study, a homozygous missense 
mutation at cDNA position 6394 in exon 23 of the FV gene was identified in a 
22-year-old Italian patient. This mutation causes the replacement of arginine 
2074 with a cysteine residue (Arg2074Cys) in the C2 domain of the protein. The 
effect of the Arg2074Cys mutation on FV secretion, stability, and activity was 
investigated. Site-directed mutagenesis of FV cDNA was used to introduce the 
identified mutation, and wild-type as well as mutant FV proteins were expressed 
by transient transfection in COS-1 cells. An enzyme immunoassay detected low FV 
antigen levels both in the conditioned media of cells expressing the mutant 
protein and in cell lysates. Metabolic labeling and pulse-chase experiments 
confirmed that the mutation caused an impaired secretion of FV associated with 
rapid intracellular degradation. In addition, evaluation of wild-type and mutant 
coagulant activity demonstrated that the FV molecules carrying the Arg2074Cys 
mutation have reduced activity. These findings, beside confirming the structural 
and functional importance of the arginine 2074 residue, demonstrate that its 
substitution with a cysteine impairs both FV secretion and activity.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-06-1928
PMID: 12393490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]