1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2002 Nov;10(11):733-40. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200870.

Spectrum and expression analysis of KRIT1 mutations in 121 consecutive and 
unrelated patients with Cerebral Cavernous Malformations.

Cavé-Riant F(1), Denier C, Labauge P, Cécillon M, Maciazek J, Joutel A, 
Laberge-Le Couteulx S, Tournier-Lasserve E.

Author information:
(1)INSERM EMI 99-21, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière, Paris, France.

Cerebral Cavernous Malformations (CCM/MIM 604214) are vascular malformations 
characterised by abnormally enlarged capillary cavities without intervening 
brain parenchyma. Clinical manifestations include seizures, cerebral 
haemorrhages and focal neurological deficits. They occur as a sporadic or 
autosomal dominant condition. Most often, sporadic cases have only one lesion 
and familial cases are characterised by a high frequency of multiple lesions. 
Three CCM loci were previously mapped on 7q (CCM1), 7p (CCM2) and 3q (CCM3) and 
CCM1 gene was identified as coding Krit1, a protein of unknown function, which 
was shown initially to interact in yeast two hybrid assays with Rap1A, a small 
ras GTPase and more recently to Icap1alpha, a modulator of beta1 integrin signal 
transduction. Herein, we screened KRIT1 gene in 121 unrelated, consecutively 
recruited, CCM probands having at least one affected relative and/or showing 
multiple lesions on cerebral MRI. Fifty-two of these probands (43%) were shown 
to carry a KRIT1 mutation. Forty-two distinct mutations were identified 
including six recurrent ones. Three-quarters of these mutations were located in 
the C-terminal half of the gene, mostly within exons 13, 15 and 17. All of them 
are predicted to lead to a premature stop codon. No missense mutation was 
identified. The only two nucleotide substitutions predicted to be missense 
mutations led in fact to an abnormal splicing and a premature stop codon. 
Altogether these data suggest that KRIT1 mRNA decay due to the presence of 
premature stop codons and Krit1 haploinsufficiency may be the underlying 
mechanism of CCM.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200870
PMID: 12404106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]