1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):14994-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.222425399. Epub 2002 Oct 25.

Mutations in Mcoln3 associated with deafness and pigmentation defects in 
varitint-waddler (Va) mice.

Di Palma F(1), Belyantseva IA, Kim HJ, Vogt TF, Kachar B, Noben-Trauth K.

Author information:
(1)Section on Neurogenetics, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute 
on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, 5 
Research Court, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):14613-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.232585699.

Deafness in spontaneously occurring mouse mutants is often associated with 
defects in cochlea sensory hair cells, opening an avenue to systematically 
identify genes critical for hair cell structure and function. The classical 
semidominant mouse mutant varitint-waddler (Va) exhibits early-onset hearing 
loss, vestibular defects, pigmentation abnormalities, and perinatal lethality. A 
second allele, Va(J), which arose in a cross segregating for Va, shows a less 
severe phenotype. By using a positional cloning strategy, we identify two 
additional members of the mucolipin gene family (Mcoln2 and Mcoln3) in the 
350-kb Va(J) minimal interval and provide evidence for Mcoln3 as the gene 
mutated in varitint-waddler. Mcoln3 encodes a putative six-transmembrane-domain 
protein with sequence and motif similarities to the family of nonselective 
transient-receptor-potential (TRP) ion channels. In the Va allele an Ala419Pro 
substitution occurs in the fifth transmembrane domain of Mcoln3, and in Va(J), a 
second sequence alteration (Ile362Thr) occurring in cis partially rescues the Va 
allele. Mcoln3 localizes to cytoplasmic compartments of hair cells and plasma 
membrane of stereocilia. Hair cell defects are apparent by embryonic day 17.5, 
assigning Mcoln3 an essential role during early hair cell maturation. Our data 
suggest that Mcoln3 is involved in ion homeostasis and acts cell-autonomously. 
Hence, we identify a molecular link between hair cell physiology and melanocyte 
function. Last, MCOLN2 and MCOLN3 are candidate genes for hereditary and/or 
sporadic forms of neurosensory disorders in humans.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.222425399
PMCID: PMC137533
PMID: 12403827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]