1. Acta Neuropathol. 2002 Nov;104(5):493-504. doi: 10.1007/s00401-002-0583-z.
Epub  2002 Jul 3.

Cytoskeletal derangements in hereditary myopathy with a desmin L345P mutation.

Carlsson L(1), Fischer C, Sjöberg G, Robson RM, Sejersen T, Thornell LE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Musculoskeletal Research, National Institute for Working Life, 907 
13 Umeå, Sweden.

Patients with abnormal accumulations of desmin have been described in myopathies 
with or without cardiac involvement. Desmin deposits were sometimes associated 
with abnormal aggregates of other cytoskeletal proteins. In the present study we 
present how the cytoskeletal organisation of desmin, nestin, synemin, paranemin, 
plectin and alphaB-crystallin is altered in skeletal muscles from a patient with 
a L345P mutation in the desmin gene. In general, accumulations of desmin 
together with synemin, nestin, plectin and alphaB-crystallin were present 
between myofibrils and beneath the sarcolemma. However, as the biopsy samples 
were very myopathic, large variability in fibre size and fibre maturation was 
seen, thus the myofibrillar content and the cytoskeletal organisation varied 
considerably. In cultured satellite cells from the patient, desmin aggregates 
were not observed in initial passages, but occurred over time in culture in the 
form of perinuclear, peripheral or cytoplasmic deposits. Nestin colocalised to 
the abnormal desmin deposits to a larger extent than did vimentin. 
alphaB-Crystallin was only present in cells with a disrupted desmin network. 
Plectin was altered in a subset of cells with a disrupted desmin network, 
whereas synemin and paranemin were not detected. We conclude that the L345P 
desmin mutation has a profound influence on the cytoskeletal organisation both 
in vivo and in vitro, which reflects the pathogenesis of the desmin myopathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-002-0583-z
PMID: 12410397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]