1. Am J Pathol. 2002 Nov;161(5):1935-48. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64469-0.

Evidence for early cytotoxic aggregates in transgenic mice for human 
transthyretin Leu55Pro.

Sousa MM(1), Fernandes R, Palha JA, Taboada A, Vieira P, Saraiva MJ.

Author information:
(1)Amyloid Unit, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal.

Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) is a lethal autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by systemic extracellular deposition of transthyretin 
(TTR) amyloid fibrils. Several groups have generated transgenic mice carrying 
human TTR Val30Met, the most common mutation in FAP. To study amyloidogenicity 
and cytotoxicity of different TTRs, we produced transgenic mice expressing human 
TTR Leu55Pro, one of the most aggressive FAP-related mutations. TTR deposition 
and presence of amyloid fibrils was investigated and compared to animals 
carrying the human TTR Val30Met gene kept under the same conditions. Deposition 
in a C57BL/6J background (TTR-Leu55Pro mice) and in a TTR-null background 
[TTR-Leu55Pro X TTR-knockout (KO) mice] was compared. Animals in a C57BL/6J 
background presented early (1 to 3 months) nonfibrillar TTR deposition but 
amyloid was absent. In a TTR-null background, presence of amyloid fibrils was 
detected starting at 4 to 8 months with a particular involvement of the 
gastrointestinal tract and skin. This data suggested that TTR homotetramers are 
more prone to fibril formation than TTR murine wild-type/human mutant 
heterotetramers. The nature of the deposited material was further investigated 
by immunocytochemistry. Both amorphous aggregates and small TTR fibrils were 
present in TTR-Leu55Pro X TTR-KO transgenics. We observed that these TTR 
deposits mimic the toxic effect of TTR deposits in FAP: animals with TTR 
deposition, present approximately twofold increased levels of nitrotyrosine in 
sites related to deposition. The TTR-Leu55Pro X TTR-KO mice here described are 
an important tool for the dual purpose of investigating factors involved in 
amyloidogenesis and in cytotoxicity of deposited TTR.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64469-0
PMCID: PMC1850789
PMID: 12414539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]