1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2002 Dec;32(12):1781-91. doi: 
10.1016/s0965-1748(02)00137-6.

Mutations in the Bemisia tabaci para sodium channel gene associated with 
resistance to a pyrethroid plus organophosphate mixture.

Morin S(1), Williamson MS, Goodson SJ, Brown JK, Tabashnik BE, Dennehy TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Arizona, Forbes 410, Tucson 85721, 
USA. morins@ag.arizona.edu

The voltage-gated sodium channel is the primary target site of pyrethroid 
insecticides. In some insects, super knockdown resistance (super-kdr) to 
pyrethroids is caused by point mutations in the linker fragment between 
transmembrane segments 4 and 5 of the para-type sodium channel protein domain II 
(IIS4-5). Here, we identify two mutations in the IIS4-5 linker of the para-type 
sodium channel of the whitefly, BEMISIA TABACI: methionine to valine at position 
918 (M918V) and leucine to isoleucine at position 925 (L925I). Although each 
mutation was isolated independently from strains >100-fold resistant to a 
pyrethroid (fenpropathrin) plus organophosphate (acephate) mixture, only L925I 
was associated with resistance in strains derived from the field in 2000 and 
2001. The L925I mutation occurred in all individuals from nine different field 
collections that survived exposure to a discriminating concentration of 
fenpropathrin plus acephate. Linkage analysis of hemizygous male progeny of 
unmated heterozygous F1 females (L925Ixwild-type) shows that the observed 
resistance is tightly linked to the voltage-gated sodium channel locus. The 
results provide a molecular tool for better understanding, monitoring and 
managing pyrethroid resistance in B. tabaci.

DOI: 10.1016/s0965-1748(02)00137-6
PMID: 12429130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]