1. Amino Acids. 2002;23(4):359-65. doi: 10.1007/s00726-002-0206-y.

The regulation of sulphurated amino acid junctions: fact or fiction in the field 
of inflammation?

Santangelo F(1).

Author information:
(1)R&D Department, Zambon Group, Bresso, Milan, Italy. 
francesco.santangelo@zambongroup.com

The diet of industrialised countries is usually rich in amino acids, which are 
in part used as a source of calories. However, metabolic alterations are 
observed in diseased patients and a preferential retention of Sulphurated Amino 
Acids (SAA) occurs during the inflammatory response. Moreover, it has been 
demonstrated in a model of an acute sepsis phase of rats that the metabolism of 
Cysteine is modified. The liver converts Cysteine at a different ratio of 
Sulphate to Taurine (Tau) i.e. the sulphate production decreases while the Tau 
conversion increases. The Glutathione (GSH) concentration is greater in the 
liver, kidneys and other organs and the Cysteine incorporation into proteins is 
higher in the spleen, lungs and plasma (Acute Phase Proteins) while the Albumin 
level decreases. The pro-inflammatory cytokines such as Interleukin-1, 
Interleukin-6 and TNF- alpha are the main initiators that alter protein and 
amino acid metabolism. Another important phenomenon is the impairment of 
Methionine conversion to Cysteine during stress. For example, premature infants 
or AIDS patients are capable of synthesizing Cysteine from Methionine at a much 
lower rate. Thus, the metabolic flow through the trans-sulphuration path may be 
inadequate to meet the Cysteine demand under critical conditions. In this 
complex picture, an SAA supply may contribute to an immune system regulation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-002-0206-y
PMID: 12436203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]