1. Pflugers Arch. 2002 Nov;445(2):177-86. doi: 10.1007/s00424-002-0920-z. Epub
2002  Sep 7.

Down-regulation of volume-sensitive Cl- channels by CFTR is mediated by the 
second nucleotide-binding domain.

Ando-Akatsuka Y(1), Abdullaev IF, Lee EL, Okada Y, Sabirov RZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Physiology, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, 
Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

Transient expression of wild-type human cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) in HEK293T cells resulted in a profound decrease in 
the amplitude of volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying Cl- channel (VSOR) 
current without changing the single-channel amplitude. This effect was not 
mimicked by expression of the DeltaF508 mutant of CFTR, which did not reach the 
plasma membrane. The VSOR regulation by CFTR was not affected by G551D mutation 
at first nucleotide-binding domain (NBD1), which is known to impair CFTR 
interaction with the outwardly rectifying chloride channel, ORCC, epithelial 
amiloride-sensitive Na-channel, ENaC, and renal potassium channel, ROMK2. The 
CFTR-VSOR interaction was insensitive to the deletion mutation, DeltaTRL, which 
is known to impair CFTR-PDZ domain binding. In contrast, the G1349D mutant, 
which impairs ATP binding at NBD2, effectively abolished the down-regulatory 
effect of CFTR. Furthermore, the K1250M mutation at the Walker A motif and the 
D1370N mutation at the Walker B motif, both known to impair ATP hydrolysis at 
NBD2, completely abolished the VSOR regulation by CFTR. Thus, we conclude that 
an ATP-hydrolysable conformation of NBD2 is essential for the regulation of the 
VSOR by the CFTR protein, and that VSOR is a first channel regulated by CFTR 
through its NBD2.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-002-0920-z
PMID: 12457238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]