1. Mutat Res. 2002 Dec 29;510(1-2):9-22. doi: 10.1016/s0027-5107(02)00248-8.

poliota-dependent lesion bypass in vitro.

Vaisman A(1), Frank EG, McDonald JP, Tissier A, Woodgate R.

Author information:
(1)Section on DNA Replication, Repair and Mutagenesis, National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 6, 
Room 1A13, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-2725, USA.

Based upon phylogenetic relationships, the broad Y-family of DNA polymerases can 
be divided into various subfamilies consisting of UmuC (polV)-like; DinB 
(polIV/polkappa)-like; Rev1-like, Rad30A (poleta)-like and Rad30B (poliota)-like 
polymerases. The polIV/polkappa-like polymerases are most ubiquitous, having 
been identified in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. In contrast, the polV-like 
polymerases appear restricted to bacteria (both Gram positive and Gram 
negative). Rev1 and poleta-like polymerases are found exclusively in eukaryotes, 
and to date, poliota-like polymerases have only been identified in higher 
eukaryotes. In general, the in vitro properties of polymerases characterized 
within each sub-family are quite similar. An exception to this rule occurs with 
the poliota-like polymerases, where the enzymatic properties of Drosophila 
melanogaster poliota are more similar to that of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 
human poleta than to the related human poliota. For example, like poleta, 
Drosophila poliota can bypass a cis-syn thymine-thymine dimer both accurately 
and efficiently, while human poliota bypasses the same lesion inefficiently and 
with low-fidelity. Even in cases where human poliota can efficiently insert a 
base opposite a lesion (such as a synthetic abasic site, the 3'T of a 
6-4-thymine-thymine pyrimidine-pyrimidone photoproduct or opposite 
benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide deoxyadenosine adducts), further extension is often 
limited. Thus, although poliota most likely arose from a genetic duplication of 
poleta millions of years ago as eukaryotes evolved, it would appear that poliota 
from humans (and possibly all mammals) has been further subjected to 
evolutionary pressures that have "tailored" its enzymatic properties away from 
lesion bypass and towards other function(s) specific for higher eukaryotes. The 
identification of such functions and the role that mammalian poliota plays in 
lesion bypass in vivo, should hopefully be forthcoming with the construction of 
human cell lines deleted for poliota and the identification of mice deficient in 
poliota.

DOI: 10.1016/s0027-5107(02)00248-8
PMID: 12459439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]