1. Biochemistry. 2002 Dec 3;41(48):14348-56. doi: 10.1021/bi0258602.

Residues 293 and 294 are ligand contact points of the human angiotensin type 1 
receptor.

Pérodin J(1), Deraët M, Auger-Messier M, Boucard AA, Rihakova L, Beaulieu ME, 
Lavigne P, Parent JL, Guillemette G, Leduc R, Escher E.

Author information:
(1)Département de pharmacologie, Faculté de médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
3001 12e Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, Québec, J1H 5N4, Canada.

The human angiotensin II type 1 receptor (hAT(1)) was photolabeled with a 
high-affinity radiolabeled photoreactive analogue of AngII, (125)I-[Sar(1), 
Val(5), p-Benzoyl-L-phenylalanine(8)]AngII ((125)I-[Sar(1),Bpa(8)]AngII). 
Chemical cleavage with CNBr produced a 7 kDa fragment (285-334) of the 
C-terminal portion of the hAT(1). Manual Edman radiosequencing of photolabeled, 
per-acetylated, and CNBr-fragmented receptor showed that ligand incorporation 
occurred through Phe(293) and Asn(294) within the seventh transmembrane domain 
of the hAT(1). Receptor mutants with Met introduced at the presumed contact 
residues, F293M and N294M, were photolabeled and then digested with CNBr. 
SDS-PAGE analysis of those digested mutant receptors confirmed the contact 
positions 293 and 294 through ligand release induced by CNBr digestion. 
Additional receptor mutants with Met residues introduced into the N- and 
C-terminal proximity of those residues 293 and 294 of the hAT(1) produced, upon 
photolabeling and CNBr digestion, fragmentation patterns compatible only with 
the above contact residues. These data indicate that the C-terminal residue of 
AngII interacts with residues 293 and 294 of the seventh transmembrane domain of 
the human AT(1) receptor. Taking into account a second receptor-ligand contact 
at the second extracellular loop and residue 3 of AngII (Boucard, A. A., Wilkes, 
B. C., Laporte, S. A., Escher, E., Guillemette, G., and Leduc, R. (2000) 
Biochemistry 39, 9662-70) the Ang II molecule must adopt an extended structure 
in the AngII binding pocket.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0258602
PMID: 12450401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]