1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2002 Oct;67(4):400-5. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.2002.67.400.

Genetics of drug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria in the Venezuelan state 
of Bolivar.

Contreras CE(1), Cortese JF, Caraballo A, Plowe CV.

Author information:
(1)Immunology Institute, School of Medicine, Central University, Caracas, 
Venezuela. contrerc@camelot.rect.ucv.ve

The state of Bolivar in Venezuela experiences episodic outbreaks of 
multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum malaria. We obtained P. 
falciparum-infected blood samples in Bolivar in 1998-2000, and performed 
molecular assays for mutations conferring resistance to the antifolate 
combination of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) and to chloroquine. All infections 
carried the dihydrofolate reductase (dhfr) S108A and N51I mutations, and 45% of 
the infections had the dhfr C50R mutation, which has been implicated in 
mid-level resistance to SP. Two dihydropteroate synthase (dhps) mutations also 
involved in SP resistance, A581G and K540E, were detected in 90% and 67% of the 
samples, respectively. The dhfr 1164L mutation, which confers high-level 
resistance, was not identified. The P. falciparum chloroquine resistance 
transporter (pfcrt) K76T mutation, which is critical for chloroquine resistance, 
was found in 167 of 168 infections. Six dhfr/dhps allelotypes and four 
pfcrt-resistant alleles were observed. Their interrelationships suggest a 
semi-clonal propagation of P. falciparum malaria in Bolivar, and an invasion of 
multi-resistant pathogens from Brazil. Despite national restrictions on the use 
of SP and chloroquine, genotypic resistance to these therapies remains 
widespread in Bolivar.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.2002.67.400
PMID: 12452494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]