1. Am J Pathol. 2002 Dec;161(6):2027-34. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64481-1.

The molecular basis for hereditary porcine membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis type II: point mutations in the factor H coding sequence 
block protein secretion.

Hegasy GA(1), Manuelian T, Hogasen K, Jansen JH, Zipfel PF.

Author information:
(1)Research Group for Biomolecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for 
Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Porcine membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II in piglets of the 
Norwegian Yorkshire breed is considered the first animal model of human dense 
deposit disease. Porcine dense deposit disease is caused by the absence of the 
complement regulator factor H in plasma. Here we report the molecular basis for 
this absence. Single nucleotide exchanges at position C1590G and T3610G in the 
coding region of the factor H gene result in amino acid exchanges at 
nonframework residues L493V and I1166R that are located within SCR 9 and SCR 20, 
respectively. Apparently the L493V mutation represents a polymorphism whereas 
the I1166R causes the physiological consequences a block in protein secretion. 
Expression analysis shows comparable mRNA levels for factor H in liver tissue 
derived from both affected and healthy animals. In affected piglets, factor H 
protein is detected in increased amounts in liver cells. Factor H accumulates 
inside the hepatocytes and is not released as shown by Western blot analysis and 
immunohistochemistry. These data demonstrate that single amino acid exchanges of 
two nonframework amino acids either alone or in combination block protein 
secretion of factor H. This observation is also of interest for other human 
diseases in which factor H is involved, such as human factor H-associated form 
of hemolytic uremic syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64481-1
PMCID: PMC1850924
PMID: 12466119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]