1. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Dec;77(4):319-25. doi: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00195-6.

Mutation analysis of the G4.5 gene in patients with isolated left ventricular 
noncompaction.

Chen R(1), Tsuji T, Ichida F, Bowles KR, Yu X, Watanabe S, Hirono K, Tsubata S, 
Hamamichi Y, Ohta J, Imai Y, Bowles NE, Miyawaki T, Towbin JA; Noncompaction 
study collaborators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University, 2630 
Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

Mutations in the gene G4.5, originally associated with Barth syndrome, have been 
reported to result in a wide spectrum of severe infantile X-linked 
cardiomyopathies. The purpose of this study was to investigate patients with 
isolated left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) for disease-causing mutations in 
G4.5. In 27 patients including 10 families with isolated LVNC, mutation analysis 
of G4.5 was performed using single-strand DNA conformation polymorphism (SSCP) 
analysis and DNA sequencing. A novel splice acceptor site mutation of intron 8 
of G4.5 was identified in a family with severe infantile X-linked LVNC without 
the usual findings of Barth syndrome. This mutation results in deletion of exon 
9 from the mRNA, and is predicted to significantly disrupt the protein product. 
Genotype-phenotype correlation of G4.5 mutations in all 38 cases reported in the 
literature to date revealed that there was no correlation between location or 
type of mutation and either cardiac phenotype or disease severity. We suggest 
that males presenting with cardiomyopathy, particularly during infancy, even in 
the absence of the typical signs of Barth syndrome, should be evaluated for 
mutations in G4.5.

DOI: 10.1016/s1096-7192(02)00195-6
PMID: 12468278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]