1. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Dec;119(6):1237-43. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.19645.x.

Loss of cell adhesion in Dsg3bal-Pas mice with homozygous deletion mutation 
(2079del14) in the desmoglein 3 gene.

Pulkkinen L(1), Choi YW, Simpson A, Montagutelli X, Sundberg J, Uitto J, Mahoney 
MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College, 
and Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Pemphigus encompasses a group of autoimmune blistering diseases with circulating 
pathogenic autoantibodies recognizing several proteins, including the desmosomal 
cadherin, desmoglein 3. Targeted disruption of the Dsg3 gene by homologous 
recombination (Dsg3tm1stan) in mouse results in fragility of the skin and oral 
mucous membranes, analogous to the human disease. In addition, the Dsg3tm1stan 
mice develop phenotypic runting and hair loss, identical to that of the mouse 
mutant, Dsg3bal-2J. The Dsg3bal-2J mice are homozygous for a 1 bp insertion 
(2275insT) in the Dsg3 gene resulting in a nonfunctional Dsg3 mRNA. In this 
study, we characterized an allelic mutation, Dsg3bal-Pas, with clinical features 
similar to those in Dsg3bal-2J. We have identified a 14 bp deletion in exon 13 
of the Dsg3 gene resulting in a frameshift and premature termination codon 7 bp 
downstream from the site of the deletion and causing a truncation of the 
desmoglein 3 polypeptide by 199 amino acids, eliminating virtually all of the 
intracellular domain. We demonstrate that, although a Dsg3 mRNA transcript was 
detectable in Dsg3bal-Pas skin, the corresponding protein for desmoglein 3 was 
completely absent in the oral mucosal epithelium of homozygous Dsg3bal-Pas 
compared with that of +/Dsg3bal-Pas mice. No significant changes in the 
expression of desmogleins 1 and 2 were detected. To elucidate a potential 
mechanism causing loss of cell adhesion in the Dsg3bal-Pas mice, we generated a 
myc-tagged truncated Dsg3bal-Pas desmoglein 3 protein and expressed it in 
keratinocytes. The myc-tagged truncated Dsg3bal-Pas desmoglein 3 protein was 
found predominantly in the cytoplasm possibly due to increased proteolytic 
degradation. Cell surface staining was also detected but was jagged, not linear 
along the cell-cell border like that observed for the full-length desmoglein 3. 
The expression of the myc-tagged truncated Dsg3bal-Pas desmoglein 3 protein 
resulted in a reduction in staining of other desmosomal proteins, including 
desmoglein 1 and 2, plakophilin 2, and plakoglobin. In addition, the cells 
expressing myc-tagged truncated Dsg3bal-Pas desmoglein 3 protein underwent 
dramatic changes in cell morphology and exhibited striking extensive filopodia. 
Collectively, these data showed that the perturbation of desmoglein 3 found in 
the Dsg3bal-Pas mice resulted in disadhesion of keratinocytes manifested with 
blistering phenotype.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2002.19645.x
PMID: 12485423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]