1. J Cell Biol. 2002 Dec 23;159(6):971-82. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200207101. Epub 2002 
Dec 23.

Ribonucleoprotein-dependent localization of the yeast class V myosin Myo4p.

Kruse C(1), Jaedicke A, Beaudouin J, Bohl F, Ferring D, Guttler T, Ellenberg J, 
Jansen RP.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany.

Class V myosins are motor proteins with functions in vesicle transport, 
organelle segregation, and RNA localization. Although they have been extensively 
studied, only little is known about the regulation of their spatial 
distribution. Here we demonstrate that a GFP fusion protein of the budding yeast 
class V myosin Myo4p accumulates at the bud cortex and is a component of highly 
dynamic cortical particles. Bud-specific enrichment depends on Myo4p's 
association with its cargo, a ribonucleoprotein complex containing the 
RNA-binding protein She2p. Cortical accumulation of Myo4p at the bud tip can be 
explained by a transient retention mechanism that requires SHE2 and, apparently, 
localized mRNAs bound to She2p. A mutant She2 protein that is unable to 
recognize its cognate target mRNA, ASH1, fails to localize Myo4p. Mutant She2p 
accumulates inside the nucleus, indicating that She2p shuttles between the 
nucleus and cytoplasm and is exported in an RNA-dependent manner. Consistently, 
inhibition of nuclear mRNA export results in nuclear accumulation of She2p and 
cytoplasmic Myo4p mislocalization. Loss of She2p can be complemented by direct 
targeting of a heterologous lacZ mRNA to a complex of Myo4p and its associated 
adaptor She3p, suggesting that She2p's function in Myo4p targeting is to link an 
mRNA to the motor complex.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.200207101
PMCID: PMC2173977
PMID: 12499354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]