1. Brain Res. 2003 Jan 10;959(2):243-50. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03753-8.

The selective A2A receptor antagonist SCH 58261 reduces striatal transmitter 
outflow, turning behavior and ischemic brain damage induced by permanent focal 
ischemia in the rat.

Melani A(1), Pantoni L, Bordoni F, Gianfriddo M, Bianchi L, Vannucchi MG, 
Bertorelli R, Monopoli A, Pedata F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Florence, 
V le Pieraccini 6, 50139, Florence, Italy.

Adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists have been proved protective in different 
ischemia models. In this study we verified if the protective effect of the 
selective A(2A) antagonist, SCH 58261, could be attributed to the reduction of 
the excitatory amino acid outflow induced by cerebral focal ischemia. A vertical 
microdialysis probe was inserted into the striatum of male Wistar rats and, 
after 24 h, permanent right intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) 
was induced. Soon after waking, rats showed a definite contralateral turning 
behavior, which persisted up to 7 h after MCAo. During 4 h after MCAo, 
glutamate, aspartate, GABA, adenosine and taurine outflow increased. SCH 58261 
(0.01 mg/kg, i.p.), administered 5 min after MCAo, suppressed turning behavior 
and significantly reduced the outflow of glutamate, aspartate, GABA and 
adenosine. At 24 h after MCAo, the rats showed severe sensorimotor deficit and 
damage in both the striatum and cortex. SCH 58261 significantly reduced cortical 
damage but did not protect against the sensorimotor deficit. The protective 
effect of SCH 58261 against turning behavior and increased outflow of excitatory 
amino acids in the first hours after MCAo suggests the potential utility of 
selective adenosine A(2A) antagonists when administered in the first hours after 
ischemia. Furthermore, this study, for the first time, proposes that turning 
behavior after permanent intraluminal MCAo, be used as a precocious index of 
neurological deficit and neuronal damage.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03753-8
PMID: 12493612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]