1. Am J Gastroenterol. 2002 Dec;97(12):3095-101. doi: 
10.1111/j.1572-0241.2002.07105.x.

Variation at NOD2/CARD15 in familial and sporadic cases of Crohn's disease in 
the Ashkenazi Jewish population.

Zhou Z(1), Lin XY, Akolkar PN, Gulwani-Akolkar B, Levine J, Katz S, Silver J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, North Shore 
University Hospital/New York University School of Medicine, Manhasset 11030, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Recent reports indicate that allelic variants in NOD2/CARD15 are 
associated with Crohn's disease (CD) susceptibility, and that homozygosity or 
compound heterozygosity at this locus for any of three recently defined sequence 
variants confers a greatly increased risk of CD. These sequence changes include 
two missense mutations, R702W and G908R, and a frameshift insertion, 1007insC. 
The aim of this study was to determine the frequency of these NOD2/CARD15 
variants in familial and sporadic CD patients in the Ashkenazi population and to 
determine their effects on disease susceptibility and age of disease onset 
(AOO).
METHODS: Allele and genotype frequencies of these three variants were determined 
in 481 CD patients of Jewish descent and 110 Jewish controls; 169 patients had a 
family history of CD, and 312 were "sporadic" cases. Variants were detected by 
polymerase chain reaction using allele-specific primers labeled with fluorescent 
dye.
RESULTS: Familial cases had a significantly higher frequency of the G908R 
variant than sporadic cases (0.127 vs 0.059, p = 0.0003) and correspondingly, a 
significantly higher proportion of homozygotes and compound heterozygotes (11.8% 
vs 4.5%, p = 0.0027). Homozygotes and compound heterozygotes had an OR for CD of 
14.6 for familial cases and 5.1 for sporadic cases. There was no increased risk 
of CD for simple heterozygotes. The AOO was significantly lower for CD patients 
who were homozygotes and compound heterozygotes for NOD2/CARD15 (17.5 vs 22.4 
yr, p = 0.04), but only for familial cases.
CONCLUSIONS: NOD2/CARD15 contributes more to CD susceptibility in familial cases 
than in sporadic cases, and to an earlier AOO. There is no increased risk of CD 
for individuals carrying only a single copy of these NOD2/ CARD15 variants, 
whereas individuals carrying two copies have a 5-15-fold increased risk. The 
penetrance of the NOD2/CARD15 mutations was estimated at less than 1%.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1572-0241.2002.07105.x
PMID: 12492195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]