1. Biochimie. 2002 Oct;84(10):1021-9. doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(02)00004-4.

Identification of the cofilin-binding sites in the large cytoplasmic domain of 
Na,K-ATPase.

Kim M(1), Jung J, Park CS, Lee K.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Center for Cell Signaling Research and Division of 
Molecular Life Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, South Korea.

Na,K-ATPase, an alpha, beta heterodimer, is found in the plasma membrane of all 
animal cells. The alpha chain is believed to have 10 transmembrane regions and a 
large cytoplasmic domain between the 4th and 5th transmembrane regions (H4-H5). 
In our previous report, the large (3rd) cytoplasmic domains of the alpha1 and 
alpha2 isoform were found to interact with cofilin, an actin-modulating protein, 
by the yeast two-hybrid system. Here we show that cofilin interacts only with 
the 3rd cytoplasmic domain of the alpha2 subunit but not with the 2nd, 4th, and 
5th cytoplasmic domains or the cytoplasmic region of the beta subunit of 
Na,K-ATPase. We also demonstrate that cofilin interacts with the large 
cytoplasmic domains of the alpha1, alpha2 and alpha3 isoforms of Na,K-ATPase, 
but not with those of glucose transporter 1, glucose transporter 4, cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator and plasma membrane Ca-ATPase. We 
introduced 10 mutations into the 3rd cytoplasmic domain of Na,K-ATPase to 
identify the binding sites with cofilin. Eight of these mutants were single 
amino acid substitutions (R417Q, K470Q, K654G, D672A, K691A, R700G, R700A and 
D710G) and two were double mutant (K654GR700G and K719AK720A). Analysis of the 
activity of the reporter gene of these mutants shows that residues D672 and R700 
of the 3rd cytoplasmic domain of Na,K-ATPase are involved in the interaction 
with cofilin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-9084(02)00004-4
PMID: 12504282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]