1. Glia. 2003 Jan 15;41(2):169-79. doi: 10.1002/glia.10178.

Astrocytic expression of the Alzheimer's disease beta-secretase (BACE1) is 
stimulus-dependent.

Hartlage-Rübsamen M(1), Zeitschel U, Apelt J, Gärtner U, Franke H, Stahl T, 
Günther A, Schliebs R, Penkowa M, Bigl V, Rossner S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Paul Flechsig Institute for Brain Research, 
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

The beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is a prerequisite for the generation 
of beta-amyloid peptides, which give rise to cerebrovascular and parenchymal 
beta-amyloid deposits in the brain of Alzheimer's disease patients. BACE1 is 
neuronally expressed in the brains of humans and experimental animals such as 
mice and rats. In addition, we have recently shown that BACE1 protein is 
expressed by reactive astrocytes in close proximity to beta-amyloid plaques in 
the brains of aged transgenic Tg2576 mice that overexpress human amyloid 
precursor protein carrying the double mutation K670N-M671L. To address the 
question whether astrocytic BACE1 expression is an event specifically triggered 
by beta-amyloid plaques or whether glial cell activation by other mechanisms 
also induces BACE1 expression, we used six different experimental strategies to 
activate brain glial cells acutely or chronically. Brain sections were processed 
for the expression of BACE1 and glial markers by double immunofluorescence 
labeling and evaluated by confocal laser scanning microscopy. There was no 
detectable expression of BACE1 protein by activated microglial cells of the 
ameboid or ramified phenotype in any of the lesion paradigms studied. In 
contrast, BACE1 expression by reactive astrocytes was evident in chronic but not 
in acute models of gliosis. Additionally, we observed BACE1-immunoreactive 
astrocytes in proximity to beta-amyloid plaques in the brains of aged Tg2576 
mice and Alzheimer's disease patients.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.10178
PMID: 12509807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]