1. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Jan 30;116A(3):249-54. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.10849.

Molecular, biochemical, and phenotypic analysis of a hemizygous male with a 
severe atypical phenotype for X-linked dominant Conradi-Hunermann-Happle 
syndrome and a mutation in EBP.

Milunsky JM(1), Maher TA, Metzenberg AB.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. jmilunsk@bu.edu

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Oct 15;122A(3):279; author reply 280. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.a.20324.
    Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Sep 15;130A(1):106. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30182.

X-linked dominant Conradi-Hunermann-Happle syndrome (CDPX2; MIM 302960) is a 
rare chondrodysplasia punctata primarily affecting females. CDPX2 is presumed 
lethal in males, although a few affected males have been reported. CDPX2 is a 
cholesterol biosynthetic disorder due to 
3-beta-hydroxysteroid-delta8,delta7-isomerase deficiency caused by mutations in 
the emopamil binding protein (EBP) gene. A 2.5-year-old Caucasian male was 
followed from the age of 6 weeks and noted to have significant developmental 
delay, hypotonia, seizures, and patchy hypopigmentation. Multiple congenital 
anomalies included a unilateral cataract, esotropia, crossed renal ectopia, 
stenotic ear canals, and failure to thrive, requiring G-tube placement. Multiple 
minor anomalies and ptosis were noted. No skeletal asymmetry or chondrodysplasia 
punctata were noted on skeletal survey at 6 weeks and 13 months. An extensive 
genetic work-up including cholesterol (126-176 mg/dl) and 7-dehydrocholesterol 
was unrevealing. However, the levels of 8(9)-cholestenol and 
8-dehydrocholesterol were mildly increased in plasma, which was confirmed in 
cultured fibroblasts. This prompted molecular analysis of the EBP gene, which 
revealed a novel hemizygous (nonmosaic) mutation in exon 2 (L18P). Two 
restriction digests were developed that confirmed this mutation in skin 
fibroblasts, blood, and buccal cells (all nonmosaic). We determined that the 
patient's mother (adopted) also has the L18P mutation enabling prenatal 
diagnosis of a normal male fetus. She has normal stature, no asymmetry, no 
cataracts at this time, and has a patch of hyperpigmentation on her chest best 
visualized on Woods lamp examination, characteristic of CDPX2. The mild maternal 
phenotype has been described previously. However, this nonmosaic missense 
mutation has resulted in a severe phenotype in her surviving son.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.10849
PMID: 12503101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]