1. Blood. 2003 May 15;101(10):3885-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-07-2212. Epub 2003
 Jan 9.

Reciprocal effects of C/EBPalpha and PKCdelta on JunB expression and monocytic 
differentiation depend upon the C/EBPalpha basic region.

Liu H(1), Keefer JR, Wang QF, Friedman AD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Monocytic differentiation of 32DPKCdelta cells in response to activation of 
protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) was 
inhibited by exogenous CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha-estradiol receptor 
(C/EBPalpha-ER), which impeded morphologic maturation and induction of 
macrosialin mRNA. Inhibition of monopoiesis was also evident in 32DPKCdelta 
subclones expressing C/EBPalphaLeu12Val-ER, which cannot dimerize or bind DNA 
because of mutation of the leucine zipper, C/EBPalphaGZ-ER, in which the leucine 
zipper has been replaced by the GCN4 zipper, or C/EBPalphaDelta3-8-ER, lacking 
the C/EBPalpha transactivation domains. In contrast, C/EBPalphaBR3-ER, 
containing a mutant basic region, did not inhibit monocytic differentiation. 
C/EBPalpha-ER strongly inhibited endogenous AP-1 DNA-binding. Supershift 
analysis revealed that the major AP-1 complex contains JunB. Activation of 
C/EBPalpha-ER specifically reduced endogenous JunB RNA and protein and exogenous 
JunB levels without affecting endogenous or exogenous c-Jun. The stability of 
PMA-induced JunB was not affected. Thus, C/EBPalpha-ER suppresses both JunB 
transcription and posttranscriptional protein generation or induction. PU.1 
levels and activity were increased. The Leu12Val, GZ, and Delta3-8 mutants also 
inhibited JunB expression, whereas the BR3 mutant was ineffective, indicating 
that inhibition of JunB expression and monocytic differentiation by 
C/EBPalpha-ER depends upon an interaction mediated by its basic region. 
Exogenous JunB restored AP-1 DNA-binding but did not prevent inhibition of 
macrosialin expression by C/EBPalpha-ER, indicating that JunB is not the only 
target relevant to inhibition of monopoiesis by C/EBPalpha.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-07-2212
PMID: 12522006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]