1. Comp Hepatol. 2003 Jan 3;2(1):1. doi: 10.1186/1476-5926-2-1.

Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells represents an important blood clearance 
system in pigs.

Nedredal GI(1), Elvevold KH, Ytrebø LM, Olsen R, Revhaug A, Smedsrød B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery, University Hospital of Tromsø, 9038 Tromsø, 
Norway. Geir.Ivar.Nedredal@fagmed.uit.no

BACKGROUND: Numerous studies in rats and a few other mammalian species, 
including man, have shown that the sinusoidal cells constitute an important part 
of liver function. In the pig, however, which is frequently used in studies on 
liver transplantation and liver failure models, our knowledge about the function 
of hepatic sinusoidal cells is scarce. We have explored the scavenger function 
of pig liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSEC), a cell type that in other 
mammals performs vital elimination of an array of waste macromolecules from the 
circulation. RESULTS: 125I-macromolecules known to be cleared in the rat via the 
scavenger and mannose receptors were rapidly removed from the pig circulation, 
50% of the injected dose being removed within the first 2-5 min following 
injection. Fluorescently labeled microbeads (2 &mgr;m in diameter) used to probe 
phagocytosis accumulated in Kupffer cells only, whereas fluorescently labeled 
soluble macromolecular ligands for the mannose and scavenger receptors were 
sequestered only by LSEC. Desmin-positive stellate cells accumulated no probes. 
Isolation of liver cells using collagenase perfusion through the portal vein, 
followed by various centrifugation protocols to separate the different liver 
cell populations yielded 280 x 107 (range 50-890 x 107) sinusoidal cells per 
liver (weight of liver 237.1 g (sd 43.6)). Use of specific anti-Kupffer cell- 
and anti-desmin antibodies, combined with endocytosis of fluorescently labeled 
macromolecular soluble ligands indicated that the LSEC fraction contained 62 x 
107 (sd 12 x 107) purified LSEC. Cultured LSEC avidly endocytosed ligands for 
the mannose and scavenger receptors. CONCLUSIONS: We show here for the first 
time that pig LSEC, similar to what has been found earlier in rat LSEC, 
represent an effective scavenger system for removal of macromolecular waste 
products from the circulation.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-5926-2-1
PMCID: PMC149430
PMID: 12537582