1. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4363-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2002-06-1879. Epub 2003 
Jan 23.

Activation of pp125FAK by type 2B recombinant von Willebrand factor binding to 
platelet GPIb at a high shear rate occurs independently of alpha IIb beta 3 
engagement.

Mekrache M(1), Bachelot-Loza C, Ajzenberg N, Saci A, Legendre P, Baruch D.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Le 
Kremlin-Bicetre, France.

Shear-induced platelet aggregation (SIPA) involves the sequential interaction of 
von Willebrand factor (VWF) with both glycoprotein Ib (GPIb) and alphaIIbbeta3 
receptors. Type 2B recombinant VWF (2B-rVWF), characterized by an increased 
affinity for GPIb, induces strong SIPA at a high shear rate (4000 s-1). Despite 
the increased affinity of 2B-rVWF for GPIb, patients with type 2B von Willebrand 
disease have a paradoxical bleeding disorder, which is not well understood. The 
purpose of this study was to determine if SIPA induced by 2B-rVWF was associated 
with alphaIIbbeta3-dependent platelet activation. To this end, we have addressed 
the influence of 2B-rVWF (Val553Met substitution) on SIPA-dependent variations 
of tyrosine protein phosphorylation (P-Tyr) and the effect of alphaIIbbeta3 
blockers. At a high shear rate, 2B-rVWF induced a strong SIPA, as shown by a 
92.7% +/- 0.4% disappearance of single platelets (DSP) after 4.5 minutes. In 
these conditions, increased P-Tyr of proteins migrating at positions 64 kd, 72 
kd, and 125 kd were observed. The band at 125 kd was identified as pp125FAK 
using anti-phospho-FAK antibody. This effect, which required a high level of 
SIPA (> 70% DSP), was observed at 4000 s-1 but not at 200 s-1. Monoclonal 
antibodies (MoAbs) 6D1 (anti-GPIb) and 328 (anti-VWF A1 domain), completely 
abolished SIPA and p125FAK phosphorylation mediated by 2B-rVWF. In contrast, 
neither RGDS peptide nor MoAb 7E3, both known to block alphaIIbbeta3 engagement, 
had any effect on SIPA and pp125FAK. The size of aggregates formed at a high 
shear rate in the presence of 2B-rVWF was decreased by genistein, demonstrating 
the biologic relevance of pp125FAK. These findings provide a unique mechanism 
whereby the enhanced interaction of 2B-rVWF with GPIb, without engagement of 
alphaIIbbeta3, is sufficient to induce SIPA but does not lead to stable thrombus 
formation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2002-06-1879
PMID: 12543870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]