1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):10922-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M209337200. Epub
2003  Jan 27.

Identification of residues important for ligand binding of thromboxane A2 
receptor in the second extracellular loop using the NMR experiment-guided 
mutagenesis approach.

So SP(1), Wu J, Huang G, Huang A, Li D, Ruan KH.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Research Center and Division of Hematology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA.

The second extracellular loop (eLP2) of the thromboxane A(2) receptor (TP) had 
been proposed to be involved in ligand binding. Through two-dimensional (1)H NMR 
experiments, the overall three-dimensional structure of a constrained synthetic 
peptide mimicking the eLP2 had been determined by our group (Ruan, K.-H., So, 
S.-P., Wu, J., Li, D., Huang, A., and Kung, J. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 275-280). 
To further identify the residues involved in ligand binding, a TP receptor 
antagonist, SQ29,548 was used to interact with the synthetic peptide. High 
resolution two-dimensional (1)H NMR experiments, NOESY, and TOCSY were performed 
for the peptide, SQ29,548, and peptide with SQ29,548, respectively. Through 
completed (1)H NMR assignment and by comparing the different spectra, extra 
peaks were observed on the NOESY spectrum of the peptide with SQ29,548, which 
implied the contacts between residues of eLP2 at Val(176), Leu(185), Thr(186), 
and Leu(187) with SQ29,548 at position H2, H7, and H8. Site-directed mutagenesis 
was used to confirm the possible ligand-binding sites on native human TP 
receptor. Each of the four residues was mutated to the residues either in the 
same group, with different structure or different charged. The mutated receptors 
were then tested for their ligand binding activity. The receptor with V176L 
mutant retained binding activity to SQ29,548. All other mutations resulted in 
decreased or lost binding activity to SQ29,548. These mutagenesis results 
supported the prediction from NMR experiments in which Val(176), Leu(185), 
Thr(186), and Leu(187) are the possible residues involved in ligand binding. 
This information facilitates the understanding of the molecular mechanism of 
thromboxane A(2) binding to the important receptor and its signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M209337200
PMID: 12551898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]