1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 4;278(14):11828-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M213243200. Epub
2003  Jan 30.

Mutations of Arg440 and Gly455/Gly456 oppositely change pH sensing of Na+/H+ 
exchanger 1.

Wakabayashi S(1), Hisamitsu T, Pang T, Shigekawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, National Cardiovascular Center Research 
Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-8565 Japan. wak@ri.ncvc.go.jp

To identify important amino acid residues involved in intracellular pH (pH(i)) 
sensing of Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 1, we produced single-residue substitution 
mutants in the region of the exchanger encompassing the putative 11th 
transmembrane segment (TM11) and its adjacent intracellular (intracellular loop 
(IL) 5) and extracellular loops (extracellular loop 6). Substitution of Arg(440) 
in IL5 with other residues except positively charged Lys caused a large shift in 
pH(i) dependence of (22)Na(+) uptake to an acidic side, whereas substitution of 
Gly(455) or Gly(456) within the highly conserved glycine-rich sequence of TM11 
shifted pH(i) dependence to an alkaline side. The observed alkaline shift was 
larger with substitution of Gly(455) with residues with increasing sizes, 
suggesting the involvement of the steric effect. Interestingly, mutation of 
Arg(440) (R440D) abolished the ATP depletion-induced acidic shift in pH(i) 
dependence of (22)Na(+) uptake as well as the cytoplasmic alkalinization induced 
by various extracellular stimuli, whereas with that of Gly(455) (G455Q) these 
functions were preserved. These mutant exchangers did not alter apparent 
affinities for extracellular transport substrates Na(+) and H(+) and the 
inhibitor 5-(N-ethyl-N-isopropyl)amiloride. These results suggest that positive 
charge at Arg(440) is required for normal pH(i) sensing, whereas 
mutation-induced perturbation of the TM11 structure may be involved in the 
effects of Gly mutations. Thus, both Arg(440) in IL5 and Gly residues in the 
conserved segment of TM11 appear to constitute important elements for proper 
functioning of the putative "pH(i) sensor" of Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M213243200
PMID: 12562776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]