1. J Neurochem. 2003 Mar;84(5):1184-92. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01611.x.

Characterization of the functional role of the N-glycans in the AMPA receptor 
ligand-binding domain.

Pasternack A(1), Coleman SK, Féthière J, Madden DR, LeCaer JP, Rossier J, 
Pasternack M, Keinänen K.

Author information:
(1)Viikki Biocenter, Department of Biosciences (Division of Biochemistry), 
Viikinkaari 5D, FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

The ligand-binding domains of AMPA receptor subunits carry two conserved 
N-glycosylation sites. In order to gain insight into the functional role of the 
corresponding N-glycans, we examined how the elimination of glycosylation at 
these sites (N407 and N414) affects the ligand-binding characteristics, 
structural stability, cell-surface expression, and channel properties of 
homomeric GluR-D (GluR4) receptor and its soluble ligand-binding domain (S1S2). 
GluR-D S1S2 protein expressed as a secreted protein in insect cells was found to 
be glycosylated at N407 and N414. No major differences in the ligand-binding 
properties were observed between the 'wild-type' S1S2 and non-glycosylated 
N407D/N414Q double mutant, or between S1S2 proteins expressed in the presence or 
absence of tunicamycin, an inhibitor of N-glycosylation. Purified glycosylated 
and non-glycosylated S1S2 proteins also showed similar thermostabilities as 
determined by CD spectroscopy. Full-length homomeric GluR-D receptor with 
N407D/N414Q mutation was expressed on the surface of HEK293 cells like the 
wild-type GluR-D. In outside-out patches, GluR-D and the N407D/N414Q mutant 
produced similar rapidly desensitizing current responses to glutamate and AMPA. 
We therefore report that the two conserved ligand-binding domain glycans do not 
play any major role in receptor-ligand interactions, do not impart a stabilizing 
effect on the ligand-binding domain, and are not critical for the formation and 
surface localization of homomeric GluR-D AMPA receptors in HEK293 cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01611.x
PMID: 12603841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]