1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16667-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M210998200. Epub
2003  Feb 27.

Amino acids interfere with the ERK1/2-dependent control of macroautophagy by 
controlling the activation of Raf-1 in human colon cancer HT-29 cells.

Pattingre S(1), Bauvy C, Codogno P.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U504, Glycobiologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, 16, avenue 
Paul-Vaillant-Couturier, 94807 Villejuif Cedex, France.

Activation of ERK1/2 stimulates macroautophagy in the human colon cancer cell 
line HT-29 by favoring the phosphorylation of the Galpha-interacting protein 
(GAIP) in an amino acid-dependent manner (Ogier-Denis, E., Pattingre, S., El 
Benna, J., and Codogno, P. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39090-39095). Here we show 
that ERK1/2 activation by aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA) treatment induces the 
phosphorylation of GAIP in an amino acid-dependent manner. Accordingly, ATA 
challenge increased the rate of macroautophagy, whereas epidermal growth factor 
did not significantly affect macroautophagy and GAIP phosphorylation status. In 
fact, ATA activated the ERK1/2 signaling pathway, whereas epidermal growth 
factor stimulated both the ERK1/2 pathway and the class I phosphoinositide 
3-kinase pathway, known to decrease the rate of macroautophagy. Amino acids 
interfered with the ATA-induced macroautophagy by inhibiting the activation of 
the kinase Raf-1. The role of the Ras/Raf-1/ERK1/2 signaling pathway in the 
GAIP- and amino acid-dependent control of macroautophagy was confirmed in HT-29 
cells expressing the Ras(G12V,T35S) mutant. Similar to the protein phosphatase 
2A inhibitor okadaic acid, amino acids sustained the phosphorylation of 
Ser(259), which is involved in the negative regulation of Raf-1. In conclusion, 
these results add a novel target to the amino acid signaling-dependent control 
of macroautophagy in intestinal cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M210998200
PMID: 12609989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]