1. Biochem J. 2003 Jun 15;372(Pt 3):799-809. doi: 10.1042/BJ20021573.

Sequence motifs of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP-2) determining 
progelatinase A (proMMP-2) binding and activation by membrane-type 
metalloproteinase 1 (MT1-MMP).

Worley JR(1), Thompkins PB, Lee MH, Hutton M, Soloway P, Edwards DR, Murphy G, 
Kn√§uper V.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, 
UK.

Fundamental cellular processes including angiogenesis and cell migration require 
a proteolytic cascade driven by interactions of membrane-type matrix 
metalloproteinase 1 (MT1-MMP) and progelatinase A (proMMP-2) that are dependent 
on the presence of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP-2). There are 
unique interactions between TIMP-2 and MT1-MMP, which we have previously 
defined, and here we identify TIMP-2 sequence motifs specific for proMMP-2 
binding in the context of its activation by MT1-MMP. A TIMP-2 mutant encoding 
the C-terminal domain of TIMP-4 showed loss of proMMP-2 activation, indicating 
that the C-terminal domain of TIMP-2 is important in establishing the 
trimolecular complex between MT1-MMP, TIMP-2 and proMMP-2. This was confirmed by 
analysis of a TIMP-4 mutant encoding the C-terminal domain of TIMP-2, which 
formed a trimolecular complex and promoted proMMP-2 processing to the 
intermediate form. Mutants encoding TIMP-4 from Cys(1) to Leu(185) and partial 
tail sequence of TIMP-2 showed some gain of activating capability relative to 
TIMP-4. The identified residues were subsequently mutated in TIMP-2 
(E(192)-D(193) to I(192)-Q(193)) and this inhibitor showed a significantly 
reduced ability to facilitate proMMP-2 processing by MT1-MMP. Furthermore, the 
tail-deletion mutant Delta(186-194)TIMP-2 was completely incapable of promoting 
proMMP-2 activation by MT1-MMP. Thus the C-terminal tail residues of TIMP-2 are 
important determinants for stable trimolecular complex formation between TIMP-2, 
proMMP-2 and MT1-MMP and play an important role in MT1-MMP-mediated processing 
to the intermediate and final active forms of MMP-2 at the cell surface.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20021573
PMCID: PMC1223438
PMID: 12630911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]