1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2003 Apr;41(4):562-70. doi: 
10.1097/00005344-200304000-00008.

Endogenous adenosine increases coronary flow by activation of both A2A and A2B 
receptors in mice.

Talukder MA(1), Morrison RR, Ledent C, Mustafa SJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, The Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina 
University, Greenville, North Carolina 27858, USA.

To clarify which adenosine receptor subtype(s) are responsible for regulation of 
coronary flow through endogenous adenosine, coronary vascular responses were 
examined in isolated hearts from wild-type (WT) and A(2A) knockout (A(2A)KO) 
mice. Adenosine deaminase inhibitor, erythro-9-hydroxy-nonyl-adenine (EHNA), and 
adenosine kinase inhibitor, iodotubericidine (ITU), were used to examine the 
effects of endogenous adenosine. Combined infusion of EHNA and ITU in Balb/c 
hearts produced comparable increases in coronary flow as exerted by exogenous 
adenosine while they markedly decreased the heart rate, and these effects were 
reversed by adenosine receptor antagonist, 8-p-sulfophenyl-theophylline (8-SPT). 
Similarly, EHNA and ITU increased coronary flow in WT hearts to 422% of 
baseline, whereas this response was reduced to 144% of baseline in A(2A)KO 
hearts. Heart rate was equally reduced (approximately 50% of baseline) in both 
groups. Alloxazine (A(2B) receptor antagonist) abolished EHNA- and ITU-induced 
coronary flow in A(2A)KO hearts without altering the reduced heart rate. 
Selective A(1) receptor antagonist, 8-cyclopentyl-1-1,3-dipropylxanthine 
(DPCPX), reversed EHNA- and ITU-induced decreases in heart rate without altering 
the elevated coronary flow. These findings suggest that coronary vascular 
responses to endogenous adenosine mimic those produced by exogenous adenosine 
and are mediated at least by activation of both A(2A) and A(2B) receptors in 
isolated mouse hearts.

DOI: 10.1097/00005344-200304000-00008
PMID: 12658057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]