1. Hypertension. 2003 May;41(5):1041-6. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000064944.60569.87. 
Epub 2003 Mar 24.

An acyl-CoA synthetase gene family in chromosome 16p12 may contribute to 
multiple risk factors.

Iwai N(1), Mannami T, Tomoike H, Ono K, Iwanaga Y.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute, National Cardiovascular Center, 5-7-1 Fujishirodai, 
Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan. niwai@res.ncvc.go.jp

We recently reported that genetic polymorphisms of SAH, an acyl-CoA synthetase 
for fatty acids, might contribute to multiple risk factors, especially 
hypertriglyceridemia. There are at least 4 members in this SAH gene family, SAH, 
MACS1, MACS2, and MACS3, and these 4 members are clustered in human Ch16p12. It 
is possible either that the previously observed associations were due to linkage 
disequilibrium with truly important polymorphisms in other members of the SAH 
gene family or that other polymorphisms in this gene family may also influence 
multiple risk factors. Thus, we performed association studies between genetic 
polymorphisms in this SAH region and multiple risk factors, using a large cohort 
representing the general population in Japan. The L513S polymorphism in MACS2 
was shown to significantly influence the triglyceride level and the waist-to-hip 
ratio. The previously observed associations between an SAH polymorphism and the 
waist-to-hip ratio appear to be due to linkage disequilibrium with the L513S 
polymorphism. Haplotype analysis indicated that a haplotype defined by the I/D 
polymorphism of SAH and the L513S polymorphism in MACS2 was highly significantly 
associated with the triglyceride level. This study confirmed the importance of 
this chromosomal region in the pathogenesis of hypertriglyceridemia and visceral 
obesity.

DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000064944.60569.87
PMID: 12654705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]