1. Biochemistry. 2003 Apr 8;42(13):3759-65. doi: 10.1021/bi027126o.

Interaction of CRP L124 with cAMP affects CRP cAMP binding constants, cAMP 
binding cooperativity, and CRP allostery.

Tomlinson SR(1), Tutar Y, Harman JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 
Texas 79409-1061, USA.

A cyclic nucleotide-binding pocket of the CRP dimer is composed of amino acid 
residues contributed by both subunits. Leucine (L) 124 of one subunit packs 
against the adenine ring of cAMP bound to the opposing subunit. We have 
undertaken a study designed to evaluate the role of L124 in CRP allostery. 
Wild-type (WT) apo-CRP is a 47 kDa protease-resistant dimer composed of 
identical subunits that exhibits a biphasic isotherm in cAMP titration studies. 
The WT CRP-cAMP complex is a protease-sensitive dimer degraded by protease to a 
dimer core that ranges between 26.5 and 30.5 kDa. Substitution of L124 with 
isoleucine (I), valine (V), cysteine (C), or alanine (A) generated a series of 
CRP variants that exhibited unique differences in apo-CRP resistance to 
protease, the mass of the core fragments generated in protease digestion 
reactions, cAMP-mediated allostery, and CRP-cAMP complex functionality. 
Differences in the affinity of the position 124 CRP variants for cAMP were 
observed. The binding constants that drive the formation of the WT and L124I 
CRP-cAMP complexes deviated by not more than a factor of 1.5. In contrast, the 
L124V, L124A, and L124C forms of CRP exhibited both a decreased K(cAMP1)(app) 
and an increased K(cAMP2)(app) to produce 2.4-, 55-, and 204-fold reductions, 
respectively, in the difference between these two parameters compared to that 
observed for WT CRP. The data indicate that the van der Waals volume and/or the 
hyrophobicity of the L124 side chain are important determinants of CRP cAMP 
binding properties and affect, either directly or indirectly, cAMP-mediated 
conformation changes in CRP.

DOI: 10.1021/bi027126o
PMID: 12667067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]