1. Ann Neurol. 2003 Apr;53(4):497-502. doi: 10.1002/ana.10499.

Phenotype modulators in myophosphorylase deficiency.

Martinuzzi A(1), Sartori E, Fanin M, Nascimbeni A, Valente L, Angelini C, 
Siciliano G, Mongini T, Tonin P, Tomelleri G, Toscano A, Merlini L, Bindoff LA, 
Bertelli S.

Author information:
(1)E. Medea Scientific Institute, Conegliano Research Centre, Conegliano, Italy. 
andrea.martinuzzi@cn.lnf.it

Myophosphorylase deficiency is characterized by exercise intolerance, muscle 
cramps, and recurrent myoglobinuria. Some patients are severely affected, 
whereas others are minimally affected or asymptomatic. The molecular basis of 
the disease has been elucidated but does not provide an explanation for the 
clinical variability. In a large cohort of patients with myophosphorylase 
deficiency, we tested the hypothesis that polymorphic variants in either 
myoadenylate deaminase (MADA) or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) could act 
as modulators of phenotype expression. Forty-seven patients were evaluated. 
Clinical severity was assessed according to a severity scale of four grades. 
MADA activity was studied by histochemical and biochemical analysis of muscle, 
and the Q12X mutation in the adenine monophosphate deaminase 1 gene (AMPD1) and 
the insertion/deletion polymorphism in the ACE gene were assessed genetically. A 
complete MADA defect together with the Q12X mutation was detected in one 
severely affected patient. Eleven patients were heterozygous for the Q12X 
mutation. There was no association between clinical grading and MADA status. In 
contrast, we found a highly significant (p < 0.01) association between ACE 
genotype and clinical severity, with strong correlation between severe phenotype 
and number of D alleles. We show that ACE insertion/deletion polymorphism may 
play a significant role as phenotype modulator in McArdle's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10499
PMID: 12666117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]