1. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 May;63(5):961-72. doi: 10.1124/mol.63.5.961.

The interaction of a constitutively active arrestin with the 
arrestin-insensitive 5-HT(2A) receptor induces agonist-independent 
internalization.

Gray JA(1), Bhatnagar A, Gurevich VV, Roth BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

5-HT(2A) serotonin receptors are unusual among G-protein coupled receptors in 
that they can be internalized and desensitized, in some cell types, in an 
arrestin-independent manner. The molecular basis of the arrestin-insensitivity 
of 5-HT(2A) receptors is unknown but is probably caused, in part, by the 
apparent lack of agonist-induced 5-HT(2A) receptor phosphorylation. Because the 
arrestin-insensitivity of 5-HT(2A) receptors is cell-type selective, we used a 
"constitutively active" arrestin mutant that can interact with agonist-activated 
but nonphosphorylated receptors. We show here that this "constitutively active" 
arrestin mutant (Arr2-R169E) can force 5-HT(2A) receptors to be regulated by 
arrestins. Cotransfection of 5-HT(2A) receptors with Arr2-R169E induced 
agonist-independent 5-HT(2A) receptor internalization, and a constitutive 
translocation of the Arr2-R169E mutant to the plasma membrane, whereas wild-type 
Arrestin-2 had no effect. Additionally, Arr2-R169E, unlike wild-type arrestin-2, 
induced a significant decrease in efficacy of agonist-induced phosphoinositide 
hydrolysis with an unexpected increase in agonist potency. Radioligand binding 
assays demonstrated that the fraction of receptors in the high-affinity agonist 
binding-state increased with expression of Arr2-R169E, indicating that 
Arr2-R169E stabilizes the agonist-high affinity state of the 5-HT(2A) receptor 
(R*). Intriguingly, the agonist-independent interaction of Arr2-R169E with 
5-HT(2A) receptors was inhibited by inverse agonist treatment and is thus 
probably caused by the high level of 5-HT(2A) receptor constitutive activity. 
This is the first demonstration that a constitutively active arrestin mutant can 
both induce agonist-independent internalization and stabilize the agonist-high 
affinity state of an arrestin-insensitive G protein coupled receptor.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.63.5.961
PMID: 12695524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]