1. Am J Transplant. 2003 Apr;3(4):424-31. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-6143.2003.00084.x.

The impact of costimulatory molecule gene polymorphisms on clinical outcomes in 
liver transplantation.

Marder BA(1), Schr√∂ppel B, Lin M, Schiano T, Parekh R, Tomer Y, Murphy B.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 
brad.marder@mssm.edu

CTLA-4 and CD28 deliver opposing signals for T-cell proliferation. We examined 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) CTLA-4 -318C/T and CD28 IVS3 +17T/C for 
associations with acute rejection in liver transplant recipients. These and two 
other polymorphisms in CTLA-4 [microsatellite polymorphism +642(AT)n and SNP +49 
A/G] were also analyzed for influence on graft survival. Two hundred and eleven 
liver transplant recipient genotypes were determined by direct sequencing or 
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis of PCR-amplified genomic DNA. 
Mean graft survival for patients with the GG genotype of CTLA-4 +49 A/G was 58.5 
+/- 6.0 months compared with 70.3 +/- 4.0 months and 73.8 +/- 2.8 months for the 
AA and AG genotypes, respectively (p = 0.0055). This is in support of previous 
studies suggesting decreased CTLA-4 function and increased incidence of 
autoimmune disease for this genotype. The 92-, 94-, and 100-bp alleles of CTLA-4 
+642(AT)n occurred more often in African-American transplant recipients and were 
associated with decreased graft survival (p = 0.0001 and 0.007, respectively) 
but the independence of these variables could not be established. No 
associations with acute rejection or graft survival were found for CTLA-4 
-318C/T or CD28 IVS3 +17T/C. The described associations between CTLA-4 gene 
polymorphisms and transplant outcomes provide the foundation for further 
investigations leading to genetic risk stratification for transplant recipients.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-6143.2003.00084.x
PMID: 12694064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]