1. Hum Cell. 2002 Sep;15(3):130-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-0774.2002.tb00107.x.

Gene therapy using tissue-specific replication competent HSV.

Miyatake S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka Medical College, Osaka, Japan. 
neu070@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

Tissue- or cell-specific targeting of vectors is critical to the success of gene 
therapy. I describe a novel approach to viral-mediated gene therapy, where viral 
replication and associated cytotoxicity are limited to a specific cell-type by 
the regulated expression of an essential immediate-early viral gene product. 
This is illustrated with two herpes simplex virus type 1 vectors (G92A and 
d12.CALP) whose growth are restricted to albumin- or calponin-expressing cells, 
respectively. G92A was constructed by inserting an albumin 
enhancer/promoter--ICP4 transgene into the thymidine kinase gene of mutant 
herpes simplex virus type 1 d120, deleted for both copies of the ICP4 gene. This 
vector also contains the Escherichia coli lacZ gene under control of the 
thymidine kinase promoter, a viral early promoter, to permit easy detection of 
infected cells containing replicating vector. In the adult, albumin is expressed 
uniquely in the liver and in hepatocellular carcinoma and is transcriptionally 
regulated. G92A efficiently replicated in vitro in two human hepatoma cell lines 
expressing albumin, but not in three human non-hepatoma, albumin-non-expressing 
tumor cell lines, while all cell lines were equally susceptible to a tissue 
non-specific HSV recombinant, hrR3. In vivo, G92A replicated well in 
subcutaneous xenografts of human hepatoma cells (Hep3B) in athymic mice, but not 
in non-hepatoma subcutaneous tumors (PC3 and HeLa), whereas, hrR3 replicated 
well in both tumor types. Intratumoral inoculation of G92A inhibited the growth 
of established subcutaneous hepatoma tumors in nude mice, but not prostate 
tumors. D12CALP also revealed the cell-specific replication to leiomyosarcoma in 
which calponin expression was augmented. Using hrR3, we demonstrated inhibition 
of re-stenosis of rat carotid arteries caused by balloon injury. The 
antiproliferative effects of this virus was marked in the proliferating smooth 
muscle cells, however, there still remained the fear for the injury of the 
endothelial cells. Confining a productive, cytotoxic viral infection to a 
specific cell-type should be useful for tumor therapy and the ablation of 
specific cell-types for the generation of animal models of disease. Further 
experiments using d12CALP will be focused on the arteriosclerosis due to balloon 
angioplasty or organ transplantation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-0774.2002.tb00107.x
PMID: 12703543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]