1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 27;278(26):23480-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M301125200. Epub
2003  Apr 21.

Molecular basis of calmodulin binding to cardiac muscle Ca(2+) release channel 
(ryanodine receptor).

Yamaguchi N(1), Xu L, Pasek DA, Evans KE, Meissner G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7260, USA.

Calmodulin (CaM) is a ubiquitous Ca2+-binding protein that regulates the 
ryanodine receptors (RyRs) by direct binding. CaM inhibits the skeletal muscle 
ryanodine receptor (RyR1) and cardiac muscle receptor (RyR2) at >1 microm Ca2+ 
but activates RyR1 and inhibits RyR2 at <1 microm Ca2+. Here we tested whether 
CaM regulates RyR2 by binding to a highly conserved site identified previously 
in RyR1. Deletion of RyR2 amino acid residues 3583-3603 resulted in background 
[35S]CaM binding levels. In single channel measurements, deletion of the 
putative CaM binding site eliminated CaM inhibition of RyR2 at Ca2+ 
concentrations below and above 1 microm. Five RyR2 single or double mutants in 
the CaM binding region (W3587A, L3591D, F3603A, W3587A/L3591D, L3591D/F3603A) 
eliminated or greatly reduced [35S]CaM binding and inhibition of single channel 
activities by CaM depending on the Ca2+ concentration. An RyR2 mutant, which 
assessed the effects of 4 amino acid residues that differ between RyR1 and RyR2 
in or flanking the CaM binding domain, bound [35S]CaM and was inhibited by CaM, 
essentially identical to wild type (WT)-RyR2. Three RyR1 mutants (W3620A, 
L3624D, F3636A) showed responses to CaM that differed from corresponding 
mutations in RyR2. The results indicate that CaM regulates RyR1 and RyR2 by 
binding to a single, highly conserved CaM binding site and that other RyR 
type-specific sites are likely responsible for the differential functional 
regulation of RyR1 and RyR2 by CaM.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M301125200
PMID: 12707260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]