1. Biochemistry. 2003 May 6;42(17):4904-8. doi: 10.1021/bi034078e.

Site-directed sulfhydryl labeling of helix IX in the lactose permease of 
Escherichia coli.

Zhang W(1), Hu Y, Kaback HR.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology and of 
Microbiology, Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los 
Angeles, California 90095-1662, USA.

Site-directed sulfhydryl modification of transmembrane helix IX in the lactose 
permease of Escherichia coli was studied in right-side-out membrane vesicles 
with the thiol-specific reagents N-[(14)C]ethylmaleimide (NEM) and 
methanethiosulfonate ethylsulfonate (MTSES) which are permeant and impermeant, 
respectively. Out of approximately 20 mutants with a single Cys residue at each 
position in the helix, only five mutants label with NEM. (i) Cys residues at 
positions 291, 308, and 310 label at 25 degrees C, and binding of substrate has 
no effect. (ii) Cys residues at positions 295 and 298 label only in the presence 
of substrate. NEM labeling at 0 degrees C indicates that alkylation of Cys 
residues at positions 295 and 308 is dependent on the thermal motion of the 
protein. In contrast, temperature has little effect on labeling of Cys residues 
at positions 291, 298, and 310. Interestingly, pretreatment with MTSES blocks 
NEM labeling of all the mutants. The findings demonstrate that the face of helix 
IX on which Arg302 is located is involved in ligand-induced conformational 
changes and accessible to water from the periplasmic surface of the membrane. 
Since Arg302 facilitates deprotonation of Glu325 (helix X) during turnover 
[Sahin-TÃ³th, M., and Kaback, H. R. (2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 
6068-6073], the findings are consistent with the idea that this face of helix IX 
may comprise part of the H(+) translocation pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/bi034078e
PMID: 12718531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]