1. Int J Cancer. 2003 Jul 1;105(4):480-3. doi: 10.1002/ijc.11126.

Polymorphic markers in the 5alpha-reductase type II gene and the incidence of 
prostate cancer.

Lamharzi N(1), Johnson MM, Goodman G, Etzioni R, Weiss NS, Dightman DA, Barnett 
M, DiTommaso D, Chen C.

Author information:
(1)Program in Epidemiology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 
98109-1024, USA.

In the prostate, the enzyme encoded by the SRD5A2 gene (5alpha-reductase) 
converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, a potent androgen that has been 
hypothesized to play a role in the genesis of prostate cancer. Several 
polymorphisms have been identified in the SRD5A2 gene, including a 
valine-to-leucine substitution (V89L) at codon 89, a variable number of TA 
dinucleotide repeats and a missense substitution at codon 49 resulting in an 
amino acid substitution of alanine with threonine (A49T). To investigate the 
influence of these polymorphisms on prostate cancer risk, we conducted a 
case-control study nested within the Beta-Carotene and Retinol Efficacy Trial. 
Genotypes were determined by PCR-based capillary electrophoresis using genomic 
DNA isolated from 300 cases and 300 controls matched on the basis of race, age 
at enrollment (within 5 years), enrollment study center and year of 
randomization. There was no association between V89L genotypes and prostate 
cancer risk. The age- and race-adjusted odds ratio (OR) associated with the VL 
and LL genotypes were 1.06 (95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.75-1.49) and 0.99 
(95% CI = 0.57-1.73), respectively, as compared to the VV genotype. The age- and 
race-adjusted odds ratio for men having 1 TA(9) or TA(18) allele was 0.98 (95% 
CI = 0.64-1.48) when compared to men without TA repeats. The corresponding odds 
ratio for men without the TA(0) alleles was 0.68 (95% CI = 0.21-2.19). The age- 
and race-adjusted odds ratio associated with having at least 1 T allele at codon 
49 was 1.11 (95% CI = 0.58-2.11), as compared to the AA genotype. Our results do 
not support the hypothesis that the V89L and A49T polymorphisms in the SRD5A2 
gene are related to the risk of prostate cancer, but are compatible with the 
suggestion from earlier studies that men who are homozygous for the TA(9) or 
(18) alleles and men who have the TA(9)/TA(18) genotype are at a modestly 
reduced risk.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.11126
PMID: 12712437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]