1. Mol Biotechnol. 2003 Jun;24(2):127-40. doi: 10.1385/MB:24:2:127.

Evaluation of optimal expression cassette in retrovirus vector for 
beta-thalassemia gene therapy.

Dong WJ(1), Li B, Liu DP, Zu ZX, Li J, Hao DL, Liu G, Guo ZC, Liang CC.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, 100005, People's Republic of China.

Trials of retroviral vector-mediated human beta-globin gene transfer were 
hampered by low titers, unstable vector transmission, and low-level expression 
of transferred gene. With the goal of optimizing the retrovirally encoded human 
beta-globin gene expression cassette for gene therapy of beta-thalassemia, we 
generated 3 series of vector constructs (a total of 12 constructs) and 
investigated the effects of the proximal promoter, 3' - enhancer, and 
derivatives from the beta-locus control region or alpha-major regulatory element 
on virus titer, vector transmission stability, and gene expression. The virus 
titers for 9 of the 12 vector constructs ranged between 2.8 x 10(4) cfu/mL and 
1.0 x 10(6) cfu/mL. We found that proviral DNA was intact in most G418- 
resistant murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cell clones for 5 vector constructs, 
while obvious genetic instability was observed for 4 other vector constructs. 
MEL cells harboring the intact provirus were induced to differentiate, and human 
beta-globin gene expression was analyzed with RNase protection assay. The 
percentage of human beta-globin transcript relative to endogenous murine 
alpha-globin transcript were 101.8 +/- 64.3% (n = 10), 40.1 +/- 28.7% (n = 4), 
31.1 +/- 31.9% (n = 12), 52.4 +/- 11.2% (n = 12), and 53.6 +/- 8.6% (n = 12) for 
the 5 constructs, respectively, demonstrating the development of optimized 
retroviral vectors for beta-globin gene therapy with murine erythroid cell lines 
as a model. Unexpectedly, we also documented that the point mutation 8700(C-->T) 
in DNase I hypersensitive site 2 (HS2) core fragment might contribute to 
low-level expression of the human beta-globin gene, based on a comparison of 
results from transfected and transduced MEL cells and sequence analysis of 
proviral DNA.

DOI: 10.1385/MB:24:2:127
PMID: 12746554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]