1. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):767-74. doi: 10.1042/BJ20030150.

A functional study on polymorphism of the ATP-binding cassette transporter 
ABCG2: critical role of arginine-482 in methotrexate transport.

Mitomo H(1), Kato R, Ito A, Kasamatsu S, Ikegami Y, Kii I, Kudo A, Kobatake E, 
Sumino Y, Ishikawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, 
Yokohama, 226-8501, Japan.

Overexpression of the ATP-binding cassette transporter ABCG2 reportedly causes 
multidrug resistance, whereas altered drug-resistance profiles and substrate 
specificity are implicated for certain variant forms of ABCG2. At least three 
variant forms of ABCG2 have been hitherto documented on the basis of their amino 
acid moieties (i.e., arginine, glycine and threonine) at position 482. In the 
present study we have generated those ABCG2 variants by site-directed 
mutagenesis and expressed them in HEK-293 cells. Exogenous expression of the 
Arg(482), Gly(482), and Thr(482) variant forms of ABCG2 conferred HEK-293 cell 
resistance toward mitoxantrone 15-, 47- and 54-fold, respectively, as compared 
with mock-transfected HEK-293 cells. The transport activity of those variants 
was examined by using plasma-membrane vesicles prepared from 
ABCG2-overexpressing HEK-293 cells. [Arg(482)]ABCG2 transports 
[(3)H]methotrexate in an ATP-dependent manner; however, no transport activity 
was observed with the other variants (Gly(482) and Thr(482)). Transport of 
methotrexate by [Arg(482)]ABCG2 was significantly inhibited by mitoxantrone, 
doxorubicin and rhodamine 123, but not by S -octylglutathione. Furthermore, 
ABCG2 was found to exist in the plasma membrane as a homodimer bound via 
cysteinyl disulphide bond(s). Treatment with mercaptoethanol decreased its 
apparent molecular mass from 140 to 70 kDa. Nevertheless, ATP-dependent 
transport of methotrexate by [Arg(482)]ABCG2 was little affected by such 
mercaptoethanol treatment. It is concluded that Arg(482) is a critical amino 
acid moiety in the substrate specificity and transport of ABCG2 for certain 
drugs, such as methotrexate.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030150
PMCID: PMC1223553
PMID: 12741957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]