1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30614-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304654200. Epub 
2003 May 29.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma represses GLUT4 promoter 
activity in primary adipocytes, and rosiglitazone alleviates this effect.

Armoni M(1), Kritz N, Harel C, Bar-Yoseph F, Chen H, Quon MJ, Karnieli E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Rambam Medical Center 
and Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, 
Haifa 31096, Israel. amichal@tx.technion.ac.il

The synthetic thiazolidinedione ligands of peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) improve insulin sensitivity in type II diabetes and 
induce GLUT4 mRNA expression in fat and muscle. However, the molecular 
mechanisms involved are still unclear. We studied the regulatory effects of 
PPARgamma and its ligands on GLUT4 gene expression in primary rat adipocytes and 
CHO-K1 cells cotransfected with PPARgamma and the GLUT4 promoter reporter. 
PPARgamma1 and PPARgamma2 repressed the activity of the GLUT4 promoter in a 
dose-dependent manner. Whereas this repression was augmented by the natural 
ligand 15Delta-prostaglandin J2, it was completely alleviated by rosiglitazone 
(Rg). Ligand binding-defective mutants PPARgamma1-L468A/E471A and 
PPARgamma2-L496A/E499A retained the repression effect, which was unaffected by 
Rg, whereas the PPARgamma2-S112A mutant exhibited a 50% reduced capacity to 
repress GLUT4 promoter activity. The -66/+163 bp GLUT4 promoter region was 
sufficient to mediate PPARgamma inhibitory effects. The PPARgamma/retinoid X 
receptor-alpha heterodimer directly bound to this region, whereas binding was 
abolished in the presence of Rg. Thus, we show that PPARgamma represses 
transcriptional activity of the GLUT4 promoter via direct and specific binding 
of PPARgamma/retinoid X receptor-alpha to the GLUT4 promoter. This effect 
requires an intact Ser112 phosphorylation site on PPARgamma and is completely 
alleviated by Rg, acting via its ligand-binding domain. These data suggest a 
novel mechanism by which Rg exerts its antidiabetic effects via detaching 
PPARgamma from the GLUT4 gene promoter, thus leading to increased GLUT4 
expression and enhanced insulin sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304654200
PMID: 12777391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]