1. Biochemistry. 2003 Jun 10;42(22):6871-80. doi: 10.1021/bi027427y.

Role of radical formation at tyrosine 193 in the allene oxide synthase domain of 
a lipoxygenase-AOS fusion protein from coral.

Wu F(1), Katsir LJ, Seavy M, Gaffney BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, 
Florida 32306-4370, USA.

Coral allene oxide synthase (cAOS), a fusion protein with 8R-lipoxygenase in 
Plexaura homomalla, is a hemoprotein with sequence similarity to catalases. cAOS 
reacts rapidly with the oxidant peracetic acid to form heme compound I and 
intermediate II. Concomitantly, an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal 
with tyrosyl radical-like features, centered at a g-value of 2.004-2.005, is 
formed. The radical is identified as tyrosyl by changes in EPR spectra when 
deuterated tyrosine is incorporated in cAOS. The radical location in cAOS is 
determined by mutagenesis of Y193 and Y209. Upon oxidation, native cAOS and 
mutant Y209F exhibit the same radical spectrum, but no significant tyrosine 
radical forms in mutant Y193H, implicating Y193 as the radical site in native 
cAOS. Estimates of the side chain torsion angles for the radical at Y193, based 
on the beta-proton isotropic EPR hyperfine splitting, A(iso), are theta(1) = 21 
to 30 degrees and theta(2) = -99 to -90 degrees. The results show that cAOS can 
cleave nonsubstrate hydroperoxides by a heterolytic path, although a homolytic 
course is likely taken in converting the normal substrate, 
8R-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (8R-HpETE), to product. Coral AOS achieves 
specificity for the allene oxide formed by selection of the homolytic pathway 
normally, while it inactivates by the heterolytic path with nonoptimal 
substrates. Accordingly, with the nonoptimal substrate, 
13R-hydroperoxyoctadecadienoic acid (13R-HpODE), mutant Y193H is inactivated 
after turning over significantly fewer substrate molecules than required to 
inactivate native cAOS or the Y209F mutant because it cannot absorb oxidizing 
equivalents by forming a radical at Y193.

DOI: 10.1021/bi027427y
PMCID: PMC1382190
PMID: 12779342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]