1. Physiol Genomics. 2003 Jul 7;14(2):161-6. doi: 
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00165.2002.

Associations between cardiorespiratory responses to exercise and the C34T AMPD1 
gene polymorphism in the HERITAGE Family Study.

Rico-Sanz J(1), Rankinen T, Joanisse DR, Leon AS, Skinner JS, Wilmore JH, Rao 
DC, Bouchard C; HERITAGE Family study.

Author information:
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Human Genomics Laboratory, Baton 
Rouge, Louisiana 70808, USA.

The associations of the C34T polymorphism of the adenosine monophosphate 
deaminase 1 (AMPD1) gene with cardiorespiratory phenotypes were tested during 
cycling exercise at absolute and relative power outputs progressing to 
exhaustion before and after endurance training for 20 wk in the HERITAGE Family 
Study cohort (n = 779). Since no blacks were mutant homozygotes (TT), only 
whites were considered for analysis (400 normal homozygotes, CC; 97 
heterozygotes, CT; and 6 TT). For sedentary state, cycling at the absolute power 
output of 50 W resulted in a higher rating of perceived exertion in TT (P < 
0.0001). At the relative intensity of 60% of Vo(2 max), stroke volume was lower 
in TT (P < 0.05). Maximal values for power output, systolic blood pressure, 
heart rate, Vco(2), and respiratory exchange ratio were lower in TT (P < 0.05). 
The cardiorespiratory training response at 50 W and at 60% of Vo(2 max) was 
similar across C34T-AMPD1 genotypes. However, the maximal values for 
ventilation, Vo(2), and Vco(2) during exercise increased less in TT (P < 0.01). 
The results indicate that subjects with the TT genotype at the C34T AMPD1 gene 
have diminished exercise capacity and cardiorespiratory responses to exercise in 
the sedentary state. Furthermore, the training response of ventilatory 
phenotypes during maximal exercise is more limited in TT.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00165.2002
PMID: 12783984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]