1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003 Jun 15;34(12):1544-54. doi: 
10.1016/s0891-5849(03)00180-1.

Enhancing effect of melatonin on chemiluminescence accompanying decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide in the presence of copper.

KÅ‚adna A(1), Aboul-Enein HY, Kruk I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical History and Ethics, Pomeranian Medical Academy, 
Szczecin, Poland.

The oxidation of melatonin (MEL) using the Cu(II) + H(2)O(2) + HO(-) (the 
Fenton-like reaction) system was investigated by chemiluminescence (CL), 
fluorescence, spectrophotometric, and EPR spin trapping techniques. The reaction 
exhibits CL in the 400-730 nm region. The light emission from the Fenton-like 
reaction was greatly enhanced in the presence of MEL and was strongly dependent 
on its concentration. The spectrum measured with cut-off filters revealed maxima 
at around 460, 500, 580-590, 640-650, and 690-700 nm. The band at 460 nm may be 
due to the excited cleavage product, 
N(1)-acetyl-N(2)-formyl-5-methoxykynuramine, whereas the bands at 500, 580-590, 
640-650, and 700 nm were similar to those observed for singlet molecular oxygen 
((1)O(2)). The effect of reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavengers on the light 
emission was studied. The CL was strongly inhibited by the (1)O(2) scavengers in 
a dose-dependent manner; at concentration 1 mM the potency of (1)O(2) scavenging 
was 5,5-dimethylcyclohexandione-1,3 > methionine > histidine > hydroquinone. The 
potency of HO(*) scavenging by thiourea, tryptophan, cysteine at concentration 5 
mM was 79-94%, by 1 mM glutathione and trolox 75 and 94%, respectively, and by 
10 mM cimetidine 18%. Specific acceptors of O(2)(*)(-) such as p-nitroblue 
tetrazolium chloride and 4,5-dihydroxy-1,3-benzene disulfonic acid (tiron) at 
concentration 5 mM decreased the CL by 51 and 95%, respectively, whereas 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) does not reduce the emission at concentration 2.8 
U/ml. At higher concentration SOD substantially enhanced the light emission. 
Addition of 1360 U/ml catalase and 100 microM desferrioxamine strongly inhibited 
CL (96 and 90%, respectively). The increased generation of (1)O(2) from the 
Cu/H(2)O(2) system in the presence of MEL was confirmed using the 
spectrophotometric method based on the bleaching of p-nitrosodimethylaniline and 
by trapping experiments with 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine (TEMP) and subsequent 
electron paramagnetic (EPR) spectroscopy. These findings suggest the increased 
production of reactive oxygen species (O(2)(*)(-), HO(*), (1)O(2)) from the 
Fenton-like reaction in the presence of MEL. This means that the hormone is not 
able to act as classical chain-breaking antioxidant even at low concentration, 
and may show clear prooxidant activity at higher concentrations. In addition, 
long-lived carbonyl product of the MEL transformation in the triplet state can 
also be toxic by transferring its energy to organelles and causing a 
photochemical process.

DOI: 10.1016/s0891-5849(03)00180-1
PMID: 12788474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]