1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):33392-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304693200. Epub
2003  Jun 16.

Crystal structure of the Yersinia protein-tyrosine phosphatase YopH complexed 
with a specific small molecule inhibitor.

Sun JP(1), Wu L, Fedorov AA, Almo SC, Zhang ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The pathogenic bacteria Yersinia are causative agents in human diseases ranging 
from gastrointestinal syndromes to bubonic plague. There is increasing risk of 
misuse of infectious agents, such as Yersinia pestis, as weapons of terror as 
well as instruments of warfare for mass destruction. Because the phosphatase 
activity of the Yersinia protein tyrosine phosphatase, YopH, is essential for 
virulence in the Yersinia pathogen, potent and selective YopH inhibitors are 
expected to serve as novel anti-plague agents. We have identified a specific 
YopH small molecule inhibitor, p-nitrocatechol sulfate (pNCS), which exhibits a 
Ki value of 25 microM for YopH and displays a 13-60-fold selectivity in favor of 
YopH against a panel of mammalian PTPs. To facilitate the understanding of the 
underlying molecular basis for tight binding and specificity, we have determined 
the crystal structure of YopH in complex with pNCS at a 2.0-A resolution. The 
structural data are corroborated by results from kinetic analyses of the 
interactions of YopH and its site-directed mutants with pNCS. The results show 
that while the interactions of the sulfuryl moiety and the phenyl ring with the 
YopH active site contribute to pNCS binding affinity, additional interactions of 
the hydroxyl and nitro groups in pNCS with Asp-356, Gln-357, Arg-404, and 
Gln-446 are responsible for the increased potency and selectivity. In 
particular, we note that residues Arg-404, Glu-290, Asp-356, and a bound water 
(WAT185) participate in a unique H-bonding network with the hydroxyl group ortho 
to the sulfuryl moiety, which may be exploited to design more potent and 
specific YopH inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304693200
PMID: 12810712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]