1. J Bacteriol. 2003 Jul;185(14):4233-42. doi: 10.1128/JB.185.14.4233-4242.2003.

Mechanisms of activation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase from Escherichia 
coli by Ca2+ and of desensitization by trypsin.

Sudom A(1), Walters R, Pastushok L, Goldie D, Prasad L, Delbaere LT, Goldie H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5E5.

The 1.8-A resolution structure of the ATP-Mg(2+)-Ca(2+)-pyruvate quinary complex 
of Escherichia coli phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK) is isomorphous to 
the published complex ATP-Mg(2+)-Mn(2+)-pyruvate-PCK, except for the Ca(2+) and 
Mn(2+) binding sites. Ca(2+) was formerly implicated as a possible allosteric 
regulator of PCK, binding at the active site and at a surface activating site 
(Glu508 and Glu511). This report found that Ca(2+) bound only at the active 
site, indicating that there is likely no surface allosteric site. (45)Ca(2+) 
bound to PCK with a K(d) of 85 micro M and n of 0.92. Glu508Gln Glu511Gln mutant 
PCK had normal activation by Ca(2+). Separate roles of Mg(2+), which binds the 
nucleotide, and Ca(2+), which bridges the nucleotide and the anionic substrate, 
are implied, and the catalytic mechanism of PCK is better explained by studies 
of the Ca(2+)-bound structure. Partial trypsin digestion abolishes Ca(2+) 
activation (desensitizes PCK). N-terminal sequencing identified sensitive sites, 
i.e., Arg2 and Arg396. Arg2Ser, Arg396Ser, and Arg2Ser Arg396Ser (double mutant) 
PCKs altered the kinetics of desensitization. C-terminal residues 397 to 540 
were removed by trypsin when wild-type PCK was completely desensitized. Phe409 
and Phe413 interact with residues in the Ca(2+) binding site, probably 
stabilizing the C terminus. Phe409Ala, DeltaPhe409, Phe413Ala, Delta397-521 
(deletion of residues 397 to 521), Arg396(TAA) (stop codon), and Asp269Glu 
(Ca(2+) site) mutations failed to desensitize PCK and, with the exception of 
Phe409Ala, appeared to have defects in the synthesis or assembly of PCK, 
suggesting that the structure of the C-terminal domain is important in these 
processes.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.14.4233-4242.2003
PMCID: PMC164867
PMID: 12837799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]