1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;88(7):3278-83. doi: 10.1210/jc.2002-021957.

Changes in diurnal sympathoadrenal balance and pituitary hormone secretion in 
subjects with Leu7Pro polymorphism in the prepro-neuropeptide Y.

Kallio J(1), Pesonen U, Jaakkola U, Karvonen MK, Helenius H, Koulu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Turku, 
Finland. jaana.kallio@utu.fi

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an important neurotransmitter in the central and 
peripheral nervous systems. It has a regulatory role in cardiovascular and 
metabolic functions and control of hormone release. The leucine 7 to proline 7 
(Leu7Pro) polymorphism in the signal peptide of prepro-NPY is associated with 
increased blood lipid levels, accelerated atherosclerosis, and diabetic 
retinopathy. This study elucidated the role of this polymorphism in diurnal 
cardiovascular, metabolic, and hormonal functions of healthy subjects during 
rest. The two study groups comprised individuals with different genotype, but 
they were matched for age and body mass index. Subjects with the Leu7Pro 
polymorphism had significantly lower plasma NPY and norepinephrine 
concentrations, lower insulin concentrations, higher glucose concentrations, and 
lower insulin-glucose ratio in plasma than the controls. Heart rate was 
significantly higher during daytime in the subjects with Leu7Pro polymorphism. 
Furthermore, these subjects had significantly lower prolactin concentrations in 
plasma. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure, serum free fatty acid and plasma 
leptin, ACTH, cortisol, LH, FSH, TSH, free thyroxin, and melatonin 
concentrations were similar during the 24-h period, compared with controls. 
These results show that genetically determined changes in NPY levels lead to 
widespread consequences in the control of sympathoadrenal, metabolic, and 
hormonal balance in healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2002-021957
PMID: 12843176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]