1. J Neurosci. 2003 Jul 2;23(13):5789-98. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-13-05789.2003.

High threshold for induction of the stress response in motor neurons is 
associated with failure to activate HSF1.

Batulan Z(1), Shinder GA, Minotti S, He BP, Doroudchi MM, Nalbantoglu J, Strong 
MJ, Durham HD.

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) protects cultured motor neurons from the toxic 
effects of mutations in Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD-1), which is responsible 
for a familial form of the disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Here, 
the endogenous heat shock response of motor neurons was investigated to 
determine whether a high threshold for activating this protective mechanism 
contributes to their vulnerability to stresses associated with ALS. When heat 
shocked, cultured motor neurons failed to express Hsp70 or transactivate a green 
fluorescent protein reporter gene driven by the Hsp70 promoter, although Hsp70 
was induced in glial cells. No increase in Hsp70 occurred in motor neurons after 
exposure to excitotoxic glutamate or expression of mutant SOD-1 with a 
glycine--> alanine substitution at residue 93 (G93A), nor was Hsp70 increased in 
spinal cords of G93A SOD-1 transgenic mice or sporadic or familial ALS patients. 
In contrast, strong Hsp70 induction occurred in motor neurons with expression of 
a constitutively active form of heat shock transcription factor (HSF)-1 or when 
proteasome activity was sufficiently inhibited to induce accumulation of an 
alternative transcription factor HSF2. These results indicate that the high 
threshold for induction of the stress response in motor neurons stems from an 
impaired ability to activate the main heat shock-stress sensor, HSF1.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-13-05789.2003
PMCID: PMC6741252
PMID: 12843283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]