1. Protein Sci. 2003 Aug;12(8):1775-85. doi: 10.1110/ps.0349703.

Identification of S-sulfonation and S-thiolation of a novel transthyretin 
Phe33Cys variant from a patient diagnosed with familial transthyretin 
amyloidosis.

Lim A(1), Prokaeva T, McComb ME, Connors LH, Skinner M, Costello CE.

Author information:
(1)Mass Spectrometry Resource, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany 
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Familial transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
associated with a variant form of the plasma carrier protein transthyretin 
(TTR). Amyloid fibrils consisting of variant TTR, wild-type TTR, and TTR 
fragments deposit in tissues and organs. The diagnosis of ATTR relies on the 
identification of pathologic TTR variants in plasma of symptomatic individuals 
who have biopsy proven amyloid disease. Previously, we have developed a mass 
spectrometry-based approach, in combination with direct DNA sequence analysis, 
to fully identify TTR variants. Our methodology uses immunoprecipitation to 
isolate TTR from serum, and electrospray ionization and matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MS) peptide mapping to identify TTR 
variants and posttranslational modifications. Unambiguous identification of the 
amino acid substitution is performed using tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis and 
confirmed by direct DNA sequence analysis. The MS and MS/MS analyses also yield 
information about posttranslational modifications. Using this approach, we have 
recently identified a novel pathologic TTR variant. This variant has an amino 
acid substitution (Phe --> Cys) at position 33. In addition, like the Cys10 
present in the wild type and in this variant, the Cys33 residue was both 
S-sulfonated and S-thiolated (conjugated to cysteine, cysteinylglycine, and 
glutathione). These adducts may play a role in the TTR fibrillogenesis.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.0349703
PMCID: PMC2323963
PMID: 12876326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]