1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39960-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307854200. Epub
2003  Jul 29.

Requirement of Cys399 for processing of the human ecto-ATPase (NTPDase2) and its 
implications for determination of the activities of splice variants of the 
enzyme.

Mateo J(1), Kreda S, Henry CE, Harden TK, Boyer JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7365, USA.

Ecto-ATPase (CD39L1) corresponds to the type 2 enzyme of the ecto-nucleoside 
triphosphate diphosphohydrolase family (E-NTPDase). We have isolated from human 
ECV304 cells three cDNAs with high homology with members of the E-NTPDase family 
that encode predicted proteins of 495, 472, and 450 amino acids. Sequencing of a 
genomic DNA clone confirmed that these three sequences correspond to splice 
variants of the human ecto-ATPase (NTPDase2 alpha,-2 beta, and -2 gamma). 
Although all three enzyme forms were expressed heterologously to similar levels 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells clone K-1 (CHO-K1) cells, only the 495-amino acid 
protein (NTPDase2 alpha exhibited ecto-ATPase activity. Immunolocalization 
studies demonstrated that NTPDase2 alpha is fully processed and trafficked to 
the plasma membrane, whereas the NTPDase2 beta and -2 gamma splice variants were 
retained in not fully glycosylated forms in the endoplasmic reticulum. The 
potential roles of two highly conserved residues, Cys399 and Asn443, in the 
activity and cellular trafficking of the ecto-ATPase were examined. Mutation of 
Cys399, which is absent in NTPDase2 beta and -2 gamma, produced a protein 
completely devoid of nucleotidase activity, while mutation of Asn443 to Asp 
resulted in substantial loss of activity. Neither the Cys399 nor Asn443 mutants 
were fully glycosylated, and both were retained in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
These results indicate that the lack of ecto-nucleotidase activity exhibited by 
NTPDase2 beta and -2 gamma and the C399S mutant, as well as the large reduction 
of activity in the N443D mutant are due to alterations in the folding/maturation 
of these proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307854200
PMID: 12888562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]