1. Genet Test. 2003 Summer;7(2):139-42. doi: 10.1089/109065703322146830.

Screening for familial dysautonomia in Israel: evidence for higher carrier rate 
among Polish Ashkenazi Jews.

Lehavi O(1), Aizenstein O, Bercovich D, Pavzner D, Shomrat R, Orr-Urtreger A, 
Yaron Y.

Author information:
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Division, Genetic Institute and Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Lis Maternity Hospital, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Familial dysautonomia (FD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies. Although extremely rare in most 
populations, FD is common among Ashkenazi Jews (AJ), with a calculated carrier 
frequency of 1 in 30, based on disease prevalence. The gene for FD was recently 
identified as IKBKAP. One major mutation (IVS2 + 6T --> C) is responsible in 
>99.5% of cases among AJ. The purpose of this study was to determine the actual 
frequency of FD carriers in the AJ population in Israel and to determine whether 
carriers are more frequent among a subpopulation of AJ from Poland. The study 
group included 1267 Jews of Ashkenazi origin who were referred for routine DNA 
screening tests. These included 1100 individuals who were full AJ and 167 who 
were part AJ. None had a family history of FD. Mutation analysis for (IVS2 + 6T 
--> C) was performed by PCR amplification followed by restriction enzyme 
analysis. All positive cases were confirmed by DHPLC WAVE( trade mark ). Among 
the 1100 full AJ tested, 34 were found to be FD carriers (1:32). The incidence 
of mutation carriers was significantly higher in AJ of Polish descent (1:18) 
compared to AJ of non-Polish descent (1:99). Among the 167 individuals who were 
part AJ, there were 3 carriers (1:56). The incidence of FD among AJ, 
particularly those of Polish background, warrants population screening. 
Population screening may be performed by denaturing high-performance liquid 
chromatography.

DOI: 10.1089/109065703322146830
PMID: 12885336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]