1. Genome. 2003 Aug;46(4):707-15. doi: 10.1139/g03-046.

A single point mutation in Drosophila dihydrofolate reductase confers 
methotrexate resistance to a transgenic CHO cell line.

Neumann K(1), Al-Batayneh KM, Kuiper MJ, Parsons-Sheldrake J, Tyshenko MG, 
Flintoff WF, Cole SP, Walker VK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Sequence analysis of a cDNA encoding dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) from a 
selected methotrexate-resistant Drosophila melanogaster cell line (S3MTX) 
revealed a substitution of Gln for Leu at position 30. Although the S3MTX cells 
were approximately 1000 fold more resistant to methotrexate (MTX), the karyotype 
was similar to the parental line and did not show elongated chromosomes. 
Furthermore, kinetic analysis of the recombinant enzyme showed a decreased 
affinity for MTX by the mutant DHFR. To determine if the resistance phenotype 
could be attributed to the mutant allele, Drosophila Dhfr cDNAs isolated from 
wild type and S3MTX cells were expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 
lacking endogenous DHFR. The heterologous insect DHFRs were functional in 
transgenic clonal cell lines, showing approximately 400-fold greater MTX 
resistance in the cell line transfected with the mutant Dhfr than the wild type 
Dhfr. Resistance to other antifolates in the CHO cells was consistent with the 
drug sensitivities seen in the respective Drosophila cell lines. ELevated Levels 
of Dhfr transcript and DHFR in transgenic CHO cells bearing the mutant cDNA were 
not seen. Taken together, these results demonstrate that a single substitution 
in Drosophila DHFR alone can confer Levels of MTX resistance comparable with 
that observed after considerable gene amplification in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1139/g03-046
PMID: 12897877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]