1. Hum Genet. 2003 Oct;113(5):432-6. doi: 10.1007/s00439-003-0983-8. Epub 2003
Aug  2.

Association of the mitochondrial DNA 15497G/A polymorphism with obesity in a 
middle-aged and elderly Japanese population.

Okura T(1), Koda M, Ando F, Niino N, Tanaka M, Shimokata H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences, 36-3 
Gengo Morioka-cho, Obu-shi, 474-8522, Aichi, Japan. okura@nils.go.jp

Although polymorphism of the mitochondrial DNA 15497guanine/adenine 
(Mt15497G-->A) leads to the Gly251Ser amino acid replacement on human cytochrome 
b, it is unknown whether functional alteration of the mitochondrion is induced 
by the Gly251Ser replacement. To see if an association exists between the 
Mt15497G-->A polymorphism and obesity, we examined differences in body size, 
body composition, and regional body fat distribution between the two genotypes 
in middle-aged and elderly Japanese individuals (825 women and 906 men). The 
Mt15497 genotype was determined with an automated colorimetric allele-specific 
DNA probe assay system using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method. The 
Mt15497G-->A polymorphism was detected in 3.5% ( n=60) of all subjects: 2.8% ( 
n=23) among women and 4.1% ( n=37) among men. After adjusting for age and 
smoking, we found that body weight, body mass index, waist and hip 
circumferences, fat mass, fat-free mass, intra-abdominal fat and triglycerides 
were significantly greater in women with the A allele compared with the G allele 
( p=0.001-0.025). For men, waist to hip ratio was significantly greater ( 
p=0.032), and waist circumference, intra-abdominal fat and triglycerides had a 
trend to be significantly greater ( p=0.062-0.087) in subjects with the A allele 
compared with the G allele. These data suggest that the Mt15497 polymorphism may 
be associated with obesity-related variables and lipid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-003-0983-8
PMID: 12905068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]