1. J Gen Physiol. 2003 Sep;122(3):365-74. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200308857. Epub 2003
Aug  11.

State-dependent block of wild-type and inactivation-deficient Na+ channels by 
flecainide.

Wang GK(1), Russell C, Wang SY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St., 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. wang@zeus.bwh.harvard.edu

The antiarrhythmic agent flecainide appears beneficial for painful congenital 
myotonia and LQT-3/DeltaKPQ syndrome. Both diseases manifest small but 
persistent late Na+ currents in skeletal or cardiac myocytes. Flecainide may 
therefore block late Na+ currents for its efficacy. To investigate this 
possibility, we characterized state-dependent block of flecainide in wild-type 
and inactivation-deficient rNav1.4 muscle Na+ channels (L435W/L437C/A438W) 
expressed with beta1 subunits in Hek293t cells. The flecainide-resting block at 
-140 mV was weak for wild-type Na+ channels, with an estimated 50% inhibitory 
concentration (IC50) of 365 micro M when the cell was not stimulated for 1,000 
s. At 100 micro M flecainide, brief monitoring pulses of +30 mV applied at 
frequencies as low as 1 per 60 s, however, produced an approximately 70% 
use-dependent block of peak Na+ currents. Recovery from this use-dependent block 
followed an exponential function, with a time constant over 225 s at -140 mV. 
Inactivated wild-type Na+ channels interacted with flecainide also slowly at -50 
mV, with a time constant of 7.9 s. In contrast, flecainide blocked the open 
state of inactivation-deficient Na+ channels potently as revealed by its rapid 
time-dependent block of late Na+ currents. The IC50 for flecainide open-channel 
block at +30 mV was 0.61 micro M, right within the therapeutic plasma 
concentration range; on-rate and off-rate constants were 14.9 micro M-1s-1 and 
12.2 s-1, respectively. Upon repolarization to -140 mV, flecainide block of 
inactivation-deficient Na+ channels recovered, with a time constant of 11.2 s, 
which was approximately 20-fold faster than that of wild-type counterparts. We 
conclude that flecainide directly blocks persistent late Na+ currents with a 
high affinity. The fast-inactivation gate, probably via its S6 docking site, may 
further stabilize the flecainide-receptor complex in wild-type Na+ channels.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.200308857
PMCID: PMC2234482
PMID: 12913091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]