1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2003 Aug;14(4):255-60. doi: 
10.1034/j.1399-3038.2003.00048.x.

The C-159T polymorphism in the CD14 promoter is associated with serum total IgE 
concentration in atopic Chinese children.

Leung TF(1), Tang NL, Sung YM, Li AM, Wong GW, Chan IH, Lam CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of 
Wales Hospital, Hong Kong. leung2142@cuhk.edu.hk

Comment in
    Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2005 Aug;16(5):456-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2005.00277.x.

Activation of macrophages through CD14 by microbes is crucial in inducing 
immunity by type 1 T helper cells. A C-to-T polymorphism at position -159 of 
CD14 was associated with serum total IgE level in Caucasians but not in Japanese 
subjects. The objective of this study is to determine whether this polymorphic 
marker is associated with atopy and asthma phenotypes in Chinese children. 
Restriction fragment length polymorphism was used to characterize CD14/-159 
genotypes. Microparticle immunoassay was used to measure serum total IgE level; 
fluorescent enzyme immunoassay was performed to measure serum concentrations of 
specific IgE to aeroallergens; and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to 
measure serum levels of soluble CD14 (sCD14). Lung function in asthmatics was 
assessed by spirometry. Two hundred and fifty-eight patients and 92 control 
children were recruited. Their mean serum total IgE concentrations were 331 and 
74 kIU/l, respectively (p < 0.0001). Atopy, defined as the presence of at least 
one allergen-specific IgE in serum, was found in 220 (85%) patients and in 41 
(45%) controls (p < 0.0001). Serum sCD14 levels were significantly associated 
with CD14/-159 genotypes (p = 0.004). Atopic subjects with CC genotype in 
CD14/-159 had the highest serum total IgE levels compared with CT and TT 
genotypes, with the respective mean values being 661, 427 and 380 kIU/l (p = 
0.015). Similarly, a higher proportion of subjects with CC genotype had 
increased serum total IgE concentration (p = 0.039). This polymorphic marker was 
not associated with asthma or aeroallergen sensitization in our cohort. Our 
results suggest that the C-159T of CD14 was associated with serum total IgE 
concentration in atopic Chinese children.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-3038.2003.00048.x
PMID: 12911501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]