1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45512-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304781200. Epub
2003  Aug 21.

Differentiation between acetylcholinesterase and the organophosphate-inhibited 
form using antibodies and the correlation of antibody recognition with 
reactivation mechanism and rate.

George KM(1), Schule T, Sandoval LE, Jennings LL, Taylor P, Thompson CM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental Health Sciences, The University of Montana, 
Missoula, Montana 59812, USA.

Two types of polyclonal antibodies were generated from (a) a decapeptide 
sequence that includes the active site serine of acetylcholinesterase 
(anti-AChE10S) and (b) the identical decapeptide sequence phosphorylated at the 
active site serine of acetylcholinesterase (anti-AChE10SP). The anti-AChE10S 
antiserum was found to specifically recognize native, control, and 
vehicle-treated recombinant mouse AChE (rMoAChE) but did not recognize rMoAChE 
that was phosphorylated by the four organophosphate (OP) compounds tested. 
Conversely the anti-AChE10SP antiserum recognized phosphoserine rMoAChE that 
resulted from reaction with phosphorous oxychloride (POCl3) but did not 
recognize native or vehicle-treated rMoAChE. Anti-AChE10SP also did not 
recognize OP-AChE conjugates that resulted from the reaction of rMoAChE with 
other OP compounds that afford neutral or monoanionic phosphoserine groups 
thereby indicating a high specificity for a precise OP conjugate. Antisera 
recognition correlated well with the rates of enzyme inhibition, aging, and 
oxime-induced reactivation indicating these antisera can both quantify the 
extent and type of inhibition and also differentiate between select mechanisms 
of inhibition. The ability to discern mechanistic differences between native 
AChE and OP-AChE conjugates suggests that these antisera can be used to identify 
biomarkers of OP exposure in a mechanism-based approach.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304781200
PMID: 12933813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]