1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45811-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306270200. Epub
2003  Aug 25.

Phosphorylation of type-1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors by cyclic 
nucleotide-dependent protein kinases: a mutational analysis of the functionally 
important sites in the S2+ and S2- splice variants.

Wagner LE 2nd(1), Li WH, Yule DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (InsP3R) are the major route of 
intracellular calcium release in eukaryotic cells and as such are pivotal for 
stimulation of Ca2+-dependent effectors important for numerous physiological 
processes. Modulation of this release has important consequences for defining 
the particular spatio-temporal characteristics of Ca2+ signals. In this study, 
regulation of Ca2+ release by phosphorylation of type-1 InsP3R (InsP3R-1) by 
cAMP (PKA)- and cGMP (PKG)-dependent protein kinases was investigated in the two 
major splice variants of InsP3R-1. InsP3R-1 was expressed in DT-40 cells devoid 
of endogenous InsP3R. In cells expressing the neuronal, S2+ splice variant of 
the InsP3R-1, Ca2+ release was markedly enhanced when either PKA or PKG was 
activated. The sites of phosphorylation were investigated by mutation of serine 
residues present in two canonical phosphorylation sites present in the protein. 
Potentiated Ca2+ release was abolished when serine 1755 was mutated to alanine 
(S1755A) but was unaffected by a similar mutation of serine 1589 (S1589A). These 
data demonstrate that Ser-1755 is the functionally important residue for 
phosphoregulation by PKA and PKG in the neuronal variant of the InsP3R-1. 
Activation of PKA also resulted in potentiated Ca2+ release in cells expressing 
the non-neuronal, S2- splice variant of the InsP3R-1. However, the PKA-induced 
potentiation was still evident in S1589A or S1755A InsP3R-1 mutants. The effect 
was abolished in the double (S1589A/S1755A) mutant, indicating both sites are 
phosphorylated and contribute to the functional effect. Activation of PKG had no 
effect on Ca2+ release in cells expressing the S2- variant of InsP3R-1. 
Collectively, these data indicate that phosphoregulation of InsP3R-1 has 
dramatic effects on Ca2+ release and defines the molecular sites phosphorylated 
in the major variants expressed in neuronal and peripheral tissues.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306270200
PMID: 12939273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]