1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Oct;307(1):110-6. doi: 10.1124/jpet.103.054155.
Epub  2003 Sep 3.

Functional analysis of three genetic polymorphisms in the glucocorticoid 
receptor gene.

Koyano S(1), Saito Y, Nagano M, Maekawa K, Kikuchi Y, Murayama N, Fujino T, 
Ozawa S, Nakajima T, Matsumoto K, Saito H, Sawada J.

Author information:
(1)Project Team for Pharmacogenetics, National Institute of Health Sciences, 
Tokyo, Japan. skoyano@nihs.go.jp

Glucocorticoids are widely used as potent anti-inflammatory drugs. 
Glucocorticoids exert their pharmacological effects by binding to a 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which promotes expression of its target genes or 
suppresses transcription mediated by other transcriptional factors, such as 
nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). To identify genetic polymorphisms affecting 
glucocorticoid responses, the GR gene was sequenced, and two novel single 
nucleotide alterations, 1510A>T (T504S) and 1952C>T (S651F), were identified in 
addition to an adenine base insertion at nucleotide 2314 (2314insA). mRNA 
expression levels of T504S and S651F were comparable with that of the wild type 
(WT), whereas the mRNA level of 2314insA was reduced to approximately 36% of the 
WT level. Protein expression was reduced to approximately 66% of WT levels in 
S651F and to approximately 6% in 2314insA. No significant change was seen in the 
T504S variant levels. The instability of the 2314insA mRNA, S651F protein, and 
2314insA protein was confirmed by time course experiments. The transcriptional 
activity of S651F and 2314insA was also reduced to approximately 63 and 2% of 
the WT levels, respectively, in the luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, the 
inhibitory effect of GR on NF-kappaB transactivation was reduced to 
approximately 81 and 12% of the WT levels for S651F and 2314insA, respectively. 
These results indicated that the overall transcriptional activity and inhibitory 
effect on NF-kappaB transactivation of S651F and 2314insA have partially reduced 
and almost abrogated, respectively, almost paralleling their reduced protein 
expression levels caused by mRNA and/or protein instabilities. Thus, these two 
variations were suggested to influence the response to glucocorticoid treatment.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.103.054155
PMID: 12954798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]