1. Biochem J. 2003 Dec 15;376(Pt 3):633-44. doi: 10.1042/BJ20030594.

Use of the transport specificity ratio and cysteine-scanning mutagenesis to 
detect multiple substrate specificity determinants in the consensus amphipathic 
region of the Escherichia coli GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) transporter 
encoded by gabP.

King SC(1), Brown-Istvan L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biosciences, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR 97239-3097, USA. kingst@ohsu.edu

The Escherichia coli GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) permease, GabP, and other 
members of the APC (amine/polyamine/choline) transporter superfamily share a CAR 
(consensus amphipathic region) that probably contributes to solute 
translocation. If true, then the CAR should contain structural features that act 
as determinants of substrate specificity ( k (cat)/ K (m)). In order to address 
this question, we have developed a novel, expression-independent TSR (transport 
specificity ratio) analysis, and applied it to a series of 69 cysteine-scanning 
(single-cysteine) variants. The results indicate that GabP has multiple 
specificity determinants (i.e. residues at which an amino acid substitution 
substantially perturbs the TSR). Specificity determinants were found: (i) on a 
hydrophobic surface of the CAR (from Leu-267 to Ala-285), (ii) on a hydrophilic 
surface of the CAR (from Ser-299 to Arg-318), and (iii) in a cytoplasmic loop 
(His-233) between transmembrane segments 6 and 7. Overall, these observations 
show that (i) structural features within the CAR have a role in substrate 
discrimination (as might be anticipated for a transport conduit) and, 
interestingly, (ii) the substrate discrimination task is shared among 
specificity determinants that appear too widely dispersed across the GabP 
molecule to be in simultaneous contact with the substrates. We conclude that 
GabP exhibits behaviour consistent with a broadly applicable specificity 
delocalization principle, which is demonstrated to follow naturally from the 
classical notion that translocation occurs synchronously with conformational 
transitions that change the chemical potential of the bound ligand [Tanford 
(1982) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79, 2882-2884].

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20030594
PMCID: PMC1223805
PMID: 12956624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]