1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45864-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303851200. Epub 
2003 Sep 3.

Highly conserved cysteines of mouse core 2 
beta1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I form a network of disulfide bonds and 
include a thiol that affects enzyme activity.

Yen TY(1), Macher BA, Bryson S, Chang X, Tvaroska I, Tse R, Takeshita S, Lew AM, 
Datti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Francisco State University, San 
Francisco, California 94132, USA.

Core 2 beta1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (C2GnT-I) plays a pivotal role 
in the biosynthesis of mucin-type O-glycans that serve as ligands in cell 
adhesion. To elucidate the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme for use in 
computer-aided design of therapeutically relevant enzyme inhibitors, we 
investigated the participation of cysteine residues in disulfide linkages in a 
purified murine recombinant enzyme. The pattern of free and disulfide-bonded Cys 
residues was determined by liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem 
mass spectrometry in the absence and presence of dithiothreitol. Of nine highly 
conserved Cys residues, under both conditions, one (Cys217) is a free thiol, and 
eight are engaged in disulfide bonds, with pairs formed between Cys59-Cys413, 
Cys100-Cys172, Cys151-Cys199, and Cys372-Cys381. The only non-conserved residue 
within the beta1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase family, Cys235, is also a 
free thiol in the presence of dithiothreitol; however, in the absence of 
reductant, Cys235 forms an intermolecular disulfide linkage. Biochemical studies 
performed with thiolreactive agents demonstrated that at least one free cysteine 
affects enzyme activity and is proximal to the UDP-GlcNAc binding site. A Cys217 
--> Ser mutant enzyme was insensitive to thiol reactants and displayed kinetic 
properties virtually identical to those of the wild-type enzyme, thereby showing 
that Cys217, although not required for activity per se, represents the only 
thiol that causes enzyme inactivation when modified. Based on the pattern of 
free and disulfide-linked Cys residues, and a method of fold 
recognition/threading and homology modeling, we have computed a 
three-dimensional model for this enzyme that was refined using the T4 
bacteriophage beta-glucosyltransferase fold.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303851200
PMID: 12954635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]