1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 15;12(18):2321-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg243.

A haplotype-based molecular analysis of CFTR mutations associated with 
respiratory and pancreatic diseases.

Lee JH(1), Choi JH, Namkung W, Hanrahan JW, Chang J, Song SY, Park SW, Kim DS, 
Yoon JH, Suh Y, Jang IJ, Nam JH, Kim SJ, Cho MO, Lee JE, Kim KH, Lee MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134 
Sinchon-Dong, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Aberrant membrane transport caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene is associated with a wide 
spectrum of respiratory and digestive diseases as well as cystic fibrosis. Using 
a gene scanning method, we found 11 polymorphisms and mutations of the CFTR gene 
in the Korean population. Individual variants at these sites were analyzed by 
conventional DNA screening in 117 control and 75 patients having bronchiectasis 
or chronic pancreatitis. In a haplotype determination based on a Bayesian 
algorithm, 15 haplotypes were assembled in the 192 individuals tested. Several 
haplotypes, especially with Q1352H, IVS8 T5, and E217G, were found to have 
disease associations in a case-control study. Notably, a common polymorphism of 
M470V appears to affect the intensity of the disease association. Among the two 
haplotypes having IVS8 T5, the T5-V470 haplotype showed higher disease 
association than the T5-M470 haplotype. In addition, a Q1352H mutation found in 
a V470 background showed the strongest disease association. The physiological 
significances of the identified mutations were rigorously analyzed. 
Non-synonymous E217G and Q1352H mutations in the M470 background caused a 60-80% 
reduction in CFTR-dependent Cl(-) currents and HCO3(-) -transport activities. 
Surprisingly, the additional M470V polymorphic variant with the Q1352H mutation 
completely abolished CFTR-dependent anion transport activities. These findings 
provide the first evidence on the importance of CFTR mutations in the Asian 
population. Importantly, the results also reveal that interactions between 
multiple genetic variants in cis affect the final function of the gene products.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg243
PMID: 12952861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]