1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47602-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M308967200. Epub
2003  Sep 15.

Iron-sulfur cluster N2 of the Escherichia coli NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase 
(complex I) is located on subunit NuoB.

Flemming D(1), Schlitt A, Spehr V, Bischof T, Friedrich T.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität 
Albertstr. 21, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The proton-pumping NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, also called respiratory 
complex I, couples the transfer of electrons from NADH to ubiquinone with the 
translocation of protons across the membrane. One FMN and up to 9 iron-sulfur 
(Fe/S) clusters participate in the redox reaction. There is discussion that the 
EPR-detectable Fe/S cluster N2 is involved in proton pumping. However, the 
assignment of this cluster to a distinct subunit of the complex as well as the 
number of Fe/S clusters giving rise to the EPR signal are still under debate. 
Complex I from Escherichia coli consists of 13 polypeptides called NuoA to N. 
Either subunit NuoB or NuoI could harbor Fe/S cluster N2. Whereas NuoB contains 
a unique motif for the binding of one Fe/S cluster, NuoI contains a typical 
ferredoxin motif for the binding of two Fe/S clusters. Individual mutation of 
all four conserved cysteine residues in NuoB resulted in a loss of complex I 
activity and of the EPR signal of N2 in the cytoplasmic membrane as well as in 
the isolated complex. Individual mutations of all eight conserved cysteine 
residues of NuoI revealed a variable phenotype. Whereas cluster N2 was lost in 
most NuoI mutants, it was still present in the cytoplasmic membranes of the 
mutants NuoI C63A and NuoI C102A. N2 was also detected in the complex isolated 
from the mutant NuoI C102A. From this we conclude that the Fe/S cluster N2 is 
located on subunit NuoB.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M308967200
PMID: 12975362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]