1. J Virol. 2003 Oct;77(19):10504-14. doi: 10.1128/jvi.77.19.10504-10514.2003.

Evolutionary pressure of a receptor competitor selects different subgroup a 
avian leukosis virus escape variants with altered receptor interactions.

Melder DC(1), Pankratz VS, Federspiel MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Section of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic 
Rochester, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

A complex interaction between the retroviral envelope glycoproteins and a 
specific cell surface protein initiates viral entry into cells. The avian 
leukosis-sarcoma virus (ALV) group of retroviruses provides a useful 
experimental system for studying the retroviral entry process and the evolution 
of receptor usage. In this study, we demonstrate that evolutionary pressure on 
subgroup A ALV [ALV(A)] entry exerted by the presence of a competitive 
inhibitor, a soluble form of the ALV(A) Tva receptor linked to a mouse 
immunoglobulin G tag (quail sTva-mIgG), can select different populations of 
escape variants. This escape population contained three abundant ALV(A) variant 
viruses, all with mutations in the surface glycoprotein hypervariable regions: a 
previously identified variant containing the Y142N mutation in the hr1 region; a 
new variant with two mutations, W141G in hr1 and K261E in vr3; and another new 
variant with two mutations, W145R in hr1 and K261E. The W141G K261E and W145R 
K261E viruses escape primarily by lowering their binding affinities for the 
quail Tva receptor competitive inhibitor while retaining wild-type levels of 
binding affinity for the chicken Tva receptor. A secondary phenotype of the new 
variants was an alteration in receptor interference patterns from that of 
wild-type ALV(A), indicating that the mutant glycoproteins are possibly 
interacting with other cellular proteins. One result of these altered 
interactions was that the variants caused a transient period of cytotoxicity. We 
could also directly demonstrate that the W141G K261E variant glycoproteins bound 
significant levels of a soluble form of the Tvb(S3) ALV receptor in a binding 
assay. Alterations in the normally extreme specificity of the ALV(A) 
glycoproteins for Tva may represent an evolutionary first step toward expanding 
viral receptor usage in response to inefficient viral entry.

DOI: 10.1128/jvi.77.19.10504-10514.2003
PMCID: PMC228527
PMID: 12970435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]