1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1992 Jan 22;43(2):377-82. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(92)90302-y.

Guinea pig whole blood 5-lipoxygenase assay: utility in the assessment of 
potential 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors.

Spaethe SM(1), Snyder DW, Pechous PA, Clarke T, VanAlstyne EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Research, Lilly Research Laboratories, Lilly 
Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285.

Guinea pigs are widely used in the study of the role of leukotrienes in airway 
pathophysiology. Extensive research efforts have utilized this species in the 
development of potential therapeutic agents associated with inhibition of 
leukotriene production (e.g. 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors and 
5-lipoxygenase-activating protein antagonists) for the treatment of acute 
bronchospasm in asthma. We now report, for the first time, an ex vivo whole 
blood 5-lipoxygenase assay in guinea pigs which should prove useful in the 
future development of leukotriene biosynthesis inhibitors. Addition of 150 
microM arachidonic acid (AA) to heparinized whole blood for 5 min prior to the 
stimulation with 20 micrograms/mL A23187 resulted in a 10-fold increase in 
leukotriene B4 (LTB4; 11.36 +/- 1.55 ng/mL) above basal (0.96 +/- 0.29 ng/mL) 
within 10 min. To further validate the utility of the assay, we utilized the 
5-lipoxygenase inhibitor BW A4C. Pretreatment of guinea pig whole blood with BW 
A4C in vitro prior to stimulation resulted in a concentration-dependent 
inhibition of LTB4 production (IC50 = 229 nM), whereas thromboxane B2 (TXB2) 
production was unaffected. Likewise, when BW A4C was administered to guinea pigs 
intravenously (3 mg/kg), we observed a rapid and marked (approximately 90%) 
reduction in whole blood LTB4 production which returned to control (pre-drug 
values) by 5 hr. In contrast, TXB2 production was unaffected over the same 
experimental time period. In summary, we have described a whole blood assay 
which can discriminate 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors both in vitro and in vivo. 
Furthermore, this assay system will be of use in determining the potency, 
efficacy, selectivity, and pharmacodynamic properties of 5-lipoxygenase 
inhibitors in guinea pigs.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(92)90302-y
PMID: 1310855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]