1. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jun;29(6):509-14. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.29.509.

[Two kindreds with familial Alzheimer's disease--analysis of the APP717 mutation 
and the mutated genes for the prion protein].

[Article in Japanese]

Nagano K(1), Miki T, Yoshioka K, Katsumi D, Katsuya T, Takeda M, Ikeda M, Tanabe 
H, Nishimura T, Sakai Y, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School.

Numerous Caucasian familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD) pedigrees have been 
described in the literature, while only 21 Japanese FAD families have been 
reported to date. Here we report the clinical findings and the result of 
molecular genetic analysis of 4 patients from two FAD kindreds, OS-2 and OS-3. 
The proband in OS-2 family has developed loss of recent memory and place 
disorientation age at 43. A brain CT showed severe diffuse cortical atrophy. Her 
younger brother had dementia at 42 years and her mother and other 3 siblings had 
also dementia symptoms suspected to be Alzheimer's disease. The proband in OS-3 
family showed declining recent memory at 49 years and developed dysphagia, gait 
disturbance and emotional incontinent with cerebral atrophy at 52 years. His 
father and elder brother demonstrated dementia signs at 60 and 54 years old, 
respectively. Recently it was reported that affected members from 2 Caucasian 
kindreds with FAD had missense mutation in exon 17 of the gene for amyloid 
precursor protein (APP). Patients from three different Japanese kindreds with 
FAD also showed the same mutation on the APP gene. Amino acid substitution 
(Val-Ile) at codon 717 by this mutation is responsible for FAD in at least some 
kindreds. We used genomic DNA from 4 affected members of 2 families to determine 
whether the disease in these families is associated with a APP717 mutation and 
the mutated codons, 102, 117, 129, 178 and 200, on the gene for 
protease-resistance prion protein (PrP) which cause transmissible dementia, 
Creutzfelt-Jacob disease (CJD) and Gerstmann-Strausler syndrome (GSS).(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.29.509
PMID: 1356166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]