1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2003 Sep;159(8-9):775-80.

[Symptomatic carriers of dystrophinopathy with chromosome X inactivation bias].

[Article in French]

Lesca G(1), Demarquay G, Llense S, Streichenberger N, Petiot P, Michel-Calemard 
L, Récan D, Vial C, Ollagnon-Roman E.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Neurogénétique, Hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, Lyon. 
gaetan.lesca@chu-lyon.fr

Several studies have recently highlighted the fact that the clinical involvement 
in females carrying a mutation in the dystrophin gene could be more frequent 
than usually thought, suggesting the need of a careful cardiac follow-up. Except 
for the classical chromosomal rearrangements, it was shown that a bias in the X 
chromosome inactivation process could be found in some affected females. We 
report two families illustrating different situations. The propositus of the 
first family, aged 32, presented with a proximal muscular weakness, increasing 
for three years, as well as elevated muscular enzymes in blood. Her brother 
suffered from classical Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Her mother was more 
severely affected, whereas her sister remained asymptomatic. A duplication of 
exons 3 to 7 of the dystrophin gene was found in all four patients. The affected 
carrier from the second family was a sporadic case. She has been suffering from 
proximal muscular weakness for six years. Muscle biopsy showed a mosaic pattern 
of the immunostaining using specific antidystrophin antibodies. A stop mutation 
was found in exon 52. Her ten year-old daughter, carrying the mutation, was 
asymptomatic. In both families, the inactivation profiles were in accordance 
with the clinical presentation. We discuss the different mechanisms that may 
lead to the inactivation bias in these patients, as well as the advantage and 
limits of using the X chromosome inactivation test as a tool for diagnosis and 
prognosis purpose in symptomatic carriers for dystrophinopathies.

PMID: 13679720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]