1. Brain. 2003 Dec;126(Pt 12):2761-72. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg283. Epub 2003 Sep
23.

Cerebellar ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 1: clinical and genetic studies.

Le Ber I(1), Moreira MC, Rivaud-Péchoux S, Chamayou C, Ochsner F, Kuntzer T, 
Tardieu M, Saïd G, Habert MO, Demarquay G, Tannier C, Beis JM, Brice A, Koenig 
M, Dürr A.

Author information:
(1)Fédération de Neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière AP-HP, Paris, France.

Ataxia with ocular motor apraxia type 1 (AOA1) is an autosomal recessive 
cerebellar ataxia (ARCA) associated with oculomotor apraxia, hypoalbuminaemia 
and hypercholesterolaemia. The gene APTX, which encodes aprataxin, has been 
identified recently. We studied a large series of 158 families with 
non-Friedreich progressive ARCA. We identified 14 patients (nine families) with 
five different missense or truncating mutations in the aprataxin gene (W279X, 
A198V, D267G, W279R, IVS5+1), four of which were new. We determined the relative 
frequency of AOA1 which is 5%. Mutation carriers underwent detailed 
neurological, neuropsychological, electrophysiological, oculographic and 
biological examinations, as well as brain imaging. The mean age at onset was 6.8 
+/- 4.8 years (range 2-18 years). Cerebellar ataxia with cerebellar atrophy on 
MRI and severe axonal sensorimotor neuropathy were present in all patients. In 
contrast, oculomotor apraxia (86%), hypoalbuminaemia (83%) and 
hypercholesterolaemia (75%) were variable. Choreic movements were frequent at 
onset (79%), but disappeared in the course of the disease in most cases. 
However, a remarkably severe and persistent choreic phenotype was associated 
with one of the mutations (A198V). Cognitive impairment was always present. 
Ocular saccade initiation was normal, but their duration was increased by the 
succession of multiple hypometric saccades that could clinically be confused 
with 'slow saccades'. We emphasize the phenotypic variability over the course of 
the disease. Cerebellar ataxia and/or chorea predominate at onset, but later on 
they are often partially masked by severe neuropathy, which is the most typical 
symptom in young adults. The presence of chorea, sensorimotor neuropathy, 
oculomotor anomalies, biological abnormalities, cerebellar atrophy on MRI and 
absence of the Babinski sign can help to distinguish AOA1 from Friedreich's 
ataxia on a clinical basis. The frequency of chorea at onset suggests that this 
diagnosis should also be considered in children with chorea who do not carry the 
IT15 mutation responsible for Huntington's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awg283
PMID: 14506070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]