1. Blood. 2004 Feb 1;103(3):903-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-01-0308. Epub 2003
Sep  22.

Identification of the primary collagen-binding surface on human glycoprotein VI 
by site-directed mutagenesis and by a blocking phage antibody.

Smethurst PA(1), Joutsi-Korhonen L, O'Connor MN, Wilson E, Jennings NS, Garner 
SF, Zhang Y, Knight CG, Dafforn TR, Buckle A, IJsseldijk MJ, De Groot PG, 
Watkins NA, Farndale RW, Ouwehand WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge & National Blood Service 
Cambridge, Long Road, Cambridge, CB2 2PT, United Kingdom. pas28@cam.ac.uk

Glycoprotein (GP) VI is the major receptor responsible for platelet activation 
by collagen, but the collagen-binding surface of GPVI is unknown. To address 
this issue we expressed, from insect cells, the immunoglobulin (Ig)-like 
ectodomains (residues 1-185) of human and murine GPVI, called hD1D2 and mD1D2, 
respectively. Both proteins bound specifically to collagen-related peptide 
(CRP), a GPVI-specific ligand, but hD1D2 bound CRP more strongly than did mD1D2. 
Molecular modeling and sequence comparison identified key differences between 
hD1D2 and mD1D2. Ten mutant hD1D2s were expressed, of which 4 had human residues 
replaced by their murine counterpart, and 6 had replacements by alanine. CRP 
binding studies with these mutants demonstrated that the exchange of lysine at 
position 59 for the corresponding murine glutamate substantially reduced binding 
to CRP. The position of lysine59 on the apical surface of GPVI suggests a mode 
of CRP binding analogous to that used by the related killer cell Ig-like 
receptors to bind HLA. This surface was confirmed as critical for collagen 
binding by epitope mapping of an inhibitory phage antibody against GPVI. This 
anti-GPVI, clone 10B12, gave dose-dependent inhibition of the hD1D2-collagen 
interaction. Clone 10B12 inhibited activation of platelets by CRP and collagen 
in aggregometry and thrombus formation by the latter in whole blood perfusion. 
Antibody 10B12 showed significantly reduced binding to the hD1D2-E59, and, on 
that basis, the GPVI:10B12 interface was modeled.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-01-0308
PMID: 14504096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]