1. FASEB J. 2003 Nov;17(14):2091-3. doi: 10.1096/fj.02-1182fje. Epub 2003 Sep 18.

Up-regulation of mitochondrial uncoupling protein 3 reveals an early muscular 
metabolic defect in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Dupuis L(1), di Scala F, Rene F, de Tapia M, Oudart H, Pradat PF, Meininger V, 
Loeffler JP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Signalisations Moléculaires et Neurodégénérescence, EA 3433, 
Université Louis Pasteur, Faculté de Médecine, 11 rue Humann, 67085 Strasbourg 
Cedex, France.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting 
primarily motor neurons. Growing evidence suggests a mitochondrial defect in 
ALS. The precise molecular mechanisms underlying those defects are unknown. We 
studied the expression of mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (UCPs), key 
regulators of mitochondrial functions, in tissues from a mouse model of ALS 
(SOD1 G86R transgenic mice) and from muscular biopsies of human sporadic ALS. 
Surprisingly, in SOD1 G86R mice, UCPs, and particularly UCP3, were upregulated 
in skeletal muscle but not in spinal cord. Consistent with this pattern of 
expression, ATP levels were selectively depleted in muscle but not in neural 
tissues 1 month before disease onset and the respiratory control ratio of 
isolated mitochondria is decreased. UCP3 up-regulation was not observed in 
experimentally denervated muscles, suggesting that changes in muscular UCP3 
expression are associated with the physiopathological processes of ALS. This is 
further supported by our observation of increased UCP3 levels in human ALS 
muscular biopsies. We propose that UCP3 up-regulation in skeletal muscle 
contributes to the characteristic mitochondrial damage of ALS and to the onset 
of the disease. Moreover, since skeletal muscle is a key metabolic tissue, our 
findings suggest that ALS may not solely arise from neuronal events but also 
from more generalized metabolic defects.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.02-1182fje
PMID: 14500553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]