1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):48666-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M309941200. Epub
2003  Sep 22.

Mutationally induced disulfide bond formation within the third extracellular 
loop causes melanocortin 4 receptor inactivation in patients with obesity.

Tarnow P(1), Schoneberg T, Krude H, Gruters A, Biebermann H.

Author information:
(1)Otto Heubner Centrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, Pädiatrische 
Endokrinologie, Charité Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

By screening patients with severe early onset obesity for mutations within the 
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene, we have identified a missense mutation 
(C271R) that occurs homozygous in two siblings with obesity. In-depth functional 
characterization of C271R revealed a right-shifted concentration response curve 
due to lower affinity to natural and synthetic MC4R agonists and a reduced cell 
surface expression. Cys-271 is located in the third extracellular loop. Here, we 
provide evidence that Cys-271 forms an intra-loop disulfide bond with Cys-277. 
Unexpectedly, we found that loss of receptor function is not only caused by the 
disruption of this disulfide bridge. Our data strongly support a new mechanism 
in which the receptor malfunction in the C271R mutant is induced by formation of 
a functionally disastrous disulfide bridge between Cys-277 and a third Cys 
residue at position 279. Mutational and chemical disruption of this improper 
disulfide bond was able to restore normal receptor potency. By demonstrating 
that a loss of a disulfide bond-participating Cys residue can favor a 
functionally disastrous disulfide bond, we now add a new mechanism of how Cys 
residues can be involved in G-protein-coupled receptor malfunction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M309941200
PMID: 14504270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]