1. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Sep;18(6):1387-401. doi:
10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02864.x.

Caspase-3 dependent proteolytic activation of protein kinase C delta mediates 
and regulates 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+)-induced apoptotic cell death in 
dopaminergic cells: relevance to oxidative stress in dopaminergic degeneration.

Kaul S(1), Kanthasamy A, Kitazawa M, Anantharam V, Kanthasamy AG.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disorder Research Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
2062 Veterinary Medicine Building, Iowa Sate University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

1-Methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), the neurotoxic metabolite of MPTP 
(1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), induces apoptosis in 
dopaminergic neurons; however, the cellular mechanisms underlying the 
degenerative process are not well understood. In the present study, we 
demonstrate that caspase-3 mediated proteolytic activation of protein kinase C 
delta (PKC delta) is critical in MPP+-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis. 
MPP+ exposure in rat dopaminergic neuronal cells resulted in time-dependent 
increases in reactive oxygen species generation, cytochrome c release, and 
caspase-9 and caspase-3 activation. Interestingly, MPP+ induced proteolytic 
cleavage of PKC delta (72-74 kDa) into a 41-kDa catalytic and a 38-kDa 
regulatory subunit, resulting in persistently increased kinase activity. The 
caspase-3 inhibitor Z-DEVD-fmk effectively blocked MPP+-induced PKC delta 
cleavage and kinase activity, suggesting that the proteolytic activation is 
caspase-3 mediated. Similar results were seen in MPP+-treated rat midbrain 
slices. Z-DEVD-fmk and the PKC delta specific inhibitor rottlerin almost 
completely blocked MPP+-induced DNA fragmentation. The superoxide dismutase 
mimetic, MnTBAP also effectively attenuated MPP+-induced caspase-3 activation, 
PKC delta cleavage, and DNA fragmentation. Furthermore, rottlerin attenuated 
MPP+-induced caspase-3 activity without affecting basal activity, suggesting 
positive feedback activation of caspase-3 by PKC delta. Intracellular delivery 
of catalytically active recombinant PKC delta significantly increased caspase-3 
activity, further indicating that PKC delta regulates caspase-3 activity. 
Finally, over-expression of a kinase inactive PKC delta K376R mutant prevented 
MPP+-induced caspase activation and DNA fragmentation, confirming the 
pro-apoptotic function of PKC delta in dopaminergic cell death. Together, we 
demonstrate for the first time that MPP+-induced oxidative stress 
proteolytically activates PKC delta in a caspase-3-dependent manner to induce 
apoptosis and up-regulate the caspase cascade in dopaminergic neuronal cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02864.x
PMID: 14511319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]