1. Blood. 2004 Feb 1;103(3):941-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-05-1505. Epub 2003 Oct
 2.

An amino acid polymorphism in von Willebrand factor correlates with increased 
susceptibility to proteolysis by ADAMTS13.

Bowen DJ(1), Collins PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Wales College of Medicine Heath Park, 
Cardiff, CF14 4XN, United Kingdom. bowendj1@cf.ac.uk

The hypothesis that increased ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease with 
thrombospondin repeats) activity or increased susceptibility of von Willebrand 
factor (VWF) to proteolysis by ADAMTS13 may underlie type I von Willebrand 
disease (VWD) in some patients was investigated. Plasma from 4 patients with 
type I VWD was cryoprecipitated. ADAMTS13 activity in the VWF-poor cryodepleted 
fraction was assessed by incubation with purified VWF; susceptibility to 
proteolysis of the VWF in the VWF-rich cryoprecipitate was assessed by 
incubation with a normal, group O cryodepleted plasma. ADAMTS13 activity was 
similar in all 4 type I VWD cryodepleted plasmas and comparable to a normal 
control plasma. In contrast, the VWF of one patient showed increased 
susceptibility to proteolysis by ADAMTS13. Investigation of additional family 
members indicated that increased susceptibility was heritable, but it did not 
track uniquely with type I VWD. Sequence analysis of VWF exon 28 indicated that 
increased susceptibility to proteolysis tracked with the "G" allele of the A/G 
polymorphism at position 24/1282, encoding the amino acid polymorphism 
Tyr/Cys1584 ("G" = Cys1584). A prospective study of 200 individuals yielded 2 
Tyr/Cys1584 heterozygotes; for both, plasma VWF showed increased susceptibility 
to proteolysis. The finding that an amino acid polymorphism in VWF may influence 
susceptibility to ADAMTS13 has potentially significant implications in diverse 
areas.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-05-1505
PMID: 14525793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]