1. J Mol Biol. 2003 Oct 17;333(2):443-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.08.026.

Conversion of wild-type p53 core domain into a conformation that mimics a 
hot-spot mutant.

Ishimaru D(1), Maia LF, Maiolino LM, Quesado PA, Lopez PC, Almeida FC, Valente 
AP, Silva JL.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica Médica, Centro Nacional de Ressonância Magnética 
Nuclear de Macromoléculas, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21941-590, Brazil.

The wild-type p53 protein can be driven into a conformation corresponding to 
that adopted by structural mutant forms by heterodimerization with a mutant 
subunit. To seek partially folded states of the wild-type p53 core domain (p53C) 
we used high hydrostatic pressure (HP) and subzero temperatures. Aggregation of 
the protein was observed in parallel with its pressure denaturation at 25 and 37 
degrees C. However, when HP experiments were performed at 4 degrees C, the 
extent of denaturation and aggregation was significantly less pronounced. On the 
other hand, subzero temperatures under pressure led to cold denaturation and 
yielded a non-aggregated, alternative conformation of p53C. Nuclear magnetic 
resonance (1H15N-NMR) data showed that the alternative p53C conformation 
resembled that of the hot-spot oncogenic mutant R248Q. This alternative state 
was as susceptible to denaturation and aggregation as the mutant R248Q when 
subjected to HP at 25 degrees C. Together these data demonstrate that wild-type 
p53C adopts an alternative conformation with a mutant-like stability, consistent 
with the dominant-negative effect caused by many mutants. This alternative 
conformation is likely related to inactive forms that appear in vivo, usually 
driven by interaction with mutant proteins. Therefore, it can be a valuable 
target in the search for ways to interfere with protein misfolding and hence to 
prevent tumor development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.08.026
PMID: 14529628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]