1. Hum Immunol. 2003 Oct;64(10):973-8. doi: 10.1016/s0198-8859(03)00176-9.

Stromal-cell derived factor-1 chemokine gene variant is associated with type 1 
diabetes age at onset in Japanese population.

Ide A(1), Kawasaki E, Abiru N, Sun F, Fukushima T, Takahashi R, Kuwahara H, 
Fujita N, Kita A, Oshima K, Uotani S, Yamasaki H, Yamaguchi Y, Kawabata Y, 
Fujisawa T, Ikegami H, Eguchi K.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Stromal-cell derived factor-1 (SDF-1) is a powerful chemokine that upregulates 
T-cell migration and activation. The gene for SDF-1 is located near type 1 
diabetes susceptibility locus IDDM10, suggesting a contribution by SDF-1 to the 
induction of diabetes. Recently the role of SDF-1 gene polymorphism in the 
clinical presentation of type 1 diabetes in French population has been reported. 
To test the putative involvement of SDF-1 gene polymorphism in predisposition to 
or clinical heterogeneity of type 1 diabetes in Japanese population, we 
conducted the case-control study. The SDF1-3'A variant (801 G to A in the 
3'-untranslated region) was determined by the polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism technique in 184 patients with 
abrupt-onset type 1 diabetes and 106 healthy control subjects. No significant 
difference in allele and genotype frequencies of SDF1-3'A variant was found 
between type 1 diabetic patients and healthy controls. However, the SDF1-3'A 
variant was strongly associated with early-onset diabetes in a recessive model 
(AA versus AG + GG, p = 0.017). The mean age-at-onset in patients carrying 
SDF1-3'AA genotype was significantly younger than that in patients with SDF1-3' 
AG or GG genotype (p = 0.028). The frequencies of SDF1-3' A variant were 
significantly increased in HLA-DR4/9 patients compared with non-DR4/9 patients 
(p = 0.008). These results suggest that the SDF-1 gene polymorphism is 
associated with the age-at-onset of type 1 diabetes in Japanese population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0198-8859(03)00176-9
PMID: 14522095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]