1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4862-6. doi: 10.1210/jc.2003-030173.

The Gly16-->Arg16 and Gln27-->Glu27 polymorphisms of beta2-adrenergic receptor 
are associated with metabolic syndrome in men.

Dallongeville J(1), Helbecque N, Cottel D, Amouyel P, Meirhaeghe A.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U-508, Institut 
Pasteur de Lille, Lille Cedex, France. jean.dallongeville@pasteur-lille.fr

Endogenous catecholamines contribute to regulation of adipose tissue lipolysis, 
glucose homeostasis, and vascular tone. The goal of the present study was to 
assess the association between the Gly(16)-->Arg(16) and Gln(27)-->Glu(27) 
polymorphisms of the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor and metabolic syndrome. 
Participants were recruited in a population survey and included 1195 men and 
women. Metabolic syndrome was defined according to National Cholesterol 
Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines. There were 276 patients 
with metabolic syndrome and 872 controls. The Gly(16)-->Arg(16) (P < 0.005) and 
Gln(27)-->Glu(27) (P < 0.04) polymorphisms were associated with metabolic 
syndrome in men, but not in women. In multivariate analyses adjusting for age, 
physical activity, smoking habits, alcohol consumption, and body mass index, the 
odds ratio of metabolic syndrome was 1.83 (95% confidence interval, 1.10-3.05) 
and 2.43 (95% confidence interval, 1.19-4.95) in men bearing the Gly(16)/Arg(16) 
and Arg(16)/Arg(16) genotypes, respectively. Similarly, the odds ratios of 
metabolic syndrome were 0.99 (95% confidence interval, 0.50-1.93) and 1.67 (95% 
confidence interval, 0.84-3.33) in men bearing the Gln(27)/Glu(27) and 
Gln(27)/Gln(27) genotypes, respectively. Because both variants were in linkage 
disequilibrium, a haplotype analysis was performed. There was no evidence of any 
statistically significant association between beta(2)-adrenergic receptor 
haplotypes and metabolic syndrome. In conclusion, these data suggest that the 
Arg(16) and Gln(27) variants of the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor gene contribute 
to metabolic syndrome susceptibility in men.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2003-030173
PMID: 14557466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]