1. Blood. 2004 Feb 15;103(4):1305-10. doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-06-1796. Epub 2003 
Oct 16.

Molecular characterization of ADAMTS13 gene mutations in Japanese patients with 
Upshaw-Schulman syndrome.

Matsumoto M(1), Kokame K, Soejima K, Miura M, Hayashi S, Fujii Y, Iwai A, Ito E, 
Tsuji Y, Takeda-Shitaka M, Iwadate M, Umeyama H, Yagi H, Ishizashi H, Banno F, 
Nakagaki T, Miyata T, Fujimura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Transfusion Medicine, Nara Medical University, Shijyo-cho 
840, Kashihara city, Nara 634-8522, Japan.

We report here 7 new mutations in the ADAMTS13 gene responsible for 
Upshaw-Schulman syndrome (USS), a catastrophic phenotype of congenital 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, by analyzing 5 Japanese families. There 
were 3 mutations that occurred at exon-intron boundaries: 414+1G>A at intron 4, 
686+1G>A at intron 6, and 1244+2T>G at intron 10 (numbered from the A of the 
initiation Met codon), and we confirmed that 2 of these mutations produced 
aberrantly spliced messenger RNAs (mRNAs). The remaining 4 mutations were 
missense mutations: R193W, I673F, C908Y, and R1123C. In expression experiments 
using HeLa cells, all mutants showed no or a marginal secretion of ADAMTS13. 
Taken together with the findings in our recent report we determined the 
responsible mutations in a total of 7 Japanese patients with USS with a uniform 
clinical picture of severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, and in their family 
members, based on ADAMTS13 gene analysis. Of these patients, 2 were homozygotes 
and 5 were compound heterozygotes. The parents of one homozygote were related 
(cousins), while those of the other were not. Molecular models of the 
metalloprotease, fifth domain of thrombospondin 1 (Tsp1-5), and Tsp1-8 domains 
of ADAMTS13 suggest that the missense mutations could cause structural defects 
in the mutants.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2003-06-1796
PMID: 14563640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]