1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 16;279(3):2192-201. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305605200. Epub
2003  Oct 22.

Structure of the sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway-modulating protein STE50 and 
analysis of its interaction with the STE11 SAM.

Grimshaw SJ(1), Mott HR, Stott KM, Nielsen PR, Evetts KA, Hopkins LJ, 
Nietlispach D, Owen D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1GA, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 5;279(10):9672.

The sterile alpha motif (SAM) is a 65-70-amino acid domain found in over 300 
proteins that are involved in either signal transduction or transcriptional 
activation and repression. SAM domains have been shown to mediate both 
homodimerization and heterodimerization and in some cases oligomerization. Here, 
we present the solution structure of the SAM domain of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae protein, Ste50p. Ste50p functions as a modulator of the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades in S. cerevisiae, which control 
mating, pseudohyphal growth, and osmo-tolerance. This is the first example of 
the structure of a SAM domain from a MAPK module protein. We have studied the 
associative behavior of Ste50p SAM in solution and shown that it is monomeric. 
We have examined the SAM domain from Ste11p, the MAPK kinase kinase that 
associates with Ste50p in vivo, and shown that it forms dimers with a 
self-association K(d) of approximately 0.5 mm. We have also analyzed the 
interaction of Ste50p SAM with Ste11p SAM and the effects of mutations at 
Val-37, Asp-38, Pro-71, Leu-73, Leu-75, and Met-99 of STE50 on the 
heterodimerization properties of Ste50p SAM. We have found that L73A and L75A 
abrogate the Ste50p interaction with Ste11p, and we compare these data with the 
known interaction sites defined for other SAM domain interactions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M305605200
PMID: 14573615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]