1. Exp Gerontol. 2003 Oct;38(10):1071-6. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(03)00211-0.

Longevity-associated mitochondrial DNA 5178 A/C polymorphism modulates effects 
of daily drinking and cigarette consumption on serum triglyceride levels in 
middle-aged Japanese men.

Kokaze A(1), Ishikawa M, Matsunaga N, Yoshida M, Sekine Y, Sekiguchi K, Satoh M, 
Harada M, Teruya K, Takeda N, Uchida Y, Tsunoda T, Takashima Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Kyorin University School of Medicine, 6-20-2, 
Shinkawa, Mitaka-shi, Tokyo 181-8611, Japan. dawn@kyorin-u.ac.jp

Mitochondrial DNA 5178 adenine/cytosine (mt5178 A/C) polymorphism is one of the 
longevity-associated mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms. The frequency of the 
mt5178A genotype is significantly higher in Japanese centenarians than in the 
general population. We previously reported that serum high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol levels were significantly higher in men with mt5178A than in those 
with mt5178C. However, this significant difference disappeared after adjusting 
for drinking frequency. To investigate the interaction between mt5178 A/C 
polymorphism and habitual drinking on serum lipid levels, we performed an 
association study in 321 healthy middle-aged Japanese men. Interaction between 
mt5178 A/C polymorphism and daily drinking on serum triglyceride (TG) levels was 
observed (P=0.019). Moreover, interaction between mt5178 A/C polymorphism and 
cigarette consumption on serum TG levels was also observed (P=0.022). Multiple 
regression analysis showed that, in men with mt5178A, daily drinking decreased 
TG levels (P=0.025), and cigarette consumption increased TG levels (P<0.001), 
while in men with mt5178C, the effects of daily drinking and cigarette 
consumption on TG levels were unclear. No interaction was observed on other 
lipid levels. Longevity-associated mitochondrial DNA 5178 A/C polymorphism thus 
influences the effects of daily drinking and cigarette consumption on TG levels 
in middle-aged Japanese men.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(03)00211-0
PMID: 14580860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]