1. J Immunol Methods. 2003 Nov;282(1-2):33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2003.07.001.

Design and assembly of anti-CD16 ScFv antibody with two different linker 
peptides.

Feng J(1), Xie Z, Guo N, Shen B.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, PO Box 130 (3), Beijing 100850, 
PR China.

Several studies have focused on the effect of different lengths of linker 
peptides on the properties of single-chain Fv (ScFv). The expressing level and 
stability of anti-CD16 ScFv with common linker peptide (Gly(4)Ser)(3) were very 
poor. Considering 3-D structures of heavy and light chain variable region gene 
of anti-CD16 antibody, a novel linker peptide PT7 (i.e. Gly(3)SerAla(3)) was 
designed. As a comparison, the linker PT5 (Gly(4)Ser) was chosen to construct 
anti-CD16 ScFv. A molecular modeling of anti-CD16 ScFv antibody with the two 
different linker peptides was designed using computer-assisted modeling 
techniques and molecular dynamics method. Based on the crystal structure of 
human IgG1 Fc fragment-Fc gamma receptor III (Fc gamma RIII) complex, putative 
interactions between anti-CD16 ScFv antibody with two different linker peptide 
and Fc gamma receptor III fragment were predicted with Docking method. Using 
molecular graphic techniques, the structure-function relationship of anti-CD16 
ScFv antibody with two different linker peptides was analyzed and the combining 
ability was predicted. The binding activity to Daudi cells by FACS showed that 
anti-CD16 ScFv antibody with two different linker peptides possessed similar 
ability and the experimental result was consistent with the theoretical 
prediction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2003.07.001
PMID: 14604538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]