1. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Mar;25(3):399-404. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgh020. Epub 2003 
Nov 6.

Substantial reduction in risk of breast cancer associated with genetic 
polymorphisms in the promoters of the matrix metalloproteinase-2 and tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 genes.

Zhou Y(1), Yu C, Miao X, Tan W, Liang G, Xiong P, Sun T, Lin D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Etiology and Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 
(TIMPs) have been shown to play important roles in multiple ways in all stages 
of cancer initiation and development. Single nucleotide polymorphisms identified 
in the promoters of MMP2 (-1306C-->T) and TIMP2 (-418G-->C) abolish the 
Sp1-binding site and thus may down-regulate expression of the genes. This 
case-control study examined the contribution of these functional polymorphisms 
to susceptibility to development and metastasis of breast cancer. MMP2 genotypes 
were determined by PCR-based denaturing high performance liquid chromatography 
analysis and TIMP2 genotypes identified by a PCR-RFLP method in 462 breast 
cancer patients and 509 frequency matched control women. We found that the 
variant MMP2 genotype (-1306CT or TT) was associated with substantially reduced 
risk of breast cancer [odds ratio (OR), 0.46; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 
0.34-0.63], compared with the CC genotype. For TIMP2, a moderately reduced risk 
of the cancer (OR, 0.76; 95% CI, 0.58-0.99) was also associated with the variant 
allele (-418GC or CC), compared with the GG common allele. Furthermore, it 
seemed that the polymorphisms in the two genes had some additive effect and the 
reduced risk related to the polymorphisms appeared to be more pronounced in 
younger subjects. However, no significant associations were observed between the 
polymorphisms in the two genes and tumor stage and metastasis of the cancer at 
the time of diagnosis. These findings suggest that the presence of the variant 
allele in the promoter of MMP2 or TIMP2 may be a protective factor for the 
development of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgh020
PMID: 14604886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]