1. J Pediatr. 2003 Nov;143(5):658-61. doi: 10.1067/S0022-3476(03)00502-X.

Prevalence and significance of mutations in the familial Mediterranean fever 
gene in Henoch-Schönlein purpura.

Gershoni-Baruch R(1), Broza Y, Brik R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center, and the Bruce Rappoport 
Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. 
rgershoni@rambam.health.gov.il

OBJECTIVES: Based on the fact that Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) occurs in 
approximately 5% of persons with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), we assessed 
the prevalence and significance of FMF gene mutations in children with one or 
more episodes of HSP.
STUDY DESIGN: Thirty-four boys and 18 girls treated for HSP at Rambam Medical 
Center were interviewed and asked to donate blood. Mean age at disease onset was 
6.7+/-2. 4 years, and mean follow-up was 3.8+/-1.3 years. Six predominant 
mutations (M694V, M680I, M694I, V726A, K695R, E148Q) in the MEFV gene were 
studied.
RESULTS: Nine heterozygotes, three homozygotes and two compound heterozygotes, 
were identified. Altogether, five persons (10%) carried two mutated MEFV 
alleles, a number significantly exceeding that determined for the general 
Israeli population (1%-2%). Of these, three displayed genotypes associated with 
a mild form of disease (M694V/E148Q and V726A/V726A), and two had genotypes 
normally observed in disease-free persons (E148Q/K695R and E148Q/E148Q).
CONCLUSIONS: Occult FMF cases much more numerous than expected were identified 
among children presenting with HSP. Such children should be closely monitored 
for renal complications, and treatment with colchicine should be considered.

DOI: 10.1067/S0022-3476(03)00502-X
PMID: 14615741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]