1. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(12):622-628. doi: 10.1007/s10038-003-0089-0. Epub 2003
Nov  15.

Novel IRF6 mutations in Japanese patients with Van der Woude syndrome: two 
missense mutations (R45Q and P396S) and a 17-kb deletion.

Kayano S(1)(2), Kure S(3), Suzuki Y(1), Kanno K(1)(2), Aoki Y(1), Kondo S(4), 
Schutte BC(4), Murray JC(4), Yamada A(2), Matsubara Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Seiryomachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Tohoku University School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Seiryomachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. skure@mail.cc.tohoku.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, 52242, 
USA.

Three Japanese families with Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) were screened for 
mutations in the interferon regulatory factor 6 gene (IRF6) by sequencing its 
entire coding region. Two novel missense mutations, R45Q in exon 3 and P396S in 
exon 9, were identified in families 1 and 2, respectively. In family 3, no 
causative base change was found by the sequencing analysis, but a deletion 
involving exons 4-9 was suggested by multiplex PCR analysis. To confirm the 
deletion and to determine its 5'- and 3'-boundaries, we amplified a DNA fragment 
containing a heterozygous polymorphic site in exon 2 by using a 5'-upstream 
forward PCR primer and eight different reverse primers located 3'-downstream of 
exon 2. The amplified product was subjected to nested PCR to generate a DNA 
fragment containing the polymorphic site. When a reverse primer located within 
the deletion was used for the first PCR amplification, only the nondeletion 
allele was detected after the second PCR. Repeated analyses with eight different 
reverse primers allowed us to map the boundaries of the deletion, and 
subsequently a heterozygous 17,162-bp deletion involving exons 4-9 was 
identified. Since IRF6 mutations in a significant portion of VWS patients remain 
undetected by conventional sequencing analysis, it may be important to search 
for a large deletion in those patients. Our simple methods to identify deletions 
and to determine the boundaries of a deletion would facilitate the 
identification of such patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-003-0089-0
PMID: 14618417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]