1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Mar 1;169(5):615-22. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200302-278OC. Epub 2003 Nov 14.

Age-specific relationship between CD14 and atopy in a cohort assessed from age 8 
to 25 years.

O'Donnell AR(1), Toelle BG, Marks GB, Hayden CM, Laing IA, Peat JK, Goldblatt J, 
Le SouÃ«f PN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Western Australia, Children's 
Hospital Medical Centre, Perth, Australia.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Mar 1;169(5):555-6. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.2401002.

CD14 influences postnatal switching of T helper cell responses. CD14 C-159T has 
been associated with altered CD14 and IgE levels in cross-sectional studies. 
Identifying whether associations vary with age requires data from children of 
the same age followed longitudinally over many years. In this study, an 
unselected population with extensive longitudinal data was used to test the 
hypothesis that CD14 C-159T was associated with early-onset atopy. A total of 
305 subjects were assessed on up to seven occasions between ages 8 and 25 years 
by questionnaire, histamine challenge, and skin prick test. For atopy, airway 
hyperresponsiveness (AHR), and wheeze, each subject was classified as having 
early onset, late onset, or no disease onset during follow-up. Compared with 
subjects with -159CT and -159TT, subjects with -159CC had an odds ratio of 2.2 
(p = 0.018) for early-onset atopy and an odds ratio of 2.6 (p = 0.019) for 
early-onset AHR. Cross-sectional analysis showed increased prevalence of -159CC 
in subjects with atopy and AHR in childhood but not adulthood. These data 
suggest that the influence of CD14 -159C on the atopic phenotype may be age 
specific, exerting an effect during midchildhood, which is no longer apparent by 
early adulthood.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200302-278OC
PMID: 14617510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]