1. Protein Sci. 2003 Dec;12(12):2794-804. doi: 10.1110/ps.0231003.

Alpha-lactalbumin unfolding is not sufficient to cause apoptosis, but is 
required for the conversion to HAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to 
tumor cells).

Svensson M(1), Fast J, Mossberg AK, DÃ¼ringer C, Gustafsson L, Hallgren O, Brooks 
CL, Berliner L, Linse S, Svanborg C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology (MIG), Institute of 
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

HAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) is a complex of 
human alpha-lactalbumin and oleic acid (C18:1:9 cis) that kills tumor cells by 
an apoptosis-like mechanism. Previous studies have shown that a conformational 
change is required to form HAMLET from alpha-lactalbumin, and that a partially 
unfolded conformation is maintained in the HAMLET complex. This study examined 
if unfolding of alpha-lactalbumin is sufficient to induce cell death. We used 
the bovine alpha-lactalbumin Ca(2+) site mutant D87A, which is unable to bind 
Ca(2+), and thus remains partially unfolded regardless of solvent conditions. 
The D87A mutant protein was found to be inactive in the apoptosis assay, but 
could readily be converted to a HAMLET-like complex in the presence of oleic 
acid. BAMLET (bovine alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) and 
D87A-BAMLET complexes were both able to kill tumor cells. This activity was 
independent of the Ca(2+)site, as HAMLET maintained a high affinity for Ca(2+) 
but D87A-BAMLET was active with no Ca(2+) bound. We conclude that partial 
unfolding of alpha-lactalbumin is necessary but not sufficient to trigger cell 
death, and that the activity of HAMLET is defined both by the protein and the 
lipid cofactor. Furthermore, a functional Ca(2+)-binding site is not required 
for conversion of alpha-lactalbumin to the active complex or to cause cell 
death. This suggests that the lipid cofactor stabilizes the altered fold without 
interfering with the Ca(2+)site.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.0231003
PMCID: PMC2366987
PMID: 14627739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]