1. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(12):634-638. doi: 10.1007/s10038-003-0091-6. Epub 2003
Nov  19.

HPC2/ELAC2 gene variants associated with incident prostate cancer.

Adler D(1), Kanji N(1), Trpkov K(2), Fick G(3), Hughes RM(4).

Author information:
(1)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Centre, Department of Oncology, University 
of Calgary, Room 300 Heritage Medical Research Building, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, 
Calgary, Alberta, T2 N 4N1, Canada.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(4)Southern Alberta Cancer Research Centre, Department of Oncology, University 
of Calgary, Room 300 Heritage Medical Research Building, 3330 Hospital Dr. NW, 
Calgary, Alberta, T2 N 4N1, Canada. rhughesb@ucalgary.ca.

The HPC2/ELAC2 gene on chromosome 17p11 was identified as a candidate gene for 
hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) susceptibility. Two HPC2 gene missense 
variants, Ser217Leu (Leu217) and Ala541Thr (Thr541) have been associated with 
incident prostate cancer cases in some studies, but not in others. We tested for 
possible associations between the two HPC2 gene variants and prostate cancer 
risk in incident prostate cancer cases (199) and healthy male controls (525) 
from the Calgary region. The Thr541 variant showed linkage disequilibrium with 
the Leu217 variant. The number of Leu217 homozygotes in the case and control 
groups (8.6 versus 8.5%) was not statistically different. Leu217 carrier status 
was associated with prostate cancer risk (cases 61.8% versus controls 50.3%) (OR 
1.6, 95% CI 1.15-2.23). Additional analysis found that this association was not 
due to the co-existence of Thr541 variant (OR1.59, P=0.009). Logistic regression 
found that the relationship between the log odds of being a Thr541carrier and 
age depends on case/control status. Thr541 carriers had an increased risk for 
late-onset prostate cancer (P=0.028). Prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) 
was more common in the Leu217 allele carriers compared to non-carriers (42.3 
versus 26.7%) (OR 2.05, 95% CI 1.10-3.83), and in the Thr541 carriers compared 
to non-carriers (50.0 versus 34.6%) (OR 1.89, 95% CI 0.75-4.78). In summary, the 
HPC2 gene variants Leu217 and Thr541 were associated with an increased risk for 
prostate cancer and for PIN in males undergoing radical prostatectomies in the 
Calgary region.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-003-0091-6
PMID: 14625808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]