1. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2003:62-81. doi: 
10.1182/asheducation-2003.1.62.

Update on cobalamin, folate, and homocysteine.

Carmel R(1), Green R, Rosenblatt DS, Watkins D.

Author information:
(1)New York Methodist Hospital, Brooklyn, NY 11215, USA.

Three topics affecting cobalamin, folate, and homocysteine that have generated 
interest, activity, and advances in recent years are discussed. These are: (I). 
the application of an expanded variety of tools to the diagnosis of cobalamin 
deficiency, and how these affect and are affected by our current understanding 
of deficiency; (II). the nature of the interaction between homocysteine and 
vascular disease, and how the relationship is affected by vitamins; and (III). 
the improved understanding of relevant genetic disorders and common genetic 
polymorphisms, and how these interact with environmental influences. The 
diagnostic approach to cobalamin deficiency now allows better diagnosis of 
difficult and atypical cases and more confident rejection of the diagnosis when 
deficiency does not exist. However, the process has also become a complex and 
sometimes vexing undertaking. Part of the difficulty derives from the lack of a 
diagnostic gold standard among the many available tests, part from the 
overwhelming numerical preponderance of patients with subclinical deficiency (in 
which isolated biochemical findings exist without clinical signs or symptoms) 
among the cobalamin deficiency states, and part from the decreased availability 
of reliable tests to identify the causes of a patient's cobalamin deficiency and 
thus a growing deemphasis of that important part of the diagnostic process. In 
Section I, Dr. Carmel discusses the tests, the diagnostic issues, and possible 
approaches to the clinical evaluation. It is suggested no single algorithm fits 
all cases, some of which require more biochemical proof than others, and that 
differentiating between subclinical and clinical deficiency, despite their 
overlap, may be a helpful and practical point of departure in the evaluation of 
patients encountered in clinical practice. The arguments for and against a 
suggested expansion of the cobalamin reference range are also weighed. The 
epidemiologic data suggest that homocysteine elevation is a risk factor for 
vascular and thrombotic disease. In Section II, Dr. Green notes that the 
interactions of metabolism and clinical risk are not well understood and a 
causative relationship remains unproven despite new reports that lowering 
homocysteine levels may reduce vascular complications. Genetic and acquired 
influences may interact in important ways that are still being sorted out. The 
use of vitamins, especially folate, often reduces homocysteine levels but also 
carries potential disadvantages and even risks. Folate fortification of the diet 
and supplement use have also markedly reduced the frequency of folate 
deficiency, and cobalamin deficiency is now the more common deficiency state, 
especially among the elderly. Although genetic disorders are rare, they 
illuminate important metabolic mechanisms and pose diagnostic challenges, 
especially when clinical presentation occurs later in life. In Section III, Drs. 
Rosenblatt and Watkins use selected disorders to illustrate the subject. 
Imerslund-GrÃ¤sbeck syndrome, a hereditary disorder of cobalamin absorption at 
the ileal level, demonstrates genetic heterogeneity. Finnish patients show 
mutation of the gene for cubilin, the multiligand receptor for intrinsic factor. 
Surprisingly, Norwegian and other patients have been found recently to have 
mutations of the AMN (amnionless) gene, mutations that are lethal in mice at the 
embryonic stage. Two disorders of cobalamin metabolism, cblG and cblE, are now 
known to arise from mutations of the methionine synthase and methionine synthase 
reductase genes, respectively. These disorders feature megaloblastic anemia and 
neurologic manifestations. The folate disorder selected for illustration, 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency, paradoxically causes 
neurological problems but no megaloblastic anemia. This rare deficiency is the 
most common inborn error of folate metabolism. It is distinct from the very 
common MTHFR gene polymorphisms, mutations that cause mild to moderate 
reductions in MTHFR activity but no direct clinical manifestations. The MTHFR 
polymTHFR polymorphisms, especially the 677C-->T mutation, may contribute to 
vascular and birth defect risks, while reducing the risk of certain 
malignancies, such as colon cancer. These polymorphisms and those of genes for 
other enzymes and proteins related to cobalamin, folate, and homocysteine 
metabolism may be important role players in frequent interactions between genes 
and the environment.

DOI: 10.1182/asheducation-2003.1.62
PMID: 14633777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]