1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5886-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311748200. Epub
2003  Nov 27.

Residues in the distal heme pocket of neuroglobin. Implications for the multiple 
ligand binding steps.

Uno T(1), Ryu D, Tsutsumi H, Tomisugi Y, Ishikawa Y, Wilkinson AJ, Sato H, 
Hayashi T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Oehonmachi, 
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan. unot@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Amino acid residues in the ligand binding pocket of human neuroglobin have been 
identified by site-directed mutagenesis and their properties investigated by 
resonance Raman and flash photolysis methods. Wild-type neuroglobin has been 
shown to have six-coordinate heme in both ferric and ferrous states. 
Substitution of His96 by alanine leads to complete loss of heme, indicating that 
His96 is the proximal ligand. The resonance Raman spectra of M69L and K67T 
mutants were similar to those of wild-type (WT) neuroglobin in both ferric and 
ferrous states. By contrast, H64V was six-coordinate high-spin and 
five-coordinate high-spin in the ferric and ferrous states, respectively, at 
acidic pH. The spectra were pH-dependent and six-coordinate with the low-spin 
component dominating at alkaline pH. In a double mutant H64V/K67T, the high-spin 
component alone was detected in the both ferric and the ferrous states. This 
implies that His64 is the endogenous ligand and that Lys67 is situated nearby in 
the distal pocket. In the ferrous H64V and H64V/K67T mutants, the nu(Fe-His) 
stretching frequency appears at 221 cm(-1), which is similar to that of 
deoxymyoglobin. In the ferrous CO-bound state, the nu(Fe-CO) stretching 
frequency was detected at 521 and 494 cm(-1) in WT, M69L, and K67T, while only 
the 494 cm(-1) component was detected in the H64V and H64V/K67T mutants. Thus, 
the 521 cm(-1) component is attributed to the presence of polar His64. The CO 
binding kinetics were biphasic for WT, H64V, and K67T and monophasic for 
H64V/K67T. Thus, His64 and Lys67 comprise a unique distal heme pocket in 
neuroglobin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311748200
PMID: 14645216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]