1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):5042-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312477200. Epub 2003 
Nov 26.

Relative contribution of Nedd4 and Nedd4-2 to ENaC regulation in epithelia 
determined by RNA interference.

Snyder PM(1), Steines JC, Olson DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Epithelial Na+ transport is regulated in large part by mechanisms that control 
expression of the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) at the cell surface. Nedd4 and 
Nedd4-2 are candidates to control ENaC surface expression, but it is not known 
which of these proteins contributes to ENaC regulation in epithelia. To address 
this question, we used RNA interference to selectively reduce expression of 
Nedd4 or Nedd4-2. We found that endogenous Nedd4-2, but not Nedd4, negatively 
regulates ENaC in two epithelial cell lines (Fischer rat thyroid and H441); 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) against Nedd4-2 increased amiloride-sensitive Na+ 
current (compared with control siRNA), but Nedd4 siRNA did not. A mutation 
associated with Liddle's syndrome (betaR566X) abolished the effect of Nedd4-2 
siRNA, suggesting that a defect in ENaC regulation by Nedd4-2 contributes to the 
pathogenesis of this inherited form of hypertension. Previous work found that 
Nedd4-2 is phosphorylated by serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase, a 
Ser/Thr kinase induced by steroid hormones. Here we found that Nedd4-2 
phosphorylation contributes to ENaC regulation by steroid hormones. Consistent 
with this model, ENaC stimulation by dexamethasone was reduced by Nedd4-2 siRNA 
and by overexpression of a mutant Nedd4-2 lacking serum and 
glucocorticoid-regulated kinase phosphorylation sites. Thus, endogenous Nedd4-2 
negatively regulates ENaC in epithelia and is a component of a signaling pathway 
by which steroid hormones regulate ENaC. Defects in this regulation may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of hypertension.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312477200
PMID: 14645220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]