1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2003 Sep;73(3):244-50. doi: 10.1007/s00223-002-0005-1.

No evidence for linkage and/or association of human alpha2-HS glycoprotein gene 
with bone mineral density variation in Chinese nuclear families.

Liu XH(1), Liu YJ, Jiang DK, Li YM, Li MX, Qin YJ, Jian WX, Zhou Q, Deng HW.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Statistical Genetics, College of Life Sciences, 
Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, PR China.

Osteoporosis is an important health problem in the world. Alpha2-HS glycoprotein 
(AHSG) is involved in bone formation and metabolism and has been considered as 
an important candidate gene for osteoporosis. In this study, we simultaneously 
tested linkage and/or association of the AHSG gene with the variation of bone 
mineral density (BMD), an important risk factor for osteoporosis. A sample of 
1,260 subjects from 401 Chinese nuclear families (including both parents and 
their daughters) were studied. The daughters' ages ranged from 20 to 45 years. 
All the subjects were genotyped by PCR-RFLP (polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism) at polymorphic Sac I site 
inside the exon 7 of the AHSG gene. This polymorphism involves a nucleotide 
substitution of C to G at the middle nucleotide of the codon at amino acid 
position 238, resulting in the replacement of threonine (ACC) with serine (AGC). 
BMD was measured at the lumbar spine and hip region by dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA). Using the QTDT (quantitative trait transmission 
disequilibrium test), we found no significant results for association or linkage 
between the AHSG gene and BMD variation at the spine or hip. Our data provided 
no evidence to support the AHSG gene as a quantitative trait locus (QTL) for the 
BMD variation in a Chinese population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-002-0005-1
PMID: 14667137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]