1. Neurobiol Dis. 2003 Dec;14(3):318-27. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2003.08.009.

Gender differences in the amount and deposition of amyloidbeta in APPswe and PS1 
double transgenic mice.

Wang J(1), Tanila H, Puoliv√§li J, Kadish I, van Groen T.

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Province Key Lab of Neuroregeneration, Nantong Medical College, 
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, PR China.

Erratum in
    Neurobiol Dis. 2004 Jun;16(1):following 289.

Transgenic mice carrying both the human amyloid precursor protein (APP) with the 
Swedish mutation and the presenilin-1 A246E mutation (APP/PS1 mice) develop 
Alzheimer's disease-like amyloidbeta protein (Abeta) deposits around 9 months of 
age. These mice show an age-dependent increase in the level of Abeta40 and 
Abeta42 and in the number of amyloid plaques in the brain. Abeta40 and Abeta42 
levels were measured, and amyloid burden and plaque number were quantified, in 
the hippocampus at the age of 4, 12, and 17 months in both male and female 
APP/PS1 mice. In all mice, amyloid burden and plaque number increased markedly 
with age, with female mice bearing a heavier amyloid burden and higher plaque 
number compared to male mice of the same age, both at 12 and at 17 months of 
age. The level of both Abeta40 and Abeta42 significantly increased in female 
mice with age and was always significantly higher in female than in male mice of 
the same age. Further, there were significant correlations between amyloid 
burden and Abeta42 level in female mice and between amyloid burden and plaques 
in both female and male mice. Together these data show that female APP/PS1 mice 
accumulate amyloid at an earlier age and that they build up more amyloid 
deposits in the hippocampus than age-matched male mice. Together, these results 
provide new insights in the potential mechanisms of the observed gender 
differences in the pathogenesis of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2003.08.009
PMID: 14678749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]