1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Dec 19;312(3):592-600. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.10.162.

Accumulation of mutant myocilins in ER leads to ER stress and potential 
cytotoxicity in human trabecular meshwork cells.

Joe MK(1), Sohn S, Hur W, Moon Y, Choi YR, Kee C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Samsung Medical Center, School of Medicine, 
Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

MYOC encoding a 55kDa secretory glycoprotein named myocilin is closely linked to 
primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG). To understand a role played by MYOC in 
glaucoma, we examined the cellular fate of various mutant myocilins that were 
adenovirally expressed in human trabecular meshwork cells. Most myocilins with 
mutations such as G364V, Q368X, K423E, Y437H, and I477N were intrinsically 
stable, and appeared to have interactions with wild-type myocilin but not with 
stromelysin and thereby selectively inhibited the secretion of the former 
protein. The myocilins expressed were identified to be concentrated into fine 
punctate aggregates in endoplasmic reticulum, but never developed into the 
formation of aggresomes. In endoplasmic reticulum, the accumulation of the 
myocilins resulted in the upregulation of 78kDa glucose-regulated protein and 
protein disulfide isomerase. In addition, the expression of the myocilins led to 
deformed cellular morphology and diminished cell proliferation, an effect 
postulated to result in the dysfunction of trabecular cells that could be a 
cause of glaucoma. Therefore, our results support the statement that gain of 
function rather than haploinsufficiency is a critical mechanism for POAG in 
individuals with mutations on MYOC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.10.162
PMID: 14680806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]