1. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 2001;1(1):45-50. doi: 10.2165/00129784-200101010-00005.

Current management of acute symptomatic deep vein thrombosis.

Heit JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Section of Vascular Diseases, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, 
USA.

Venous thromboembolism is a common and potentially fatal disease. If properly 
used, anticoagulation therapy is effective in preventing recurrence of venous 
thromboembolism and in improving survival. Symptomatic patients with an 
objective diagnosis of acute deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism 
(PE) should receive immediate systemic heparin anticoagulation at dosages 
sufficient to rapidly prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time into the 
laboratory-specific therapeutic range; this range corresponds to a plasma 
heparin concentration of 0.2 to 0.4 IU/ml (as measured by protamine sulfate 
titration), or 0.3 to 0.7 anti-Xa IU/ml. An oral vitamin K antagonist (e.g. 
warfarin) should be started within 24 hours after starting heparin; the starting 
dose should be the estimated patient-specific daily dose with no loading dose. 
Heparin and warfarin anticoagulation should be overlapped for at least 4 to 5 
days and until the international normalized ratio (INR) is within the 
therapeutic range (2.0 to 3.0) on 2 measurements made at least 24 hours apart. 
The duration of warfarin anticoagulation should be individualized based on the 
respective risks of venous thromboembolism recurrence and anticoagulant-related 
bleeding. In general, warfarin should be continued for at least 3 months, and 
longer for patients with recurrent or idiopathic venous thromboembolism, 
malignant neoplasm, neurologic disease with extremity paresis, obesity, or 
laboratory evidence of a lupus anticoagulant/anticardiolipin antibody, 
homozygous carrier or combined heterozygous carrier for the factor V R506Q 
(Leiden) and prothrombin G20210A mutations, and possibly deficiency of either 
antithrombin, protein C, or protein S. Low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is 
effective and well tolerated as acute therapy for patients with DVT or stable 
PE, and does not require laboratory monitoring or dose adjustment. Outpatient 
LMWH therapy is also well tolerated and cost effective for most patients with 
DVT, and possibly for selected patients with PE.

DOI: 10.2165/00129784-200101010-00005
PMID: 14728051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]