1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1279-91. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.3.1279-1291.2004.

Phosphorylation of the Bloom's syndrome helicase and its role in recovery from 
S-phase arrest.

Davies SL(1), North PS, Dart A, Lakin ND, Hickson ID.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Laboratories, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Bloom's syndrome (BS) is a human genetic disorder associated with cancer 
predisposition. The BS gene product, BLM, is a member of the RecQ helicase 
family, which is required for the maintenance of genome stability in all 
organisms. In budding and fission yeasts, loss of RecQ helicase function confers 
sensitivity to inhibitors of DNA replication, such as hydroxyurea (HU), by 
failure to execute normal cell cycle progression following recovery from such an 
S-phase arrest. We have examined the role of the human BLM protein in recovery 
from S-phase arrest mediated by HU and have probed whether the stress-activated 
ATR kinase, which functions in checkpoint signaling during S-phase arrest, plays 
a role in the regulation of BLM function. We show that, consistent with a role 
for BLM in protection of human cells against the toxicity associated with arrest 
of DNA replication, BS cells are hypersensitive to HU. BLM physically associates 
with ATR (ataxia telangiectasia and rad3(+) related) protein and is 
phosphorylated on two residues in the N-terminal domain, Thr-99 and Thr-122, by 
this kinase. Moreover, BS cells ectopically expressing a BLM protein containing 
phosphorylation-resistant T99A/T122A substitutions fail to adequately recover 
from an HU-induced replication blockade, and the cells subsequently arrest at a 
caffeine-sensitive G(2)/M checkpoint. These abnormalities are not associated 
with a failure of the BLM-T99A/T122A protein to localize to replication foci or 
to colocalize either with ATR itself or with other proteins that are required 
for response to DNA damage, such as phosphorylated histone H2AX and RAD51. Our 
data indicate that RecQ helicases play a conserved role in recovery from 
perturbations in DNA replication and are consistent with a model in which RecQ 
helicases act to restore productive DNA replication following S-phase arrest and 
hence prevent subsequent genomic instability.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.3.1279-1291.2004
PMCID: PMC321429
PMID: 14729972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]