1. J Bacteriol. 2004 Feb;186(3):758-66. doi: 10.1128/JB.186.3.758-766.2004.

Formation of thiolated nucleosides present in tRNA from Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium occurs in two principally distinct pathways.

Leipuviene R(1), Qian Q, Björk GR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, S-90187 Umeå, Sweden.

tRNA from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium contains five thiolated 
nucleosides, 2-thiocytidine (s(2)C), 4-thiouridine (s(4)U), 
5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine (mnm(5)s(2)U), 
5-carboxymethylaminomethyl-2-thiouridine (cmnm(5)s(2)U), and 
N-6-(4-hydroxyisopentenyl)-2-methylthioadenosine (ms(2)io(6)A). The levels of 
all of them are significantly reduced in cells with a mutated iscS gene, which 
encodes the cysteine desulfurase IscS, a member of the ISC machinery that is 
responsible for [Fe-S] cluster formation in proteins. A mutant (iscU52) was 
isolated that carried an amino acid substitution (S107T) in the IscU protein, 
which functions as a major scaffold in the formation of [Fe-S] clusters. In 
contrast to the iscS mutant, the iscU52 mutant showed reduced levels of only two 
of the thiolated nucleosides, ms(2)io(6)A (10-fold) and s(2)C (more than 
2-fold). Deletions of the iscU, hscA, or fdx genes from the isc operon lead to a 
similar tRNA thiolation pattern to that seen for the iscU52 mutant. 
Unexpectedly, deletion of the iscA gene, coding for an alternative scaffold 
protein for the [Fe-S] clusters, showed a novel tRNA thiolation pattern, where 
the synthesis of only one thiolated nucleoside, ms(2)io(6)A, was decreased 
twofold. Based on our results, we suggest two principal distinct routes for 
thiolation of tRNA: (i) a direct sulfur transfer from IscS to the tRNA modifying 
enzymes ThiI and MnmA, which form s(4)U and the s(2)U moiety of (c)mnm(5)s(2)U, 
respectively; and (ii) an involvement of [Fe-S] proteins (an unidentified enzyme 
in the synthesis of s(2)C and MiaB in the synthesis of ms(2)io(6)A) in the 
transfer of sulfur to the tRNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.186.3.758-766.2004
PMCID: PMC321476
PMID: 14729702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]