1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2004 May;12(5):365-71. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201157.

Exclusion of an extracolonic disease modifier locus on chromosome 1p33-36 in a 
large Swiss familial adenomatous polyposis kindred.

Plasilova M(1), Russell AM, Wanner A, Wolf A, Dobbie Z, MÃ¼ller HJ, Heinimann K.

Author information:
(1)Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics, University 
Children's Hospital, Department of Research and Clinico-Biological Sciences, 
Vesalgasse1, 4031 Basel, Switzerland. martina.plasilova@unibas.ch

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an autosomal dominantly inherited 
colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome, displays considerable inter- and 
intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity, which represents a major problem in 
genetic counselling of APC mutation carriers. The Min mouse model indicated a 
putative disease modifier locus on chromosome 4, which is syntenic to human 
chromosome 1p35-36. This finding was subsequently supported by parametric and 
nonparametric linkage analyses in FAP families, however, without identifying 
functional variants in candidate genes. Recently, germline mutations in the 
base-excision repair gene MYH (1p33-34) have been described in patients with 
multiple adenomas, pointing to a possible role as disease modifier in FAP. Here, 
we present critical reassessment of one of the largest FAP kindreds published, 
which was previously used in linkage mapping of 1p35-36. In this family, all 
affected members harbour the same APC germline mutation (5945delA), but display 
marked phenotypic variability, in particular regarding the occurrence of 
extracolonic disease that segregates in several branches of the family tree. 
Using updated clinical information, additional mutation carriers and polymorphic 
markers, fine mapping of the critical region as well as mutation analysis of the 
MYH gene were performed. These investigations allowed us to significantly 
exclude (i) the 1p33-36 region as a modifier locus and (ii) MYH as a modifier 
gene for extracolonic disease in this FAP kindred. Our results do not eliminate 
1p33-36 from suspicion in other families, but clearly indicate that in our 
family linkage analysis of further putative candidate regions is necessary to 
identify a disease modifier locus in FAP.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201157
PMID: 14735163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]