1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 Jun;286(6):C1423-33. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00382.2003. Epub 2004 Jan 21.

Regulation of the human NBC3 Na+/HCO3- cotransporter by carbonic anhydrase II 
and PKA.

Loiselle FB(1), Morgan PE, Alvarez BV, Casey JR.

Author information:
(1)Canadian Institute of Health Research Membrane Protein Research Group, 
Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada T6G 2H7.

Human NBC3 is an electroneutral Na(+)/HCO(3)(-) cotransporter expressed in 
heart, skeletal muscle, and kidney in which it plays an important role in 
HCO(3)(-) metabolism. Cytosolic enzyme carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) catalyzes 
the reaction CO(2) + H(2)O left arrow over right arrow HCO(3)(-) + H(+) in many 
tissues. We investigated whether NBC3, like some Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange 
proteins, could bind CAII and whether PKA could regulate NBC3 activity through 
modulation of CAII binding. CAII bound the COOH-terminal domain of NBC3 (NBC3Ct) 
with K(d) = 101 nM; the interaction was stronger at acid pH. Cotransfection of 
HEK-293 cells with NBC3 and CAII recruited CAII to the plasma membrane. 
Mutagenesis of consensus CAII binding sites revealed that the D1135-D1136 region 
of NBC3 is essential for CAII/NBC3 interaction and for optimal function, because 
the NBC3 D1135N/D1136N retained only 29 +/- 22% of wild-type activity. 
Coexpression of the functionally dominant-negative CAII mutant V143Y with NBC3 
or addition of 100 microM 8-bromoadenosine to NBC3 transfected cells reduced 
intracellular pH (pH(i)) recovery rate by 31 +/- 3, or 38 +/- 7%, respectively, 
relative to untreated NBC3 transfected cells. The effects were additive, 
together decreasing the pH(i) recovery rate by 69 +/- 12%, suggesting that PKA 
reduces transport activity by a mechanism independently of CAII. Measurements of 
PKA-dependent phosphorylation by mass spectroscopy and labeling with 
[gamma-(32)P]ATP showed that NBC3Ct was not a PKA substrate. These results 
demonstrate that NBC3 and CAII interact to maximize the HCO(3)(-) transport 
rate. Although PKA decreased NBC3 transport activity, it did so independently of 
the NBC3/CAII interaction and did not involve phosphorylation of NBC3Ct.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00382.2003
PMID: 14736710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]