1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2004 Mar;12(3):206-12. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201130.

Analysis of the CARD15 variants R702W, G908R and L1007fs in Italian IBD 
patients.

Giachino D(1), van Duist MM, Regazzoni S, Gregori D, Bardessono M, Salacone P, 
Scaglione N, Sostegni R, Sapone N, Bresso F, Sambataro A, Gaia E, Pera A, 
Astegiano M, De Marchi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, Italy.

CARD15 on chromosome 16 is the only IBD susceptibility gene identified among 
several mapped loci. Its recurrent variants R702W, G908R and L1007fs have shown 
significant association with Crohn's disease (CD), but not with ulcerative 
colitis (UC), in different Caucasian populations. We analysed these three 
variants in 184 CD and 92 UC Italian patients and in 177 healthy controls. 
L1007fs and G908R were independently associated with CD, while R702W showed a 
nonsignificant increase. After combining the three variants together, 32.6% of 
CD patients were positive vs 18.6% of the controls. The association was stronger 
for homozygotes and compound heterozygotes, OR 13.9 (1.8-108), and weaker but 
still significant for simple heterozygotes, OR 1.7 (1.0-2.9). An excess of 
homozygotes/compound heterozygotes also resulted from the comparison with 
Hardy-Weinberg expectations. Phenotype-genotype correlations were analysed first 
by univariate logistic regression and then by multivariate analysis, the effect 
of CARD15 positivity being adjusted according to the status of smoking, 
familiarity and sex, so as to focus on the predictivity of genetic and 
environmental risk factors on the clinical phenotype. Significant risk estimates 
of the CARD15 genotype were obtained for stricturing vs inflammatory behaviour, 
OR 2.76 (1.2-6.3), and for penetrating behaviour, 2.59 (1.0-6.6), and marginally 
significant for ileal vs colic location, OR 3.0 (0.9-9.8). Our findings indicate 
that the association of the CARD15 genotype with behaviour and location of 
disease holds also for the Italian population.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201130
PMID: 14747834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]