1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Feb;74(2):326-37. doi: 10.1086/381718. Epub 2004 Jan 22.

Mutations within the MGC4607 gene cause cerebral cavernous malformations.

Denier C(1), Goutagny S, Labauge P, Krivosic V, Arnoult M, Cousin A, Benabid AL, 
Comoy J, Frerebeau P, Gilbert B, Houtteville JP, Jan M, Lapierre F, Loiseau H, 
Menei P, Mercier P, Moreau JJ, Nivelon-Chevallier A, Parker F, Redondo AM, 
Scarabin JM, Tremoulet M, Zerah M, Maciazek J, Tournier-Lasserve E; Société 
Française de Neurochirurgie.

Author information:
(1)INSERM E365, Faculté de Médecine Lariboisière, and Laboratoire de 
Cytogénetique, Hôpital Lariboisiere, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Paris, France.

Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are hamartomatous vascular malformations 
characterized by abnormally enlarged capillary cavities without intervening 
brain parenchyma. They cause seizures and focal neurological deficits due to 
cerebral hemorrhages. CCM loci have already been assigned to chromosomes 7q 
(CCM1), 7p (CCM2), and 3q (CCM3) and have been identified in 40%, 20%, and 40%, 
respectively, of families with CCM. Loss-of-function mutations have been 
identified in CCM1/KRIT1, the sole CCM gene identified to date. We report here 
the identification of MGC4607 as the CCM2 gene. We first reduced the size of the 
CCM2 interval from 22 cM to 7.5 cM by genetic linkage analysis. We then 
hypothesized that large deletions might be involved in the disorder, as already 
reported in other hamartomatous conditions, such as tuberous sclerosis or 
neurofibromatosis. We performed a high-density microsatellite genotyping of this 
7.5-cM interval to search for putative null alleles in 30 unrelated families, 
and we identified, in 2 unrelated families, null alleles that were the result of 
deletions within a 350-kb interval flanked by markers D7S478 and D7S621. 
Additional microsatellite and single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping showed 
that these two distinct deletions overlapped and that both of the two deleted 
the first exon of MGC4607, a known gene of unknown function. In both families, 
one of the two MGC4607 transcripts was not detected. We then identified eight 
additional point mutations within MGC4607 in eight of the remaining families. 
One of them led to the alteration of the initiation codon and five of them to a 
premature termination codon, including one nonsense, one frameshift, and three 
splice-site mutations. All these mutations cosegregated with the disease in the 
families and were not observed in 192 control chromosomes. MGC4607 is so far 
unrelated to any known gene family. Its implication in CCMs strongly suggests 
that it is a new player in vascular morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1086/381718
PMCID: PMC1181930
PMID: 14740320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]