1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Feb 15;117(Pt 5):701-10. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00905.

Nuclear translocation of the Hsp70/Hsp90 organizing protein mSTI1 is regulated 
by cell cycle kinases.

Longshaw VM(1), Chapple JP, Balda MS, Cheetham ME, Blatch GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Biotechnology, Rhodes 
University, Grahamstown 6140, South Africa.

The co-chaperone murine stress-inducible protein 1 (mSTI1), an Hsp70/Hsp90 
organizing protein (Hop) homologue, mediates the assembly of the Hsp70/Hsp90 
chaperone heterocomplex. The mSTI1 protein can be phosphorylated in vitro by 
cell cycle kinases proximal to a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS), 
which substantiated a predicted casein kinase II (CKII)-cdc2 kinase-NLS (CcN) 
motif at position 180-239 and suggested that mSTI1 might move between the 
cytoplasm and the nucleus under certain cell cycle conditions. The mechanism 
responsible for the cellular localization of mSTI1 was probed using NIH3T3 
fibroblasts to investigate the localization of endogenous mSTI1 and enhanced 
green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-tagged mSTI1 mutants. Localization studies on 
cell lines stably expressing NLS(mSTI1)-EGFP and EGFP demonstrated that the 
NLS(mSTI1) was able to promote a nuclear localization of EGFP. The mSTI1 protein 
was exclusively cytoplasmic in most cells under normal conditions but was 
present in the nucleus of a subpopulation of cells and accumulated in the 
nucleus following inhibition of nuclear export (leptomycin B treatment). 
G1/S-phase arrest (using hydroxyurea) and inhibition of cdc2 kinase (using 
olomoucine) but not inhibition of casein kinase II (using 
5,6-dichlorobenzimidazole riboside), increased the proportion of cells with 
endogenous mSTI1 nuclear staining. mSTI1-EGFP behaved identically to endogenous 
mSTI1. The functional importance of key residues was tested using modified 
mSTI1-EGFP proteins. Inactivation and phosphorylation mimicking of potential 
phosphorylation sites in mSTI1 altered the nuclear translocation. Mimicking of 
phosphorylation at the mSTI1 CKII phosphorylation site (S189E) promoted nuclear 
localization of mSTI1-EGFP. Mimicking phosphorylation at the cdc2 kinase 
phosphorylation site (T198E) promoted cytoplasmic localization of mSTI1-EGFP at 
the G1/S-phase transition,whereas removal of this site (T198A) promoted the 
nuclear localization of mSTI1-EGFP under the same conditions. These data provide 
the first evidence of nuclear import and export of a major Hsp70/Hsp90 
co-chaperone and the regulation of this nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling by cell 
cycle status and cell cycle kinases.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00905
PMID: 14754904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]