1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;32(1):129-44. doi: 10.1677/jme.0.0320129.

A1 adenosine receptors mediate hypoglycemia-induced neuronal injury.

Turner CP(1), Blackburn MR, Rivkees SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale Child Health Researh Center, 464 Congress 
Avenue, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. scott.rivkees@yale.edu

The cellular mechanisms that lead to neuronal death following glucose 
deprivation are not known, although it is recognized that hypoglycemia can lead 
to perturbations in intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i) levels. Recently, activation 
of A1 adenosine receptors (A1AR) has been shown to alter [Ca2+]i and promote 
neuronal death. Thus, we examined if A1AR activation contributes to 
hypoglycemia-induced neuronal injury using rat cortical neurons. First, we 
observed that hypoglycemia was associated with large increases in neuronal 
adenosine release. Next, decreased neuronal viability was seen with progressive 
reduction in glucose concentration (25, 6, 3, 0.75 and 0 mM). Using the 
calcium-sensitive dye, Fluo-3, we observed both acute and long-term changes in 
relative [Ca2+]i during hypoglycemic conditions. Demonstrating a role for 
adenosine in this process, both the loss in neuronal viability and the early 
changes in [Ca2+]i were reversed by treatment with A1AR antagonists 
(8-cyclopentyl, 1,3-dipropylxanthine; 
9-chloro-2-(2-furyl)(1,2,4)-triazolo(1,5-c)quinazolin-5-amine; and 
N-cyclopentyl-9-methyladenine). We also found that hypoglycemia induced the 
expression of the pro-apoptotic enzyme, caspase-3, and that A1AR antagonism 
reversed hypoglycemia-induced caspase-3 activity. Collectively, these data show 
that hypoglycemia induces A1ARs activation leading to alterations in [Ca2+]i, 
which plays a prominent role in leading to hypoglycemia-induced neuronal death.

DOI: 10.1677/jme.0.0320129
PMID: 14765997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]