1. Pediatr Res. 2004 May;55(5):842-6. doi: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000117844.73436.68.
Epub  2004 Feb 5.

A new mitochondrial DNA mutation in ND3 gene causing severe Leigh syndrome with 
early lethality.

Crimi M(1), Papadimitriou A, Galbiati S, Palamidou P, Fortunato F, Bordoni A, 
Papandreou U, Papadimitriou D, Hadjigeorgiou GM, Drogari E, Bresolin N, Comi GP.

Author information:
(1)Centro Dino Ferrari, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of 
Milan, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Centro di Eccellenza per le malattie 
Neuro-Degenerative, 20122 Milano, Italy. neurogene@policlinico.mi.it

We describe a new mitochondrial DNA mutation in a male infant who presented 
clinical and magnetic resonance imaging features of Leigh syndrome and died at 
the age of 9 mo. The patient's development was reportedly normal in the first 
months of life. At the age of 5 mo, he presented severe generalized hypotonia, 
nystagmus, and absent eye contact. Laboratory examination showed increased 
lactate and pyruvate in both serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Brain magnetic 
resonance imaging revealed multiple necrotic lesions in the basal ganglia, brain 
stem, and thalamus. Muscle histopathology was unremarkable, whereas respiratory 
chain enzyme analysis revealed a severe complex I deficiency. The patient died 
after an acidotic coma at age 9 mo. Sequence analysis of the entire mtDNA 
disclosed a new T10158C mutation with variable tissue heteroplasm (muscle: 83%; 
blood: 48%). The mutation was undetectable in the blood of his unaffected 
mother. The transition changes a serine residue into a proline, in a highly 
conserved region of the NADH dehydrogenase subunit 3 (ND3). This is the first 
description of a mitochondrial ND3 gene in Leigh syndrome with early lethality.

DOI: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000117844.73436.68
PMID: 14764913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]