1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Dec 25;20(24):6649-55. doi: 10.1093/nar/20.24.6649.

Small sequence insertions within the branch point region dictate alternative 
sites of lariat formation in a yeast intron.

Castanotto D(1), Rossi JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Beckman Research Institute of the City of 
Hope, Duarte, CA 91010.

The problem of intron recognition in S. cerevisiae appears to be in part solved 
by the strong conservation of intron encoded splicing signals, in particular the 
5' GUAUGU and the branch point UACUAAC which interact via base pairing with the 
RNA components of U1 and U2 snRNPs respectively. Nevertheless, the mere presence 
of such signals is insufficient for splicing to occur. In the S. cerevisiae ACT1 
intron, a silent UACUAAC-like sequence (UACUAAG) is located 7 nucleotides 
upstream of the canonical branch point signal. In order to investigate whether 
other factors, in addition to the U2-UACUAAC base-pair interactions, affect 
branch point selection in yeast, we created a cis-competition assay by 
converting the UACUAAG to a strong branch point signal (UACUAAC). If simply 
having a canonical UACUAAC sequence were sufficient for lariat formation, a 1:1 
ratio in usage of the two signals should have been observed. In this double 
branch point intron, however, the downstream UACUAAC is utilized preferentially 
(4:1). Results obtained from the analyses of numerous sequence variants flanking 
the two UACUAAC sequences, demonstrate that non-conserved sequences in the 
branch point region are able to define lariat formation. Consequently, we 
conclude that U2 base-pairing is not the only requirement determining branch 
point selection in yeast, and local structure in the vicinity of the branch 
point could play a critical role in its recognition.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/20.24.6649
PMCID: PMC334582
PMID: 1480486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]