1. Placenta. 2004 Feb-Mar;25(2-3):208-17. doi: 10.1016/S0143-4004(03)00181-4.

Umbilical vein and placental vessels from newborns with hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia type 1 genotype are normal despite reduced expression of 
endoglin.

Chan NL(1), Bourdeau A, Vera S, Abdalla S, Gross M, Wong J, Cymerman U, Paterson 
AD, Mullen B, Letarte M.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University 
Avenue, Toronto M5G 1X8, Canada.

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia, HHT, is an autosomal dominant disorder 
that affects approximately 1 in 8000 people. HHT1 is associated with mutations 
in the ENG (Endoglin) gene and with haploinsufficiency. The disorder is 
characterized by focally dilated vessels, which can lead to arteriovenous 
malformations and serious complications even in young children. In the current 
study, umbilical cord and placenta samples from newborns with ENG mutations were 
analyzed to estimate the level of corresponding protein and look for potential 
vascular dysplasia. We confirmed, using metabolic labelling and flow cytometry, 
that endoglin levels were significantly reduced to median values of 47 per cent 
(range 32-56 per cent) and 58 per cent (46-90 per cent), respectively, in human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells derived from newborns with ENG mutations (HHT1 
group; n=18) relative to samples from newborns shown not to have the familial 
mutation (non-HHT group). We also quantified the relative expression of endoglin 
by estimating the endoglin/PECAM-1 staining ratio in tissue sections. We 
observed significantly lower values in the HHT1 group, compared to the non-HHT 
group for the umbilical vein (n=9; median 0.6 vs 0.9; ranges 0.2-1.0 and 
0.5-1.5) and for placental stem villus vessels (n=9 and 10; median 0.42 vs 0.93; 
ranges 0.24-0.58 and 0.56-1.18). No differences in the estimated umbilical vein 
cross-sectional area and in the proportion of vessels present in placental villi 
were observed in sections from the HHT1 group relative to the non-HHT group. 
Thus, blood vessels from HHT1 individuals are maintained intact in the umbilical 
vein and placenta during pregnancy and delivery, despite a significant reduction 
in endoglin expression.

DOI: 10.1016/S0143-4004(03)00181-4
PMID: 14972453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]