1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 2;101(9):3124-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0303709101. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

E1A and E1B proteins inhibit inflammation induced by adenovirus.

Schaack J(1), Bennett ML, Colbert JD, Torres AV, Clayton GH, Ornelles D, 
Moorhead J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver, CO 80262, USA. jerry.schaack@uchsc.edu

Replication-defective human adenovirus (Ad) group C transducing vectors, most of 
which have the E1A, E1B, and E3 genes deleted, are highly inflammatory despite 
the fact that the parental viruses typically cause subclinical or mild 
infections. To investigate this paradox, the roles that the E1A, E1B, and E3 
genes play in inflammation were tested by using replication-incompetent viruses 
carrying a deletion of the preterminal protein gene. The viruses were injected 
into BALB/c mouse ears, and edema was monitored as a sensitive surrogate marker 
of inflammation. A virus deleted for the E1A 289R (transcription activating) 
protein was noninflammatory, and inhibited edema induced by empty virus 
particles. The E1A 243R and E1B 55-kDa (p53 binding) proteins play the most 
important roles in inhibition of inflammation by the noninflammatory virus. The 
E1B 19-kDa antiapoptotic protein inhibited edema when both the E1A 243R and E1B 
55-kDa proteins were expressed but strongly induced edema when only one was 
expressed. E3 proteins had their greatest effect on the inhibition of edema 
induced by the E1A 289R protein. The results support a model in which 
inflammation is countered through a mechanism that involves complex genetic 
interactions between Ad early region proteins and offer promise for the design 
and construction of noninflammatory Ad gene therapy vectors that are relatively 
easy to grow and purify.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0303709101
PMCID: PMC365754
PMID: 14976240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]