1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Apr 15;13(8):783-97. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh099. Epub 2004
Feb  19.

Genomic evidence for recent positive selection at the human MDR1 gene locus.

Tang K(1), Wong LP, Lee EJ, Chong SS, Lee CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

The MDR1 multidrug transporter regulates the traffic of drugs, peptides and 
xenobiotics into the body as well as sensitive tissues like the brain, germ 
cells and the developing fetus. Hence, it may influence an individual's response 
to drugs as well as his/her susceptibility to complex diseases in which 
environmental factors, especially xenobiotics, play a role. Polymorphisms within 
this gene, especially single-nucleotide polymorphism e26/3435(C/T), have been 
variously associated with differences in MDR1 expression, function, drug 
response and disease susceptibility. Here, we report the detailed 
characterization of the haplotype and linkage disequilibrium architecture of the 
entire 200 kb of the MDR1 gene in five world populations, namely, Chinese, 
Malays, Indians, Caucasians and African-Americans. We observed varied haplotype 
diversity across the entire gene in the different populations. The major 
haplotype mh5, which contains the subhaplotype e12/1236T-e21/2677T-e26/3435T, is 
highly represented among the four non-African populations, while mh7, which 
contains the subhaplotype e12/1236C-e21/2677G-e26/3435C, accounts for over a 
third of African-American chromosomes. These observations are inconsistent with 
a simple population evolution model, but instead are suggestive of recent 
historical events that have maintained such long range linkage disequilibrium. 
Using a modified long-range haplotype test, we found statistically significant 
evidence of recent positive selection for the e21/2677T and e26/3435T alleles in 
the Chinese population, and for the e26/3435T allele in the Malay population. 
Interestingly, we also detected evidence for positive selection of the 
alternative allele e26/3435C in the African-American population. These data 
suggest that independent mutational events may have occurred on the mh5 and mh7 
haplotypes of the MDR1 gene to confer positive selection in the non-African and 
African-American populations, respectively.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh099
PMID: 14976162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]