1. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 May;15(5):2061-72. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e02-08-0502. Epub 2004
 Feb 20.

Dominant gain-of-function mutations in Hsp104p reveal crucial roles for the 
middle region.

Schirmer EC(1), Homann OR, Kowal AS, Lindquist S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Heat-shock protein 104 (Hsp104p) is a protein-remodeling factor that promotes 
survival after extreme stress by disassembling aggregated proteins and can 
either promote or prevent the propagation of prions (protein-based genetic 
elements). Hsp104p can be greatly overexpressed without slowing growth, 
suggesting tight control of its powerful protein-remodeling activities. We 
isolated point mutations in Hsp104p that interfere with this control and block 
cell growth. Each mutant contained alterations in the middle region (MR). Each 
of the three MR point mutations analyzed in detail had distinct phenotypes. In 
combination with nucleotide binding site mutations, Hsp104p(T499I) altered bud 
morphology and caused septin mislocalization, colocalizing with the misplaced 
septins. Point mutations in the septin Cdc12p suppressed this phenotype, 
suggesting that it is due to direct Hsp104p-septin interactions. Hsp104p(A503V) 
did not perturb morphology but stopped cell growth. Remarkably, when expressed 
transiently, the mutant protein promoted survival after extreme stress as 
effectively as did wild-type Hsp104p. Hsp104p(A509D) had no deleterious effects 
on growth or morphology but had a greatly reduced ability to promote 
thermotolerance. That mutations in an 11-amino acid stretch of the MR have such 
profound and diverse effects suggests the MR plays a central role in regulating 
Hsp104p function.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e02-08-0502
PMCID: PMC404004
PMID: 14978213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]