1. Brain. 2004 May;127(Pt 5):973-80. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh125. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

A clinical, genetic and biochemical study of SPG7 mutations in hereditary 
spastic paraplegia.

Wilkinson PA(1), Crosby AH, Turner C, Bradley LJ, Ginsberg L, Wood NW, Schapira 
AH, Warner TT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Free and University College 
Medical School, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Brain. 2004 Sep;127(Pt 9):2148.

Mutations in the SPG7 gene, encoding the mitochondrial protein paraplegin, were 
the first to be identified in autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia 
(ARHSP). Four different SPG7 mutations have been described so far in association 
with both pure and complicated HSP phenotypes. Muscle biopsies from the most 
severely affected patients have shown histological evidence of an oxidative 
phosphorylation defect. We identified six ARHSP kindreds, in whom linkage to 
SPG7 could not be excluded, and 29 sporadic spastic paraplegia patients. The 17 
exons and flanking regions of the SPG7 gene were screened for mutations using a 
combination of single-stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and 
sequencing. Three patients were found to carry compound heterozygous SPG7 
mutations, comprising five novel and one previously described mutation. Muscle 
biopsies from two SPG7 mutation patients did not show any histological evidence 
of an oxidative phosphorylation defect. However, biochemical analysis revealed a 
reduction in citrate synthase-corrected complex I and complex II/III activities 
in muscle and complex I activity in mitochondrial-enriched fractions from 
cultured myoblasts, suggesting that either a primary or a secondary defect of 
respiratory chain function may play an important role in the pathogenesis of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh125
PMID: 14985266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]