1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):20906-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M401012200. Epub 
2004 Mar 8.

Evidence that the TM1-TM2 loop contributes to the rho1 GABA receptor pore.

Filippova N(1), Wotring VE, Weiss DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of 
Medicine, 1719 Sixth Avenue South, CIRC410, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Considerable evidence indicates the second transmembrane domain (TM2) of the 
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor lines the integral ion pore. To further 
delineate the structures that constitute the ion pore and selectivity filter of 
the rho1 GABA receptor, we used the substituted cysteine accessibility method 
with charged reagents to identify anion- and cation-accessible surfaces. 
Twenty-one consecutive residues were mutated to cysteine, one at a time, in the 
presumed intracellular end of the first transmembrane domain (TM1; 
Ala(271)-Met(276)), the entire linker connecting TM1 to TM2 (Leu(277)-Arg(287)), 
and the presumed intracellular end of TM2 (Ala(288)-Ala(291)). Positively 
(MTSEA(+)) and negatively (pCMBS(-)) charged sulfhydryl reagents, as well as 
Cd(2+), were added extracellularly to test accessibility of the engineered 
cysteines. Four of the mutants, all at the intracellular end of TM2 (R287C, 
V289C, P290C, A291C), were accessible to positively charged reagents, whereas 
seven mutants (A271C, T272C, L277C, W279C, V280C, P290C, A291C) were 
functionally modified by negatively charged pCMBS(-). These seven modified 
residues were at the intracellular end of TM2, in the TM1-TM2 linker, and at the 
intracellular end of TM1. In nearly all cases (excluding P290C), the rate and 
the degree of modification were state-dependent, with greater accessibility in 
the presence of agonist. Select cysteine mutants were combined with a point 
mutation (A291E) that converted the pore from chloride- to non-selective. In 
this case, positively charged reagents could modify residues in the TM1-TM2 
linker (Leu(277) and Val(280)), supporting the notion that the modifying 
reagents were reaching their target through the pore. Taken together, our 
results suggest that, up to its intracellular end, the TM2 domain is not charge 
selective. In addition, we propose that the TM1-TM2 linker and the intracellular 
end of TM1 are along the pathway of the permeating ion. These findings may lend 
new insights into the structure of the GABA receptor pore.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M401012200
PMID: 15007065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]