1. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1780-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207292.

Marsupial BRCA1: conserved regions in mammals and the potential effect of 
missense changes.

Ramirez CJ(1), Fleming MA, Potter JD, Ostrander GK, Ostrander EA.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Clinical Research and Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

More than half of the reported missense changes in the breast cancer 
susceptibility protein BRCA1 occur in exon 11, but none has been clearly 
identified as disease associated and only 28 are designated 'probable' neutral 
polymorphisms. Previously, in a comparison of sequences from 57 eutherian mammal 
species, we found seven 'highly conserved regions' between amino acids 282 and 
1103, and identified 38 missense changes as likely to disrupt gene function. 
These conserved regions were also present in birds and amphibians and included 
only six of the mutations predicted to affect function. In this new analysis, we 
hypothesized that using 37 ancestral sequences derived from the 57 GenBank 
sequences and including eight marsupial sequences would allow us to identify 
regions unique to mammals and refine our predictions of disease-associated 
missense changes. We identified 13 conserved regions, three of which appear to 
be unique to mammals, and 21 likely disease-associated missense changes, 11 of 
which occur in conserved regions. Seven regions identified in this analysis, 
including the three found only in mammalian sequences, and nine missense changes 
predicted to affect function are in the putative STAT1-interaction domain, 
suggesting that the role of STAT1 in immune response is important to mammary 
function. The reduction in the number of missense changes predicted to be 
disease associated and the identification of conserved regions specific to 
mammals can facilitate the further study of the role of missense changes in 
BRCA1-associated breast cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207292
PMID: 15001988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]