1. J Neurochem. 2004 Mar;88(5):1151-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02245.x.

Opposite modulatory roles for adenosine A1 and A2A receptors on glutamate and 
dopamine release in the shell of the nucleus accumbens. Effects of chronic 
caffeine exposure.

Quarta D(1), Ferr√© S, Solinas M, You ZB, Hockemeyer J, Popoli P, Goldberg SR.

Author information:
(1)Preclinical Pharmacology, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21224, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated opposing roles for adenosine A1 and A2A 
receptors in the modulation of extracellular levels of glutamate and dopamine in 
the striatum. In the present study, acute systemic administration of 
motor-activating doses of the A2A receptor antagonist MSX-3 significantly 
decreased extracellular levels of dopamine and glutamate in the shell of the rat 
nucleus accumbens (NAc) and counteracted both dopamine and glutamate release 
induced by systemic administration of motor-activating doses of either the A1 
receptor antagonist CPT or caffeine. Furthermore, exposure to caffeine in the 
drinking water (1 mg/mL, 14 days) resulted in tolerance to the effects of 
systemic injection of CPT or caffeine, but not MSX-3, on extracellular levels of 
dopamine and glutamate in the NAc shell. The present results show: first, the 
existence of opposite tonic effects of adenosine on extracellular levels of 
dopamine and glutamate in the shell of the NAc mediated by A1 and A2A receptors; 
second, that complete tolerance to caffeine's dopamine- and glutamate-releasing 
effects which develops after chronic caffeine exposure is attributable to an A1 
receptor-mediated mechanism. Development of tolerance to the dopamine-releasing 
effects of caffeine in the shell of the NAc may explain its weak addictive 
properties and atypical psychostimulant profile.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02245.x
PMID: 15009670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]