1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):22833-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402577200. Epub 
2004 Mar 10.

A TM2 residue in the beta1 subunit determines spontaneous opening of homomeric 
and heteromeric gamma-aminobutyric acid-gated ion channels.

Miko A(1), Werby E, Sun H, Healey J, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892-8115, USA.

Gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptors are major inhibitory 
neurotransmitter-gated ion channels in the central nervous system. GABAA 
receptors consist of multiple subunits and exhibit distinct pharmacological and 
channel properties. Of all GABAA receptor subunits, the beta subunit is thought 
to be a key component for the functionality of the receptors. Certain types of 
GABAA receptors have been found to be constitutively active. However, the 
molecular basis for spontaneous opening of channels of these receptors is not 
totally understood. In this study, we showed that channels that contain the 
beta1 but not beta3 subunits opened spontaneously when these subunits were 
expressed homomerically or co-expressed with other types of GABAA receptor 
subunits in Xenopus oocytes. Using subunit chimeras and site-directed 
mutagenesis, we localized a key amino acid residue, a serine at position 265, 
that is critical in conferring an open state of the beta1 subunit-containing 
GABAA receptors in the absence of agonist. Moreover, some point mutations of 
Ser-265 also produced constitutively active channels. The magnitude of 
spontaneous activity of these receptors was correlated with the molecular volume 
of the residue at 265 for both homomeric and heteromeric GABAA receptors, 
suggesting that the spontaneous activity of the beta1 subunit-containing GABAA 
receptors may be mediated through a similar molecular mechanism that is 
dependent on the molecular volume of the residue at 265.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402577200
PMID: 15014066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]