1. Blood. 2004 Jul 15;104(2):415-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2004-02-0478. Epub 2004
Mar  23.

A recombinant murine meizothrombin precursor, prothrombin R157A/R268A, inhibits 
thrombosis in a model of acute carotid artery injury.

Shim K(1), Zhu H, Westfield LA, Sadler JE.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, 
660 S Euclid Ave, Box 8022, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Mutations in human prothrombin that generate a stable form of meizothrombin or 
meizothrombin(desF1) cause dysprothrombinemia in both the homozygous and 
heterozygous state, suggesting that meizothrombin has dominant anticoagulant 
effects in vivo. The enzymatic characterization of recombinant mouse 
meizothrombin, meizothrombin(desF1), and thrombin indicates that all 3 enzymes 
have similar activity toward the chromogenic substrate S-2238, that 
meizothrombin and meizothrombin(desF1) have less than 10% of the 
fibrinogen-clotting activity of thrombin, and that meizothrombin is more active 
than thrombin or meizothrombin(desF1) for thrombomodulin-dependent protein C 
activation. Thus, activated mouse prothrombin R157A/R268A is similar to human 
meizothrombin in activity toward S-2238, fibrinogen, and protein C. The time to 
occlusion after FeCl(3)-induced carotid artery injury was delayed (11.8 +/- 3.6 
minutes, n = 5) in Cf2(+/-) mice infused with prothrombin R157A/R268A compared 
with control mice infused with wild-type prothrombin (5.3 +/- 1.5 minutes, n = 
3; P =.006). In this model, prothrombin R157A/R268A has anticoagulant activity 
that reflects its decreased fibrinogen-clotting activity and preserved protein 
C-activating activity and is consistent with dominant inhibition of fibrinogen 
clotting.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2004-02-0478
PMID: 15039280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]