1. Mol Genet Metab. 2004 Apr;81(4):300-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.12.006.

Identification of alternatively spliced human biotinidase mRNAs and putative 
localization of endogenous biotinidase.

Stanley CM(1), Hymes J, Wolf B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Medical College of Virginia of Virginia 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Biotinidase is essential for recycling the vitamin biotin and for transferring 
biotin to proteins, such as histones, suggesting that the enzyme localizes to 
various cellular and extracellular sites. To better understand the functions of 
the enzyme, we examined its gene structure and subcellular localization. Using 
RACE-PCR and a BLAST search, we extended the 5' sequence of the biotinidase 
gene. Three novel, alternatively spliced variants of biotinidase, 1a, 1b, and 
1c, were identified in multiple human tissues. Exon 1c is present only in 
testes. The sequence of the 5' splice variants, 1a and 1b, suggest that 
biotinidase localizes to the mitochondria and/or ER, respectively. Using 
indirect immunofluorescence studies, biotinidase localizes to organelles in the 
cytoplasm, but not nucleus, of human fibroblasts and Hep G2 cells. Endogenous 
expression was examined by isopycnic gradient centrifugation of rat liver 
organelles, which identified an 85kDa biotinidase protein with 
biotinyl-hydrolase and transferase activities in microsomes and possibly 
lysosomes. A 48kDa protein, which also reacts with anti-biotinidase, localizes 
to mitochondria. The 48kDa protein is not N-glycosylated but is biotinylated, is 
in the inner mitochondrial matrix, but has no biotinyl-hydrolase or transferase 
activities. The function and validation of the mitochondrial species remains to 
be determined. The 5' splice variants and organelle fractionation studies 
indicate that biotinidase is directed to the secretory pathway and perhaps 
mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2003.12.006
PMID: 15059618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]