1. Mutat Res. 2004 Apr 14;548(1-2):19-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2003.12.012.

Novel germline hMSH2 genomic deletion and somatic hMSH2 mutations in a 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer family.

Miyaki M(1), Iijima T, Yamaguchi T, Shirahama S, Ito T, Yasuno M, Mori T.

Author information:
(1)Hereditary Tumor Research Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, and 
Institute of Molecular Oncology, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan. 
mmiyaki@opal.famille.ne.jp

Germline and somatic mutations of the hMSH2 gene were determined in a Japanese 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) family fulfilling the 
Amsterdam criteria. PCR-SSCP-sequencing of genomic DNA detected a somatic hMSH2 
mutation of an A deletion at codon 227-229 in a duodenal carcinoma and a somatic 
hMSH2 mutation of an A insertion at codon 21 in a gastric carcinoma from 
affected family members, both carcinomas exhibiting high microsatellite 
instability. However, no germline hMSH2 mutation was detected by the 
PCR-SSCP-sequencing method. Genomic DNA was then analyzed by Southern blot 
hybridization using three hMSH2 cDNA probes (probe A involving exons 1-5, probe 
B involving exons 4-11 and probe C involving exons 9-16) after digestion by 
restriction enzymes, EcoRI, HindIII and NsiI. The NsiI digest of DNA from normal 
tissues of affected members exhibited an aberrant 8.6 kb restriction fragment, 
in addition to the normal 10.6 kb fragment, when hybridized to probes A and B. 
This suggested the presence of a heterozygous 2kb genomic deletion encompassing 
exon 4, 5 or 6. RT-PCR-sequencing revealed that the deleted region encompassed 
exon 5. This novel genomic deletion of the hMSH2 gene was confirmed to be 
pathogenic, and the Southern hybridization pattern was applied to the 
pre-symptomatic diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2003.12.012
PMID: 15063132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]