1. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Apr;50(4):1179-86. doi: 10.1002/art.20121.

Association of the interleukin-1 gene cluster with radiographic signs of 
osteoarthritis of the hip.

Meulenbelt I(1), Seymour AB, Nieuwland M, Huizinga TW, van Duijn CM, Slagboom 
PE.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. i.meulenbelt@lumc.nl

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Feb;52(2):675; author reply 675-6. doi: 
10.1002/art.20813.
    Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Nov;54(11):3722-3. doi: 10.1002/art.22182.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of the interleukin-1 beta gene (IL1B) and the IL-1 
receptor antagonist gene (IL1RN) in relation to the occurrence of radiographic 
osteoarthritis (ROA) in the hip, knee, and hand and disc degeneration of the 
spine.
METHODS: The study population consisted of a random sample of 886 subjects (ages 
55-65 years) from a population-based cohort (the Rotterdam study). Two 
polymorphisms within IL1B (3953C>T and -511C>T) and one within IL1RN (the 
variable-number tandem repeat [VNTR]) were analyzed and used in an association 
study of the occurrence of ROA. Haplotyping and simultaneous logistic regression 
analysis were performed to investigate whether the associations observed were 
independent.
RESULTS: Associations with a predisposition for hip ROA were observed for 
heterozygous and homozygous carriers of the rare IL1B allele -511T (crude odds 
ratio [OR] 1.8, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.0-3.4 and OR 2.9, 95% CI 
1.4-6.3, respectively) and of the IL1RN VNTR allele 2 (crude OR 2.0, 95% CI 
1.1-3.4 and OR 3.3, 95% CI 1.4-7.8, respectively). An additive effect was 
observed for carriers of risk alleles of both polymorphisms, with a significant 
linear-by-linear association (P = 0.00022).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the IL-1 gene cluster polymorphisms may 
play a significant role in the pathogenesis of OA of the hip.

DOI: 10.1002/art.20121
PMID: 15077300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]