1. J Korean Med Sci. 2004 Apr;19(2):253-7. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2004.19.2.253.

Association of Angiotensin-converting enzyme and angiotensinogen gene 
polymorphisms with preeclampsia.

Choi H(1), Kang JY, Yoon HS, Han SS, Whang CS, Moon IG, Shin HH, Park JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine/Cardiology, Samsung Cheil Hospital, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We tested the hypothesis that angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and 
angiotensinogen gene polymorphism influence the incidence, development and 
outcome of preeclampsia. Subjects were recruited from 90 Korean patients with 
preeclampsia during pregnancy and 98 age-matched controls. After isolation of 
DNA, polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were carried out to detect polymorphism of 
the ACE and angiotensinogen. M235T and T174M genotypes of angiotensinogen were 
determined by digestion with restriction enzyme endonuclease Tth 111-I and NCo 
I, respectively. The frequency of DD genotype was significantly greater in 
preeclampsia (0.36) than in controls (0.14) (p<0.05). The frequency of D allele 
was 0.55 in preeclampsia and 0.40 in controls (p<0.05). There were no 
differences in the onset of preeclampsia and pregnancy outcomes according to the 
ACE genotypes. There was no difference in the frequency of a allele of 
angiotensinogen M235T between the groups (0.79:0.78 in preeclampsia : controls). 
The frequency of T allele of angiotensinogen T174M gene was slightly increased, 
but not significantly, in preeclampsia (0.11) than in controls (0.07). In a 
multivariate analysis, only ACE genotype was associated with the development of 
preeclampsia (beta=0.27, p=0.05). In conclusion, a molecular variant of ACE, but 
not angiotensinogen, gene is associated with preeclampsia in Korean women.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2004.19.2.253
PMCID: PMC2822307
PMID: 15082899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]