1. Diabetologia. 2004 May;47(5):878-84. doi: 10.1007/s00125-004-1388-5. Epub 2004
 Apr 17.

Genotypic and phenotypic differences between Arabian and Scandinavian women with 
gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Ekelund M, Lernmark A, Ivarsson S, Nilsson A, Perfekt R, Berntorp K, 
Groop L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Wallenberg Laboratory, 
University Hospital MAS, Malmo, Sweden. nael.shaat@endo.mas.lu.se

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Gestational diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous disorder 
characterised by impaired insulin secretion and action. Our aim was to study 
whether autoimmunity, variations in genes affecting insulin secretion and 
action, or both, contribute to the development of gestational diabetes and 
whether the pathogenesis of the disease differs between women with a 
Scandinavian or Arabian background.
METHODS: We studied a total of 500 unrelated women with gestational diabetes 
(400 Scandinavian and 100 Arabian) and 550 unrelated pregnant non-diabetic 
control women (428 Scandinavian and 122 Arabian) matched for ethnicity.
RESULTS: Arabian women with gestational diabetes were 50% more insulin resistant 
for the same BMI compared with Scandinavian women with the disease (homeostasis 
model assessment [HOMA-IR]; 3.2+/-0.3 vs 2.2+/-0.2, p=0.02). Both Scandinavian 
(4.2% vs 0.9%, p=0.008) and Arabian (4.6% vs 0.0%, p=0.03) women with 
gestational diabetes had a higher frequency of GAD antibodies (GAD65Ab) than the 
matched controls. The frequency of HLA-DQB1 risk genotypes was slightly higher 
in Scandinavian women with gestational diabetes than in the Scandinavian 
controls (46.3% vs 38.8%, p=0.03) but no significant difference was found 
between the Arabian women with gestational diabetes and the Arabian controls 
(47% vs 51.6%, p=0.47). There were no significant differences in the frequency 
of the insulin gene variable number of tandem repeat ( INS VNTR) alleles and 
genotypes or the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 2 ( PPAR gamma 
2-Pro12Ala) polymorphism between the women with gestational diabetes and the 
control women either in Arabian or in Scandinavian women.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Gestational diabetes mellitus was associated with 
the presence of GAD65Ab in both study groups. Scandinavian women with 
gestational diabetes may share some genetic features with Type 1 diabetes. In 
addition, Arabian women with gestational diabetes are more insulin resistant 
than Scandinavian women with gestational diabetes and with the same BMI.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-004-1388-5
PMID: 15095040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]