1. Hum Mutat. 2004 May;23(5):523-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.9237.

First genotype characterization of Argentinean FAP patients: identification of 
14 novel APC mutations.

De Rosa M(1), Dourisboure RJ, Morelli G, Graziano A, Gutiérrez A, Thibodeau S, 
Halling K, Avila KC, Duraturo F, Podesta EJ, Izzo P, Solano AR.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Unversità di Napoli 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

We examined the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene for disease-causing 
mutations in 51 unrelated Argentinean probands affected by familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP). Using a combination of the protein truncation test, the single 
strand conformation polymorphism technique, DNA sequencing and quantitative PCR 
analysis, we identified the specific mutation in 39 (average age: 28.4 years) of 
the 51 probands (detection rate: 76.47%); 13 are novel germline mutations and 
one is a novel sequence variant. There were 27 small deletions, four small 
duplications, five nonsense mutations in exon 15, three nonsense mutations in 
exons 6, 11, and 12, and one sequence variant in exon 3 identified in a patient 
bearing a truncating mutation in exon 15. The most common mutation (found in 10 
cases) was at codon 1309. All patients negative for APC mutations were also 
negative for the MutY homolog (MYH) gene mutation, as expected because of fully 
penetrant FAP cases. This study enlarges the spectrum of APC gene mutations, and 
reinforces the concept of mutation heterogeneity. It also sheds light on 
correlations between the site of APC germline mutations and the clinical 
manifestations of FAP. Our data indicate that the genotype/phenotype 
correlations in Argentinean patients are similar to those observed in other 
populations.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9237
PMID: 15108288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]