1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Apr 23;32(7):2231-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh541. Print 
2004.

The initiative role of XPC protein in cisplatin DNA damaging treatment-mediated 
cell cycle regulation.

Wang G(1), Chuang L, Zhang X, Colton S, Dombkowski A, Reiners J, Diakiw A, Xu 
XS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 2727 
Second Avenue, Room 4325, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. g.wang@wayne.edu

XPC is an important DNA damage recognition protein involved in DNA nucleotide 
excision repair. We have studied the role of the XPC protein in cisplatin 
treatment-mediated cell cycle regulation. Through the comparison of microarray 
data obtained from human normal fibroblasts and two individual XPC-defective 
cell lines, 486 genes were identified as XPC-responsive genes in the cisplatin 
treatment (with a minimal 1.5-fold change) and 297 of these genes were further 
mapped to biological pathways and gene ontologies. The cell cycle and cell 
proliferation-related genes were the most affected genes by the XPC defect in 
the cisplatin treatment. Many other cellular function genes were also affected 
by the XPC defect in the treatment. Western blot hybridization results revealed 
that the XPC defect reduced the p53 responses to the cisplatin treatment. The 
ability to activate caspase-3 was also attenuated in the XPC cells with the 
treatment. These results suggest that the XPC protein plays a critical role in 
initiating the cisplatin DNA damaging treatment-mediated signal transduction 
process, resulting in activation of the p53 pathway and cell cycle arrest that 
allow DNA repair and apoptosis to take place. These results reveal an important 
role of the XPC protein in the cancer prevention.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkh541
PMCID: PMC407824
PMID: 15107491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]