1. Cell Cycle. 2004 May;3(5):678-84. Epub 2004 May 19.

Murine FGF-inducible kinase is rapidly degraded via the nuclear 
ubiquitin-proteosome system when overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells.

Alberts GF(1), Winkles JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the 
Biomedical Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, Maryland 20855, USA.

FGF-inducible kinase (Fnk) is a member of the polo-like kinase family of 
structurally-related serine/threonine protein kinases. These kinases appear to 
play critical roles in normal cell cycle progression and in the DNA damage 
response. In the case of Fnk, several reports indicate that this protein 
normally functions in cells as a stress-activated checkpoint kinase. However, 
when Fnk is ectopically overexpressed in cells, it likely becomes constitutively 
activated, and this promotes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. In the present 
paper, we report that murine Fnk has a short half-life when transiently 
overexpressed in transfected NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. In contrast, when a 
kinase-deficient Fnk mutant protein, Fnk-K92M, is overexpressed in transfected 
cells, it is significantly more stable. We also found that Fnk-wild-type (WT) 
and Fnk-K92M are present in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of transfected cells 
and that Fnk nuclear export requires CRM1 function. Both of these proteins are 
degraded in cells via the nuclear ubiquitin-proteosome system; however, Fnk-K92M 
does not enter the nuclear compartment as efficiently as Fnk-WT and consequently 
it is significantly more stable. These results demonstrate that Fnk expression 
levels in transfected cells can be regulated by nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking, 
ubiquitination, and proteosome-dependent degradation. Furthermore, our studies 
indicate that the downregulation of endogenous Fnk activity in stressed cells 
may occur, at least in part, by Fnk nuclear translocation and proteosomal 
degradation.

PMID: 15107614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]