1. Genome Biol. 2004;5(5):R31. doi: 10.1186/gb-2004-5-5-r31. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Multi-tissue gene-expression analysis in a mouse model of thyroid hormone 
resistance.

Miller LD(1), McPhie P, Suzuki H, Kato Y, Liu ET, Cheng SY.

Author information:
(1)1Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 
60 Biopolis Street, Singapore, 138672.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is caused by mutations of the 
thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRbeta) gene. To understand the transcriptional 
program underlying TRbeta mutant-induced phenotypic expression of RTH, cDNA 
microarrays were used to profile the expression of 11,500 genes in a mouse model 
of human RTH.
RESULTS: We analyzed transcript levels in cerebellum, heart and white adipose 
tissue from a knock-in mouse (TRbetaPV/PV mouse) that harbors a human mutation 
(referred to as PV) and faithfully reproduces human RTH. Because TRbetaPV/PV 
mice have elevated thyroid hormone (T3), to define T3-responsive genes in the 
context of normal TRbeta, we also analyzed T3 effects in hyperthyroid wild-type 
gender-matched littermates. Microarray analysis revealed 163 genes responsive to 
T3 treatment and 187 genes differentially expressed between TRbetaPV/PV mice and 
wild-type littermates. Both the magnitude and gene make-up of the 
transcriptional response varied widely across tissues and conditions. We 
identified genes modulated in T3-dependent PV-independent, T3- and PV-dependent, 
and T3-independent PV-dependent pathways that illuminated the biological 
consequences of PV action in vivo. Most T3-responsive genes that were 
dysregulated in the heart and white adipose tissue of TRbetaPV/PV mice were 
repressed in T3-treated wild-type mice and upregulated in TRbetaPV/PV mice, 
suggesting the inappropriate activation of T3-suppressed genes in RTH.
CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive multi-tissue gene-expression analysis uncovered 
complex multiple signaling pathways that mediate the molecular actions of TRbeta 
mutants in vivo. In particular, the T3-independent mutant-dependent genomic 
response unveiled the contribution of a novel 'change-of-function' of TRbeta 
mutants to the pathogenesis of RTH. Thus, the molecular actions of TRbeta 
mutants are more complex than previously envisioned.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2004-5-5-r31
PMCID: PMC416467
PMID: 15128445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]