1. Biochemistry. 2004 May 11;43(18):5341-51. doi: 10.1021/bi049821x.

Dissecting the catalytic mechanism of betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase 
by use of intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence and site-directed mutagenesis.

Castro C(1), Gratson AA, Evans JC, Jiracek J, Collinsov√° M, Ludwig ML, Garrow 
TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase (BHMT) is a zinc-dependent enzyme that 
catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from glycine betaine (Bet) to 
homocysteine (Hcy) to form dimethylglycine (DMG) and methionine (Met). Previous 
studies in other laboratories have indicated that catalysis proceeds through the 
formation of a ternary complex, with a transition state mimicked by the 
inhibitor S-(delta-carboxybutyl)-l-homocysteine (CBHcy). Using changes in 
intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence to determine the affinity of human BHMT for 
substrates, products, or CBHcy, we now demonstrate that the enzyme-substrate 
complex reaches its transition state through an ordered bi-bi mechanism in which 
Hcy is the first substrate to bind and Met is the last product released. Hcy, 
Met, and CBHcy bind to the enzyme to form binary complexes with K(d) values of 
7.9, 6.9, and 0.28 microM, respectively. Binary complexes with Bet and DMG 
cannot be detected with fluorescence as a probe, but Bet and DMG bind tightly to 
BHMT-Hcy to form ternary complexes with K(d) values of 1.1 and 0.73 microM, 
respectively. Mutation of each of the seven tryptophan residues in human BHMT 
provides evidence that the enzyme undergoes two distinct conformational changes 
that are reflected in the fluorescence of the enzyme. The first is induced when 
Hcy binds, and the second, when Bet binds. As predicted by the crystal structure 
of BHMT, the amino acids Trp44 and Tyr160 are involved in binding Bet, and 
Glu159 in binding Hcy. Replacing these residues by site-directed mutagenesis 
significantly reduces the catalytic efficiency (V(max)/K(m)) of the enzyme. 
Replacing Tyr77 with Phe abolishes enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049821x
PMID: 15122900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]