1. Biochemistry. 2004 May 18;43(19):5888-901. doi: 10.1021/bi049640v.

In vitro phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 by protein kinase 
C-zeta: functional analysis and identification of novel phosphorylation sites.

Sommerfeld MR(1), Metzger S, Stosik M, Tennagels N, Eckel J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, German Diabetes 
Research Institute, Germany.

Protein kinase C-zeta (PKC-zeta) participates both in downstream insulin 
signaling and in the negative feedback control of insulin action. Here we used 
an in vitro approach to identify PKC-zeta phosphorylation sites within insulin 
receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) and to characterize the functional implications. A 
recombinant IRS-1 fragment (rIRS-1(449)(-)(664)) containing major tyrosine 
motifs for interaction with phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase strongly 
associated to the p85alpha subunit of PI 3-kinase after Tyr phosphorylation by 
the insulin receptor. Phosphorylation of rIRS-1(449)(-)(664) by PKC-zeta induced 
a prominent inhibition of this process with a mixture of classical PKC isoforms 
being less effective. Both PKC-zeta and the classical isoforms phosphorylated 
rIRS-1(449)(-)(664) on Ser(612). However, modification of this residue did not 
reduce the affinity of p85alpha binding to pTyr-containing peptides (amino acids 
605-615 of rat IRS-1), as determined by surface plasmon resonance. 
rIRS-1(449)(-)(664) was then phosphorylated by PKC-zeta using [(32)P]ATP and 
subjected to tryptic phosphopeptide mapping based on two-dimensional HPLC 
coupled to mass spectrometry. Ser(498) and Ser(570) were identified as novel 
phosphoserine sites targeted by PKC-zeta. Both sites were additionally confirmed 
by phosphopeptide mapping of the corresponding Ser --> Ala mutants of 
rIRS-1(449)(-)(664). Ser(570) was specifically targeted by PKC-zeta, as shown by 
immunoblotting with a phosphospecific antiserum against Ser(570) of IRS-1. 
Binding of p85alpha to the S570A mutant was less susceptible to inhibition by 
PKC-zeta, when compared to the S612A mutant. In conclusion, our in vitro data 
demonstrate a strong inhibitory action of PKC-zeta at the level of IRS-1/PI 
3-kinase interaction involving multiple serine phosphorylation sites. Whereas 
Ser(612) appears not to participate in the negative control of insulin 
signaling, Ser(570) may at least partly contribute to this process.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049640v
PMID: 15134463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]