1. Peptides. 2004 Mar;25(3):521-5. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2003.12.010.

Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and neprilysin hydrolyze neuropeptides: a 
brief history, the beginning and follow-ups to early studies.

Skidgel RA(1), Erd√∂s EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of Medicine, 
Pharmacology (MC 868), 835 S. Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL 60612-7344, USA.

Our investigations started when synthetic bradykinin became available and we 
could characterize two enzymes that cleaved it: kininase I or plasma 
carboxypeptidase N and kininase II, a peptidyl dipeptide hydrolase that we later 
found to be identical with the angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE). When we 
noticed that ACE can cleave peptides without a free C-terminal carboxyl group 
(e.g., with a C-terminal nitrobenzylamine), we investigated inactivation of 
substance P, which has a C-terminal Met(11)-NH(2). The studies were extended to 
the hydrolysis of the neuropeptide, neurotensin and to compare hydrolysis of the 
same peptides by neprilysin (neutral endopeptidase 24.11, CD10, NEP). Our 
publication in 1984 dealt with ACE and NEP purified to homogeneity from human 
kidney. NEP cleaved substance P (SP) at Gln(6)-Phe(7), Phe(7)[see text]-Phe(8), 
and Gly(9)-Leu(10) and neurotensin (NT) at Pro(10)-Tyr(11) and Tyr(11)-Ile(12). 
Purified ACE also rapidly inactivated SP as measured in bioassay. HPLC analysis 
showed that ACE cleaved SP at Phe(8)-Gly(9) and Gly(9)-Leu(10) to release 
C-terminal tri- and dipeptide (ratio = 4:1). The hydrolysis was Cl(-) dependent 
and inhibited by captopril. ACE released only dipeptide from SP free acid. ACE 
hydrolyzed NT at Tyr(11)-Ile(12) to release Ile(12)-Leu(13). Then peptide 
substrates were used to inhibit ACE hydrolyzing Fa-Phe-Gly-Gly and NEP cleaving 
Leu(5)-enkephalin. The K(i) values in microM were as follows: for ACE, 
bradykinin = 0.4, angiotensin I = 4, SP = 25, SP free acid = 2, NT = 14, and 
Met(5)-enkephalin = 450, and for NEP, bradykinin = 162, angiotensin I = 36, SP = 
190, NT = 39, Met(5)-enkephalin = 22. These studies showed that ACE and NEP, two 
enzymes widely distributed in the body, are involved in the metabolism of SP and 
NT. Below we briefly survey how NEP and ACE in two decades have gained the 
reputation as very important factors in health and disease. This is due to the 
discovery of more endogenous substrates of the enzymes and to the very broad and 
beneficial therapeutic applications of ACE inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2003.12.010
PMID: 15134871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]