1. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 1;381(Pt 3):735-41. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040302.

Mutational analysis of the triclosan-binding region of enoyl-ACP (acyl-carrier 
protein) reductase from Plasmodium falciparum.

Kapoor M(1), Gopalakrishnapai J, Surolia N, Surolia A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, 
India.

Triclosan, a known antibacterial, acts by inhibiting enoyl-ACP (acyl-carrier 
protein) reductase (ENR), a key enzyme of the type II fatty acid synthesis (FAS) 
system. Plasmodium falciparum, the human malaria-causing parasite, harbours the 
type II FAS; in contrast, its human host utilizes type I FAS. Due to this 
striking difference, ENR has emerged as an important target for the development 
of new antimalarials. Modelling studies, and the crystal structure of P. 
falciparum ENR, have highlighted the features of ternary complex formation 
between the enzyme, triclosan and NAD+ [Suguna, A. Surolia and N. Surolia (2001) 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 283, 224-228; Perozzo, Kuo, Sidhu, Valiyaveettil, 
Bittman, Jacobs, Fidock, and Sacchettini (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 13106-13114; 
and Swarnamukhi, Kapoor, N. Surolia, A. Surolia and Suguna (2003) PDB1UH5]. To 
address the issue of the importance of the residues involved in strong specific 
and stoichiometric binding of triclosan to P. falciparum ENR, we mutated the 
following residues: Ala-217, Asn-218, Met-281, and Phe-368. The affinity of all 
the mutants was reduced for triclosan as compared with the wild-type enzyme to 
different extents. The most significant mutation was A217V, which led to a 
greater than 7000-fold decrease in the binding affinity for triclosan as 
compared with wild-type PfENR. A217G showed only 10-fold reduction in the 
binding affinity. Thus, these studies point out significant differences in the 
triclosan-binding region of the P. falciparum enzyme from those of its bacterial 
counterparts.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040302
PMCID: PMC1133883
PMID: 15139852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]