1. Int J Cancer. 2004 Jul 10;110(5):683-6. doi: 10.1002/ijc.20162.

A high proportion of founder BRCA1 mutations in Polish breast cancer families.

Górski B(1), Jakubowska A, Huzarski T, Byrski T, Gronwald J, Grzybowska E, 
Mackiewicz A, Stawicka M, Bebenek M, Sorokin D, Fiszer-Maliszewska Ł, Haus O, 
Janiszewska H, Niepsuj S, Góźdź S, Zaremba L, Posmyk M, Płuzańska M, Kilar E, 
Czudowska D, Waśko B, Miturski R, Kowalczyk JR, Urbański K, Szwiec M, Koc J, 
Debniak B, Rozmiarek A, Debniak T, Cybulski C, Kowalska E, Tołoczko-Grabarek A, 
Zajaczek S, Menkiszak J, Medrek K, Masojć B, Mierzejewski M, Narod SA, Lubiński 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, International Hereditary Cancer Center, 
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. gorskib@sci.pam.szczecin.pl

Three mutations in BRCA1 (5382insC, C61G and 4153delA) are common in Poland and 
account for the majority of mutations identified to date in Polish breast and 
breast-ovarian cancer families. It is not known, however, to what extent these 3 
founder mutations account for all of the BRCA mutations distributed throughout 
the country. This question has important implications for health policy and the 
design of epidemiologic studies. To establish the relative contributions of 
founder and nonfounder BRCA mutations, we established the entire spectrum of 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a large set of breast-ovarian cancer families with 
origins in all regions of Poland. We sequenced the entire coding regions of the 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 100 Polish families with 3 or more cases of breast 
cancer and in 100 families with cases of both breast and ovarian cancer. A 
mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 was detected in 66% of breast cancer families and in 
63% of breast-ovarian cancer families. Of 129 mutations, 122 (94.6%) were in 
BRCA1 and 7 (5.4%) were in BRCA2. Of the 122 families with BRCA1 mutations, 119 
(97.5%) had a recurrent mutation (i.e., one that was seen in at least 2 
families). In particular, 111 families (91.0%) carried one of the 3 common 
founder mutations. The mutation spectrum was not different between families with 
and without ovarian cancer. These findings suggest that a rapid and inexpensive 
assay directed at identifying the 3 common founder mutations will have a 
sensitivity of 86% compared to a much more costly and labor-intensive 
full-sequence analysis of both genes. This rapid test will facilitate 
large-scale national epidemiologic and clinical studies of hereditary breast 
cancer, potentially including studies of chemoprevention.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.20162
PMID: 15146557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]