1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31750-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M313017200. Epub 
2004 May 15.

Identification of an amino acid residue in the protein kinase C C1b domain 
crucial for its localization to the Golgi network.

Schultz A(1), Ling M, Larsson C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Molecular Medicine, Lund University, 205 
02 Malm√∂, Sweden.

Protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms have been reported to be targeted to the Golgi 
complex via their C1 domains. We have shown recently that the regulatory domain 
of PKC induces apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells and that this effect is 
correlated to Golgi localization via the C1b domain. This study was designed to 
identify specific residues in the C1 domains that mediate Golgi localization. We 
demonstrate that the isolated C1b domains from PKCalpha, -delta, -epsilon, -eta, 
and - are targeted to the Golgi complex, whereas the corresponding C1a domains 
localize throughout the cell. Sequence alignment showed that amino acid residues 
corresponding to Glu-246 and Met-267 in PKC are conserved among C1b but absent 
from C1a domains. Mutation of Met-267, but not of Glu-246, to glycine abolished 
the Golgi localization of the isolated C1b domain and the regulatory domain of 
PKC. The mutated PKC regulatory domain constructs lacking Golgi localization 
were unable to induce apoptosis, suggesting a direct correlation between Golgi 
localization and apoptotic activity of PKC regulatory domain. Mutation of 
analogous residues in the C1b domain of PKCepsilon abrogated its Golgi 
localization, demonstrating that this effect is not restricted to one PKC 
isoform. The abolished Golgi localization did not affect neurite induction by 
PKCepsilon. However, the PKCepsilon mutant did not relocate to the Golgi network 
in response to ceramide and ceramide did not suppress the neurite-inducing 
capacity of the protein. Thus, the specific mutations in the C1b domain 
influence both the localization and function of full-length PKCepsilon.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M313017200
PMID: 15145947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]