1. Tissue Antigens. 2004 Jun;63(6):578-83. doi: 10.1111/j.0001-2815.2004.00184.x.

No association between interleukin-18 gene polymorphisms and haplotypes in Dutch 
sarcoidosis patients.

Janssen R(1), Grutters JC, Ruven HJ, Zanen P, Sato H, Welsh KI, du Bois RM, van 
den Bosch JM.

Author information:
(1)Heart Lung Center Utrecht, Department of Pulmonology, St. Antonius Hospital, 
Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.

Previously, an association between susceptibility to sarcoidosis and a 
polymorphism in the interleukin (IL-18) gene (IL-18 -607A/C) has been reported 
in Japanese. The aim of the present study was to validate this association in a 
clinically well-characterized population of Dutch Caucasians. Three other 
polymorphisms at positions -656, -137, and 1248 were included in order to extend 
the mapping of the IL-18 gene and to enable the construction of haplotypes. 
Polymorphisms were determined using sequence-specific primers (SSPs) and 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A total of 236 individuals was studied (133 
patients and 103 controls). No significant differences were observed in the 
distribution of the -607 and the other polymorphisms between Dutch sarcoidosis 
patients and controls. However, significant differences in IL-18 -607 genotype 
and allele frequency distributions were found between the Dutch and the 
Japanese. From the investigated IL-18-promoter polymorphisms, we were able to 
deduce four haplotypes. No differences were observed in haplotype frequencies 
between Dutch sarcoidosis patients and controls. In conclusion, IL-18 
polymorphisms do not appear to influence the susceptibility to sarcoidosis in 
Dutch Caucasians. Important differences in allele frequencies were observed 
between Japanese and Dutch sarcoidosis patients and controls.

Copyright 2004 Blackwell Munksgaard

DOI: 10.1111/j.0001-2815.2004.00184.x
PMID: 15140035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]