1. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 1;43(21):6519-34. doi: 10.1021/bi049647c.

Disulfide bonding arrangements in active forms of the somatomedin B domain of 
human vitronectin.

Kamikubo Y(1), De Guzman R, Kroon G, Curriden S, Neels JG, Churchill MJ, Dawson 
P, OÅ‚dziej S, Jagielska A, Scheraga HA, Loskutoff DJ, Dyson HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Division of Vascular Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, 
USA.

The N-terminal cysteine-rich somatomedin B (SMB) domain (residues 1-44) of the 
human glycoprotein vitronectin contains the high-affinity binding sites for 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) and the urokinase receptor (uPAR). We 
previously showed that the eight cysteine residues of recombinant SMB (rSMB) are 
organized into four disulfide bonds in a linear uncrossed pattern 
(Cys(5)-Cys(9), Cys(19)-Cys(21), Cys(25)-Cys(31), and Cys(32)-Cys(39)). In the 
present study, we use an alternative method to show that this disulfide bond 
arrangement remains a major preferred one in solution, and we determine the 
solution structure of the domain using NMR analysis. The solution structure 
shows that the four disulfide bonds are tightly packed in the center of the 
domain, replacing the traditional hydrophobic core expected for a globular 
protein. The few noncysteine hydrophobic side chains form a cluster on the 
outside of the domain, providing a distinctive binding surface for the 
physiological partners PAI-1 and uPAR. The hydrophobic surface consists mainly 
of side chains from the loop formed by the Cys(25)-Cys(31) disulfide bond, and 
is surrounded by conserved acidic and basic side chains, which are likely to 
contribute to the specificity of the intermolecular interactions of this domain. 
Interestingly, the overall fold of the molecule is compatible with several 
arrangements of the disulfide bonds. A number of different disulfide bond 
arrangements were able to satisfy the NMR restraints, and an extensive series of 
conformational energy calculations performed in explicit solvent confirmed that 
several disulfide bond arrangements have comparable stabilization energies. An 
experimental demonstration of the presence of alternative disulfide 
conformations in active rSMB is provided by the behavior of a mutant in which 
Asn(14) is replaced by Met. This mutant has the same PAI-1 binding activity as 
rVN1-51, but its fragmentation pattern following cyanogen bromide treatment is 
incompatible with the linear uncrossed disulfide arrangement. These results 
suggest that active forms of the SMB domain may have a number of allowed 
disulfide bond arrangements as long as the Cys(25)-Cys(31) disulfide bond is 
preserved.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049647c
PMID: 15157085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]