1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 Jun;28(6):701-5. doi:
10.1097/01.pas.0000126759.43227.d9.

Expression of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (P504S) in nephrogenic adenoma: a 
significant immunohistochemical pitfall compounding the differential diagnosis 
with prostatic adenocarcinoma.

Skinnider BF(1), Oliva E, Young RH, Amin MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Vancouver Hospital and Health Sciences Center and 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Sep;29(9):1252-4. doi: 
10.1097/01.pas.0000170347.62927.d9.

Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR, P504S) has recently been shown to be a 
useful marker for the diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma and a potential aid 
in its distinction from its many mimics, one of which is the benign lesion, 
nephrogenic adenoma (NA). The goal of this study was to assess the expression of 
AMACR in NA by immunohistochemistry, as well as other potentially useful 
markers, high-molecular-weight cytokeratin clone 34betaE12, p63, and 
prostate-specific antigen (PSA). AMACR was expressed in 4/4 NAs involving the 
prostatic urethra and underlying stroma, and in 3/16 NAs involving the bladder. 
The prostatic cases showed circumferential granular cytoplasmic AMACR expression 
of at least moderate intensity, in >75% of tubules in 3 cases and in <10% of 
tubules in the remaining case. The AMACR-positive cases in the bladder typically 
showed focal weak noncircumferential staining of the tubules and stronger 
staining of the cells lining the papillae. 34betaE12 staining was observed in 
1/4 prostatic NAs and 4/16 bladder NAs, typically in a cytoplasmic pattern in a 
minority of cells. p63 and PSA were negative in all cases. Our data indicate 
that NA of the prostatic urethra commonly expresses AMACR and lacks basal 
cell-specific markers, making it not only a potential morphologic mimic of 
prostatic adenocarcinoma but also a significant immunohistochemical mimic as 
well. Awareness of NA as a significant pitfall in the diagnosis of prostatic 
adenocarcinoma and careful examination of hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections 
remains the key to the correct diagnosis, which can be supported by a negative 
PSA stain.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000126759.43227.d9
PMID: 15166661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]