1. Virology. 2004 May 20;323(1):9-23. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.02.010.

Analysis of thermal stress-mediated PSTVd variation and biolistic inoculation of 
progeny of viroid "thermomutants" to tomato and Brassica species.

Matousek J(1), Orctová L, Steger G, Skopek J, Moors M, Dedic P, Riesner D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Plant Molecular Biology, Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Branisovská 31, 37005 Ceské Budejovice, Czech Republic.

Thermal stress of PSTVd-infected Nicotiana benthamiana led to appearance of a 
broad PSTVd sequence distribution, where most of mutations accumulated in the 
left half of the viroid's secondary structure including the "pathogenicity" 
domain. A similar effect had been reported for hop latent viroid [Virology 287 
(2001) 349]. The pool of viroid "thermomutants" progenies was transcribed into 
cDNA and used for biolistic inoculation of Raphanus sativa, where the PSTVd 
infection was detectable by reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR). Newly generated inoculum from R. sativa was used for biolistic 
transfer to Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type and silencing-deficient mutants 
bearing one of sde1, sde2, and sde3 locuses. Irrespective to A. thaliana 
silencing mutants, viroid levels in Brasicaceae species infected with mutated 
PSTVd variants were of approximately 300 times lower than it is expected for 
tomato. At the same time, no systemic infection of A. thaliana was achieved with 
the wild-type PSTVd. In Arabidopsis, a population of PSTVd, consisting of 
frequent and minor variants, was present and the sequence distribution differed 
from that of the original viroid "thermomutants"; that is, mutations were not 
predominantly restricted to the left half of viroid's secondary structure. At 
least 65% of viroid sequences from Arabidopsis library accumulated mutations in 
the upper conserved central region (UCCR). In addition, mutants having changes 
in "hairpin II" domain (C-->A transition at position 229) and in the conserved 
internal loop element in the left part of viroid structure (single insertion of 
G at position 39) were detected. All those mutants were inoculated biolistically 
to tomato and promoted infection especially after prolonged period of plant 
cultivation (50-80 days pi) when infection reached 70-90%. However, the sequence 
variants were unstable and reverted to the wild type and to other sequence 
variants stable in tomato. Our results demonstrate that heat stress-mediated 
production of viroid quasi-species could be of significance for viroid 
adaptations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2004.02.010
PMID: 15165815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]