1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33336-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M404631200. Epub
2004  Jun 1.

Binding and kinetic mechanisms of the Zeta class glutathione transferase.

Ricci G(1), Turella P, De Maria F, Antonini G, Nardocci L, Board PG, Parker MW, 
Carbonelli MG, Federici G, Caccuri AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences and Technologies, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The Zeta class of glutathione transferases (GSTs) has only recently been 
discovered and hence has been poorly characterized. Here we investigate the 
substrate binding and kinetic mechanisms of the human Zeta class GSTZ1c-1c by 
means of pre-steady state and steady-state experiments and site-directed 
mutagenesis. Binding of GSH occurs at a very low rate compared with that 
observed for the more recently evolved GSTs (Alpha, Mu, and Pi classes). 
Moreover, the single step binding mechanism observed in this enzyme is 
reminiscent of that found for the Theta class enzyme, whereas the Alpha, Mu, and 
Pi classes have adopted a multistep binding mechanism. Replacement of Cys16 with 
Ala increases the rate of GSH release from the active site causing a 10-fold 
decrease of affinity toward GSH. Cys16 also plays a crucial role in co-substrate 
binding; the mutant enzyme is unable to bind the carcinogenic substrate 
dichloroacetic acid in the absence of GSH. However, both substrate binding and 
GSH activation are not rate-limiting in catalysis. A peculiarity of the 
hGSTZ1c-1c is the half-site activation of bound GSH. This suggests a primitive 
monomer-monomer interaction that, in the recently diverged GSTP1-1, gives rise 
to a sophisticated cooperative mechanism that preserves the catalytic efficiency 
of this GST under stress conditions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M404631200
PMID: 15173170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]