1. J Neurol Sci. 2004 Jun 15;221(1-2):113-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.03.016.

Large-artery stroke in a young patient with Crohn's disease. Role of vitamin B6 
deficiency-induced hyperhomocysteinemia.

Younes-Mhenni S(1), Derex L, Berruyer M, Nighoghossian N, Philippeau F, Salzmann 
M, Trouillas P.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Urgences NeuroVasculaires, HÃ´pital Neurologique, 59 Boulevard 
Pinel, 69003 Lyon, France.

An increased incidence of ischemic stroke has been reported in patients with 
Crohn's disease. Cerebral infarcts are usually considered as a complication of 
the hypercoagulable state associated with this inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
The association between Crohn's disease, hyperhomocysteinemia and large-artery 
stroke of the young has rarely been reported. A 39-year-old woman, with prior 
medical history of Crohn's disease and hypertension, presented with an ischemic 
stroke of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) territory. Etiological workup 
disclosed bilateral high-grade ICA stenosis and atheroma of the subclavian and 
vertebral arteries. Exhaustive search for prothrombotic factors showed 
inflammation, with an increased level of fibrinogen and factor IX, and a marked 
hyperhomocysteinemia. Both vitamin B1 and vitamin B6 plasmatic levels were 
decreased. Heterozygous C677T methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase gene mutation 
was present. This observation highlights the combined proatherogenic effect of 
vitamin B deficiency-induced hyperhomocysteinemia and inflammation leading to 
large-artery stroke of the young in the setting of Crohn's disease. Our case 
report stresses the importance of vitamin deficiency screening in patients with 
IBD in terms of stroke prevention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.03.016
PMID: 15178225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]