1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Oct;29(10):1901-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300503.

A missense variation in human casein kinase I epsilon gene that induces 
functional alteration and shows an inverse association with circadian rhythm 
sleep disorders.

Takano A(1), Uchiyama M, Kajimura N, Mishima K, Inoue Y, Kamei Y, Kitajima T, 
Shibui K, Katoh M, Watanabe T, Hashimotodani Y, Nakajima T, Ozeki Y, Hori T, 
Yamada N, Toyoshima R, Ozaki N, Okawa M, Nagai K, Takahashi K, Isojima Y, 
Yamauchi T, Ebisawa T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Protein Metabolism, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that functional variations in clock genes, which 
generate circadian rhythms through interactive positive/negative feedback loops, 
contribute to the development of circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans. 
Another potential candidate for rhythm disorder susceptibility is casein kinase 
I epsilon (CKIepsilon), which phosphorylates clock proteins and plays a pivotal 
role in the circadian clock. To determine whether variations in CKIepsilon 
induce vulnerability to human circadian rhythm sleep disorders, such as delayed 
sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) and non-24-h sleep-wake syndrome (N-24), we analyzed 
all of the coding exons of the human CKIepsilon gene. One of the variants 
identified encoded an amino-acid substitution S408N, eliminating one of the 
putative autophosphorylation sites in the carboxyl-terminal extension of 
CKIepsilon. The N408 allele was less common in both DSPS (p = 0.028) and N-24 
patients (p = 0.035) compared to controls. When DSPS and N-24 subjects were 
combined, based on an a priori prediction of a common mechanism underlying both 
DSPS and N-24, the inverse association between the N408 allele and rhythm 
disorders was highly significant (p = 0.0067, odds ratio = 0.42, 95% confidence 
interval: 0.22-0.79). In vitro kinase assay revealed that CKIepsilon with the 
S408N variation was approximately 1.8-fold more active than wild-type 
CKIepsilon. These results indicate that the N408 allele in CKIepsilon plays a 
protective role in the development of DSPS and N-24 through alteration of the 
enzyme activity.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300503
PMID: 15187983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]