1. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Oct;25(10):1859-66. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgh206. Epub 2004
 Jun 3.

A novel splice-site variant of the base excision repair gene MYH is associated 
with production of an aberrant mRNA transcript encoding a truncated MYH protein 
not localized in the nucleus.

Tao H(1), Shinmura K, Hanaoka T, Natsukawa S, Shaura K, Koizumi Y, Kasuga Y, 
Ozawa T, Tsujinaka T, Li Z, Yamaguchi S, Yokota J, Sugimura H, Tsugane S.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Pathology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

The MYH gene encodes a DNA glycosylase involved in the excision repair of 
adenines paired with 8-hydroxyguanines, a major component of oxidative DNA 
damage, and bi-allelic germline MYH mutations have been reported to predispose 
individuals to multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinoma. To determine whether 
the MYH gene is involved in gastric carcinogenesis, we examined blood specimens 
from 20 Japanese familial gastric cancer (GC) patients for MYH mutations by 
polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) 
analysis followed by direct sequencing. Bi-allelic germline MYH mutations were 
not found in any of the specimens, but in addition to four known variants, a 
novel splice-site variant, IVS10-2A > G (c.892-2A > G), was found in two 
patients as its heterozygote. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis revealed that 
the IVS10-2A > G variant caused the production of an aberrant mRNA transcript 
encoding a truncated MYH protein. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that the 
wild-type MYH protein, but not the variant-type, is localized in the nucleus. We 
then searched for the IVS10-2A > G variant in 128 digestive tract cancer 
patients by PCR with confronting two-pair primers, and eight cancers from six 
patients with the IVS10-2A/G genotype were identified. However, no other 
germline MYH mutations or inactivation of the remaining wild-type allele was 
detected. We next tested the presumed correlation of the IVS10-2G allele with GC 
risk in a case-control study of 148 GC cases and 292 controls, but no 
significant difference in the distribution of the IVS10-2A > G variant was found 
between the cases and controls. Interestingly, the homozygote for the IVS10-2G 
allele was found in one GC case, but not in any controls. These results 
suggested that the ability to repair 8-hydroxyguanine in nuclear DNA may differ 
among Japanese individuals due to the splicing abnormality based on the MYH 
IVS10-2A > G variant, and that the bi-allelic IVS10-2A > G variation may be 
responsible for the occurrence of GC.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgh206
PMID: 15180946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]