1. Br J Pharmacol. 2004 Jul;142(5):869-78. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705859. Epub 2004
 Jun 14.

Subtype specific internalization of P2Y1 and P2Y2 receptors induced by novel 
adenosine 5'-O-(1-boranotriphosphate) derivatives.

Tulapurkar ME(1), Laubinger W, Nahum V, Fischer B, Reiser G.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Neurobiochemie, Medizinische Fakultät, 
Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Leipziger Strasse 44, 39120 Magdeburg, 
Germany.

P2Y-nucleotide receptors represent important targets for drug development. The 
lack of stable and receptor specific agonists, however, has prevented successful 
therapeutic applications. A novel series of P-boronated ATP derivatives 
(ATP-alpha-B) were synthesized by substitution of a nonbridging O at P(alpha) 
with a BH(3) group. This introduces a chiral center, thus resulting in 
diastereoisomers. In addition, at C2 of the adenine ring a further substitution 
was made (Cl- or methylthio-). The pairs of diastereoisomers were denoted here 
as A and B isomers. Here, we tested the receptor subtype specificity of these 
analogs on HEK 293 cells stably expressing rat P2Y(1) and rat P2Y(2) receptors, 
respectively, both attached to the fluorescent marker protein GFP (rP2Y(1)-GFP, 
rP2Y(2)-GFP). We investigated agonist-induced receptor endocytosis, [Ca(2+)](i) 
rise and arachidonic acid (AA) release. Agonist-induced endocytosis of 
rP2Y(1)-GFP was more pronounced for the A isomers than the corresponding B 
counterparts for all ATP-alpha-B analogs. Both 2-MeS-substituted 
diastereoisomers induced a greater degree of agonist-induced receptor 
endocytosis as compared to the 2-Cl-substituted derivatives. Endocytosis results 
are in accordance with the potency to induce Ca(2+) release by these compounds 
in HEK 293 cells stably transfected with rP2Y(1). In case of rP2Y(2)-GFP, the 
borano-nucleotides were very weak agonists in comparison to UTP and ATP in terms 
of Ca(2+) release, AA release and in inducing receptor endocytosis. The 
different ATP-alpha-B derivatives and also the diastereoisomers were equally 
ineffective. Thus, the new agonists may be considered as potent and highly 
specific agonist drug candidates for P2Y(1) receptors. The difference in 
activity of the ATP analogs at P2Y receptors could be used as a tool to 
investigate structural differences between P2Y receptor subtypes.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0705859
PMCID: PMC1575069
PMID: 15197109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]