1. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 29;43(25):8014-20. doi: 10.1021/bi049478w.

A novel amino acid substitution is responsible for spectral tuning in a rodent 
violet-sensitive visual pigment.

Parry JW(1), Poopalasundaram S, Bowmaker JK, Hunt DM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, 11-43 Bath Street, 
London EC1V 9EL, UK.

Cone short-wave (SWS1) visual pigments can be divided into two categories that 
correlate with spectral sensitivity, violet sensitive above 390 nm and 
ultraviolet sensitive below that wavelength. The evolution and mechanism of 
spectral tuning of SWS1 opsins are proving more complex than those of other 
opsin classes. Violet-sensitive pigments probably evolved from an ancestral 
ultraviolet-sensitive opsin, although in birds ultraviolet sensitivity has 
re-evolved from violet-sensitive pigments. In certain mammals, a single 
substitution involving the gain of a polar residue can switch sensitivity from 
ultraviolet to violet sensitivity, but where such a change is not involved, 
several substitutions may be required to effect the switch. The guinea pig, 
Cavia porcellus, is a hystricognathous rodent, a distinct suborder from the 
Sciurognathi, such as rats and mice. It has been shown by microspectrophotometry 
to have two cone visual pigments at 530 and 400 nm. We have ascertained the 
sequence of the short-wave pigment and confirmed its violet sensitivity by 
expression and reconstitution of the pigment in vitro. Moreover, we have shown 
by site-directed mutagenesis that a single residue is responsible for wavelength 
tuning of spectral sensitivity, a Val86Phe causing a 60 nm short-wave shift into 
the ultraviolet and a Val86Tyr substitution shifting the pigment 8 nm long wave. 
The convergent evolution of this mammalian VS pigment provides insight into the 
mechanism of tuning between the violet and UV.

DOI: 10.1021/bi049478w
PMID: 15209496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]