1. Anticancer Drugs. 2004 Jul;15(6):587-91. doi: 
10.1097/01.cad.0000132230.51759.8d.

Pegylated interferon-alpha2b treatment in melanoma patients: influence on amino 
acids, 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid and pteridine plasma concentrations.

Van Gool AR(1), van Ojik HH, Kruit WH, Bannink M, Mulder PG, Eggermont AM, 
Stoter G, Fekkes D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Erasmus MC-Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.vangool@erasmusmc.nl

Our objective was to study the influence of pegylated interferon-alpha2b 
(PEG-IFN-alpha) on the metabolism of amino acids and pteridines. We used an 
exploratory study into plasma concentrations of large neutral amino acids, 
5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (5-HIAA), total biopterin (BIOP) and neopterin (NEOP) 
in 40 high-risk melanoma patients. Patients were randomized to treatment with 
PEG-IFN-alpha once a week in a dose of 6 microg/kg/week s.c. during 8 weeks, 
followed by a maintenance treatment of 3 microg/kg/week s.c. or to observation 
only. We found that treatment with PEG-IFN-alpha decreases tryptophan (TRP) 
concentrations in the first 3 months of treatment to a maximum of 25.3% compared 
to controls [95% confidence interval (CI): 14.9 to 34.4]. The TRP:LNAA ratio, an 
index for the availability of TRP to the central nervous system (CNS), decreases 
during 6 months with 18.8% (95% CI: 11.9 to 25.2). Concentrations of NEOP rose; 
however, concentrations of BIOP, the sum of tetrahydrobiopterin [BH4] and its 
oxidative products, did not decrease. The ratio of phenylalanine to tyrosine was 
increased with 11.7% (95% CI: 1.0 to 23.5) during 6 months. We conclude that, 
like conventional IFN-alpha, PEG-IFN-alpha lowers TRP concentrations and 
decreases the availability of TRP to the CNS. PEG-IFN-alpha has a similar 
influence on pteridine metabolism as standard IFN-alpha. If a lowered 
availability of TRP and a consequent decrease of serotonergic neurotransmission 
are indeed a mechanism underlying neuropsychiatric side-effects of IFN-alpha, 
patients on PEG-IFN-alpha are not at a lower risk of developing neuropsychiatric 
side-effects as patients on conventional IFN-alpha.

DOI: 10.1097/01.cad.0000132230.51759.8d
PMID: 15205601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]