1. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord. 2004 Mar;5(1):16-21. doi: 
10.1080/14660820310016804.

Long term proteasome inhibition does not preferentially afflict motor neurons in 
organotypical spinal cord cultures.

Vlug AS(1), Jaarsma D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Ubiquitinated inclusions are a constant feature of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). It has been hypothesised that these inclusions reflect overload or 
failure of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and that this failure contributes to 
the degeneration of motor neurons. In the present study we have examined the 
effect of low concentrations of proteasome inhibitors on protein aggregation and 
viability of neurons in organotypical spinal cord cultures. We found a 
dose-dependent degeneration of neurons after a one-week exposure to the 
proteasome inhibitors lactacystin and epoxomicin. Neuronal degeneration was 
associated with an increase in poly-ubiquitination, consistent with failure of 
the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Proteasome inhibition caused degeneration of 
both motor neurons and interneurons, and no difference in survival between motor 
neurons and interneurons was observed. Since protein aggregation may 
particularly play a role in ALS patients with superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) 
mutations, we have compared the effect of proteasome inhibition between spinal 
cord cultures from non-transgenic and SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice. There was no 
difference between the viability of motor neurons from transgenic and 
non-transgenic mice.

DOI: 10.1080/14660820310016804
PMID: 15204019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]