1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):37153-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403210200. Epub 
2004 Jun 21.

c-Cbl-mediated ubiquitinylation is required for epidermal growth factor receptor 
exit from the early endosomes.

Ravid T(1), Heidinger JM, Gee P, Khan EM, Goldkorn T.

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
California, School of Medicine, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) controls cell growth and has a key role 
in tumorigenic processes. The extent of EGFR signaling is tightly regulated by 
post-transcriptional modifications leading to down-regulation of the levels of 
the receptor. Previous studies from our laboratory demonstrated that the 
reactive oxidant hydrogen peroxide activates the EGFR, yet, without 
down-regulation of the receptor levels, which results in prolonged receptor 
signaling. In the present study we examined the role of the E3 ligase c-Cbl, as 
a possible link between oxidative stress, EGFR signaling, and tumorigenic 
responses. First, we ectopically expressed a mutant EGFR (Tyr-1045 --> Phe) in 
cells lacking endogenous receptor, to determine whether the lack of 
phosphorylation at this site is the cause for EGFR retention at the membrane 
under oxidative stress, as we have previously suggested. Our findings suggest 
that abrogation of tyrosine 1045 phosphorylation alone is not enough to retain 
the EGFR at the plasma membrane under oxidative stress. Second, through the use 
of the Src inhibitor PP1, our findings establish EGFR movement out of the early 
endosomes as the exact location where c-Cbl-mediated ubiquitinylation is 
essential for EGFR trafficking. Finally, our studies substantiate the findings 
that c-Cbl-mediated ubiquitinylation is needed for degradation, but not for 
internalization of the EGFR in both transfection-dependent Chinese hamster ovary 
cells and transfection-independent A549 lung epithelial cells. These findings 
only begin to explain the features seen under oxidative stress, but they yield a 
greater understanding of the role of c-Cbl in EGFR trafficking.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M403210200
PMID: 15210722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]