1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jul 1;128A(1):39-45. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30005.

A novel missense mutation in the galactosyltransferase-I (B4GALT7) gene in a 
family exhibiting facioskeletal anomalies and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome resembling 
the progeroid type.

Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M(1), Zaidi SH, Al-Ali M, Al-Mureikhi MS, Kennedy S, Al-Thani G, 
Tsui LC, Teebi AS.

Author information:
(1)Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, Department of Genetics, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, 9th Floor Elm Wing, Rm. 9115, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. muhammad@genet.sickkids.on.ca

The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of heritable 
connective tissue disorders characterized by skin hyperextensibility, joint 
hypermobility, and tissue fragility. Several genes have been implicated to 
result in EDS phenotypes. The progeroid type of EDS is characterized by 
wrinkled, loose skin on the face, curly fine hair, scanty eyebrows and 
eyelashes, in addition to the classical features of EDS. Here we describe two 
similarly affected individuals in two sibships of a large consanguineous family 
from Qatar. DNA samples from affected and unaffected members of the family were 
analyzed for homozygosity of polymorphic markers associated with genes that have 
been implicated in EDS. Among 28 markers analyzed, homozygosity was only 
observed for D5S469 and D5S2111, which were markers for galactosyltransferase-I 
(B4GALT7) located on chromosome 5q35.2, where the previously reported 
progeroid-like variant of EDS has been mapped. Exons harboring the coding 
regions and exon-intron junctions of B4GALT7 were amplified by PCR and examined 
for mutations. A homozygous misssense C to T substitution at nucleotide 808 in 
the coding region was discovered in both affected individuals. The carrier 
parents were heterozygous for this mutation, which was not found among 76 DNA 
samples from control individuals of the same ethnicity. Segregation of this 
novel mutation in the family further confirmed the allelic variant and its 
recessive mode of inheritance in this type of EDS. The C to T substitution 
results in an arginine to cysteine change at amino acid residue 270 that is 
located in the catalytically active extracellular C-terminal domain. This change 
could result in abnormal protein folding and/or aberrant interactions of mutated 
galactosyltransferase-I with other extracellular matrix proteins leading to the 
development of a progeroid-like phenotype in affected individuals.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30005
PMID: 15211654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]