1. J Med Chem. 2004 Jul 1;47(14):3580-90. doi: 10.1021/jm031136l.

1,2,4-triazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one moiety as an attractive scaffold to 
develop new potent and selective human A3 adenosine receptor antagonists: 
synthesis, pharmacological, and ligand-receptor modeling studies.

Colotta V(1), Catarzi D, Varano F, Calabri FR, Lenzi O, Filacchioni G, Martini 
C, Trincavelli L, Deflorian F, Moro S.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Universit√† degli Studi di Firenze, 
Polo Scientifico, Via Ugo Schiff 6, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy. 
vittoria.colotta@unifi.it

In the past few years much effort in our laboratory has been directed toward the 
study of adenosine receptor antagonists, and recently we focused our attention 
on 2-aryl-1,2,4-triazolo[4,3-a]quinoxaline-1,4-diones and 
2-aryl-1,2,4-triazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-4-amino-1-ones, some of which were potent 
and/or selective A(3) receptor antagonists. In the present paper, a new series 
of triazoloquinoxaline derivatives is described. Most of the new compounds, 
biologically evaluated in radioligand binding assays at bovine (b) A(1) and 
A(2A) and at human (h) A(1) and A(3) adenosine receptors, showed high hA(3) 
adenosine receptor affinity and selectivity. In particular, 
2-(4-nitrophenyl)-1,2,4,5-tetrahydro-1,2,4-triazolo[4,3-a]quinoxaline-1,4-dione 
(1), also tested at the hA(2A) ARs, shows the best binding profile with a high 
hA(3) affinity (K(i) = 0.60 nM) and strong selectivity vs hA(1) and vs hA(2A) 
receptors (both selectivity ratios greater than 16 600). To interpret our 
experimental results, we decided to theoretically depict the putative 
transmembrane binding motif of our triazoloquinoxaline analogues on hA(3) 
receptor. Structure-activity relationships have been explained analyzing the 
three-dimensional structure of the antagonist-receptor models obtained by 
molecular docking simulation.

DOI: 10.1021/jm031136l
PMID: 15214785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]