1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Aug;24(2):186. doi: 10.1002/humu.9262.

Sjögren-Larsson syndrome: seven novel mutations in the fatty aldehyde 
dehydrogenase gene ALDH3A2.

Carney G(1), Wei S, Rizzo WB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Munroe-Meyer Institute, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center and Hobart Wiltse Center for the Study of Metabolic Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska.

Sjögren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is an inherited neurocutaneous disease caused by 
mutations in the ALDH3A2 gene that codes for fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase 
(FALDH), an enzyme involved in lipid metabolism. We performed mutation analysis 
in probands or fetuses from 13 unrelated SLS families and identified seven novel 
ALDH3A2 mutations. Two mutations involved an insertion or deletion of a single 
guanine nucleotide at the same position in exon 9: c.1223delG and 
c.1223_1224insG. A 66-bp duplication in exon 2 probably arose from unequal 
crossing over within a mispaired 10-bp sequence that is normally repeated within 
the exon. Based on RT-PCR of fibroblast RNA, the c.1107+2T>G donor splice-site 
mutation in intron 7 produced two mRNA transcripts, one skipping exon 7 and the 
other skipping exons 6-8. Expression of the c.1139G>A mutation in exon 8, which 
is predicted to cause an amino acid substitution (Ser380Asn) in an 
evolutionarily conserved region of the FALDH catalytic domain, resulted in a 
protein with profoundly reduced enzymatic activity. By analyzing single 
nucleotide polymorphisms within the ALDH3A2 gene, we detected four different 
haplotypes among the new mutant alleles. These results demonstrate a rich 
diversity of mutations and haplotype associations in SLS.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9262
PMID: 15241804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]