1. J Biochem. 2004 Jul;136(1):65-72. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvh093.

Lysosomal acid lipase as a preproprotein.

Zschenker O(1), Oezden D, Ameis D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 
20246 Hamburg, FRG. zschenker@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL; EC 3.1.1.13) hydrolyzes intracellular triglycerides 
and cholesterol esters taken up by various cell-types. Previously, LAL purified 
from human liver tissue was described as a preproprotein with a 27 amino acid 
signal peptide and a 49 amino acid propeptide. Three mutants of the putative 
proregion of LAL were produced and expressed in Spodoptera frugiperda insect 
cells. Pulse-chase experiments demonstrated that LAL undergoes proteolytical 
processing. The deletion of the 49 amino acids led to a complete loss of the LAL 
activity. The two other mutants were produced at the C-terminus of the 
pro-region, at positions 49 and 50, by site-directed mutagenesis. Mutant K49R 
showed wild-type LAL activity, but mutant G50A showed significantly reduced 
enzyme activity compared to wild-type LAL and a greater reduction in culture 
medium than in detergent cell extracts. Kinetic data suggest that mutant G50A is 
less stable than wild-type LAL and mutant K49R. In contrast to K49, the highly 
conserved amino acid residue G50 seems to be in a very important position and 
its mutation influences both secretion and enzyme activity of LAL. A 
three-dimensional model of LAL shows that K49 and G50 are localized in the 
loop-region between two beta-sheets, highly accessible for proteolytic enzymes. 
These data together indicate that LAL is indeed a preproprotein, in which the 
pro-region is essential for its folding and stability, secretion, and enzyme 
activity.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvh093
PMID: 15269241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]