1. J Gen Virol. 2004 Aug;85(Pt 8):2447-2457. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.80070-0.

Mutation of Phe50 to Ser50 in the 126/183-kDa proteins of Odontoglossum ringspot 
virus abolishes virus replication but can be complemented and restored by exact 
reversion.

Wang HH(1), Yu HH(1), Wong SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 
Science Drive 4, Kent Ridge, Singapore 117543.

Sequence comparison of a non-biologically active full-length cDNA clone of 
Odontoglossum ringspot virus (ORSV) pOT1 with a biologically active ORSV cDNA 
clone pOT2 revealed a single nucleotide change of T-->C at position 211. This 
resulted in the change of Phe50 in OT2 to Ser50 in OT1. It was not the 
nucleotide but the amino acid change of Phe50 that was responsible for the 
inability of OT1 to replicate. Time-course experiments showed that no 
minus-strand RNA synthesis was detected in mutants with a Phe50 substitution. 
Corresponding mutants in Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) showed identical results, 
suggesting that Phe50 may play an important role in replication in all 
tobamoviruses. Complementation of a full-length mutant OT1 was demonstrated in a 
co-infected local-lesion host, a systemic host and protoplasts by 
replication-competent mutants tORSV.GFP or tORSV.GFPm, and further confirmed by 
co-inoculation using tOT1.GFP+tORSV (TTC), suggesting that ORSV contains no RNA 
sequence inhibitory to replication in trans. Surprisingly, a small number of 
exact revertants were detected in plants inoculated with tOT1+tORSV.GFPm or 
tOT1.GFP+tORSV (TTC). No recombination was detected after screening of silent 
markers in virus progeny extracted from total RNA or viral RNA from inoculated 
and upper non-inoculated leaves as well as from transfected protoplasts. Exact 
reversion from TCT (OT1) to TTT (OT2), rather than recombination, restored its 
replication function in co-inoculated leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.80070-0
PMID: 15269387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]