1. Int J Lepr Other Mycobact Dis. 2004 Jun;72(2):143-8. doi: 
10.1489/1544-581X(2004)072<0143:SNPSAA>2.0.CO;2.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at -238 and -308 positions in the 
TNFalpha promoter: clinical and bacteriological evaluation in leprosy.

Vanderborght PR(1), Matos HJ, Salles AM, Vasconcellos SE, Silva-Filho VF, 
Huizinga TW, Ottenhoff TH, Sampaio EP, Sarno EN, Santos AR, Moraes MO.

Author information:
(1)Leprosy Laboratory, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) plays a key role in orchestrating the 
complex events involved in inflammation and immune response. The presence of 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the promoter region of the TNFa 
gene has been associated with a number of diseases. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the distribution of polymorphisms at positions -238 (G/A) and -308 
(G/A) at the TNFalpha promoter, and its association to the outcome of different 
clinical forms of leprosy. Furthermore, the bacteriological index (BI) was 
evaluated among genotyped multibacillary (MB) patients in order to investigate 
the possible influence of each polymorphism on the bacterial load. This study 
included a total of 631 leprosy patients being 401 MB and 230 paucibacillary 
(PB), that was further separated according to its ethnicity (Afro- and 
Euro-Brazilians). The combination of SNPs in haplotypes generated three 
different arrangements: TNFG-G, TNFG-A and TNFA-G. In spite of the marked 
differences observed in the frequency of the haplotypes along the ethnic groups, 
no statistical differences were observed in haplotype frequencies between MB and 
PB patients. The BI analyses showed a lower bacteriological index among the -308 
carriers, while the BI of the -238 carriers was higher. Although no significance 
has been achieved in this analysis regarding the influence of the polymorphisms 
to the development of the clinical outcome, it seems that in a different stage 
(among the MB patients) the polymorphisms could contribute to the degree of 
severity observed.

DOI: 10.1489/1544-581X(2004)072<0143:SNPSAA>2.0.CO;2
PMID: 15301589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]