1. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jul 30;341(1):171-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.05.057.

Characterization and manipulation of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa dimethylarginine 
dimethylaminohydrolase monomer--dimer equilibrium.

Plevin MJ(1), MagalhÃ£es BS, Harris R, Sankar A, Perkins SJ, Driscoll PC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University College London, 
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

In mammals, the enzyme dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH) is 
implicated in the regulation of the cellular levels of asymmetric 
methylarginines, small molecule metabolites that themselves represent a family 
of endogenous inhibitors of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). The involvement of DDAH 
function in the regulation of NOS makes this enzyme a potentially attractive 
therapeutic target. DDAH from the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PaDDAH) is 
so far the only structurally tractable homologue of mammalian DDAH isoforms. To 
complement the recent crystal structure of this protein, we show by hydrodynamic 
measurements that PaDDAH exists in dynamic equilibrium between monomer (ca 29 
kDa) and symmetric homodimer (ca 58 kDa) states with a dimer dissociation 
constant, K(d) approximately 500nM. For the purposes of NMR-based approaches to 
the study of this enzyme's interactions with substrate and inhibitor ligands, it 
would be useful to obtain the protein in monomeric form. Through detailed 
analysis of the homodimer PaDDAH crystal structure we identified key residues 
involved in the protomer-protomer interface and targeted these for mutation. The 
hydrodynamic and self-associative properties of a series of PaDDAH interface 
mutants were analyzed by concentration-dependent analytical size-exclusion 
chromatography and sedimentation equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation. The 
individual substitution of several of the interface residues shifts the 
equilibrium position towards the monomer, which allowed the design of a double 
mutant variant (Arg40-->Glu, Arg98-->His) that behaves exclusively as a stable 
monomer, yet retains greater than 95% catalytic activity compared to wild-type. 
Comparative two-dimensional (1)H, (15)N heteronuclear NMR spectra indicate that 
the double mutant remains a monomer even at approximately 1 mM concentration. 
Accordingly, the double mutant PaDDAH is an attractive template for further 
NMR-based investigations of the enzyme mechanism and characterization of 
ligand-binding and inhibitor-binding profiles. These results indicate that 
dimerization of PaDDAH is not critical for the maintenance of the biological 
function of the protein. These results are discussed in the context of known 
modes of self-association between structurally related, but functionally 
distinct, members of the beta/alpha-propeller fold class.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.05.057
PMID: 15312771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]