1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Jan;13(1):96-101. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201285.

Fcgamma receptor IIA genotype and susceptibility to P. aeruginosa infection in 
patients with cystic fibrosis.

De Rose V(1), Arduino C, Cappello N, Piana R, Salmin P, Bardessono M, Goia M, 
Padoan R, Bignamini E, Costantini D, Pizzamiglio G, Bennato V, Colombo C, Giunta 
A, Piazza A.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Disease Division, Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, 
University of Turin, Turin, Italy. virginia.derose@unito.it

It has been suggested that genes other than CFTR could modulate the severity of 
lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF). Neutrophil Fcgamma receptor II 
(FcgammaRII) is involved in host defense against microorganisms and in 
inflammatory response. We evaluated the association between genetic variability 
of this gene and both airway infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and severity 
of lung disease in patients with CF. We studied 167 Italian unrelated patients 
with CF and 50 control subjects. The distribution of FcgammaRIIA genotypes in CF 
patients was compared with that in control subjects and the different genotypes 
were related with the presence or absence of P. aeruginosa infection and markers 
of disease severity in CF patients. The distribution of FcgammaRIIA genotypes 
was not significantly different between CF patients and controls. We observed 
that in CF patients with the same CFTR genotype (DeltaF508/DeltaF508), those 
carrying the R allele of FcgammaRIIA had an increased risk of acquiring chronic 
P. aeruginosa infection (P=0.042, R.R.: 4.38; 95% CI: 1.17/22.4). Moreover, the 
frequency of R/R genotype in patients with chronic P. aeruginosa infection seems 
to be higher than that of control subjects and patients without chronic 
infection. The observation that CF patients carrying the R allele of FcgammaRIIA 
are at higher risk of acquiring chronic P. aeruginosa infection suggests that 
the FcgammaRII loci genetic variation is contributing to this infection 
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201285
PMID: 15367919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]