1. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Dec;66(6):1617-24. doi: 10.1124/mol.104.000166. Epub 2004 
Sep 10.

Using molecular tools to dissect the role of Galphas in sensitization of AC1.

Vortherms TA(1), Nguyen CH, Berlot CH, Watts VJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA.

Short-term activation of Galpha(i/o)-coupled receptors inhibits adenylyl 
cyclase, whereas persistent activation of Galpha(i/o)-coupled receptors results 
in a compensatory sensitization of adenylyl cyclase activity after subsequent 
activation by Galpha(s) or forskolin. Several indirect observations have 
suggested the involvement of increased Galpha(s)-adenylyl cyclase interactions 
in the expression of sensitization; however, evidence supporting a direct role 
for Galpha(s) has not been well established. In the present report, we used two 
genetic approaches to further examine the role of Galpha(s) in heterologous 
sensitization of Ca(2+)-sensitive type 1 adenylyl cyclase (AC1). In the first 
approach, we constructed Galpha(s)-insensitive mutants of AC1 (F293L and Y973S) 
that retained sensitivity to Ca2+ and forskolin activation. Persistent (2 h) 
activation of the D2 dopamine receptor resulted in a significant augmentation of 
basal or Ca(2+)- and forskolin-stimulated AC1 activity; however, sensitization 
of Galpha(s)-insensitive mutants of AC1 was markedly reduced compared with 
wild-type AC1. In the second strategy, we examined the requirement of an intact 
receptor-Galpha(s) signaling pathway for the expression of sensitization using 
dominant-negative Galpha(s) mutants (alpha3beta5 G226A/A366S or alpha3beta5 
G226A/E268A/A366S) to disrupt D1 dopamine receptor activation of recombinant 
AC1. D1 dopamine receptor-Galpha(s) signaling was attenuated in the presence of 
alpha3beta5 G226A/A366S or alpha3beta5 G226A/E268A/A366S, but D2 agonist-induced 
sensitization of Ca(2+)-stimulated AC1 activity was not altered. Together, the 
present findings directly support the hypothesis that the expression of 
sensitization of AC1 involves Galpha(s)-adenylyl cyclase interactions.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.104.000166
PMID: 15361543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]