1. Diabet Med. 2004 Oct;21(10):1113-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2004.01304.x.

Polymorphisms in the 5'-upstream region of the PKCbeta gene in Japanese patients 
with Type 2 diabetes.

Ikeda Y(1), Suehiro T, Osaki F, Tsuzura S, Kumon Y, Hashimoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nephrology, Kochi Medical School, 
Japan. ikeday@kochi-ms.ac.jp

AIMS: Protein kinase C (PKC), a serine/threonine kinase, is known to be 
activated in various tissues under hyperglycaemic conditions. Notably, PKCbeta, 
a member of the conventional PKC group, is the predominant isoform detected in 
vascular tissues and could be involved in the development of diabetic vascular 
complications. In the present study, we investigated genetic variations in the 
5'-upstream region of the PKCbeta gene to assess their possible relation to 
vascular complications in diabetic patients.
METHODS: Variations upstream from the PKCbeta gene (-1066/+256) were examined in 
60 Type 2 diabetic patients using a cycle sequencing method. Screening of 
detected variations was performed in 204 Type 2 diabetic patients and 160 
healthy controls.
RESULTS: Five single nucleotide polymorphisms; C(-238)G, C(-287)T, A(-348)G, 
C(-546)G, and C(-853)T, were identified in the upstream region. The C(-287)T and 
A(-348)G polymorphisms were in perfect linkage disequilibrium. There were no 
significant differences in genotype or allele frequencies of the five 
polymorphisms among the diabetic patients and healthy subjects. However, both 
-238GG and -287CC (-348GG) homozygotes showed significantly higher frequencies 
of macrovascular disease compared with patients with other genotypes. Further, 
an electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed that the -238G fragment had a 
five-fold higher affinity for transcription factor Sp1 when compared with -238C.
CONCLUSIONS: The C(-238)G and C(-287)T-A(-348)G polymorphisms in the 5'-upstream 
region of the PKCbeta gene may have an effect on the susceptibility of diabetic 
vascular complications through an alteration of tissue PKCbeta density or 
function.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2004.01304.x
PMID: 15384959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]