1. J Exp Med. 2004 Sep 20;200(6):701-12. doi: 10.1084/jem.20041270.

Loss of HIV-1-specific CD8+ T cell proliferation after acute HIV-1 infection and 
restoration by vaccine-induced HIV-1-specific CD4+ T cells.

Lichterfeld M(1), Kaufmann DE, Yu XG, Mui SK, Addo MM, Johnston MN, Cohen D, 
Robbins GK, Pae E, Alter G, Wurcel A, Stone D, Rosenberg ES, Walker BD, Altfeld 
M.

Author information:
(1)Partners AIDS Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 149 13th St., 
Boston, MA 02129, USA.

Virus-specific CD8(+) T cells are associated with declining viremia in acute 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)1 infection, but do not correlate with control 
of viremia in chronic infection, suggesting a progressive functional defect not 
measured by interferon gamma assays presently used. Here, we demonstrate that 
HIV-1-specific CD8(+) T cells proliferate rapidly upon encounter with cognate 
antigen in acute infection, but lose this capacity with ongoing viral 
replication. This functional defect can be induced in vitro by depletion of 
CD4(+) T cells or addition of interleukin 2-neutralizing antibodies, and can be 
corrected in chronic infection in vitro by addition of autologous CD4(+) T cells 
isolated during acute infection and in vivo by vaccine-mediated induction of 
HIV-1-specific CD4(+) T helper cell responses. These data demonstrate a loss of 
HIV-1-specific CD8(+) T cell function that not only correlates with progressive 
infection, but also can be restored in chronic infection by augmentation of 
HIV-1-specific T helper cell function. This identification of a reversible 
defect in cell-mediated immunity in chronic HIV-1 infection has important 
implications for immunotherapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20041270
PMCID: PMC2211961
PMID: 15381726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]