1. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Feb;202(2):464-73. doi: 10.1002/jcp.20142.

Involvement of p42/p44 MAPK, JNK, and NF-kappaB in IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 
expression in human pulmonary epithelial cells.

Lin FS(1), Lin CC, Chien CS, Luo SF, Yang CM.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Natural Products, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, 
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) has been shown to induce the expression of 
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on airway epithelial cells and 
contributes to inflammatory responses. However, the mechanisms regulating ICAM-1 
expression by IL-1beta in human A549 cells was not completely understood. Here, 
the roles of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and NF-kappaB pathways 
for IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 expression were investigated in A549 cells. IL-1beta 
induced expression of ICAM-1 protein and mRNA in a time- and 
concentration-dependent manner. The IL-1beta induction of ICAM-1 mRNA and 
protein were partially inhibited by U0126 and PD98059 (specific inhibitors of 
MEK1/2) and SP600125 [a specific inhibitor of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK)]. 
U0126 was more potent than other inhibitors to attenuate IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 
expression. Consistently, IL-1beta stimulated phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPK 
and JNK which was attenuated by pretreatment with U0126 or SP600125, 
respectively. Moreover, transfection with dominant negative mutants of MEK1/2 
(MEK K97R) or ERK2 (ERK2 K52R) also attenuated IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 
expression. The combination of PD98059 and SP600125 displayed an additive effect 
on IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 gene expression. IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 expression 
was almost completely blocked by a specific NF-kappaB inhibitor helenalin. 
Consistently, IL-1beta stimulated translocation of NF-kappaB into the nucleus 
and degradation of IkappaB-alpha which was blocked by helenalin, U0126, or 
SP600125. Taken together, these results suggest that activation of p42/p44 MAPK 
and JNK cascades, at least in part, mediated through NF-kappaB pathway is 
essential for IL-1beta-induced ICAM-1 gene expression in A549 cells. These 
results provide new insight into the mechanisms of IL-1beta action that 
cytokines may promote inflammatory responses in the airway disease.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.20142
PMID: 15389584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]