1. Kidney Int. 2004 Oct;66(4):1453-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00908.x.

The amino acid transporter asc-1 is not involved in cystinuria.

Pineda M(1), Font M, Bassi MT, Manzoni M, Borsani G, Marigo V, Fernández E, Río 
RM, Purroy J, Zorzano A, Nunes V, Palacín M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The human amino acid transporter asc-1 (SLC7A10) exhibits substrate 
selectivity for small neutral amino acids, including cysteine, is expressed in 
kidney, is located close to the cystinuria B gene and presents sequence variants 
(e.g., E112D) in some cystinuria patients. We have cloned human asc-1, assessed 
its transport characteristics, localized its expression in kidney, searched for 
mutations in cystinuria patients, and tested the transport function of variant 
E112D.
METHODS: We used an EST-based homology cloning strategy. Transport 
characteristics of asc-1 were assessed by coexpression with 4F2hc in Xenopus 
oocytes and HeLa cells. Localization of asc-1 mRNA in kidney was assessed by in 
situ hybridization. Exons and intron-exon boundaries were polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)-amplified from blood cell DNA and mutational screening was 
performed by single-stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP).
RESULTS: Asc-1 reaches the plasma membrane in HeLa cells, unlike in oocytes, 
most probably by interaction with endogenous 4F2hc and presents similar 
transport characteristics to those in oocytes coexpressing asc-1/4F2hc. Asc-1 
mediates a substantial efflux of alanine in a facilitated diffusion mode of 
transport. Expression of asc-1 mRNA localized to Henle's loop, distal tubules, 
and collecting ducts. Finally, SLC7A10 polymorphisms were identified in 
cystinuria probands and the SLC7A10 sequence variant E112D showed full transport 
activity.
CONCLUSION: The lack of expression of asc-1 in the proximal tubule indicates 
that it plays no role in the bulk of renal reabsorption of amino acids. No 
mutations causing cystinuria have been found in SLC7A10. The facilitated 
diffusion mode of transport and the expression in distal nephron suggest a role 
for asc-1 in osmotic adaptation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2004.00908.x
PMID: 15458438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]