1. Hypertension. 2004 Nov;44(5):681-8. doi: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000144294.28985.d5. 
Epub 2004 Sep 27.

Interaction between an 11betaHSD1 gene variant and birth era modifies the risk 
of hypertension in Pima Indians.

Franks PW(1), Knowler WC, Nair S, Koska J, Lee YH, Lindsay RS, Walker BR, Looker 
HC, Permana PA, Tataranni PA, Hanson RL.

Author information:
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 1550 
E Indian School Rd, Phoenix, AZ 85014, USA. pfranks@niddk.nih.gov

11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11betaHSD1) is a candidate gene for 
hypertension, diabetes, and obesity through altered glucocorticoid production. 
This study explored the association of 11betaHSD1 gene variants with diabetes, 
hypertension, and obesity in a longitudinal population study of American Indians 
(N=918; exams=5508). In multivariate mixed models assuming an additive effect of 
genotype, a 5' upstream variant (rs846910) was associated with blood pressure 
(diastolic blood pressure beta=1.58 mm Hg per copy of the A allele, P=0.0008; 
systolic blood pressure beta=2.28 mm Hg per copy of the A allele, P=0.004; mean 
arterial blood pressure beta=1.83 mm Hg per copy of the A allele, P=0.0006) and 
hypertension (odds ratio=1.27 per copy of the A allele, P=0.02). However, birth 
date modified these associations (test for interaction: diastolic blood pressure 
P=0.16; systolic blood pressure P=0.007; mean arterial blood pressure P=0.01), 
such that the magnitude and direction of association between genotype and blood 
pressure changed with time. Finally, in models controlling for potential 
confounding by population stratification, we observed evidence of within-family 
effects for blood pressure (diastolic blood pressure beta=1.77 mm Hg per copy of 
the A allele, P=0.004; systolic blood pressure beta=2.04 mm Hg per copy of the A 
allele, P=0.07; mean arterial blood pressure beta=1.85 mm Hg per copy of the A 
allele, P=0.01) and for hypertension (odds ratio=1.26 per copy of the A allele; 
P=0.08). No association was observed for obesity. Associations with diabetes 
were similar in magnitude as reported previously but were not statistically 
significant. These data demonstrate association between genetic variability at 
11betaHSD1 with hypertension, but these effects are modified by environmental 
factors.

DOI: 10.1161/01.HYP.0000144294.28985.d5
PMID: 15452033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]