1. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Oct;271(20):4107-13. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.2004.04348.x.

X-ray structure of peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A from Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

Henriksson LM(1), Johansson P, Unge T, Mowbray SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases (EC 5.2.1.8) catalyse the interconversion 
of cis and trans peptide bonds and are therefore considered to be important for 
protein folding. They are also thought to participate in processes such as 
signalling, cell surface recognition, chaperoning and heat-shock response. Here 
we report the soluble expression of recombinant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase PpiA in Escherichia coli, together with an 
investigation of its structure and biochemical properties. The protein was shown 
to be active in a spectrophotometric assay, with an estimated kcat/Km of 2.0 x 
10(6) m(-1).s(-1). The X-ray structure of PpiA was solved by molecular 
replacement, and refined to a resolution of 2.6 A with R and Rfree values of 
21.3% and 22.9%, respectively. Comparisons to known structures show that the 
PpiA represents a slight variation on the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase 
fold, previously not represented in the Protein Data Bank. Inspection of the 
active site suggests that specificity for substrates and cyclosporin A will be 
similar to that found for most other enzymes of this structural family. 
Comparison to the sequence of the second M. tuberculosis enzyme, PpiB, suggests 
that binding of peptide substrates as well as cyclosporin A may differ in that 
case.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.2004.04348.x
PMID: 15479239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]