1. Carcinogenesis. 2005 Jan;26(1):169-75. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgh303. Epub 2004
Oct  7.

Reduced nucleotide excision repair and GSTM1-null genotypes influence 
anti-B[a]PDE-DNA adduct levels in mononuclear white blood cells of highly 
PAH-exposed coke oven workers.

Pavanello S(1), Pulliero A, Siwinska E, Mielzynska D, Clonfero E.

Author information:
(1)Occupational Health Section, Department of Environmental Medicine and Public 
Health, University of Padova, Via Giustiniani 2, 35128 Padova, Italy. 
sofia.pavanello@unipd.it

It is important to identify the potential genetic-susceptible factors that are 
able to modulate individual responses to exposure to carcinogenic polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). In the present study we evaluated the influence of 
four polymorphisms of nucleotide excision repair (NER) genes [xeroderma 
pigmentosum-C (XPC)-PAT +/-, xeroderma pigmentosum-A (XPA) 5' non-coding 
region-A23G, XPD-exon 23 A35931C Lys751Gln, xeroderma pigmentosum-D (XPD)-exon 
10 G23591A Asp312Asn] and that of glutathione S-transferase mu1 (GSTM1-active or 
-null) on benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide (B[a]PDE)-DNA adduct levels from the 
lympho-monocyte fraction (LMF) of highly PAH benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P)-exposed 
Polish coke oven workers (n = 67, 67% current smokers) with individual urinary 
post-shift excretion of 1-pyrenol exceeding the proposed biological exposure 
index (BEI) (2.28 micromol/mol creatinine). The bulky 
(+/-)-r-7,t-8-dihydroxy-t-9,10-oxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo[a]pyrene 
(anti-B[a]PDE)-DNA adduct levels were detected by high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC)/fluorescence analysis and genotypes by polymerase chain 
reaction. We found that workers with the low DNA repair capacity of XPC-PAT+/+ 
and XPA-A23A genotypes had significantly increased anti-B[a]PDE-DNA adduct 
levels (Mann-Whitney U-test, z = 2.24, P = 0.02 and z = 2.65, P = 0.01). 
Moreover, DNA adducts were also raised in workers without GSTM1 activity 
(GSTM1-null genotype) (Mann-Whitney U-test, z = 2.25, P = 0.0246). Workers with 
unfavourable XPC-PAT+/+ and XPA-A23A NER genotypes, alone (approximately 65% of 
workers) or combined with GSTM1-null genotype (approximately 75% of workers) 
were in the tertile with the highest adduct level, i.e. >4.11 adducts/10(8) nt 
(chi2 = 5.85, P = 0.0156 and chi2 = 5.40, P = 0.01). The increase in 
anti-B[a]PDE-DNA adduct levels (ln values) was significantly related in a 
multiple linear regression analysis to PAH exposure (i.e. urinary post-shift 
excretion of 1-pyrenol) (t = 2.61, P = 0.0115), lack of GSTM1 activity (t = 
2.41, P = 0.0192) and to low DNA repair capacity of the XPC-PAT+/+ genotype (t = 
2.34, P = 0.0226). The influence of the XPA-A23A genotype was not evident in 
this statistical analysis, and no associations with XPD polymorphisms, dietary 
habits or tobacco smoking were found. The modulation of anti-B[a]PDE-DNA adducts 
in the LMF by GSTM1-null and some low-activity NER genotypes may be considered 
as a potential genetic susceptibility factor capable of modulating individual 
responses to PAH (B[a]P) genotoxic exposure and the consequent risk of cancer in 
coke oven workers.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgh303
PMID: 15471894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]