1. Hemoglobin. 2004 Aug;28(3):229-35. doi: 10.1081/hem-120040259.

Hb Yaoundé [beta134(H12)Val-->Ala] in association with Hb C [beta6(A3)Glu-->Lys] 
in a Caucasian Portuguese family.

Faustino P(1), Miranda A, do Céu Silva M, Alves C, Picanço I, Ferreira C, Seixas 
MT, Pina F, Romão L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto 
Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. 
paula.faustino@insa.min-saude.pt

Hb Yaoundé [beta134(H12)Val-->Ala] is a rare, silent and asymptomatic hemoglobin 
(Hb) variant. It was previously reported in a Black man from Cameroon, in 
association with Hb Kenitra [beta69(E13)Gly-->Arg], and was subsequently found 
and described as Hb Mataro in a sub-Saharan child. To date, Hb Yaoundé has not 
been described in Caucasian people and molecular studies have never been 
performed. Here we describe a three-generation Caucasian Portuguese family in 
whom Hb Yaoundé was found in association with Hb C [beta6(A3)Glu-->Lys] (in the 
proband) and in a heterozygous state (in the proband's mother). The Hb studies 
of the proband's hemolysate, performed by isoelectric focusing (IEF) and 
low-pressure cation exchange chromatography, only revealed an Hb variant 
identified as Hb C by comparison with a control. However, analysis performed by 
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) showed two 
different beta chain variants and a complete absence of the normal beta chain. 
This uncommon Hb variant was identified as Hb Yaoundé by DNA sequencing analysis 
of the beta-globin gene (codon 134, GTG-->GCG). The beta-globin gene haplotypes 
were determined in all family members using polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR)-based methodology; Hb Yaoundé was found to be associated with the 
Mediterranean haplotype II. This study is the first description of Hb Yaoundé in 
Caucasian individuals, and its association with a Mediterranean haplotype 
supports the hypothesis of an independent genetic origin other than African.

DOI: 10.1081/hem-120040259
PMID: 15481891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]