1. Circulation. 2004 Nov 9;110(19):3023-7. doi:
10.1161/01.CIR.0000144299.17008.07.  Epub 2004 Nov 1.

Value of electrocardiographic parameters and ajmaline test in the diagnosis of 
Brugada syndrome caused by SCN5A mutations.

Hong K(1), Brugada J, Oliva A, Berruezo-Sanchez A, Potenza D, Pollevick GD, 
Guerchicoff A, Matsuo K, Burashnikov E, Dumaine R, Towbin JA, Nesterenko V, 
Brugada P, Antzelevitch C, Brugada R.

Author information:
(1)Masonic Medical Research Laboratory, 2150 Bleecker St, Utica, NY 13501, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Brugada syndrome is an arrhythmogenic disease caused in part by 
mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene, SCN5A. The electrocardiographic 
pattern characteristic of the syndrome is dynamic and is often absent in 
affected individuals. Sodium channel blockers are effective in unmasking 
carriers of the disease. However, the value of the test remains controversial.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 147 individuals representing 4 large families 
with SCN5A mutations. Of these, 104 were determined to be at possible risk for 
Brugada syndrome and underwent both electrocardiographic and genetic evaluation. 
Twenty-four individuals displayed an ECG diagnostic of Brugada syndrome at 
baseline. Of the remaining, 71 received intravenous ajmaline. Of the 35 genetic 
carriers who received ajmaline, 28 had a positive test and 7 a negative ajmaline 
test. The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values 
of the drug challenge were 80% (28:35), 94.4% (34:36), 93.3% (28:30), and 82.9% 
(34:41), respectively. Penetrance of the disease phenotype increased from 32.7% 
to 78.6% with the use of sodium channel blockers. In the absence of ST-segment 
elevation under baseline conditions, a prolonged P-R interval, but not 
incomplete right bundle-branch block or early repolarization patterns, indicates 
a high probability of an SCN5A mutation carrier.
CONCLUSIONS: In families with Brugada syndrome, the data suggest that ajmaline 
testing is valuable in the diagnosis of SCN5A carriers. In the absence of 
ST-segment elevation at baseline, family members with first-degree 
atrioventricular block should be suspected of carrying the mutation. An ajmaline 
test is often the key to making the proper diagnosis in these patients.

DOI: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000144299.17008.07
PMCID: PMC1513622
PMID: 15520322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]