1. Atherosclerosis. 2004 Dec;177(2):337-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2004.07.001.

Total homocysteine is not a determinant of arterial pulse wave velocity in young 
healthy adults.

Woodside JV(1), McMahon R, Gallagher AM, Cran GW, Boreham CA, Murray LJ, Strain 
JJ, McNulty H, Robson PJ, Brown KS, Whitehead AS, Savage M, Young IS.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Queen's University, Mulhouse Building, Grosvenor Road, 
Belfast BT126BJ, Northern Ireland, UK. j.woodside@qub.ac.uk

AIMS: Hyperhomocysteinaemia has been associated with reduced pulse wave velocity 
(PWV) in patients with end-stage renal disease and in those with hypertension. 
The aim of this study was to examine the association between total homocysteine 
(tHcy) concentrations, the biochemical and genetic determinants of tHcy and PWV 
in healthy young adults.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 489 subjects aged 20-25 years participated. A 
fasting blood sample was taken and PWV measured using a non-invasive optical 
method. tHcy did not correlate with PWV, whether assessed at the aorto-iliac 
segment (P = 0.18), the aorto-radial segment (P = 0.39) or the 
aorto-dorsalis-pedis segment (P = 0.22). When tHcy was classified into normal 
(<15) and high (> or =15micromol/l), PWV did not differ between the two groups 
at any segment. PWV did not differ by MTHFR C677T or NOS3 G894T genotype, even 
when smoking and folate sub-groups were considered. Considering aortic PWV as a 
dependent variable, stepwise regression analysis showed that the only parameter 
entering the model for all segments was systolic blood pressure (aorto-iliac, P 
< 0.001; aorto-radial, P = 0.01; aorto-dorsalis-pedis, P = 0.001). Age, sex, 
COL1A1 genotype and triglycerides entered the model significantly for two of 
three segments.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that arterial PWV is not associated with tHcy in a 
healthy young population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2004.07.001
PMID: 15530908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]