1. Mol Genet Metab. 2004 Nov;83(3):264-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.011.

Screening of SNPs at 18 positional candidate genes, located within the GD-1 
locus on chromosome 14q23-q32, for susceptibility to Graves' disease: a TDT 
study.

Chistiakov DA(1), Savost'anov KV, Turakulov RI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Ecology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium. dimitry.chistiakov@bio.kuleuven.ac.be

Graves' disease (GD) is a complex autoimmune thyroid disorder with a strong 
genetic component. Genome-wide screens resolved several susceptibility loci that 
contribute to the development of GD. One of the susceptibility loci (GD-1 locus) 
was mapped on chromosome 14q31. However, a susceptibility gene located within 
the GD-1 locus remains undefined. Here we screen eighteen single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), each is situated at a corresponding positional candidate 
gene, located within the GD-1 susceptibility locus on chromosome 14q23-q32, for 
predisposition to GD using the transmission disequilibrium test in 126 simplex 
Russian families affected with GD. Among SNPs tested, a significant preferential 
transmission of the Ala allele (41 transmissions vs. 17 nontransmissions, 
corrected P=0.031) of the Thr92Ala SNP within the DIO2 gene, encoding type II 
iodothyronine deiodinase, from parents to affected children was found in a 
Russian family data set. The Thr92Ala SNP of the DIO2 gene and the D727E 
substitution of the thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) gene have been found to be in 
pair-wise linkage disequilibrium. The A92/E727 haplotype showed significant 
preferential transmission from parents to affected sibling (17 transmissions vs. 
8 nontransmissions, P=0.039) in simplex families. This suggests that the 
Thr92Ala variant of the DIO2 gene is associated or may be in linkage 
disequilibrium with a functional DIO2 polymorphism which involves in the 
development of GD in a Russian population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.07.011
PMID: 15542398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]