1. Eur J Biochem. 1992 Apr 1;205(1):93-104. doi: 
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1992.tb16755.x.

Investigating interdomain region mutants Phe194----Leu and Phe194----Trp of 
yeast phosphoglycerate kinase by 1H-NMR spectroscopy.

Jo√£o HC(1), Taddei N, Williams RJ.

Author information:
(1)Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, England.

Site-directed mutagenesis has been used to produce two mutant forms of yeast 
phosphoglycerate kinase in which the interdomain residue Phe194 has been 
replaced by a leucine or tryptophan residue. Using 1H-NMR spectroscopy, it was 
found that the mutations at position 194 induce both local and long-range 
conformational changes in the protein. It was also found that 3-phosphoglycerate 
binding to the mutant proteins induces somewhat different conformational effects 
to those observed for wild-type phosphoglycerate kinase. The affinity of mutant 
Phe194----Trp for 3-phosphoglycerate was found by NMR studies to be unaffected, 
while the affinity of Phe194----Leu mutant is reduced by about threefold 
relative to the wild-type enzyme. The binding of ATP at the electrostatic site 
of the mutant proteins is also seen to be about three times weaker for the 
Phe194----Leu mutant when compared to wild-type or Phe194----Leu mutant. These 
results are discussed in the light of the kinetic studies on the mutants which 
show that for Phe194----Leu mutant the Km values for both 3-phosphoglycerate and 
ATP, as well as the Vmax, are decreased relative to the wild-type enzyme, while 
for mutant Phe194----Trp, the Km values for 3-phosphoglycerate and ATP are 
unaffected and the Vmax is decreased when compared to wild-type enzyme. Kinetic 
studies in the presence of sulphate reveal that the anion activation is greater 
for mutant Phe194----Trp and less for mutant Phe194----Leu, relative to that 
observed for wild-type phosphoglycerate kinase. The NMR data, taken together 
with the kinetic data, are consistent with the on and off rates of 
3-phosphoglycerate being affected by the mutations at position 194. It is 
suggested that Phe194 is important for the mobility of the interdomain region 
and the relative movement of the 3-phosphoglycerate binding site which allows 
the optimum conformation for catalysis to be attained. Apparently Trp194 reduces 
the mobility of the interdomain region of the protein, while Leu194 increases 
it.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1992.tb16755.x
PMID: 1555608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]