1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 30;101(48):16903-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0407256101. Epub 2004 Nov 19.

Correction of kinetic and stability defects by tetrahydrobiopterin in 
phenylketonuria patients with certain phenylalanine hydroxylase mutations.

Erlandsen H(1), Pey AL, Gámez A, Pérez B, Desviat LR, Aguado C, Koch R, 
Surendran S, Tyring S, Matalon R, Scriver CR, Ugarte M, Martínez A, Stevens RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Phenylketonuria patients harboring a subset of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) 
mutations have recently shown normalization of blood phenylalanine levels upon 
oral administration of the PAH cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin 
[(6R)-L-erythro-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)]. Several hypotheses have been 
put forward to explain BH4 responsiveness, but the molecular basis for the 
corrective effect(s) of BH4 has not been understood. We have investigated the 
biochemical, kinetic, and structural changes associated with BH4-responsive 
mutations (F39L, I65T, R68S, H170D, E178G, V190A, R261Q, A300S, L308F, A313T, 
A373T, V388M, E390G, P407S, and Y414C). The biochemical and kinetic 
characterization of the 15 mutants studied points toward a multifactorial basis 
for the BH4 responsiveness; the mutants show residual activity (>30% of WT) and 
display various kinetic defects, including increased Km (BH4) and reduced 
cooperativity of substrate binding, but no decoupling of cofactor (BH4) 
oxidation. For some, BH4 seems to function through stabilization and protection 
of the enzyme from inactivation and proteolytic degradation. In the crystal 
structures of a phenylketonuria mutant, A313T, minor changes were seen when 
compared with the WT PAH structures, consistent with the mild effects the mutant 
has upon activity of the enzyme both in vitro and in vivo. Truncations made in 
the A313T mutant PAH form revealed that the N and C termini of the enzyme 
influence active site binding. Of fundamental importance is the observation that 
BH4 appears to increase Phe catabolism if at least one of the two heterozygous 
mutations has any residual activity remaining.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0407256101
PMCID: PMC534739
PMID: 15557004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]