1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;13(3):336-40. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201335.

Possible role of USP26 in patients with severely impaired spermatogenesis.

Stouffs K(1), Lissens W, Tournaye H, Van Steirteghem A, Liebaers I.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Dutch-speaking Brussels 
Free University (Vrije Universiteit Brussel), Laarbeeklaan 101, Brussels, 
Belgium. katrien.stouffs@az.vub.ac.be

The ubiquitin-specific protease 26 (USP26) gene is an X-linked gene specifically 
expressed in testis tissue. This gene is therefore a potential infertility gene. 
In order to analyse its possible involvement in spermatogenesis and infertility, 
42 patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome were analysed for mutations in this 
gene. We found four patients with exactly the same three changes of the 
nucleotide and therefore also amino acid sequence. These patients showed 
370-371insACA, 494T>C and 1423C>T causing T123-124ins, L165S and H475Y, 
respectively. These changes were not found in 10 control samples. Furthermore, 
two polymorphisms were observed which do not alter the amino-acid sequence. A 
restriction analysis that can make a distinction between a T and a C, at 
position 494, was set up in order to examine more patient and control samples. 
Another 69 patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome, 32 patients with maturation 
arrest and 142 control samples were analysed using this method. None of the 
control samples or patients with maturation arrest featured the change at 
position 494. However, four more patients with Sertoli cell-only syndrome were 
identified with the three alterations. The frequency of alterations in this 
group is therefore 7.2% (8/111). One of the patients had a deletion of the long 
arm of the Y chromosome, while another patient had a varicocoele. These results 
indicate that these alterations might be involved in male infertility or might 
increase the risk of male infertility.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201335
PMID: 15562280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]