1. Ann Neurol. 2005 Jan;57(1):42-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.20305.

An alphaTropomyosin mutation alters dimer preference in nemaline myopathy.

Corbett MA(1), Akkari PA, Domazetovska A, Cooper ST, North KN, Laing NG, Gunning 
PW, Hardeman EC.

Author information:
(1)The Muscle Development Unit, The Children's Medical Research Institute, 
Wentworthville, New South Wales 2145, Australia.

Nemaline myopathy is a human neuromuscular disorder associated with muscle 
weakness, Z-line accumulations (rods), and myofibrillar disorganization. 
Disease-causing mutations have been identified in genes encoding muscle thin 
filament proteins: actin, nebulin, slow troponin T, betaTropomyosin, and 
alphaTropomyosin(slow). Skeletal muscle expresses three tropomyosin (Tm) 
isoforms from separate genes: alphaTm(fast)(alphaTm, TPM1), betaTm (TPM2), and 
alphaTm(slow) (gammaTm, TPM3). In this article, we show that the level of 
betaTm, but not alphaTm(fast) protein, is reduced in human patients with 
mutations in alphaTm(slow) and in a transgenic mouse model of 
alphaTm(slow)(Met9Arg) nemaline myopathy. A postnatal time course of Tm 
expression in muscles of the mice indicated that the onset of 
alphaTm(slow)(Met9Arg) expression coincides with the decline of betaTm. 
Reduction of betaTm levels is independent of the degree of pathology (rods) 
within a muscle and is detected before the onset of muscle weakness. Thus, 
reduction in the level of betaTm represents an early clinical diagnostic marker 
for alphaTm(slow)-based mutations. Examinations of tropomyosin dimer formation 
using either recombinant proteins or sarcomeric extracts show that the mutation 
reduces the formation of the preferred alpha/beta heterodimer. We suggest this 
perturbation of tropomyosin isoform levels and dimer preference alters 
sarcomeric thin filament dynamics and contributes to muscle weakness in nemaline 
myopathy.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20305
PMID: 15562513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]