1. J Gastrointest Surg. 2004 Dec;8(8):971-81; discussion 981-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.gassur.2004.09.032.

Gene variants and binge eating as predictors of comorbidity and outcome of 
treatment in severe obesity.

Potoczna N(1), Branson R, Kral JG, Piec G, Steffen R, Ricklin T, Hoehe MR, 
Lentes KU, Horber FF.

Author information:
(1)Klinik Hirslanden, Witellikerstrasse, ZÃ¼rich, Switzerland.

Melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4R) variants are associated with obesity and 
binge eating disorder (BED), whereas the more prevalent proopiomelanocortin 
(POMC) and leptin receptor gene (LEPR) mutations are rarely associated with 
obesity or BED. The complete coding regions of MC4R, POMC, and leptin-binding 
domain of LEPR were comparatively sequenced in 300 patients (233 women and 67 
men; mean +/- SEM age, 42 +/- 1 years; mean +/- SEM body mass index, 43.5 +/- 
0.3 kg/m2) undergoing laparoscopic gastric banding. Eating behavior, 
esophagogastric pathology, metabolic syndrome prevalence, and postoperative 
weight loss and complications were retrospectively compared between carriers and 
noncarriers of gene variants with and without BED during 36 +/- 3-month 
follow-up. Nineteen patients (6.3%) carried 8 MC4R variants, 144 (48.0%) carried 
13 POMC variants, and 247 (82.3%) carried 11 LEPR variants. All MC4R variant 
carriers had BED, compared with 18.1% of noncarriers (P < 0.001). BED rates were 
similar among POMC and LEPR variant carriers and noncarriers. Gastroscopy 
revealed more erosive esophagitis in bingers than in nonbingers before and after 
banding (P < 0.04), regardless of genotype. MC4R variant carriers lost less 
weight (P=0.003), showed less improvement in metabolic syndrome (P < 0.001), had 
dilated esophagi (P < 0.001) and more vomiting (P < 0.05), and had fivefold more 
gastric complications (P < 0.001) than noncarriers. Overall outcome was poorest 
in MC4R variant carriers, better in noncarriers with BED (P < 0.05), and best in 
noncarriers without BED (P < 0.001). MC4R variants influence comorbidities and 
treatment outcomes in severe obesity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gassur.2004.09.032
PMID: 15585384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]