1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5563-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410483200. Epub
2004  Dec 6.

In vitro and in vivo analyses of a Phe/Tyr switch controlling product 
specificity of histone lysine methyltransferases.

Collins RE(1), Tachibana M, Tamaru H, Smith KM, Jia D, Zhang X, Selker EU, 
Shinkai Y, Cheng X.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry and Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30392, USA.

The functional significance of mono-, di-, and tri-methylation of lysine 
residues within histone proteins is under investigation. Evidence from several 
model organisms suggests that different methylated states of H3 Lys(9) (H3K9) 
are generated by specific histone methyltransferases (MTases) to mark distinct 
types of silent chromatin. Sequence alignment of all histone lysine MTases with 
known product specificity suggested that a key residue in the active site 
determines how many methyl groups they add. We examined this possibility both in 
vitro and in vivo and found that a Phe at the position equivalent to Phe(281) of 
Neurospora crassa DIM-5 or Phe(1205) of human G9a allows the enzyme to perform 
di and tri-methylation, whereas a Tyr at this position is restrictive, 
inhibiting tri-methylation and thus yielding a mono- or di-MTase. Phe to Tyr 
mutants of both DIM-5 and G9a restrict product specificity in vitro and in vivo 
without compromising overall catalysis. These mutants were employed to probe the 
biological significance of mono-, di-, and tri-methylation of H3K9 in both mouse 
embryonic stem cells and N. crassa. G9a F1205Y, when expressed in G9a (-/-) 
embryonic stem cells, rescued only H3K9 mono-methylation, but not 
di-methylation, to wild-type levels yet silenced Mage-a gene expression. When 
expressed in dim-5 strains, DIM-5 F281Y generated significant levels of mono- 
and di-H3K9 methylation (which are not observed in wild type Neurospora) as well 
as tri-methyl H3K9. The altered DIM-5 rescued the growth defect characteristic 
of dim-5 N. crassa but did not fully rescue the gross DNA hypomethylation of 
dim-5 strains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410483200
PMCID: PMC2696276
PMID: 15590646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]