1. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Mar;19(3):771-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2004-0161. Epub 2004
Dec  9.

Unoccupied alpha(v)beta3 integrin regulates osteoclast apoptosis by transmitting 
a positive death signal.

Zhao H(1), Ross FP, Teitelbaum SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8118, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, 
USA.

Cell/matrix detachment is a general inducer of programmed cell death, an event 
mediated by loss of integrin/ligand association. Because alpha(v)beta3 is the 
major integrin expressed by the osteoclast, we asked whether its occupancy 
promotes survival of the resorptive cell. Thus, we generated wild-type 
preosteoclasts and placed them on selective matrix proteins. Consistent with the 
posture that alpha(v)beta3 occupancy promotes survival, preosteoclasts plated on 
native collagen, a matrix not recognized by the integrin, undergo apoptosis 
4-fold faster than those on the alpha(v)beta3 ligand, vitronectin. To further 
explore the role of alpha(v)beta3 in osteoclast apoptosis, wild-type and 
beta3-/- preosteoclasts were suspended and apoptosis determined, with time. 
Beta3-/- preosteoclasts, in suspension, undergo a rate of apoptosis only 40-60% 
of that of their wild-type counterparts, indicating that unoccupied 
alpha(v)beta3 transmits a positive death signal that we find regulated by 
caspase-8. Attesting to specificity of the unoccupied integrin-transmitted death 
signal, apoptosis in the absence of alpha(v)beta3 is mediated by capsase-9. We 
have shown that the resorptive defect of beta3-/- osteoclasts is rescued by 
wild-type beta3 cDNA but not by one bearing a S752P mutation. To determine 
whether the same holds true regarding osteoclast apoptosis, we constructed 
lentivirus vectors encoding green fluorescent protein, wild-type beta3, or 
beta3S752P. Once again, native beta3-/- preosteoclasts were protected against 
apoptosis. Similar to its effect on bone resorption, transduced wild-type beta3 
normalizes the apoptotic rate of beta3-/- preosteoclasts. Unexpectedly, however, 
beta3S752P transductants also die at a rate indistinguishable from wild type. 
Thus, unoccupied alpha(v)beta3 integrin regulates osteoclast apoptosis via a 
component of the integrin that is different than that regulating resorption.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2004-0161
PMID: 15591537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]