1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2005 Aug;255(4):279-83. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-004-0560-8. Epub 2004 Dec 24.

Interaction of tumor necrosis alpha - G308A and epidermal growth factor gene 
polymorphisms in early-onset schizophrenia.

Kampman O(1), Anttila S, Illi A, Mattila KM, Rontu R, Leinonen E, LehtimÃ¤ki T.

Author information:
(1)University of Tampere, Medical School, 33014 Tampere, Finland. 
olli.kampman@uta.fi

The study population comprised 94 Finnish patients with DSM-IV diagnosis of 
schizophrenia. The patients were placed into two subgroups according to 
medication response to conventional neuroleptics. The aim of the study was to 
examine the frequency of tumor necrosis factor -308 (G > A) polymorphism in 
these patients and their 98 control subjects who were age- and gender-matched 
blood donors. Associations between TNFalpha -308 polymorphism alone and between 
the interaction of TNFalpha and epidermal growth factor gene polymorphisms, and 
medication response and age at onset of schizophrenia were also studied. The 
frequencies of TNFalpha A-allele were 11.7 % in patients and 12.8% in controls. 
The difference was not significant (p = 0.75). TNFalpha -308 polymorphism was 
not associated with medication response. However, patients with EGF AA and 
TNFalpha AG/AA genotype had a lower age at onset of schizophrenia compared with 
the rest of the patients not having this combination (20.0 years, 3.3 vs. 30.2 
years, 10.1 mean + SD; p < 0.001). The results support earlier findings 
according to which TNFalpha polymorphism is not associated with the incidence of 
schizophrenia. On the other hand, the role of cytokines in schizophrenia may 
involve genetic interactions predisposing early onset of illness.

DOI: 10.1007/s00406-004-0560-8
PMID: 15614591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]