1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jan 11;102(2):407-12. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0406252102. Epub 2005 Jan 3.

tp53 mutant zebrafish develop malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.

Berghmans S(1), Murphey RD, Wienholds E, Neuberg D, Kutok JL, Fletcher CD, 
Morris JP, Liu TX, Schulte-Merker S, Kanki JP, Plasterk R, Zon LI, Look AT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Division 
of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

TP53 is the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in human cancer, with 
nearly 50% of all tumors exhibiting a loss-of-function mutation. To further 
elucidate the genetic pathways involving TP53 and cancer, we have exploited the 
zebrafish, a powerful vertebrate model system that is amenable to whole-genome 
forward-genetic analysis and synthetic-lethal screens. Zebrafish lines harboring 
missense mutations in the tp53 DNA-binding domain were identified by using a 
target-selected mutagenesis strategy. Homozygous mutant fish from two of these 
lines were viable and exhibited mutations similar to those found in human 
cancers (tp53(N168K) and tp53(M214K)). Although homozygous tp53(N168K) mutants 
were temperature-sensitive and suppressed radiation-induced apoptosis only at 37 
degrees C, cells in the tp53(M214K) embryos failed to undergo apoptosis in 
response to gamma radiation at both 28 and 37 degrees C. Unlike wild-type 
control embryos, irradiated tp53(M214K) embryos also failed to up-regulate p21 
and did not arrest at the G(1)/S checkpoint. Beginning at 8.5 months of age, 28% 
of tp53(M214K) mutant fish developed malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. 
In addition to providing a model for studying the molecular pathogenic pathways 
of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, these mutant zebrafish lines 
provide a unique platform for modifier screens to identify genetic mutations or 
small molecules that affect tp53-related pathways, including apoptosis, 
cell-cycle delay, and tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0406252102
PMCID: PMC544293
PMID: 15630097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]