1. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Feb 15;303(2):287-99. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.09.031.
Epub  2004 Nov 18.

Recruitment of mRNA-destabilizing protein TIS11 to stress granules is mediated 
by its zinc finger domain.

Murata T(1), Morita N, Hikita K, Kiuchi K, Kiuchi K, Kaneda N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical Neurobiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Meijo University, 
150 Yagotoyama, Tempaku, Nagoya 468-8503, Japan.

TIS11, a member of the CCCH zinc finger protein family, was found to be 
distributed throughout cells with a preferential cytoplasmic localization when 
transiently expressed in COS-7 cells. Upon treatment with heat shock, TIS11 
became localized in discrete particles in the cytoplasm of the transfectants. We 
showed the TIS11-positive particles to be stress granules (SGs), which are known 
to be formed in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells in response to environmental 
stresses. By deletion studies using the green fluorescent protein fusion system, 
we mapped a functional stress granule (SG) localization signal to a region 
containing two tandem repeats of the zinc finger motif of TIS11. Site-directed 
mutations of Tyr105/Tyr113, Gly109/Gly 114, and Phe119 in the first zinc finger 
motif diminished the ability of this TIS11 domain to direct SG localization. 
Importantly, when the zinc-chelating Cys residues in either the first or second 
zinc finger were mutated to Ala residues, the recruitment of the TIS11 zinc 
finger region to SG was significantly inhibited by the mutation and was 
completely abolished by the mutation in both zinc fingers. These results suggest 
that recruitment of TIS11 to heat shock-induced SG is governed by the tandem 
zinc finger domains of this protein.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2004.09.031
PMID: 15652343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]