1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2005 Jan;38(1):17-25. doi:
10.1590/s0100-879x2005000100004.  Epub 2005 Jan 18.

Mutations in SRY and WT1 genes required for gonadal development are not 
responsible for XY partial gonadal dysgenesis.

Tagliarini EB(1), Assumpção JG, Scolfaro MR, Mello MP, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra 
Júnior G, Hackel C.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética (CBMEG), Faculdade de 
Ciências Médicas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas. SP, Brazil.

The WT1 transcription factor regulates SRY expression during the initial steps 
of the sex determination process in humans, activating a gene cascade leading to 
testis differentiation. In addition to causing Wilms' tumor, mutations in WT1 
are often responsible for urogenital defects in men, while SRY mutations are 
mainly related to 46,XY pure gonadal dysgenesis. In order to evaluate their role 
in abnormal testicular organogenesis, we screened for SRY and WT1 gene mutations 
in 10 children with XY partial gonadal dysgenesis, 2 of whom with a history of 
Wilms' tumor. The open reading frame and 360 bp of the 5' flanking sequence of 
the SRY gene, and the ten exons and intron boundaries of the WT1 gene were 
amplified by PCR of genomic DNA. Single-strand conformation polymorphism was 
initially used for WT1 mutation screening. Since shifts in fragment migration 
were only observed for intron/exon 4, the ten WT1 exons from all patients were 
sequenced manually. No mutations were detected in the SRY 5' untranslated region 
or within SRY open-reading frame sequences. WT1 sequencing revealed one missense 
mutation (D396N) in the ninth exon of a patient who also had Wilms' tumor. In 
addition, two silent point mutations were found in the first exon including one 
described here for the first time. Some non-coding sequence variations were 
detected, representing one new (IVS4+85A>G) and two already described (-7ATG 
T>G, IVS9-49 T>C) single nucleotide polymorphisms. Therefore, mutations in two 
major genes required for gonadal development, SRY and WT1, are not responsible 
for XY partial gonadal dysgenesis.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2005000100004
PMID: 15665984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]