1. Biochemistry. 2005 Feb 8;44(5):1683-9. doi: 10.1021/bi0480943.

Contributions of cysteine residues in Zn2 to zinc fingers and thiol-disulfide 
oxidoreductase activities of chaperone DnaJ.

Shi YY(1), Tang W, Hao SF, Wang CC.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, 15 Datun Road, Beijing 100101, China.

Escherichia coli DnaJ, possessing both chaperone and thiol-disulfide 
oxidoreductase activities, is a homodimeric Hsp40 protein. Each subunit contains 
four copies of a sequence of -CXXCXGXG-, which coordinate with two Zn(II) ions 
to form an unusual topology of two C4-type zinc fingers, 
C144DVC147Zn(II)C197NKC200 (Zn1) and C161PTC164Zn(II)C183PHC186 (Zn2). Studies 
on five DnaJ mutants with Cys in Zn2 replaced by His or Ser (C183H, C186H, 
C161H/C183H, C164H/183H, and C161S/C164S) reveal that substitutions of one or 
two Cys residues by His or Ser have little effect on the general conformation 
and association property of the molecule. Replacement of two Cys residues by His 
does not interfere with the zinc coordination. However, replacement of two Cys 
by Ser results in a significant decrease in the proportion of coordinated 
Zn(II), although the unique zinc finger topology is retained. The mutants of 
C183H, C186H, and C161S/C164S display full disulfide reductase activity of 
wild-type DnaJ, while C161H/C183H and C164H/183H exhibit severe defect in the 
activity. All of the mutations do not substantially affect the chaperone 
activity. The results indicate that the motif of -CXXC- is critical to form an 
active site and indispensable to the thiol-disulfide oxidoreductase activity of 
DnaJ. Each -CXXC- motif in Zn2 but not in Zn1 functions as an active site.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0480943
PMID: 15683252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]