1. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2005 Mar-Apr;40(2):113-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2004.07.003.

Interaction between longevity-associated mitochondrial DNA 5178 C/A polymorphism 
and cigarette smoking on hematological parameters in Japanese men.

Kokaze A(1), Ishikawa M, Matsunaga N, Yoshida M, Makita R, Satoh M, Teruya K, 
Sekiguchi K, Masuda Y, Harada M, Uchida Y, Takashima Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Kyorin University School of Medicine, 6-20-2 
Shinkawa, Mitaka-shi, Tokyo 181-8611, Japan. dawn@kyorin-u.ac.jp

Mitochondrial DNA 5178 C/A (mt5178 C/A), namely NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 237 
Leu/Met, polymorphism is as reported in literature associated with longevity and 
susceptibility to ischemic heart disease or cerebrovascular disorders in the 
Japanese population. Previous reports suggested that mt5178A genotype exerts 
antiatherogenic effects. The aim of this study was to investigate whether mt5178 
C/A polymorphism is associated with hematological parameters, such as 
thrombogenic risk factors for myocardial infarction and stroke, in 321 healthy 
Japanese men. No significant differences were observed between mt5178 C/A 
genotypes, but in subjects with body mass index (BMI) of < or = 23, this 
polymorphism influenced the effects of habitual smoking on hematological 
parameters. Red blood cell (RBC) counts were significantly lower and mean 
corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) levels were significantly higher in smokers with 
mt5178A than nonsmokers with mt5178A. Platelet counts were significantly higher 
in smokers with mt5178C than nonsmokers with mt5178C. Cigarette consumption was 
strongly associated with RBC counts, mean corpuscular volume levels, and MCH 
levels for men with mt5178A, and was associated with platelet counts for those 
with mt5178C. Moreover, BMI was significantly positively associated with RBC 
counts and platelet counts only in men with mt5178A, age was significantly 
negatively associated with RBC counts only in men with mt5178C. These data 
suggest that mt5178 C/A polymorphism may influence the effects of cigarette 
smoking on hematological parameters in healthy BMI < or = 23 Japanese men.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2004.07.003
PMID: 15680495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]