1. Mutat Res. 2005 Feb 15;570(1):89-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2004.10.002.

Presymptomatic diagnosis using a deletion of a single codon in families with 
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer.

Ripa RS(1), Katballe N, Wikman FP, JÃ¤ger AC, Bernstein I, Orntoft T, Schwartz M, 
Nielsen FC, Bisgaard ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, H:S 
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark. ripa@rh.dk

The diagnosis of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is often 
confirmed by a mutation in one of several mismatch-repair genes, in particular 
MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6. Presymptomatic diagnosis requires the identification of a 
mutation causing the disease. Three different deletions of a single amino acid 
codon have previously been published as assumed pathogenic. The objective of 
this study was to determine if an MSH2 3 base pair in-frame deletion (N596del) 
could be used in presymptomatic screening of at-risk individuals. We report on 
five HNPCC families with the N596del mutation, identified after mutation 
screening of MSH2 and MLH1. All patients in the families were haplotyped using 
markers flanking the MSH2 gene. The haplotypes revealed that the five families 
with high probability descended from only two founders. The N596del segregated 
with the HNPCC phenotype with lod scores of 3.2 and 2.0 at the recombination 
fraction of 0.0 in the two founder families. Sequencing of MSH2 and MLH1 did not 
reveal other pathogenic mutations, and N596del was not identified in 50 healthy 
controls. The mutation has previously been found expressed in mRNA, and is 
located in a conserved domain. The results support the hypothesis that N596del 
is the disease causing mutation and not a clinically silent variation. On this 
basis, the application of the MSH2 N596del mutation, in presymptomatic screening 
of HNPCC families, is recommended.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2004.10.002
PMID: 15680406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]