1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28(1):35-48. doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-5263-4.

Measurement of urinary CDH and CTH by tandem mass spectrometry in patients 
hemizygous and heterozygous for Fabry disease.

Mills K(1), Morris P, Lee P, Vellodi A, Waldek S, Young E, Winchester B.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry, Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, 30 Guilford Street, WC1N 1EH, London, UK.

Fabry disease is an X-linked disorder of glycosphingolipid metabolism resulting 
from a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. This deficiency 
leads to the progressive accumulation, in lysosomes of visceral tissues and in 
body fluids of hemizygotes, of the glycosphingolipids globotriaosylceramide 
(CTH, Gb(3) or GL-3) and galabiosylceramide (CDH) and to a lesser extent the 
blood group AB and B related glycolipids. Elevated levels of the 
glycosphingolipids are found in the urine of hemizygous males with the classic 
phenotype, but it is not known whether all symptomatic or asymptomatic 
heterozygotes have elevated levels. We have therefore measured CTH and CDH 
quantitatively in a multiplex assay using tandem mass spectrometry in urine from 
a large cohort (44) of genetically proven or obligate heterozygotes including 
four with the N215S mutation, from classic hemizygotes (28), from cardiac 
variant hemizygotes with the N215S mutation (6) and from normal controls. The 
levels of CTH and CDH were related to both creatinine and sphingomyelin. Urinary 
CTH was elevated in all 28 classic hemizygotes but only in 4/6 of the cardiac 
variants. The level was within or just above the normal reference range in the 
four individuals heterozygous for the N215S mutation but was elevated in 38/40 
of the other heterozygotes. Similar results were obtained for CDH, except that 
only 34/40 heterozygotes had an elevated level. The level of CDH was not 
elevated in the four heterozygotes and 4/6 of the hemizygotes for the N215S 
mutation. Combining the levels of CTH and CDH did not improve the discrimination 
of heterozygotes from controls. The ratio of CDH to CTH was higher in 
heterozygotes than in hemizygotes. Measurement of urinary CTH gave the best 
discrimination of heterozygotes from controls.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-005-5263-4
PMID: 15702404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]