1. J Neurochem. 2005 Mar;92(5):1216-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02959.x.

Inherited and acquired interactions between ACHE and PON1 polymorphisms modulate 
plasma acetylcholinesterase and paraoxonase activities.

Bryk B(1), BenMoyal-Segal L, Podoly E, Livnah O, Eisenkraft A, Luria S, Cohen A, 
Yehezkelli Y, Hourvitz A, Soreq H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

The 5.5 Mb chromosome 7q21-22 ACHE/PON1 locus harbours the ACHE gene encoding 
the acetylcholine hydrolyzing, organophosphate (OP)-inhibitable 
acetylcholinesterase protein and the paraoxonase gene PON1, yielding the 
OP-hydrolyzing PON1 enzyme which also displays arylesterase activity. In search 
of inherited and acquired ACHE-PON1 interactions we genotyped seven polymorphic 
sites and determined the hydrolytic activities of the corresponding plasma 
enzymes and of the AChE-homologous butyrylcholinesetrase (BChE) in 157 healthy 
Israelis. AChE, arylesterase, BChE and paraoxonase activities in plasma 
displayed 5.4-, 6.5-, 7.2- and 15.5-fold variability, respectively, with 
genotype-specific differences between carriers of distinct compound 
polymorphisms. AChE, BChE and arylesterase but not paraoxonase activity 
increased with age, depending on leucine at PON1 position 55. In contrast, 
carriers of PON1 M55 displayed decreased arylesterase activity independent of 
the - 108 promoter polymorphism. Predicted structural consequences of the PON1 
L55M substitution demonstrated spatial shifts in adjacent residues. Molecular 
modelling showed substrate interactions with the enzyme variants, explaining the 
changes in substrate specificity induced by the Q192R substitution. 
Intriguingly, PON1, but not BChE or arylesterase, activities displayed inverse 
association with AChE activity. Our findings demonstrate that polymorphism(s) in 
the adjacent PON1 and ACHE genes affect each other's expression, predicting for 
carriers of biochemically debilitating ACHE/PON1 polymorphisms adverse 
genome-environment interactions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02959.x
PMID: 15715671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]