1. Genetics. 2005 Apr;169(4):1799-806. doi: 10.1534/genetics.104.036962. Epub
2005  Feb 16.

Requirements for replication restart proteins during constitutive stable DNA 
replication in Escherichia coli K-12.

Sandler SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 01003, USA. 
sandler@microbio.umass.edu

Constitutive stable DNA replication (cSDR) is a mechanism for replisome loading 
in Escherichia coli K-12. This occurs in a dnaA-independent fashion in an rnhA 
mutant. cSDR is dependent on recA, priA, and transcription. In this report, it 
is shown that dnaA rnhA mutants using cSDR for initiation of their DNA 
replication additionally require priB, but not priC, for viability. Two subtle 
priA missense mutations either eliminated the ability to grow using cSDR 
(priA301 C479Y) or resulted in very small colonies (priA300 K230R). DnaC809, a 
priA suppressor, failed to allow priA or priB mutants to grow using cSDR to 
initiate DNA replication. Furthermore, unlike dnaC(+) strains, dnaC809 strains 
require priC for cSDR. DnaC809,820, a priC-independent suppressor of priA2::kan 
phenotypes, allowed priA and priC (but not priB) mutants to grow using cSDR to 
initiate DNA replication. It is also shown that rep and rnhA mutations are 
synthetically lethal. DnaC809 and dnaC809,820 mutations suppress this lethality. 
Rep is further shown to be required for cSDR in a dnaC809 strain. A model 
whereby these different sets of replication restart proteins interact 
preferentially with substrates associated with either RecA or SSB during 
replication restart and cSDR, respectively, is proposed.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.104.036962
PMCID: PMC1449598
PMID: 15716497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]