1. Metab Eng. 2005 Jan;7(1):10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2004.05.006.

Directed evolution of copy number of a broad host range plasmid for metabolic 
engineering.

Tao L(1), Jackson RE, Cheng Q.

Author information:
(1)Biological and Chemical Sciences and Engineering, Central Research and 
Development, E. I. DuPont de Nemours Inc., Experimental Station, E328/B48, 
Wilmington, DE 19880-0328, USA.

Random mutagenesis and directed evolution has been successfully used to improve 
desired properties of enzymes for biocatalysis and metabolic engineering. Here 
we employ the method to increase copy number of a pBBR-based broad host range 
plasmid, which can be used to express desired enzymes in a variety of microbial 
hosts. Localized random mutagenesis was performed in the replication control 
region of a pBBR-derived plasmid containing a beta-carotene reporter. Mutant 
plasmids were isolated that showed increased beta-carotene production. Real-time 
PCR analysis confirmed that the copy number of the mutant plasmids increased 3-7 
fold. Sequence of the 10 mutant plasmids indicated that each plasmid contained 
single or multiple mutations in the rep gene or the flanking regions. Single 
amino acid change of serine to leucine at codon 100 of the replication protein 
and single nucleotide change of C to T at 46 bp upstream of the rep gene caused 
the increase of plasmid copy number. The utility of the mutant plasmids for 
metabolic engineering were further demonstrated by increased beta-carotene 
production, when an isoprenoid pathway gene (dxs) was co-expressed on a 
compatible plasmid. The mutant plasmids were tested in Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens. Increase of plasmid copy number and beta-carotene production was 
also observed in the non-Escherichia coli host.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2004.05.006
PMID: 15721806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]