1. Clin Genet. 2005 Apr;67(4):330-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2005.00401.x.

Elastic fiber abnormalities in hypermobility type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
patients with tenascin-X mutations.

Zweers MC(1), Dean WB, van Kuppevelt TH, Bristow J, Schalkwijk J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. m.zweers@derma.umcn.nl

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of connective tissue 
disorders with characteristic skin and joint involvement. The concept that EDS 
is a disease of fibrillar collagen was challenged by the identification of a 
clinically distinct, recessive type of EDS caused by deficiency of the 
extracellular matrix protein tenascin-X (TNX). Interestingly, haploinsufficiency 
of TNX is associated with the dominantly inherited hypermobility type of EDS. In 
this study, we examined whether missense mutations in the TNX gene can account 
for some of the cases of hypermobility type EDS. Furthermore, we studied whether 
missense mutations or heterozygosity for truncating mutations in the TNX gene 
lead to alterations in the dermal connective tissue. Sequence analysis revealed 
three missense mutations in TNX in hypermobility type EDS patients, which were 
not present in 192 control alleles. Morphometric analysis of skin biopsies of 
these patients showed altered elastic fibers in one of them, suggesting that 
this missense mutation is disease causing. Light microscopic and ultrastructural 
changes of the elastic fibers were observed in TNX-haploinsufficient 
hypermobility type EDS patients, which were not found in hypermobility type EDS 
patients in whom TNX mutations were excluded. Our results indicate that the 
observed alterations in elastic fibers are specific for hypermobility type EDS 
patients with mutations of TNX.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2005.00401.x
PMID: 15733269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]