1. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;19(7):1821-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2004-0421. Epub 2005
Feb  24.

Insights into the structure and molecular basis of ligand docking to the G 
protein-coupled secretin receptor using charge-modified amino-terminal agonist 
probes.

Dong M(1), Pinon DI, Miller LJ.

Author information:
(1)M.D. Director, Cancer Center Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale, 13400 East Shea 
Boulevard, Johnson Research Building, Scottsdale AZ 85259, USA.

The amino terminus and third loop regions of class B G protein-coupled receptors 
play critical roles in ligand docking and action. For the prototypic secretin 
receptor, the hormone amino terminus is spatially approximated with receptor 
region high in transmembrane segment 6 (TM6), whereas residues ranging from 
position 6 through 26 label the amino terminus. Here, we focus on the role of 
charge of the secretin amino terminus, using a series of full-agonist, 
acetylated probes. Sites of covalent labeling were examined using sequential 
purification, chemical and enzymatic cleavage, and Edman degradation. 
High-affinity amino-terminally-blocked probes labeled the distal amino-terminal 
tail, rather than TM6, while adding a basic residue, again labeled TM6. These 
data suggest that the secretin amino terminus docks between the amino terminus 
and TM6 of the receptor, with this region of secretin likely interacting with an 
acidic residue within the receptor TM6 and the third extracellular loop. To 
explore this, candidate acidic residues were mutated to Ala (E341A, D342A, 
E345A, E351A). The E351A mutant markedly interfered with binding, biological 
activity, and internalization, whereas all others bound secretin and signaled 
and internalized normally. This supports the possibility that there is a 
charge-charge interaction between this residue and the amino terminus of 
secretin that is critical to its normal docking.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2004-0421
PMID: 15731172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]