1. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2005 Feb;4(1):28-31.

Orthotopic liver transplantation for patients with Klatskin tumor.

Zheng SS(1), Shi QF, Liang TB, Wu J, Wang WL, Shen Y, Zhang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, First Affiliated 
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China. 
zhengss@mail.hz.zj.cn

BACKGROUND: It is not certain whether Klatskin tumor should be a routine 
indication for orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). This study was to 
summarize the indication and value of orthotopic liver transplantation for 
patients with Klatskin tumor.
METHODS: Forty patients with Klatskin tumors including 5 patients who had had 
liver transplantation (LTx) and 35 patients who had not undergone LTx (WLTx) 
from January 1992 to December 2003 were analyzed retrospectively. Their TNM 
stages were comparable in both groups. In the LTx group, 4 patients had Klatskin 
tumor including recurrent tumor after resection(1), and 1 cancerization from 
Carolis disease. Biliary duct anastomosis was made by Roux-en-Y 
choledochojejunostomy in 2, and end-to-end choledochocholedochostomy (C-C) in 3.
RESULTS: In the LTx group, the total resection rate and radical resection rate 
were both 100%. Four patients have been surviving for 48, 38, 21 and 5 months, 
respectively, except one died from bile leakage at day 40 after transplantation. 
All 4 survivors enjoyed good life without tumors at local and distant sites, 
even though 2 of these patients developed biliary stricture, which was soon 
resolved by radiological intervention. The 1-,3-year survival rates were both 
80% in this group. The total resection rate and radical resection rate in the 
WLTx group were 63.0%(17/27)and 40.7%(11/27)and, the 1-, 3-, 5-year survival 
rates were 32.2%, 8.0%, 0%, respectively. There were significant differences 
between the two groups in radical resection rates and survival rates(P=0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: OLT is a good choice for patients with unresectable Klatskin tumor 
by routine modalities. The prognosis of patients undergoing OLT is encouraging.

PMID: 15730914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]