1. Protein Sci. 2005 Apr;14(4):921-8. doi: 10.1110/ps.041211205. Epub 2005 Mar 1.

Misfolded forms of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase interact with GroEL 
and inhibit chaperonin-assisted folding of the wild-type enzyme.

Polyakova OV(1), Roitel O, Asryants RA, Poliakov AA, Branlant G, Muronetz VI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry of Animal Cell, Belozersky Institute of 
Physico-Chemical Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow 119992, Russian 
Federation.

We studied the interaction of chaperonin GroEL with different misfolded forms of 
tetrameric phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH): (1) 
GAPDH from rabbit muscles with all SH-groups modified by 
5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoate); (2) O-R-type dimers of mutant GAPDH from 
Bacillus stearothermophilus with amino acid substitutions Y283V, D282G, and 
Y283V/W84F, and (3) O-P-type dimers of mutant GAPDH from B. stearothermophilus 
with amino acid substitutions Y46G/S48G and Y46G/R52G. It was shown that 
chemically modified GAPDH and the O-R-type mutant dimers bound to GroEL with 1:1 
stoichiometry and dissociation constants K(d) of 0.4 and 0.9 muM, respectively. 
A striking feature of the resulting complexes with GroEL was their stability in 
the presence of Mg-ATP. Chemically modified GAPDH and the O-R-type mutant dimers 
inhibited GroEL-assisted refolding of urea-denatured wild-type GAPDH from B. 
stearothermophilus but did not affect its spontaneous reactivation. In contrast 
to the O-R-dimers, the O-P-type mutant dimers neither bound nor affected 
GroEL-assisted refolding of the wild-type GAPDH. Thus, we suggest that 
interaction of GroEL with certain types of misfolded proteins can result in the 
formation of stable complexes and the impairment of chaperonin activity.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.041211205
PMCID: PMC2253444
PMID: 15741339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]