1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 May 15;171(10):1136-41. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.200405-658OC. Epub 2005 Mar 4.

Study of C-C chemokine receptor 2 alleles in sarcoidosis, with emphasis on 
family-based analysis.

Valentonyte R(1), Hampe J, Croucher PJ, Müller-Quernheim J, Schwinger E, 
Schreiber S, Schürmann M.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Kiel Center of the German 
National Genotyping Platform, and Institute for Medical Informatics and 
Statistics, Christian-Albrects-University Kiel, University Clinics 
Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel, Germany.

Prevailing models of sarcoidosis pathogenesis involve the activation of alveolar 
macrophages, aggregation of CD4+ T lymphocytes, and their accumulation in 
epithelioid cell granulomas. Increasing evidence suggests that each of these 
steps is modified by the host genetic constitution. Consequently, candidate 
susceptibility genes have been selected based on their potential function under 
this model. The C-C chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) is involved in Th1 immune 
activity by recruiting competent cells and possibly by balancing response. CCR2 
gene variants have been shown to be associated with sarcoidosis or, more 
specifically, with Löfgren's syndrome, a distinct form of acute sarcoidosis. We 
have studied three CCR2 gene polymorphisms (c.190G>A, c.840C>T, and c.4385A>T) 
in an extended sample of 1,203 patients with sarcoidosis and their relatives. 
Case-control comparisons and family-based genetic analyses did not support 
previous findings of an association between CCR2 gene variability and the risk 
of sarcoidosis. However, they confirmed linkage disequilibrium and showed 
positive linkage results (p = 0.034) and therefore suggest a susceptibility gene 
in the surrounding chromosomal region.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200405-658OC
PMID: 15750046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]