1. J Neuroinflammation. 2005 Mar 11;2(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-2-9.

Inflammatory cytokine levels correlate with amyloid load in transgenic mouse 
models of Alzheimer's disease.

Patel NS(1), Paris D, Mathura V, Quadros AN, Crawford FC, Mullan MJ.

Author information:
(1)Roskamp Institute, 2040 Whitfield Avenue, Sarasota, FL34243, USA. 
npatel@rfdn.org.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is believed to play an important role in the pathology 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and cytokine production is a key pathologic event in 
the progression of inflammatory cascades. The current study characterizes the 
cytokine expression profile in the brain of two transgenic mouse models of AD 
(TgAPPsw and PS1/APPsw) and explores the correlations between cytokine 
production and the level of soluble and insoluble forms of Abeta. METHODS: 
Organotypic brain slice cultures from 15-month-old mice (TgAPPsw, PS1/APPsw and 
control littermates) were established and multiple cytokine levels were analyzed 
using the Bio-plex multiple cytokine assay system. Soluble and insoluble forms 
of Abeta were quantified and Abeta-cytokine relationships were analyzed. 
RESULTS: Compared to control littermates, transgenic mice showed a significant 
increase in the following pro-inflammatory cytokines: TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-12p40, 
IL-1beta, IL-1alpha and GM-CSF. TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-1alpha and GM-CSF showed a 
sequential increase from control to TgAPPsw to PS1/APPsw suggesting that the 
amplitude of this cytokine response is dependent on brain Abeta levels, since 
PS1/APPsw mouse brains accumulate more Abeta than TgAPPsw mouse brains. 
Quantification of Abeta levels in the same slices showed a wide range of Abeta 
soluble:insoluble ratio values across TgAPPsw and PS1/APPsw brain slices. 
Abeta-cytokine correlations revealed significant relationships between 
Abeta1-40, 1-42 (both soluble and insoluble) and all the above cytokines that 
changed in the brain slices. CONCLUSION: Our data confirm that the brains of 
transgenic APPsw and PS1/APPsw mice are under an active inflammatory stress, and 
that the levels of particular cytokines may be directly related to the amount of 
soluble and insoluble Abeta present in the brain suggesting that pathological 
accumulation of Abeta is a key driver of the neuroinflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-2-9
PMCID: PMC555557
PMID: 15762998