1. J Med Chem. 2005 Mar 24;48(6):1984-2008. doi: 10.1021/jm0303857.

In-depth study of tripeptide-based alpha-ketoheterocycles as inhibitors of 
thrombin. Effective utilization of the S1' subsite and its implications to 
structure-based drug design.

Costanzo MJ(1), Almond HR Jr, Hecker LR, Schott MR, Yabut SC, Zhang HC, 
Andrade-Gordon P, Corcoran TW, Giardino EC, Kauffman JA, Lewis JM, de Garavilla 
L, Haertlein BJ, Maryanoff BE.

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development, 
Spring House, Pennsylvania 19477-0776, USA.

Erratum in
    J Med Chem. 2007 Nov 15;50(23):5868.

Thrombin inhibitors are potentially useful in medicine for their anticoagulant 
and antithrombotic effects. We synthesized and evaluated diverse 
heterocycle-activated ketones based on the d-Phe-Pro-Arg, and related thrombin 
active-site recognition motifs, as candidate inhibitors. The peptide-based 
alpha-ketoheterocycles were typically prepared by either an imidate or a Weinreb 
amide route (Schemes 1 and 2), the latter of which proved to be more general. 
Test compounds were generally assayed for inhibition of human alpha-thrombin and 
bovine trypsin. From a structure-based design standpoint, the heterocycle allows 
one to explore and adjust interactions within the S1' subsite of thrombin. The 
preferred alpha-ketoheterocycle is a pi-rich 2-substituted azole with at least 
two heteroatoms proximal to the carbon bearing the keto group, and a preferred 
thrombin inhibitor is 2-ketobenzothiazole 3, with a potent K(i) value of 0.2 nM 
and ca. 15-fold selectivity over trypsin. 2-Ketobenzothiazole 13 exhibited 
exceedingly potent thrombin inhibition (K(i) = 0.000 65 nM; slow tight binding). 
Several alpha-ketoheterocycles had thrombin K(i) values in the range 0.1-400 nM. 
The "Arg" unit in the alpha-ketoheterocycles can be sensitive to stereomutation 
under mildy basic conditions. For example, 2-ketothiazoles 4 and 59 readily 
epimerize at pH 7.4, although they are fairly stable stereochemically at pH 3-4; 
thus, suitable conditions had to be selected for the enzymatic assays. Lead 
d-Phe-Pro-Arg 2-benzothiazoles 3, 4, and 68 displayed good selectivity for 
thrombin over other key coagulation enzymes (e.g., factor Xa, plasmin, protein 
Ca, uPA, tPA, and streptokinase); however, their selectivity for thrombin over 
trypsin was modest (<25-fold). Compounds 3, 4, and 68 exhibited potent in vitro 
antithrombotic activity as measured by inhibition of gel-filtered platelet 
aggregation induced by alpha-thrombin (IC(50) = 30-40 nM). They also proved to 
be potent anticoagulant/antithrombotic agents in vivo on intravenous 
administration, as determined in the canine arteriovenous shunt (ED(50) = 
0.45-0.65 mg/kg) and the rabbit deep vein thrombosis (ED(50) = 0.1-0.4 mg/kg) 
models. Intravenous administration of 3, and several analogues, to guinea pigs 
caused hypotension and electrocardiogram abnormalities. Such cardiovascular side 
effects were also observed with some nonguanidine inhibitors and inhibitors 
having recognition motifs other than d-Phe-Pro-Arg. 2-Benzothiazolecarboxylates 
4 and 68 exhibited significantly diminished cardiovascular side effects, and 
benzothiazolecarboxylic acid 4 had the best profile with respect to therapeutic 
index. The X-ray crystal structures of the ternary complexes 3-thrombin-hirugen 
and 4-thrombin-hirugen depict novel interactions in the S(1)' region, with the 
benzothiazole ring forming a hydrogen bond with His-57 and an aromatic stacking 
interaction with Trp-60D of thrombin's insertion loop. The benzothiazole ring of 
3 displaces the Lys-60F side chain into a U-shaped gauche conformation, whereas 
the benzothiazole carboxylate of 4 forms a salt bridge with the side chain of 
Lys-60F such that it adopts an extended anti conformation. Since 3 has a 10-fold 
greater affinity for thrombin than does 4, any increase in binding energy 
resulting from this salt bridge is apparently offset by perturbations across the 
enzyme (viz. Figure 4). The increased affinity and selectivity of 
2-ketobenzothiazole inhibitors, such as 3, may be primarily due to the aromatic 
stacking interaction with Trp-60D. However, energy contour calculations with the 
computer program GRID also indicate a favorable interaction between the 
benzothiazole sulfur atom and a hydrophobic patch on the surface of thrombin.

DOI: 10.1021/jm0303857
PMID: 15771442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]