1. Br J Pharmacol. 2005 Mar;144(6):840-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706095.

Blockade of HERG cardiac K+ current by antifungal drug miconazole.

Kikuchi K(1), Nagatomo T, Abe H, Kawakami K, Duff HJ, Makielski JC, January CT, 
Nakashima Y.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and 
Environmental Health Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.

1. Miconazole, an imidazole antifungal agent, is associated with acquired long 
QT syndrome and ventricular arrhythmias. Miconazole increases the plasma 
concentration of QT-prolonging drugs by inhibiting the hepatic cytochrome P450 
metabolic pathway, but whether it has direct effects on cardiac ion channels has 
not been elucidated. 2. To determine the mechanism underlying these clinical 
findings, we investigated the effect of miconazole on human 
ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) K+ channels. 3. HERG channels were 
heterologously expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells and 
whole-cell currents were recorded using a patch-clamp technique (23 degrees C). 
4. Miconazole inhibited HERG peak tail current in a concentration-dependent 
manner (0.4-40 microM) with an IC50 of 2.1 microM (n=3-5 cells at each 
concentration, Hill coefficient 1.2). HERG block was not frequency-dependent. It 
required channel activation, occurred rapidly, and had very slow dissociation 
properties. 5. The activation curve was shifted in a negative direction (V(1/2): 
-9.5+/-2.3 mV in controls and -15.3+/-2.4 mV after 4 microM miconazole, P<0.05, 
n=6). Miconazole did not change other channel kinetics (activation, 
deactivation, onset of inactivation, recovery from inactivation, steady-state 
inactivation). 6. The S6 domain mutation, F656C, abolished the inhibitory action 
of miconazole on HERG current indicating that miconazole preferentially binds to 
an aromatic amino-acid residue within the pore-S6 region. 7. Our findings 
indicate that miconazole causes HERG channel block by binding to a common drug 
receptor, and this involves preferential binding to activated channels. Thus, 
miconazole prolongs the QT interval by direct inhibition of HERG channels.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0706095
PMCID: PMC1576066
PMID: 15778703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]