1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 29;102(13):4718-23. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0501074102. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Protein kinase casein kinase 2 holoenzyme produced ectopically in human cells 
can be exported to the external side of the cellular membrane.

Rodríguez F(1), Allende CC, Allende JE.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Independencia 1027, 8380453 
Santiago, Chile.

Ectokinases can phosphorylate extracellular proteins and external domains of 
membrane proteins influencing cell adhesion, movement, and cellular 
interactions. An ectokinase with the properties of casein kinase 2 (CK2) has 
been previously described, but little is known about the structural 
characteristics that allow this enzyme to be exported from the cell. 
Transfection of human embryonic kidney-293 cells with cDNAs coding for the 
catalytic (CK2alpha or CK2alpha') and regulatory (CK2beta) subunits with 
hemaglutinin tags allowed us to study the export of ectopically synthesized 
enzyme. When the catalytic (CK2alpha or CK2alpha') and the CK2beta regulatory 
subunits are cotransfected, the tetrameric enzyme composed of both subunits 
(holoenzyme) is detected outside the cell. This observation has been confirmed 
by assaying protein kinase activity in immunoprecipitates obtained with 
antihemaglutinin antibody by using a CK2-specific peptide substrate and by 
Western blots as well as by immunofluorescence of nonpermeabilized cells. 
Transfection with cDNA of catalytic or regulatory subunit alone does not result 
in export of these subunits. A study of the kinetics of appearance of the 
ectopically synthesized protein at different times after transfection indicates 
that a 5- to 7-h delay after the synthesis of the protein before it appears in 
the extracellular compartment. Using mutations of CK2alpha that eliminate 
phosphorylating activity [CK2alpha(Asp-156-Ala)] or that make it less sensitive 
to heparin inhibition [CK2alpha(Lys-75-Glu,Lys-76-Glu)] demonstrated that these 
mutations do not prevent the holoenzyme to be exported from the cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0501074102
PMCID: PMC555726
PMID: 15774585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]