1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 May 6;330(2):410-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.172.

Regulation of apical localization of the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter 
by WNK4 in polarized epithelial cells.

Yang SS(1), Yamauchi K, Rai T, Hiyama A, Sohara E, Suzuki T, Itoh T, Suda S, 
Sasaki S, Uchida S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and 
Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Missense mutations in the WNK4 gene have been postulated to cause 
pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII), an autosomal-dominant disorder 
characterized by hyperkalemia and hypertension. Previous reports using Xenopus 
oocytes showed that wild-type WNK4 expression inhibited surface expression of 
the thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC), while a disease-causing mutant 
lost the inhibitory effect on NCC surface expression. To determine if these 
changes observed in oocytes really occur in polarized epithelial cells, we 
generated stable MDCK II cell lines expressing NCC alone or NCC plus wild-type 
WNK4 or a disease-causing (D564A) WNK4. In contrast to the apical localization 
of NCC without co-expression of WNK4, immunofluorescence microscopy and biotin 
surface labeling revealed that this apical localization was equally decreased by 
both the wild-type and the mutant WNK4 expression. Apical localizations of two 
PHAII-unrelated apical transporters, sodium-independent amino acid transporter, 
BAT1 and bile salt export pump, Bsep, were also found to be decreased by both 
wild-type and mutant WNK4 expression. These results indicate that the regulation 
of NCC was not related to the disease-causing mutation and not restricted to the 
PHAII-related specific transporters. The regulation of intracellular 
localization of NCC by WNK4 might not be involved in the pathogenesis of PHAII.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.02.172
PMID: 15796898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]