1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 May 15;14(10):1283-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi139. Epub 2005 
Mar 30.

Functional analysis of Peutz-Jeghers mutations reveals that the LKB1 C-terminal 
region exerts a crucial role in regulating both the AMPK pathway and the cell 
polarity.

Forcet C(1), Etienne-Manneville S, Gaude H, Fournier L, Debilly S, Salmi M, Baas 
A, Olschwang S, Clevers H, Billaud M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Génétique Moléculaire, Signalisation et Cancer, CNRS UMR 5201, 
Domaine Rockfeller, Lyon, France.

Germline mutations of the LKB1 gene are responsible for the cancer-prone 
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). LKB1 encodes a serine-threonine kinase that acts 
as a regulator of cell cycle, metabolism and cell polarity. The majority of PJS 
missense mutations abolish LKB1 enzymatic activity and thereby impair all 
functions assigned to LKB1. Here, we have investigated the functional 
consequences of recurrent missense mutations identified in PJS and in sporadic 
tumors which map in the LKB1 C-terminal non-catalytic region. We report that 
these C-terminal mutations neither disrupt LKB1 kinase activity nor interfere 
with LKB1-induced growth arrest. However, these naturally occuring mutations 
lessened LKB1-mediated activation of the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and 
impaired downstream signaling. Furthermore, C-terminal mutations compromise LKB1 
ability to establish and maintain polarity of both intestinal epithelial cells 
and migrating astrocytes. Consistent with these findings, mutational analysis 
reveals that the LKB1 tail exerts an essential function in the control of cell 
polarity. Overall, our results ascribe a crucial regulatory role to the LKB1 
C-terminal region. Our findings further indicate that LKB1 tumor suppressor 
activity is likely to depend on the regulation of AMPK signaling and cell 
polarization.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi139
PMID: 15800014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]