1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Mar;90(2):113-5. doi: 10.1007/s10549-004-3607-7.

Interleukin-10 promoter polymorphism is associated with decreased breast cancer 
risk.

Langsenlehner U(1), Krippl P, Renner W, Yazdani-Biuki B, Eder T, KÃ¶ppel H, 
Wascher TC, Paulweber B, Samonigg H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Oncology, Medical University 
Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 15, 8036, Graz, Austria. 
uwe.langsenlehner@klinikum.graz.at

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is an immunosuppressive cytokine which may facilitate 
development of cancer by supporting tumor escape from the immune response. A 
[TCATA] haplotype formed by polymorphisms at positions -3575, -2763, -1082, -819 
and -592 in the promoter of the IL-10 gene is a strong determinant for IL-10 
expression. The presence of this haplotype can be determined by analysis of the 
-592C > A polymorphism. Aim of the present study was to analyze the role of the 
IL-10 [TCATA] haplotype for breast cancer. We performed a case-control study 
including 500 female patients with histologically confirmed breast cancer and 
500 female, age-matched, healthy control subjects from population-based 
screening studies. The -592C > A polymorphism was determined by a 5'-nuclease 
assay (TaqMan). Frequency of the homozygous -592 AA genotype, indicating 
homozygosity for the [TCATA] haplotype, was 4.2% among patients and 7.3% among 
controls (p=0.038; odds ratio 0.56; 95% confidence interval 0.32-0.97). IL-10 
genotypes were not associated with tumor size, histological grading, estrogen or 
progesterone receptor status and age at diagnosis. Therefore we conclude that 
the IL-10 -592C > A promoter polymorphism may be associated with a reduced 
breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-004-3607-7
PMID: 15803357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]