1. Pediatr Res. 2005 May;57(5 Pt 2):54R-61R. doi: 
10.1203/01.PDR.0000160446.01907.B1. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

NPHS2 (Podocin) mutations in nephrotic syndrome. Clinical spectrum and fine 
mechanisms.

Caridi G(1), Perfumo F, Ghiggeri GM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory on Pathophysiology of Uremia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, 
Italy.

Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is the most frequent cause of proteinuria in children 
and is emerging as a leading cause of uremia. Molecular studies in families with 
recessive NS have led to the discovery of specialized molecules endowed in 
podocytes that play a role in proteinuria. This review focalizes the key 
position of podocin (NPHS2 gene) in this rapidly evolving field and furnishes a 
compendium to those involved in clinics and genetics of NS. Screening for NPHS2 
mutations have been done in sporadic NS and familial cases with recessive 
inheritance, documenting a mutation detection rate of 45-55% in families and 
8-20% in sporadic NS according to the different groups and considering all the 
clinical phenotypes. Almost 50 NPHS2 mutations have been reported and variants 
and/or non silent polymorphisms potentially involved in proteinuria were 
recognized. Personalized data on clinical aspects related to responsiveness to 
drugs, evolution to end stage renal failure and post-transplant outcome are 
reported. Functional studies and cell sorting experiments demonstrated retention 
in the endoplasmic reticulum of most mutants involving the stomatin domain. 
Pull-down experiments with the common R229Q polymorphism demonstrated an altered 
interaction with nephrin that affects the stability of the functional unit. 
Overall, data are here presented that underscore a major role of inherited 
defects of NPHS2 in NS in children (including a relevant impact in sporadic 
cases) and give the functional rationale for the association. A practical 
compendium is also given to clinicians involved in the management of NS that 
should modify the classic therapeutic approach.

DOI: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000160446.01907.B1
PMID: 15817495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]