1. Clin Genet. 2005 May;67(5):429-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2005.00431.x.

Molecular analysis of non-syndromic preaxial polydactyly: preaxial polydactyly 
type-IV and preaxial polydactyly type-I.

Fujioka H(1), Ariga T, Horiuchi K, Otsu M, Igawa H, Kawashima K, Yamamoto Y, 
Sugihara T, Sakiyama Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. fujioka@bibaih.rofuku.go.jp

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2005 Sep;68(3):284; author reply 285. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-0004.2005.0485a.x.

Human GLI3 gene mutations have been identified in several phenotypes of digital 
abnormality such as Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall 
syndrome, preaxial polydactyly type-IV (PPD-IV) and postaxial polydactyly. 
However, the different phenotypes resulting from GLI3 mutations have not yet 
been properly defined. We have experienced two types of digital abnormality 
without other complicating developmental defects; a family with foot PPD-IV with 
syndactyly of the third and fourth fingers, and four sporadic cases with 
biphalangeal thumb polydactyly (PPD-I). The genes responsible for syndactyly of 
the third and fourth fingers (syndactyly type-I) and PPD-I have not yet been 
identified; we therefore examined the involvement of the GLI3 gene in these 
subtypes of digital abnormality. We found a non-sense mutation in the GLI3 gene 
in the family with foot PPD-IV accompanied with hand syndactyly of the third and 
fourth fingers, but no mutations were detected in the GLI3 gene in the four 
other cases with PPD-I alone. Thus, the phenotype of foot PPD-IV accompanied 
with hand syndactyly of the third and fourth fingers may result from a GLI3 
mutation, whereas the PPD-I phenotype alone is not caused by GLI3 gene defect. 
These results will help to define the phenotypic spectrum of GLI3 morphopathies, 
which have been recently proposed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2005.00431.x
PMID: 15811011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]