1. Virol J. 2005 Apr 11;2:29. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-2-29.

Quantitative assessment of the effect of uracil-DNA glycosylase on amplicon DNA 
degradation and RNA amplification in reverse transcription-PCR.

Kleiboeker SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory and Department of Veterinary 
Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
Missouri 65211, USA. kleiboekers@missouri.edu

Although PCR and RT-PCR provided a valuable approach for detection of pathogens, 
the high level of sensitivity of these assays also makes them prone to false 
positive results. In addition to cross-contamination with true positive samples, 
false positive results are also possible due to "carry-over" contamination of 
samples with amplicon DNA generated by previous reactions. To reduce this source 
of false positives, amplicon generated by reactions in which dUTP was 
substituted for dTTP can be degraded by uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG). UNG does 
not degrade RNA but will cleave contaminating uracil-containing DNA while 
leaving thymine-containing DNA intact. The availability of heat-labile UNG makes 
use of this approach feasible for RT-PCR. In this study, real-time RT-PCR was 
used to quantify UNG degradation of amplicon DNA and the effect of UNG on RNA 
detection. Using the manufacturers' recommended conditions, complete degradation 
of DNA was not observed for samples containing 250 copies of amplicon DNA. 
Doubling the UNG concentration resulted in degradation of the two lowest 
concentrations of DNA tested, but also resulted in an increase of 1.94 cycles in 
the CT for RNA detection. To improve DNA degradation while minimizing the effect 
on RNA detection, a series of time, temperature and enzyme concentrations were 
evaluated. Optimal conditions were found to be 0.25 U UNG per 25 microl reaction 
with a 20 min, 30 degrees C incubation prior to RT-PCR. Under these conditions, 
high concentrations of amplicon DNA could be degraded while the CT for RNA 
detection was increased by 1.2 cycles.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-2-29
PMCID: PMC1087508
PMID: 15823209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]