1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005 Jun;16(6):1562-70. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2004040256. Epub
2005  Apr 13.

Individual PKC-phosphorylation sites in organic cation transporter 1 determine 
substrate selectivity and transport regulation.

Ciarimboli G(1), Koepsell H, Iordanova M, Gorboulev V, Dürner B, Lang D, Edemir 
B, Schröter R, Van Le T, Schlatter E.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik D, Experimentelle Nephrologie, 
Universitätsklinikum Münster, Domagkstrasse 3a, Münster, D-48149 Germany. 
gciari@uni-muenster.de

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005 Jun;16(6):1535-6. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2005030311.

To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying stimulation of rat organic 
cation transporter type 1 (rOCT1) by protein kinase C (PKC) activation, 
functional properties and regulation of rOCT1 stably expressed in HEK293 cells 
after site-directed mutagenesis of putative PKC phosphorylation-sites were 
compared with wild-type (WT) rOCT1 using microfluorometric measurements with the 
fluorescence organic cation 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N-methylpyridinium 
(ASP(+)). Either substitutions of single (S286A, S292A, T296A, S328A, and T550A) 
or of all five PKC-sites (5x-PKC) with alanine suppressed PKC-induced 
stimulation of ASP(+) uptake, whereas regulation by p56(lck) tyrosine kinase was 
conserved in all mutants. Remarkably, the apparent affinities for TEA(+), 
TPA(+), and quinine were changed differently in each mutant (EC(50) in WT, 
S286A, S292A, T296A, S328A, T550A, and 5x-PKC in mumol: TEA(+): 105, 153, 56, 
1135, 484, 498, 518; TPA(+): 0.1, 2.1, 0.3, 1.0, 43, 0.3, 2.2; quinine: 1.5, 
3.0, 2.5, 4.8, 81, 7.6, 8.9, respectively). After mutations, no effects of PKC 
activation on apparent affinity of rOCT1 for these substrates could be detected, 
in contrast to what was observed in WT. PKC activation had no significant effect 
on rOCT1 trafficking from intracellular pools to the cell membrane. Substitution 
of all PKC sites suppressed PKC-induced phosphorylation of rOCT1. In conclusion, 
it was found that the presence of all five potential PKC phosphorylation sites 
is necessary for the PKC-induced stimulation of rOCT1. The different effects on 
the EC(50) values by the different mutations suggest that the large 
intracellular loop participates in building the substrate binding pocket of 
rOCT1 or specifically modulates its structure.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2004040256
PMID: 15829703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]