1. Kidney Int. 2005 May;67(5):1704-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.00267.x.

Pyridoxine effect in type I primary hyperoxaluria is associated with the most 
common mutant allele.

Monico CG(1), Rossetti S, Olson JB, Milliner DS.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905, USA. monico.carla@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: Pyridoxine (VB6) response in type I primary hyperoxaluria (PHI) is 
variable, with nearly equal numbers of patients showing partial to complete 
reductions in oxaluria, and resistance. Because high urine oxalate 
concentrations cause stones and renal injury, reduction in urine oxalate 
excretion is deemed favorable. Mechanisms of VB6 action on hepatic 
alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT), the deficient enzyme in PHI, and VB6 
dose response have not been well-characterized.
METHODS: Sequencing or restriction site-generating polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) was used for c.508 genotyping in 23 PHI patients. Pre- and post-VB6 
24-hour urine oxalate excretion and VB6 dose were ascertained by retrospective 
chart review.
RESULTS: There were six c.508 G>A homozygotes (AA), eight heterozygotes (GA), 
and nine patients lacking this change (GG). Pre-VB6 urine oxalate excretion was 
152 +/- 39, 203 +/- 68 and 206 +/- 74 mg/1.73 m(2)/24 hours, respectively, and 
did not differ [AA vs. GA (P= 0.07); AA vs. GG (P= 0.07); GA vs. GG, (P= 0.47)]. 
Post-VB6 urine oxalate excretion was normal in AA (pre- vs. post-VB6) (P < 
0.001), partially reduced in GA (P < 0.001), and unchanged in GG (P= 0.06). 
Urine oxalate excretion attenuation was similar for VB6 doses (mg/kg/day) of 1 
to 4.9, 5 to 9.9, and 10 to 14.9 in AA (P= 0.41, P= 0.28, and P= 0.11, 
respectively) and GA (P= 0.42, P= 0.39, and P= 0.30, respectively) during 
follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Presence of the c.508 G>A allele confers VB6 response in PHI and VB6 
doses of 5 mg/kg/day appear sufficient. c.508 genotyping can be used to predict 
VB6 response and guide treatment in PHI. [c represents cDNA sequence where 
nucleotide position +1 corresponds to the adenine (A) of the translation start 
codon ATG. Equivalent positions based on 5' UTR nucleotide numbering are as 
follows: c.508 G>A = G630A (Gly170Arg), c.32 C>T = C154T (Pro11Leu), and c.454 
T>A = T576A (Phe152Ile)], yields highest residual AGT activity. To test whether 
VB6 response might be attributable to this allele, we performed c.508 
genotyping.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1523-1755.2005.00267.x
PMID: 15840016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]