1. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2005 Apr 27;135(1-2):12-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.11.019.

Mouse motor neuron disease caused by truncated SOD1 with or without C-terminal 
modification.

Watanabe Y(1), Yasui K, Nakano T, Doi K, Fukada Y, Kitayama M, Ishimoto M, 
Kurihara S, Kawashima M, Fukuda H, Adachi Y, Inoue T, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Nishi-cho 36-1,Yonago 683-8504, Japan. 
yawatana@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Mutation of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) contributes to a portion of the 
cases of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS). We previously reported 
on a FALS family whose members had a mutant form of SOD1 characterized by a 
2-base pair (bp) deletion at codon 126 of the SOD1 gene. To investigate the 
cellular consequences of this mutation, we produced transgenic mice that 
expressed normal and mutated copies of human SOD1: wild-type SOD1 (W), wild-type 
SOD1 with a FLAG epitope at C-terminal (WF), mutated SOD1 with the 2-bp deletion 
(D), and SOD1 with the 2-bp deletion with FLAG (DF). The mice heterozygotic for 
the human mutated SOD1 (D and DF) showed distinct ALS-like motor symptoms, 
whereas the mice heterozygotic for the normal SOD1 (W and WF) mice did not. 
Homozygotes of D and DF lines showed the ALS symptoms at an earlier age and died 
earlier than the heterozygotes. By Northern blot analysis, the mRNAs for all 
human SOD1s were confirmed in these lines. All the human SOD1 proteins, except 
the D mutant, were detectable by immunoblot. The D protein was only confirmed 
when it was concentrated by immunoprecipitation. Neuropathologically, loss of 
spinal motor neurons and reactive gliosis were common features in the 
symptomatic lines. The remaining motor neurons in these mice also exhibited 
eosinophilic inclusions. The biochemical and pathological characteristics of 
these mice are quite similar to those of human FALS patients with same mutation. 
This intriguing model will provide an important source of information of the 
pathogenesis of FALS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbrainres.2004.11.019
PMID: 15857664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]