1. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Aug;68(2):383-92. doi: 10.1124/mol.105.012062. Epub 2005
Apr  27.

Discovery of novel flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) single nucleotide 
polymorphisms and functional analysis of upstream haplotype variants.

Koukouritaki SB(1), Poch MT, Cabacungan ET, McCarver DG, Hines RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank 
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

The flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) are important for xenobiotic 
metabolism. FMO3, the predominant FMO enzyme in human adult liver, exhibits 
significant interindividual variation that is poorly understood. This study was 
designed to identify common FMO3 genetic variants and determine their potential 
for contributing to interindividual differences in FMO3 expression. FMO3 single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discovery was accomplished by resequencing DNA 
samples from the Coriell Polymorphism Discovery Resource. Population-specific 
SNP frequencies were determined by multiplexed, single-base extension using DNA 
from 201 Hispanic American (Mexican descent), 201 African American, and 200 
White (northern European descent) subjects. Haplotypes were inferred and 
population frequencies estimated using PHASE version 2.1. Multiple site-directed 
mutagenesis was used to introduce inferred upstream haplotypes into an 
FMO3/luciferase construct for functional analysis in HepG2 cells. Sequence 
analysis revealed seven FMO3 upstream SNPs, 11 exon SNPs, and 22 intron SNPs. 
Five of the latter fell within consensus splice sites. A g.72G>T variant (E24D) 
is predicted to impact the structure of the Rossmann fold involved in FAD 
binding, whereas a g.11177C>A variant (N61K) is predicted to disrupt the 
secondary structure of a conserved membrane interaction domain. Seven common 
(>1%) promoter region haplotypes were inferred in one or more of the study 
populations that differed in estimated frequency among the groups. Haplotype 2 
resulted in an 8-fold increase in promoter activity, whereas haplotypes 8 and 15 
exhibited a near complete loss of activity. In conclusion, FMO3 promoter 
haplotype variants modulate gene function and probably contribute to 
interindividual differences in FMO3 expression.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.105.012062
PMID: 15858076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]