1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Apr 28;33(8):2410-20. doi: 10.1093/nar/gki539. Print 
2005.

The requirement of yeast replication origins for pre-replication complex 
proteins is modulated by transcription.

Nieduszynski CA(1), Blow JJ, Donaldson AD.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen Foresterhill, Aberdeen 
AB25 2ZD, Scotland, UK.

The mini-chromosome maintenance proteins Mcm2-7 are essential for DNA 
replication. They are loaded onto replication origins during G1 phase of the 
cell cycle to form a pre-replication complex (pre-RC) that licenses each origin 
for subsequent initiation. We have investigated the DNA elements that determine 
the dependence of yeast replication origins on Mcm2-7 activity, i.e. the 
sensitivity of an origin to mcm mutations. Using chimaeric constructs from mcm 
sensitive and mcm insensitive origins, we have identified two main elements 
affecting the requirement for Mcm2-7 function. First, transcription into an 
origin increases its dependence on Mcm2-7 function, revealing a conflict between 
pre-RC assembly and transcription. Second, sequence elements within the minimal 
origin influence its mcm sensitivity. Replication origins show similar 
differences in sensitivity to mutations in other pre-RC proteins (such as Origin 
Recognition Complex and Cdc6), but not to mutations in initiation and elongation 
factors, demonstrating that the mcm sensitivity of an origin is determined by 
its ability to establish a pre-RC. We propose that there is a hierarchy of 
replication origins with respect to the range of pre-RC protein concentrations 
under which they will function. This hierarchy is both 'hard-wired' by the 
minimal origin sequences and 'soft-wired' by local transcriptional context.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki539
PMCID: PMC1087785
PMID: 15860777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]