1. Biochemistry. 2005 May 10;44(18):6809-22. doi: 10.1021/bi0477236.

Aspartate 120 of Escherichia coli methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase: evidence 
for major roles in folate binding and catalysis and a minor role in flavin 
reactivity.

Trimmer EE(1), Ballou DP, Galloway LJ, Scannell SA, Brinker DR, Casas KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa 50112-2036, USA. 
trimmere@grinnell.edu

Escherichia coli methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) catalyzes the 
NADH-linked reduction of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (CH(2)-H(4)folate) to 
5-methyltetrahydrofolate (CH(3)-H(4)folate) using flavin adenine dinucleotide 
(FAD) as cofactor. MTHFR is unusual among flavin oxidoreductases because it 
contains a conserved, negatively rather than positively charged amino acid 
(aspartate 120) near the N1-C2=O position of the flavin. At this location, Asp 
120 is expected to influence the redox properties of the enzyme-bound FAD. 
Modeling of the CH(3)-H(4)folate product into the enzyme active site suggests 
that Asp 120 may also play crucial roles in folate binding and catalysis. We 
have replaced Asp 120 with Asn, Ser, Ala, Val, and Lys and have characterized 
the mutant enzymes. Consistent with a loss of negative charge near the flavin, 
the midpoint potentials of the mutants increased from 17 to 30 mV. A small 
kinetic effect on the NADH reductive half-reaction was also observed as the 
mutants exhibited a 1.2-1.5-fold faster reduction rate than the wild-type 
enzyme. Catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K(m)) in the CH(2)-H(4)folate oxidative 
half-reaction was decreased significantly (up to 70000-fold) and in a manner 
generally consistent with the negative charge density of position 120, 
supporting a major role for Asp 120 in electrostatic stabilization of the 
putative 5-iminium cation intermediate during catalysis. Asp 120 is also 
intimately involved in folate binding as increases in the apparent K(d) of up to 
15-fold were obtained for the mutants. Examining the E(red) + CH(2)-H(4)folate 
reaction at 4 degrees C, we obtained, for the first time, evidence for the rapid 
formation of a reduced enzyme-folate complex with wild-type MTHFR. The more 
active Asp120Ala mutant, but not the severely impaired Asp120Lys mutant, 
demonstrated the species, suggesting a connection between the extent of complex 
formation and catalytic efficiency.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0477236
PMID: 15865426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]