1. Biomacromolecules. 2005 May-Jun;6(3):1516-23. doi: 10.1021/bm049226a.

Expression and characterization of a four-alpha-helix bundle protein that binds 
the volatile general anesthetic halothane.

Pidikiti R(1), Shamim M, Mallela KM, Reddy KS, Johansson JS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Anesthesia, and the Johnson Research Foundation, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The structural features of volatile anesthetic binding sites on proteins are 
being investigated with the use of a defined model system consisting of a 
four-alpha-helix bundle scaffold with a hydrophobic core. The current study 
describes the bacterial expression, purification, and initial characterization 
of the four-alpha-helix bundle (Aalpha(2)-L1M/L38M)(2). The alpha-helical 
content and stability of the expressed protein are comparable to that of the 
chemically synthesized four-alpha-helix bundle (Aalpha(2)-L38M)(2) reported 
earlier. The affinity for binding halothane is somewhat improved with a K(d) = 
120 +/- 20 microM as determined by W15 fluorescence quenching, attributed to the 
L1M substitution. Near-UV circular dichroism spectroscopy demonstrated that 
halothane binding changes the orientation of the aromatic residues in the 
four-alpha-helix bundle. Nuclear magnetic resonance experiments reveal that 
halothane binding results in narrowing of the peaks in the amide region of the 
one-dimensional proton spectrum, indicating that bound anesthetic limits protein 
dynamics. This expressed protein should prove to be amenable to nuclear magnetic 
resonance structural studies on the anesthetic complexes, because of its 
relatively small size (124 residues) and the high affinities for binding 
volatile anesthetics. Such studies will provide much needed insight into how 
volatile anesthetics interact with biological macromolecules and will provide 
guidelines regarding the general architecture of binding sites on central 
nervous system proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/bm049226a
PMID: 15877373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]