1. Eur J Neurol. 2005 Jun;12(6):480-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01059.x.

Bone mineral density in familial amyloid polyneuropathy and in other 
neuromuscular disorders.

Conceição IM(1), Miranda LC, Simões E, Gouveia RG, Evangelista TD, de Carvalho 
MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal. 
isabel.conceicao@mail.telepac.pt

Neuromuscular diseases are a known risk factor for immobilization-induced 
osteoporosis. The aim of the study was to analyse bone mineral density (BMD) in 
patients with familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) type I (Val30 Met) and to 
compare them with a population of patients with other neuromuscular disorders. 
We studied 24, ambulatory, neuromuscular patients, all men and premenopausal 
women. We included 12 FAP patients (GI) and 12 patients with other disorders 
(GII). Clinical data included age, sex, height, weight, alcohol intake, smoking, 
calcium intake, physical activity and history of fractures. Serum and urinary 
calcium, osteocalcin, bone alkaline phosphatase, parathyroid hormone, thyroid 
stimulating hormone and urinary N-telopeptide cross-linked type 1 collagen were 
determined in all patients. Bone mineral density of lumbar spine, hip and wrist 
were determined by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry scan. No statistical 
differences were found in clinical or analytic data between the two groups, 
except for body mass index and calciuria, which were lower in GI. In GI, 54.5% 
were osteoporotic, against 23.1% in GII (P = 0.04). Bone mineral density was 
lower in GI when compared with GII, and tended to decrease with disease 
duration. Decreased BMI and the early autonomic involvement in GI probably 
explain the results. The prevention and early treatment of osteoporosis, in FAP 
patients should be considered a priority.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2005.01059.x
PMID: 15885054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]