1. Peptides. 2005 Nov;26(11):2302-13. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2005.04.002.

Isolation and characterization of antagonist and agonist peptides to the human 
melanocortin 1 receptor.

Bonetto S(1), Carlavan I, Baty D.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Structurale et Microbiologie, Laboratoire d'Ingénierie 
des Systèmes Macromoléculaires, UPR9027, CNRS, 31 chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13402 
Marseille Cedex 20, France.

We identified a large number of peptide mimotopes of the adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH) and the alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) to 
analyze better the structure-function relationships of these hormones with the 
human MC1 receptor (hMC1R). We have investigated the use of phage-display 
technology to isolate specific peptides of this receptor by using three 
monoclonal anti-ACTH antibodies (mAbs). A library of 10(8) phage-peptides 
displaying randomized decapeptides was constructed and used to select 
phage-peptides that bind to mAbs. Forty-five phage-peptides have been isolated 
and from their amino acid sequences, we have identified two consensus sequences, 
EXFRWGKPA and WGXPVGKP, corresponding to the regions 5-13 and 9-16 of ACTH, 
respectively. A biological assay on cells expressing the hMC1-R was developed to 
determine the capacity of phage-peptides to stimulate the receptor. Only two 
phage-peptides showed detectable activity. Thirty-one peptides were synthesized 
to analyze their biological effect. We identified two weak agonists, EC50=16 and 
11 microM, two strong agonists, EC50=25 and 14 nM and a partial antagonist, 
IC50=36 microM. This work confirmed the modulator agonist role of the regions 
11-12 of alpha-MSH and ACTH, and the importance of the methionine residue at 
position 4 for the stimulation of the hMC1-R. We also identified analogues of 
the regions 8-17 of ACTH that exhibited a weak activator effect, and of one 
analogue of the N-terminal regions 1-9 of ACTH and alpha-MSH having a partial 
antagonist effect. These results may be useful in the development of potential 
agonists or antagonists of the hMC1R.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2005.04.002
PMID: 15893405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]