1. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2005 Jun;14(2):109-14. doi: 
10.1097/01.pas.0000158987.07907.7e.

Mutation analysis of the SDHD gene in four kindreds with familial paraganglioma: 
description of one novel germline mutation.

Velasco A(1), Palomar-Asenjo V, Ga√±an L, Catasus L, Llecha N, Panizo A, 
Palomar-Garcia V, Quer M, Matias-Guiu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, 
University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.

The familial paraganglioma syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by the presence of carotid body paragangliomas and, less 
frequently, paragangliomas of the glomus jugulare, glomus vagale, and adrenal 
pheochromocytomas. Germline mutations of the genes for succinate dehydrogenase 
subunits D, B, or C (SDHD, SDHB, SDHC) have been identified in some kindreds 
with familial paraganglioma. In this study, we report the clinicopathologic 
features of four different kindreds with familial paraganglioma, which were 
screened for germline mutations in the SDHD gene. DNA was obtained from tumor 
and normal tissue, as well as from peripheral blood. Mutation analysis was 
performed by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and DNA 
sequencing. SDHD germline mutations were detected in the affected family members 
of the four families, as well as in several asymptomatic carriers. An identical 
mutation in exon 4 of SDHD (334-337delACTG) was identified in two apparently 
unrelated kindreds. The third family showed a germline mutation in exon 2 
(W43X). The mutations present in these three families had been previously 
described in Spanish families, suggesting a founder effect. The fourth family 
exhibited a mutation in exon 2 of SDHD (170-171delTT), which had not been 
previously identified. The affected family members of the four kindreds showed 
paragangliomas, located in the head and neck region, and all of them were 
benign. These results confirm that genetic testing of SDHD may be a powerful 
tool for the identification of the syndrome in patients with multiple or 
bilateral paragangliomas.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000158987.07907.7e
PMID: 15905695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]