1. BMC Genet. 2005 May 27;6:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-6-29.

Potential genetic modifiers of the cystic fibrosis intestinal inflammatory 
phenotype on mouse chromosomes 1, 9, and 10.

Norkina O(1), De Lisle RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of 
Medicine, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. norkina_o@mail.ru

BACKGROUND: Although cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations in the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, the severity of 
disease is highly variable indicating the influence of modifier genes. The 
intestines of Cftr deficient mice (CF mice: Cftrtm1Unc) are prone to obstruction 
by excessive mucus accumulation and are used as a model of meconium ileus and 
distal intestinal obstruction syndrome. This phenotype is strongly dependent on 
the genetic background of the mice. On the C57Bl/6 background, the majority of 
CF mice cannot survive on solid mouse chow, have inflammation of the small 
intestine, and are about 30% smaller than wild type littermates. In this work 
potential modifier loci of the CF intestinal phenotype were identified.
RESULTS: CF mice on a mixed genetic background (95% C57Bl/6 and 5% 129Sv) were 
compared to CF mice congenic on the C57Bl/6 background for several parameters of 
the intestinal CF phenotype. CF mice on the mixed background exhibit 
significantly greater survival when fed dry mouse chow, have reduced intestinal 
inflammation as measured by quantitative RT-PCR for marker genes, have near 
normal body weight gain, and have reduced mucus accumulation in the intestinal 
crypts. There was an indication of a gender effect for body weight gain: males 
did not show a significant improvement at 4 weeks of age, but were of normal 
weight at 8 weeks, while females showed improvement at both 4 and 8 weeks. By a 
preliminary genome-wide PCR allele scanning, three regions were found to be 
potentially associated with the milder phenotype. One on chr.1, defined by 
marker D1Mit36, one on chr. 9 defined by marker D9Mit90, and one on chr. 10, 
defined by marker D10Mit14.
CONCLUSION: Potential modifier regions were found that have a positive impact on 
the inflammatory phenotype of the CF mouse small intestine and animal survival. 
Identification of polymorphisms in specific genes in these regions should 
provide important new information about genetic modifiers of the CF intestinal 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-6-29
PMCID: PMC1166548
PMID: 15921521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]