1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;37(10):2207-16. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2005.04.008.

Insulin-like growth factor-I inhibits dexamethasone-induced proteolysis in 
cultured L6 myotubes through PI3K/Akt/GSK-3beta and PI3K/Akt/mTOR-dependent 
mechanisms.

Li BG(1), Hasselgren PO, Fang CH.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Cincinnati Burns Hospital, 3229 Burnet 
Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

We and others reported previously that IGF-I inhibits dexamethasone-induced 
proteolysis in cultured L6 myotubes. Recent evidence suggests that this effect 
of IGF-I at least in part reflects PI3K/Akt-mediated inhibition of Foxo 
transcription factors. The potential role of other mechanisms, downstream of 
PI3K/Akt, is not well understood. Here we tested the hypothesis that 
PI3K/Akt-mediated inactivation of GSK-3beta and activation of mTOR contribute to 
the anabolic effects of IGF-I in dexamethasone-treated myotubes. Cultured L6 
myotubes were treated with 1 microM dexamethasone in the absence or presence of 
0.1 microg/ml of IGF-I and inhibitors of GSK-3beta and mTOR. Protein degradation 
was measured by determining the release of trichloroacetic acid soluble 
radioactivity from myotubes that had been prelabeled with (3)H-tyrosine for 48 
h. IGF-I reduced basal protein breakdown rates and completely abolished the 
dexamethasone-induced increase in myotube proteolysis. These effects of IGF-I 
were associated with increased phosphorylation of Akt, GSK-3beta, and the mTOR 
downstream targets p70(S6K) and 4E-BP1. The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 and the mTOR 
inhibitor rapamycin reversed the anabolic effect of IGF-I in 
dexamethasone-treated myotubes. In addition, the GSK-3beta inhibitors LiCl and 
TDZD-8 reduced protein degradation in a similar fashion as IGF-I. Our results 
suggest that PI3K/Akt-mediated inactivation of GSK-3beta and activation of mTOR 
contribute to the anabolic effects of IGF-I in dexamethasone-treated myotubes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2005.04.008
PMID: 15927518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]