1. Cardiovasc Res. 2005 Aug 15;67(3):476-86. doi:
10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.04.036.

Abnormal KCNQ1 trafficking influences disease pathogenesis in hereditary long QT 
syndromes (LQT1).

Wilson AJ(1), Quinn KV, Graves FM, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Tinker A.

Author information:
(1)BHF Laboratories and Department of Medicine, University College London, 5 
University Street, London, WC1E 6JJ, UK.

OBJECTIVE: In the hereditary long QT syndromes the commonest defect is in the K+ 
channel pore forming subunit, KCNQ1. In this study we investigated the role that 
abnormal KCNQ1 trafficking has in the pathogenesis of the hereditary long QT 
syndrome (LQT1).
METHODS: We introduced nine missense and nonsense mutations occurring in LQT1 
into the cDNA encoding KCNQ1 fused in frame to the green fluorescent protein. 
These mutations occur in syndromes that are inherited in both autosomal dominant 
and recessive fashions. We used biochemistry, electrophysiology and cell imaging 
to examine the behaviour of wildtype and mutant channel subunits expressed 
together with the auxiliary subunit KCNE1 expressed in CHO-K1 and C2C12 cells.
RESULTS: We found that a number of mutations in KCNQ1 are retained in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and unable to translocate to the plasma membrane. 
Furthermore, some mutations act in a dominant negative fashion and have the 
ability to suppress the trafficking of wildtype channel. We use fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer microscopy to show that this occurs because of direct 
interaction between the mutant subunit and wildtype channel in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Finally, a number of specific and nonspecific pharmacological tools 
are unable to promote the delivery of these mutants to the plasma membrane.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed that channel trafficking may contribute to the 
pathogenesis of LQT1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2005.04.036
PMID: 15935335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]