1. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2005 Jul;8(4):361-6. doi: 
10.1097/01.mco.0000172573.25902.33.

Calpain 10 and type 2 diabetes: are we getting closer to an explanation?

Ridderstråle M(1), Parikh H, Groop L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Wallenberg Laboratory, 
University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden. 
martin.ridderstrale@endo.mas.lu.se

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: A variation in the gene encoding the cysteine protease 
calpain 10 (CAPN10) was recently linked and associated with type 2 diabetes by 
positional cloning. This positional cloning was a follow-up investigation to the 
identification of a diabetes-linked region on human chromosome 2 identified by 
genome-wide scanning a few years earlier. In this paper we give a general 
background on the genetic studies performed on CAPN10 to date, and review the 
most recent studies on the functional role of calpain 10.
RECENT FINDING: A haplotype or haplotype combination comprising three intronic 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (UCSNP-43, 19, and 63) were associated with a 
threefold increased risk of type 2 diabetes in the population in which linkage 
was first found. Another polymorphism, UCSNP-44, which is in linkage 
disequilibrium with a coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (Thr504Ala), has 
subsequently been associated with type 2 diabetes in extensive meta-analyses. 
Meanwhile, initial studies probing the possible role of calpain-10, completely 
unknown at the time, are now being pursued, both in isolated cells and humans.
SUMMARY: The positional cloning of CAPN10 as a candidate gene for type 2 
diabetes has been particularly fruitful. Not only has it identified an important 
and surprising piece of the puzzle underlying the development of diabetes, but 
it has also modelled and paved the way for investigations concerning complex 
genetic diseases other than type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mco.0000172573.25902.33
PMID: 15930958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]