1. Lupus. 2005;14(5):356-62. doi: 10.1191/0961203305lu2093oa.

Polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin system genes in Brazilian patients with 
lupus nephropathy.

Sprovieri SR(1), Sens YA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Santa Casa de 
SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil. luvieri@uol.com.br

Genetic polymorphisms of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) has been associated 
with cardiovascular events and the progression of nephropathy in several 
diseases. The objective of this study was to evaluate a possible association of 
the genetic polymorphisms of RAS with the development and/or progression of 
lupus nephritis in a Brazilian population. Seventy-five SLE patients with lupus 
nephropathy (LN group) were compared to 72 SLE patients without LN (SLE group) 
and 65 healthy individuals (CONTROL group), of sex and ethnic matched, in a 
Brazilian population sample. Mean global follow-up was 9 +/- 6 years for lupus 
without nephropathy and 11 +/- 7 years for lupus nephropathy. Following the 
extraction of genomic DNA from the leukocytes in the peripheral blood, 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE I/D), angiotensinogen (AGT M(235)T) and 
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AGTR1 A(1166)C) genotypes were determined by the 
polymerase chain reaction. No significant difference of ACE, AGT and AGTR1 
genotypes distribution between groups was observed in this study. There was no 
significant association between the variables of the RAS genotypes and the 
presence of hypertension in SLE. However, an increased frequency ofDD genotype 
(ACE I/D) was observed in SLE patients with LN who progressed to CRF compared to 
healthy controls (DD 60%, DI 26.7%, II 13.3% versus 27.7%, 60% and 12.3%, 
respectively; chi2 = 6.299, P = 0.0429). In the population studied, there was no 
influence of the RAS genetic polymorphisms in the development of lupus 
nephropathy, but the progression to CRF was associated with ACE DD polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1191/0961203305lu2093oa
PMID: 15934435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]