1. Genet Test. 2005 Summer;9(2):126-32. doi: 10.1089/gte.2005.9.126.

The Arg482His mutation in the beta-galactosidase gene is responsible for a high 
frequency of GM1 gangliosidosis carriers in a Cypriot village.

Georgiou T(1), Stylianidou G, Anastasiadou V, Caciotti A, Campos Y, Zammarchi E, 
Morrone A, D'azzo A, Drousiotou A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 
Genetics, 1683 Nicosia, Cyprus.

GM1 gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disorder caused by deficiency of 
beta-galactosidase. It is mainly characterized by progressive neurodegeneration, 
and in its most severe infantile form, it leads to death before the age of 4. 
The GLB1 gene gives rise to two alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode the 
beta-galactosidase and the elastin binding protein (EBP). The diagnosis of two 
patients with the infantile form of GM1 gangliosidosis and 11 carriers in a 
small mountainous village in Cyprus prompted us to carry out a study in order to 
establish the frequency of carriers in the village and identify the mutations 
involved. Carrier detection was initially based on the measurement of 
beta-galactosidase activity in leucocytes. Among 85 random samples from the 
village, 10 were classified as carriers. Sequencing of the GLB1 gene in a 
Cypriot patient identified the missense mutation c.1445G>A (p.Arg482His) in the 
homozygous state. Seven of the 10 carriers identified using the enzyme assay 
were found to carry the same mutation by NspI restriction enzyme analysis. The 
three individuals who were negative for the c.1445G>A had borderline enzyme 
results and were probably wrongly classified as carriers. The frequency of GM1 
gangliosidosis carriers in this village is approximately 8% (1:12). Western blot 
analysis showed a marked decrease of the 64-kDa mature form of the enzyme 
protein and a similar reduction of the 67-kDa EBP. Our results indicate that the 
c.1445G>A mutation, which appears to be responsible for all GM1 gangliosidosis 
alleles in this Cypriot village, affects protein conformation.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.2005.9.126
PMID: 15943552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]