1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Jun;14(6):1460-3. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0672.

Evidence for an association between compound heterozygosity for germ line 
mutations in the hemochromatosis (HFE) gene and increased risk of colorectal 
cancer.

Robinson JP(1), Johnson VL, Rogers PA, Houlston RS, Maher ER, Bishop DT, Evans 
DG, Thomas HJ, Tomlinson IP, Silver AR.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Colorectal Cancer Unit, St. Mark's Hospital, Harrow, HA1 
3UJ, United Kingdom.

Whereas a recent study reported an increased risk of colorectal cancer 
associated with any HFE germ line mutation (C282Y or H63D), other investigators 
have concluded there is no increased risk, or that any increase is dependent on 
polymorphisms in HFE-interacting genes such as the transferrin receptor (TFR). 
We have established the frequency of HFE mutations in colorectal cancer patients 
(n = 327) with a family history of the disease and randomly selected controls (n 
= 322); this design increases greatly the study's power. Genotyping for the TRF 
S142G polymorphism was also conducted on a large proportion of the study group. 
Using PCR, restriction enzyme mapping, sequencing followed by data analysis with 
Fisher's exact test and logistic regression, we show that the presence of any 
HFE mutation (Y282 or D63) was not associated with colorectal cancer risk (P = 
0.57). In contrast, individuals compound heterozygous for both mutations (15 
cases versus 5 controls) had thrice the odds of developing colorectal cancer 
(odds ratio, 3.03; 95% confidence interval, 1.06-8.61) compared with those with 
a single mutation. This finding did not quite reach statistical significance 
after allowing for multiple post hoc testing (P(observed) = 0.038 versus P = 
0.025, with Bonferonni correction). Overall, our data indicate that individuals 
with a single HFE mutation, C282Y or H63D, are unlikely predisposed to develop 
colorectal cancer. However, risk of colorectal cancer might be increased by 
compound heterozygosity for the HFE mutations in the small number of subjects 
studied. TFR gene polymorphism was not an independent risk factor and did not 
modify the disease risk associated with HFE mutation.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-04-0672
PMID: 15941956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]