1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):28973-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504568200. Epub 
2005 Jun 16.

An intramolecular interaction between SH2-kinase linker and kinase domain is 
essential for the catalytic activity of protein-tyrosine kinase-6.

Kim HIe(1), Lee ST.

Author information:
(1)National Research Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of 
Biochemistry, College of Science, and Protein Network Research Center, Yonsei 
University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Protein-tyrosine kinase-6 (PTK6, also known as Brk) is a non-receptor tyrosine 
kinase that contains SH3, SH2, and catalytic (Kinase) domains. We have 
identified an intramolecular interaction between the linker (Linker) region 
connecting the SH2 and Kinase domains and the Kinase domain. Residue Trp-184 
within the Linker region is essential for the Linker-Kinase interaction but not 
for the Linker-SH3 interaction. A recombinant PTK6 Kinase domain connected to 
the Linker region had catalytic activity in terms of autophosphorylation, 
phosphorylation of a PTK6 substrate, BKS, and phosphorylation of an oligopeptide 
substrate, whereas the Kinase domain itself, or one connected to a Linker region 
containing a W184A substitution, did not. The introduction of the W184A mutation 
into PTK6 also abrogated autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of another PTK6 
substrate, Sam68, as well as phosphorylation of intracellular proteins. It also 
abolished the ability of PTK6 to promote proliferation and prevent apoptosis of 
HEK 293 cells, as well as to permit anchorage-independent colony formation. 
Therefore, unlike Src family members, in which the Linker-Kinase interaction 
inhibits catalytic activity, in PTK6 this interaction has an essential positive 
role.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504568200
PMID: 15961400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]