1. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Jan;27(1):103-11. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgi171. Epub 2005
Jun  29.

Polymorphisms of cytochrome P4501A2 and N-acetyltransferase genes, smoking, and 
risk of pancreatic cancer.

Li D(1), Jiao L, Li Y, Doll MA, Hein DW, Bondy ML, Evans DB, Wolff RA, Lenzi R, 
Pisters PW, Abbruzzese JL, Hassan MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas, 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 426, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. dli@mdanderson.org

To test the hypothesis that genetic variation in the metabolism of tobacco 
carcinogens, such as aromatic amines (AA) and heterocyclic amines (HCA), 
contributes to pancreatic cancer, we have examined genetic polymorphisms of 
three key enzymes, i.e. cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) and N-acetyltransferase 1 
and 2 (NAT1 and NAT2), in a hospital-based case-control study of 365 patients 
with pancreatic adenocarcinoma and 379 frequency-matched healthy controls. 
Genotypes were determined using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) and Taqman methods. Smoking information was collected by personal 
interview. Adjusted odds ratio (AOR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) was 
estimated by unconditional multivariate logistic regression analysis. We found 
that the NAT1 'rapid' alleles were associated with a 1.5-fold increased risk of 
pancreatic cancer (95% CI: 1.0-2.1) with adjustment of potential confounders. 
This effect was more prominent among never smokers (AOR: 2.4, 95% CI: 1.4-4.3) 
and females (AOR: 1.8, 95% CI: 1.0-3.1). Some genotypes were significantly 
associated with increased risk for pancreatic cancer among smokers, especially 
heavy smokers (<20 pack years). For example, heavy smokers with the CYP1A2*1D 
(T-2467delT) delT, CYP1A2*1F(A-163C) C allele, NAT1 'rapid' or NAT2 'slow' 
alleles had an AOR (95% CI) of 1.4 (0.7-2.3), 1.9 (1.1-3.4), 3.0 (1.6-5.4) and 
1.5 (0.8-2.6), respectively, compared with never smokers carrying the 
non-at-risk alleles. These effects were more prominent in females than in males. 
The corresponding AOR (95% CI) was 3.1 (1.0-8.0), 3.8 (1.5-10.1), 4.5 (1.6-12.7) 
and 2.0 (0.8-5.1) for females versus 1.0 (0.4-1.9), 1.1 (0.5-2.4), 2.1 (1.0-4.6) 
and 1.1 (0.5-2.6) for males. A significant synergistic effect of CYP1A2*1F C 
allele and NAT1"rapid" alleles on the risk for pancreatic cancer was also 
detected among never smokers (AOR: 2.9, 95% CI: 1.2-6.9) and among females (AOR: 
2.5, 95% CI: 1.1-5.7). These data suggest that polymorphisms of the CYP1A2 and 
NAT1 genes modify the risk of pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgi171
PMCID: PMC1350610
PMID: 15987714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]