1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 Jul;46(7):2264-70. doi: 10.1167/iovs.04-1280.

Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa is associated with mutations in RP1 in 
three consanguineous Pakistani families.

Riazuddin SA(1), Zulfiqar F, Zhang Q, Sergeev YV, Qazi ZA, Husnain T, Caruso R, 
Riazuddin S, Sieving PA, Hejtmancik JF.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

PURPOSE: To localize and identify the gene and mutations causing autosomal 
recessive retinitis pigmentosa in three consanguineous Pakistani families.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected and DNA was extracted. A genome-wide scan 
was performed by using 382 polymorphic microsatellite markers on genomic DNA 
from affected and unaffected family members, and lod scores were calculated.
RESULTS: A genome-wide scan of 25 families gave an hlod = 4.53 with D8S260. 
Retinitis pigmentosa in all three families mapped to a 14.21-cM (21.19-Mb) 
region on chromosome 8 at q11, flanked by D8S532 and D8S260. This region harbors 
RP1, which is known to cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Sequencing 
of the coding exons of RP1 showed mutations in all three families: two 
single-base deletions, c.4703delA and c.5400delA, resulting in a frame shift, 
and a 4-bp insertion, c.1606insTGAA, all causing premature termination of the 
protein. All affected individuals in these families are homozygous for the 
mutations. Parents and siblings heterozygous for the mutant allele did not show 
any signs or symptoms of RP.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide strong evidence that mutations in RP1 can 
result in recessive as well as dominant retinitis pigmentosa. The findings 
suggest that truncation of RP1 before the BIF motif or within the terminal 
portion results in a simple loss of RP1 function, producing a recessive 
inheritance pattern. In contrast, disruption of RP1 within or immediately after 
the BIF domain may result in a protein with a deleterious effect and hence a 
dominant inheritance pattern.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.04-1280
PMID: 15980210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]