1. Cell Signal. 2006 May;18(5):661-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2005.06.008. Epub
2005  Jun 28.

Differences in signaling pathways and expression level of the phosphoinositide 
phosphatase SHIP1 between two oncogenic mutants of the receptor tyrosine kinase 
KIT.

Vanderwinden JM(1), Wang D, Paternotte N, Mignon S, Isozaki K, Erneux C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Campus Erasme, CP 601, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, 808 route de Lennik, B-1070 Brussels, Belgium. 
jmvdwin@ulb.ac.be

Oncogenic mutations of the receptor tyrosine kinase KIT are encountered in 
myeloid leukemia and various solid tumors, including gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors. We previously identified the human oncogenic germ line mutant 
KIT(K642E), a substitution in the tyrosine kinase 1 domain (TK1D) in a familial 
form of gastrointestinal stromal tumors. The effects of oncogenic KIT mutants on 
cell signaling and regulation are complex. Cellular models are valuable basic 
tools to tailor novel strategies on specific cellular and molecular bases for 
tumors expressing KIT oncogenic mutants. Murine KIT(WT) and the murine 
homologues of human KIT oncogenic mutants, further referred to as KIT(K641E) and 
KIT(del559), a point deletion in the juxtamembrane domain (JMD), were stably 
expressed in IL-3-dependent Ba/F3 cells. Major differences in the constitutively 
activation of Akt/PKB, MAP kinases and STATs pathways were observed between 
KIT(K641E) and KIT(del559), whereas KIT ligand elicited responses in both 
mutants. Noteworthy, the protein level of the phosphoinositide phosphatase 
SHIP1, but not SHIP2 and PTEN, was reduced in KIT(K641E) only while inhibition 
of KIT phosphorylation reversibly raised SHIP1 level in both JMD and TK1D 
oncogenic mutants, unraveling the control of SHIP protein level by KIT 
phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2005.06.008
PMID: 15990278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]