1. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Mar;185(1):210-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.06.008. Epub 2005 Jul 7.

Estrogen receptor-alpha variants are associated with lipoprotein size 
distribution and particle levels in women: the Framingham Heart Study.

Demissie S(1), Cupples LA, Shearman AM, Gruenthal KM, Peter I, Schmid CH, Karas 
RH, Housman DE, Mendelsohn ME, Ordovas JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 715 
Albany Street, TE425 Boston, MA 02118, USA. demissie@bu.edu

Plasma lipid profile is affected by endogenous estrogen levels and hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT). As plasma lipid concentrations have a significant 
heritable basis and the effects of both endogenous estrogen and use of HRT are 
mediated by estrogen receptors, we sought to investigate the relationships 
between polymorphisms in estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and plasma lipid and 
lipoprotein concentrations. We analyzed data from 854 women (mean age 52+/-10 
years) from the Framingham Heart Study. A TA repeat in the promoter region, 
c.30T>C in exon 1, c.454-397T>C, and c.454-351A>G in intron 1, all in linkage 
disequilibrium (LD), were significantly associated with low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) particle size and concentration of small LDL particles. Women with the 
c.454-397C allele had larger LDL particle size (21.09+/-0.02 nm versus 
21.01+/-0.03 nm, p=0.021) concurrent with lower small LDL particle concentration 
(0.47+/-0.02 mmol/L versus 0.58+/-0.03 mmol/L, p=0.008). Moreover, the 
TA[L]-c.30C-c.454-397C-c.454-351G haplotype (frequency, 32%) was associated with 
lower small LDL particle concentrations (-0.06+/-0.03 mmol/L change associated 
with each copy of this haplotype, p=0.011) when compared to the 
TA[S]-c.30T-c.454-397T-c.454-351A haplotype (frequency, 46%), where L and S are 
long and short TA repeats. Our results suggest that common ESR1 polymorphisms 
have a significant effect on lipoprotein metabolism in women.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2005.06.008
PMID: 16005459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]