1. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(15):9702-13. doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.15.9702-9713.2005.

Shutoff of RNA polymerase II transcription by poliovirus involves 3C 
protease-mediated cleavage of the TATA-binding protein at an alternative site: 
incomplete shutoff of transcription interferes with efficient viral replication.

Kundu P(1), Raychaudhuri S, Tsai W, Dasgupta A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, UCLA School 
of Medicine, University of California--Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

The TATA-binding protein (TBP) plays a crucial role in cellular transcription 
catalyzed by all three DNA-dependent RNA polymerases. Previous studies have 
shown that TBP is targeted by the poliovirus (PV)-encoded protease 3C(pro) to 
bring about shutoff of cellular RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription in 
PV-infected cells. The processing of the majority of viral precursor proteins by 
3C(pro) involves cleavages at glutamine-glycine (Q-G) sites. We present evidence 
that suggests that the transcriptional inactivation of TBP by 3C(pro) involves 
cleavage at the glutamine 104-serine 105 (Q104-S105) site of TBP and not at the 
Q18-G19 site as previously thought. The TBP Q104-S105 cleavage by 3C(pro) is 
greatly influenced by the presence of an aliphatic amino acid at the P4 
position, a hallmark of 3C(pro)-mediated proteolysis. To examine the importance 
of host cell transcription shutoff in the PV life cycle, stable HeLa cell lines 
were created that express recombinant TBP resistant to cleavage by the viral 
proteases, called GG rTBP. Transcription shutoff was significantly impaired and 
delayed in GG rTBP cells upon infection with poliovirus compared with the cells 
that express wild-type recombinant TBP (wt rTBP). Infection of GG rTBP cells 
with poliovirus resulted in small plaques, significantly reduced viral RNA 
synthesis, and lower viral yields compared to the wt rTBP cell line. These 
results suggest that a defect in transcription shutoff can lead to inefficient 
replication of poliovirus in cultured cells.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.15.9702-9713.2005
PMCID: PMC1181600
PMID: 16014932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]