1. Biochemistry. 2005 Jul 26;44(29):9871-9. doi: 10.1021/bi050388g.

Anion binding and controlled aggregation of human interleukin-1 receptor 
antagonist.

Raibekas AA(1), Bures EJ, Siska CC, Kohno T, Latypov RF, Kerwin BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand 
Oaks, California 91320, USA. andreir@amgen.com

Highly concentrated human recombinant interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) 
aggregates at elevated temperature without perturbation in its secondary 
structure. The protein aggregation can be suppressed depending on the buffer 
ionic strength and the type of anion present in the sample solution. Phosphate 
is an approximately 4-fold weaker suppressant than either citrate or 
pyrophosphate on the basis of the measured protein aggregation rates. This is in 
agreement with the strength of protein-anion interactions at the IL-1ra single 
anion-binding site as judged by the estimated dissociation constant values of 
2.9 mM, 3.8 mM, and 13.7 mM for pyrophosphate, citrate, and phosphate, 
respectively. The strength of binding also correlates with the anion size and 
with the number of ionized groups available per molecule at a given pH. Affinity 
probing of IL-1ra with methyl acetyl phosphate (MAP) in combination with 
proteolytic digestion and mass spectral analysis show that an anion-binding site 
location on the IL-1ra surface is contributed by lysine-93 and lysine-96 of the 
loop 84-98 as well as by lysine-6 of the unstructured N-terminal region 1-7. The 
replacement of lysine-93 with alanine by site-directed mutagenesis results in 
dramatically suppressed IL-1ra aggregation. Furthermore, when the unstructured 
N-terminal region of IL-1ra is removed by limited proteolysis, a 2-fold increase 
in the time course of the aggregation lag phase is observed for the truncated 
protein. An anion-controlled mechanism of IL-1ra aggregation is proposed by 
which the anion competition for the protein cationic site prevents formation of 
intermolecular cation-pi interactions and, thus, interferes with the protein 
asymmetric self-association pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/bi050388g
PMID: 16026159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]