1. Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7955-63. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208945.

Phosphorylation of the homeotic tumor suppressor Cdx2 mediates its 
ubiquitin-dependent proteasome degradation.

Gross I(1), Lhermitte B, Domon-Dell C, Duluc I, Martin E, Gaiddon C, Kedinger M, 
Freund JN.

Author information:
(1)Development and Physiopathology of the Intestine and Pancreas, 3, avenue 
MoliÃ¨re, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2005 Dec 1;24(54):7953-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209084.

The Caudal-related homeodomain transcription factor Cdx2 plays a key role in 
intestinal cell fate determination. Reduction of Cdx2 expression is a feature of 
many human colon carcinomas and inactivation of one cdx2 allele facilitates the 
development of invasive adenocarcinoma in the murine colon. Here, we 
investigated the post-translational regulation of Cdx2. We showed that various 
forms of Cdx2 coexist in the intestine and colon cancer cell lines, some of them 
being phosphorylated forms. We found that cyclin-dependent kinase 2 
phosphorylated Cdx2 in vitro and in vivo. Using site-specific mutagenesis, we 
identified serine 281 as a new key residue for Cdx2 phosphorylation. 
Intriguingly, serine 281 belongs to a conserved motif of four evenly spaced 
serines (the 4S motif) similar to the one controlling beta-catenin degradation 
by the proteasome pathway. A nonphosphorylated mutant Cdx2 lacking the 4S motif 
(4S>A) exhibited reduced polyubiquitination upon proteasome inhibition and 
increased stability compared to wild-type Cdx2. In addition, we found that this 
mutant was less efficient to suppress colony formation than wild-type Cdx2. 
Thus, our data highlight a novel post-translational mechanism controlling Cdx2 
degradation via phosphorylation and polyubiquitination, which may be of 
importance for intestinal development and cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208945
PMID: 16027724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]