1. Basic Res Cardiol. 2005 Sep;100(5):453-60. doi: 10.1007/s00395-005-0530-y.
Epub  2005 Jul 20.

Relevance of the NOS3 T-786C and G894T variants for cholinergic and adrenergic 
coronary vasomotor responses in man.

Naber ChK(1), Frey UH, Oldenburg O, Brauck K, Eggebrecht H, Schmermund A, 
Baumgart D, Erbel R, Siffert W, Heusch G.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Kardiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122 
Essen, Germany. christoph.naber@uni-essen.de

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the impact of the -786C allele at the promoter and 
the 894T allele in exon 7 of the gene encoding the endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (NOS3) on coronary vasomotor responses to exogenous and endogenous 
stimuli.
METHODS: In 47 individuals undergoing coronary angiography for chest pain, but 
without significant stenosis in the left anterior descending artery (LAD), 
nitroglycerine and acetylcholine were infused intracoronarily, and a cold 
pressor test (CPT) was performed. Coronary blood flow (CBF) in the LAD was 
calculated from quantitative coronary angiography and intracoronary Doppler 
measurements. Aortic and coronary sinus lactate levels were determined in 18 
individuals. To analyze the impact of NOS3 genotypes, a logistic regression 
model was used.
RESULTS: In response to acetylcholine (p = 0.002) and CPT (p = 0.015) CBF 
reduction was associated with homocygosity for the -786C allele. Myocardial 
lactate uptake was reversed into net lactate production in CC homocygotes. No 
independent effects of the G894T polymorphism were observed in the present 
study. Haplotype analysis revealed a significant linkage disequilibrium between 
both polymorphisms (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest a pathophysiologically relevant role for the 
T-786C polymorphism in human coronary vasomotion. The observed linkage 
disequilibrium between both NOS3 genotypes deserves further research in future 
studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00395-005-0530-y
PMID: 16032374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]