1. Anal Biochem. 2005 Sep 1;344(1):25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2005.06.019.

A homogeneous assay for relative affinity of binding proteins using a green 
fluorescent protein tag and membrane disk.

Aoki T(1), Kazama H, Satoh M, Mizuki K, Watabe H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Health 
Sciences University of Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu, Hokkaido 061-0293, Japan. 
aokit@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

When the association between a ligand immobilized on a membrane disk and a 
fluorescence-labeled analyte was monitored with a fluorescent microplate reader, 
the time-dependent increase in fluorescence intensity of the reaction mixture 
was observed. A novel assay system for the specific interaction based on this 
phenomenon was designated the homogeneous assay for fluorescence concentrated on 
membrane (HAFCOM). In this study, streptococcal protein G (SpG) and 
glycogen-binding subunit R5 of protein phosphatase 1 (PPP1R5) tagged by green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) were used as the fluorescence-labeled analytes, and 
the affinity change caused by various amino acid substitutions was measured with 
HAFCOM. From the site-directed mutagenesis of SpG and PPP1R5, it was clarified 
that (i) the association rate constant of the Lys454Pro/Glu456Gln mutant of SpG 
to goat immunoglobulin G was almost equivalent to that of the wild-type but its 
dissociation rate constant was about 2.7 times that of the wild-type and (ii) 
the amino acid substitutions of Phe180 in PPP1R5 reduced glycogen-binding by 
30-50%. Since HAFCOM using the GFP-tagged analyte requires no special chemicals 
and instruments, this system can easily and economically assay the specific 
interaction between target protein and ligand.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2005.06.019
PMID: 16043112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]