1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 7;280(40):33775-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504092200. Epub
2005  Aug 8.

Tyrosine modification is not required for myeloperoxidase-induced loss of 
apolipoprotein A-I functional activities.

Peng DQ(1), Wu Z, Brubaker G, Zheng L, Settle M, Gross E, Kinter M, Hazen SL, 
Smith JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 
44195, USA.

Apolipoprotein A-I (apoAI), the major protein of high density lipoprotein, plays 
an important role in reverse cholesterol transport via its activity as an 
ABCA1-dependent acceptor of cellular cholesterol. We reported recently that 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) modification of apoAI inhibits its ABCA1-dependent 
cholesterol acceptor activity (Zheng, L., Nukuna, B., Brennan, M. L., Sun, M., 
Goormastic, M., Settle, M., Schmitt, D., Fu, X., Thomson, L., Fox, P. L., 
Ischiropoulos, H., Smith, J. D., Kinter, M., and Hazen, S. L. (2004) J. Clin. 
Invest. 114, 529-541). We also reported that MPO-mediated chlorination 
preferentially modifies two of the seven tyrosines in apoAI, and loss of parent 
peptides containing these residues dose-dependently correlates with loss in 
ABCA1-mediated cholesterol acceptor activity (Zheng, L., Settle, M., Brubaker, 
G., Schmitt, D., Hazen, S. L., Smith, J. D., and Kinter, M. (2005) J. Biol. 
Chem. 280, 38-47). To determine whether oxidative modification of apoA-I 
tyrosine residues was responsible for the MPO-mediated inactivation of 
cholesterol acceptor activity, we made recombinant apoAI with site-specific 
substitutions of all seven tyrosine residues to phenylalanine. ApoAI and the 
tyrosine-free apoAI were equally susceptible to dose-dependent MPO-mediated loss 
of ABCA1-dependent cholesterol acceptor activity, as well as lipid binding 
activity. MPO modification altered the migration of apoAI on SDS gels and 
decreased its alpha-helix content. MPO-induced modification also targeted apoAI 
tryptophan and lysine residues. Specifically, we detected apoAI tryptophan 
oxidation to mono- and dihydroxytryptophan and apoAI lysine modification to 
chlorolysine and 2-aminoadipic acid. Thus, tyrosine modification of apoAI is not 
required for its MPO-mediated inhibition of cholesterol acceptor activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504092200
PMID: 16091367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]