1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36409-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506977200. Epub 
2005 Aug 11.

Determinants of substrate specificity in omega-aminotransferases.

Markova M(1), Peneff C, Hewlins MJ, Schirmer T, John RA.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences and School of Chemistry, Cardiff University, P. O. Box 
911, CF23 6QU, Wales, United Kingdom.

Ornithine aminotransferase and 4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase are related 
pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes having different substrate specificities. 
The atomic structures of these enzymes have shown (i) that active site 
differences are limited to the steric positions occupied by two tyrosine 
residues in ornithine aminotransferase and (ii) that, uniquely among related, 
structurally characterized aminotransferases, the conserved arginine that binds 
the alpha-carboxylate of alpha-amino acids interacts tightly with a glutamate 
residue. To determine the contribution of these residues to the specificities of 
the enzymes, we analyzed site-directed mutants of ornithine aminotransferase by 
rapid reaction kinetics, x-ray crystallography, and 13C NMR spectroscopy. 
Mutation of one tyrosine (Tyr-85) to isoleucine, as found in aminobutyrate 
aminotransferase, decreased the rate of the reaction of the enzyme with 
ornithine 1000-fold and increased that with 4-aminobutyrate 16-fold, indicating 
that Tyr-85 is a major determinant of specificity toward ornithine. 
Unexpectedly, the limiting rate of the second half of the reaction, conversion 
of ketoglutarate to glutamate, was greatly increased, although the kinetics of 
the reverse reaction were unaffected. A mutant in which the glutamate (Glu-235) 
that interacts with the conserved arginine was replaced by alanine retained its 
regiospecificity for the delta-amino group of ornithine, but the glutamate 
reaction was enhanced 650-fold, whereas only a 5-fold enhancement of the 
ketoglutarate reaction rate resulted. A model is proposed in which conversion of 
the enzyme to its pyridoxamine phosphate form disrupts the internal 
glutamate-arginine interaction, thus enabling ketoglutarate but not glutamate to 
be a good substrate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506977200
PMID: 16096275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]