1. FEBS J. 2005 Aug;272(16):4023-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04776.x.

PA700, the regulatory complex of the 26S proteasome, interferes with 
alpha-synuclein assembly.

Ghee M(1), Melki R, Michot N, Mallet J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire de la Neurotransmission et des Processus 
Neurodégénératifs, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Hôpital de la 
Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France. mghee@infobiogen.fr

Parkinson's disease is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the 
nigrostriatal pathway accompanied by the presence of intracellular cytoplasmic 
inclusions, termed Lewy bodies. Fibrillized alpha-synuclein forms the major 
component of Lewy bodies. We reported a specific interaction between rat 
alpha-synuclein and tat binding protein 1, a subunit of PA700, the regulatory 
complex of the 26S proteasome. It has been demonstrated that PA700 prevents the 
aggregation of misfolded, nonubiquinated substrates. In this study, we examine 
the effect of PA700 on the aggregation of wild-type and A53T mutant 
alpha-synuclein. PA700 inhibits both wild-type and A53T alpha-synuclein fibril 
formation as measured by Thioflavin T fluorescence. Using size exclusion 
chromatography, we present evidence for a stable PA700-alpha-synuclein complex. 
Sedimentation analyses reveal that PA700 sequesters alpha-synuclein in an 
assembly incompetent form. Analysis of the morphology of wild-type and A53T 
alpha-synuclein aggregates during the course of fibrillization by electron 
microscopy demonstrate the formation of amyloid-like fibrils. Secondary 
structure analyses of wild-type and A53T alpha-synuclein assembled in the 
presence of PA700 revealed a decrease in the overall amount of assembled 
alpha-synuclein with no significant change in protein conformation. Thus, PA700 
acts on alpha-synuclein assembly and not on the structure of fibrils. We 
hypothesize that PA700 sequesters alpha-synuclein oligomeric species that are 
the precursors of the fibrillar form of the protein, thus preventing its 
assembly into fibrils.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04776.x
PMID: 16098186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]