1. Mol Psychiatry. 2005 Dec;10(12):1104-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001730.

A dopamine transporter mutation associated with bipolar affective disorder 
causes inhibition of transporter cell surface expression.

Horschitz S(1), Hummerich R, Lau T, Rietschel M, Schloss P.

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Laboratory, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Jul;11(7):704.

The dopamine transporter (DAT) plays a crucial role in dopaminergic 
neurotransmission as it clears the extracellular space of dopamine (DA) and thus 
controls the concentration of active neurotransmitter. Genetic association 
studies have reported a variable number of tandem repeat polymorphisms in the 
3'-noncoding region of the DAT gene implicating this protein in the development 
of various psychiatric disorders. In a sample of bipolar patients, two rare 
missense substitutions (A559V and E602G) have been identified, one of which 
(E602G) was inherited by the patient from her affected father. None of these 
mutations had been identified in any control subjects of this survey. Using a 
heterologous cellular expression system, we have analysed possible consequences 
of these mutations on functional properties of the encoded DAT protein. DA 
transport measurements and antagonist binding revealed that the A559V mutant 
protein is fully functional, whereas the E602G mutant is not. Further analyses 
by confocal microscopy showed that the E602G protein is transcribed and 
translated but not delivered to the cell surface. Taken together, our results 
suggest that this missense mutation has functional consequences thus supporting 
the need to screen larger samples of patients and their relatives for this rare 
but bipolar disorder-associated mutation in the DAT gene.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001730
PMID: 16103889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]