1. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2005 Aug 19;5:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-5-24.

PAIS: paracetamol (acetaminophen) in stroke; protocol for a randomized, double 
blind clinical trial [ISCRTN 74418480].

van Breda EJ(1), van der Worp HB, van Gemert HM, Algra A, Kappelle LJ, van Gijn 
J, Koudstaal PJ, Dippel DW; PAIS investigators.

Author information:
(1)Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. e.vanbreda@erasmusmc.nl

Erratum in
    BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2008 Nov 04;8:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-8-29.

BACKGROUND: In patients with acute stroke, increased body temperature is 
associated with large lesion volumes, high case fatality, and poor functional 
outcome. A 1 degrees C increase in body temperature may double the odds of poor 
outcome. Two randomized double-blind clinical trials in patients with acute 
ischemic stroke have shown that treatment with a daily dose of 6 g acetaminophen 
(paracetamol) results in a small but rapid and potentially worthwhile reduction 
of 0.3 degrees C (95% CI: 0.1-0.5) in body temperature. We set out to test the 
hypothesis that early antipyretic therapy reduces the risk of death or 
dependency in patients with acute stroke, even if they are normothermic.
METHODS/DESIGN: Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) In Stroke (PAIS) is a randomized, 
double-blind clinical trial, comparing high-dose acetaminophen with placebo in 
2500 patients. Inclusion criteria are a clinical diagnosis of hemorrhagic or 
ischemic stroke and the possibility to start treatment within 12 hours from 
onset of symptoms. The study will have a power of 86% to detect an absolute 
difference of 6% in the risk of death or dependency at three months, and a power 
of 72% to detect an absolute difference of 5%, at a 5% significance level.
DISCUSSION: This is a simple trial, with a drug that only has a small effect on 
body temperature in normothermic patients. However, when lowering body 
temperature with acetaminophen does have the expected effectiveness, 20 patients 
will have to be treated to prevent dependency or death in one.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2261-5-24
PMCID: PMC1208871
PMID: 16109181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]