1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35108-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M503912200. Epub 
2005 Aug 16.

Phosphorylation of Numb family proteins. Possible involvement of 
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases.

Tokumitsu H(1), Hatano N, Inuzuka H, Sueyoshi Y, Yokokura S, Ichimura T, Nozaki 
N, Kobayashi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Signal Transduction Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa 
University, 1750-1 Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan. 
tokumit@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp

To search for the substrates of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I 
(CaM-KI), we performed affinity chromatography purification using either the 
unphosphorylated or phosphorylated (at Thr177) GST-fused CaM-KI catalytic domain 
(residues 1-293, K49E) as the affinity ligand. Proteomic analysis was then 
carried out to identify the interacting proteins. In addition to the detection 
of two known CaM-KI substrates (CREB and synapsin I), we identified two Numb 
family proteins (Numb and Numbl) from rat tissues. These proteins were 
unphosphorylated and were bound only to the Thr177-phosphorylated CaM-KI 
catalytic domain. This finding is consistent with the results demonstrating that 
Numb and Numbl were efficiently and stoichiometrically phosphorylated in vitro 
at equivalent Ser residues (Ser264 in Numb and Ser304 in Numbl) by activated 
CaM-KI and also by two other CaM-Ks (CaM-KII and CaM-KIV). Using 
anti-phospho-Numb/Numbl antibody, we observed the phosphorylation of Numb family 
proteins in various rat tissue extracts, and we also detected the 
ionomycin-induced phosphorylation of endogenous Numb at Ser264 in COS-7 cells. 
The present results revealed that the Numb family proteins are phosphorylated in 
vivo as well as in vitro. Furthermore, we found that the recruitment of 14-3-3 
proteins was the functional consequence of the phosphorylation of the Numb 
family proteins. Interaction of 14-3-3 protein with phosphorylated Numbl-blocked 
dephosphorylation of Ser304. Taken together, these results indicate that the 
Numb family proteins may be intracellular targets for CaM-Ks, and they may also 
be regulated by phosphorylation-dependent interaction with 14-3-3 protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M503912200
PMID: 16105844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]