1. Mol Psychiatry. 2005 Dec;10(12):1126-32. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001734.

Transmission disequilibrium of polymorphic variants in the tryptophan 
hydroxylase-2 gene in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Walitza S(1), Renner TJ, Dempfle A, Konrad K, Wewetzer Ch, Halbach A, 
Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Remschmidt H, Smidt J, Linder M, Flierl L, Knölker U, 
Friedel S, Schäfer H, Gross C, Hebebrand J, Warnke A, Lesch KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Julius-Maximilians-University, Würzburg, Germany. walitza@kjp.uni-wuerzburg.de

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common behavioral 
disorder in childhood with substantial heritability. Pharmacological and 
molecular genetic studies as well as characterization of animal models have 
implicated serotonergic dysfunction in the pathophysiology of ADHD. Here, we 
investigated the effect of polymorphic variants in the gene of the tryptophan 
hydroxylase-2 (TPH2), the rate-limiting enzyme of serotonin (5-HT) synthesis in 
the brain, in children and adolescents with ADHD. We analyzed three single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in and downstream of the transcriptional control 
region of the TPH2 gene in 103 families with 225 affected children. Allelic 
association in families with more than one affected child was assessed using the 
pedigree disequilibrium test. Preferential transmissions were detected for the 
two SNPs in TPH2's regulatory region (rs4570625, P=0.049; rs11178997, P=0.034), 
but not for the third SNP in intron 2 (rs4565946, P=0.3517). Haplotype analysis 
revealed a strong trend of association between the regulatory region SNPs 
(rs4570625, rs11178997) and ADHD (P=0.064). Our results link potentially 
functional TPH2 variations to the pathophysiology of ADHD, and further support 
the relevance of 5-HT in disorders related to altered motor activity and 
cognitive processes.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001734
PMID: 16116490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]