1. J Clin Invest. 2005 Sep;115(9):2564-71. doi: 10.1172/JCI24898. Epub 2005 Aug
25.

Small-molecule correctors of defective DeltaF508-CFTR cellular processing 
identified by high-throughput screening.

Pedemonte N(1), Lukacs GL, Du K, Caci E, Zegarra-Moran O, Galietta LJ, Verkman 
AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, UCSF, San Francisco, California 94143-0521, USA.

The most common cause of cystic fibrosis (CF) is deletion of phenylalanine 508 
(DeltaF508) in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride 
channel. The DeltaF508 mutation produces defects in folding, stability, and 
channel gating. To identify small-molecule correctors of defective cellular 
processing, we assayed iodide flux in DeltaF508-CFTR-transfected epithelial 
cells using a fluorescent halide indicator. Screening of 150,000 chemically 
diverse compounds and more than 1,500 analogs of active compounds yielded 
several classes of DeltaF508-CFTR correctors (aminoarylthiazoles, 
quinazolinylaminopyrimidinones, and bisaminomethylbithiazoles) with micromolar 
potency that produced greater apical membrane chloride current than did 
low-temperature rescue. Correction was seen within 3-6 hours and persisted for 
more than 12 hours after washout. Functional correction was correlated with 
plasma membrane expression of complex-glycosylated DeltaF508-CFTR protein. 
Biochemical studies suggested a mechanism of action involving improved 
DeltaF508-CFTR folding at the ER and stability at the cell surface. The 
bisaminomethylbithiazoles corrected DeltaF508-CFTR in DeltaF508/DeltaF508 human 
bronchial epithelia but did not correct a different temperature-sensitive CFTR 
mutant (P574H-CFTR) or a dopamine receptor mutant. Small-molecule correctors may 
be useful in the treatment of CF caused by the DeltaF508 mutation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI24898
PMCID: PMC1190372
PMID: 16127463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]