1. Yi Chuan. 2005 Jul;27(4):539-43.

[Polymorphisms screening of PON gene cluster].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XL(1), Fan ZJ, Huang JF, Su SY, Zhao JG, Gu DF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Genetics and Prevention, Fuwai Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, 
China. wangxl_74@yahoo.com

To identify all putative functional polymorphisms of PON gene cluster in Chinese 
Han population. Common polymorphisms of PON1, PON2 and PON3 gene were identified 
by directly sequencing of genomic DNAs derived from 48 randomly selected 
patients with coronary heart disease. We designed PCR arrays to amplify regions 
up to about 1kb upstream from transcription-initiation sites, i.e., putative 
promoter regions, all exons and adjacent non-coding regions. In a total length 
of 13.9 kb explored, we identified thirty-one SNPs, of which, 17 were first 
reported. A new coding polymorphism was detected in PON1 gene, which gives rise 
to amino acid substitutions of arginine (R) for glycine (G) at codon 160, 
whereas L54M polymorphism, which is common in white population, was not detected 
in our Han population. Among the five polymorphisms identified in PON3 gene, one 
in the promoter regions at position -133 (C/A) was located in a potential 
binding site for transcription factor LF-A1. Allele frequencies of some 
polymorphisms are significantly different from those reported in Caucasian 
populations. Complete or nearly complete association between polymorphisms was 
frequently observed. The identified multiple putative functional polymorphisms 
in PON gene cluster and their linkage disequilibrium patterns in combination 
with the population specific frequencies are of values for futher association 
studies of PON gene cluster with cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 16120573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]