1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan;1762(1):73-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2005.08.002.  Epub 2005 Aug 22.

The Wnt pathway is active in a small subset of pancreas cancer cell lines.

Pujal J(1), Capellá G, Real FX.

Author information:
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació 
Mèdica, Barcelona, Spain.

Activation of the Wnt pathway plays an important role in the development of a 
wide variety of tumor types. Two genes involved in the activation of this 
pathway in tumors are Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) and beta-catenin. Here, 
we analyze the activity of the Wnt pathway in cultured cells derived from ductal 
and acinar pancreatic adenocarcinomas using a reporter assay dependent on the 
activity of the beta-catenin/Tcf4 complex. We find that low-level Wnt activity 
can be detected in several pancreas cancer lines. High levels of reporter 
activity were detected exclusively in RWP-1 cells. These cells display nuclear 
beta-catenin and express a truncated APC protein resulting from a CAA>TAA 
mutation (Q1303X). Expression of a dominant negative Tcf4 protein inhibited 
proliferation of RWP-1 cells but not in other lines lacking 
beta-catenin-dependent reporter activity, supporting the functional relevance of 
this mutation. Our findings indicate that activation of the Wnt pathway may play 
a role in a small subset of ductal pancreatic cancers. Alternatively, RWP-1 
cells may have been derived from a tumor arising in a structure adjacent to the 
pancreas such as the biliary tract or the Ampulla of Vater. Additional studies 
on the role of Wnt pathway components in the development/progression of tumors 
of the peripancreatic region merit consideration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2005.08.002
PMID: 16137866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]