1. J Hum Genet. 2005;50(10):530-533. doi: 10.1007/s10038-005-0288-y. Epub 2005
Sep  2.

The Glu23Lys polymorphism in KCNJ11 and impaired hypoglycaemia awareness in 
patients with type 1 diabetes.

Holstein A(1), Plaschke A(1), Stumvoll M(2), Kovacs P(3).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Medicine, Clinic Lippe-Detmold, Detmold, Germany.
(2)Medical Department III, University of Leipzig, Philipp-Rosenthal-Str. 27, 
04103, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Medical Department III, University of Leipzig, Philipp-Rosenthal-Str. 27, 
04103, Leipzig, Germany. peter.kovacs@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

Impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia affects approximately 25% of all patients 
with type 1 diabetes (T1D). Duration of diabetes and tight glycaemic control 
represent the main risk factors for hypoglycaemia unawareness. However, even 
among patients with good glycaemic control and longstanding T1D, awareness of 
hypoglycaemia may be intact. Genetic factors might explain some of this 
remaining variability, and genes involved in central glucose sensing should 
represent plausible candidates. Some evidence indicates that ventromedial 
hypothalamus glucose-responsive neurons require the potassium inward rectifier 
(KIR) 6.2 subunit of the K(ATP) channel to sense glucose. Therefore, the effects 
of the Glu23Lys polymorphism in the KCNJ11 (KIR6.2) gene (potassium inwardly 
rectifying channel, subfamily J, member 11) on impaired hypoglycaemia awareness 
in 217 patients with T1D were studied. Hypoglycaemia awareness status was 
determined using standardized questionnaires. Genotyping of the Glu23Lys in a 
cohort of T1D subjects was done using the TaqMan allelic discrimination assay 
(frequency of the Lys-allele = 0.35; P = 0.57 for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium). 
The study confirms that diabetes duration, C-peptide, and HbA(1c) represent risk 
factors for impaired hypoglycaemia awareness. However, no significant effect of 
the Glu23Lys polymorphism on impaired hypoglycaemia awareness was observed with 
or without adjustment for age, diabetes duration, C-peptide, and HbA(1c). Even 
though the study provides a relatively large dataset, it is possible that small 
differences may have been missed.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-005-0288-y
PMID: 16142506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]