1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Sep;71(9):5420-6. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.71.9.5420-5426.2005.

Genetic determinants of volatile-thiol release by Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
during wine fermentation.

Howell KS(1), Klein M, Swiegers JH, Hayasaka Y, Elsey GM, Fleet GH, HÃ¸j PB, 
Pretorius IS, de Barros Lopes MA.

Author information:
(1)The Australian Wine Research Institute, P.O. Box 197, Glen Osmond, Adelaide, 
SA 5064, Australia.

Volatile thiols, particularly 4-mercapto-4-methylpentan-2-one (4MMP), make an 
important contribution to the aroma of wine. During wine fermentation, 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mediates the cleavage of a nonvolatile cysteinylated 
precursor in grape juice (Cys-4MMP) to release the volatile thiol 4MMP. 
Carbon-sulfur lyases are anticipated to be involved in this reaction. To 
establish the mechanism of 4MMP release and to develop strains that modulate its 
release, the effect of deleting genes encoding putative yeast carbon-sulfur 
lyases on the cleavage of Cys-4MMP was tested. The results led to the 
identification of four genes that influence the release of the volatile thiol 
4MMP in a laboratory strain, indicating that the mechanism of release involves 
multiple genes. Deletion of the same genes from a homozygous derivative of the 
commercial wine yeast VL3 confirmed the importance of these genes in affecting 
4MMP release. A strain deleted in a putative carbon-sulfur lyase gene, YAL012W, 
produced a second sulfur compound at significantly higher concentrations than 
those produced by the wild-type strain. Using mass spectrometry, this compound 
was identified as 2-methyltetrathiophen-3-one (MTHT), which was previously shown 
to contribute to wine aroma but was of unknown biosynthetic origin. The 
formation of MTHT in YAL012W deletion strains indicates a yeast biosynthetic 
origin of MTHT. The results demonstrate that the mechanism of synthesis of 
yeast-derived wine aroma components, even those present in small concentrations, 
can be investigated using genetic screens.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.71.9.5420-5426.2005
PMCID: PMC1214692
PMID: 16151133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]