1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 4;280(44):36848-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M504415200. Epub
2005  Sep 2.

A single aromatic amino acid at the carboxyl terminus of Helicobacter pylori 
{alpha}1,3/4 fucosyltransferase determines substrate specificity.

Ma B(1), Lau LH, Palcic MM, Hazes B, Taylor DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 4;281(31):22428.

Fucosyltransferases (FucT) from different Helicobacter pylori strains display 
distinct Type I (Galbeta1,3GlcNAc) or Type II (Galbeta1,4GlcNAc) substrate 
specificity. FucT from strain UA948 can transfer fucose to the OH-3 of Type II 
acceptors as well as to the OH-4 of Type I acceptors on the GlcNAc moiety, so it 
has both alpha1,3 and alpha1,4 activities. In contrast, FucT from strain 
NCTC11639 has exclusive alpha1,3 activity. Our domain swapping study (Ma, B., 
Wang, G., Palcic, M. M., Hazes, B., and Taylor, D. E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 
21893-21900) demonstrated that exchange of the hypervariable loops, 
(347)DNPFIFC(353) in 11639FucT and (345)CNDAHYSALH(354) in UA948FucT, were 
sufficient to either confer or abolish alpha1,4 activity. Here we performed 
alanine scanning site-directed mutagenesis to identify which amino acids within 
(345)CNDAHYSALH(354) of UA948FucT confer Type I substrate specificity. The 
Tyr(350) --> Ala mutation dramatically reduced alpha1,4 activity without 
lowering alpha1,3 activity. None of the other alanine substitutions selectively 
eliminated alpha1,4 activity. To elucidate how Tyr(350) determines alpha1,4 
specificity, mutants Tyr(350) --> Phe, Tyr(350) --> Trp, and Tyr(350) --> Gly 
were constructed in UA948FucT. These mutations did not decrease alpha1,3 
activity but reduced the alpha1,4 activity to 66.9, 55.6, and 3.1% [corrected] 
of wild type level, respectively. Apparently the aromatic nature, but not the 
hydroxyl group of Tyr(350), is essential for alpha1,4 activity. Our data 
demonstrate that a single amino acid (Tyr(350)) in the C-terminal hypervariable 
region of UA948FucT determines Type I acceptor specificity. Notably, a single 
aromatic residue (Trp) has also been implicated in controlling Type I acceptor 
preference for human FucT III, but it is located in an N-terminal hypervariable 
stem domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M504415200
PMID: 16150700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]