1. Mol Vis. 2005 Sep 2;11:713-6.

Analysis of fifteen positional candidate genes for Schnyder crystalline corneal 
dystrophy.

Aldave AJ(1), Rayner SA, Principe AH, Affeldt JA, Katsev D, Yellore VS.

Author information:
(1)Cornea Service, Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. aldave@jsei.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: To identify the genetic basis of Schnyder crystalline corneal dystrophy 
(SCCD) through screening of positional candidate genes in affected patients.
METHODS: Mutation screening of fifteen genes (CORT, CLSTN1, CTNNBIP1, DFFA, 
ENO1, GPR157, H6PD, KIF1B, LOC440559, LZIC, MGC4399, PEX14, PGD, PIK3CD, and 
SSB1) that lie within the candidate gene region for SCCD was performed in 
members of two families affected with SCCD.
RESULTS: No presumed disease-causing mutations were identified in affected 
patients. Seventeen previously described single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
were identified in eight of the candidate genes. Novel SNPs were identified in 
both affected and unaffected individuals in GPR157 (c.795C>T [Arg218Leu]; 
c.811C>T [Ala223Val]), MGC4399 (c.1024G>C [Leu277Leu]), and H6PD (c.754A>C 
[Asp151Ala]).
CONCLUSIONS: No pathogenic mutations were identified in fifteen positional 
candidate genes in two families with SCCD. As the candidate gene region in each 
SCCD family previously examined with haplotype analysis has been mapped to the 
same chromosomal region, the absence of pathogenic mutations in these positional 
candidates in the families we examined reduces the number of remaining 
positional candidate genes by half, and the number of remaining candidate genes 
with a known gene function by two-thirds. We anticipate that screening of the 
remaining positional candidate genes will lead to the identification of the 
genetic basis of SCCD.

PMID: 16163269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]