1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 1;14(21):3227-36. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi353. Epub 2005
Sep  20.

Hypothetical LOC387715 is a second major susceptibility gene for age-related 
macular degeneration, contributing independently of complement factor H to 
disease risk.

Rivera A(1), Fisher SA, Fritsche LG, Keilhauer CN, Lichtner P, Meitinger T, 
Weber BH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Germany.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a multifactorial disease and a 
prevalent cause of visual impairment in developed countries. Risk factors 
include environmental components and genetic determinants. The complement factor 
H (CFH) has been the first major susceptibility gene for AMD identified within 
1q32. Here, we focused on a second region of interest in 10q26 where a recent 
meta-analysis revealed strongest evidence for linkage to AMD at a genome-wide 
significance level. Within an interval of 22 Mb, we have analyzed 93 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms for allelic association with AMD in two independent 
case-control cohorts of German origin (AMD(combined) n=1166; controls(combined) 
n=945). Significant association was found across a 60 kb region of high linkage 
disequilibrium harboring two genes PLEKHA1 and hypothetical LOC387715. The 
strongest association (P=10(-34)) centered over a frequent coding polymorphism, 
Ala69Ser, at LOC387715, strongly implicating this gene in the pathogenesis of 
AMD. Besides abundant expression in placenta, we demonstrate weak expression of 
LOC387715 in the human retina. At present, however, there is no functional 
information on this gene, which appears to have evolved recently within the 
primate lineage. The joint contribution of the common risk allele at LOC387715, 
Ala69Ser, and at CFH, Tyr402His, was assessed in our case-control population, 
which suggests an additive model indicating an independent contribution of the 
two gene loci to disease risk. Our data show a disease odds ratio of 57.6 (95% 
CI: 37.2, 89.0) conferred by homozygosity for risk alleles at both CFH and 
LOC387715 when compared with the baseline non-risk genotype.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi353
PMID: 16174643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]