1. Int J Oncol. 2005 Nov;27(5):1381-9.

The role of human prolactin and its antagonist, G129R, in mammary gland 
development and DMBA-initiated tumorigenesis in transgenic mice.

Tomblyn S(1), Langenheim JF, Jacquemart IC, Holle E, Chen WY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, 
USA.

Human prolactin (hPRL) has been implicated to have a pathological role in breast 
cancer and play a critical role in mammary gland development. The hPRL 
antagonist, G129R, has been shown to induce breast cancer cell apoptosis. 
9,10-Dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracene (DMBA), a potent mammary gland carcinogen, 
induces hormone responsive mammary tumor formation in rodents. To investigate 
the effects of hPRL and its counterpart, G129R, on mammary gland development and 
tumorigenesis, transgenic mice that express hPRL or G129R under the regulation 
of the metallothionein (Mt) promoter were generated. Mammary glands from virgin 
female transgenic mice at the ages of 12, 24, and 36 weeks were used to compare 
the effect of hPRL and G129R in various developmental stages. Mammary gland 
whole mount comparisons between transgenic mice and their littermates revealed a 
significant increase in ductal branching and lobular bud formation in hPRL 
transgenic mice; whereas a drastic decrease in ductal branching and lobular bud 
formation was observed in the mammary glands of G129R transgenic mice. In 
addition, total RNA isolated from the mammary glands of transgenic mice at the 
three different ages was analyzed on Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Expression 430A 
chips (MOE430A). Microarray data revealed alteration to the gene expression 
levels, greatest at 12 and 36 weeks. Furthermore, hPRL and G129R transgenic 
mice, as well as their littermates, were treated with multiple doses of DMBA and 
the rate of mammary tumor formation and survival were compared. The tumor rates 
in the G129R transgenic mice were significantly reduced (18% at 28 weeks) as 
compared to that of either NTG (39%) or hPRL (40%). On the other hand, the tumor 
appearance is significantly earlier in the PRL transgenic group as compared to 
that of controls. Taken together, the data further confirmed the inhibitory 
effects of G129R in mammary gland development, which translates to a resistance 
to DMBA-initiated breast tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16211235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]