1. Retrovirology. 2005 Oct 18;2:62. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-2-62.

Contribution of the C-terminal tri-lysine regions of human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 integrase for efficient reverse transcription and viral DNA nuclear 
import.

Ao Z(1), Fowke KR, Cohen EA, Yao X.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Human Retrovirology, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 0W3, Canada. ao@cc.umanitoba.ca

BACKGROUND: In addition to mediating the integration process, HIV-1 integrase 
(IN) has also been implicated in different steps during viral life cycle 
including reverse transcription and viral DNA nuclear import. Although the 
karyophilic property of HIV-1 IN has been well demonstrated using a variety of 
experimental approaches, the definition of domain(s) and/or motif(s) within the 
protein that mediate viral DNA nuclear import and its mechanism are still 
disputed and controversial. In this study, we performed mutagenic analyses to 
investigate the contribution of different regions in the C-terminal domain of 
HIV-1 IN to protein nuclear localization as well as their effects on virus 
infection.
RESULTS: Our analysis showed that replacing lysine residues in two highly 
conserved tri-lysine regions, which are located within previously described 
Region C (235WKGPAKLLWKGEGAVV) and sequence Q (211KELQKQITK) in the C-terminal 
domain of HIV-1 IN, impaired protein nuclear accumulation, while mutations for 
RK263,4 had no significant effect. Analysis of their effects on viral infection 
in a VSV-G pseudotyped RT/IN trans-complemented HIV-1 single cycle replication 
system revealed that all three C-terminal mutant viruses (KK215,9AA, KK240,4AE 
and RK263,4AA) exhibited more severe defect of induction of beta-Gal positive 
cells and luciferase activity than an IN class 1 mutant D64E in 
HeLa-CD4-CCR5-beta-Gal cells, and in dividing as well as non-dividing C8166 T 
cells, suggesting that some viral defects are occurring prior to viral 
integration. Furthermore, by analyzing viral DNA synthesis and the 
nucleus-associated viral DNA level, the results clearly showed that, although 
all three C-terminal mutants inhibited viral reverse transcription to different 
extents, the KK240,4AE mutant exhibited most profound effect on this step, 
whereas KK215,9AA significantly impaired viral DNA nuclear import. In addition, 
our analysis could not detect viral DNA integration in each C-terminal mutant 
infection, even though they displayed various low levels of nucleus-associated 
viral DNA, suggesting that these C-terminal mutants also impaired viral DNA 
integration ability.
CONCLUSION: All of these results indicate that, in addition to being involved in 
HIV-1 reverse transcription and integration, the C-terminal tri-lysine regions 
of IN also contribute to efficient viral DNA nuclear import during the early 
stage of HIV-1 replication.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-2-62
PMCID: PMC1277849
PMID: 16232319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]