1. JAMA. 2005 Oct 26;294(16):2057-63. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.16.2057.

Predictors and prevalence of paraganglioma syndrome associated with mutations of 
the SDHC gene.

Schiavi F(1), Boedeker CC, Bausch B, Peçzkowska M, Gomez CF, Strassburg T, Pawlu 
C, Buchta M, Salzmann M, Hoffmann MM, Berlis A, Brink I, Cybulla M, Muresan M, 
Walter MA, Forrer F, Välimäki M, Kawecki A, Szutkowski Z, Schipper J, Walz MK, 
Pigny P, Bauters C, Willet-Brozick JE, Baysal BE, Januszewicz A, Eng C, Opocher 
G, Neumann HP; European-American Paraganglioma Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2006 Feb 8;295(6):628.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2006 Feb 8;295(6):625; author reply 625. doi: 
10.1001/jama.295.6.625-a.

CONTEXT: Paraganglioma syndrome includes inherited head and neck paragangliomas 
(HNPs) and adrenal or extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas and are classified 
according to the susceptibility genes SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD. In contrast with 
those with germline mutations of the SDHB and SDHD genes, clinical and genetic 
data on patients with mutations of SDHC are scarce.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence and clinical characteristics of SDHC 
mutation carriers compared with patients with SDHB and SDHD mutations and with 
sporadic cases.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: Genetic screening for SDHC mutations in an 
international HNP registry of 121 unrelated index cases and in 371 sporadic 
cases from a pheochromocytoma registry, conducted January 1, 2001, until 
December 31, 2004. Identified index cases and affected relatives were clinically 
evaluated.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prevalence of and clinical findings for SDHC 
mutation-associated HNPs vs those with SDHB and SDHD mutations.
RESULTS: The prevalence of SDHC carriers was 4% in HNP but 0% in 
pheochromocytoma index cases. None of the SDHC mutation carriers had signs of 
pheochromocytoma. We compared HNPs in 22 SDHC mutation carriers with the HNPs of 
SDHB (n = 15) and SDHD (n = 42) mutation carriers and with 90 patients with 
sporadic HNPs. Location, number of tumors, malignancy, and age were different: 
more carotid body tumors were found in SDHC (13/22 [59%]) than in sporadic HNPs 
(29/90 [32%], P = .03), as well as fewer instances of multiple tumors in SDHC 
(2/22) than in SDHD (24/42; P<.001), 0 malignant tumors in SDHC vs 6/15 in SDHB 
(P = .002), and younger age at diagnosis in SDHC than in sporadic HNPs (45 vs 52 
years; P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HNP, but not those with pheochromocytoma, harbor SDHC 
mutations in addition to those in SDHB and SDHD. In total, more than one quarter 
of HNP patients carry a mutation in 1 of these 3 genes. Head and neck 
paragangliomas associated with SDHC mutations are virtually exclusively benign 
and seldom multifocal. Analysis for germline mutations of SDHC is recommended in 
apparently sporadic HNP to identify risk of inheritance.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.294.16.2057
PMID: 16249420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]