1. Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;118(5):578-90. doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-0072-2. Epub 2005
Oct  26.

Disruptions of the novel KIAA1202 gene are associated with X-linked mental 
retardation.

Hagens O(1), Dubos A, Abidi F, Barbi G, Van Zutven L, Hoeltzenbein M, Tommerup 
N, Moraine C, Fryns JP, Chelly J, van Bokhoven H, GÃ©cz J, Dollfus H, Ropers HH, 
Schwartz CE, de Cassia Stocco Dos Santos R, Kalscheuer V, Hanauer A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195, Berlin, Germany.

The extensive heterogeneity underlying the genetic component of mental 
retardation (MR) is the main cause for our limited understanding of the 
aetiology of this highly prevalent condition. Hence we set out to identify genes 
involved in MR. We investigated the breakpoints of two balanced X;autosome 
translocations in two unrelated female patients with mild/moderate MR and found 
that the Xp11.2 breakpoints disrupt the novel human KIAA1202 (hKIAA1202) gene in 
both cases. We also identified a missense exchange in this gene, segregating 
with the Stocco dos Santos XLMR syndrome in a large four-generation pedigree but 
absent in >1,000 control X-chromosomes. Among other phenotypic characteristics, 
the affected males in this family present with severe MR, delayed or no speech, 
seizures and hyperactivity. Molecular studies of hKIAA1202 determined its 
genomic organisation, its expression throughout the brain and the regulation of 
expression of its mouse homologue during development. Transient expression of 
the wild-type KIAA1202 protein in HeLa cells showed partial colocalisation with 
the F-actin based cytoskeleton. On the basis of its domain structure, we argue 
that hKIAA1202 is a new member of the APX/Shroom protein family. Members of this 
family contain a PDZ and two ASD domains of unknown function and have been shown 
to localise at the cytoskeleton, and play a role in neurulation, cellular 
architecture, actin remodelling and ion channel function. Our results suggest 
that hKIAA1202 may be important in cognitive function and/or development.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-005-0072-2
PMID: 16249884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]