1. Plant Methods. 2005 Nov 9;1(1):10. doi: 10.1186/1746-4811-1-10.

Using genomic DNA-based probe-selection to improve the sensitivity of 
high-density oligonucleotide arrays when applied to heterologous species.

Hammond JP(#)(1), Broadley MR(#)(2), Craigon DJ(3), Higgins J(3), Emmerson 
ZF(3), Townsend HJ(3), White PJ(1), May ST(3).

Author information:
(1)Warwick HRI, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick, CV35 9EF, UK.
(2)Plant Sciences Division, School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, 
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, UK.
(3)Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre, School of Biosciences, University of 
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

High-density oligonucleotide (oligo) arrays are a powerful tool for transcript 
profiling. Arrays based on GeneChip technology are amongst the most widely used, 
although GeneChip arrays are currently available for only a small number of 
plant and animal species. Thus, we have developed a method to improve the 
sensitivity of high-density oligonucleotide arrays when applied to heterologous 
species and tested the method by analysing the transcriptome of Brassica 
oleracea L., a species for which no GeneChip array is available, using a 
GeneChip array designed for Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. Genomic DNA from B. 
oleracea was labelled and hybridised to the ATH1-121501 GeneChip array. 
Arabidopsis thaliana probe-pairs that hybridised to the B. oleracea genomic DNA 
on the basis of the perfect-match (PM) probe signal were then selected for 
subsequent B. oleracea transcriptome analysis using a .cel file parser script to 
generate probe mask files. The transcriptional response of B. oleracea to a 
mineral nutrient (phosphorus; P) stress was quantified using probe mask files 
generated for a wide range of gDNA hybridisation intensity thresholds. An 
example probe mask file generated with a gDNA hybridisation intensity threshold 
of 400 removed > 68 % of the available PM probes from the analysis but retained 
>96 % of available A. thaliana probe-sets. Ninety-nine of these genes were then 
identified as significantly regulated under P stress in B. oleracea, including 
the homologues of P stress responsive genes in A. thaliana. Increasing the gDNA 
hybridisation intensity thresholds up to 500 for probe-selection increased the 
sensitivity of the GeneChip array to detect regulation of gene expression in B. 
oleracea under P stress by up to 13-fold. Our open-source software to create 
probe mask files is freely available 
http://affymetrix.arabidopsis.info/xspecies/ and may be used to facilitate 
transcriptomic analyses of a wide range of plant and animal species in the 
absence of custom arrays.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-4811-1-10
PMCID: PMC1308859
PMID: 16280083