1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Nov;14(11 Pt 1):2524-30. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0414.

Interindividual variation in nucleotide excision repair genes and risk of 
endometrial cancer.

Weiss JM(1), Weiss NS, Ulrich CM, Doherty JA, Voigt LF, Chen C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, 6120 Executive Boulevard, 
EPS 8123, MSC 7240, Rockville, MD 20852, USA. weissjoc@mail.nih.gov

Erratum in
    Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Jan;17(1):261.

Exposure to estrogens is a likely cause of endometrial cancer, but the means by 
which estrogens exert this effect are not entirely clear. One hypothesis is that 
certain estrogen metabolites bind to the DNA, forming bulky adducts that damage 
the DNA and initiate carcinogenesis. A woman's reduced capacity to repair such 
damage may increase her risk of endometrial cancer. We conducted a 
population-based case-control study in western Washington State to address the 
role of variation in nucleotide excision repair genes on the risk of endometrial 
cancer. Case women (n = 371), ages 50 to 69 years, were diagnosed with invasive 
endometrial cancer between 1994 and 1999. Control women (n = 420) were selected 
using random-digit dialing (ages 50-65 years) and by random selection from 
Health Care Financing Administration data files (ages 66-69 years). Genotyping 
assays were done for ERCC1, ERCC2 (XPD), ERCC4 (XPF), ERCC5 (XPG), XPA, and XPC. 
No appreciable differences between cases and controls were observed in the 
genotype distributions of ERCC1 (c8092a and c19007t), ERCC2 (D312N, K751Q, and 
c22541a), ERCC4 (R415Q and t30028c), or ERCC5 (D1104H). Carriage of at least one 
variant allele for XPA G23A was associated with decreased risk of endometrial 
cancer [odds ratio (OR), 0.70; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 0.53-0.93]. 
Carriage of at least one XPC A499V variant allele was associated with a modest 
decrease in risk (OR, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.59-1.05). Women with variant alleles at 
both XPC A499V and K939Q had 58% of the risk of women with no XPC variant 
alleles (OR, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.35-0.96). Our data suggest that interindividual 
variation in XPA and XPC influences a woman's risk of endometrial cancer.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0414
PMID: 16284373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]