1. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Apr;27(4):820-5. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgi267. Epub 2005
Nov  14.

Associations between GPX1 Pro198Leu polymorphism, erythrocyte GPX activity, 
alcohol consumption and breast cancer risk in a prospective cohort study.

Ravn-Haren G(1), Olsen A, Tjønneland A, Dragsted LO, Nexø BA, Wallin H, Overvad 
K, Raaschou-Nielsen O, Vogel U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology and Risk Assessment, Danish Institute for Food and 
Veterinary Research, Søborg, Denmark. grh@dfvf.dk

Breast cancer may be related to oxidative stress. Breast cancer patients have 
been reported to have lower antioxidant enzyme activity than healthy controls 
and the polymorphism GPX1 Pro198Leu has been associated with risk of lung and 
breast cancer. The purpose of the present nested case-control study was to 
determine whether GPX1 Pro198Leu and glutathione peroxidase (GPX) activity in 
prospectively collected blood samples are associated with breast cancer risk 
among postmenopausal women and whether GPX activity levels are associated with 
other known breast cancer risk factors. We matched 377 female breast cancer 
cases with 377 controls all nested within the prospective 'Diet, Cancer and 
Health' study of 57 000 Danes. Carriers of the variant T-allele of GPX1 
Pro198Leu were at 1.43-fold higher risk of breast cancer compared with 
non-carriers (95% CI=1.07-1.92). Pre-diagnostic GPX activity tended to be lower 
in cases compared with controls. GPX activity was positively correlated with 
intake of alcohol (P<0.0001) and the catalytic activity was lowered 5% for each 
additional copy of the variant T-allele (P=0.0003). Alcohol intake was 
correlated with increased GPX activity for the C-allele but not for the 
T-allele. Results from this prospective study suggest that the GPX1 
Pro198Leu-associated lowered GPX activity is associated with higher breast 
cancer risk among Danish women.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgi267
PMID: 16287877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]