1. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Apr;87(4):323-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.09.013. Epub 
2005 Nov 22.

Expression study of mutant cystathionine beta-synthase found in Japanese 
patients with homocystinuria.

Katsushima F(1), Oliveriusova J, Sakamoto O, Ohura T, Kondo Y, Iinuma K, Kraus 
E, Stouracova R, Kraus JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Japan.

Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deficiency is the most common cause of 
homocystinuria. More than 130 pathogenic mutations, mostly in the Caucasian 
populations, have been described. Recently, our group reported a mutation 
analysis of Japanese homocystinuric patients. In the present paper, we report an 
expression study of several mutant CBS enzymes in Escherichia coli, i.e., R121H, 
G148R, G151R, S217F, H232D, R266G, 1591delTTCG, and K441X. All of the mutants 
except K441X exhibited severely decreased activity, and the capability to form 
tetramers of most mutants was severely impaired. The K441X mutant, on the other 
hand, exhibited relatively high activity (63% of the wild type activity). This 
was probably due to two factors. First, the high abundance of the full-length 
CBS protein, a likely K441Q mutant, which was produced through suppression of 
the amber termination codon by glutamine tRNA in E. coli. And second, the 
presence of a C-terminally truncated protein, which was previously shown to be 
constitutively activated. Patient-derived lymphocytes, however, showed no 
detectable CBS subunits. As previously hypothesized, the increased aggregation 
of mutant CBS subunits might be a common pathogenic mechanism in CBS deficiency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2005.09.013
PMID: 16307898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]