1. Mol Vis. 2005 Nov 14;11:977-85.

A variant form of Oguchi disease mapped to 13q34 associated with partial 
deletion of GRK1 gene.

Zhang Q(1), Zulfiqar F, Riazuddin SA, Xiao X, Yasmeen A, Rogan PK, Caruso R, 
Sieving PA, Riazuddin S, Hejtmancik JF.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1860, USA. 
zhang-q@gzsums.edu.cn

PURPOSE: The purpose of this paper is to map the locus for a variant form of 
Oguchi disease in a Pakistani family and to identify the causative mutation.
METHODS: Family 61029 was ascertained in the Punjab province of Pakistan. It 
includes three 13- to 19-year-old patients with night blindness and 12 
unaffected family members. A complete ophthalmological examination including 
fundus photography and electroretinography (ERG) was performed on each family 
member. A genome-wide scan was performed using microsatellite markers at about 
10 cM intervals, and two-point lod scores were calculated. Polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) cycle dideoxynucleotide sequencing was used to screen candidate 
genes inside the linked region for mutations and to delineate the deletion. 
Multiplex PCR and long template PCR were used to detect deletions and to define 
the size of deletions. Evaluation of fundus changes and ERG, lod score 
estimation, and identification of a mutation in the GRK1 gene were carried out.
RESULTS: All patients had night blindness since early childhood. Irregular 
coarse pigmentation was observed in the peripheral retina of each patient. The 
fundus appearance before and after 4 h of dark adaptation was similar except 
that the peripheral retinal pigmentary changes were slightly less evident after 
extended dark adaptation. Minimal or no rod function with normal cone function 
on ERG recordings were detected in all three affected members. The rod showed 
slow recovery to nearly normal amplitude after 4 h in the dark ERG in one 
individual but not in two other patients. A genome-wide scan showed linkage only 
to D13S285. Fine mapping defined a region from D13S1315 to 13qter, with a lod 
score of 2.89 at theta=0 shown by D13S285 and 2.90 at theta=0 by the 
D13S261-D13S285-D13S1295-D13S293 haplotype. Analysis of the GRK1 gene, which is 
included in this interval, identified a c.827+623_883del mutation. This 
intragenic deletion cosegregates with the disease in the family and is only 
homozygous in affected individuals. This mutation was not detected in 96 
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The retinal disease in the family reported here has several 
features differing from typical Oguchi disease, including an atypical 
Mizuo-Nakamura phenomenon and a non-recordable rod ERG even after 4 h of dark 
adaptation. Normal visual acuity, normal caliber of retinal blood vessels, and 
normal cone response on ERG recording suggest retinal dysfunction rather than 
degeneration (i.e., a variant form of Oguchi disease but unlikely to be 
retinitis pigmentosa). The disease in the Pakistani family localizes to 13q34 
and is caused by a novel deletion including Exon 3 of the GRK1 gene.

PMID: 16319817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]