1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Jan 1;140(1):31-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31026.

Novel splicing mutation in the NEMO (IKK-gamma) gene with severe 
immunodeficiency and heterogeneity of X-chromosome inactivation.

Ã˜rstavik KH(1), Kristiansen M, Knudsen GP, Storhaug K, Vege A, Eiklid K, 
Abrahamsen TG, Smahi A, Steen-Johnsen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Forskningsveien 2B, Rikshospitalet, 0027 
Oslo, Norway. k.h.orstavik@medisin.uio.no

We report on a family with three stillborn males, three affected males who were 
small for gestational age and died within 8 months, and one male who died at age 
5 years. This boy had cone-shaped teeth and oligoodontia. He had serious 
bacterial infections and inflammatory bowel disease. Mutations in the NF-kappaB 
essential modulator (NEMO) gene have recently been shown to be the cause of a 
group of ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency disorders (EDA-ID). Analysis 
of the NEMO gene revealed a nucleotide change in the consensus sequence of the 
splicing donor site of exon 6 IVS6 + 5G --> A(1027 + 5G --> A), which has not 
previously been described in EDA-ID. RT-PCR analysis of fibroblast RNA from an 
aborted affected male fetus demonstrated a skipping of exons 4, 5, and 6 which 
resulted in a truncated protein of about 35 kDa revealed by NEMO antibody. The 
skipping of exons 4, 5, and 6 did not affect the ORF of the C-terminal of NEMO 
encoded by exons 7, 8, 9, and 10, which contains a coiled-coil motif (CC2), a 
leucin-zipper (LZ), and a zinc finger motif (ZF) sub-domains of NEMO. 
IkappaBalpha degradation was strongly impaired in the fetal fibroblasts, 
suggesting an impaired NF-kappaB signaling. One healthy carrier had a completely 
skewed X-inactivation pattern with the normal X active, whereas the two other 
carriers had a random X-inactivation pattern. This family may represent a new 
phenotype within the EDA-ID disorders. From the heterogeneity in X-inactivation 
phenotype, we conclude that this mutation is not deleterious enough to be lethal 
for peripheral blood cells.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31026
PMID: 16333836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]