1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 20;102(51):18700-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0508693102. Epub 2005 Dec 12.

Apolipoprotein (apo) E4 enhances amyloid beta peptide production in cultured 
neuronal cells: apoE structure as a potential therapeutic target.

Ye S(1), Huang Y, MÃ¼llendorff K, Dong L, Giedt G, Meng EC, Cohen FE, Kuntz ID, 
Weisgraber KH, Mahley RW.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, 1650 Owens Street, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Apolipoprotein (apo) E4 is a major risk factor for Alzheimer's disease, and many 
studies have suggested that apoE has isoform-specific effects on the deposition 
or clearance of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides. We examined the effects of apoE 
isoforms on the processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) and on Abeta 
production in rat neuroblastoma B103 cells stably transfected with human 
wild-type APP695 (B103-APP). Lipid-poor apoE4 increased Abeta production in 
B103-APP cells to a greater extent than lipid-poor apoE3 (60% vs. 30%) due to 
more pronounced stimulation of APP recycling by apoE4 than apoE3. The difference 
in Abeta production was abolished by preincubating the cells with the 
receptor-associated protein (25 nM), which blocks the low-density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein (LRP) pathway, or by reducing LRP expression by small 
interference RNA. The differences were also attenuated by replacing Arg-61 with 
threonine in apoE4 or pretreating apoE4 with small molecules, both of which 
abolish apoE4 intramolecular domain interaction. Thus, apoE4 appears to modulate 
APP processing and Abeta production through both the LRP pathway and domain 
interaction. These findings provide insights into why apoE4 is associated with 
increased risk for Alzheimer's disease and may represent a potential target for 
drug development.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0508693102
PMCID: PMC1311738
PMID: 16344478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]