1. J Exp Med. 2005 Dec 19;202(12):1649-58. doi: 10.1084/jem.20050126. Epub 2005
Dec  13.

A functional promoter polymorphism in monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 is 
associated with increased susceptibility to pulmonary tuberculosis.

Flores-Villanueva PO(1), Ruiz-Morales JA, Song CH, Flores LM, Jo EK, Monta√±o M, 
Barnes PF, Selman M, Granados J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, University of Texas Health Center at Tyler, 
Tyler, TX 75708, USA. pedro.flores@UTHCT.edu

We examined the distribution of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in nitric 
oxide synthase 2A, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), regulated on 
activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted, and macrophage inflammatory 
protein-1alpha genes in tuberculosis patients and healthy controls from Mexico. 
The odds of developing tuberculosis were 2.3- and 5.4-fold higher in carriers of 
MCP-1 genotypes AG and GG than in homozygous AA. Cases of homozygous GG had the 
highest plasma levels of MCP-1 and the lowest plasma levels of IL-12p40, and 
these values were negatively correlated. Furthermore, stimulation of monocytes 
from healthy carriers of the genotype GG with Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
antigens yielded higher MCP-1 and lower IL-12p40 concentrations than parallel 
experiments with monocytes from homozygous AA. Addition of anti-MCP-1 increased 
IL-12p40 levels in cultures of M. tuberculosis-stimulated monocytes from 
homozygous GG, and addition of exogenous MCP-1 reduced IL-12p40 production by M. 
tuberculosis-stimulated monocytes from homozygous AA. Furthermore, we could 
replicate our results in Korean subjects, in whom the odds of developing 
tuberculosis were 2.8- and 6.9-fold higher in carriers of MCP-1 genotypes AG and 
GG than in homozygous AA. Our findings suggest that persons bearing the MCP-1 
genotype GG produce high concentrations of MCP-1, which inhibits production of 
IL-12p40 in response to M. tuberculosis and increases the likelihood that M. 
tuberculosis infection will progress to active pulmonary tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20050126
PMCID: PMC2212957
PMID: 16352737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]