1. J Bone Miner Metab. 2006;24(1):48-52. doi: 10.1007/s00774-005-0645-0.

Genetic and enzymatic analysis for two Japanese patients with idiopathic 
infantile arterial calcification.

Numakura C(1), Yamada M, Ariyasu D, Maesaka A, Kobayashi H, Nishimura G, Ikeda 
M, Hasegawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Unit, Tokyo Metropolitan Kiyose Children's 
Hospital, Kiyose, Japan. cnumakur@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp

Idiopathic infantile arterial calcification (IIAC) is a life-threatening 
disorder in young infants. Cardiovascular symptoms are usually apparent within 
the first month of life. The symptoms are caused by calcification of large and 
medium-sized arteries, including the aorta, coronary arteries, and renal 
arteries. Most of the patients die by 6 months of age because of heart failure. 
Recently, homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations for the ectonucleotide 
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1) gene were reported as causative for 
the disorder. ENPP1 regulates extracellular inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), a 
major inhibiter of extracellular matrix calcification. Two Japanese patients 
with IIAC were studied. One, from first-cousin parents, showed a typical 
clinical course. The onset in the second patient was late. Both of the patients 
were clinically compatible for IIAC; arterial calcification was shown, and 
hypertension was prominent. We sequenced all the exons and exon-intron 
boundaries of the gene and measured nucleotide pyrophosphohydrolase (NPPH) 
activity of ENPP1. Homozygous Arg730Stop was detected in the typical IIAC 
patient. The mutation was a novel nonsense mutation and not detected in 60 
healthy controls. His NPPH activity was 4% of normal. On the other hand, the 
late-onset patient was not shown to have any mutations. NPPH activity in this 
patient was 70% of normal. We confirmed that ENPP1 was also responsible for the 
Japanese patient with IIAC. The atypical late-onset phenotype may not be 
associated with ENPP1 abnormalities. IIAC is considered to be a clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s00774-005-0645-0
PMID: 16369898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]