1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):F1118-26. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00462.2005. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Functional influence of N-glycosylation in OCT2-mediated tetraethylammonium 
transport.

Pelis RM(1), Suhre WM, Wright SH.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Physiology, College of Medicine, Univ. of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, 
USA. rpelis@email.arizona.edu

OCT2, an organic cation transporter critical for removal of many drugs and 
toxins from the body, contains consensus sites for N-glycosylation at amino acid 
position 71, 96, and 112. However, the extent to which these sites are 
glycosylated by the cell, and the influence glycosylation has on OCT2 function, 
remains unknown. To address these issues, the acquisition of N-glycosylation was 
disrupted by mutating the amino acid asparagine (N) to glutamine (Q) at these 
sites in the rabbit ortholog of OCT2, which was expressed in Chinese hamster 
ovary cells. Disruption of N-glycosylation followed by Western blotting 
indicated that each site is indeed glycosylated and that OCT2 contains no other 
sites of N-glycosylation. Plasma membrane expression (determined by surface 
biotinylation) of the N112Q mutant, but not N71Q or N96Q mutants, was fourfold 
lower than that of wild-type OCT2, and unglycosylated OCT2 (N71Q/N96Q/N112Q) was 
sequestered in an unidentified intracellular compartment. The N71Q, N96Q, and 
N112Q mutants had a higher affinity ( approximately 2-fold) for 
tetraethylammonium (TEA). Maximum transport rate was reduced in the N96Q 
(3-fold) and N112Q (5-fold) mutants, but not the N71Q mutant, and unglycosylated 
OCT2 failed to transport TEA (associated with its absence in the plasma 
membrane). Whereas the reduction in maximum transport rate of the N112Q mutant 
is consistent with its reduced plasma membrane expression, the lower rate of the 
N96Q mutant, which appeared to traffic properly, suggests that glycosylation at 
N96 increases the transporter turnover number.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00462.2005
PMID: 16368738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]