1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):L1010-7. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00487.2005. Epub 2005 Dec 16.

Genetic and environmental influences of surfactant protein D serum levels.

Sørensen GL(1), Hjelmborg Jv, Kyvik KO, Fenger M, Høj A, Bendixen C, Sørensen 
TI, Holmskov U.

Author information:
(1)Medical Biotechnology Center, Institute for Medical Biology, University of 
Southern Denmark, Winsloewparken 25.3, DK-5000 Odense, Denmark. 
glsorensen@health.sdu.dk

The collectin surfactant protein D (SP-D) is an important component of the 
pulmonary innate immune system, but SP-D is also present on extrapulmonary 
epithelial surfaces and in serum, where it has been used as a biomarker for 
pulmonary disease states. In this study, we investigate the mechanisms defining 
the constitutional serum level of SP-D and determine the magnitude of the 
genetic contribution to serum SP-D in the adult population. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that serum SP-D concentrations in children are genetically 
determined and that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located in the 
NH(2)-terminal region (Met11Thr) of the mature protein is significantly 
associated with the serum SP-D levels. A classic twin study was performed on a 
twin population including 1,476 self-reported healthy adults. The serum SP-D 
levels increased with male sex, age, and smoking status. The intraclass 
correlation was significantly higher for monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs than for 
dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs. Serum SP-D variance was influenced by nonshared 
environmental effects and additive genetic effects. Multivariate analysis of MZ 
and DZ covariance matrixes showed significant genetic correlation among serum 
SP-D and metabolic variables. The Met11Thr variant explained a significant part 
of the heritability indicating that serum SP-D variance could be decomposed into 
non-shared environmental effects (e(2) = 0.19), additive genetic effects (h(2) = 
0.42), and the effect of the Met11Thr variations (q(2) = 0.39).

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00487.2005
PMID: 16361352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]