1. Cancer Sci. 2005 Dec;96(12):866-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2005.00126.x.

Role of Cys-603 in dimer/oligomer formation of the breast cancer resistance 
protein BCRP/ABCG2.

Kage K(1), Fujita T, Sugimoto Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese 
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-10-6 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2) is a half-molecule ATP-binding 
cassette transporter that we have previously suggested might function as a 
homodimer, bridged by disulfide bonds. In the present study, we carried out 
cysteine-scanning mutagenesis, substituting Ser for Cys, and established 12 
PA317 transfectants expressing BCRP mutants with possible disruptions to their 
S-S bonds. Western blot analysis of BCRP from the wild-type transfectants 
(PA/WT) confirmed that the wild-type protein migrates as a 140-kDa dimer under 
non-reducing conditions, but as a 70-kDa monomer under reducing conditions. 
However, under non-reducing conditions the BCRP-C603S mutant migrated both as a 
70-kDa monomer and a 140-kDa dimer, whereas all other mutant BCRP migrated only 
as dimers. PA317 cells transfected with C603S-BCRP (PA/C603S) showed either 
similar or only marginally lower SN-38 resistance than PA/WT cells, despite the 
reduced levels of BCRP dimer in these cells. Moreover, the degree of SN-38 
resistance in the mutant BCRP transfectants was found to be associated with the 
monomer expression levels under reducing conditions. Reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis showed that the BCRP mRNA 
levels were similar in the transfectants. We subsequently generated six C603X 
mutants of BCRP (X=D, H, R, Y, A and W) and carried out western blot analysis 
and drug sensitivity assays. The results were equivalent to those from the 
PA/C603S cells, with some variations that again corresponded to the monomer 
levels. Our findings suggest that Cys-603 is an important residue in the 
covalent bridge between BCRP monomers but that a functioning unit of BCRP may 
not necessarily require covalent linkages.

(Cancer Sci 2005; 96: 866-872).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2005.00126.x
PMCID: PMC11159771
PMID: 16367905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]