1. Plant Cell. 2006 Feb;18(2):477-90. doi: 10.1105/tpc.105.035931. Epub 2005 Dec 
23.

Arabidopsis TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN interacts with RAPTOR, which regulates the 
activity of S6 kinase in response to osmotic stress signals.

Mahfouz MM(1), Kim S, Delauney AJ, Verma DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Plant Biotechnology Center, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR) kinase controls many cellular functions in eukaryotic 
cells in response to stress and nutrient availability and was shown to be 
essential for embryonic development in Arabidopsis thaliana. We demonstrated 
that Arabidopsis RAPTOR1 (a TOR regulatory protein) interacts with the HEAT 
repeats of TOR and that RAPTOR1 regulates the activity of S6 kinase (S6K) in 
response to osmotic stress. RAPTOR1 also interacts in vivo with Arabidopsis 
S6K1, a putative substrate for TOR. S6K1 fused to green fluorescent protein and 
immunoprecipitated from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) leaves after transient 
expression was active in phosphorylating the Arabidopsis ribosomal S6 protein. 
The catalytic domain of S6K1 could be phosphorylated by Arabidopsis 
3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase-1 (PDK1), indicating the involvement 
of PDK1 in the regulation of S6K. The S6K1 activity was sensitive to osmotic 
stress, while PDK1 activity was not affected. However, S6K1 sensitivity to 
osmotic stress was relieved by co-overexpression of RAPTOR1. Overall, these 
observations demonstrated the existence of a functional TOR kinase pathway in 
plants. However, Arabidopsis seedlings do not respond to normal physiological 
levels of rapamycin, which appears to be due its inability to bind to the 
Arabidopsis homolog of FKBP12, a protein that is essential for the binding of 
rapamycin with TOR. Replacement of the Arabidopsis FKBP12 with the human FKBP12 
allowed rapamycin-dependent interaction with TOR. Since homozygous mutation in 
TOR is lethal, it suggests that this pathway is essential for integrating the 
stress signals into the growth regulation.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.105.035931
PMCID: PMC1356553
PMID: 16377759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]