1. Gene. 2006 Mar 15;369:126-33. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2005.10.031. Epub 2006 Jan
10.

Identification of a constitutively active variant of LuxO that affects 
production of HA/protease and biofilm development in a non-O1, non-O139 Vibrio 
cholerae O110.

Raychaudhuri S(1), Jain V, Dongre M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbial Technology, Molecular Biology Division, Sector 39A, 
Chandigarh 160036, India. saumya@imtech.res.in

Pathogenesis of Vibrio cholerae depends on the concerted action of numerous 
virulence factors that includes a secreted hemagglutinin (HA) protease. Recent 
studies have evidenced that the expression of these virulence factors as well as 
the genes responsible for biofilm development is subject to control by quorum 
sensing in this organism. At low cell density, LuxO, the pivotal regulator of 
quorum-sensing circuit, has been shown to be phosphorylated at aspartate-47. 
Working in concert with sigma-54, LuxO-P activates the downstream repressor, 
which turned out to be four sRNAs [Lenz, D.H., Mok, K.C., Lilley, B.N., 
Kulkarni, R.V., Wingreen, N.S., Bassler, B.L., 2004. The small RNA chaperone Hfq 
and multiple small RNAs control quorum sensing in Vibrio harveyi and Vibrio 
cholerae. Cell 118, 69-82]. Subsequently, these sRNAs form complex with sRNA 
chaperone, Hfq. The Hfq-sRNA complex causes the destabilization of hapR mRNA 
transcript. HapR is a positive regulator of hapA that encodes HA/protease. At 
high cell density, dephosphorylation of LuxO impairs its function to activate 
the expression of sRNA, which in turn promotes HapR expression and causes 
protease production. It has been demonstrated that conversion of aspartate to 
glutamate (D47E) renders the LuxO molecule active without being phosphorylated. 
This variant of LuxO is referred as constitutively active LuxO or con-LuxO 
[Freeman, J.A., Bassler, B.L., 1999. A genetic analysis of the function of LuxO, 
a two-component response regulator involved in quorum sensing in Vibrio harveyi. 
Mol Microbiol 31, 665-677]. Other than D47E, mutation at L104Q also develops 
con-LuxO [Vance, R.E., Zhu, J., Mekalanos, J.J., 2003. A constitutively active 
variant of the quorum-sensing regulator LuxO affects protease production and 
biofilm formation in Vibrio cholerae. Infect. Immun. 71, 2571-2576]. The purpose 
of this study was to investigate the cause of protease negative phenotype of a 
non-O1, non-O139 strain of V. cholerae O110. In the process of exploring the 
nature of the phenotype, a constitutively active variant of LuxO molecule was 
characterized which represses protease production and enhances biofilm formation 
by this strain. Unlike luxU, disruption of luxO restored the protease 
production, which showed the constitutively active nature of LuxO protein in 
this strain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2005.10.031
PMID: 16376028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]