1. Mol Immunol. 2006 Apr;43(11):1769-75. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.11.008. Epub 
2006 Jan 18.

Insights into hemolytic uremic syndrome: segregation of three independent 
predisposition factors in a large, multiple affected pedigree.

Esparza-Gordillo J(1), Jorge EG, Garrido CA, Carreras L, López-Trascasa M, 
Sánchez-Corral P, de Córdoba SR.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

Mutations in the complement regulators factor H, membrane cofactor protein 
(MCP), and factor I are associated with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome 
(aHUS, MIM 235400), suggesting that the disease develops as a consequence of the 
inefficient protection of the renal endothelium from damage by the complement 
system. Incomplete penetrance of the disease in individuals carrying these 
mutations is, however, relatively frequent. Here, we report the identification 
of a large, multiple affected aHUS pedigree in which there is independent 
segregation of three different aHUS risk factors: a MCP missense mutation 
(c.-598C>T; Pro165Ser) that decreases MCP expression on the cell surface, a 
dinucleotide insertion in the coding sequence of factor I (c.-1610insAT) that 
introduces a premature stop codon in the factor I protein, and the MCPggaac SNP 
haplotype block that was previously shown to decrease the transcription activity 
from the MCP promoter. Interestingly, individuals affected by aHUS in the 
pedigree are only those who have inherited the three aHUS risk factors. These 
data show an additive effect for mutations in MCP and factor I and provide 
definitive support to the conclusion that aHUS results from a defective 
protection of cellular surfaces from complement activation. Furthermore, they 
help to explain the incomplete penetrance of the disease, illustrating that 
concurrence of multiple hits in complement regulatory proteins may be necessary 
to significantly impair host tissue protection and to confer susceptibility to 
aHUS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2005.11.008
PMID: 16386793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]