1. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 1;42(3):401-7. doi: 10.1086/499364. Epub 2005 Dec
27.

Pharmacogenetics of plasma efavirenz exposure after treatment discontinuation: 
an Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group Study.

Ribaudo HJ(1), Haas DW, Tierney C, Kim RB, Wilkinson GR, Gulick RM, Clifford DB, 
Marzolini C, Fletcher CV, Tashima KT, Kuritzkes DR, Acosta EP; Adult AIDS 
Clinical Trials Group Study.

Author information:
(1)Statistical Data Analysis Center, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Feb 1;42(3):408-10. doi: 10.1086/499369.
    Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Aug 15;43(4):541-2; author reply 542-4. doi: 
10.1086/505984.

BACKGROUND: Efavirenz has a long plasma half-life and a low genetic barrier to 
resistance. Simultaneously stopping treatment with all agents in 
efavirenz-containing regimens may result in functional efavirenz monotherapy 
that selects for drug-resistant human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Lower 
plasma efavirenz clearance is associated with a cytochrome P450 2B6 gene 
(CYP2B6) polymorphism (516G-->T) that is more frequent among African American 
individuals than among European American individuals.
METHODS: We characterized relationships between this polymorphism and predicted 
plasma efavirenz concentration-time profiles after discontinuation of therapy 
with use of data obtained from subjects receiving therapy. Pharmacokinetic 
parameters were estimated using population-based methods. Concentrations after 
discontinuation of therapy were predicted from subject-specific estimates. 
RESULTS. Median estimated efavirenz half-lives were 23, 27, and 48 h for 
patients with CYP2B6 position 516 GG (78 patients), GT (60), and TT (14) 
genotypes, respectively (P<.001). After therapy was stopped, plasma efavirenz 
concentrations in patients with GG, GT, and TT genotypes were predicted to 
exceed 46.7 ng/mL (the estimated protein-adjusted 95% inhibitory concentration 
for wild-type virus) for a median of 5.8 days (interquartile range [IQR], 
4.4-8.3 days), 7.0 days (IQR, 5.0-8.0 days), and 14 days (IQR, 11.1-21.2 days), 
respectively (P<.001). Plasma efavirenz levels were predicted to exceed 46.7 
ng/mL for >21 days in 5% of subjects with GG genotype, 5% of subjects with GT 
genotype, and 29% of subjects with TT genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The CYP2B6 position 516 TT genotype or a prolonged measured 
elimination half-life may predict increased risk of developing drug resistance 
among patients who discontinue efavirenz-containing regimens. This has 
implications for strategies to safely discontinue antiretroviral regimens while 
avoiding the emergence of drug resistance.

DOI: 10.1086/499364
PMID: 16392089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]