1. J Invest Dermatol. 2006 Jan;126(1):172-81. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700036.

Dimerization of the human melanocortin 1 receptor: functional consequences and 
dominant-negative effects.

Sánchez-Laorden BL(1), Sánchez-Más J, Martínez-Alonso E, Martínez-Menárguez JA, 
García-Borrón JC, Jiménez-Cervantes C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Murcia, 
Espinardo, Spain.

The melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R), a G(S)-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), is a 
key regulator of proliferation and differentiation of epidermal melanocytes, and 
a determinant of human skin phototype and cancer risk. Homodimerization has been 
demonstrated for several GPCRs, but little information is available for MC1R. 
SDS-PAGE analysis of melanoma cells and heterologous cells expressing 
epitope-tagged MC1R revealed dimeric and oligomeric species in 
detergent-solubilized extracts, confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of 
differentially tagged MC1R forms. Dimerization occurs early during MC1R 
biosynthesis, and is seen for mutants displaying intracellular retention. These 
mutants exerted dominant-negative effects on wild-type (WT) MC1R. Conversely, 
partial functional trans-complementation of selected loss-of-function mutants 
was observed. WT-MC1R lacks cooperativity in agonist binding, yet coexpression 
of WT and a C-terminal deletion mutant yielded a form of different 
pharmacological properties. The natural diminished function alleles R151C, 
R160W, and D294H, associated with red hair, displayed dimerization and 
heterodimerization with WT. Coexpression of WT and R151C or R160W reduced the 
density of binding sites on the plasma membrane of transfected cells, whereas 
D294H mediated a dominant-negative effect on functional coupling to adenylyl 
cyclase. Therefore, subtle changes of functional properties may be associated 
with different MC1R haplotypes, contributing to the complexity of skin 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700036
PMID: 16417234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]