1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2006 Feb;64(2):129-35. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2006.02434.x.

The tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-308GA promoter polymorphism is related to 
prenatal growth and postnatal insulin resistance.

Casano-Sancho P(1), López-Bermejo A, Fernández-Real JM, Monrós E, Valls C, 
Rodríguez-González FX, Ricart W, Ibáñez L.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology, Sant Joan de Déu Children's Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Variation in the tumour necrosis factor gene, (TNF) has been 
associated with insulin resistance traits. We questioned whether the TNF-308G/A 
polymorphism is associated with birthweight and insulin resistance in children 
born small for gestational age (SGA), a patient population known to be at risk 
for insulin resistance.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional, hospital-based study assessing insulin sensitivity in 
SGA children.
PATIENTS: One hundred and ninety-eight school-age children born either SGA 
(n=90, age 7.4+/- 4.5 years) or appropriate for gestational age (AGA, n=108, age 
8.7+/- 4.0 years).
MEASUREMENTS: All children were genotyped for the TNF-308G/A polymorphism; a 
biochemical profile was also performed in prepubertal SGA (n=58) and AGA (n=57) 
subjects.
RESULTS: Genotype frequencies for the TNF-308G/A single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) (GG and GA/AA) differed between SGA and AGA children (86%vs. 72% and 
14%vs. 28%, respectively; P=0.025). The GG genotype was associated with lower 
birthweight and birth length (2747.0+/- 23.3 g vs. 2851.0+/- 45.7 g, P=0.045, 
and 47.0+/- 0.2 cm vs. 48.2+/- 0.4 cm, P=0.011, respectively) and, in AGA but 
not in SGA children, with higher systolic blood pressure [103.3 (95% confidence 
interval (CI) 96.4-110.2) mmHg vs. 92.8 (84.9-100.7) mmHg; P=0.028], higher 
blood glucose [4.8 (4.7-5.0) mmol/l vs. 4.5 (4.3-4.8) mmol/l; P=0.042] and 
higher homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index [1.4 
(1.1-1.7) vs. 0.9 (0.4-1.3); P=0.005]. In multivariate analysis, the TNF-308GG 
genotype was an independent predictor of HOMA-IR during childhood, explaining 8% 
of its variance.
CONCLUSION: SGA children show increased frequency of the TNF-308G allele, an 
allele that is associated with prenatal growth and with postnatal insulin 
resistance. The TNF-308G/A polymorphism may have implications in the growth and 
metabolic abnormalities that characterise SGA children.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2006.02434.x
PMID: 16430709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]