1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Jan;12(1):35-9. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gal002. Epub 2006 Feb
 2.

Polymorphisms in the promoter regions of the matrix metalloproteinases-7, -9 and 
the risk of endometriosis and adenomyosis in China.

Shan K(1), Lian-Fu Z, Hui D, Wei G, Na W, Xia J, Yan L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hebei Medical University, Fourth 
Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) may contribute to the development of 
endometriosis. The aim of this study was to assess the effects of the 
polymorphisms in the promoters of MMP-7 (181A/G) and MMP-9 (1562C/T) on the risk 
of occurrence of endometriosis and adenomyosis. We genotyped 219 patients (143 
women with endometriosis, 76 women with adenomyosis) and 160 control women in 
North China. There was a significant difference in frequency of the MMP-7 
genotype between endometriosis and controls (P = 0.01) and also between 
adenomyosis and controls (P = 0.01). The frequency of the G allele in two groups 
of patients (7.3 and 7.9%) was significantly higher than in the controls (2.8%) 
(P = 0.01 and 0.01, respectively). Compared to the A/A genotype, the genotype 
with the -181G allele showed a significantly increased susceptibility to both 
diseases, with adjusted odds ratio of 2.62 [95% confidence interval (CI) = 
1.17-5.87] for endometriosis and 3.14 (95% CI = 1.26-7.81) for adenomyosis. 
However, the overall genotype and allelotype distribution of the MMP-9 in the 
two case groups were not different from that of controls. We conclude that 
MMP-7-181A/G polymorphism has a potential to be a susceptibility factor for 
endometriosis and adenomyosis while MMP-9-1562C/T polymorphism may not provide a 
useful marker to predict susceptibility to endometriosis and adenomyosis, at 
least in women from North China.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gal002
PMID: 16455621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]