1. Biochemistry. 1991 May 21;30(20):4953-62. doi: 10.1021/bi00234a017.

Amino acid substitutions at tryptophan-51 of cytochrome c peroxidase: effects on 
coordination, species preference for cytochrome c, and electron transfer.

Goodin DB(1), Davidson MG, Roe JA, Mauk AG, Smith M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La 
Jolla, California 92037.

Amino acid replacements of an aromatic residue, Trp-51, which is in contact with 
the heme of yeast cytochrome c peroxidase have a number of significant effects 
on the kinetics and coordination state of the enzyme. Six mutants at this site 
(W51F, W51M, W51T, W51C, W51A, and W51G) were examined. Optical and EPR spectra 
show that each of these mutations introduces a shift from the 5-coordinate to 
6-coordinate form, and slightly increases the asymmetry of the heme ligand 
field. Conversion from a 6-coordinate high-spin form at pH 5 to a 6-coordinate 
low-spin form at pH 7 is observed for several of the variants (W51F, W51T, and 
W51A), while W51G and W51C appear as predominantly low-spin species between pH 5 
and 7. Addition of 50% glycerol prevents the facile conversion to the low-spin 
conformation for W51F, W51T, and W51A, and only W51F can be stabilized in a 
5-coordinate configuration by glycerol. For the oxidation of cytochrome c by 
H2O2, three of the variants (W51F, W51M, and W51T) exhibit values of kcat(app) 
that are greater than for the wild-type enzyme, while the other mutations give 
decreased rates of enzyme turnover. Unlike the wild-type enzyme, which functions 
more efficiently with cytochrome c from yeast than with the horse heart protein, 
the mutant W51F does not show a preference for substrate from its native 
organism. The three mutants which exhibit increased values of kcat(app) show a 
pH optimum at 6.8 compared with that of 5.25 for the wild-type enzyme when 
measured with horse heart cytochrome c. This shift in pH optimum is not observed 
with yeast cytochrome c. Construction of single and multiple mutations at 
Trp-51, Ile-53, and Gly-152 shows that these kinetic properties are not due to 
natural amino acid variations observed at these sites. Pre-steady-state kinetics 
show that the bimolecular rate constant for the fast phase of the reaction of 
the enzyme with H2O2 is only slightly decreased from 3.03 (0.09) X 10(7) to 2.2 
(0.1) X 10(7) M-1 s-1 for W51F and to 1.5 (0.1) X 10(7) M-1 s-1 for W51A. The 
slow phase of the reaction (4.9 s-1) which contributes approximately 30% to the 
amplitude of the change for the wild-type enzyme is not observed for W51F or 
W51A.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00234a017
PMID: 1645185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]