1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2352-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0510441103. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Mutation and genomic deletion status of ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and 
p53 confer specific gene expression profiles in mantle cell lymphoma.

Greiner TC(1), Dasgupta C, Ho VV, Weisenburger DD, Smith LM, Lynch JC, Vose JM, 
Fu K, Armitage JO, Braziel RM, Campo E, Delabie J, Gascoyne RD, Jaffe ES, 
Muller-Hermelink HK, Ott G, Rosenwald A, Staudt LM, Im MY, Karaman MW, Pike BL, 
Chan WC, Hacia JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. tgreiner@unmc.edu

Although mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) frequently harbors inactivated ataxia 
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and p53 alleles, little is known about the 
molecular phenotypes caused by these genetic changes. We identified point 
mutations and genomic deletions in these genes in a series of cyclin D1-positive 
MCL cases and correlated genotype with gene expression profiles and overall 
survival. Mutated and/or deleted ATM and p53 alleles were found in 56% (40/72) 
and 26% (21/82) of the cases examined, respectively. Although MCL patients with 
inactive p53 alleles showed a significant reduction in median overall survival, 
aberrant ATM status did not predict for survival. Nevertheless, specific gene 
expression signatures indicative of the mutation and genomic deletion status of 
each gene were identified that were different from wild-type cases. These 
signatures were comprised of a select group of genes related to apoptosis, 
stress responses, and cell cycle regulation that are relevant to ATM or p53 
function. Importantly, we found the molecular signatures are different between 
cases with mutations and deletions, because the latter are characterized by loss 
of genes colocalized in the same chromosome region of ATM or p53. This 
information on molecular phenotypes may provide new areas of investigation for 
ATM function or may be exploited by designing specific therapies for MCL cases 
with p53 aberrations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0510441103
PMCID: PMC1413716
PMID: 16461462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.