1. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2006 Mar;67(3):349-55. doi: 10.1002/ccd.20663.

677TT polymorphism of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase in combination with 
low serum vitamin B12 is associated with coronary in-stent restenosis.

Chung SL(1), Chiou KR, Charng MJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, LoTung Poh-Ai Hospital, Yilan 
County, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that a common mutation (nucleotide 677 
C-->T) in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene may contribute to 
a mild rise in plasma homocysteine levels and increase the incidence of coronary 
artery disease. Therefore, this study was designed to further investigate 
whether the effects of MTHFR 677 C to T mutation, plasma homocysteine, serum 
vitamin B12, and folate can influence restenosis after successful coronary 
stenting.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated 260 patients each with a lesion after 
successful coronary stent placement. All patients received a repeated 
angiography after 6 months, or earlier if clinically indicated. Angiographic 
in-stent restenosis (ISR) was defined as >or=50% diameter stenosis at follow-up. 
Genotyping for MTHFR was based on a polymerase chain reaction technique. Also 
fasting plasma homocysteine, vitamin B12, and folate levels were measured at the 
same time. The ISR rate was higher among the patients with the TT genotype than 
in those with the non-TT genotypes (64.0% versus 32.9%, P=0.002). There was no 
significant difference in plasma homocysteine levels among patients with the TT 
genotype and patients with the non-TT genotypes (15.9+/-7.6 versus 15.5+/-6.6 
micromol/L, P=0.75). However, among the patients with the TT genotype, those 
with higher plasma homocysteine levels (>or=12 micromol/L) demonstrated a 
significantly higher ISR rate (75.0% versus 33.5%, P=0.001). Logistic regression 
analysis revealed that the combined presence of the MTHFR TT genotype and lower 
than average serum vitamin B12 (>or=550 pg/mL) resulted in the most significant 
difference in the risk of ISR (OR=3.57, CI=1.51-8.46, P=0.004; OR=2.36, 
CI=1.35-4.15, P=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: MTHFR 677TT polymorphism and low serum vitamin B12 each 
individually increased the risk of coronary ISR. Furthermore, the combination of 
these parameters resulted in a greater increase in risk.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ccd.20663
PMID: 16489563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]