1. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4898-906. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-09-3596. Epub
2006  Feb 21.

Clarifying the role of Stat5 in lymphoid development and Abelson-induced 
transformation.

Hoelbl A(1), Kovacic B, Kerenyi MA, Simma O, Warsch W, Cui Y, Beug H, 
Hennighausen L, Moriggl R, Sexl V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, 
Austria.

The Stat5 transcription factors Stat5a and Stat5b have been implicated in 
lymphoid development and transformation. Most studies have employed 
Stat5a/b-deficient mice where gene targeting disrupted the first protein-coding 
exon, resulting in the expression of N-terminally truncated forms of Stat5a/b 
(Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice). We have now reanalyzed lymphoid development in 
Stat5a/b(null/null) mice having a complete deletion of the Stat5a/b gene locus. 
The few surviving Stat5a/b(null/null) mice lacked CD8(+) T lymphocytes. A 
massive reduction of CD8(+) T cells was also found in Stat5a/b(fl/fl) lck-cre 
transgenic animals. While gammadelta T-cell receptor-positive (gammadeltaTCR(+)) 
cells were expressed at normal levels in Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice, they were 
completely absent in Stat5a/b(null/null) animals. Moreover, B-cell maturation 
was abrogated at the pre-pro-B-cell stage in Stat5a/b(null/null) mice, whereas 
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) B-lymphoid cells developed to the early pro-B-cell 
stage. In vitro assays using fetal liver-cell cultures confirmed this 
observation. Most strikingly, Stat5a/b(null/null) cells were resistant to 
transformation and leukemia development induced by Abelson oncogenes, whereas 
Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN)-derived cells readily transformed. These findings show 
distinct lymphoid defects for Stat5a/b(DeltaN/DeltaN) and Stat5a/b(null/null) 
mice and define a novel functional role for the N-termini of Stat5a/b in 
B-lymphoid transformation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-09-3596
PMCID: PMC2875852
PMID: 16493008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]