1. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Mar 1;7:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-17.

Evidence for a gene influencing heart rate on chromosome 5p13-14 in a 
meta-analysis of genome-wide scans from the NHLBI Family Blood Pressure Program.

Laramie JM(1), Wilk JB, Hunt SC, Ellison RC, Chakravarti A, Boerwinkle E, Myers 
RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA. laramiej@bu.edu

BACKGROUND: Elevated resting heart rate has been shown in multiple studies to be 
a strong predictor of cardiovascular disease. Previous family studies have shown 
a significant heritable component to heart rate with several groups conducting 
genomic linkage scans to identify quantitative trait loci.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide linkage scan to identify quantitative trait 
loci influencing resting heart rate among 3,282 Caucasians and 3,989 
African-Americans in three independent networks comprising the Family Blood 
Pressure Program (FBPP) using 368 microsatellite markers. Mean heart rate 
measurements were used in a regression model including covariates for age, body 
mass index, pack-years, currently drinking alcohol (yes/no), hypertension status 
and medication usage to create a standardized residual for each gender/ethnic 
group within each study network. This residual was used in a nonparametric 
variance component model to generate a LOD score and a corresponding P value for 
each ethnic group within each study network. P values from each ethnic group and 
study network were merged using an adjusted Fisher's combining P values method 
and the resulting P values were converted to LOD scores. The entire analysis was 
redone after individuals currently taking beta-blocker medication were removed.
RESULTS: We identified significant evidence of linkage (LOD = 4.62) to 
chromosome 10 near 142.78 cM in the Caucasian group of HyperGEN. Between race 
and network groups we identified a LOD score of 1.86 on chromosome 5 (between 
39.99 and 45.34 cM) in African-Americans in the GENOA network and the same 
region produced a LOD score of 1.12 among Caucasians within a different network 
(HyperGEN). Combining all network and race groups we identified a LOD score of 
1.92 (P = 0.0013) on chromosome 5p13-14. We assessed heterogeneity for this 
locus between networks and ethnic groups and found significant evidence for low 
heterogeneity (P < or = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: We found replication (LOD > 1) between ethnic groups and between 
study networks with low heterogeneity on chromosome 5p13-14 suggesting that a 
gene in this region influences resting heart rate.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-17
PMCID: PMC1413518
PMID: 16509988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]