1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Feb 25;34(4):1237-49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkl007. Print 
2006.

RNA-binding of the human cytomegalovirus transactivator protein UL69, mediated 
by arginine-rich motifs, is not required for nuclear export of unspliced RNA.

Toth Z(1), Lischka P, Stamminger T.

Author information:
(1)Institut f√ºr Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Schlossgarten 4, 91054 
Erlangen, Germany.

The human cytomegalovirus protein pUL69 belongs to a family of regulatory 
factors that is conserved within the Herpesviridae and includes the proteins 
ICP27 of herpes simplex virus type 1 and EB2 of Epstein-Barr virus. ICP27 and 
EB2 have been shown to facilitate the nuclear export of viral mRNAs via 
interacting with the cellular mRNA export factor REF. Furthermore, direct 
RNA-binding of these proteins was found to be essential for their stimulating 
effects on mRNA export. Recently, we demonstrated that pUL69 shares common 
features with ICP27 and EB2 such as (i) nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and (ii) 
stimulation of nuclear RNA export via binding to the cellular mRNA export 
machinery. Here, we demonstrate that pUL69 can also interact with RNA both in 
vivo and in vitro via a complex N-terminal RNA-binding domain consisting of 
three arginine-rich motifs. Interestingly, the RNA-binding domain of pUL69 
overlaps with both the NLS and the binding site of the cellular mRNA export 
factors UAP56 and URH49. While the deletion of the UAP56/URH49-binding site 
abolished pUL69-mediated RNA export, an RNA-binding deficient pUL69 mutant which 
still interacts with UAP56/URH49 retained its RNA export activity. This 
surprising finding suggests that, in contrast to its homologues, RNA-binding is 
not a prerequisite for pUL69-mediated nuclear RNA export.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkl007
PMCID: PMC1383624
PMID: 16500893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]