1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Mar;15(3):502-8. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0804.

Prostacyclin synthase and arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase polymorphisms and risk of 
colorectal polyps.

Poole EM(1), Bigler J, Whitton J, Sibert JG, Potter JD, Ulrich CM.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Prevention Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 
Fairview Avenue North, M4-B402, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

Prostacyclin synthase (PGIS) and arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) are enzymes 
relevant to prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis, both important pathways for 
colon cancer risk. We hypothesized that genetic variation altering the function 
of these enzymes would modify risk of colorectal polyps. In a Minnesota-based 
case-control study of adenomatous (n = 517) or hyperplastic (n = 192) polyps 
versus polyp-free controls (n = 618), we investigated the role of promoter 
repeat polymorphisms in PGIS and ALOX5 as well as ALOX5 -1700 G>A. Having fewer 
than six repeats on both PGIS alleles (<6R/<6R) was associated with an increased 
risk of adenomas compared with the 6R/6R (wild-type) genotype (OR, 1.90; 95% CI, 
1.09-3.30). Having more repeats (>6R/> or =6R) reduced risk (OR, 0.73; 95% CI, 
0.40-1.35; P(trend) = 0.03). In allele-based analyses, fewer repeats were 
associated with a modestly increased risk of adenomas and perhaps hyperplastic 
polyps. There were no risk differences for either the ALOX5 VNTR or -1700 G>A 
polymorphisms. Associations with regular use of aspirin or other nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) differed by PGIS genotype. Among individuals 
with at least one wild-type allele, NSAID use was associated with a decreased 
risk; however, those with fewer PGIS repeats (<6R/<6R) did not benefit 
(P(interaction) = 0.06). There was also evidence of an interaction between the 
COX-2 -765 G>C and ALOX5 -1700 G>A genotypes (P(interaction) = 0.07). The PGIS 
promoter polymorphism may affect risk of colorectal polyps and modify the 
effects of NSAID use on polyp risk. A more comprehensive investigation of 
genetic variability in prostaglandin synthesis in relation to risk of colorectal 
neoplasia and NSAID pharmacogenetics is warranted.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-05-0804
PMID: 16537708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]