1. Transplant Proc. 2006 Mar;38(2):521-8. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2006.01.041.

The role of proinflammatory cytokine gene polymorphisms for development of 
insulin resistance after renal transplantation.

Gençtoy G(1), Kahraman S, Arici M, Altun B, Erdem Y, Bakkaloğlu M, Yasavul U, 
Turgan C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Insulin resistance, a frequent prediabetic metabolic complication 
after renal transplantation, is generally linked to immunosuppressive drugs 
including corticosteroids, cyclosporine (CsA) or tacrolimus, as well as to age, 
cadaveric donors and ethnic factors. Cytokines are known to be inflammation 
modulatory substances that contribute to metabolic derangements after 
transplantation. The present study investigated the effects of cytokine gene 
polymorphisms on insulin resistance in renal transplant recipients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty-one renal transplant recipients (37 men, 24 women; 
mean age: 39.3 +/- 10.8 years) who attended regular clinical visits without a 
known history of diabetes were enrolled in the study. All patients were on a 
regimen of steroid, CsA, and mycophenolate mofetil. Venous blood samples were 
collected for biochemical analyses after an overnight fast at 08:00 pm. CsA 
trough levels, C-reactive protein, and fibrinogen were also estimated. 
Additional 10 mL of blood was withdrawn into an ethylenediamine tetraacetic 
acid-containing tube to determine cytokine genotypes (tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha [TNF-alpha] -238 G/A, transforming growth factor-beta [TGF-beta] 
codon 10 -869 T/C). Insulin resistance was calculated by the homeostasis model 
assessment (HOMA) method using the values of fasting blood glucose (FBG) and 
insulin levels. Anthropometric indices as well as body height, weight, waist and 
hip circumferences were measured simultaneously to calculate body mass index 
(kg/m2) and waist-to-hip ratio. Impaired fasting glucose (IFG) was described as 
an FBG > or = 110 but < 126 mg/dL.
RESULTS: IFG was detected in 27.9% of this study group. The HOMA index was 
significantly higher among patients with IFG compared with normal FBG (NoGT) 
(6.3 +/- 4.5 vs 3.7 +/- 1.5; P = .01). Neither FBG and insulin nor HOMA values 
correlated with antrophometric, metabolic, or inflammatory parameters. Cytokine 
genotype allele frequencies, age, sex, immunosuppressive and antihypertensive 
drug type and doses, CsA trough levels, and donor source (cadaveric/living) were 
similar for patients with IFG and NoGT. Mutant allele carrier genotypes (AA + 
GA) for TNF-alpha -238 G/A showed higher fasting insulin (14.0 +/- 7.9 vs 34.1 
+/- 17.7 microIU/mL; P = .04) and HOMA (4.01 +/- 2.01 vs 7.95 +/- 5.44; P = 
.002) levels than GG homozygote subjects. FBG, HOMA, and other metabolic and 
anthropometric indices were similar between TGF-beta codon 10 -869 T/C 
genotypes. The daily dose of steroid (mg/d) and A allele frequency for TNF-alpha 
-238 G/A genotype were significant predictors of HOMA index in linear regression 
analysis.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that beside the daily dose of steroids, 
TNF-alpha -238 G/A genotype may contribute to insulin resistance in renal 
transplant recipients. Further investigations may highlight the effects of 
cytokine gene heterogenity on insulin resistance in those patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2006.01.041
PMID: 16549165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]