1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Nov;31(11):2433-42. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301065.
 Epub 2006 Mar 22.

Pharmacogenomic evaluation of the antidepressant citalopram in the mouse tail 
suspension test.

Crowley JJ(1), Brodkin ES, Blendy JA, Berrettini WH, Lucki I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

The identification of genetic variants regulating antidepressant response in 
human patients would allow for more individualized, rational, and successful 
drug treatments. We have previously identified the BALB/cJ inbred mouse strain 
as highly responsive to the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) 
citalopram in the tail suspension test (TST), a widely used and well-established 
screening paradigm for detecting compounds with antidepressant activity. In 
contrast, A/J mice did not show a significant response to citalopram in this 
test despite exposure to equivalent plasma levels of the drug. To identify 
genetic determinants of this differential response, 506 F2 mice from an 
intercross between BALB/cJ and A/J mice were phenotyped. Composite interval 
mapping of 92 mice from the phenotypic extremes revealed three loci on 
chromosomes 7, 12, and 19 affecting citalopram response in the TST. The 
quantitative trait locus (QTL) at the telomeric end of chromosome 19 showed the 
greatest level of significance. Three candidate genes residing in this locus 
include those for vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2, slc18a2), alpha 2A 
adrenergic receptor (adra2a), and beta 1 adrenergic receptor (adrb1). The 
protein coding regions of these three genes in BALB/cJ and A/J mice were 
sequenced and two polymorphisms were found in VMAT2 (Leu117Pro and Ser505Pro), 
while the transcribed regions of adra2a and adrb1 were of identical sequence 
between strains. Follow-up studies are needed to determine if the VMAT2 
polymorphisms are functional and if they could explain the chromosome 19 QTL. 
The present quantitative trait study suggests possible candidate genes for human 
pharmacogenetic studies of therapeutic responses to SSRIs such as citalopram.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301065
PMID: 16554742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]