1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;91(6):2264-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2005-2146.
Epub  2006 Mar 28.

Clinical and functional characteristics of the human Arg59Ter insulin-like 
growth factor i receptor (IGF1R) mutation: implications for a gene dosage effect 
of the human IGF1R.

Raile K(1), Klammt J, Schneider A, Keller A, Laue S, Smith R, Pfäffle R, 
Kratzsch J, Keller E, Kiess W.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Augustenburgerplatz 1, D-13353 Berlin, Germany. klemens.raile@charite.de

CONTEXT: Signaling via the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) is crucial for normal 
prenatal and postnatal growth. The heterozygous IGF-IR mutation Arg59Ter 
resulted in reduced IGF-IR expression and represents haploinsufficiency of the 
human IGF1R gene.
OBJECTIVE: We studied clinical and in vitro aspects of a human IGF1R gene dosage 
effect. We provide detailed clinical data on the two half-brothers and their 
mother with the Arg59Ter mutation. Arg59Ter and control fibroblasts were 
examined for functionality of IGF-I and insulin-stimulated receptor 
phosphorylation and signal transduction.
RESULTS: The two brothers presented with primary microcephaly, mild mental 
retardation, and intrauterine as well as postnatal growth deficits. After GH 
therapy (30 microg/kg.d) for 24 months, the growth deficit in the propositus 
decreased by +1.0 sd. There was no clinical evidence for impaired glucose 
tolerance or hypoglycemia in all Arg59Ter subjects. In vitro, IGF-IR-deficient 
Arg59Ter cells expressed less IGF-IR and unchanged insulin receptor (IR) 
protein. Receptor autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of downstream protein 
kinase B/Akt exhibited resistance to IGF-I but showed an augmented response to 
insulin in Arg59Ter cells. Decreased IGF-IR content was accompanied by a 
reduction of IGF-IR/IR receptor hybrids, and therefore, increased levels of 
IR/IR homodimers probably explain increased insulin-stimulated receptor 
autophosphorylation and Akt phosphorylation.
CONCLUSIONS: In vivo and in vitro IGF-I resistance in Arg59Ter subjects and 
fibroblasts indicates a human IGF1R gene dosage effect involving not only the 
IGF-IR, but also IGF-IR/IR hybrids. The abundance of both the IGF-IR protein and 
IGF-IR/IR hybrid receptors may have an impact on human growth, organ function, 
and glucose metabolism.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2005-2146
PMID: 16569742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]