1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;14(6):780-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201612.

Haplotype-based association analysis of 56 functional candidate genes in the 
IBD6 locus on chromosome 19.

Tello-Ruiz MK(1), Curley C, DelMonte T, Giallourakis C, Kirby A, Miller K, Wild 
G, Cohen A, Langelier D, Latiano A, Wedemeyer N, Lander E, Schreiber S, Annese 
V, Daly MJ, Rioux JD.

Author information:
(1)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Evidence from four independent linkage studies and two meta-analyses of 
genome-wide data support the existence of a locus conferring susceptibility to 
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) in chromosomal region 19p. Identification of a 
susceptibility allele in this approximately 28.5 Mb region with over 600 genes 
is a formidable task. To tackle this problem, we undertook two approaches: (1) 
haplotype-based candidate-gene screen, and (2) evaluation of previously reported 
associations. For the former, we selected genes with potential implication in 
IBD pathogenesis based on published functional and expression data, typed SNPs, 
constructed haplotypes, screened for association in 180 IBD trios, and followed 
up preliminary associations in 343 IBD patients and 207 control individuals. 
Overall, we analyzed 465 SNPs, and 260 haplotypes distributed across 56 
candidate genes. We found suggestive evidence of association (nominal P<0.01) 
with four genes (C3, FCER2, IL12RB1, and CRLF1) in a screening stage, but were 
unable to confirm these preliminary observations at follow-up. In the second 
approach, we typed four nonsynonymous polymorphisms in genes C3 (R102G and 
L314P) and ICAM1 (G241R and K469E) in four independent cohorts totaling 2178 IBD 
cases. We evaluated these data together with previously published reports for 
three of these variants (C3-Gly102, ICAM1-Arg241, and ICAM1-Glu469), in a 
meta-analysis. Our pooled meta-analysis provides compelling evidence against 
association of these variants with disease. Overall, we performed the most 
comprehensive candidate-gene association study for IBD to date. The information 
hereby generated constitutes a valuable resource to investigate other common 
genetic immune diseases, such as celiac disease.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201612
PMID: 16570073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]