1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006 Oct;99(3):257-65. doi:
10.1007/s10549-006-9210-3.  Epub 2006 Apr 5.

An intronic polymorphism associated with increased XRCC1 expression, reduced 
apoptosis and familial breast cancer.

Bu D(1), Tomlinson G, Lewis CM, Zhang C, Kildebeck E, Euhus DM.

Author information:
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9155, USA.

XRCC1 coordinates the activities of DNA polymerase-beta and DNA ligase for base 
excision repair of oxidative DNA damage. In addition, there is some evidence 
that XRCC1 is a negative regulator of apoptosis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
in XRCC1 have been inconsistently associated with breast cancer risk. We 
evaluated XRCC1 gene expression in breast cancer cell lines and 
carcinogen-induced apoptosis in benign breast epithelial cells in relation to 
XRCC1 genotypes. XRCC1 IVS10+141G>A was associated with increased expression of 
XRCC1 mRNA and protein, and reduced apoptosis in response to benzo-[a]-pyrene or 
ionizing radiation, but XRCC1 R399Q was not. These genotypes were also assessed 
in a clinic-based sample that included 190 breast cancer patients with a family 
history of breast cancer and 95 controls with no family history of breast 
cancer. Heterozygous XRCC1 IVS10+141G>A was associated with an increased breast 
cancer risk (O.R. = 1.7, 95% C.I. 1.016-2.827, P = 0.04) as was homozygous XRCC1 
IVS10+141G>A (O.R. = 4.7, 95% C.I. 1.028-21.444, P = 0.03). XRCC1 R399Q was not 
associated with breast cancer (O.R. 1.00, 95% C.I. 0.61-1.64). The XRCC1 
IVS10+141G>A locus is centered in a sequence that is nearly identical to the 
consensus binding site for the PLAG1 transcription factor. XRCC1 IVS10+141G>A is 
an intronic polymorphism that is associated with XRCC1 expression, apoptosis and 
familial breast cancer. It may occur within an intronic regulatory sequence.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-006-9210-3
PMID: 16596326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]