1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6142-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0601805103. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Partnering between monomers of cyclooxygenase-2 homodimers.

Yuan C(1), Rieke CJ, Rimon G, Wingerd BA, Smith WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, 
5416 Medical Science Building I, 1301 East Catherine Street, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-0606, USA.

Prostaglandin endoperoxide H synthases (PGHSs) 1 and 2 convert arachidonic acid 
to prostaglandin H2 in the committed step of prostanoid biosynthesis. These 
enzymes are pharmacological targets of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and 
cyclooxygenase (COX) 2 inhibitors. Although PGHSs function as homodimers and 
each monomer has its own COX and peroxidase active sites, the question of 
whether there is cross-talk between monomers has remained unresolved. Here we 
describe two heterodimers in which a native subunit of human PGHS-2 has been 
coupled to a subunit having a defect within the COX active site at some distance 
from the dimer interface. Native/G533A PGHS-2, a heterodimer with a COX-inactive 
subunit, had the same specific COX activity as the native homodimer. 
Native/R120Q PGHS-2, a heterodimer in which both subunits can oxygenate 
arachidonic acid but in which the R120Q subunit cannot bind the COX inhibitor 
flurbiprofen, was inhibited by flurbiprofen to about the same extent as native 
PGHS-2. These results imply that native PGHS-2 exhibits half-of-sites 
reactivity. Isothermal titration calorimetry established that only one monomer 
of the native PGHS-2 homodimer binds flurbiprofen tightly. In short, binding of 
ligand to the COX site of one monomer alters its companion monomer so that it is 
unable to bind substrate or inhibitor. We conclude that PGHS monomers comprising 
a dimer, although identical in the resting enzyme, differ from one another 
during catalysis. The nonfunctioning subunit may provide structural support 
enabling its partner monomer to catalyze the COX reaction. This subunit 
complementarity may prove to be characteristic of other dimeric enzymes having 
tightly associated monomers.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0601805103
PMCID: PMC1458845
PMID: 16606823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.