1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 18;103(16):6154-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0601923103. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Juxtamembranous aspartic acid in Insig-1 and Insig-2 is required for cholesterol 
homeostasis.

Gong Y(1), Lee JN, Brown MS, Goldstein JL, Ye J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9046, USA.

Insig-1 and Insig-2 are closely related proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) that mediate feedback control of cholesterol synthesis by sterol-dependent 
binding to the following two membrane proteins: the escort protein Scap, thus 
preventing proteolytic processing of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins; 
and the cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA 
reductase, thus inducing the ubiquitination and ER-associated degradation of the 
enzyme. Here, we report that the conserved Asp-205 in Insig-1, which abuts the 
fourth transmembrane helix at the cytosolic side of the ER membrane, is 
essential for its dual function. When Asp-205 was mutated to alanine, the mutant 
Insig-1 lost the ability to bind to Scap and, thus, was unable to suppress the 
cleavage of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins. The mutant Insig-1 was 
ineffective also in accelerating sterol-stimulated degradation of 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase. Alanine substitution of the 
corresponding aspartic acid in Insig-2 produced the same dual defects. These 
studies identify a single amino acid residue that is crucial for the function of 
Insig proteins in regulating cholesterol homeostasis in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0601923103
PMCID: PMC1435366
PMID: 16606821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.