1. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006 Sep;291(3):R728-35. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.00757.2005. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Contribution of adenosine A2A and A2B receptors and heme oxygenase to 
AMPA-induced dilation of pial arterioles in rats.

Ohata H(1), Cao S, Koehler RC.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21287-4961, USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) has been implicated in mediation of cerebral vasodilation 
during neuronal activation and, specifically, in pharmacological activation of 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) and kainate receptors. Possible mediators of 
cerebral vasodilation to alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic 
acid (AMPA) have not been well studied in mature brain, although heme oxygenase 
(HO) activity has been implicated in newborn pigs. In anesthetized rats, 5 min 
of topical superfusion of 30 and 100 microM AMPA on the cortical surface through 
a closed cranial window resulted in increases in pial arteriolar diameter. The 
dilatory response to AMPA was not inhibited by superfusion of an NO synthase 
inhibitor, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, or a cytochrome P-450 epoxygenase 
inhibitor, all of which have been shown to inhibit the cortical blood flow 
response to sensory activation. However, the 48 +/- 13% dilation to 100 microM 
AMPA was attenuated 56-71% by superfusion of the adenosine A(2A) receptor 
antagonist ZM-241385, the A(2B) receptor antagonist alloxazine, and the HO 
inhibitor chromium mesoporphyrin. Combination of the latter three inhibitors did 
not attenuate the dilator response more than the individual inhibitors, whereas 
an AMPA receptor antagonist fully blocked the vasodilation to AMPA. These 
results indicate that cortical pial arteriolar dilation to AMPA does not require 
activation of NO synthase, cyclooxygenase-2, or cytochrome P-450 epoxygenase but 
does depend on activation of adenosine A(2A) and A(2B) receptors. In addition, 
CO derived from HO appears to play a role in the vascular response to AMPA 
receptor activation in mature brain by a mechanism that is not additive with 
that of adenosine receptor activation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.00757.2005
PMCID: PMC1764456
PMID: 16601261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]