1. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2006 Mar;81(2):101-5, 107, 109.

Generation of a constitutively active mutant of human GPR48/LGR4, a 
G-protein-coupled receptor.

Gao Y(1), Kitagawa K, Shimada M, Uchida C, Hattori T, Oda T, Kitagawa M.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry 1, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Hamamatsu, 431-3192, Japan.

GPR48, also known as leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing G-protein-coupled 
receptor 4 (LGR4), is a member of the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family 
of proteins. However, its biological functions remain unclear, since neither its 
ligand nor signal transduction pathway have been identified, and it is usually 
difficult to solve the function of such orphan receptors. The aim of this study 
was to generate a constitutively active form of human GPR48, that would form a 
ligand-independent active conformation and may function in a similar manner to 
activated GPR48 following ligand binding. We introduced four independent 
mutations into transmembrane domains V and VI of a human GPR48 cDNA. The 
wild-type and mutant GPR48s were expressed in HEK293 cells by transient 
transfection of appropriate expression plasmids. Since ligand-activated 
receptors for gonadotropins, which are structurally similar to GPR48, stimulate 
adenylate cyclase and increase cellular cyclic AMP, we investigated, whether the 
GPR48-transfected cells showed altered cyclic AMP levels. The cellular cyclic 
AMP level in HEK293 cells was increased following transfection of wild-type 
GPR48 in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, transfection of a GPR48-T7551 
mutant, in which threonine-755 was replaced with isoleucine, dramatically 
increased the cyclic AMP level. Stable transformants derived from HCT116 cells 
that constitutively expressed the GPR48-T7551 mutant also showed high cyclic AMP 
levels. These results indicate that the GPR48-T7551 mutant is a constitutively 
active mutant. This mutant may be useful for studying the biological functions 
of GPR48 and GPR48-mediated signal transduction, even if the specific ligand 
remains unknown in the future.

PMID: 16607882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]