1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 May;84(5):349-64. doi: 10.1007/s00109-005-0029-x. Epub 
2006 Apr 8.

Role of L-type Ca2+ channels in iron transport and iron-overload cardiomyopathy.

Oudit GY(1), Trivieri MG, Khaper N, Liu PP, Backx PH.

Author information:
(1)Heart and Stroke/Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence, University Health 
Network, University of Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E2, Canada.

Excessive body iron or iron overload occurs under conditions such as primary 
(hereditary) hemochromatosis and secondary iron overload (hemosiderosis), which 
are reaching epidemic levels worldwide. Primary hemochromatosis is the most 
common genetic disorder with an allele frequency greater than 10% in individuals 
of European ancestry, while hemosiderosis is less common but associated with a 
much higher morbidity and mortality. Iron overload leads to iron deposition in 
many tissues especially the liver, brain, heart and endocrine tissues. Elevated 
cardiac iron leads to diastolic dysfunction, arrhythmias and dilated 
cardiomyopathy, and is the primary determinant of survival in patients with 
secondary iron overload as well as a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in 
primary hemochromatosis patients. In addition, iron-induced cardiac injury plays 
a role in acute iron toxicosis (iron poisoning), myocardial ischemia-reperfusion 
injury, Friedreich ataxia and neurodegenerative diseases. Patients with iron 
overload also routinely suffer from a range of endocrinopathies, including 
diabetes mellitus and anterior pituitary dysfunction. Despite clear connections 
between elevated iron and clinical disease, iron transport remains poorly 
understood. While low-capacity divalent metal and transferrin-bound transporters 
are critical under normal physiological conditions, L-type Ca2+ channels (LTCC) 
are high-capacity pathways of ferrous iron (Fe2+) uptake into cardiomyocytes 
especially under iron overload conditions. Fe2+ uptake through L-type Ca2+ 
channels may also be crucial in other excitable cells such as pancreatic beta 
cells, anterior pituitary cells and neurons. Consequently, LTCC blockers 
represent a potential new therapy to reduce the toxic effects of excess iron.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-005-0029-x
PMCID: PMC7095819
PMID: 16604332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]