1. Am J Hematol. 2006 May;81(5):335-9. doi: 10.1002/ajh.20596.

Allele frequencies of three factor VIII gene polymorphisms in Iranian 
populations and their application in hemophilia A carrier detection.

Azimifar SB(1), Seyedna SY, Zeinali S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University, 
Shahid Chamran Highway, Evin, Tehran, Iran. Azimifar_babak@yahoo.com

Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder caused by a quantitative 
or qualitative deficiency of blood coagulation factor VIII (FVIII). ARMS 
(amplification refractory mutation system) primers were designed to determine 
allele frequencies of three FVIII gene linked markers, IVS7 nt 27 G/A SNP, 
BclI/intron 18, and HindIII/intron 19 among 85 normal Iranian women from 
unrelated families. Then same method was applied to perform carrier detection 
for hemophilia A families. The allele frequencies of IVS7 nt 27 "G"/"A" allele, 
BclI "T"/"A" allele, and HindIII "C"/"T" allele among normal women were 
0.88/0.12, 0.52/0.48, and 0.48/0.52, respectively. The three polymorphisms were 
found to be in strong linkage disequilibrium, which decreased the overall 
heterozygosity to 51%. Twenty-one women from 15 unrelated hemophilia A families 
were referred to us for hemophilia A carrier detection. Taking advantage of 
these three biallelic polymorphisms in conjunction with multiallelic St14 VNTR 
(locus DXS52), IVS13 (CA)n STR, and IVS22 (CA)n STR, carrier status was 
determined in 16 women (16/21 or 76% of the at-risk women) from 11 families 
(11/15 or 73% of the families). The used ARMS methods are rapid and can easily 
be applied in conjunction with other FVIII gene linked polymorphisms for 
indirect mutation detection of hemophilia A where they are informative.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.20596
PMID: 16628729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]