1. Lipids Health Dis. 2006 Apr 20;5:10. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-5-10.

How dietary arachidonic- and docosahexaenoic- acid rich oils differentially 
affect the murine hepatic transcriptome.

Berger A(1), Roberts MA, Hoff B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA. aberger2@nc.rr.com

INTRODUCTION: Herein, we expand our previous work on the effects of long chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA) on the murine hepatic transcriptome using 
novel statistical and bioinformatic approaches for evaluating microarray data. 
The analyses focuses on key differences in the transcriptomic response that will 
influence metabolism following consumption of FUNG (rich in 20:4n6), FISH (rich 
in 20:5n3, 22:5n3, and 22:6n3) and COMB, the combination of the two.
RESULTS: Using a variance-stabilized F-statistic, 371 probe sets (out of 13 K 
probe sets in the Affymetrix Mu11K chip set) were changed by dietary treatment 
(P < 0.001). Relative to other groups, COMB had unique affects on murine hepatic 
transcripts involved in cytoskeletal and carbohydrate metabolism; whereas FUNG 
affected amino acid metabolism via CTNB1 signaling. All three diets affected 
transcripts linked to apoptosis and cell proliferation, with evidence FISH may 
have increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation via various 
transcription factors, kinases, and phosphatases. The three diets affected lipid 
transport, lipoprotein metabolism, and bile acid metabolism through diverse 
pathways. Relative to other groups, FISH activated cyps that form hydroxylated 
fatty acids known to affect vascular tone and ion channel activity. FA synthesis 
and delta 9 desaturation were down regulated by COMB relative to other groups, 
implying that a FA mixture of 20:4n6, 20:5n3, and 22:6n3 is most effective at 
down regulating synthesis, via INS1, SREBP, PPAR alpha, and TNF signaling. Heme 
synthesis and the utilization of heme for hemoglobin production were likely 
affected by FUNG and FISH. Finally, relative to other groups, FISH increased 
numerous transcripts linked to combating oxidative such as peroxidases, an 
aldehyde dehydrogenase, and heat shock proteins, consistent with the major 
LC-PUFA in FISH (20:5n3, 22:5n3, 22:6n3) being more oxidizable than the major 
fatty acids in FUNG (20:4n6).
CONCLUSION: Distinct transcriptomic, signaling cascades, and predicted affects 
on murine liver metabolism have been elucidated for 20:4n6-rich dietary oils, 
22:6n3-rich oils, and a surprisingly distinct set of genes were affected by the 
combination of the two. Our results emphasize that the balance of dietary n6 and 
n3 LC-PUFA provided for infants and in nutritional and neutraceutical 
applications could have profoundly different affects on metabolism and cell 
signaling, beyond that previously recognized.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-511X-5-10
PMCID: PMC1479345
PMID: 16623957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]