1. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Jul;17(7):2996-3008. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-09-0862. Epub
2006  Apr 19.

On and off membrane dynamics of the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi tethering factor 
p115 in vivo.

Brandon E(1), Szul T, Alvarez C, Grabski R, Benjamin R, Kawai R, Sztul E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35924, USA.

The mechanisms regulating membrane recruitment of the p115 tethering factor in 
vivo are unknown. Here, we describe cycling of p115 between membranes and 
cytosol and document the effects of Golgi matrix proteins, Rab1, and soluble 
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein (SNAP) receptors 
(SNAREs) on this process. Rapid membrane/cytosol exchange is shown by swift 
(t1/2 approximately 20 s) loss of Golgi-localized p115-green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) after repeated photobleaching of cell periphery and rapid (t1/2 
approximately 13 s) fluorescence recovery after photobleaching Golgi-localized 
p115-GFP. p115 mutant missing the GM130/giantin binding site exhibits analogous 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) (t1/2 approximately 13 s), 
suggesting that GM130 and giantin are not major determinants of p115 membrane 
dynamics. In contrast, p115-GFP exchanges more rapidly (t1/2 approximately 8 s) 
in cells expressing the inactive Rab1/N121I mutant, indicating that p115 cycling 
is influenced by Rab1. p115-GFP dynamics is also influenced by the assembly 
status of SNAREs. In cells expressing an ATPase-deficient NSF/E329Q mutant that 
inhibits SNARE complex disassembly, the cycling kinetics of p115-GFP are 
significantly slower (t1/2 approximately 21 s). In contrast, in cells incubated 
at reduced temperature (10 degrees C) that inhibits vesicular traffic, the 
cycling kinetics of p115-GFP are faster (t1/2 approximately 7 s). These data 
suggest that p115-binding sites on the membrane are provided by unassembled 
SNAREs. In agreement, biochemical studies show increased p115 recruitment to 
membranes in the presence of NSF and alpha-SNAP. Our data support a model in 
which recruitment of tethers is directly regulated by the assembly status of 
SNAREs.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-09-0862
PMCID: PMC1483036
PMID: 16624868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]