1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006 Jul;34(7):1237-46. doi: 10.1124/dmd.106.009613. Epub 
2006 Apr 25.

Glutathione S-transferase omega 1 and omega 2 pharmacogenomics.

Mukherjee B(1), Salavaggione OE, Pelleymounter LL, Moon I, Eckloff BW, Schaid 
DJ, Wieben ED, Weinshilboum RM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Drug Metab Dispos. 2006 Sep;34(9):1666.

Glutathione S-transferase omega 1 and omega 2 (GSTO1 and GSTO2) catalyze 
monomethyl arsenate reduction, the rate-limiting reaction in arsenic 
biotransformation. As a step toward pharmacogenomic studies of these phase II 
enzymes, we resequenced human GSTO1 and GSTO2 using DNA samples from four ethnic 
groups. We identified 31 and 66 polymorphisms in GSTO1 and GSTO2, respectively, 
with four nonsynonymous-coding single nucleotide polymorphisms (cSNPs) in each 
gene. There were striking variations among ethnic groups in polymorphism 
frequencies and types. Expression constructs were created for all eight 
nonsynonymous cSNPs, as well as a deletion of codon 155 in GSTO1, and those 
constructs were used to transfect COS-1 cells. Quantitative Western blot 
analysis, after correction for transfection efficiency, showed a reduction in 
protein level of greater than 50% for the GSTO1 Tyr32 variant allozyme compared 
with wild type (WT), whereas levels for the Asp140, Lys208, Val236, and codon 
155 deletion variant constructs were similar to that of the WT. For GSTO2, the 
Tyr130 and Ile158 variant allozymes showed 50 and 84% reductions in levels of 
expression, respectively, compared with WT, whereas the Ile41 and Asp142 
allozymes displayed levels similar to that of WT GSTO2. Rabbit reticulocyte 
lysate degradation studies showed that the GSTO1 Tyr32 and the GSTO2 Tyr130, 
Ile158, and Asp142/Ile158 variant allozymes were degraded more rapidly than were 
their respective WT allozymes. These observations raise the possibility of 
functionally significant pharmacogenomic variation in the expression and 
function of GSTO1 and GSTO2.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.106.009613
PMID: 16638819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]