1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 23;281(25):17061-17068. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M602217200.
Epub  2006 Apr 26.

Limited mutations in full-length tetrameric human alpha2-macroglobulin abrogate 
binding of platelet-derived growth factor-BB and transforming growth 
factor-beta1.

Arandjelovic S(1), Van Sant CL(2), Gonias SL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92093.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 
22908.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92093. Electronic address: sgonias@ucsd.edu.

alpha2-Macroglobulin (alpha2M) inhibits diverse extracellular proteases, binds 
growth factors such as platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) and 
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), and carries beta-amyloid peptide. 
alpha2M may also trigger cell signaling by binding to the low density 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP-1) and/or other cell surface 
receptors. Based on studies with recombinant alpha2M fragments expressed in 
bacteria and synthetic peptides, we previously localized a growth factor-binding 
site near the center of the alpha2M subunit. However, because intact alpha2M 
forms a hollow cylinder structure, an alternative model for growth factor 
binding involves nonspecific entrapment within the alpha2M core. To distinguish 
between these two models, we engineered mutations in the putative growth factor 
binding sequence of full-length alpha2M. These mutations did not perturb the 
tetrameric structure of alpha2M, reaction with proteases, the thiol ester bonds, 
or binding to LRP-1. A single mutation (E730R) completely blocked binding of 
platelet-derived growth factor-BB to intact alpha2M. E730R did not alter 
TGF-beta1 binding; however, this mutation in combination with mutations at 
Glu714 and Asp719 eliminated the increase in TGF-beta1 binding associated with 
alpha2M conformational change. These studies demonstrate that growth factor 
binding to intact alpha2M is specific, involving a defined region of the alpha2M 
subunit. The exact sequences required for binding different growth factors may 
be non-identical, mimicking the model of the bait region in which different 
proteases target adjacent and sometimes overlapping sequences.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M602217200
PMID: 16641085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]