1. Blood. 2006 May 15;107(10):3876-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-3043. Epub 2006
 Jan 10.

Depolymerized holothurian glycosaminoglycan and heparin inhibit the intrinsic 
tenase complex by a common antithrombin-independent mechanism.

Sheehan JP(1), Walke EN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology, University of Wisconsin, Medical Sciences 
Center Rm. 4285, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA. 
jps@medicine.wisc.edu

Depolymerized holothurian glycosaminoglycan (DHG) is a fucosylated chrondroitin 
sulfate that possesses antithrombin-independent antithrombotic properties and 
inhibits factor X activation by the intrinsic tenase complex (factor IXa-factor 
VIIIa). The mechanism and molecular target for intrinsic tenase inhibition were 
determined and compared with inhibition by low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). 
DHG inhibited factor X activation in a noncompetitive manner (reduced 
V(max(app))), with 50-fold higher apparent affinity than LMWH. DHG did not 
affect factor VIIIa half-life or chromogenic substrate cleavage by factor 
IXa-phospholipid but reduced the affinity of factor IXa for factor VIIIa. DHG 
competed factor IXa binding to immobilized LMWH with an EC(50) 35-fold lower 
than soluble LWMH. Analysis of intrinsic tenase inhibition, employing factor IXa 
with mutations in the heparin-binding exosite, demonstrated that relative 
affinity (K(i)) for DHG was as follows: wild type > K241A > H92A > R170A > > 
R233A, with partial rather than complete inhibition of the mutants. This rank 
order for DHG potency correlated with the effect of these mutations on factor 
IXa-LMWH affinity and the potency of LMWH for intrinsic tenase. DHG also 
accelerated decay of the intact intrinsic tenase complex. Thus, DHG binds to an 
exosite on factor IXa that overlaps with the binding sites for LMWH and factor 
VIIIa, disrupting critical factor IXa-factor VIIIa interactions.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-07-3043
PMCID: PMC1895295
PMID: 16672689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]