1. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Aug;88(4):372-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.03.013. Epub 
2006 May 8.

Diversity of the CYP21A2 gene: a 6.2-kb TaqI fragment and a 3.2-kb TaqI fragment 
mistaken as CYP21A1P.

Lee HH(1), Tsai FJ, Lee YJ, Yang YC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, No. 45 Min-Sheng 
Road, Tanshui, Taipei 251, Taiwan. hhlee@ms1.mmh.org.tw

The 3.7- and 3.2-kb fragments produced by TaqI digestion are respective crucial 
markers of the CYP21A2 and CYP21A1P genes for the analysis of the RCCX module in 
chromosome 6p21.3. Herein, we report two distinct CYP21A2 haplotypes. One 
occurred in a CAH patient with a 6.2-kb TaqI fragment caused by a mutation at 
the TaqI site (TCGA) located downstream of the CYP21A2 gene, and the other was a 
parent in a suspected CAH family with a 3.2-kb TaqI fragment resulting from a 
156-bp fragment conversion of the CYP21P promoter sequence which led to the 
production of a TaqI site at nt -209 and two additional CYP21A1P nucleotides at 
nt -198 (C>T) and -188/-189 (T insertion). From further sequencing analysis, the 
promoter region of the 3.2-kb allele showed four normal transcriptional 
sequences positioned at nt -126C, -113G, -110T, and -103A. However, other 
nucleotides such as at nt -294T, -293A, and -282A were unchanged. We concluded 
that the 6.2-kb TaqI fragments of the CYP21A2 haplotype may lead to an incorrect 
result in the analysis between CYP21A2 and CYP21A1P. The formation of the 3.2-kb 
TaqI fragment allele which can be mistaken for the CYP21A1P gene may be caused 
by small-scale conversions of the CYP21A1P gene located between nt -126C and 
-282A. Therefore, the CYP21A2 haplotype not only presents a 3.7-kb TaqI fragment 
but also may possibly exist in multiple forms including both 6.2- and 3.2-kb 
fragments.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.03.013
PMID: 16684614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]