1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jun 16;359(4):1023-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.024. Epub 
2006 Apr 25.

From the similarity analysis of protein cavities to the functional 
classification of protein families using cavbase.

Kuhn D(1), Weskamp N, Schmitt S, HÃ¼llermeier E, Klebe G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Marburg, Marbacher Weg 
6, D-35032 Marburg, Germany.

In this contribution, the classification of protein binding sites using the 
physicochemical properties exposed to their pockets is presented. We recently 
introduced Cavbase, a method for describing and comparing protein binding 
pockets on the basis of the geometrical and physicochemical properties of their 
active sites. Here, we present algorithmic and methodological enhancements in 
the Cavbase property description and in the cavity comparison step. We give 
examples of the Cavbase similarity analysis detecting pronounced similarities in 
the binding sites of proteins unrelated in sequence. A similarity search using 
SARS M(pro) protease subpockets as queries retrieved ligands and ligand 
fragments accommodated in a physicochemical environment similar to that of the 
query. This allowed the characterization of the protease recognition pockets and 
the identification of molecular building blocks that can be incorporated into 
novel antiviral compounds. A cluster analysis procedure for the functional 
classification of binding pockets was implemented and calibrated using a diverse 
set of enzyme binding sites. Two relevant protein families, the alpha-carbonic 
anhydrases and the protein kinases, are used to demonstrate the scope of our 
cluster approach. We propose a relevant classification of both protein families, 
on the basis of the binding motifs in their active sites. The classification 
provides a new perspective on functional properties across a protein family and 
is able to highlight features important for potency and selectivity. 
Furthermore, this information can be used to identify possible 
cross-reactivities among proteins due to similarities in their binding sites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.04.024
PMCID: PMC7094329
PMID: 16697007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]