1. J Am Chem Soc. 2006 May 31;128(21):6766-7. doi: 10.1021/ja058822p.

Catalytic reduction of NO to N2O by a designed heme copper center in myoglobin: 
implications for the role of metal ions.

Zhao X(1), Yeung N, Russell BS, Garner DK, Lu Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 600 
South Mathews Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

The effects of metal ions on the reduction of nitric oxide (NO) with a designed 
heme copper center in myoglobin (F43H/L29H sperm whale Mb, CuBMb) were 
investigated under reducing anaerobic conditions using UV-vis and EPR 
spectroscopic techniques as well as GC/MS. In the presence of Cu(I), catalytic 
reduction of NO to N2O by CuBMb was observed with turnover number of 2 mol 
NO.mol CuBMb-1.min-1, close to 3 mol NO.mol enzyme-1.min-1 reported for the ba3 
oxidases from T. thermophilus. Formation of a His-heme-NO species was detected 
by UV-vis and EPR spectroscopy. In comparison to the EPR spectra of 
ferrous-CuBMb-NO in the absence of metal ions, the EPR spectra of 
ferrous-CuBMb-NO in the presence of Cu(I) showed less-resolved hyperfine 
splitting from the proximal histidine, probably due to weakening of the proximal 
His-heme bond. In the presence of Zn(II), formation of a five-coordinate 
ferrous-CuBMb-NO species, resulting from cleavage of the proximal heme Fe-His 
bond, was shown by UV-vis and EPR spectroscopic studies. The reduction of NO to 
N2O was not observed in the presence of Zn(II). Control experiments using 
wild-type myoglobin indicated no reduction of NO in the presence of either Cu(I) 
or Zn(II). These results suggest that both the identity and the oxidation state 
of the metal ion in the CuB center are important for NO reduction. A 
redox-active metal ion is required to deliver electrons, and a higher oxidation 
state is preferred to weaken the heme iron-proximal histidine toward a 
five-coordinate key intermediate in NO reduction.

DOI: 10.1021/ja058822p
PMCID: PMC2531162
PMID: 16719438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]