1. Prenat Diagn. 2006 Aug;26(8):655-8. doi: 10.1002/pd.1431.

Prenatal diagnosis of free sialic acid storage disorders (SASD).

Aula N(1), Aula P.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Finland. nina.aula@helsinki.fi

Free sialic acid storage disorders, Salla disease (SD) and Infantile sialic acid 
storage disease (ISSD), are lysosomal storage diseases due to impaired function 
of a sialic acid transporter, sialin, at the lysosomal membrane. Several 
mutations of the sialin gene, SLC17A5, are known, leading either to the severe 
neonatal/infantile disease or to the milder, adult-type developmental disorder, 
Salla disease. Free sialic acid accumulation in lysosomes causes increased 
tissue concentration and consequently elevated urinary excretion. Prenatal 
diagnosis of SASD is possible either by determination of free sialic acid 
concentration or by mutation analysis of the SLC17A5 gene in fetal specimen, in 
chorionic villus biopsy particularly. Both techniques have been successfully 
applied in several cases, sialic acid assay more often in ISSD cases but 
mutation analysis preferentially in SD. Sialic acid assay of amniotic fluid 
supernatant or cultured amniotic fluid cells may give erroneous results and 
should not be used for prenatal diagnosis of these disorders. The present 
comments are mainly based on our experience of prenatal diagnosis of SD in 
Finnish families. A founder mutation in SLC17A5 gene, 115C-> T, represents 95% 
of the disease alleles in the Finnish SD patients, which provides a unique 
possibility to apply mutation analysis. Therefore, molecular studies have 
successfully been used in 17 families since the identification of the gene and 
the characterization of the SD mutations. Earlier, eight prenatal studies were 
performed by measuring the free sialic acid concentration in chorionic villus 
samples.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.1431
PMID: 16715535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]