1. FASEB J. 2006 Jul;20(9):1558-60. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-5622fje. Epub 2006 May 24.

Cooperative mitogenic signaling by G protein-coupled receptors and growth 
factors is dependent on G(q/11).

Kong KC(1), Billington CK, Gandhi U, Panettieri RA Jr, Penn RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest 
University Health Sciences, Medical Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, North Carolina 
27157, USA.

Previously we reported that the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) agonist 
thrombin potentiated the mitogenic effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) on 
human airway smooth muscle (ASM) by promoting sustained late-phase activation of 
PI3K and p70S6K via a pathway dependent on Gbetagamma subunits of heterotrimeric 
G proteins. Here, we provide additional mechanistic insight and reveal the 
robustness of this phenomenon by demonstrating that H1 histamine and thromboxane 
receptors utilize the same mechanism to augment ASM growth via specific 
activation of the heterotrimeric G protein G(q/11). Thrombin, histamine, and 
U46619 all enhanced EGF-stimulated [3H]-thymidine incorporation as well as 
late-phase Akt and p70S6K phosphorylation in ASM cultures. Heterologous 
expression of Gbetagamma sequestrants (GRK2CT-GFP or Galpha(i)G203A), as well as 
GRK2NT-GFP (an RGS protein for G(q/11)) but neither p115RhoGEFRGS-GFP (an RGS 
for G(12/13)) nor pertussis toxin pretreatment (inactivating G(i/o)), attenuated 
the effects on both signaling and growth. Inhibition of Rho, Rho kinase, or Src, 
or modulation of arrestin expression did not significantly affect the 
cooperative signaling by EGF and any of the GPCR agonists. Thus, G(q/11)-coupled 
receptors are the principal GPCR subfamily mediating cooperative mitogenic 
signaling in ASM, acting through Gbetagamma-dependent, and 
Src/arrestin-independent activation of PI3K and p70S6K.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-5622fje
PMID: 16723377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]