1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2006 Sep;149(1):48-57. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2006.04.004. Epub 2006 May 15.

Identification of an effector protein and gain-of-function mutants that activate 
Pfmrk, a malarial cyclin-dependent protein kinase.

Chen Y(1), Jirage D, Caridha D, Kathcart AK, Cortes EA, Dennull RA, Geyer JA, 
Prigge ST, Waters NC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Division of Experimental Therapeutics, Walter 
Reed Army Institute of Research, 503 Robert Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 
20910, USA.

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) are key regulators of cell cycle 
control. In humans, CDK7 performs dual roles as the CDK activating kinase (CAK) 
responsible for regulating numerous CDKs and as the RNA polymerase II 
carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) kinase involved in the regulation of 
transcription. Binding of an effector protein, human MAT1, stimulates CDK7 
kinase activity and influences substrate specificity. In Plasmodium falciparum, 
CDKs and their roles in regulating growth and development are poorly understood. 
In this study, we characterized the regulatory mechanisms of Pfmrk, a putative 
homolog of human CDK7. We identified an effector, PfMAT1, which stimulates Pfmrk 
kinase activity in a cyclin-dependent manner. The addition of PfMAT1 stimulated 
RNA polymerase II CTD phosphorylation and had no effect on the inability of 
Pfmrk to phosphorylate PfPK5, a putative CDK1 homolog, which suggests that Pfmrk 
may be a CTD kinase rather than a CAK. In an attempt to abrogate the requirement 
for PfMAT1 stimulation, we mutated amino acids within the active site of Pfmrk. 
We found that two independent mutants, S138K and F143L, yielded a 4-10-fold 
increase in Pfmrk activity. Significant kinase activity of these mutants was 
observed in the absence of either cyclin or PfMAT1. Finally, we observed 
autophosphorylation of Pfmrk that is unaffected by the addition of either cyclin 
or PfMAT1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2006.04.004
PMID: 16737745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]