1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006 Jun;144(3):425-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2249.2006.03087.x.

PARK2/PACRG polymorphisms and susceptibility to typhoid and paratyphoid fever.

Ali S(1), Vollaard AM, Widjaja S, Surjadi C, van de Vosse E, van Dissel JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Centre, the 
Netherlands.

Host genetic factors may contribute to susceptibility to and outcome in 
infectious diseases. Recently polymorphisms in PARK2/PACRG, a gene cluster 
linked to ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated protein degradation, were found 
to be associated with manifest infection by M. leprae. Here, we address whether 
these polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to infection with 
Salmonella typhi and S. paratyphi A, intracellular pathogens that upon infection 
of humans share with mycobacteria aspects of the hosts' immune response. The 
polymorphisms of PARK_e01(-697), PARK2_e01(-2599), rs1333955 and rs1040079 were 
analysed by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length 
polymorphism in a case-control study of typhoid and paratyphoid fever patients 
in an endemic area in Jakarta, Indonesia. For this study, samples were obtained 
from patients with blood culture-confirmed typhoid fever (n=90), paratyphoid 
fever (n=26) and fever controls (n=337) in a passive, community-based 
surveillance and compared to those of randomly selected community controls 
(n=322) from the same city area. The PARK2_e01(-2599) allele T was significantly 
associated with typhoid and paratyphoid fever (OR: 1.51, 95%CI: 1.02-2.23) but 
the other polymorphisms, PARK2_e01(-697), rs1333955 and rs1040079, were not 
associated. Although within the PARK2/PACRG gene cluster the PARK2_e01(-2599) 
allele T was most strongly associated with leprosy (OR approximately 3-5), the 
association with typhoid is much less strong. Our findings suggest that this 
polymorphism in PARK2/PACRG plays a small but significant role in susceptibility 
to the intracellular pathogens S. typhi and S. paratyphi.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2006.03087.x
PMCID: PMC1941982
PMID: 16734611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]