1. Br J Cancer. 2006 Jun 19;94(12):1942-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6603197. Epub 2006
 May 30.

Sensitivity of markers of DNA stability and DNA repair activity to folate 
supplementation in healthy volunteers.

Basten GP(1), Duthie SJ, Pirie L, Vaughan N, Hill MH, Powers HJ.

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Division of Clinical Sciences (North), The University 
of Sheffield, Northern General Hospital, UK.

We have previously reported that supplementation with folic acid (1.2 mg day(-1) 
for 12 week) elicited a significant improvement in the folate status of 61 
healthy volunteers. We have examined effects of this supplement on markers of 
genomic stability. Little is known about the effect of folate supplementation on 
DNA stability in a cohort, which is not folate deficient. Preintervention, there 
was a significant inverse association between uracil misincorporation in 
lymphocyte DNA and red cell folate (P < 0.05). In contrast, there were no 
associations between folate status and DNA strand breakage, global DNA 
methylation or DNA base excision repair (measured as the capacity of the 
lymphocyte extract to repair 8-oxoGua ex vivo). Folate supplementation elicited 
a significant reduction in uracil misincorporation (P < 0.05), while DNA strand 
breakage and global DNA methylation remained unchanged. Increasing folate status 
significantly decreased the base excision repair capacity in those volunteers 
with the lowest preintervention folate status (P < 0.05). Uracil 
misincorporation was more sensitive to changes in folate status than other 
measures of DNA stability and therefore could be considered a specific and 
functional marker of folate status, which may also be relevant to cancer risk in 
healthy people.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6603197
PMCID: PMC2361358
PMID: 16736000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]