1. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;28(2):107-10.

[Association of the responsiveness of advanced non-small cell lung cancer to 
platinum-based chemotherapy with p53 and p73 polymorphisms].

[Article in Chinese]

Yuan P(1), Miao XP, Zhang XM, Wang ZH, Tan W, Zhang XR, Sun Y, Xu BH, Lin DX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

OBJECTIVE: It has been proposed that genetic polymorphisms in apoptosis-related 
genes might be associated with sensitivity of cancer cells to platinum-based 
chemotherapy. This study examined the relationship between p53 and p73 genetic 
polymorphisms and the response to platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with 
advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: A total of 165 patients with advanced NSCLC treated with platinum-based 
chemotherapy were genotyped for the p53 codon 72 Pro-->Arg and p73 exon 2 
G4C14-->A4T14 polymorphisms using PCR-RFLP and ARMS-PCR assays. Clinical 
response to the chemotherapy was obtained after 2 to 3 cycles. The adjusted odds 
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using 
unconditional logistic regression model. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: The p53 Pro allele carriers had higher response rate than non-carriers 
(OR = 2.46; 95% CI = 1.11 - 5.45). A higher response rate was also observed for 
the p73 G4C14/A4T14 or A4T14/A4T14 genotype, compared with the G4C14/G4C14 
genotype (OR = 2.22; 95% CI = 1.14 - 4.30). When these two polymorphisms were 
combined to be analyzed, it was found that the response rate in those carrying 
the wild-type genotypes at both genes was only 7.7%, whereas the response rates 
in patients carrying 1, 2, or more than 2 variant alleles of p53 and p73 were 
34.8%, 42.2% and 40.7%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Those results suggest that p53 and p73 polymorphisms may be 
associated with clinical responsiveness to platinum-based chemotherapy in 
advanced NSCLC.

PMID: 16750013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]