1. Kidney Int. 2006 Aug;70(4):743-50. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5001551. Epub 2006 Jun
7.

Renal vascular sclerosis is associated with inherited thrombophilias.

Goforth RL(1), Rennke H, Sethi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa, IA, 
USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2006 Aug;70(4):620-1. doi: 10.1038/sj.ki.5001721.

Vascular sclerosis is often seen in renal biopsies. It is usually associated 
with diabetes mellitus, hypertension, smoking, etc. However, whether inherited 
thrombophilic states such as factor V gene mutation, prothrombin gene mutation, 
and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene mutation are associated 
with the vascular sclerosis is not known. Renal biopsies that showed vascular 
disease were grouped into five groups: (1) diabetic patients, (2) hypertensive 
patients, (3) diabetic and hypertensive patients, (4) smokers, and (5) vascular 
sclerosis of unknown etiology (idiopathic renal disease). Renal biopsies with no 
vascular sclerosis were used as controls. Frozen tissue was analyzed for factor 
V Leiden mutation, prothrombin G20210A mutation, and MTHFR C677T. Factor V 
Leiden mutation and prothrombin G20210A mutation was not seen in patients with 
diabetes, hypertension, or smoking, whereas MTHFR C677T polymorphism in these 
groups was not significant, compared to the controls. In the idiopathic renal 
disease group, three of the 17 patients (17.6%) had prothrombin G20210A 
mutation, two of the 17 patients (11.8%) had the factor V Leiden mutation, and 
five of the 17 (29.4%) were homozygous for the MTHFR C677T polymorphism. When 
the data were evaluated as a whole, 10 mutations were found in 17 patients 
(P<0.0005 compared to controls) or eight of the 17 patients (47%) were observed 
to have at least one of the three forms of inherited thrombophilia (P<0.001 
compared to controls). These findings indicate that renal vascular lesions, in 
the absence of diabetes, hypertension, or smoking appears to be associated with 
inherited thrombophilias.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ki.5001551
PMID: 16760910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]