1. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Sep;70(3):851-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.105.021436. Epub 2006
Jun  7.

Purine release from spinal cord microglia after elevation of calcium by 
glutamate.

Liu GJ(1), Kalous A, Werry EL, Bennett MR.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Laboratory, Discipline of Physiology, School of Medical 
Sciences, Institute for Biomedical Research, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, 
Australia.

The propagation of Ca2+ waves in a network of microglial cells, after its 
initiation by glutamate, is mediated by purinergic transmission. In this study, 
we investigated the mechanisms by which glutamate releases ATP from cultured 
spinal cord microglia. The 4-fold increase in ATP release from microglia in 
response to glutamate (0.5 mM) was blocked by 
alpha-aminohydroxy-5-methyl-isoxazole-4-proprionate (AMPA)/kainate receptor 
antagonist 6-cyano-7-nitroguinoxaline-2,3-dione and specific AMPA receptor 
antagonist 1-(4-aminophenyl)-4-methyl-7,8-methylenedioxy-5H-2,3-benzodiazepine 
hydrochloride (GYKI 52466) but not by N-methyl-d-aspartic acid or metabotropic 
glutamate receptor antagonists. Glutamate acting on AMPA receptors evoked an ATP 
release that was blocked by antagonizing the rise in intracellular Ca2+ as a 
result of its release from internal stores as well as by antagonizing protein 
kinase C with chelerythrine. Glutamate-stimulated ATP release was significantly 
antagonized by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
blockers flufenamic acid and glibenclamide. A role for the CFTR was further 
confirmed using microglia from CFTR knockout mice, which released significantly 
less ATP than microglia from control wild-type mice in response to glutamate. 
Use of 6-methoxy-1-(3-sulfopropyl)quinolinium fluorescence assay revealed 
functional CFTR in microglia. These observations suggest that glutamate acted on 
microglial AMPA receptors to stimulate release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores 
as well as a Ca2+-dependent isoform of protein kinase C, which then acts to 
trigger release of ATP with the CFTR acting as a regulator of the ATP release 
process, perhaps through another channel or transporter.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.105.021436
PMID: 16760362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]