1. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Nov;27(11):2295-300. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgl108. Epub
2006  Jun 15.

Genetic polymorphisms of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene, plasma 
folate levels and breast cancer susceptibility: a case-control study in Taiwan.

Chou YC(1), Wu MH, Yu JC, Lee MS, Yang T, Shih HL, Wu TY, Sun CA.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) balances the pool of folate 
coenzymes in one-carbon metabolism for DNA synthesis and methylation, both are 
implicated in carcinogenesis. Two common variants in the MTHFR gene (C677T and 
A1298C) have been associated with reduced enzyme activity, thereby making MTHFR 
polymorphisms a potential candidate cancer-predisposing factor. To evaluate the 
C677T and A1298C functional polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene and their 
associations with breast cancer risk, as well as the potential modifying effect 
by plasma folate status on the MTHFR-associated risk, a hospital-based 
case-control study was conducted on a Taiwanese population consisting of 146 
histologically confirmed incident breast cancer cases and their 285 age-matched 
controls without a history of cancer. A PCR-RFLP method was used for MTHFR 
polymorphism genotyping and RIA was used to measure the plasma folate. 
Statistical evaluations were performed using logistic regression analysis. The 
plasma folate level was inversely associated with breast cancer risk with an 
adjusted odds ratio (OR) of 0.52 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.26-1.05] 
observed among women who were in the highest plasma folate tertile. The MTHFR 
677T and 1298C variant alleles were associated with decreased risk for breast 
cancer [adjusted ORs were 0.81 (95% CI: 0.54-1.21) and 0.57 (95% CI: 0.36-0.89) 
for 677CT + TT genotypes and 1298AC + CC genotypes, respectively]. Furthermore, 
compound heterozygote and homozygote variants (677CT + TT and 1298AC + CC) had 
greater reduced risk (adjusted OR: 0.11, 95% CI: 0.03-0.43) among women with 
lower plasma folate levels. These results provide support for the important role 
of folate metabolism in breast tumorigenesis. Further mechanistic studies are 
warranted to investigate how MTHFR combined genotypes exert their effect on 
cancer susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgl108
PMID: 16777985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]