1. Neuroscience. 2006 Sep 1;141(3):1469-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.05.013. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

Typical and atypical antipsychotic drugs target dopamine and cyclic 
AMP-regulated phosphoprotein, 32 kDa and neurotensin-containing neurons, but not 
GABAergic interneurons in the shell of nucleus accumbens of ventral striatum.

Ma J(1), Ye N, Cohen BM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Laboratory, Mailman Research Center, McLean Hospital, 
115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

Specific neurons in the brain are the primary targets of the action of 
antipsychotic drugs. Identification and characterization of the nature of these 
neurons are important for understanding how antipsychotic drugs produce their 
effects. In previous studies GABAergic/dynorphinergic neurons were identified as 
a principal cell target of antipsychotic drugs in the shell of nucleus 
accumbens. In the present study, we further characterized which subpopulations 
of GABAergic neurons in this area respond after acute administration of 
antipsychotic drugs. Rats were treated with the typical antipsychotic 
haloperidol, or the prototype atypical antipsychotic clozapine and killed two 
hours after treatment. In appropriate sections of brain, double 
immunofluorescence labeling was performed with antibodies directed against 
markers specific to candidate cell types and Fos-like proteins (a marker to 
identify drug-induced cell activation). We reported here that haloperidol- and 
clozapine-activated neurons showed the following features: 1) approximately 
54-57% of them express dopamine and cyclic AMP-regulated phosphoprotein, 32 kDa 
(a marker for GABAergic medium spiny projection neurons), 2) they appear rarely 
to be GABAergic interneurons, marked by the calcium binding proteins, 
parvalbumin, calretinin or calbindin-D28K, 3) about 84-86% of them express the 
neuropeptide neurotensin (a neurotransmitter most often associated with 
projection neurons in the site tested). The results suggest that most of the 
antipsychotic drug-activated neurons in the shell of nucleus accumbens are 
likely to be neurotensin containing projection neurons.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.05.013
PMID: 16781818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]