1. J Neuroinflammation. 2006 Jun 30;3:15. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-3-15.

Astrogliosis is delayed in type 1 interleukin-1 receptor-null mice following a 
penetrating brain injury.

Lin HW(1), Basu A, Druckman C, Cicchese M, Krady JK, Levison SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, 
Newark, NJ 07103, USA. linh3@umdnj.edu

The cytokines IL-1alpha and IL-1beta are induced rapidly after insults to the 
CNS, and their subsequent signaling through the type 1 IL-1 receptor (IL-1R1) 
has been regarded as essential for a normal astroglial and microglial/macrophage 
response. To determine whether abrogating signaling through the IL-1R1 will 
alter the cardinal astrocytic responses to injury, we analyzed molecules 
characteristic of activated astrocytes in response to a penetrating stab wound 
in wild type mice and mice with a targeted deletion of IL-1R1. Here we show that 
after a stab wound injury, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) induction on a 
per cell basis is delayed in the IL-1R1-null mice compared to wild type 
counterparts. However, the induction of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, 
tenascin, S-100B as well as glutamate transporter proteins, GLAST and GLT-1, and 
glutamine synthetase are independent of IL-1RI signaling. Cumulatively, our 
studies on gliosis in the IL-1R1-null mice indicate that abrogating IL-1R1 
signaling delays some responses of astroglial activation; however, many of the 
important neuroprotective adaptations of astrocytes to brain trauma are 
preserved. These data recommend the continued development of therapeutics to 
abrogate IL-1R1 signaling to treat traumatic brain injuries. However, astroglial 
scar related proteins were induced irrespective of blocking IL-1R1 signaling and 
thus, other therapeutic strategies will be required to inhibit glial scarring.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-3-15
PMCID: PMC1533808
PMID: 16808851