1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2006 Jul;70(7):1740-9. doi: 10.1271/bbb.60088. Epub
 2006 Jul 1.

Involvement of Moc1 in sexual development and survival of Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe.

Yakura M(1), Ishikura Y, Adachi Y, Kawamukai M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and 
Environmental Science, Shimane University, Matsue 690-8504, Japan.

The moc1 gene in Schizosaccharomyces pombe was found as to overcome sterility 
caused by high expression of adenylyl cyclase. The moc1 gene was found to be 
identical with sds23 and psp1. Although psp1 has been reported to be essential 
for growth, sds23 has not been. To clarify this apparent discrepancy, we first 
assessed independently the phenotypes of the moc1 disruptant. We confirmed that 
the deletion mutant of moc1 is sterile, sensitive to high salt, and grows slowly 
at higher and lower temperatures, and that mutant cells are elongated. Besides 
these phenotypes, we found that viability of the moc1 disruptant was rapidly 
lost at the stationary phase. We confirmed that the Moc1 protein is 
phosphorylated in the stationary phase and also under nitrogen-starved 
conditions. We examined the significance of this phosphorylation of Moc1 by 
creating the S333A or S333D mutant Moc1. Interestingly, while S333D mutant Moc1 
is lower in inducing sexual development, S333A mutant Moc1 is higher in this 
than the wild type, suggesting that phosphorylation of Moc1 affects sexual 
development. The other phenotypes, such as sensitivity to high salt and higher 
temperature and elongation of cells, were not affected by mutation of S333A nor 
S333D. We found that Moc1-GFP localized to both the cytosol and the nucleus 
during mitotic growth, but accumulated in the nucleus in mating cells and then 
enriched in spores, and that this localization shift was negatively regulated by 
the cAMP pathway. This and the observations above suggest that nuclear localized 
Moc1 is an inducer of sexual development. Thus, in addition to the roles of 
moc1/sds23/psp1 in mitosis and stress response, it is also important for the 
survival and sexual development of fission yeast, but phosphorylation of Moc1 
only affects the sexual development.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.60088
PMID: 16819157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]