1. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Aug;18(2):299-308.

Assessment of genetic factors for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Yamada Y(1), Matsuo H, Segawa T, Watanabe S, Kato K, Kameyama T, Yokoi K, 
Ichihara S, Metoki N, Yoshida H, Satoh K, Nozawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie 
University, Mie 514-8507, Japan. yamada@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

The purpose of the present study was to identify gene polymorphisms for reliable 
assessment of genetic factors for type 2 diabetes mellitus. The study population 
comprised 4853 unrelated Japanese individuals (2688 men, 2165 women), including 
1489 subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus (969 men, 520 women) and 3364 
controls (1719 men, 1645 women). The genotypes for 148 polymorphisms of 124 
candidate genes were determined with a method that combines polymerase chain 
reaction and sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes with suspension array 
technology. Sixteen polymorphisms were related (p<0.05) to the prevalence of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus as determined by the chi-square test. Multivariable 
logistic regression analysis with adjustment for age, sex, and the prevalence of 
smoking revealed that, among these polymorphisms, the -603A --> G polymorphism 
of the gene for coagulation factor III (F3) was significantly (p<0.001) 
associated with the prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus, with the -603G 
allele representing a risk factor for this condition. A stepwise forward 
selection procedure demonstrated that F3 genotype (GG versus AA + AG) 
significantly (p<0.001) and independently affected the prevalence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Genotype for F3 may prove reliable for assessment of genetic 
factors for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Determination of the genotype for this 
gene may contribute to personalized prevention of this condition.

PMID: 16820938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]