1. Mol Psychiatry. 2006 Oct;11(10):914-28. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001870. Epub 2006 
Jul 18.

Tryptophan hydroxylase-2 gene polymorphisms in rhesus monkeys: association with 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function and in vitro gene expression.

Chen GL(1), Novak MA, Hakim S, Xie Z, Miller GM.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, New England Primate Research Center, Division of 
Neurochemistry, Southborough, MA 01772-9102, USA.

Tryptophan hydroxylase-2 (TPH2) is a newly identified second form of TPH 
responsible for serotonin synthesis in the brain and has been increasingly 
implicated as a contributor to the etiology of various psychiatric disorders. In 
this study, we have identified the constellation of polymorphisms in rhesus 
monkey TPH2 and investigated genotype/phenotype association as well as gene 
expression effects of specific polymorphisms. Genomic DNA was obtained from 247 
rhesus monkeys, among which 24 had been previously examined for plasma cortisol 
level, dexamethasone suppression, and combined dexmethasone/ACTH challenge. 
Polymorphisms in all exons, splicing junctions and approximately 2 kb of the 
5'-flanking region (5'-FR) of TPH2 were identified by sequencing. We identified 
17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) including two that are predictive of 
amino-acid change (25Pro>His and 75Gly>Ser, respectively), two mononucleotide 
repeats, one dinucleotide repeat, and one 159-bp insertion polymorphism. The 
3'-UTR polymorphisms were significantly associated with 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity, especially 2051A>C, which 
was strikingly correlated with plasma cortisol level in the morning only 
(F=10.203, P=0.001). Luciferase reporter gene assays showed that the 3'-UTR 
polymorphisms and haplotypes had a profound effect on in vitro gene expression. 
Accordingly, these investigations revealed that polymorphisms in 3'-UTR of 
rhesus monkey TPH2 modulate HPA axis function, presumably by affecting levels of 
TPH2 expression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001870
PMID: 16847459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]