1. Pediatr Res. 2006 Sep;60(3):321-6. doi: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000233252.60457.cf.
Epub  2006 Jul 20.

Fatal neonatal-onset mitochondrial respiratory chain disease with T cell 
immunodeficiency.

Reichenbach J(1), Schubert R, Horvàth R, Petersen J, Fütterer N, Malle E, Stumpf 
A, Gebhardt BR, Koehl U, Schraven B, Zielen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Paediatrics, JW Goethe University Frankfurt, 60590 
Frankfurt, Germany. janine.reichenbach@kispe.unizh.ch

We present the clinical and laboratory features of a boy with a new syndrome of 
mitochondrial depletion syndrome and T cell immunodeficiency. The child suffered 
from severe recurrent infectious diseases, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. 
Clinically, he presented with severe psychomotor retardation, axial hypotonia, 
and a disturbed pain perception leading to debilitating biting of the thumb, 
lower lip, and tongue. Brain imaging showed hypoplasia of corpus callosum and an 
impaired myelinization of the temporo-occipital region with consecutive 
supratentorial hydrocephalus. Histologic examination of a skeletal muscle biopsy 
was normal. Biochemical investigation showed combined deficiency of respiratory 
chain complexes II+III and IV. MtDNA depletion was found by real-time PCR. No 
pathogenic mutations were identified in the TK2, SUCLA2, DGUOK, and ECGF1 genes. 
A heterozygous missense mutation was found in POLG1. The pathogenic relevance of 
this mutation is unclear. Interestingly, a lack of CD8(+) T lymphocytes as well 
as NK cells was also observed. The percentage of CD45RO-expressing cells was 
decreased in activated CD8(+) T lymphocytes. Activation of T lymphocytes via 
IL-2 was diminished. The occurrence of the immunologic deficiency in our patient 
with mtDNA depletion is a rare finding, implying that cells of the immune system 
might also be affected by mitochondrial disease.

DOI: 10.1203/01.pdr.0000233252.60457.cf
PMID: 16857757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]