1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):H399-407. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.01025.2005. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Sodium channel kinetic changes that produce Brugada syndrome or progressive 
cardiac conduction system disease.

Zhang ZS(1), Tranquillo J, Neplioueva V, Bursac N, Grant AO.

Author information:
(1)Duke Univ. Medical Center, Box 3504, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Some mutations of the sodium channel gene Na(V1.5) are multifunctional, causing 
combinations of LQTS, Brugada syndrome and progressive cardiac conduction system 
disease (PCCD). The combination of Brugada syndrome and PCCD is uncommon, 
although they both result from a reduction in the sodium current. We hypothesize 
that slow conduction is sufficient to cause S-T segment elevation and undertook 
a combined experimental and theoretical study to determine whether conduction 
slowing alone can produce the Brugada phenotype. Deletion of lysine 1479 in one 
of two positively charged clusters in the III/IV inter-domain linker causes both 
syndromes. We have examined the functional effects of this mutation using 
heterologous expression of the wild-type and mutant sodium channel in 
HEK-293-EBNA cells. We show that DeltaK1479 shifts the potential of 
half-activation, V(1/2m), to more positive potentials (V(1/2m) = -36.8 +/- 0.8 
and -24.5 +/- 1.3 mV for the wild-type and DeltaK1479 mutant respectively, n = 
11, 10). The depolarizing shift increases the extent of depolarization required 
for activation. The potential of half-inactivation, V(1/2h), is also shifted to 
more positive potentials (V(1/2h) = -85 +/- 1.1 and -79.4 +/- 1.2 mV for 
wild-type and DeltaK1479 mutant respectively), increasing the fraction of 
channels available for activation. These shifts are quantitatively the same as a 
mutation that produces PCCD only, G514C. We incorporated experimentally derived 
parameters into a model of the cardiac action potential and its propagation in a 
one dimensional cable (simulating endo-, mid-myocardial and epicardial regions). 
The simulations show that action potential and ECG changes consistent with 
Brugada syndrome may result from conduction slowing alone; marked repolarization 
heterogeneity is not required. The findings also suggest how Brugada syndrome 
and PCCD which both result from loss of sodium channel function are sometimes 
present alone and at other times in combination.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.01025.2005
PMID: 16877553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]