1. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Jul 27;7:65. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-65.

Lack of MEF2A Delta7aa mutation in Irish families with early onset ischaemic 
heart disease, a family based study.

Horan PG(1), Allen AR, Hughes AE, Patterson CC, Spence M, McGlinchey PG, Belton 
C, Jardine TC, McKeown PP.

Author information:
(1)Regional Medical Cardiology Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, Grosvenor Road, 
Belfast, BT12 6BA, Northern Ireland, UK. paul_horan@lineone.net

BACKGROUND: Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) is a complex disease due to the 
combination of environmental and genetic factors. Mutations in the MEF2A gene 
have recently been reported in patients with IHD. In particular, a 21 base pair 
deletion (Delta7aa) in the MEF2A gene was identified in a family with an 
autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance of IHD. We investigated this region of 
the MEF2A gene using an Irish family-based study, where affected individuals had 
early-onset IHD.
METHODS: A total of 1494 individuals from 580 families were included (800 
discordant sib-pairs and 64 parent-child trios). The Delta7aa region of the 
MEF2A gene was investigated based on amplicon size.
RESULTS: The Delta7aa mutation was not detected in any individual. Variation in 
the number of CAG (glutamate) and CCG (proline) residues was detected in a 
nearby region. However, this was not found to be associated with IHD.
CONCLUSION: The Delta7aa mutation was not detected in any individual within the 
study population and is unlikely to play a significant role in the development 
of IHD in Ireland. Using family-based tests of association the number of 
tri-nucleotide repeats in a nearby region of the MEF2A gene was not associated 
with IHD in our study group.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-65
PMCID: PMC1552052
PMID: 16872533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]