1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Oct 1;140(19):2057-62. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31413.

DHCR7 mutation carrier rates and prevalence of the RSH/Smith-Lemli-Opitz 
syndrome: where are the patients?

Nowaczyk MJ(1), Waye JS, Douketis JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Canada. nowaczyk@hhsc.ca

RSH/Smith-Lemli-Opitz (SLOS) is an inborn error of metabolism with protean 
manifestations. Its exact incidence and prevalence are not known; however, the 
carrier rate for the most frequently occurring mutation, the null mutation 
IVS8-1G > C, is approximately 1 in 100 for the Caucasian population in North 
America (1%) and possibly as high as 1 in 50 to 1 in 30 in Central European 
populations (2-3.3%). Based on the allele frequencies and the proportion of this 
mutation observed in various patient populations, the expected incidence of 
RSH/SLOS in those populations was calculated and reported to be between 1 in 
1,590 and 1 in 17,000. However, around the world the observed prevalence and 
incidence are much lower than those calculated from the individual mutation 
carrier rates observed in any given population. The discrepancy between the 
expected incidence and prevalence can be explained only in part by the neonatal 
and infancy deaths of the most severely affected children with RSH/SLOS and the 
under ascertainment of mild and atypical cases at the mild end of the spectrum. 
RSH/SLOS may be responsible for a high number of miscarriages. Recent 
observations estimate the prevalence of SLOS at 16 weeks of gestation as similar 
to that observed at birth (approximately 1 in 60,000) suggesting that either 
reduced fertility of carrier couples or losses of affected embryos or fetuses in 
the first trimester play a significant role in reducing the second trimester 
prevalence of RSH/SLOS. It is possible that the estimates of carrier rates based 
on population screening for the most commonly occurring mutations may not 
reflect the true carrier rates in the population. In order to reconcile the 
above-mentioned paradoxes, we propose a model based on a higher than observed 
carrier frequency of the most common mutation and on very high fetal loss of 
homozygotes for that mutation.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31413
PMID: 16906538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]