1. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 15;26(7):1067-77. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209855. Epub 2006
Aug  14.

Src kinase phosphorylates vascular endothelial-cadherin in response to vascular 
endothelial growth factor: identification of tyrosine 685 as the unique target 
site.

Wallez Y(1), Cand F, Cruzalegui F, Wernstedt C, Souchelnytskyi S, Vilgrain I, 
Huber P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Développement et Vieillissement de l'Endothélium, Département 
Recherche et Dynamique Cellulaires, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, Inserm, 
Grenoble, France.

Src-family tyrosine kinases are regulatory proteins that play a pivotal role in 
the disorganization of cadherin-dependent cell-cell contacts. We previously 
showed that Src was associated with vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin and that 
tyrosine phosphorylation level of VE-cadherin was dramatically increased in 
angiogenic tissues as compared to quiescent tissues. Here, we examined whether 
VE-cadherin was a direct substrate for Src in vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF)-induced VE-cadherin phosphorylation, and we identified the target 
tyrosine sites. Co-transfections of Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO) cells with 
VE-cadherin and constitutively active Src (Y530F) resulted in a robust tyrosine 
phosphorylation of VE-cadherin that was not detected with kinase-dead Src 
(K298M). In an in vitro Src assay, the VE-cadherin cytoplasmic domain is 
directly phosphorylated by purified Src as well as the tyrosine residue 685 
(Tyr)685-containing peptide RPSLY(685)AQVQ. VE-cadherin peptide mapping from 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells stimulated by VEGF and VE-cadherin-CHO 
cells transfected with active Src revealed that Y685 was the unique 
phosphorylated site. The presence of PhosphoY685 was confirmed by its ability to 
bind to C-terminal Src kinase-SH2 domain in a pull-down assay. Finally, we found 
that in a VEGF-induced wound-healing assay, cadherin adhesive activity was 
impaired by Src kinase inhibitors. These data identify that 
VEGF-induced-VE-cadherin tyrosine phosphorylation is mediated by Src on Y685, a 
process that appears to be critical for VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209855
PMID: 16909109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]