1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Apr;87(8):3151-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.87.8.3151.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor residue covalently cross-linked to 
epidermal growth factor.

Wu DG(1), Wang LH, Chi Y, Sato GH, Sato JD.

Author information:
(1)W. Alton Jones Cell Science Center, Inc., Lake Placid, NY 12946.

An epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor monoclonal antibody (mAb), mAb LA22, 
was used to analyze the covalent coupling of human EGF receptors to mouse EGF by 
the amine-reactive cross-linking agent disuccinimidyl suberate. A soluble Mr 
105,000 truncated form of the receptor secreted by A-431 epidermoid carcinoma 
cells and consisting of the ligand-binding extracellular domain was cross-linked 
to 125I-labeled EGF. Digestion of this complex with an endoproteinase that 
specifically cleaves at the COOH side of glutamyl residue released a single 
radiolabeled glycosylated fragment of Mr 18,000 that reacted with mAb LA22. As 
the epitope for mAb LA22 resided between Ala-351 and Asp-364 of the mature 
receptor, this result localized the cross-linked receptor residue(s) to the 
47-amino acid interval from Phe-321 to Glu-367. The receptor residue(s) involved 
in the covalent coupling of rat 125I-labeled transforming growth factor alpha 
was similarly localized to this region of the receptor. This receptor interval, 
which included two glycosylated asparaginyl residues at positions 328 and 337, 
contained but three amino acid residues that were potentially reactive with 
disuccinimidyl suberate: Lys-332, Lys-333, and Lys-336. Characterization of mAb 
LA22-reactive 125I-EGF-labeled receptor fragments generated by an endoproteinase 
specific for the COOH side of lysyl residue placed the NH2 termini of the two 
smallest fragments between the glycosylated residues Asn-328 and Asn-337. These 
results indicated that disuccinimidyl suberate cross-linked the NH2 group of EGF 
residue Asn-1 to the human EGF receptor residue Lys-336. Our results further 
suggest that EGF and transforming growth factor alpha, two members of the EGF 
family of peptide growth factors, interact with closely apposed or identical 
features of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.8.3151
PMCID: PMC53852
PMID: 1691502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]