1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;292(1):E138-44. doi: 
10.1152/ajpendo.00228.2006. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

T222P mutation of the insulin-like 3 hormone receptor LGR8 is associated with 
testicular maldescent and hinders receptor expression on the cell surface 
membrane.

Bogatcheva NV(1), Ferlin A, Feng S, Truong A, Gianesello L, Foresta C, Agoulnik 
AI.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.

Insulin-like 3 (INSL3) hormone plays a crucial role in testicular descent during 
embryonic development. Genetic ablation of Insl3 or its G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) Lgr8 causes cryptorchidism in mice. Previously, we identified a 
nonfunctional T222P mutation of LGR8 in several human patients with testicular 
maldescent. Using a large population of patients and healthy controls from 
Italy, we have demonstrated that T222P LGR8 mutation is present only in affected 
patients (19 T222P/+ of 598 vs. 0/450, P < 0.0001). We have also identified a 
novel allele of LGR8 (R223K) found in one patient with retractile testes. Both 
mutations are located in the leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) of GPCR ectodomain. The 
expression analysis of T222P mutant receptor transfected into 293T cells 
revealed that the mutation severely compromised GPCR cell membrane expression. 
The substitution of Thr(222) with the neutral Ser or Ala, or the R223K mutation, 
did not alter receptor cell membrane expression or ligand-induced cAMP increase. 
Additional mutations, affecting first leucine in a signature LxxLxLxxN/CxL 
stretch of LRR (L283F), or the amino acid residues, forming the disulfide bond 
or coordinating calcium ion in the LDLa module (C71Y and D70Y), also rendered 
proteins with reduced cell surface expression. The structural alterations of 
both LRRs and LDLa of the ligand-binding part of LGR8 cause the inability of 
receptor to express on the cell surface membrane and might be responsible for 
the abnormal testicular phenotype in patients.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.00228.2006
PMID: 16926383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]