1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 3;281(44):33403-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605195200. Epub
2006  Sep 6.

Sulfonylureas correct trafficking defects of disease-causing ATP-sensitive 
potassium channels by binding to the channel complex.

Yan FF(1), Casey J, Shyng SL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channels mediate glucose-induced insulin 
secretion by coupling metabolic signals to beta-cell membrane potential and the 
secretory machinery. Reduced K(ATP) channel expression caused by mutations in 
the channel proteins: sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) and Kir6.2, results in loss 
of channel function as seen in congenital hyperinsulinism. Previously, we 
reported that sulfonylureas, oral hypoglycemic drugs widely used to treat type 
II diabetes, correct the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane 
trafficking defect caused by two SUR1 mutations, A116P and V187D. In this study, 
we investigated the mechanism by which sulfonylureas rescue these mutants. We 
found that glinides, another class of SUR-binding hypoglycemic drugs, also 
markedly increased surface expression of the trafficking mutants. Attenuating or 
abolishing the ability of mutant SUR1 to bind sulfonylureas or glinides by the 
following mutations: Y230A, S1238Y, or both, accordingly diminished the rescuing 
effects of the drugs. Interestingly, rescue of the trafficking defects requires 
mutant SUR1 to be co-expressed with Kir6.2, suggesting that the channel complex, 
rather than SUR1 alone, is the drug target. Observations that sulfonylureas also 
reverse trafficking defects caused by neonatal diabetes-associated Kir6.2 
mutations in a way that is dependent on intact sulfonylurea binding sites in 
SUR1 further support this notion. Our results provide insight into the 
mechanistic and structural basis on which sulfonylureas rescue K(ATP) channel 
surface expression defects caused by channel mutations.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M605195200
PMID: 16956886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]