1. Anal Biochem. 1990 May 15;187(1):179-86. doi: 10.1016/0003-2697(90)90438-f.

Radiometric measurement of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate and ribose 5-phosphate by 
enzymatic procedures.

King MT(1), Passonneau JV, Veech RL.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Laboratory of Metabolism 
and Molecular Biology, Rockville, Maryland 20852.

Methods for the measurement of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) and ribose 
5-phosphate (R-5-P) in tissues have been developed. The lability of these 
compounds during tissue extraction and the recovery of standards from tissue 
preparations have been examined. Enzymatic conversion of 
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate to [14C]AMP in the presence of labeled adenine or 
formation of [14C]GMP ([14C]IMP) in the presence of labeled guanine or 
hypoxanthine was accomplished in the first step. In the second step, the labeled 
product was separated from the substrate. For the measurement of R-5-P, the 
first step included phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase, as well as the 
appropriate substrate and effector (ATP and Pi), in combination with adenine 
phosphoribosyl transferase. The product [14C]AMP was measured in three ways: (1) 
HPLC separation with an on-line radioisotope detector; (2) butanol extraction of 
the labeled base, and measurement of an aliquot of the aqueous phase in a 
scintillation counter; (3) filtration of the incubation mixture with 
chromatographic filter paper disks, which were then counted in a scintillation 
counter. When [14C]guanine was the substrate, HPLC separation was used because 
the butanol or paper separation was not adequate. Measurement of 5-125 pmol of 
PRPP or R-5-P gave a linear response.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-2697(90)90438-f
PMID: 1695494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]