1. Clin Genet. 2006 Oct;70(4):330-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00687.x.

Hereditary lymphedema type I associated with VEGFR3 mutation: the first de novo 
case and atypical presentations.

Ghalamkarpour A(1), Morlot S, Raas-Rothschild A, Utkus A, Mulliken JB, Boon LM, 
Vikkula M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Christian de Duve Institute of 
Cellular Pathology, Universit√© Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Mutations in the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 gene, 
VEGFR3/FLT4, have been identified in a subset of families with hereditary 
lymphedema type I or Milroy disease (MIM 153100). Individuals carrying a VEGFR3 
mutation exhibit congenital edema of the lower limbs, usually bilaterally and 
below the knees, sometimes associated with cellulitis, prominent veins, 
papillomatosis, upturned toenails, and hydrocele. In this study, we report the 
first de novo VEGFR3 mutation in a patient with sporadic congenital lymphedema. 
We also describe three other families with a VEGFR3 mutation. In each family, 
one individual had an atypical clinical presentation of hereditary lymphedema 
type I, whereas the others had the classical VEGFR3 mutation-caused phenotype. 
The atypical presentations included pre-natal pleural effusion, spontaneous 
resorption of lymphedema and elephantiasis. Three of the four identified 
mutations were novel. These data show that de novo VEGFR3 mutations may be 
present in patients without family history of congenital lymphedema. This has 
implications for follow-up care, as such individuals have nearly a 50% risk for 
occurrence of lymphedema in their children. Our findings also indicate that 
although most patients with a VEGFR3 mutation have the well-defined phenotype 
for hereditary lymphedema type I, there are exceptions that should be considered 
in genetic counseling. Because VEGFR3 mutation can cause generalized lymphatic 
dysfunction and can thus result in hydrops fetalis, VEGFR3 screening should be 
added to the investigation of cases of hydrops fetalis of an unknown etiology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2006.00687.x
PMID: 16965327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]