1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Oct 1;41(7):1044-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.04.026. Epub 2006 May 6.

eNOS gene T-786C polymorphism modulates atorvastatin-induced increase in blood 
nitrite.

Nagassaki S(1), Sert√≥rio JT, Metzger IF, Bem AF, Rocha JB, Tanus-Santos JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto, University 
of Sao Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes, 3900, 14049-900 Ribeirao Preto, SP, Brazil.

Comment in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Oct 1;41(7):1041-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.05.034.

Statins inhibit cholesterol synthesis and produce pleiotropic, 
cholesterol-independent effects including endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) 
stimulation and increased expression. However, a functional polymorphism in the 
promoter of the eNOS gene (T-786C) reduces its activity and could modulate the 
response to statins. Here, we examined whether this polymorphism modulates the 
effects of atorvastatin on the plasma levels of markers of NO formation and 
oxidative stress. We genotyped 200 healthy subjects for this polymorphism, and 
15 subjects with the TT genotype and 15 with the CC genotype were selected to 
receive placebo or atorvastatin 10 mg/day po for 14 days. To assess NO 
bioavailability, the plasma concentrations of nitrate, nitrite, and cGMP and the 
whole blood nitrite concentrations were determined after placebo or atorvastatin 
using an ozone-based chemiluminescence assay and an enzyme immunoassay. 
Thiobarbituric acid-reactive species (TBA-RS) were measured in the plasma to 
assess oxidative stress. Atorvastatin decreased cholesterol concentrations 
independent of genotype. Whereas atorvastatin produced no significant changes in 
plasma nitrite, nitrate, or cGMP concentrations in both genotype groups, 
atorvastatin increased whole blood nitrite concentrations and decreased plasma 
TBA-RS concentrations in the CC (but not in the TT) genotype group. These 
findings suggest that the T-786C polymorphism modulates the effects of 
atorvastatin on NO bioavailability and oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.04.026
PMID: 16962929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]