1. Curr Biol. 2006 Oct 24;16(20):2073-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.08.085. Epub
2006  Sep 14.

CRACM1 multimers form the ion-selective pore of the CRAC channel.

Vig M(1), Beck A, Billingsley JM, Lis A, Parvez S, Peinelt C, Koomoa DL, 
Soboloff J, Gill DL, Fleig A, Kinet JP, Penner R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Receptor-mediated Ca(2+) release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is often 
followed by Ca(2+) entry through Ca(2+)-release-activated Ca(2+) (CRAC) channels 
in the plasma membrane . RNAi screens have identified STIM1 as the putative ER 
Ca(2+) sensor and CRACM1 (Orai1; ) as the putative store-operated Ca(2+) 
channel. Overexpression of both proteins is required to reconstitute CRAC 
currents (I(CRAC); ). We show here that CRACM1 forms multimeric assemblies that 
bind STIM1 and that acidic residues in the transmembrane (TM) and extracellular 
domains of CRACM1 contribute to the ionic selectivity of the CRAC-channel pore. 
Replacement of the conserved glutamate in position 106 of the first TM domain of 
CRACM1 with glutamine (E106Q) acts as a dominant-negative protein, and 
substitution with aspartate (E106D) enhances Na(+), Ba(2+), and Sr(2+) 
permeation relative to Ca(2+). Mutating E190Q in TM3 also affects channel 
selectivity, suggesting that glutamate residues in both TM1 and TM3 face the 
lumen of the pore. Furthermore, mutating a putative Ca(2+) binding site in the 
first extracellular loop of CRACM1 (D110/112A) enhances monovalent cation 
permeation, suggesting that these residues too contribute to the coordination of 
Ca(2+) ions to the pore. Our data provide unequivocal evidence that CRACM1 
multimers form the Ca(2+)-selective CRAC-channel pore.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2006.08.085
PMCID: PMC5685803
PMID: 16978865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]