1. BMC Cell Biol. 2006 Sep 19;7:34. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-7-34.

EGF-induced activation of Akt results in mTOR-dependent p70S6 kinase 
phosphorylation and inhibition of HC11 cell lactogenic differentiation.

Galbaugh T(1), Cerrito MG, Jose CC, Cutler ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, United States Military Cancer Institute, Uniformed 
Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA. 
t-galbaugh@northwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: HC11 mouse mammary epithelial cells differentiate in response to 
lactogenic hormone resulting in expression of milk proteins including 
beta-casein. Previous studies have shown that epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
blocks differentiation not only through activation of the Ras/Mek/Erk pathway 
but also implicated phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI-3-kinase) signaling. The 
current study analyzes the mechanism of the PI-3-kinase pathway in an 
EGF-induced block of HC11 lactogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: HC11 and HC11-luci cells, which contain luciferase gene under the 
control of a beta-casein promotor, were treated with specific chemical 
inhibitors of signal transduction pathways or transiently infected/transfected 
with vectors encoding dominant negative-Akt (DN-Akt) or conditionally active-Akt 
(CA-Akt). The expression of CA-Akt inhibited lactogenic differentiation of HC11 
cells, and the infection with DN-Akt adenovirus enhanced beta-casein 
transcription and rescued beta-casein promotor-regulated luciferase activity in 
the presence of EGF. Treatment of cells with Rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, 
blocked the effects of EGF on beta-casein promotor driven luciferase activity as 
effectively as PI-3-kinase inhibitors. While expression of CA-Akt caused a 
constitutive activation of p70S6 kinase (p70S6K) in HC11 cells, the inhibition 
of either PI-3-kinase or mTOR abolished the activation of p70S6K by EGF. The 
activation of p70S6K by insulin or EGF resulted in the phosphorylation of 
ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6), elongation initiation factor 4E (elF4E) and 4E 
binding protein1 (4E-BP1). But lower levels of PI-3-K and mTOR inhibitors were 
required to block insulin-induced phosphorylation of RPS6 than EGF-induced 
phosphorylation, and insulin-induced phosphorylation of elF4E and 4E-BP1 was not 
completely mTOR dependent suggesting some diversity of signaling for EGF and 
insulin. In HC11 cells undergoing lactogenic differentiation the phosphorylation 
of p70S6K completely diminished by 12 hours, and this was partly attributable to 
dexamethasone, a component of lactogenic hormone mix. However, p70S6K 
phosphorylation persisted in the presence of lactogenic hormone and EGF, but the 
activation could be blocked by a PI-3-kinase inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: PI-3-kinase signaling contributes to the EGF block of lactogenic 
differentiation via Akt and p70S6K. The EGF-induced activation of 
PI-3-kinase-Akt-mTOR regulates phosphorylation of molecules including ribosomal 
protein S6, eIF4E and 4E-BP1 that influence translational control in HC11 cells 
undergoing lactogenic differentiation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-7-34
PMCID: PMC1590014
PMID: 16984645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]