1. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Oct 4;7:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-75.

Contribution of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequence alterations to breast cancer 
in Northern India.

Saxena S(1), Chakraborty A, Kaushal M, Kotwal S, Bhatanager D, Mohil RS, 
Chintamani C, Aggarwal AK, Sharma VK, Sharma PC, Lenoir G, Goldgar DE, Szabo CI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Safdarjang Hospital Campus, New Delhi, India. 
sunita_saxena@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: A large number of distinct mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes 
have been reported worldwide, but little is known regarding the role of these 
inherited susceptibility genes in breast cancer risk among Indian women. We 
investigated the distribution and the nature of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline 
mutations and polymorphisms in a cohort of 204 Indian breast cancer patients and 
140 age-matched controls.
METHOD: Cases were selected with regard to early onset disease (< or =40 years) 
and family history of breast and ovarian cancer. Two hundred four breast cancer 
cases along with 140 age-matched controls were analyzed for mutations. All 
coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were 
screened by heteroduplex analysis followed by direct sequencing of detected 
variants.
RESULTS: In total, 18 genetic alterations were identified. Three deleterious 
frame-shift mutations (185delAG in exon 2; 4184del4 and 3596del4 in exon 11) 
were identified in BRCA1, along with one missense mutation (K1667R), one 5'UTR 
alteration (22C>G), three intronic variants (IVS10-12delG, IVS13+2T>C, 
IVS7+38T>C) and one silent substitution (5154C>T). Similarly three pathogenic 
protein-truncating mutations (6376insAA in exon 11, 8576insC in exon19, and 
9999delA in exon 27) along with one missense mutation (A2951T), four intronic 
alterations (IVS2+90T>A, IVS7+75A>T, IVS8+56C>T, IVS25+58insG) and one silent 
substitution (1593A>G) were identified in BRCA2. Four previously reported 
polymorphisms (K1183R, S1613G, and M1652I in BRCA1, and 7470A>G in BRCA2) were 
detected in both controls and breast cancer patients. Rare BRCA1/2 sequence 
alterations were observed in 15 out of 105 (14.2%) early-onset cases without 
family history and 11.7% (4/34) breast cancer cases with family history. Of 
these, six were pathogenic protein truncating mutations. In addition, several 
variants of uncertain clinical significance were identified. Among these are two 
missense variants, one alteration of a consensus splice donor sequence, and a 
variant that potentially disrupts translational initiation.
CONCLUSION: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations appear to account for a lower proportion 
of breast cancer patients at increased risk of harboring such mutations in 
Northern India (6/204, 2.9%) than has been reported in other populations. 
However, given the limited extent of reported family history among these 
patients, the observed mutation frequency is not dissimilar from that reported 
in other cohorts of early onset breast cancer patients. Several of the 
identified mutations are unique and novel to Indian patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-7-75
PMCID: PMC1617095
PMID: 17018160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]