1. Retrovirology. 2006 Oct 2;3:66. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-3-66.

Effects of prostratin on Cyclin T1/P-TEFb function and the gene expression 
profile in primary resting CD4+ T cells.

Sung TL(1), Rice AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. ts144315@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: The latent reservoir of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
in resting CD4+ T cells is a major obstacle to the clearance of infection by 
highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Recent studies have focused on 
searches for adjuvant therapies to activate this reservoir under conditions of 
HAART. Prostratin, a non tumor-promoting phorbol ester, is a candidate for such 
a strategy. Prostratin has been shown to reactivate latent HIV-1 and 
Tat-mediated transactivation may play an important role in this process. We 
examined resting CD4+ T cells from healthy donors to determine if prostratin 
induces Cyclin T1/P-TEFb, a cellular kinase composed of Cyclin T1 and 
Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (CDK9) that mediates Tat function. We also examined 
effects of prostratin on Cyclin T2a, an alternative regulatory subunit for CDK9, 
and 7SK snRNA and the HEXIM1 protein, two factors that associate with P-TEFb and 
repress its kinase activity.
RESULTS: Prostratin up-regulated Cyclin T1 protein expression, modestly induced 
CDK9 protein expression, and did not affect Cyclin T2a protein expression. 
Although the kinase activity of CDK9 in vitro was up-regulated by prostratin, we 
observed a large increase in the association of 7SK snRNA and the HEXIM1 protein 
with CDK9. Using HIV-1 reporter viruses with and without a functional Tat 
protein, we found that prostratin stimulation of HIV-1 gene expression appears 
to require a functional Tat protein. Microarray analyses were performed and 
several genes related to HIV biology, including APOBEC3B, DEFA1, and S100 
calcium-binding protein genes, were found to be regulated by prostratin.
CONCLUSION: Prostratin induces Cyclin T1 expression and P-TEFb function and this 
is likely to be involved in prostratin reactivation of latent HIV-1 proviruses. 
The large increase in association of 7SK and HEXIM1 with P-TEFb following 
prostratin treatment may reflect a requirement in CD4+ T cells for a precise 
balance between active and catalytically inactive P-TEFb. Additionally, genes 
regulated by prostratin were identified that have the potential to regulate 
HIV-1 replication both positively and negatively.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-3-66
PMCID: PMC1599745
PMID: 17014716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]