1. Biochem Genet. 2006 Oct;44(7-8):349-60. doi: 10.1007/s10528-006-9034-1. Epub 
2006 Sep 21.

Transgenic mice can express mutant human coagulation factor IX with higher level 
of clotting activity.

Yan JB(1), Wang S, Huang WY, Xiao YP, Ren ZR, Huang SZ, Zeng YT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 24/1400 West 
Beijing Road, Shanghai, PR China.

To improve the available values of transgenic animals, we produced a mutant 
human coagulation factor IX minigene (including cDNA and intron I) with arginine 
at 338 changed to alanine (R338A-hFIX) by using a direct mutation technique. The 
R338A-hFIX minigene was then cloned into a plasmid carrying the goat beta-casein 
promoter to get a mammary gland-specific expression vector. The clotting 
activity in the supernatant of the transfected HC-11 cells increased to 
approximately three times more than that of wild-type hFIX. Nine transgenic mice 
(three females and six males) were produced, and the copy number of the foreign 
gene was very different, ranging from 1 to 43 in different lines. ELISA, Western 
blot, and clotting assay experiments showed that the transgenic mice could 
express R338A-hFIX, showing higher average levels of clotting activity than 
wild-type hFIX in the milk (103.76% vs. 49.95%). The highest concentration and 
clotting activity of hFIX reached 26 mug/mL and 1287% in one founder (F(0)-7), 
which was over 10 times higher than that in human plasma. Furthermore, RT-PCR, 
APTT assay, and histological analysis indicated that hFIX was expressed 
specifically in the mammary gland without affecting the intrinsic coagulation 
pathway and physiologic performance of the local tissue.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-006-9034-1
PMID: 17028784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]