1. Tumour Biol. 2006;27(6):334-8. doi: 10.1159/000096126. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

ALDH2 1510 G/A (Glu487Lys) polymorphism interaction with age in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Hashimoto T(1), Uchida K, Okayama N, Imate Y, Suehiro Y, Ueyama Y, Yamashita H, 
Hinoda Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

Recent molecular epidemiological studies have revealed a possible association of 
the acetaldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2) 1510 G/A (Glu487Lys) polymorphism with 
various cancers including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). To 
further elucidate the significance of this polymorphism in HNSCC development, 
the relationship between ALDH2 1510 G/A and clinicopathological parameters, 
cigarette smoking or alcohol intake was evaluated in patients with HNSCC. DNA 
samples from 192 patients with primary HNSCC and 192 age- and gender-matched 
healthy controls were genotyped and statistically evaluated. Although there was 
no significant difference in the genotype distribution of ALDH2 1510 G/A between 
cases and controls, we found that the frequency of the ALDH2 genotypes with the 
mutated A (Lys) allele was greater in patients aged <66 years than in those aged 
> or = 66 years (p = 0.034). This tendency became more evident in patients with 
the habit of drinking (n = 143; p = 0.009). The association of ALDH2 1510 G/A 
with age remained significant after multivariate logistic regression analysis 
was performed for the patients (odds ratio for an age interval for 1 year, 
0.970; 95% confidence interval, 0.943-0.998). The present data suggest a 
possible interaction between the ALDH2 1510 G/A polymorphism and age in HNSCC.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000096126
PMID: 17033202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]