1. Immunogenetics. 2006 Nov;58(11):859-64. doi: 10.1007/s00251-006-0161-y. Epub 
2006 Oct 11.

Association of interferon-gamma gene haplotype in the Chinese population with 
hepatitis B virus infection.

Liu M(1), Cao B, Zhang H, Dai Y, Liu X, Xu C.

Author information:
(1)Medical College, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

In general, cytokines encoded by different genes of human genome might strongly 
influence host cell-mediated immune responses, which play an important role in 
the clearance of virus by the infected host. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) 
produced by T lymphocytes and natural killer cells plays an essential role in 
affecting cellular immune responses. A functional study demonstrated that two 
single nucleotide polymorphisms located in the IFN-gamma gene intron (at 
positions +874 and +2109) were involved in its transcriptional regulation. The 
aim of this study was to evaluate whether IFN-gamma gene polymorphisms or its 
haplotypes might be associated with predisposition to hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection in the Chinese population. The study included 181 cases with HBV 
infection and 272 gender, age-matched healthy controls. All genotyping were 
identified by polymerase chain reaction in association with the measurement of 
amplification refractory mutation system. A significant difference was observed 
between case and control groups. The frequency of +874A allele was significantly 
higher in patients than in controls (OR = 2.25, 95%CI = 1.69-2.99, P < 0.0001). 
However, no significant difference was found in the allelic frequencies of 
IFN-gamma +2109A/G between cases and controls (P > 0.05). By haplotype analysis, 
the frequency of haplotype AG (+874A and +2109G) revealed a significant 
difference in the cases in comparison to controls (P < 0.0001). Multiple 
logistic regression analysis showed that individuals possessing haplotype AG had 
an increased likelihood of HBV infection (OR = 8.14, 95%CI = 4.98-13.30). Our 
results suggest that haplotype AG containing +874A and +2109G may be a crucial 
risk factor of genetic susceptibility to HBV infection in the Chinese 
population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-006-0161-y
PMID: 17033822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]