1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Dec 1;15(23):3379-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl414. Epub 2006
Oct  11.

Fibulin-5 mutations: mechanisms of impaired elastic fiber formation in recessive 
cutis laxa.

Hu Q(1), Loeys BL, Coucke PJ, De Paepe A, Mecham RP, Choi J, Davis EC, Urban Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of impaired elastic fiber formation in 
recessive cutis laxa, we have investigated two disease-causing missense 
substitutions in fibulin-5, C217R and S227P. Pulse-chase immunoprecipitation 
experiments indicated that S227P mutant fibulin-5 was synthesized and secreted 
by skin fibroblasts at a reduced rate when compared with the wild-type protein. 
Both mutants failed to be incorporated into elastic fibers by transfected rat 
lung fibroblasts. Purified recombinant fibulin-5 with either mutation showed 
reduced affinity for tropoelastin in solid-phase binding assays. Furthermore, 
S227P mutant fibulin-5 also showed impaired association with fibrillin-1 
microfibrils. The same mutation triggered an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
response, as indicated by the strong co-localization of this mutant protein with 
folding chaperones in the ER, including calreticulin, immunoglobulin-binding 
protein and protein disulfide isomerase, and by increased rates of apoptosis in 
patient fibroblasts. Histological analysis of skin sections from a cutis laxa 
patient with a homozygous S227P mutation showed a lack of fibulin-5 in the 
extracellular matrix and a concomitant disorganization of dermal elastic fibers. 
By electron microscopy, elastic fibers in the skin of this patient showed a 
failure of elastin globules to fuse into a continuous elastic fiber core. We 
conclude that recessive cutis laxa mutations in fibulin-5 result in misfolding, 
decreased secretion and a reduced interaction with elastin and fibrillin-1 
leading to impaired elastic fiber development. These findings support the 
hypothesis that fibulin-5 is necessary for elastic fiber formation by 
facilitating the deposition of elastin onto a microfibrillar scaffold via direct 
molecular interactions.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl414
PMID: 17035250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]