1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Mar 5;144B(2):207-14. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30423.

Association between the 5q31.1 gene neurogenin1 and schizophrenia.

Fanous AH(1), Chen X, Wang X, Amdur RL, O'Neill FA, Walsh D, Kendler KS.

Author information:
(1)Washington VA Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia, USA. 
ayman.fanous@med.va.gov

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that schizophrenia results from aberrant 
neurodevelopment. The neurogenin1 gene (neurog1) consists of a single 1,666 bp 
exon that encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that 
causes neuronal differentiation and induces cortical and glutamatergic 
differentiation programs. Because of its function and its location in 5q31.1, 
which has been linked to schizophrenia in multiple samples, we tested it for 
association with the disorder. We sequenced neurog1 in 25 affected subjects from 
the Irish Study of High-Density Schizophrenia Families. We observed a 5'-UTR SNP 
at position -60, already present in databases as rs8192558, and tested it along 
with rs2344485, rs8192559, and rs2344484. Narrow, intermediate, and broad 
diagnostic definitions were used. The major alleles of rs8192558 and rs2344484 
were over-transmitted to affected subjects using both Pedigree Disequilibrium 
Test (PDT) (0.01 < or = P < or = 0.06) and FBAT (0.02 < or = P < or = 0.07). A 
haplotype consisting of the major alleles of all four SNPs was significantly 
over-transmitted in FBAT to the broad definition (P = 0.049), with trend 
significance to the narrow and intermediate definitions, and with trend 
significance in PDT. In confirmatory tests using 657 cases and 411 controls, 
this haplotype was slightly but not significantly over-represented in cases (81% 
vs. 77%, P = 0.21). These results, along with a priori evidence for the 
involvement of neurog1 in neurodevelopment, suggest that variants in neurog1 
might have a small effect on susceptibility to schizophrenia. This gene should 
be tested in additional and larger samples.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30423
PMID: 17044100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]