1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2006 Dec;29(6):739-42. doi: 10.1007/s10545-006-0356-2.
Epub  2006 Oct 14.

Mutational spectrum of classical galactosaemia in Spain and Portugal.

Gort L(1), Boleda MD, Tyfield L, Vilarinho L, Rivera I, Cardoso ML, Santos-Leite 
M, Girós M, Briones P.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Corporació Sanitària Clínic, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Classical galactosaemia is an autosomal recessive inherited metabolic disorder 
due to deficient galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT). Over 180 
different base changes and disease-causing mutations have been reported in the 
GALT gene. Mutation p.Q188R was found to be the most common molecular defect 
among caucasian classical galactosaemia patients. We have characterized the 
spectrum of GALT mutations in a group of 51 Spanish families and 32 Portuguese 
families with this disease. p.Q188R is also the most prevalent mutation in the 
Spanish and Portuguese population, accounting for 50% and 57.8% of galactosaemic 
alleles, respectively. An additional 15 mutations were also identified in 
Spanish patients, four of which were novel: p.D28H, p.S181A, c.658dupG and 
c.377+53_1059+87del. In the Portuguese population, 11 different mutations were 
found, three of which were novel: p.R33H, p.P185S, and p.S192G. The differences 
observed between the genotypes identified in Portuguese and Spanish 
galactosaemic populations are notable. Only mutations p.Q188R, p.R148Q and 
c.820+13g>a were identified in both populations. In spite of the geographical 
proximity of Spain and Portugal, it seems that they have received genetic 
influences from different populations. The repeated migrations that occurred in 
the Iberian Peninsula throughout centuries may explain such variability.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-006-0356-2
PMID: 17041746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]