1. Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;121(1):23-34. doi: 10.1007/s00439-006-0260-8. Epub 2006
Oct  18.

Association of warfarin dose with genes involved in its action and metabolism.

Wadelius M(1), Chen LY, Eriksson N, Bumpstead S, Ghori J, Wadelius C, Bentley D, 
McGinnis R, Deloukas P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital, 
751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

We report an extensive study of variability in genes encoding proteins that are 
believed to be involved in the action and biotransformation of warfarin. 
Warfarin is a commonly prescribed anticoagulant that is difficult to use because 
of the wide interindividual variation in dose requirements, the narrow 
therapeutic range and the risk of serious bleeding. We genotyped 201 patients 
for polymorphisms in 29 genes in the warfarin interactive pathways and tested 
them for association with dose requirement. In our study, polymorphisms in or 
flanking the genes VKORC1, CYP2C9, CYP2C18, CYP2C19, PROC, APOE, EPHX1, CALU, 
GGCX and ORM1-ORM2 and haplotypes of VKORC1, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, CYP2C19, PROC, F7, 
GGCX, PROZ, F9, NR1I2 and ORM1-ORM2 were associated with dose (P < 0.05). 
VKORC1, CYP2C9, CYP2C18 and CYP2C19 were significant after experiment-wise 
correction for multiple testing (P < 0.000175), however, the association of 
CYP2C18 and CYP2C19 was fully explained by linkage disequilibrium with CYP2C9*2 
and/or *3. PROC and APOE were both significantly associated with dose after 
correction within each gene. A multiple regression model with VKORC1, CYP2C9, 
PROC and the non-genetic predictors age, bodyweight, drug interactions and 
indication for treatment jointly accounted for 62% of variance in warfarin dose. 
Weaker associations observed for other genes could explain up to approximately 
10% additional dose variance, but require testing and validation in an 
independent and larger data set. Translation of this knowledge into clinical 
guidelines for warfarin prescription will be likely to have a major impact on 
the safety and efficacy of warfarin.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-006-0260-8
PMCID: PMC1797064
PMID: 17048007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]