1. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;71(2):389-97. doi: 10.1124/mol.106.030809. Epub 2006
Oct  25.

Species selectivity of a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist is conferred 
by two adjacent extracellular beta4 amino acids that are implicated in the 
coupling of binding to channel gating.

Young GT(1), Broad LM, Zwart R, Astles PC, Bodkin M, Sher E, Millar NS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University College London, Gower Street, London, 
WC1E 6BT, UK.

5-(Trifluoromethyl)-6-(1-methyl-azepan-4-yl)methyl-1H-quinolin-2-one (TMAQ) is a 
novel nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist with strong selectivity 
for beta4-containing receptors. TMAQ also exhibits remarkable species 
selectivity, being a potent agonist of nAChRs containing the human beta4 subunit 
but having no detectable agonist activity on nAChRs containing the rat beta4 
subunit. With the aim of identifying subunit domains and individual amino acids, 
which contribute to the species selectivity of TMAQ, a series of chimeric and 
mutated beta4 subunits has been constructed. Recombinant receptors containing 
wild-type, chimeric, or mutated beta4 subunits have been examined by radioligand 
binding, intracellular calcium assays, and electrophysiological recording. Two 
adjacent amino acids located within the extracellular loop D domain of the beta4 
subunit (amino acids 55 and 56) have been identified as playing a critical role 
in determining the agonist potency of TMAQ. Mutagenesis of these two residues 
within the rat beta4 subunit to the corresponding amino acids in the human beta4 
subunit (S55N and I56V mutations) confers sensitivity to TMAQ. The converse 
mutations in the human beta4 subunit (N55S and V56I) largely abolish sensitivity 
to TMAQ. In contrast, these mutations have little or no effect on sensitivity to 
the nonselective nicotinic agonist epibatidine. Despite acting as a potent 
agonist of human beta4-containing nAChRs, TMAQ acts as an antagonist of rat 
beta4-containing receptors. Our experimental data, together with homology models 
of the rat and human alpha3beta4 nAChRs, suggest that amino acids 55 and 56 may 
be involved in the coupling of agonist binding and channel gating.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.106.030809
PMID: 17065235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]