1. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2006 Oct;21(5):375-83. doi: 10.2133/dmpk.21.375.

Mutation in an adaptor protein PDZK1 affects transport activity of organic 
cation transporter OCTNs and oligopeptide transporter PEPT2.

Sugiura T(1), Kato Y, Kubo Y, Tsuji A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Natural Science and 
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.

Genetic polymorphisms in xenobiotic transporters have recently been clarified to 
be associated with change in drug distribution and disposition. To expand on 
recent identification of direct interaction and functional regulation of several 
transporters by a PDZ (PSD95, Dlg and ZO1) domain containing protein PDZK1, the 
effect of mutation in PDZK1 on transport activity and subcellular localization 
of organic cation/carnitine transporters OCTN1 and OCTN2, and oligopeptide 
transporter PEPT2 was examined in the present study. HEK293 cells stably 
expressing a mutant transcript PDZK1-E195K (HEK293/PDZK1-E195K) were 
constructed, followed by transient transfection of cDNA for each transporter. 
Uptake of tetraethylammonium by OCTN1 was much higher in HEK293/PDZK1 cells, 
compared with that in the parent HEK293 cells, the uptake in HEK293/PDZK1-E195K 
cells showing middle range between the two values. Such difference in transport 
activity was accounted for the difference in transport capacity, with minimal 
change in affinity of OCTN1 to the substrate or other compounds. The similar 
difference among HEK293/PDZK1, HEK293/PDZK1-E195K and HEK293 cells was also 
observed in transport property of OCTN2 and PEPT2, whereas the difference was 
not so remarkable in each transporter with the last four amino acids deleted, 
that has much lower interaction potential with PDZK1. Immunohistochemical 
analysis indicated that OCTN1 was colocalized with PDZK1 on cell-surface, 
whereas colocalization with PDZK1-E195K was partially observed in cytoplasmic 
region. These results suggest a novel hypothesis that mutation in PDZK1 
potentially changes transport property of various types of xenobiotic 
transporters by affecting their subcellular localization, possibly leading to 
change in disposition of various types of substrate drugs.

DOI: 10.2133/dmpk.21.375
PMID: 17072090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]