1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 29;281(52):40201-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M607987200. Epub
2006  Nov 2.

Biochemical basis of glucokinase activation and the regulation by glucokinase 
regulatory protein in naturally occurring mutations.

Heredia VV(1), Carlson TJ, Garcia E, Sun S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Pharmacology, La Jolla Laboratories, Pfizer Global 
Research and Development, San Diego, California 92121, USA.

Glucokinase (GK) has several known polymorphic activating mutations that 
increase the enzyme activity by enhancing glucose binding affinity and/or by 
alleviating the inhibition of glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP), a key 
regulator of GK activity in the liver. Kinetic studies were undertaken to better 
understand the effect of these mutations on the enzyme mechanism of GK 
activation and GKRP regulation and to relate the enzyme properties to the 
associated clinical phenotype of hypoglycemia. Similar to wild type GK, the 
transient kinetics of glucose binding for activating mutations follows a general 
two-step mechanism, the formation of an enzyme-glucose complex followed by an 
enzyme conformational change. However, the kinetics for each step differed from 
wild type GK and could be grouped into specific types of kinetic changes. 
Mutations T65I, Y214C, and A456V accelerate glucose binding to the apoenzyme 
form, whereas W99R, Y214C, and V455M facilitate enzyme isomerization to the 
active form. Mutations that significantly enhance the glucose binding to the 
apoenzyme also disrupt the protein-protein interaction with GKRP to a large 
extent, suggesting these mutations may adopt a more compact conformation in the 
apoenzyme favorable for glucose binding. Y214C is the most active mutation 
(11-fold increase in k(cat)/K(0.5)(h)) and exhibits the most severe clinical 
effects of hypoglycemia. In contrast, moderate activating mutation A456V nearly 
abolishes the GKRP inhibition (76-fold increase in K(i)) but causes only mild 
hypoglycemia. This suggests that the alteration in GK enzyme activity may have a 
more profound biological impact than the alleviation of GKRP inhibition.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M607987200
PMID: 17082186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]