1. PLoS Genet. 2006 Nov 10;2(11):e169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020169. Epub
2006  Aug 28.

Harnessing a high cargo-capacity transposon for genetic applications in 
vertebrates.

Balciunas D(1), Wangensteen KJ, Wilber A, Bell J, Geurts A, Sivasubbu S, Wang X, 
Hackett PB, Largaespada DA, McIvor RS, Ekker SC.

Author information:
(1)The Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center for Transposon Research, Institute of 
Human Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States 
of America.

Viruses and transposons are efficient tools for permanently delivering foreign 
DNA into vertebrate genomes but exhibit diminished activity when cargo exceeds 8 
kilobases (kb). This size restriction limits their molecular genetic and 
biotechnological utility, such as numerous therapeutically relevant genes that 
exceed 8 kb in size. Furthermore, a greater payload capacity vector would 
accommodate more sophisticated cis cargo designs to modulate the expression and 
mutagenic risk of these molecular therapeutics. We show that the Tol2 transposon 
can efficiently integrate DNA sequences larger than 10 kb into human cells. We 
characterize minimal sequences necessary for transposition (miniTol2) in vivo in 
zebrafish and in vitro in human cells. Both the 8.5-kb Tol2 transposon and 
5.8-kb miniTol2 engineered elements readily function to revert the deficiency of 
fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase in an animal model of hereditary tyrosinemia type 
1. Together, Tol2 provides a novel nonviral vector for the delivery of large 
genetic payloads for gene therapy and other transgenic applications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020169
PMCID: PMC1635535
PMID: 17096595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. We note that the University 
of Minnesota and PBH, RSM, DAL, and SCE are all founders of a gene therapy 
company called Discovery Genomics, Incorporated.