1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Feb;27(2):394-9. doi: 
10.1161/01.ATV.0000252680.72734.10. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Association between a leukotriene C4 synthase gene promoter polymorphism and 
coronary artery calcium in young women: the Muscatine Study.

Iovannisci DM(1), Lammer EJ, Steiner L, Cheng S, Mahoney LT, Davis PH, Lauer RM, 
Burns TL.

Author information:
(1)Childrens's Hospital and Research Center Oakland, CA, USA. 
Diovannisci@chori.org

OBJECTIVE: A majority of the recognized risk factors for atherosclerosis and the 
development of cardiovascular disease have been derived from the study of older 
populations who have already manifested clinical symptoms. If risk factors can 
be identified earlier in life, such as genetic variation, preventive measures 
may be taken before overt symptoms of pathology have manifested, and when 
treatments may be most effective.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In an effort to identify individuals at increased risk for 
cardiovascular disease, we genotyped 732 members of the Muscatine Study 
Longitudinal Adult Cohort for candidate genetic markers associated with several 
pathogenetic processes. We identified age-adjusted increased risks for coronary 
artery calcium (OR 4.29; 95% CI 1.78, 10.31) and increased mean carotid artery 
intimal-medial thickness associated with the (-444)A>C promoter polymorphism of 
Leukotriene C4 Synthase (LTC4S) in women. There were no similar associations in 
men.
CONCLUSIONS: LTC4S plays a key role in the process of inflammation as the rate 
limiting enzyme in the conversion of arachidonic acid to cysteinyl-leukotrienes, 
important mediators of inflammatory responses. The (-444)C variant upregulates 
LTC4S mRNA expression, increasing the synthesis of proinflammatory leukotrienes. 
Our results support genetic variation modifying inflammatory pathways as an 
important mechanism in the development of atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000252680.72734.10
PMID: 17110605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]