1. Biophys J. 2007 Feb 15;92(4):1224-32. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.090316. Epub 
2006 Nov 17.

Disulfide trapping the mechanosensitive channel MscL into a gating-transition 
state.

Iscla I(1), Levin G, Wray R, Blount P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas-Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9040, USA.

The mechanosensitive channel of large conductance, MscL, serves as a biological 
emergency release valve protecting bacteria from acute osmotic downshock, and is 
to date the best characterized mechanosensitive channel. The N-terminal region 
of the protein has been shown to be critical for function by random, 
site-directed, and deletion mutagenesis, yet is structurally poorly understood. 
One model proposes that the extreme N-termini form a cluster of amphipathic 
helices that serves as a cytoplasmic second gate, separated from the 
pore-forming transmembrane domain by a "linker". Here, we have utilized cysteine 
trapping of single-cysteine mutated channels to determine the proximity, within 
the homopentameric complex, of residues within and just peripheral to this 
proposed linker. Our results indicate that all residues in this region can form 
disulfide bridges, and that the percentage of dimers increases when the channel 
is gated in vivo. Functional studies suggest that oxidation traps one of these 
mutated channels, N15C, into a gating-transition state that retains the capacity 
to obtain both fully open and closed states. The data are not easily explained 
by current models for the smooth transition from closed-to-open states, but 
predict that an asymmetric movement of one or more of the subunits commonly 
occurs upon gating.

DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.106.090316
PMCID: PMC1783893
PMID: 17114217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]