1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 12;352(2):491-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.035. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

Allelic variants of ABC drug transporter Cdr1p in clinical isolates of Candida 
albicans.

Haque A(1), Rai V, Bahal BS, Shukla S, Lattif AA, Mukhopadhyay G, Prasad R.

Author information:
(1)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 
110067, India.

Candida drug resistance protein (Cdr1p) is a major drug efflux protein, which 
plays a key role in commonly encountered clinical azole resistance in Candida 
albicans. We have analyzed its sequence in several azole resistant clinical 
isolates to evaluate the allelic variation within CDR1 gene and to relate it to 
its functional activity. The sequence analysis revealed 53 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), out of which six were non-synonymous single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (NS-SNPs) implying a change in amino acid and were found in two or 
more than two allelic combinations in different sensitive or resistant isolates. 
We have identified three new NS-SNPs namely, E948P, T950S, and F1399Y, in 
isolates wherein F1399Y appeared to be unique and was present in one of the 
naturally occurring azole resistant isolates obtained from Indian diabetic 
patients. However, site-directed mutagenesis showed that the residue F1399 in 
between TMS 11 and TMS 12 does not affect the functionality of Cdr1p. Taken 
together, our SNPs analyses reveal that unlike human P-gp, the naturally 
acquired allelic variations are mostly present in non-conserved regions of the 
protein which do not allow Cdr1p to genetically evolve in a manner, that would 
allow a change in its functionality to affect substrate recognition, 
specificity, and drug efflux activity of C. albicans cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.11.035
PMID: 17126815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]