1. J Orthop Sci. 2006 Nov;11(6):592-600. doi: 10.1007/s00776-006-1069-y. Epub
2006  Dec 4.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the interleukin-6 gene promoter, tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha gene promoter, and transforming growth factor-beta1 gene 
signal sequence as predictors of time to onset of aseptic loosening after total 
hip arthroplasty: preliminary study.

Kolundzić R(1), Orlić D, Trkulja V, Pavelić K, Troselj KG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Clinical Hospital Center Zagreb and 
University School of Medicine, Salata 3, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: Aseptic loosening resulting from inflammatory response to the 
implant wear debris is the major cause of late total hip arthroplasty (THA) 
failure. We examined single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes encoding for three 
involved cytokines--interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha), and transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1)--as potential 
predictors of time to onset of aseptic instability.
METHODS: A total of 41 patients/45 total hip endoprostheses (same type, same 
surgeon) were followed up for as long as 18 years. They were genotyped for the 
IL-6 promoter (-597G-->A) and (-572G-->C), TNF-alpha promoter (-308G-->A), and 
TGF-beta1 signal sequence (29T-->C) transitions. Cox regression was performed on 
the prosthesis survival.
RESULTS: Overall, 22 of 45 prostheses developed aseptic instability. Cumulative 
survivals at 10 and 15 years after THA were 95.6% and 66.6%, respectively. The 
effect of a particular polymorphic site was estimated with adjustment for sex, 
age at THA, reason for THA, and the effects of other analyzed sites. The hazard 
ratio (HR) for genotype T/T versus "C-allele carriage" at the TGF-beta1 site was 
8.23 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.45-46.8] (P=0.017) or 5.70 (1.39-23.4) 
(P=0.016) when the IL-6 promoter sites were considered as a "combination of 
genotypes (-597)|(-572)." The most prevalent combination of genotypes at IL-6 
sites was G/A (-597)|C/C (-572). HR for this combination (versus other 
combinations) was 5.43 (1.73-17.0) (P=0.004) when "TGF-beta1 (29T-->C)" was 
considered as a three-level factor (three possible genotypes), and 4.92 
(1.71-14.1) (P=0.003) when TGF-beta1 site was considered as a two-level factor 
(T/T and "C-allele carriage"). The HR for the "A-allele carriage" at TNF-alpha 
(-308G-->A) could not be determined (only two patients had the G/G genotype).
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary study is the first to suggest that the TGF-beta1 
signal sequence (29T-->C) and IL-6 promoter (-597G-->A)|(-572G-->C) transitions 
are predictive for the time to onset of aseptic instability after THA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00776-006-1069-y
PMID: 17139467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]