1. J Med Genet. 2007 Mar;44(3):219-24. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046359. Epub 2006
Dec  8.

Abnormal apolipoprotein B pre-mRNA splicing in patients with familial 
hypobetalipoproteinaemia.

Di Leo E, Magnolo L, Lancellotti S, CrocÃ¨ L, Visintin L, Tiribelli C, Bertolini 
S, Calandra S, Tarugi P.

BACKGROUND: Familial hypobetalipoproteinaemia (FHBL) is a codominant disorder 
characterised by fatty liver and reduced plasma levels of low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) and its protein constituent apolipoprotein B (apoB). FHBL is 
linked to the APOB gene in some but not all known cases. In a group of 59 
patients with FHBL genotyped for APOB gene mutations, we found three novel 
splice-site mutations: c.904+4A-->G in intron 8, c.3843-2A-->G in intron 24 and 
c.4217-1G-->T in intron 25.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects of these mutations on apoB pre-mRNA splicing.
METHODS: ApoB mRNA was analysed in the liver of one proband and in cells 
expressing APOB minigenes harbouring the mutations found in the other probands.
RESULTS: In the liver of the c.3843-2A-->G carrier, an apoB mRNA devoid of exon 
25 was identified, predicted to encode a truncated peptide of 1260 amino acids. 
The analysis of minigene transcripts in COS-1 cells showed that the c.904+4A-->G 
mutation caused the formation of an mRNA devoid of exon 8, predicted to encode a 
short apoB of 247 amino acids. The minigene harbouring the c.4217-1G-->T 
mutation in intron 25 generated an mRNA in which exon 25 joined to a partially 
deleted exon 26, resulting from the activation of an acceptor site in exon 26; 
this mRNA is predicted to encode a truncated protein of 1380 amino acids. All 
these truncated apoBs were not secreted as constituents of plasma lipoproteins.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate the pathogenic effect of rare splice-site 
mutations of the APOB gene found in FHBL.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.046359
PMCID: PMC2598025
PMID: 17158591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.