1. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):11571-5. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2914.

Adrenal hyperplasia and adenomas are associated with inhibition of 
phosphodiesterase 11A in carriers of PDE11A sequence variants that are frequent 
in the population.

Horvath A(1), Giatzakis C, Robinson-White A, Boikos S, Levine E, Griffin K, 
Stein E, Kamvissi V, Soni P, Bossis I, de Herder W, Carney JA, Bertherat J, 
Gregersen PK, Remmers EF, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Resources, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

Several types of adrenocortical tumors that lead to Cushing syndrome may be 
caused by aberrant cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling. We recently identified patients 
with micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia who were carriers of inactivating 
mutations in the 2q-located phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A) gene. We now studied 
the frequency of two missense substitutions, R804H and R867G, in conserved 
regions of the enzyme in several sets of normal controls, including 745 
individuals enrolled in a longitudinal cohort study, the New York Cancer 
Project. In the latter, we also screened for the presence of the previously 
identified PDE11A nonsense mutations. R804H and R867G were frequent among 
patients with adrenocortical tumors; although statistical significance was not 
reached, these variants affected significantly enzymatic function in vitro with 
variable increases in cAMP and/or cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate levels in 
HeLa and HEK293 cells. Adrenocortical tissues carrying the R804H mutation showed 
2q allelic losses and higher cyclic nucleotide levels and cAMP-responsive 
element binding protein phosphorylation. We conclude that missense mutations of 
the PDE11A gene that affect enzymatic activity in vitro are present in the 
general population; protein-truncating PDE11A mutations may also contribute to a 
predisposition to other tumors, in addition to their association with 
adrenocortical hyperplasia. We speculate that PDE11A genetic defects may be 
associated with adrenal pathology in a wider than previously suspected clinical 
spectrum that includes asymptomatic individuals.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2914
PMID: 17178847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]