1. Diabetologia. 2007 Feb;50(2):325-33. doi: 10.1007/s00125-006-0542-7. Epub 2006
 Dec 21.

Functional analysis of human glucokinase gene mutations causing MODY2: exploring 
the regulatory mechanisms of glucokinase activity.

García-Herrero CM(1), Galán M, Vincent O, Flández B, Gargallo M, Delgado-Alvarez 
E, Blázquez E, Navas MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology III, Faculty of Medicine, 
Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Glucokinase (GCK) acts as a glucose sensor in the pancreatic 
beta cell and regulates insulin secretion. In the gene encoding GCK the 
heterozygous mutations that result in enzyme inactivation cause MODY2. 
Functional studies of naturally occurring GCK mutations associated with 
hyperglycaemia provide further insight into the biochemical basis of glucose 
sensor regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Identification of GCK mutations in selected MODY patients 
was performed by single-strand conformation polymorphism and direct sequencing. 
The kinetic parameters and thermal stability of recombinant mutant human GCK 
were determined, and in pull-down assays the effect of these mutations on the 
association of GCK with glucokinase (hexokinase 4) regulator (GCKR, also known 
as glucokinase regulatory protein [GKRP]) and 
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PFKFB1, also known as 
PFK2) was tested.
RESULTS: We identified three novel GCK mutations: the insertion of an asparagine 
residue at position 161 (inserN161) and two missense mutations (M235V and 
R308W). We also identified a fourth mutation (R397L) reported in a previous 
work. Functional characterisation of these mutations revealed that insertion of 
asparagine residue N161 fully inactivates GCK, whereas the M235V and R308W 
mutations only partially impair enzymatic activity. In contrast, GCK kinetics 
was almost unaffected by the R397L mutation. Although none of these mutations 
affected the interaction of GCK with PFKFB1, we found that the R308W mutation 
caused protein instability and increased the strength of interaction with GCKR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results show that different MODY2 mutations 
impair GCK function through different mechanisms such as enzymatic activity, 
protein stability and increased interaction with GCKR, helping further elucidate 
the regulation of GCK activity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-006-0542-7
PMID: 17186219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]