1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2006 Dec;27(6):748-54.

Polymorphisms and low plasma activity of dopamine-beta-hydroxylase in ADHD 
children.

Kopeckov√° M(1), Paclt I, Goetz P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd School of Medicine, Charles 
University, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. 
marta.kopeckova@seznam.cz

Attention-deficit Hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a multifactorial disorder 
clinically characterized by inattentiveness, impulsivity and hyperactivity. The 
occurrence of this disorder is between 3 and 6% of the children population, with 
boys predominating over girls at a ratio of 3:1 or more. The research of some 
candidate genes (DRD4, DAT, DRD5, DBH, 5HTT, HTR1B and SNAP25) brought 
consistent results confirming the heredity of ADHD syndromes. 
Dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) is an enzyme responsible for the conversion of 
dopamine into noradrenaline. Alteration of the dopamine/noradrenaline levels can 
result in hyperactivity. The DBH protein is released in response to stimulation. 
DBH activity, derived largely from sympathetic nerves, can be measured in human 
plasma. Patients with ADHD showed decreased activities of DBH in serum and 
urine. Low DBH levels correlate indirectly with the seriousness of the 
hyperkinetic syndrome in children [19,20]. In the DBH gene, the G444A, G910T, 
C1603T, C1912T, C-1021T, 5 -ins/del and TaqI polymorphisms occur frequently and 
may affect the function of gene products or modify gene expression and thus 
influence the progression of ADHD. This article reviews the DBH itself and 
polymorphisms in the DBH gene that influence the DBH activity in the serum and 
the CSF level of DBH. All those are evaluated in connection with ADHD.

PMID: 17187001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]