1. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Jan 15;16(2):173-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl459. Epub 2006
Dec  21.

The Meckel-Gruber Syndrome proteins MKS1 and meckelin interact and are required 
for primary cilium formation.

Dawe HR(1), Smith UM, Cullinane AR, Gerrelli D, Cox P, Badano JL, Blair-Reid S, 
Sriram N, Katsanis N, Attie-Bitach T, Afford SC, Copp AJ, Kelly DA, Gull K, 
Johnson CA.

Author information:
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive lethal malformation 
syndrome characterized by renal cystic dysplasia, central nervous system 
malformations (typically, posterior occipital encephalocele), and hepatic 
developmental defects. Two MKS genes, MKS1 and MKS3, have been identified 
recently. The present study describes the cellular, sub-cellular and functional 
characterization of the novel proteins, MKS1 and meckelin, encoded by these 
genes. In situ hybridization studies for MKS3 in early human embryos showed 
transcript localizations in agreement with the tissue phenotype of MKS patients. 
Both MKS proteins predominantly localized to epithelial cells, including 
proximal renal tubules and biliary epithelial cells. MKS1 localized to basal 
bodies, while meckelin localized both to the primary cilium and to the plasma 
membrane in ciliated cell-lines and primary cells. Meckelin protein with the 
Q376P missense mutation was unable to localize at the cell membrane. 
siRNA-mediated reduction of Mks1 and Mks3 expression in a ciliated epithelial 
cell-line blocked centriole migration to the apical membrane and consequent 
formation of the primary cilium. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments show that 
wild-type meckelin and MKS1 interact and, in three-dimensional tissue culture 
assays, epithelial branching morphogenesis was severely impaired. These results 
suggest that MKS proteins mediate a fundamental developmental stage of ciliary 
formation and epithelial morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl459
PMID: 17185389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]