1. Virol J. 2006 Dec 27;3:105. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-3-105.

Nectin-2-mediated entry of a syncytial strain of herpes simplex virus via 
pH-independent fusion with the plasma membrane of Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Delboy MG(1), Patterson JL, Hollander AM, Nicola AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical College of Virginia at 
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, 23298-0678, USA. 
mdelboy@vcu.edu <mdelboy@vcu.edu>

BACKGROUND: Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can utilize multiple pathways to enter 
host cells. The factors that determine which route is taken are not clear. 
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells that express glycoprotein D (gD)-binding 
receptors are model cells that support a pH-dependent, endocytic entry pathway 
for all HSV strains tested to date. Fusion-from-without (FFWO) is the induction 
of target cell fusion by addition of intact virions to cell monolayers in the 
absence of viral protein expression. The receptor requirements for HSV-induced 
FFWO are not known. We used the syncytial HSV-1 strain ANG path as a tool to 
evaluate the complex interplay between receptor usage, membrane fusion, and 
selection of entry pathway.
RESULTS: Inhibitors of endocytosis and endosome acidification blocked ANG path 
entry into CHO cells expressing nectin-1 receptors, but not CHO-nectin-2 cells. 
Thus, under these conditions, nectin-2 mediates pH-independent entry at the 
plasma membrane. In addition, CHO-nectin-2 cells supported pH-dependent, 
endocytic entry of different strains of HSV-1, including rid1 and HFEM. The 
kinetics of ANG path entry was rapid (t1/2 of 5-10 min) regardless of entry 
route. However, HSV-1 ANG path entry by fusion with the CHO-nectin-2 cell plasma 
membrane was more efficient and resulted in larger syncytia. ANG path virions 
added to the surface of CHO-nectin-2 cells, but not receptor-negative CHO cells 
or CHO-nectin-1 cells, induced rapid FFWO.
CONCLUSION: HSV-1 ANG path can enter CHO cells by either endocytic or 
non-endocytic pathways depending on whether nectin-1 or nectin-2 is present. In 
addition to these cellular receptors, one or more viral determinants is 
important for the selection of entry pathway. HSV-induced FFWO depends on the 
presence of an appropriate gD-receptor in the target membrane. Nectin-1 and 
nectin-2 target ANG path to divergent cellular pathways, and these receptors may 
have different roles in triggering viral membrane fusion.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-3-105
PMCID: PMC1779275
PMID: 17192179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]