1. Chem Biodivers. 2005 Jan;2(1):51-65. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200490166.

Biosynthesis of new indigoid inhibitors of protein kinases using recombinant 
cytochrome P450 2A6.

Wu ZL(1), Aryal P, Lozach O, Meijer L, Guengerich FP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, 638 Robinson Research Building, 23rd and Pierce 
Avenues, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) is a potential drug target for a number of 
human diseases. Some indigoids have been found to be potent inhibitors of GSK-3, 
and individual compounds with better activity, specificity, and solubility are 
desired. In this work, a new disubstituted indigoid generation system was 
developed with a tryptophanase-deficient Escherichia coli strain as a host to 
express the human cytochrome P450 2A6 mutant L240C/N297Q, which catalyzes the 
oxidation of indole to isatin and indoxyl, which in turn react to generate 
indigoids. Forty-five substituted 1H-indoles from commercial sources were used 
as substrates in the system, and indigoid mixtures were tested as potential 
inhibitors of GSK-3. After preliminary screening, cell extracts with high 
inhibitory activity towards GSK-3alpha/beta were fractionated, and the IC50 
values of twelve individual indigoids were measured for GSK-3alpha/beta as well 
as the protein kinases CDK1/cyclinB and CDK5/p25. Several indigoids, including 
an indigo, showed stronger inhibition than found in previous work. The most 
potent towards GSK-3alpha/beta, dimethyl indirubin 5,5'-dicarboxylate (IC50 of 
51 nM), was modified by chemical reactions. One product, indirubin 
5,5'-dicarboxylic acid 5-methyl ester, inhibited GSK-3alpha/beta with an IC50 of 
14 nM and selectivity nearly 40-fold over CDK1 and CDK5. 
Indirubin-5-5'-dicarbonitrile was also modified to the corresponding 3'-oxime, 
which had low specificity but showed very high inhibition of all three kinases 
with IC50 values of 5, 13, and 10 nM towards GSK-3alpha/beta, CDK1, and CDK5, 
respectively. Thus, this system has the potential to generate new indigoids with 
therapeutic potential.

DOI: 10.1002/cbdv.200490166
PMID: 17191919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]