1. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2006 Sep;17(3):148-54.

Genetic impact of TNF-beta on risk factors for coronary atherosclerosis.

Schulz S(1), Schagdarsurengin U, Rehfeld D, Süss T, Werdan K, Müller-Werdan U, 
Gläser C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Medical Biology, Martin-Luther-University 
Halle-Wittenberg, Magdeburger Str. 2, 06097 Halle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory processes are considered to play an important role in 
the development of coronary atherosclerosis. The proinflammatory cytokine, tumor 
necrosis factor beta (TNF-beta), is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis.
STUDY DESIGN: In this clinical study, the influence of genetic variants of 
TNF-beta (c.7G>A, IVS1+90G>A, C13R, T60N) on major coronary risk factors, 
including gender, smoking, history of cardiovascular diseases, biochemical data 
(inflammatory markers, factors of lipid metabolism, coagulation/fibrinolysis 
balance), and angiographically-proven coronary state, was investigated in 176 
European Caucasian probands (130 males, mean age: 51.9 +/- 8.9 y).
RESULTS: The most frequent combinations of the polymorphisms investigated were 
significantly associated with four of the coronary risk factors evaluated: 
hypertension, body mass index, the common inflammatory marker TNF-alpha (mRNA 
expression), and fibrinogen (p < 0.05). However, on testing the impact of the 
genetic background on the incidence of coronary stenosis in this sample of 
European Caucasians, no significant influence of these polymorphisms (stepwise 
binary logistic regression analysis) could be proven. These findings emphasise a 
distinct influence of TNF-beta polymorphisms on important modulators of the 
development of coronary atherosclerosis, but exclude its genetic background, 
investigated in this study as an independent coronary risk factor.

PMID: 17194634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]