1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;374(5-6):373-83. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-006-0126-6. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Interaction of nucleoside diphosphate kinase B with heterotrimeric G protein 
betagamma dimers: consequences on G protein activation and stability.

Wieland T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Medizinische Fakultät Mannheim, Universität Heidelberg, Maybachstrasse 14, 
D-68169 Mannheim, Germany. thomas.wieland@pharmtox.uni-heidelberg.de

It is generally accepted that G protein coupled receptors (GPCR) activate 
heterotrimeric G proteins by inducing a GDP/GTP exchange at the G protein alpha 
subunit. In addition, the transfer of high energetic phosphate by nucleoside 
diphosphate kinase (NDPK) and/or the beta subunit of G proteins (Gbeta) can 
induce G protein activation. Recent evidence suggests that the NDPK isoform B 
(NDPK B) forms a complex with Gbetagamma dimers. In this complex, NDPK B acts as 
a protein histidine kinase phosphorylating Gbeta at histidine residue 266 
(His266). The high energetic phosphoamidate bond on His266 allows for a 
phosphate transfer specifically onto GDP and thus local formation of GTP, which 
binds to and thereby activates the respective G protein alpha subunit. 
Apparently, this process occurs independent of the classical GPCR-induced 
GDP/GTP exchange at least for members of the G(s) and G(i) subfamilies of 
heterotrimeric G proteins. By using a mutant of Gbeta(1) in which His266 was 
replaced by Leu, it was recently demonstrated that NDPK B/Gbetagamma-mediated 
G(s) activation contributes by about 50% to basal cAMP formation and 
contractility in rat cardiac myocytes. Besides its apparent role in G protein 
activation, the complex formation of NDPK B with Gbetagamma dimers might be 
essential for G protein stability. Depletion of either the NDPK B orthologue or 
Gbeta(1) isoforms in zebrafish embryos led to a similar phenotype displaying 
contractile dysfunction in the heart accompanied by a complete loss of 
heterotrimeric G protein expression. In conclusion, the interaction of NDKP B 
with Gbetagamma dimers might play an important role in signal transduction, and 
alterations in this novel pathway might be of pathophysiological importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-006-0126-6
PMID: 17200862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]