1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007 Jan;66(1):95-102. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2006.02692.x.

Hormonal, pituitary magnetic resonance, LHX4 and HESX1 evaluation in patients 
with hypopituitarism and ectopic posterior pituitary lobe.

Melo ME(1), Marui S, Carvalho LR, Arnhold IJ, Leite CC, Mendon√ßa BB, 
Knoepfelmacher M.

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e 
Genetica Molecular LIM 42, Disciplina de Endocrinologia - HCFMUSP, Brazil. 
medna@usp.br

OBJECTIVE: LHX4 and HESX1 are important in early stages of pituitary development 
and their mutations can be associated with an ectopic posterior lobe (EPL) in 
the pituitary of patients with hypopituitarism. The EPL can be located at the 
median eminence or at the path of the pituitary stalk. The aim of this study was 
to analyse LHX4 and HESX1 and characterize the hormonal deficiency profiles, 
establishing relationships with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings in 
these patients.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Sixty-two patients with hypopituitarism associated with EPL 
were submitted to evaluation of pituitary function, analysis of MRI with EPL 
location and molecular analysis of LHX4 and HESX1 using polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR), digestion with restriction enzyme and automatic sequencing.
RESULTS: Forty-two patients had a nonvisualized pituitary stalk (NPS), and 20 a 
visualized pituitary stalk (VPS). Most patients (95%) with NPS had combined 
pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), with ACTH deficiency in 85%. In patients 
with VPS, CPHD was found in 50% and ACTH deficiency occurred in only 20%. The 
frequency of the location of EPL was similar in patients with VPS and NPS: 35% 
at median eminence and 65% at the path of the stalk. No mutations in LHX4 and 
HESX1 were identified. Three new polymorphisms in LHX4 were found.
CONCLUSIONS: ACTH deficiency is frequent in patients with hypopituitarism and 
NPS (85%), the location of EPL at the median eminence was not predictive of the 
hormonal profile [isolated GH deficiency (IGHD) or CPHD], and LHX4 and HESX1 
genes mutations remain rare causes of hypopituitarism associated with EPL.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2006.02692.x
PMID: 17201807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]