1. Arch Ophthalmol. 2007 Jan;125(1):98-104. doi: 10.1001/archopht.125.1.98.

Myocilin Gly252Arg mutation and glaucoma of intermediate severity in Caucasian 
individuals.

Hewitt AW(1), Bennett SL, Richards JE, Dimasi DP, Booth AP, Inglehearn C, Anwar 
R, Yamamoto T, Fingert JH, HÃ©on E, Craig JE, Mackey DA.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, 
Royal Victorian Eye & Ear Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the phenotype of an Australian pedigree with the 
myocilin (MYOC) Gly252Arg mutation, comparing it with other pedigrees carrying 
the same mutation.
METHODS: All recruited subjects underwent a comprehensive clinical examination, 
including optic disc assessment, applanation tonometry, and visual field 
measurement. Mutation analysis was performed through direct sequencing. 
Haplotype analysis was performed using microsatellite markers around the MYOC 
gene.
RESULTS: Eight Gly252Arg mutation carriers with glaucoma were identified from 
the same pedigree. Carriers' mean +/- SD age at diagnosis was 46.3 +/- 11.4 
years (range, 31-60 years). Highest recorded intraocular pressure ranged from 27 
to 42 mm Hg (mean +/- SD, 32.4 +/- 5.6 mm Hg). Cup-disc ratios in the worst eye 
ranged from 0.6 to 0.9. Six of the 8 individuals had undergone filtration 
surgery. A common founding haplotype between MY5 and D1S218 was found for 
Caucasian individuals tested with this mutation. One subject was compound 
heterozygotic for the MYOC Gly252Arg mutation and a novel MYOC Gly244Val 
variant.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a common founder for Gly252Arg across Caucasian subjects 
was found, the phenotype from this Australian MYOC mutation-carrying pedigree is 
less severe than previously described. The severity of glaucoma caused by the 
Gly252Arg mutation may be similar to the Thr377Met MYOC mutation, yet is more 
severe than the most common Gln368Stop mutation.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Since its implication in glaucoma, much work has been 
performed investigating the clinical features of MYOC-related glaucoma. Given 
the strong genotype-phenotype correlations with MYOC disease-causing variants, 
health care professionals armed with such molecular information are able to 
accurately counsel patients on their likely disease course. Our work suggests 
that the disease associated with MYOC Gly252Arg is less severe than previously 
described in other pedigrees with this specific mutation.

DOI: 10.1001/archopht.125.1.98
PMID: 17210859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]