1. Biopolymers. 2007;88(2):199-207. doi: 10.1002/bip.20679.

Structure-activity relationship of HP (2-20) analog peptide: enhanced 
antimicrobial activity by N-terminal random coil region deletion.

Park Y(1), Park SC, Park HK, Shin SY, Kim Y, Hahm KS.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Proteineous Materials, Chosun University, Kwangju, Korea.

HP (2-20) (AKKVFKRLEKLFSKIQNDK) is a 19-aa antimicrobial peptide derived from 
N-terminus of Helicobacter pylori Ribosomal protein L1 (RpL1). In the previous 
study, several analogs with amino acid substitutions were designed to increase 
or decrease only the net hydrophobicity. In particular, substitutions of Gln(16) 
and Asp(18) with Trp (Anal 3) for hydrophobic amino acid caused a dramatic 
increase in antibiotic activity without a hemolytic effect. HP-A3 is a potent 
antimicrobial peptide that forms, in a hydrophobic medium, an amphipathic 
structure consisting of an N-terminal random coil region (residues 2-5) and 
extended C-terminal regular alpha-helical region (residues 6-20). To obtain the 
short and potent alpha-helical antimicrobial peptide, we synthesized a 
N-terminal random coil deleted HP-A3 (A3-NT) and examined their antimicrobial 
activity and mechanism of action. The resulting 15mer peptide showed increased 
antibacterial and antifungal activity to 2- and 4-fold, respectively, without 
hemolysis. Confocal fluorescence microscopy studies showed that A3-NT was 
accumulated in the plasma membrane. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that A3-NT 
acted in salt- and energy-independent manner. Furthermore, A3-NT causes 
significant morphological alterations of the bacterial surfaces as shown by 
scanning electron microscopy. Circular dichroism (CD) analysis revealed that 
A3-NT showed higher alpha-helical contents than the HP-A3 peptide in 50% TFE 
solution. Therefore, the cell-lytic efficiency of HP-A3, which depended on the 
alpha-helical content of peptide, correlated linearly with their antimicrobial 
potency.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.20679
PMID: 17216635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]