1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Mar;1768(3):538-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.11.021. Epub 2006 Dec 16.

The predicted transmembrane fragment 17 of the human multidrug resistance 
protein 1 (MRP1) behaves as an interfacial helix in membrane mimics.

Vincent M(1), Gallay J, Jamin N, Garrigos M, de Foresta B.

Author information:
(1)CNRS UMR8619 IBBMC, Orsay, F-91405, France; Univ Paris-Sud, Orsay, F-91405, 
France.

The human multidrug resistance protein MRP1 (or ABCC1) is one of the most 
important members of the large ABC transporter family, in terms of both its 
biological (tissue defense) and pharmacological functions. Many studies have 
investigated the function of MRP1, but structural data remain scarce for this 
protein. We investigated the structure and dynamics of predicted transmembrane 
fragment 17 (TM17, from Ala(1227) to Ser(1251)), which contains a single Trp 
residue (W(1246)) involved in MRP1 substrate specificity and transport function. 
We synthesized TM17 and a modified peptide in which Ala(1227) was replaced by a 
charged Lys residue. Both peptides were readily solubilized in dodecylmaltoside 
(DM) or dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) micelles, as membrane mimics. The 
interaction of these peptides with DM or DPC micelles was studied by 
steady-state and time-resolved Trp fluorescence spectroscopy, including 
experiments in which Trp was quenched by acrylamide or by two brominated analogs 
of DM. The secondary structure of these peptides was determined by circular 
dichroism. Overall, the results obtained indicated significant structuring ( 
approximately 50% alpha-helix) of TM17 in the presence of either DM or DPC 
micelles as compared to buffer. A main interfacial location of TM17 is proposed, 
based on significant accessibility of Trp(1246) to brominated alkyl chains of DM 
and/or acrylamide. The comparison of various fluorescence parameters including 
lambda(max), lifetime distributions and Trp rotational mobility with those 
determined for model fluorescent transmembrane helices in the same detergents is 
also consistent with the interfacial location of TM17. We therefore suggest that 
TM17 intrinsic properties may be insufficient for its transmembrane insertion as 
proposed by the MRP1 consensus topological model. This insertion may also be 
controlled by additional constraints such as interactions with other TM domains 
and its position in the protein sequence. The particular pattern of behavior of 
this predicted transmembrane peptide may be the hallmark of a fragment involved 
in substrate transport.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.11.021
PMID: 17257580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]