1. Biochemistry. 2007 Feb 6;46(5):1228-39. doi: 10.1021/bi0619977.

A complete structural description of the catalytic cycle of yeast 
pyrophosphatase.

Oksanen E(1), Ahonen AK, Tuominen H, Tuominen V, Lahti R, Goldman A, Heikinheimo 
P.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology and Biophysics, Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 65, 
University of Helsinki, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

We have determined the structures of the wild type and seven active site 
variants of yeast inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPase) in the presence of Mg2+ and 
phosphate, providing the first complete structural description of its catalytic 
cycle. PPases catalyze the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate and require four divalent 
metal cations for catalysis; magnesium provides the highest activity. The 
crystal form chosen contains two monomers in the asymmetric unit, corresponding 
to distinct catalytic intermediates. In the "closed" wild-type active site, one 
of the two product phosphates has already dissociated, while the D115E variant 
"open" conformation is of the hitherto unobserved two-phosphate and 
two-"bridging" water active site. The mutations affect metal binding and the 
hydrogen bonding network in the active site, allowing us to explain the effects 
of mutations. For instance, in Y93F, F93 binds in a cryptic hydrophobic pocket 
in the absence of substrate, preserving hydrogen bonding in the active site and 
leading to relatively small changes in solution properties. This is not true in 
the presence of substrate, when F93 is forced back into the active site. Such 
subtle changes underline how low the energy barriers are between 
thermodynamically favorable conformations of the enzyme. The structures also 
allow us to associate metal binding constants to specific sites. Finally, the 
wild type and the D152E variant contain a phosphate ion adjacent to the active 
site, showing for the first time how product is released through a channel of 
flexible cationic side chains.

DOI: 10.1021/bi0619977
PMID: 17260952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]