1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Apr 5;144B(3):266-70. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30322.

Positive association of the Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia-1 gene (DISC1) with 
schizophrenia in the Chinese Han population.

Qu M(1), Tang F, Yue W, Ruan Y, Lu T, Liu Z, Zhang H, Han Y, Zhang D, Wang F, 
Zhang D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mental Health, Peking University, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China.

Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) is located on 1q42.1, one of the most 
promising susceptibility loci in schizophrenia linkage studies. A non-synonymous 
genetic variation rs821616 (Ser704Cys) in DISC1, has recently been shown to be 
associated with schizophrenia in family-based study [Callicott et al. (2005); 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102: 8627-8632]. In order to further confirm this issue, 
we examined four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a chromosomal region 
spanning 42 kb of this gene, namely rs821616, rs821597, rs4658971, and rs843979, 
in Chinese sample of 313 schizophrenia patients and 317 healthy controls. Our 
results showed that two SNPs had strong associations with schizophrenia 
(rs821616: Allele A > T, chi(2) = 7.8006, df = 1, P = 0.0052; Genotype, chi(2) = 
7.7935, df = 2, P = 0.0203; rs821597: Allele A > G, chi(2) = 9.5404, df = 1, P = 
0.0020; Genotype, chi(2) = 12.2780, df = 2, P = 0.0022). When haplotypes were 
constructed with two, three, and four markers, a number of haplotype 
combinations, especially those including rs821616 and rs821597, were 
significantly associated with schizophrenia. Furthermore, there was a strong 
evidence for association in a four-marker haplotype analysis (chi(2) = 7.686, df 
= 4, P = 0.005581, corrected P = 0.006199). Although the case-control and 
family-based association studies both suggest that DISC1 gene may play a role in 
genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia, the risk haplotypic combinations have 
subtle differences in the two studies. Our findings provide further evidence for 
DISC1 as a predisposing gene involved in schizophrenia in the Chinese Han 
Population.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30322
PMID: 17286247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]