1. Protein Expr Purif. 2007 May;53(1):63-79. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.12.018. Epub
 2006 Dec 31.

Purification and protective efficacy of monomeric and modified Yersinia pestis 
capsular F1-V antigen fusion proteins for vaccination against plague.

Goodin JL(1), Nellis DF, Powell BS, Vyas VV, Enama JT, Wang LC, Clark PK, 
Giardina SL, Adamovicz JJ, Michiel DF.

Author information:
(1)Bacteriology Division, U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The F1-V vaccine antigen, protective against Yersinia pestis, exhibits a strong 
tendency to multimerize that affects larger-scale manufacture and 
characterization. In this work, the sole F1-V cysteine was replaced with serine 
by site-directed mutagenesis for characterization of F1-V non-covalent multimer 
interactions and protective potency without participation by disulfide-linkages. 
F1-V and F1-V(C424S) proteins were overexpressed in Escherichia coli, recovered 
using mechanical lysis/pH-modulation and purified from urea-solubilized soft 
inclusion bodies, using successive ion-exchange, ceramic hydroxyapatite, and 
size-exclusion chromatography. This purification method resulted in up to 2mg/g 
of cell paste of 95% pure, mono-disperse protein having < or =0.5 endotoxin 
units per mg by a kinetic chromogenic limulus amoebocyte lysate reactivity 
assay. Both F1-V and F1-V(C424S) were monomeric at pH 10.0 and progressively 
self-associated as pH conditions decreased to pH 6.0. Solution additives were 
screened for their ability to inhibit F1-V self-association at pH 6.5. An 
L-arginine buffer provided the greatest stabilizing effect. Conversion to 
>500-kDa multimers occurred between pH 6.0 and 5.0. Conditions for efficient 
F1-V adsorption to the cGMP-compatible alhydrogel adjuvant were optimized. 
Side-by-side evaluation for protective potency against subcutaneous plague 
infection in mice was conducted for F1-V(C424S) monomer; cysteine-capped F1-V 
monomer; cysteine-capped F1-V multimer; and a F1-V standard reported previously. 
After a two-dose vaccination with 2 x 20 microg of F1-V, respectively, 100%, 
80%, 80%, and 70% of injected mice survived a subcutaneous lethal plague 
challenge with 10(8) LD(50)Y. pestis CO92. Thus, vaccination with F1-V monomer 
and multimeric forms resulted in significant, and essentially equivalent, 
protection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.12.018
PMCID: PMC2811967
PMID: 17293124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]