1. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Dec;195(2):262-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2006.12.031. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Functional analysis of the genetic variability in the F7 gene promoter.

Sabater-Lleal M(1), Chillón M, Howard TE, Gil E, Almasy L, Blangero J, 
Fontcuberta J, Soria JM.

Author information:
(1)Unitat d'Hemostàsia i Trombosi, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Barcelona 08025, Spain.

The FVII level is considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Some of 
the polymorphic differences in the promoter of the F7 gene have been associated 
with variations in FVII levels. However, linkage disequilibrium among those 
polymorphisms has made it difficult to pinpoint the true functional variants, so 
contradictory results have often appeared among various studies. We provide new 
findings of the effect of the polymorphisms in the promoter region of F7. In 
vitro transfection of 15 plasmids containing different combinations of F7 
promoter polymorphisms was performed in HepG2 cells. We found that allelic 
variants -323ins10 and -122C strongly reduced promoter activity and that allelic 
variant -402A significantly increased promoter activity. We report the effect of 
a novel variant (-2989A) that significantly increases F7 expression levels. 
However, this novel allelic variant is in strong linkage disequilibrium with the 
-323ins10 variant in our Spanish population, which has a clear dominant effect 
over the -2989A variant and completely masks its effect. Our results have 
important implications for mapping genes affecting complex diseases using 
association studies. That is, they imply that true functional variants should be 
chosen to confirm the analyses and to ensure that the results can be reproduced 
in other populations. In addition, our results suggest that it would be 
informative to screen for the -2989A variant in other populations, since it may 
well be a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in populations where it does 
not appear with the decanucleotide insertion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2006.12.031
PMID: 17292373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]