1. Physiol Res. 2006;55 Suppl 2:S145-154. doi: 
10.33549/physiolres.930000.55.S2.145.

De Novo mutation found in the porphobilinogen deaminase gene in Slovak acute 
intermittent porphyria patient: molecular biochemical study.

Ulbrichova D(1), Flachsova E, Hrdinka M, Saligova J, Bazar J, Raman CS, Martasek 
P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Charles University, First School of Medicine, 
Praque, Czech Republic.

The porphyrias are group of mostly inherited disorders in which a specific 
spectrum of accumulated and excreted porphyrins and heme precursors are 
associated with characteristic clinical features. There are eight enzymes 
involved in the heme synthesis and defects in seven of them cause porphyria. 
Four of them are described as acute hepatic porphyrias, which share possible 
precipitation of acute attacks with symptoms engaging the nervous system. Acute 
intermittent porphyria (AIP), caused by partial deficiency of the 
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), is the most frequent among hepatic porphyrias. 
Clinical expression is highly variable and ~ 90 % of AIP heterozygotes remain 
asymptomatic throughout life. During systematic genetic analysis of the AIP 
patients diagnosed in the Czech and Slovak Republics, we found a special case of 
AIP. In a 15-year-old boy with abdominal and subsequent neurological 
symptomatology, we identified de novo mutation 966insA within the PBGD gene 
leading to a stop codon after 36 completely different amino acids compared to 
the wt-sequence. To establish the effects of this mutation on the protein 
structure, we expressed mutant constructs with described mutation in E. coli and 
analyzed their biochemical and enzymatic properties. Moreover, computer-assisted 
protein structure prediction was performed.

DOI: 10.33549/physiolres.930000.55.S2.145
PMID: 17298218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]