1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Feb;16(2):214-22. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0790.

Common genetic variation in TP53 is associated with lung cancer risk and 
prognosis in African Americans and somatic mutations in lung tumors.

Mechanic LE(1), Bowman ED, Welsh JA, Khan MA, Hagiwara N, Enewold L, Shields PG, 
Burdette L, Chanock S, Harris CC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, Center for 
Cancer Research, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4258, USA.

Lung cancer is primarily caused by tobacco smoking, but susceptibility is likely 
modified by common genetic variation. In response to many forms of cellular 
stress, including DNA damage, the p53 protein functions to induce cell cycle 
arrest, DNA repair, senescence, or apoptosis. We hypothesized that common TP53 
haplotypes modulate pathways of lung carcinogenesis and lung cancer 
susceptibility or prognosis. To investigate our hypothesis, 14 polymorphisms in 
TP53, including haplotype tagging and coding single nucleotide polymorphisms, 
were genotyped in two studies from the greater Baltimore, Maryland area. One 
study is a case-control study and the second is a case-only study for which TP53 
mutational spectra data are available. African Americans with Pro-T-A-G-G 
haplotypes of the combined TP53 polymorphisms TP53_01 (rs1042522), TP53_65 
(rs9895829), TP53_66 (rs2909430), TP53_16 (rs1625895), and TP53_11 (rs12951053) 
had both an increased risk for lung cancer (odds ratio, 2.32; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.18-4.57) and a worsened lung cancer prognosis (hazards ratio, 2.38; 
95% confidence interval, 1.38-4.10) compared with those with Arg-T-A-G-T 
haplotypes. No associations of TP53 polymorphisms with lung cancer were observed 
in Caucasians. In the case-only study, several polymorphisms in TP53 and TP53 
haplotypes, overlapping regions of TP53 associated with risk and prognosis in 
African Americans, were associated with increased odds of somatic TP53 mutation 
in lung tumors in Caucasians. In conclusion, common genetic variation in TP53 
could modulate lung cancer pathways, as suggested by the association with lung 
cancer in African Americans and somatic TP53 mutation frequency in lung tumors.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-06-0790
PMID: 17301252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]