1. Genet Med. 2007 Feb;9(2):67-73. doi: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31803068b1.

Myeloperoxidase G-463A polymorphism and lung cancer: a HuGE genetic 
susceptibility to environmental carcinogens pooled analysis.

Taioli E(1), Benhamou S, Bouchardy C, Cascorbi I, Cajas-Salazar N, Dally H, Fong 
KM, Larsen JE, Le Marchand L, London SJ, Risch A, Spitz MR, Stucker I, 
Weinshenker B, Wu X, Yang P.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pensylvania 15232, 
USA.

Myeloperoxidase is a phase I metabolic enzyme that converts the metabolites of 
benzo[a]pyrene from tobacco smoke into highly reactive epoxides. A polymorphism 
in the promoter region of myeloperoxidase (463G-->A) has been found to be 
inversely associated with lung cancer; differences in the association with age 
and gender have been suggested. We conducted a pooled analysis of individual 
data from 10 studies (3688 cases and 3874 controls) from the Genetic 
Susceptibility to Environmental Carcinogens database. The odds ratio for lung 
cancer was 0.88 (95% confidence interval: 0.80-0.97) for the AG variant of 
myeloperoxidase G-463A polymorphism, and 0.71 (95% confidence interval: 
0.57-0.88) for the AA variant after adjusting for smoking, age, gender, and 
ethnicity. The inverse association between lung cancer and myeloperoxidase 
G-463A polymorphism was equally found in males and females (odds ratio for the 
AA genotype 0.73 [95% confidence interval: 0.56-0.96] and 0.67 [95% confidence 
interval: 0.46-0.98], respectively), without differences in the association 
according to age in the two genders. The myeloperoxidase G-463A polymorphism was 
significantly protective in "ever" smokers but not in "never" smokers. 
Myeloperoxidase is a key enzyme in tobacco-induced carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1097/gim.0b013e31803068b1
PMID: 17304047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]