1. Biochemistry. 2007 Mar 20;46(11):3161-70. doi: 10.1021/bi062218p. Epub 2007
Feb  20.

Characterization of the binding of isoniazid and analogues to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase.

Zhao X(1), Yu S, Magliozzo RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York 11210, USA.

The first-line antituberculosis drug isonicotinic hydrazide (INH) is a prodrug 
whose bactericidal function requires activation by Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
catalase-peroxidase (KatG) to produce an acyl-NAD adduct. Peroxidation of INH is 
considered a required catalytic process for drug action. The binding of INH and 
a series of hydrazide analogues to resting KatG was examined using optical and 
calorimetric techniques to provide thermodynamic parameters, binding 
stoichiometries, and kinetic constants (on and off rates). This work revealed 
high-affinity binding of these substrates to a small fraction of ferric enzyme 
in a six-coordinate heme iron form, a species most likely containing a weakly 
bound water molecule, which accumulates during storage of the enzyme. The 
binding of hydrazides is associated with a large enthalpy loss (>100 kcal/mol); 
dissociation constants are in the range of 0.05-1.6 microM, and optical 
stopped-flow measurements demonstrated kon values in the range of 0.5-27 x 10(3) 
M-1 s-1 with very small koff rates. Binding parameters did not depend on pH in 
the range 5-8. High-affinity binding of INH is disrupted in two mutant enzymes 
bearing replacements of key distal side residues, KatG[W107F] and KatG[Y229F]. 
The rates of reduction of KatG Compound I by hydrazides parallel the on rates 
for association with the resting enzyme. In a KatG-mediated biomimetic 
activation assay, only isoniazid generated in good yield the acyl-NAD adduct 
which is considered a key molecule in INH action, providing a better 
understanding of the action mechanism of INH.

DOI: 10.1021/bi062218p
PMID: 17309235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]