1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Apr;18(4):1262-70. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2006111235. Epub
2007  Feb 21.

Impaired protein stability of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2: a 
novel mechanism of apparent mineralocorticoid excess.

Atanasov AG(1), Ignatova ID, Nashev LG, Dick B, Ferrari P, Frey FJ, Odermatt A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Berne, 
Freiburgstrasse 15, 3010 Berne, Switzerland.

Apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) is a severe form of hypertension that is 
caused by impaired activity of 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 
(11beta-HSD2), which converts biologically active cortisol into inactive 
cortisone. Mutations in HSD11B2 result in cortisol-induced activation of 
mineralocorticoid receptors and cause hypertension with hypokalemia, metabolic 
alkalosis, and suppressed circulating renin and aldosterone concentrations. This 
study uncovered the first patient with AME who was described in the literature, 
identified the genetic defect in HSD11B2, and provided evidence for a novel 
mechanism of reduced 11beta-HSD2 activity. This study identified a cluster of 
amino acids (335 to 339) in the C-terminus of 11beta-HSD2 that are essential for 
protein stability. The cluster includes Tyr(338), which is mutated in the index 
patient, and Arg(335) and Arg(337), previously reported to be mutated in 
hypertensive patients. It was found that wild-type 11beta-HSD2 is a relatively 
stable enzyme with a half-life of 21 h, whereas that of Tyr(338)His and 
Arg(337)His was 3 and 4 h, respectively. Enzymatic activity of Tyr(338)His was 
partially retained at 26 degrees C or in the presence of the chemical chaperones 
glycerol and dexamethasone, indicating thermodynamic instability and misfolding. 
The results provide evidence that the degradation of both misfolded mutant 
Tyr(338)His and wild-type 11beta-HSD2 occurs through the proteasome pathway. 
Therefore, impaired 11beta-HSD2 protein stability rather than reduced gene 
expression or loss of catalytic activity seems to be responsible for the 
development of hypertension in some individuals with AME.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2006111235
PMID: 17314322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]