1. FASEB J. 2007 Jun;21(8):1730-41. doi: 10.1096/fj.06-6545com. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

FAK association with multiple signal proteins mediates pressure-induced colon 
cancer cell adhesion via a Src-dependent PI3K/Akt pathway.

Thamilselvan V(1), Craig DH, Basson MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, 4646 John R. St., 
Detroit, Michigan 48201-1932, USA.

Cancer cell adhesion is traditionally viewed as random, occurring if the cell's 
receptors match the substrate. Cancer cells are subjected to pressure and shear 
during growth against a constraining stroma, surgical manipulation, and passage 
through the venous and lymphatic system. Cells shed into a cavity such as the 
abdomen postoperatively also experience increased pressure from postoperative 
edema. Increased extracellular pressure stimulates integrin-mediated cancer cell 
adhesion via FAK and Src. PI 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitors (LY294002 or 
wortmannin), Akt inhibitors, or Akt1 siRNA blocked adhesion stimulated by 15 
mmHg pressure in SW620 or primary human malignant colonocytes. Pressure 
activated PI3K, tyrosine-phosphorylated and membrane-translocated the p85 
subunit, and phosphorylated Akt. PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) prevented 
pressure-stimulated Akt Ser473 and FAK Tyr397, but not FAK576 or Src416 
phosphorylation. PP2 inhibited PI3K activity and Akt phosphorylation. FAK siRNA 
did not affect pressure-induced PI3K activation but blocked Akt phosphorylation. 
Pressure also stimulated FAK or FAKY397F mutant translocation to the membrane. 
Akt inhibitor IV blocked pressure-induced Akt and FAK translocation. Pressure 
activated Src- and PI3K-dependently induced p85 interaction with FAK, and FAK 
with beta1 integrin. These results delineate a novel force-activated inside-out 
Src/PI3K/FAK/Akt pathway by which cancer cells regulate their own adhesion. 
These signals may be potential targets for inhibition of metastatic adhesion.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.06-6545com
PMID: 17317726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]