1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Mar;30(3):502-7. doi: 10.1248/bpb.30.502.

Identification of new small molecule inhibitors of cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator protein: in vitro and in vivo studies.

Muanprasat C(1), Kaewmokul S, Chatsudthipong V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok 
10400, Thailand.

Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein is a 
cAMP-regulated chloride channel that has been proposed as a pharmacological 
target to reduce intestinal fluid loss in cholera. The aim of this study was to 
identify new CFTR inhibitors by high-throughput screening. Screening of 50,000 
drug-like small molecules was performed using a cell-based assay of iodide 
influx in Fisher rat thyroid (FRT) cells co-expressing human CFTR and 
halide-sensitive yellow fluorescent protein (YFP-H148Q). Two new CFTR 
inhibitors, 2-[N-(3-hydroxy-4-carboxyphenyl) amino]-4-(4-methylphenyl)-thiazole 
(INH 1) and 
1-acetyl-5-bromo-2,3-dihydro-N-(1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1-naphthalenyl)-1H-Indole-7-sulfonamide 
(INH 2), were identified. They were then determined for potency, reversibility 
and specificity by electrophysiological methods, and for in vivo efficacy in 
mouse model of cholera toxin-induced intestinal fluid secretion. INH 1 and INH 2 
reversibly inhibited cAMP-activated apical chloride current in FRT cells with 
Kis of 15 and 20 microM, respectively. Similarly, in short-circuit current 
analysis in human colonic epithelial cell lines (T84 cells), cAMP-activated 
chloride secretion was inhibited by INH 1 and INH 2 with Kis of 24.5 and 25.3 
microM, respectively. Calcium-activated chloride secretion in the T84 cells was 
markedly inhibited by 100 microM of INH 1, but was unaffected by 100 microM of 
INH 2. In vivo studies in mice showed that a single intraperitoneal injection of 
INH 1 (3 mg/kg) reduced cholera toxin-induced intestinal fluid secretion by 40%, 
whereas INH 2 produced no effect. Our results indicate that INH 1 could be a new 
class candidate for a blocker of cholera toxin-induced intestinal fluid 
secretion as well as a CFTR inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.30.502
PMID: 17329846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]