1. Biochemistry. 2007 Mar 20;46(11):3319-30. doi: 10.1021/bi061521n. Epub 2007
Feb  27.

Biochemical analysis of Thermotoga maritima GH36 alpha-galactosidase (TmGalA) 
confirms the mechanistic commonality of clan GH-D glycoside hydrolases.

Comfort DA(1), Bobrov KS, Ivanen DR, Shabalin KA, Harris JM, Kulminskaya AA, 
Brumer H, Kelly RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7905, USA.

Organization of glycoside hydrolase (GH) families into clans expands the utility 
of information on catalytic mechanisms of member enzymes. This issue was 
examined for GH27 and GH36 through biochemical analysis of GH36 
alpha-galactosidase from Thermotoga maritima (TmGalA). Catalytic residues in 
TmGalA were inferred through structural homology with GH27 members to facilitate 
design of site-directed mutants. Product analysis confirmed that the wild type 
(WT) acted with retention of anomeric stereochemistry, analogous to GH27 
enzymes. Conserved acidic residues were confirmed through kinetic analysis of 
D327G and D387G mutant enzymes, azide rescue, and determination of azide rescue 
products. Mutation of Asp327 to Gly resulted in a mutant that had a 200-800-fold 
lower catalytic rate on aryl galactosides relative to the WT enzyme. Azide 
rescue experiments using the D327G enzyme showed a 30-fold higher catalytic rate 
compared to without azide. Addition of azide to the reaction resulted in 
formation of azide beta-d-galactopyranoside, confirming Asp327 as the 
nucleophilic residue. The Asp387Gly mutation was 1500-fold catalytically slower 
than the WT enzyme on p-nitrophenyl alpha-d-galactopyranoside. Analysis at 
different pH values produced a bell-shaped curve of the WT enzyme, but D387G 
exhibited higher activity with increasing pH. Catalyzed reactions with the D387G 
mutant in the presence of azide resulted in formation of azide 
alpha-d-galactopryanoside as the product of a retaining mechanism. These results 
confirm that Asp387 is the acid/base residue of TmGalA. Furthermore, they show 
that the biochemical characteristics of GH36 TmGalA are closely related to GH27 
enzymes, confirming the mechanistic commonality of clan GH-D members.

DOI: 10.1021/bi061521n
PMID: 17323919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]