1. J Periodontol. 2007 Mar;78(3):493-7. doi: 10.1902/jop.2007.060309.

Association of interleukin-10 gene polymorphisms with severe generalized chronic 
periodontitis.

Sumer AP(1), Kara N, Keles GC, Gunes S, Koprulu H, Bagci H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis and Radiology, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Ondokuzmayis University, Samsun, Turkey. psumer1970@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-10 (IL-10), an anti-inflammatory cytokine, plays a role 
in periodontal disease by inhibiting synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and 
stimulating protective antibody production. Genetic polymorphisms in the IL-10 
gene might be useful as a marker to diagnose susceptibility to periodontitis. 
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the association between 
IL-10 gene polymorphisms and severe generalized chronic periodontitis (CP) in a 
Turkish population.
METHODS: Samples of venous blood and DNA were obtained from 75 patients with 
severe generalized CP and 73 healthy subjects. The IL-10 promoter sequences at 
positions -597 and -824 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction, and 
polymorphisms were detected by restriction enzyme cleavage. Genotype and allele 
frequencies were calculated, and data were analyzed using the chi(2) test.
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant difference in frequencies of 
genotypes (AA/CC + CA: P = 0.00007, odds ratio = 12.37, 95% confidence intervals 
= 2.74 to 7.77; CC/CA + AA: P = 0.001, odds ratio = 3.05, 95% confidence 
intervals = 1.47 to 6.33) and alleles (P = 0.0002, odds ratio = 2.61, 95% 
confidence intervals = 1.52 to 4.51) at position -597 C to A between patients 
with severe generalized CP and healthy controls, whereas there was no 
significant difference in genotypes and allele frequencies at position -824 C to 
T between patients with CP and healthy subjects.
CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of sample selection and number, the IL-10 
gene polymorphism at position -597 seems to be associated with severe 
generalized CP.

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2007.060309
PMID: 17335372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]