1. Diabetes Care. 2007 Jun;30(6):1448-53. doi: 10.2337/dc06-2499. Epub 2007 Mar
2.

How doctors choose medications to treat type 2 diabetes: a national survey of 
specialists and academic generalists.

Grant RW(1), Wexler DJ, Watson AJ, Lester WT, Cagliero E, Campbell EG, Nathan 
DM.

Author information:
(1)General Medicine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. rgrant@partners.org

OBJECTIVE: Glycemic control remains suboptimal despite the wide range of 
available medications. More effective medication prescription might result in 
better control. However, the process by which physicians choose glucose-lowering 
medicines is poorly understood. We sought to study the means by which physicians 
choose medications for type 2 diabetic patients.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We surveyed 886 physician members of either the 
Society of General Internal Medicine (academic generalists, response rate 30%) 
or the American Diabetes Association (specialists, response rate 23%) currently 
managing patients with type 2 diabetes. Respondents weighed the importance of 15 
patient, physician, and nonclinical factors when deciding which medications to 
prescribe for type 2 diabetic subjects at each of three management stages 
(initiation, use of second-line oral agents, and insulin).
RESULTS: Respondents reported using a median of five major considerations 
(interquartile range 4-6) at each stage. Frequently cited major considerations 
included overall assessment of the patient's health/comorbidity, A1C level, and 
patient's adherence behavior but not expert guidelines/hospital algorithms or 
patient age. For insulin initiation, academic generalists placed greater 
emphasis on patient adherence (76 vs. 60% of specialists, P < 0.001). These 
generalists also identified patient fear of injections (68%) and patient desire 
to prolong noninsulin therapy (68%) as major insulin barriers. Overall, 
qualitative factors (e.g., adherence, motivation, overall health assessment) 
were somewhat more highly considered than quantitative factors (e.g., A1C, age, 
weight) with mean aggregate scores of 7.3 vs. 6.9 on a scale of 0-10, P < 0.001.
CONCLUSIONS: The physicians in our survey considered a wide range of qualitative 
and quantitative factors when making medication choices for hyperglycemia 
management. The apparent complexity of the medication choice process contrasts 
with current evidence-based treatment guidelines.

DOI: 10.2337/dc06-2499
PMCID: PMC3829641
PMID: 17337497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]