1. Behav Brain Res. 2007 Apr 16;179(1):167-71. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.01.026.
Epub  2007 Feb 3.

Involvement of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in inhibitory effects 
of a hydrophobic dipeptide Leu-Ile on morphine-induced sensitization and 
rewarding effects.

Niwa M(1), Nitta A, Shen L, Noda Y, Nabeshima T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychopharmacology and Hospital Pharmacy, Nagoya 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsuruma-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 
466-8560, Japan.

There are few efficacious medications for drug dependence at present. We have 
previously demonstrated that Leu-Ile, which induces the expression of not only 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) but also glial cell line-derived 
neurotrophic factor (GDNF), inhibits methamphetamine (METH) and morphine 
(MOR)-induced sensitization and rewarding effects by regulating extracellular 
dopamine levels via the induction of TNF-alpha expression, and indicated the 
potential of Leu-Ile as a novel therapeutic agent for METH and MOR-induced 
dependence. In the present study, we investigated the involvement of GDNF in 
inhibitory effects of Leu-Ile on MOR-induced sensitization and rewarding 
effects. Repeated treatment with MOR for 9 days, which results in an enhancement 
of the locomotor-stimulating effects (sensitization) of MOR, increased GDNF 
levels in the nucleus accumbens compared with those in saline-treated mice. 
Repeated pre-treatment with Leu-Ile for 9 days potentiated the MOR-induced 
increase in GDNF levels. MOR at a low dose (3mg/kg) produced place preference in 
GDNF heterozygous knockout (GDNF-(+/-)) mice, but not in littermate GDNF-(+/+) 
mice. No inhibitory effect of Leu-Ile on MOR-induced place preference was 
observed in GDNF-(+/-) mice. These results suggest that GDNF is involved in the 
inhibitory effects of Leu-Ile on MOR-induced sensitization and rewarding 
effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.01.026
PMID: 17331595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]