1. Brain Res. 2007 May 25;1147:248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.02.002. Epub 
2007 Feb 7.

Familial Alzheimer's disease presenilin 1 mutation M146V increases gamma 
secretase cutting of p75NTR in vitro.

Hatchett CS(1), Tyler S, Armstrong D, Dawbarn D, Allen SJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Unit, University of Bristol, CSSB, Dorothy Hodgkin 
Building, Bristol BS1 3NY, UK.

The cholinergic neurons of the basal forebrain are amongst the first to 
degenerate in Alzheimer's disease. These neurons are unique in the brain, 
expressing the tyrosine kinase receptor TrkA, together with the common 
neurotrophin receptor p75NTR; both of which bind nerve growth factor. Activation 
of the TrkA receptor is important in the maintenance of cell viability, whereas 
the p75NTR receptor has been implicated in apoptosis. Mutations in the gene for 
presenilin 1, a multi-transmembrane aspartyl protease, are known to cause 
familial Alzheimer's disease. This is thought to be due to their effect on 
gamma-secretase-dependent processing of amyloid precursor protein and subsequent 
formation of amyloid. Since p75NTR was recently shown to undergo gamma-secretase 
regulated intramembrane proteolysis, this study examines the effect of familial 
Alzheimer mutations on processing of p75NTR. PC12 cells were stably transfected 
with familial mutations M146V, A246E and deltaE9 and wild-type presenilin 1 and 
were examined here for gamma-secretase-dependent proteolysis of p75NTR. 
Overexpression of wild-type presenilin 1 did not increase 
gamma-secretase-mediated cleavage of p75NTR. However, by contrast, the presence 
of the M146V mutation was shown to significantly increase cleavage of p75NTR 
compared with the other mutations. Survival of cholinergic neurons will depend 
on the balance between the receptors TrkA and p75NTR, and their respective 
signalling pathways. Thus alterations in p75NTR proteolysis may influence this 
equilibrium. The novel finding that a mutation may increase processing of p75NTR 
may have implications for the pathogenic outcome in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.02.002
PMID: 17349981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]