1. Biochemistry. 2007 Apr 3;46(13):4077-89. doi: 10.1021/bi7000483. Epub 2007 Mar
 13.

Mechanistic diversity in the RuBisCO superfamily: the "enolase" in the 
methionine salvage pathway in Geobacillus kaustophilus.

Imker HJ(1), Fedorov AA, Fedorov EV, Almo SC, Gerlt JA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Chemistry, University of Illinois, 600 South 
Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

D-Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), the most abundant 
enzyme, is the paradigm member of the recently recognized mechanistically 
diverse RuBisCO superfamily. The RuBisCO reaction is initiated by abstraction of 
the proton from C3 of the d-ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate substrate by a carbamate 
oxygen of carboxylated Lys 201 (spinach enzyme). Heterofunctional homologues of 
RuBisCO found in species of Bacilli catalyze the tautomerization ("enolization") 
of 2,3-diketo-5-methylthiopentane 1-phosphate (DK-MTP 1-P) in the methionine 
salvage pathway in which 5-methylthio-d-ribose (MTR) derived from 
5'-methylthioadenosine is converted to methionine [Ashida, H., Saito, Y., 
Kojima, C., Kobayashi, K., Ogasawara, N., and Yokota, A. (2003) A functional 
link between RuBisCO-like protein of Bacillus and photosynthetic RuBisCO, 
Science 302, 286-290]. The reaction catalyzed by this "enolase" is accomplished 
by abstraction of a proton from C1 of the DK-MTP 1-P substrate to form the 
tautomerized product, a conjugated enol. Because the RuBisCO- and 
"enolase"-catalyzed reactions differ in the regiochemistry of proton abstraction 
but are expected to share stabilization of an enolate anion intermediate by 
coordination to an active site Mg2+, we sought to establish structure-function 
relationships for the "enolase" reaction so that the structural basis for the 
functional diversity could be established. We determined the stereochemical 
course of the reaction catalyzed by the "enolases" from Bacillus subtilis and 
Geobacillus kaustophilus. Using stereospecifically deuterated samples of an 
alternate substrate derived from d-ribose (5-OH group instead of the 
5-methylthio group in MTR) as well as of the natural DK-MTP 1-P substrate, we 
determined that the "enolase"-catalyzed reaction involves abstraction of the 
1-proS proton. We also determined the structure of the activated "enolase" from 
G. kaustophilus (carboxylated on Lys 173) liganded with Mg2+ and 
2,3-diketohexane 1-phosphate, a stable alternate substrate. The 
stereospecificity of proton abstraction restricts the location of the general 
base to the N-terminal alpha+beta domain instead of the C-terminal 
(beta/alpha)8-barrel domain that contains the carboxylated Lys 173. Lys 98 in 
the N-terminal domain, conserved in all "enolases", is positioned to abstract 
the 1-proS proton. Consistent with this proposed function, the K98A mutant of 
the G. kaustophilus "enolase" is unable to catalyze the "enolase" reaction. 
Thus, we conclude that this functionally divergent member of the RuBisCO 
superfamily uses the same structural strategy as RuBisCO for stabilizing the 
enolate anion intermediate, i.e., coordination to an essential Mg2+, but the 
proton abstraction is catalyzed by a different general base.

DOI: 10.1021/bi7000483
PMID: 17352497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]