1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;80(4):716-26. doi: 10.1086/513206. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Admixture mapping of an allele affecting interleukin 6 soluble receptor and 
interleukin 6 levels.

Reich D(1), Patterson N, Ramesh V, De Jager PL, McDonald GJ, Tandon A, Choy E, 
Hu D, Tamraz B, Pawlikowska L, Wassel-Fyr C, Huntsman S, Waliszewska A, Rossin 
E, Li R, Garcia M, Reiner A, Ferrell R, Cummings S, Kwok PY, Harris T, Zmuda JM, 
Ziv E; Health, Aging and Body Composition (Health ABC) Study.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, New Research Building, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. reich@genetics.med.harvard.edu

Circulating levels of inflammatory markers can predict cardiovascular disease 
risk. To identify genes influencing the levels of these markers, we genotyped 
1,343 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,184 African Americans from the 
Health, Aging and Body Composition (Health ABC) Study. Using admixture mapping, 
we found a significant association of interleukin 6 soluble receptor (IL-6 SR) 
with European ancestry on chromosome 1 (LOD 4.59), in a region that includes the 
gene for this receptor (IL-6R). Genotyping 19 SNPs showed that the effect is 
largely explained by an allele at 4% frequency in West Africans and at 35% 
frequency in European Americans, first described as associated with IL-6 SR in a 
Japanese cohort. We replicate this association (P<<1.0x10-12) and also 
demonstrate a new association with circulating levels of a different molecule, 
IL-6 (P<3.4x10-5). After replication in 1,674 European Americans from Health 
ABC, the combined result is even more significant: P<<1.0x10-12 for IL-6 SR, and 
P<2.0x10-9 for IL-6. These results also serve as an important proof of 
principle, showing that admixture mapping can not only coarsely localize but can 
also fine map a phenotypically important variant.

DOI: 10.1086/513206
PMCID: PMC1852718
PMID: 17357077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]