1. Genes Immun. 2007 Jun;8(4):302-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364387. Epub 2007 Mar 
15.

Disease association of the interleukin-18 promoter polymorphisms in Taiwan 
Chinese systemic lupus erythematosus patients.

Lin YJ(1), Wan L, Lee CC, Huang CM, Tsai Y, Tsai CH, Shin TL, Chao K, Liu CM, 
Xiao JW, Tsai FJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, No. 2 Yuh 
Der Road, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Interleukin (IL)-18, an important mediator of innate and adaptive immunity, 
plays multiple roles in chronic inflammation, in autoimmune diseases, in a 
variety of cancers and in number of infectious diseases. IL-18 promoter 
polymorphisms have been also noted associated with various inflammatory 
diseases. We investigated the association of IL-18 promoter polymorphisms 
(-656T/G, -607A/C and -137C/G) with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in Taiwan 
Chinese patients and controls. Six haplotypes (hts) were identified from the 
three promoter polymorphisms. The genotype distribution of the ht1 (GCC), ht2 
(TAC), ht4 (GAC) and ht5 (TCC) were different in patients and controls 
(P<0.002). Moreover, the haplotype and genotype frequencies of ht1 were 
significantly increased in patients with discoid rash (P=0.045, odds ratio (OR): 
2.01, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.01-4.00; P=0.027, OR: 5.13, 95% CI: 
1.41-18.68). In addition, the homozygous genotype ht1/ht1 was significant 
increased in patients with serositis (P=0.015, OR: 9.78, 95% CI: 1.55-61.73). 
These observations suggest that the three promoter polymorphisms contribute to 
the genetic background of SLE pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364387
PMID: 17361200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]