1. Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;121(5):591-9. doi: 10.1007/s00439-007-0341-3. Epub 2007
Mar  22.

Molecular diagnostics of Meckel-Gruber syndrome highlights phenotypic 
differences between MKS1 and MKS3.

Consugar MB(1), Kubly VJ, Lager DJ, Hommerding CJ, Wong WC, Bakker E, Gattone VH 
2nd, Torres VE, Breuning MH, Harris PC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 200 
First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a recessively inherited, lethal disorder 
characterized by renal cystic dysplasia, occipital encephalocele, polydactyly 
and biliary dysgenesis. MKS is genetically heterogeneous with three loci mapped 
and two identified; MKS1 (17q23) and MKS3 (8q22.1). MKS1 is part of the Finnish 
disease heritage, while MKS3 has been described exclusively in consanguineous 
Asian families. Here we aimed to establish molecular diagnostics for MKS, 
determine the importance of MKS1 and MKS3 in non-consanguineous populations, and 
study genotype/phenotype correlations. The coding regions of MKS1 and MKS3 were 
screened for mutations by direct sequencing in 17 families clinically diagnosed 
with MKS in the US or The Netherlands. The clinical phenotype was compared to 
genic and allelic effects. Both mutations were identified in ten families; five 
MKS1 and five MKS3. All but two were compound heterozygotes, consistent with 
their non-consanguineous nature. The MKS1-Fin(major) mutation accounted for 7/10 
MKS1 mutations; two novel changes were additionally detected. Seven novel 
mutations were found in MKS3, including three missense changes. We concluded 
that MKS1 and MKS3 account for the majority of MKS in non-consanguineous 
populations of European origin. Polydactyly is usually found in MKS1 but rare in 
MKS3. Cases with no, or milder, CNS phenotypes were only found in MKS3; 
hypomorphic missense mutations may be associated with less severe CNS outcomes. 
This study is consistent with further genetic heterogeneity of MKS, but 
underlines the value of molecular diagnostics of the known genes to aid family 
planning decisions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-007-0341-3
PMID: 17377820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]