1. Blood. 2007 Jul 1;110(1):354-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-01-069237. Epub 2007
Mar  21.

Different STAT-3 and STAT-5 phosphorylation discriminates among Ph-negative 
chronic myeloproliferative diseases and is independent of the V617F JAK-2 
mutation.

Teofili L(1), Martini M, Cenci T, Petrucci G, Torti L, Storti S, Guidi F, Leone 
G, Larocca LM.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Hematology, Catholic University of Rome, Italy.

The V617F JAK2 mutation reported in Ph-negative myeloproliferative diseases 
(MPDs) induces the constitutive activation of JAK2, which produces an increased 
phosphorylation of signal transducer activator of transcription (STAT). In this 
study, we have analyzed a series of 114 patients (54 with polycythemia vera 
[PV], 44 with essential thrombocythemia [ET], 12 with idiopathic myelofibrosis 
[IM], and 4 with myelofibrosis secondary to MPD) for the expression pattern of 
phosphorylated STAT-3 and STAT-5 (pSTAT-3 and pSTAT-5, respectively) by 
immunostaining bone marrow biopsies. We found 3 specific patterns of pSTAT-3 and 
pSTAT-5 expression, significantly different from the normal staining pattern: 
uniformly increased pSTAT-3 and pSTAT-5 expression in PV, increased pSTAT-3 and 
reduced pSTAT-5 expression in ET, and uniformly reduced pSTAT-3 and pSTAT-5 
expression in IM. A moderate increase of pSTAT-3 and pSTAT-5 expression was 
observed in secondary forms of erythrocytosis and thrombocytosis. In all 
evaluated MPDs, the pSTAT-5 and pSTAT-3 expression pattern was not influenced by 
the presence of V617F JAK2 mutation. These findings underline the importance of 
bone marrow histology in the differential diagnosis of Ph-negative MPD and 
support the hypothesis that V617F mutation simply contributes with other 
molecular defects in allowing the PV, ET, or IM phenotype to emerge.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-01-069237
PMID: 17376889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]