1. BMC Infect Dis. 2007 Mar 19;7:19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-7-19.

Sex- and age-dependent association of SLC11A1 polymorphisms with tuberculosis in 
Chinese: a case control study.

Leung KH(1), Yip SP, Wong WS, Yiu LS, Chan KK, Lai WM, Chow EY, Lin CK, Yam WC, 
Chan KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hong Kong SAR, China. htgeorge@inet.polyu.edu.hk 
<htgeorge@inet.polyu.edu.hk>

BACKGROUND: Host genetic factors are important determinants in tuberculosis 
(TB). The SLC11A1 (or NRAMP1) gene has been studied extensively for genetic 
association with TB, but with inconsistent findings. In addition, no study has 
yet looked into the effect of sex and age on the relationship between SLC11A1 
polymorphisms and TB.
METHODS: A case-control study was conducted. In total, 278 pulmonary TB patients 
and 282 sex- and age-matched controls without TB were recruited. All subjects 
were ethnic Chinese. On the basis of linkage disequilibrium pattern, three 
genetic markers from SLC11A1 and one from the nearby IL8RB locus were selected 
and examined for association with TB susceptibility. These markers were 
genotyped using single strand conformation polymorphism analysis or fragment 
analysis of amplified products.
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences in allele (P = 0.0165, OR = 1.51) 
and genotype (P = 0.0163, OR = 1.59) frequencies of the linked markers SLC6a/b 
(classically called D543N and 3'UTR) of the SLC11A1 locus were found between 
patients and controls. With stratification by sex, positive associations were 
identified in the female group for both allele (P = 0.0049, OR = 2.54) and 
genotype (P = 0.0075, OR = 2.74) frequencies. With stratification by age, 
positive associations were demonstrated in the young age group (age < or =65 
years) for both allele (P = 0.0047, OR = 2.52) and genotype (P = 0.0031, OR = 
2.92) frequencies. All positive findings remained significant even after 
correction for multiple comparisons. No significant differences were noted in 
either the male group or the older age group. No significant differences were 
found for the other markers (one SLC11A1 marker and one IL8RB marker) either.
CONCLUSION: This study confirmed the association between SLC11A1 and TB 
susceptibility and demonstrated for the first time that the association was 
restricted to females and the young age group.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-7-19
PMCID: PMC1847518
PMID: 17371589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]