1. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Jun;91(2):157-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.02.008. Epub
 2007 Mar 26.

Clinical, biochemical and genetic findings in two siblings with a 
dihydropyrimidinase deficiency.

van Kuilenburg AB(1), Meijer J, Dobritzsch D, Meinsma R, Duran M, Lohkamp B, 
Zoetekouw L, Abeling NG, van Tinteren HL, Bosch AM.

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Emma Children's Hospital, 
P.O. Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.b.vankuilenburg@amc.uva.nl

Dihydropyrimidinase (DHP) is the second enzyme of the pyrimidine degradation 
pathway and it catalyses the ring opening of 5,6-dihydrouracil and 
5,6-dihydrothymine to N-carbamyl-beta-alanine and 
N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid, respectively. To date, only nine 
individuals have been reported suffering from a complete DHP deficiency. We 
report two siblings presenting with strongly elevated levels of 
5,6-dihydrouracil and 5,6-dihydrothymine in plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and 
urine. One of the siblings had a severe delay in speech development and white 
matter abnormalities, whereas the other one was free of symptoms. Analysis of 
the DHP gene (DPYS) showed that both patients were compound heterozygous for the 
missense mutation 1078T>C (W360R) in exon 6 and a novel missense mutation 
1235G>T (R412M) in exon 7. Heterologous expression of the mutant enzymes in 
Escherichia coli showed that both missense mutations resulted in a mutant DHP 
enzyme without residual activity. Analysis of the crystal structure of 
eukaryotic DHP from the yeast Saccharomyces kluyveri and the slime mold 
Dictyostelium discoideum suggests that the W360R and R412M mutations lead to 
structural instability of the enzyme which could potentially impair the assembly 
of the tetramer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.02.008
PMID: 17383919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]