1. Endocrinology. 2007 Jun;148(6):2622-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2006-1352. Epub 2007
Mar  29.

The genetics of low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 in bone: a 
story of extremes.

Balemans W(1), Van Hul W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 
B-2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

A few years ago, human genetic studies provided compelling evidence that the 
low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) is involved in the 
regulation of bone homeostasis because pathogenic LRP5 mutations were found in 
monogenic conditions with abnormal bone density. On the one hand, the 
osteoporosis pseudoglioma syndrome results from loss of function of LRP5, 
whereas on the other hand, gain-of-function mutations in LRP5 cause conditions 
with an increased bone density. On the molecular level, these types of mutations 
result in disturbed (respectively, decreased and increased) canonical Wnt 
signaling, an important metabolic pathway in osteoblasts during embryonic and 
postnatal osteogenesis. This signaling cascade is activated by binding of Wnt 
ligand to the Frizzled/LRP5 receptor complex. In addition to the involvement of 
LRP5 in conditions with extreme bone phenotypes, the genetic profile of this 
gene has also been shown to contribute to the determination of bone density in 
the general population. Quite a number of studies already demonstrated that 
common polymorphic variants in LRP5 are associated with bone mineral density and 
consequently osteoporosis, a multifactorial trait with low bone mass and porous 
bone structure. These genetic studies together with results obtained from in 
vitro and in vivo studies emphasize the importance of LRP5 and canonical Wnt 
signaling in the regulation of bone homeostasis. Therefore, unraveling the exact 
mechanisms of this signaling cascade has become an important area in bone 
research. This review focuses on the genetics of LRP5 and summarizes the 
findings on monogenic bone conditions as well as the current knowledge of its 
involvement in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2006-1352
PMID: 17395706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]