1. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Mar 31;40(2):218-25. doi:
10.5483/bmbrep.2007.40.2.218.

AtMAP65-1 binds to tubulin dimers to promote tubulin assembly.

Li H(1), Yuan M, Mao T.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry; Department of 
Plant Sciences, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing 100094, China.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, the microtubule-associated protein AtMAP65-1 shows 
various functions on microtubule dynamics and organizations. However, it is 
still an open question about whether AtMAP65-1 binds to tubulin dimers and how 
it regulates microtubule dynamics. In present study, the tubulin-binding 
activity of AtMAP65-1 was investigated. Pull-down and co-sedimentation 
experiments demonstrated that AtMAP65-1 bound to tubulin dimers, at a molar 
ratio of 1 : 1. Cross-linking experiments showed that AtMAP65-1 bound to tubulin 
dimers by interacting with alpha-tubulin of the tubulin heterodimer. Interfering 
the bundling effect of AtMAP65-1 by addition of salt and monitoring the tubulin 
assembly, the experiment results indicated that AtMAP65-1 promoted tubulin 
assembly by interacting with tubulin dimers. In addition, five truncated 
versions of AtMAP65-1, namely AtMAP65-1 deltaN339 (amino acids 340-587); 
AtMAP65-1 deltaN494 (amino acids 495-587); AtMAP65-1 340-494 (amino acids 
340-494); AtMAP65-1 deltaC495 (amino acids 1-494) and AtMAP65-1 deltaC340 (amino 
acids 1-339), were tested for their binding activities and roles in tubulin 
polymerization in vitro. Four (AtMAP65-1 deltaN339, deltaN494, AtMAP65-1 340-494 
and deltaC495) from the five truncated proteins were able to co-sediment with 
microtubules, and three (AtMAP65-1 deltaN339, deltaN494 and AtMAP65-1 340-494) 
of them could bind to tubulin dimers in vitro. Among the three truncated 
proteins, AtMAP65-1 deltaN339 showed the greatest activity to promote tubulin 
polymerization, AtMAP65-1 deltaN494 exhibited almost the same activity as the 
full length protein in promoting tubulin assembly, and AtMAP65-1 340-494 had 
minor activity to promote tubulin assembly. On the contrast, AtMAP65-1 
deltaC495, which bound to microtubules but not to tubulin dimers, did not affect 
tubulin assembly. Our study suggested that AtMAP65-1 might promote tubulin 
assembly by binding to tubulin dimers in vivo.

DOI: 10.5483/bmbrep.2007.40.2.218
PMID: 17394772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]