1. Biochemistry. 2007 May 1;46(17):5094-105. doi: 10.1021/bi6025648. Epub 2007
Apr  7.

A conserved region between the heptad repeats of paramyxovirus fusion proteins 
is critical for proper F protein folding.

Gardner AE(1), Martin KL, Dutch RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky 
College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0509, USA.

Paramyxoviruses are a diverse family that utilizes a fusion (F) protein to enter 
cells via fusion of the viral lipid bilayer with a target cell membrane. 
Although certain regions of the F protein are known to play critical roles in 
membrane fusion, the function of much of the protein remains unclear. Sequence 
alignment of a set of paramyxovirus F proteins and analysis utilizing Block 
Maker identified a region of conserved amino acid sequence in a large domain 
between the heptad repeats of F1, designated CBF1. We employed site-directed 
mutagenesis to analyze the function of completely conserved residues of CBF1 in 
both the simian virus 5 (SV5) and Hendra virus F proteins. The majority of CBF1 
point mutants were deficient in homotrimer formation, proteolytic processing, 
and transport to the cell surface. For some SV5 F mutants, proteolytic cleavage 
and surface expression could be restored by expression at 30 degrees C, and 
varying levels of fusion promotion were observed at this temperature. In 
addition, the mutant SV5 F V402A displayed a hyperfusogenic phenotype at both 30 
and 37 degrees C, indicating that this mutation allows for efficient fusion with 
only an extremely small amount of cleaved, active protein. The recently 
published prefusogenic structure of PIV5/SV5 F (Yin, H. S., et al. (2006) Nature 
439, 38-44) indicates that residues within and flanking CBF1 interact with the 
fusion peptide domain. Together, these data suggest that CBF1-fusion peptide 
interactions are critical for the initial folding of paramyxovirus F proteins 
from this important viral family and can also modulate subsequent membrane 
fusion promotion.

DOI: 10.1021/bi6025648
PMCID: PMC2525568
PMID: 17417875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]