1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Aug;293(2):H949-58. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.01341.2006. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Rescue of tropomyosin-induced familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mice by 
transgenesis.

Jagatheesan G(1), Rajan S, Petrashevskaya N, Schwartz A, Boivin G, Arteaga GM, 
Solaro RJ, Liggett SB, Wieczorek DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University 
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0524, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Aug;293(2):H907-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00272.2007.

Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC) is a disease caused by mutations in 
contractile proteins of the sarcomere. Our laboratory developed a mouse model of 
FHC with a mutation in the thin filament protein alpha-tropomyosin (TM) at amino 
acid 180 (Glu180Gly). The hearts of these mice exhibit dramatic systolic and 
diastolic dysfunction, and their myofilaments demonstrate increased calcium 
sensitivity. The mice also develop severe cardiac hypertrophy, with death 
ensuing by 6 mo. In an attempt to normalize calcium sensitivity in the 
cardiomyofilaments of the hypertrophic mice, we generated a chimeric 
alpha-/beta-TM protein that decreases calcium sensitivity in transgenic mouse 
cardiac myofilaments. By mating mice from these two models together, we tested 
the hypothesis that an attenuation of myofilament calcium sensitivity would 
modulate the severe physiological and pathological consequences of the FHC 
mutation. These double-transgenic mice "rescue" the hypertrophic phenotype by 
exhibiting a normal morphology with no pathological abnormalities. Physiological 
analyses of these rescued mice show improved cardiac function and normal 
myofilament calcium sensitivity. These results demonstrate that alterations in 
calcium response by modification of contractile proteins can prevent the 
pathological and physiological effects of this disease.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.01341.2006
PMID: 17416600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]