1. J Hum Genet. 2007;52(5):391-396. doi: 10.1007/s10038-007-0135-4. Epub 2007 Apr
 11.

Mutation analysis and genotype/phenotype relationships of Gaucher disease 
patients in Spain.

Alfonso P(1)(2), Aznarez S(3)(4), Giralt M(5), Pocovi M(3)(4), Giraldo P(4)(5); 
Spanish Gaucher’s Disease Registry.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad Ciencias, 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Plaza San Francisco s/n, 50009, Zaragoza, Spain. 
palfonso@unizar.es.
(2)Institute Aragones of Health Sciences (I+CS), Zaragoza, Spain. 
palfonso@unizar.es.
(3)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad Ciencias, 
Universidad de Zaragoza, Plaza San Francisco s/n, 50009, Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Institute Aragones of Health Sciences (I+CS), Zaragoza, Spain.
(5)Miguel Servet University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain.

Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene cause Gaucher disease (GD). The 
aim of this study was to characterise the GBA mutations and analyze 
genotype/phenotype relationships in 193 unrelated patients from the Spanish GD 
Registry. We have identified 98.7% of the mutated GBA alleles, finding 56 
different GBA mutations and 66 genotypes causing GD in Spain: 47 previously 
described mutations and 9 novel mutations (4 missense R395C, R463H, W312R and 
V398I, 1 nonsense R359X, 4 frameshift c.708delC, c.1214-1215delGC, 
c.1439-1445del7 and c.42-65del24). The most prevalent mutations were N370S and 
L444P, accounting for 68.7% of the mutated alleles. A wide phenotypic difference 
was observed within each genotypic group, and 9% of diagnosed type 1 patients 
developed neurological involvement including parkisonism, tremor, hypoacusia and 
eye movements. All of these findings indicate that there is a significant 
genotypic heterogeneity that explains the huge phenotypic variation among 
Spanish GD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10038-007-0135-4
PMID: 17427031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]