1. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Aug;212(2):526-36. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21049.

MEK/ERK-dependent uPAR expression is required for motility via phosphorylation 
of P70S6K in human hepatocarcinoma cells.

Bessard A(1), Frémin C, Ezan F, Coutant A, Baffet G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U522, IFR 140, Université de Rennes1, Rennes, France.

Motility and invasiveness events require specific intracellular signaling 
cascade activations. In cancer liver cells, one of these mechanisms could 
involve the MAPK MEK/ERK cascade activation which has been shown over expressed 
and activated in hepatocellular carcinoma. To study whether the MEK/ERK cascade 
is involved in the motility of HCC, we examined the effect of MEK inhibitor and 
ERK2 silencing using monolayer wound-healing assays and fluoroblock invasion 
systems. Evidence was provided that the MAPK cascade is a key transduction 
pathway which controls HCC cells motility and invasiveness. We could disconnect 
proliferation to motility using mitomycin C and we established that 
RNAi-mediated inhibition of ERK2 led to strongly reduced cell motility. To 
improve our understanding, we analysed the regulation and the role of urokinase 
receptor (uPAR) in this process. We provided evidence that uPAR was under a 
MEK/ERK dependent mechanism and blocking uPAR activity using specific antagonist 
or inhibiting its expression by RNA interference which resulted in complete 
inhibition of motility. Moreover, we found in MAPK inhibited cultures and in 
uPAR silencing cells that p70S6K phosphorylation on residue Thr-389 was 
significantly reduced, whereas Ser-421/Thr-424 phosphorylation did not change. 
We highlighted that the FRAP/mTOR pathway did not affect motility and Thr-389 
phosphorylation. Furthermore, we demonstrated that p70S6K inhibition by RNA 
interference completely inhibited hepatocarcinoma cell motility. Therefore, 
targeting uPAR and/or MEK/ERK/S6K by RNA interference could be a major 
therapeutic strategy for the future treatment of invasive hepatocarcinoma cells.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21049
PMID: 17427199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]