1. Proteins. 2007 Jun 1;67(4):1119-27. doi: 10.1002/prot.21398.

Site directed mutagenesis at position 193 of human trypsin 4 alters the rate of 
conformational change during activation: role of local internal viscosity in 
protein dynamics.

Tóth J(1), Simon Z, Medveczky P, Gombos L, Jelinek B, Szilágyi L, Gráf L, 
Málnási-Csizmadia A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Eötvös Loránd University, 
H-1117 Budapest, Hungary.

Upon activation of trypsinogen four peptide segments flanked by hinge glycine 
residues undergo conformational changes. To test whether the degree of 
conformational freedom of hinge regions affects the rate of activation, we 
introduced amino acid side chains of different characters at one of the hinges 
(position 193) and studied their effects on the rate constant of the 
conformational change. This structural rearrangement leading to activation was 
triggered by a pH-jump and monitored by intrinsic fluorescence change in the 
stopped-flow apparatus. We found that an increase in the size of the side chain 
at position 193 is associated with the decrease of the reaction rate constant. 
To analyze the thermodynamics of the reaction, temperature dependence of the 
reaction rate constants was examined in a wide temperature range (5-60 degrees 
C) using a novel temperature-jump/stopped-flow apparatus developed in our 
laboratory. Our data show that the mutations do not affect the activation energy 
(the exponential term) of the reaction, but they significantly alter the 
preexponential term of the Arrhenius equation. The effect of solvent viscosity 
on the rate constants of the conformational change during activation of the wild 
type enzyme and its R193G and R193A mutants was determined and evaluated on the 
basis of Kramers' theory. Based on this we propose that the reaction rate of 
this conformational transition is regulated by the internal molecular friction, 
which can be specifically modulated by mutagenesis in the hinge region.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21398
PMID: 17436323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]