1. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007 Sep;77 Suppl 1:S116-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2007.01.044. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Genetics of type 1 diabetes in Asian and Caucasian populations.

Ikegami H(1), Kawabata Y, Noso S, Fujisawa T, Ogihara T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Kinki University School 
of Medicine, Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan. ikegami@med.kindai.ac.jp

Among candidate genes for type 1 diabetes, HLA, INS, CTLA4, PTPN22 and SUMO4 
have been shown to be associated with the disease in Caucasian populations. To 
clarify the similarities and differences in the contribution of these genes to 
type 1 diabetes between Asian and Caucasian populations, association of these 
genes with type 1 diabetes was studied in a large number of samples in Japanese 
and Korean populations. Class II HLA was strongly associated with type 1 
diabetes in both Asian and Caucasian populations, but haplotypes associated with 
type 1 diabetes were markedly different due to difference in the presence and 
absence of haplotypes in each population. INS was consistently associated with 
type 1 diabetes in both Japanese and Caucasian populations, but frequency of 
disease-associated haplotype was markedly high in Japanese general population. 
CTLA4 was associated with type 1 diabetes only in a subset of patients with type 
1 diabetes complicated with AITD in Japanese. A variant (R620W) of PTPN22 was 
associated with type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune diseases in Caucasians, but 
the variant was absent in Asians. SUMO4 was associated with type 1 diabetes in 
Asians, but not in Caucasian, suggesting a genetic heterogeneity among diverse 
ethnic groups. Trans-racial study with a large number of samples in both Asian 
and Caucasian populations will contribute to genetic dissection of type 1 
diabetes and identification of causative variants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diabres.2007.01.044
PMID: 17452059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]