1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2007 Jul;149(1):40-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03394.x.
 Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Association of -318 C/T and +49 A/G cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) 
gene polymorphisms with a clinical subset of Italian patients with systemic 
sclerosis.

Balbi G(1), Ferrera F, Rizzi M, Piccioli P, Morabito A, Cardamone L, Ghio M, 
Palmisano GL, Carrara P, Pedemonte S, Sessarego M, De Angioletti M, Notaro R, 
Indiveri F, Pistillo MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Biology and Genetics, University of Genoa, Genoa, 
Italy.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a complex and heterogeneous autoimmune disorder with 
a multi-factorial pathogenesis. Like other autoimmune disorders, the possible 
role of specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene polymorphisms in 
predisposing to SSc has been hypothesized, but it remains controversial. CTLA-4 
promoter (-318C/T) and exon 1 (+49 A/G) polymorphisms have been analysed in 43 
Italian females with SSc and in 93 unrelated matched healthy controls by a newly 
designed tetra-primer amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain 
reaction (T-ARMS-PCR) method. No significant association has been found with 
either polymorphisms.Nevertheless, SSc patients without concomitant Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis (HT) were carrying both the -318T allele (P = 0.031) and the +49 G 
allele (P = 0.076) more frequently than SSc patients with HT [defined by 
positivity for anti-thyroperoxidase (TPO) and anti-thyroglobulin (TGA) 
autoantibodies] than controls. Haplotype analysis confirms this association (P = 
0.028), and suggests the predominant role of the -318T, whereas that of the +49 
G, if any, seems weak. Thus, in Italian SSc patients the CTLA-4 -318C/T promoter 
polymorphism appears to be associated with the susceptibility to develop SSc 
without thyroid involvement. Larger studies are needed to confirm these findings 
and to clarify whether the -318C/T polymorphism is the functional responsible or 
whether it reflects the presence of another linked genetic element in the same 
chromosomal region.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03394.x
PMCID: PMC1942023
PMID: 17459075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]