1. Med Sci Monit. 2007 May;13(5):BR112-8.

Postprandial plasma lipid levels are influenced by the interaction of functional 
polymorphisms in the microsome triglyceride transfer protein and beta3 
adrenergic receptor genes.

Ueno T(1), Takahashi Y, Matsumoto T, Tsunemi A, Watanabe H, Tahira K, Fukuda N, 
Soma M, Matsumoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Nihon 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. tueno@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The effects of polymorphisms in the genes encoding microsome 
triglycerides transfer protein (MTP) and beta3-adrenergic receptor (beta3-AR) on 
lipid and glucose metabolism were investigated.
MATERIAL/METHOD: Clinical phenotypes related to lipid and glucose metabolism 
were evaluated during dietary loading (17 g of fat, 750 Cal) and glucose loading 
(75 g glucose). MTP and beta3-AR genotypes were determined by restriction 
fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: Subjects with the Arg64 beta3-AR gene (Arg+) polymorphism showed 
significantly higher fasting (FTG) and postprandial (PTG) triglyceride levels, 
fasting plasma glucose (FPG), fasting plasma immuno-reactive insulin (FIRI) and 
HOMA-R in comparison with Trp64 homozygotes. Subjects with the T allele (T +) of 
MTP -164T/G polymorphism (with T allele) showed significantly lower levels of 
FPG, FIRI, HOMA-R and PTG than did subjects without the T allele (T-). To 
evaluate the interaction of the polymorphisms, we divided our subjects into four 
groups. T-/Arg-, T-/Arg+, T+/Arg- and T+/Arg+. In these four groups, only 
T-/Arg+ showed significantly higher PTG levels. Plasma glucose levels were 
significantly higher at 60 and 120 min after oral glucose loading in in the 
T-/Arg+ subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified an example of genotypic interactions 
that influence the clinical phenotype in multi-factorial diseases.

PMID: 17476189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]