1. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Jun;37(6):1653-62. doi: 10.1002/eji.200637024.

Adenosine closes the K+ channel KCa3.1 in human lung mast cells and inhibits 
their migration via the adenosine A2A receptor.

Duffy SM(1), Cruse G, Brightling CE, Bradding P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Institute for Lung 
Health, University of Leicester, and Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, UK.

Human lung mast cells (HLMC) express the Ca2+-activated K+ channel KCa3.1, which 
opens following IgE-dependent activation. This hyperpolarises the cell membrane 
and potentiates both Ca2+ influx and degranulation. In addition, blockade of 
KCa3.1 profoundly inhibits HLMC migration to a variety of diverse chemotactic 
stimuli. KCa3.1 activation is attenuated by the beta2adrenoceptor through a 
Galphas-coupled mechanism independent of cyclic AMP. Adenosine is an important 
mediator that both attenuates and enhances HLMC mediator release through the 
Galphas-coupled A2A and A2B adenosine receptors, respectively. We show that at 
concentrations that inhibit HLMC degranulation (10(-5)-10(-3) M), adenosine 
closes KCa3.1 both dose-dependently and reversibly. KCa3.1 suppression by 
adenosine was reversed partially by the selective adenosine A2A receptor 
antagonist ZM241385 but not by the A2B receptor antagonist MRS1754, and the 
effects of adenosine were mimicked by the selective A2A receptor agonist 
CGS21680. Adenosine also opened a depolarising current carried by non-selective 
cations. As predicted from the role of KCa3.1 in HLMC migration, adenosine 
abolished HLMC chemotaxis to asthmatic airway smooth muscle-conditioned medium. 
In summary, the Galphas-coupled adenosine A2A receptor closes KCa3.1, providing 
a clearly defined mechanism by which adenosine inhibits HLMC migration and 
degranulation. A2A receptor agonists with channel-modulating function may be 
useful for the treatment of mast cell-mediated disease.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.200637024
PMCID: PMC2699420
PMID: 17474152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]