1. J Pept Sci. 2007 Jun;13(6):379-85. doi: 10.1002/psc.855.

Development of a potent and selective GPR7 (NPBW1) agonist: a systematic 
structure-activity study of neuropeptide B.

Kanesaka M(1), Matsuda M, Hirano A, Tanaka K, Kanatani A, Tokita S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorder Research, Tsukuba Research Institute, Banyu 
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Okubo 3, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan.

Neuropeptide B (NPB) has been recently identified as an endogenous ligand for 
GPR7 (NPBW1) and GPR8 (NPBW2) and has been shown to possess a relatively high 
selectivity for GPR7. In order to identify useful experimental tools to address 
physiological roles of GPR7, we synthesized a series of NPB analogs based on 
modification of an unbrominated form of 23 amino acids with amidated C-terminal, 
Br(-)NPB-23-NH(2). We confirmed that truncation of the N-terminal Trp residue 
resulted in almost complete loss of the binding affinity of NPB for GPR7 and 
GPR8, supporting the special importance of this residue for binding. 
Br(-)NPB-23-NH2 analogs in which each amino acid in positions 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
12 and 21 was replaced with alanine or glycine exhibited potent binding affinity 
comparable to the parent peptide. In contrast, replacement of Tyr(11) with 
alanine reduced the binding affinity for both GPR7 and GPR8 four fold. Of 
particular interest, several NPB analogs in which the consecutive amino acids 
from Pro4 to Val(13) were replaced with several units of 5-aminovaleric acid 
(Ava) linkers retained their potent affinity for GPR7. Furthermore, these 
Ava-substituted NPB analogs exhibited potent agonistic activities for GPR7 
expressed in HEK293 cells. Among the Ava-substituted NPB analogs, analog 15 
(Ava-5) and 17 (Ava-3) exhibited potency comparable to the parent peptide for 
GPR7 with significantly reduced activity for GPR8, resulting in high selectivity 
for GPR7. These highly potent and selective NPB analogs may be useful 
pharmacological tools to investigate the physiological and pharmacological roles 
of GPR7.

Copyright (c) 2007 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.855
PMID: 17486669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]