1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jun;1774(6):671-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2007.04.004.  Epub 2007 Apr 14.

Remarkable enhancement in PLD activity from Streptoverticillium cinnamoneum by 
substituting serine residue into the GG/GS motif.

Ogino C(1), Daido H, Ohmura Y, Takada N, Itou Y, Kondo A, Fukuda H, Shimizu N.

Author information:
(1)The Division of Material Sciences, Graduate School of Natural Science and 
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. 
ochiaki@t.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The gene that encodes phospholipase D (PLD) from Streptoverticillium cinnamoneum 
contains three consensus regions (Region I, II and IV as shown in Fig. 1A) that 
are conserved among the PLD superfamily. The glycine-glycine (GG) motif in 
Region I and the glycine-serine (GS) motif in Region IV are also conserved in 
the PLD superfamily. These (GG and GS) motifs are located 7 residues downstream 
from each HKD motif. In an investigation of fifteen GG/GS motif mutants, 
generated as fusion proteins with maltose-binding protein (MBP-PLDs), three 
highly active mutants were identified. Three of the mutants (G215S, G216S, and 
G216S-S489G) contained a serine residue in the GG motif, and exhibited 
approximately a 9-27-fold increased transphosphatidylation activity to DPPC 
compared with recombinant wild type MBP-PLD. When heat stability was compared 
between three mutants and the recombinant wild type, only G216S-S489G showed 
heat labile properties. It appears that the 489th serine residue in the GS motif 
also contributes to the thermal stability of the enzyme. In addition, the GG/GS 
motif was very close to the active center residue, including two HKD motifs, as 
shown by computer modeling. The findings suggest that the GG/GS motif of PLD is 
a key motif that affects catalytic function and enzymatic stability.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2007.04.004
PMID: 17499030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]