1. J Neurosci. 2007 May 9;27(19):5081-91. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0957-07.2007.

Defective retrotranslocation causes loss of anti-Bax function in human familial 
prion protein mutants.

Jodoin J(1), Laroche-Pierre S, Goodyer CG, LeBlanc AC.

Author information:
(1)Bloomfield Center for Research in Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical 
Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada H3T 1E2.

Prion protein (PrP) inhibits the activation of proapoptotic Bax in primary human 
neurons and MCF-7 cells. Because neuronal apoptosis occurs in human prion 
diseases, here we examine the anti-Bax function of familial PrP mutants. All 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and fatal familial insomnia-associated prion protein 
mutations partially or completely lose the anti-Bax function in human neurons 
and, except for A117V and V203I, in MCF-7 cells. The ability of the mutants to 
protect against Bax-mediated cell death is divided into three groups: (1) group 
I, retention of anti-Bax function in both the Val129 and Met129 mutants; (2) 
group II, retention of anti-Bax function only in Val129 mutants; and (3) group 
III, reduction or no anti-Bax function in Val129 and Met129 mutants. The loss of 
anti-Bax function in these PrP mutants correlates completely with a significant 
decrease in the production of cytosolic PrP, a form of PrP shown previously to 
have anti-Bax function in human neurons. Cotransfection of the full-length PrP 
mutants with wild-type or mutant cytosolic PrP, but not with wild type 
full-length PrP, rescues the anti-Bax function of PrP. The results show that the 
failure of PrP mutants to produce cytosolic PrP is responsible for the loss of 
anti-Bax function and that the effect of the PrP mutants is dominant over 
wild-type PrP. Furthermore, these results imply that misfolded PrP that escapes 
retrotranslocation could accumulate at the cell surface and cause neuronal 
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0957-07.2007
PMCID: PMC6672383
PMID: 17494694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]