1. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Aug;147(4):690-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.cbpb.2007.04.011. Epub 2007 Apr 22.

Cloning, expression and investigation for polymorphisms of canine peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors.

Nishii N(1), Takasu M, Soe OK, Maeda S, Ohba Y, Inoue-Murayama M, Kitagawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, United Graduate School of 
Veterinary Sciences, Gifu University, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are ligand-activated 
transcription factors implicated in lipid metabolism. In this study, the 
full-length cDNA of canine PPARbeta and gamma were sequenced, and expression of 
PPARs was evaluated in normal tissues and primary cultures of adipocytes in 
dogs, followed by investigations for polymorphisms of canine PPARgamma. 
Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequences of canine PPARbeta and gamma cDNA 
with that of human PPARbeta and gamma cDNA revealed 95.9% and 98.2% identity, 
respectively. PPARbeta expression was ubiquitous and high PPARgamma expression 
was detected in the subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues, spleen and large 
intestine. Canine PPARgamma mRNA expression in cultured adipocytes began to 
increase from 4 days after induction of differentiation, and increased nearly 
ninefold within 10 days after induction of differentiation. Although expression 
level of PPARalpha was low in the cultured adipocytes, it slightly increased 
within 10 days. In contrast, expression of PPARbeta showed only small variations 
during adipocyte differentiation, though expression levels were relatively high. 
These results suggest that PPARgamma may play an important role in adipocyte 
differentiation in dogs. Investigations for polymorphisms of PPARgamma revealed 
a silent polymorphism, C1362T, in 3 of 92 dogs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpb.2007.04.011
PMID: 17512769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]