1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2007 Jun;15(2):175-80. doi: 
10.1097/01.pai.0000213107.20355.d8.

Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase/P504S overexpression in colorectal carcinoma is 
correlated with tumor differentiation.

Shi X(1), Gong E, Wu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, 
Beijing, China. zhsh6812@yahoo.com.cn

Alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR)/P504S is an enzyme involved in the 
metabolism of branched-chain fatty acids. Little is known about correlation of 
AMACR expression with colorectal carcinoma (CRC) differentiation and prognosis. 
We investigated the expression of AMACR in 106 cases of primary CRC, and in 47 
lymph nodes with metastatic CRC by immunohistochemical analysis. These cases 
were divided into 3 groups according to the histologic differentiation of the 
primary tumors. group A included 50 cases of histologically well and moderately 
differentiated CRCs, 20 of these with lymph node metastasis; group B included 23 
cases of well and moderately differentiated CRCs, histologically similar to 
group A, except these tumors had small foci (less than 20%) of high-grade 
carcinoma, and 10 of these had lymph node metastasis; group C included 33 cases 
of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and undifferentiated carcinoma, 17 with 
lymph node metastasis. The results showed the overall positive rates of 
expression in primary and metastatic CRCs were 59.4% and 46.8%, respectively. 
Expression in groups A (76.0%) and B (69.6%) was much higher than that in group 
C (27.3%). In group B, although overexpression of AMACR in primary tumors was 
similar to that of group A, it was only seen in 30.0% of group B metastatic 
tumors, which was similar to the rate of expression in group C (23.5%). In 
contrast, rates of expression in group A primary and metastatic tumors were 
similar (80.0% and 75.0%). Positive staining for AMACR in benign epithelium 
adjacent to tumor was rare (<2%). No relation was found between AMACR expression 
and overall survival. Our findings support the view that the expression of AMACR 
in CRC is correlated with tumor differentiation.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pai.0000213107.20355.d8
PMID: 17525630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]