1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(15):5381-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00282-07. Epub 2007
May  25.

Hypoxia-inducible factor linked to differential kidney cancer risk seen with 
type 2A and type 2B VHL mutations.

Li L(1), Zhang L, Zhang X, Yan Q, Minamishima YA, Olumi AF, Mao M, Bartz S, 
Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Mayer 457, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

Clear cell carcinoma of the kidney is a major cause of mortality in patients 
with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, which is caused by germ line mutations 
that inactivate the VHL tumor suppressor gene. Biallelic VHL inactivation, due 
to mutations or hypermethylation, is also common in sporadic clear cell renal 
carcinomas. The VHL gene product, pVHL, is part of a ubiquitin ligase complex 
that targets the alpha subunits of the heterodimeric transcription factor 
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) for destruction under well-oxygenated conditions. 
All VHL mutations linked to classical VHL disease compromise this pVHL function 
although some missense mutations result in a low risk of kidney cancer (type 2A 
VHL disease) while others result in a high risk (type 2B VHL disease). We found 
that type 2A mutants were less defective than type 2B mutants when reintroduced 
into VHL-/- renal carcinoma cells with respect to HIF regulation. A stabilized 
version of HIF2alpha promoted tumor growth by VHL-/- cells engineered to produce 
type 2A mutants, while knock-down of HIF2alpha in cells producing type 2B 
mutants had the opposite effect. Therefore, quantitative differences with 
respect to HIF deregulation are sufficient to account for the differential risks 
of kidney cancer linked to VHL mutations.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00282-07
PMCID: PMC1952077
PMID: 17526729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]