1. Am J Cardiol. 2007 Jun 1;99(11):1549-54. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.01.029. 
Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Factors influencing blood pressure response to trandolapril add-on therapy in 
patients taking verapamil SR (from the International Verapamil SR/Trandolapril 
[INVEST] Study).

Brunner M(1), Cooper-DeHoff RM, Gong Y, Karnes JH, Langaee TY, Pepine CJ, 
Johnson JA; INVEST Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, USA.

Factors such as age and race/ethnicity might influence blood pressure (BP) 
response to drugs. Therapeutic response to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor trandolapril used as add-on therapy to stable calcium channel blocker 
therapy with verapamil sustained release 240 mg was addressed in a 
racially/ethnically diverse group of 1,832 hypertensive patients with coronary 
artery disease. Furthermore, the association with a polymorphism (1166A-->C) in 
the angiotensin II type 1 receptor gene (AGTR1) was tested. BP response was 
compared between groups using analysis of covariance after adjustment for 
covariates associated with BP response. Genotyping was performed using 
polymerase chain reaction and pyrosequencing. Trandolapril decreased mean 
unadjusted systolic and diastolic BPs by -9.1 +/- 17.3 (SD) and -4.1 +/- 10.1 mm 
Hg, respectively. The percentage of patients with BP under control (<140/90 mm 
Hg) increased from 6.7% to 41.3% (p <0.0001). Adjusted BP response was 
significantly associated with age and baseline systolic and diastolic BP (p 
<0.0001). Whereas the decrease in systolic BP was more pronounced in younger 
patients, the opposite was observed for diastolic BP decrease. Diastolic BP 
response was also significantly associated with race. Specifically, the adjusted 
diastolic BP decrease was significantly smaller in Hispanics and blacks than 
whites (p = 0.0032 and p = 0.0069, respectively). However, Hispanics achieved a 
decrease in systolic BP and an increase in BP control similar to the other 
ethnic groups. There was no genetic association between AGTR1 1166A-->C genotype 
and BP response. In conclusion, trandolapril add-on therapy was effective in 
increasing BP control, with age and baseline BP associated with both systolic 
and diastolic BP response. Race was associated with diastolic BP response, 
although the difference is likely not to be clinically significant and AGTR1 
genotype was not associated with BP response.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.01.029
PMCID: PMC2720593
PMID: 17531579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]