1. J Lipid Res. 2007 Sep;48(9):2047-57. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700248-JLR200. Epub
2007  Jun 3.

N-Glycosylation regulates endothelial lipase-mediated phospholipid hydrolysis in 
apoE- and apoA-I-containing high density lipoproteins.

Skropeta D(1), Settasatian C, McMahon MR, Shearston K, Caiazza D, McGrath KC, 
Jin W, Rader DJ, Barter PJ, Rye KA.

Author information:
(1)Lipid Research Group, Heart Research Institute, Camperdown, New South Wales 
2050, Australia.

Endothelial lipase (EL) is a member of the triglyceride lipase gene family with 
high phospholipase and low triacylglycerol lipase activities and a distinct 
preference for hydrolyzing phospholipids in HDL. EL has five potential 
N-glycosylation sites, four of which are glycosylated. The aim of this study was 
to determine how glycosylation affects the phospholipase activity of EL in 
physiologically relevant substrates. Site-directed mutants of EL were generated 
by replacing asparagine (N) 62, 118, 375, and 473 with alanine (A). These 
glycan-deficient mutants were used to investigate the kinetics of phospholipid 
hydrolysis in fully characterized preparations of spherical reconstituted high 
density lipoprotein (rHDL) containing apolipoprotein E2 (apoE2) [(E2)rHDL], 
apoE3 [(E3)rHDL], apoE4 [(E4)rHDL], or apoA-I [(A-I)rHDL] as the sole 
apolipoprotein. Wild-type EL hydrolyzed the phospholipids in (A-I)rHDL, 
(E2)rHDL, (E3)rHDL, and (E4)rHDL to similar extents. The phospholipase 
activities of EL N118A, EL N375A, and EL N473A were significantly diminished 
relative to that of wild-type EL, with the greatest reduction being apparent for 
(E3)rHDL. The phospholipase activity of EL N62A was increased up to 6-fold 
relative to that of wild-type EL, with the greatest enhancement of activity 
being observed for (E2)rHDL. These data show that individual N-linked glycans 
have unique and important effects on the phospholipase activity and substrate 
specificity of EL.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M700248-JLR200
PMID: 17545692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]