1. BMC Plant Biol. 2007 Jun 6;7:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-7-28.

The red fluorescent protein eqFP611: application in subcellular localization 
studies in higher plants.

Forner J(1), Binder S.

Author information:
(1)Molekulare Botanik, Universit√§t Ulm, Ulm, Germany. joachim.forner@uni-ulm.de

BACKGROUND: Intrinsically fluorescent proteins have revolutionized studies in 
molecular cell biology. The parallel application of these proteins in dual- or 
multilabeling experiments such as subcellular localization studies requires 
non-overlapping emission spectra for unambiguous detection of each label. In the 
red spectral range, almost exclusively DsRed and derivatives thereof are used 
today. To test the suitability of the red fluorescent protein eqFP611 as an 
alternative in higher plants, the behavior of this protein was analyzed in terms 
of expression, subcellular targeting and compatibility with GFP in tobacco.
RESULTS: When expressed transiently in tobacco protoplasts, eqFP611 accumulated 
over night to levels easily detectable by fluorescence microscopy. The native 
protein was found in the nucleus and in the cytosol and no detrimental effects 
on cell viability were observed. When fused to N-terminal mitochondrial and 
peroxisomal targeting sequences, the red fluorescence was located exclusively in 
the corresponding organelles in transfected protoplasts. Upon co-expression with 
GFP in the same cells, fluorescence of both eqFP611 and GFP could be easily 
distinguished, demonstrating the potential of eqFP611 in dual-labeling 
experiments with GFP. A series of plasmids was constructed for expression of 
eqFP611 in plants and for simultaneous expression of this fluorescent protein 
together with GFP. Transgenic tobacco plants constitutively expressing 
mitochondrially targeted eqFP611 were generated. The red fluorescence was stably 
transmitted to the following generations, making these plants a convenient 
source for protoplasts containing an internal marker for mitochondria.
CONCLUSION: In plants, eqFP611 is a suitable fluorescent reporter protein. The 
unmodified protein can be expressed to levels easily detectable by 
epifluorescence microscopy without adverse affect on the viability of plant 
cells. Its subcellular localization can be manipulated by N-terminal signal 
sequences. eqFP611 and GFP are fully compatible in dual-labeling experiments.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-7-28
PMCID: PMC1904219
PMID: 17553146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]