1. Genes Immun. 2007 Jul;8(5):422-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364405. Epub 2007 Jun
7.

A polymorphism in human TLR2 is associated with increased susceptibility to 
tuberculous meningitis.

Thuong NT(1), Hawn TR, Thwaites GE, Chau TT, Lan NT, Quy HT, Hieu NT, Aderem A, 
Hien TT, Farrar JJ, Dunstan SJ.

Author information:
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho 
Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Tuberculous meningitis (TBM) results from the haematogenous dissemination of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the lung to the brain. Dissemination is believed 
to occur early during infection, before the development of adaptive immunity. 
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) mediates recognition of M. tuberculosis and 
initiates the innate immune response to infection. We hypothesized that 
polymorphisms in the TLR2 gene influence bacterial dissemination and the 
development of TBM. A case-control study was designed to test the hypothesis. 
Cases of bacteriologically confirmed pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) (n=183) and TBM 
(n=175), and cord blood controls (n=389) were enrolled in Vietnam. TLR2 genotype 
597CC was associated with susceptibility to TB (odds ratio (OR)=2.22, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.23-3.99). The association was found with meningeal 
rather than pulmonary TB (TBM vs control, OR=3.26, 95% CI: 1.72-6.18), and was 
strongest when miliary TB was found on chest radiography (controls vs TBM with 
miliary TB, OR=5.28, 95% CI: 2.20-12.65). Furthermore, the association increased 
with the severity of neurologic symptoms (grade I TBM, OR=1.93, 95% CI: 
0.54-6.92; grade II, OR=3.32, 95% CI: 0.84-13.2; and grade III, OR=5.70, 95% CI: 
1.81-18.0). These results demonstrate a strong association of TLR2 SNP T597C 
with the development of TBM and miliary TB and indicate that TLR2 influences the 
dissemination of M. tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364405
PMID: 17554342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]