1. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Nov;127(11):2544-51. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700896. Epub
 2007 May 31.

Polymorphisms in interleukin-15 gene on chromosome 4q31.2 are associated with 
psoriasis vulgaris in Chinese population.

Zhang XJ(1), Yan KL, Wang ZM, Yang S, Zhang GL, Fan X, Xiao FL, Gao M, Cui Y, 
Wang PG, Sun LD, Zhang KY, Wang B, Wang DZ, Xu SJ, Huang W, Liu JJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology at No.1 Hospital, 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China. ayzxj@vip.sina.com

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Nov;127(11):2495-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700855.
    J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Dec;128(12):2904-5. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.148.

Through a series of linkage analyses in a large Chinese family cohort of 
psoriasis, we previously identified and confirmed a non-HLA psoriasis linkage 
locus PSORS9 within a small region at 4q31.2-32.1. Within the critical region of 
the PSORS9 locus, IL-15 has been long recognized as a strong candidate gene for 
psoriasis. In this study, we investigated the association between IL-15 genetic 
polymorphisms and psoriasis in a large Chinese sample. Highly significant 
evidence for association was identified at a single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) (g.96516A --> T) within the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of the IL-15 gene 
(P=0.00006, after correction for multiple testing). Haplotype analysis using the 
SNPs within the 3'UTR region also provided strong supporting evidence for 
association (P=0.00005), where we identified a haplotype of the 3'UTR region of 
IL-15 associated with increased risk to psoriasis (odds ratio=1.65). This 
association was also supported by the results of our expression activity 
analyses, where we demonstrated that the identified risk haplotype is associated 
with an increased activity of IL-15. Therefore, we provided early evidence for 
the important role of IL-15 genetic variants in the pathogenesis of psoriasis, 
probably by increasing interleukin production and inflammation in the lesions of 
psoriasis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.jid.5700896
PMID: 17554368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]