1. Thromb Res. 2007;121(3):333-8. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2007.05.003. Epub 2007 
Jun 12.

Fibrinogen Aalpha-Thr312Ala and factor XIII-A Val34Leu polymorphisms in 
idiopathic venous thromboembolism.

Le Gal G(1), Delahousse B, Lacut K, Malaviolle V, Regina S, Blouch MT, Couturaud 
F, Mottier D, Oger E, Gruel Y; Groupe d'Etudes sur la Thrombose des HÃ´pitaux 
Universitaires du Grand Ouest.

Author information:
(1)EA 3878, Department of Internal Medicine and Chest Diseases, Brest University 
Hospital, Brest, France. gregoire.legal@chu-brest.fr

INTRODUCTION: Fibrinogen Aalpha-Thr312Ala and Factor XIII Val34Leu polymorphisms 
have been shown to modify fibrin clot structure and function. However, clinical 
studies have yielded conflicting results on their possible association with 
venous thromboembolism (VTE).
METHODS: We studied the association between these two polymorphisms and VTE in a 
hospital-based case-control study. We also assessed whether an independent or 
interactive association exists between Aalpha-fibrinogen Thr312Ala and FXIII 
Val34Leu polymorphisms and VTE. Fibrinogen Aalpha-Thr312Ala and FXIII Val34Leu 
polymorphisms were determined after PCR and restriction endonuclease digestion 
in 286 patients with idiopathic VTE and 286 age- and gender-matched controls. 
Results were analysed using a conditional logistic regression model for matched 
series.
RESULTS: The Fg-Aalpha 312Ala allele was associated with higher risk of VTE (OR 
1.5; 95% CI: 1.1 to 2.2, p=0.01) while the FXIII 34Leu allele appeared 
protective (OR 0.7; 95% CI: 0.6 to 0.9, p=0.02). Both alleles demonstrated an 
independent association with idiopathic VTE after adjustment for Factor V Leiden 
and G20210A prothrombin polymorphisms. There was no interaction between the 
fibrinogen Aalpha-Thr312Ala and FXIII Val34Leu polymorphisms for the risk of 
VTE.
CONCLUSION: In this case-control study, the fibrinogen Fg-Aalpha 312Ala allele 
was associated with an increased risk of VTE. The FXIII 34Leu allele was also 
significantly associated with a lower risk of VTE without any interaction 
between the two polymorphisms studied.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2007.05.003
PMID: 17568659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]