1. J Neurochem. 2007 Sep;102(6):2097-2109. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04680.x.
 Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Evidence that ethanol acts on a target in Loop 2 of the extracellular domain of 
alpha1 glycine receptors.

Crawford DK(1), Trudell JR(1), Bertaccini EJ(1), Li K(1), Davies DL(1), Alkana 
RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Alcohol and Brain Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, California, USANeuroscience Graduate Program, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USADepartment of Anesthesia and 
Beckman Program for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USADepartment of Anesthesia, Palo Alto Veterans Affairs 
Health Care System, Palo Alto, California, USA.

Considerable evidence indicates that ethanol acts on specific residues in the 
transmembrane domains of glycine receptors (GlyRs). In this study, we tested the 
hypothesis that the extracellular domain is also a target for ethanol action by 
investigating the effect of cysteine substitutions at positions 52 
(extracellular domain) and 267 (transmembrane domain) on responses to n-alcohols 
and propyl methanethiosulfonate (PMTS) in alpha1GlyRs expressed in Xenopus 
oocytes. In support of the hypothesis: (i) The A52C mutation changed ethanol 
sensitivity compared to WT GlyRs; (ii) PMTS produced irreversible alcohol-like 
potentiation in A52C GlyRs; and (iii) PMTS binding reduced the n-chain alcohol 
cutoff in A52C GlyRs. Further studies used PMTS binding to cysteines at 
positions 52 or 267 to block ethanol action at one site in order to determine 
its effect at other site(s). In these situations, ethanol caused negative 
modulation when acting at position 52 and positive modulation when acting at 
position 267. Collectively, these findings parallel the evidence that 
established the TM domain as a target for ethanol, suggest that positions 52 and 
267 are part of the same alcohol pocket and indicate that the net effect of 
ethanol on GlyR function reflects the summation of its positive and negative 
modulatory effects on different targets.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04680.x
PMID: 17561937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]