1. Mutat Res. 2007 Aug 15;632(1-2):20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2007.04.011.
Epub  2007 Apr 21.

Analysis of genetic variants of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 gene in breast 
cancer in French patients.

Cao WH(1), Wang X, Frappart L, Rigal D, Wang ZQ, Shen Y, Tong WM.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
5, Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is a nuclear enzyme that catalyzes the 
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of target proteins in response to DNA damage and has been 
proposed to play a role in DNA repair, recombination, transcription, cell death, 
cell proliferation, as well as in stabilization of the genome. We have recently 
shown that PARP-1 deficiency causes mammary tumorigenesis in mice. In the 
present study, we investigated whether genetic variants and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) of PARP-1 contribute to human breast cancer. To this end, 
we screened all PARP-1 exons, 7.1kb of intron-exon junction and 1.0-kb promoter 
sequences in 83 French patients with breast cancer and 100 controls by direct 
sequencing of genomic DNA. Twenty rare genetic variants of PARP-1, including 
c.1148C>A (Ser383Tyr), c.1354C>A (Arg452Arg), c.2819A>G (Lys940Arg) were 
detected in nine (10.8%) breast cancers of these patients. Among 31 polymorphic 
sites examined, five haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) of PARP-1 were identified. 
Interestingly, the genotype distribution of htSNP c.852T>C (Ala284Ala) was 
likely associated with loss of estrogen- and progesterone-receptor expression. 
The present study implies that genetic variants of PARP-1 may contribute to 
breast cancerogenesis and that PARP-1 htSNP c.852T>C (Ala284Ala) may influence 
hormonal therapy of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2007.04.011
PMID: 17560163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]