1. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Sep;82(3):742-51. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1206736. Epub 2007 Jun 
15.

Rapid T cell receptor-mediated SHP-1 S591 phosphorylation regulates SHP-1 
cellular localization and phosphatase activity.

Liu Y(1), Kruhlak MJ, Hao JJ, Shaw S.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, Bldg. 10/4B05 National Cancer Institute, NIH 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Since the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 plays a major role in regulating T cell 
signaling, we investigated regulation thereof by Ser/Thr phosphorylation. We 
found that T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation induced fast (<or=1 min) and 
transient phosphorylation of SHP-1 S591 in both Jurkat and human peripheral 
blood T-cells (PBT). Phosphorylation of S591 in T-cells could be mediated 
artificially by a constitutive active PKC-theta construct, but the dose 
dependence of inhibition by PKC inhibitors indicated that PKCs were not the 
relevant basophilic kinase in the physiological response. S591 phosphorylation 
inhibited phosphatase function since a S591D mutant had lower activity than the 
S591A mutant. Additional evidence that S591 phosphorylation alters SHP-1 
function was provided by studies of Jurkat cells stably expressing SHP-1 wild 
type or mutants. In those cells, S591D mutation reduced the capacity of 
transfected SHP-1 to inhibit TCR-induced phosphorylation of PLC-gamma1. 
Interestingly, SHP-1 Y536 phosphorylation (previously shown to augment 
phosphatase activity) was also induced in PBT by TCR signal but at a much later 
time compared with S591 ( approximately 30 min). S591 phosphorylation also 
altered cellular distribution of SHP-1 because: 1) SHP-1 in lipid rafts and a 
sheared membrane fraction was hypophosphorylated; 2) In stably transfected 
Jurkat cell lines, S591D mutant protein had reduced presence in both lipid raft 
and the sheared membrane fraction; 3) S591 phosphorylation prevented nuclear 
localization of a C-terminal GFP tagged SHP-1 construct. Our studies also shed 
light on an additional mechanism regulating SHP-1 nuclear localization, namely 
conformational autoinhibition. These findings highlight elegant regulation of 
SHP-1 by sequential phosphorylation of serine then tyrosine.

DOI: 10.1189/jlb.1206736
PMCID: PMC2084461
PMID: 17575265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]