1. Ann Hematol. 2007 Oct;86(10):727-31. doi: 10.1007/s00277-007-0327-1. Epub 2007
 Jun 16.

Factor V Leiden and G20210A prothrombin mutations in patients with recurrent 
pregnancy loss: data from the southeast of Turkey.

Altintas A(1), Pasa S, Akdeniz N, Cil T, Yurt M, Ayyildiz O, Batun S, Isi H.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Department of Hematology-Oncology, Dicle University, 
21280, Diyarbakir, Turkey. draaltintas@dicle.edu.tr

Factor V Leiden (FV-Leiden) and prothrombin gene mutations (FII G20210A) are 
well-established independent risk factors for thrombosis. In the recent years, 
many studies have suggested that these mutations are associated with an 
increased risk of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). We aimed to investigate the 
prevalence of these molecular defects in subjects with a history of early RPL. 
One hundred and fourteen women with three or more consecutive unexplained 
first-trimester miscarriages were compared to 185 parous women with 
uncomplicated pregnancies from the same ethnic origin. The presence of FV-Leiden 
and FII G20210A mutations was assessed by polymerase chain reaction analysis. 
Overall, 11 out of the 114 women with early RPL (9.6%) had either FV-Leiden or 
FII G20210A mutation, as compared with 16 out of the 185 women with normal 
pregnancies (8.6%; p = 0.756). The prevalence of FV-Leiden mutation was 7.9% 
(9/114) in patient group, compared with 7% (13/185) in control group (p = 
0.780). One hundred and two patients were primary and 12 were secondary 
aborters. All FV-Leiden positive cases were primary aborters (8.8%; 9/102, p = 
0.584). Concerning the FII G20210A, two out of 114 (1.7%) were first-trimester 
RPL (primary aborters) and three out of 185 (1.6%) controls were carriers of the 
FII G20210A mutation (1.7 vs 1.6%, p = 0.931). The results obtained from 
patients with first-trimester RPL and the control group have no statistical 
significant differences in the prevalence of FV-Leiden and FII G20210A 
mutations. These results suggest that mutations have no role in etiology of 
first-trimester recurrent abortions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-007-0327-1
PMID: 17572893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]