1. Exp Neurol. 2007 Sep;207(1):52-63. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2007.05.016. Epub 
2007 Jun 2.

The lack of effect of specific overexpression of IGF-1 in the central nervous 
system or skeletal muscle on pathophysiology in the G93A SOD-1 mouse model of 
ALS.

Messi ML(1), Clark HM, Prevette DM, Oppenheim RW, Delbono O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

The ability of insulin like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) to prevent the 
pathophysiology associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is currently 
being explored with animal models and in clinical trials with patients. Several 
studies have reported positive effects of IGF-1 in reducing motor neuron death, 
delaying the onset of motor performance decline, and increasing life span, in 
SOD-1 mouse models of ALS and in one clinical trial. However, a second clinical 
trial produced no positive results raising questions about the therapeutic 
efficacy of IGF-1. To investigate the effect of specific and sustained IGF-1 
expression in skeletal muscle or central nervous system on motor performance, 
life span, and motor neuron survival, human-IGF-1 transgenic mice were crossed 
with the G93A SOD-1 mutant model of ALS. No significant differences were found 
in onset of motor performance decline, life span, or motor neuron survival in 
the spinal cord, between SOD+/IGF-1+ and SOD+/IGF-1- hybrid mice. IGF-1 
concentration levels, measured by radioimmunoassay, were found to be highly 
increased throughout life in the central nervous system (CNS) and skeletal 
muscle of IGF-1 transgenic hybrid mice. Additionally, increased CNS weight in 
SOD+ mice crossbred with CNS IGF-1 transgenic mice demonstrates that IGF-1 
overexpression is biologically active even after the disease is fully developed. 
Taken together, these results raise questions concerning the therapeutic value 
of IGF-1 and indicate that further studies are needed to examine the 
relationship between methods of IGF-1 administration and its potential 
therapeutic value.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2007.05.016
PMCID: PMC2043146
PMID: 17597610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]