1. PLoS Pathog. 2007 Jun;3(6):e89. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030089.

Characterization of reemerging chikungunya virus.

Sourisseau M(1), Schilte C, Casartelli N, Trouillet C, Guivel-Benhassine F, 
Rudnicka D, Sol-Foulon N, Le Roux K, Prevost MC, Fsihi H, Frenkiel MP, Blanchet 
F, Afonso PV, Ceccaldi PE, Ozden S, Gessain A, Schuffenecker I, Verhasselt B, 
Zamborlini A, Saïb A, Rey FA, Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Desprès P, Michault A, 
Albert ML, Schwartz O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, Unité Virus et Immunité, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.

An unprecedented epidemic of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection recently 
started in countries of the Indian Ocean area, causing an acute and painful 
syndrome with strong fever, asthenia, skin rash, polyarthritis, and lethal cases 
of encephalitis. The basis for chikungunya disease and the tropism of CHIKV 
remain unknown. Here, we describe the replication characteristics of recent 
clinical CHIKV strains. Human epithelial and endothelial cells, primary 
fibroblasts and, to a lesser extent, monocyte-derived macrophages, were 
susceptible to infection and allowed viral production. In contrast, CHIKV did 
not replicate in lymphoid and monocytoid cell lines, primary lymphocytes and 
monocytes, or monocyte-derived dendritic cells. CHIKV replication was cytopathic 
and associated with an induction of apoptosis in infected cells. Chloroquine, 
bafilomycin-A1, and short hairpin RNAs against dynamin-2 inhibited viral 
production, indicating that viral entry occurs through pH-dependent endocytosis. 
CHIKV was highly sensitive to the antiviral activity of type I and II 
interferons. These results provide a general insight into the interaction 
between CHIKV and its mammalian host.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0030089
PMCID: PMC1904475
PMID: 17604450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.