1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 25;266(36):24632-6.

The role of N-glycosylation of GLUT1 for glucose transport activity.

Asano T(1), Katagiri H, Takata K, Lin JL, Ishihara H, Inukai K, Tsukuda K, 
Kikuchi M, Hirano H, Yazaki Y, et al.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

To elucidate a functional role of N-glycosylation in glucose transporters, we 
introduced oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis in GLUT1 cDNA to remove the 
possible site for N-linked glycosylation. The wild-type and the mutated GLUT1 
cDNAs which induced a mutation of Asn at residue 45 to Asp, Tyr, or Gln were 
transfected and stably expressed into Chinese hamster ovary cells. The expressed 
wild-type and the mutated GLUT1 was demonstrated to be a broad band of a 
45-60-kDa form and a sharp band of a 38-kDa form on Western blot analysis, 
respectively, indicating no glycosylation in the mutated GLUT1. Although the 
cell surface labeling of the glucose transporters demonstrated the presence of 
the glycosylation-defective glucose transporters on the cells surface, 
photoaffinity labeling of glycosylation-defective GLUT1 with [3H] cytochalasin B 
and a photoreactive mannose derivative, 
[3H]2-N-4-(1-azi-2,2,2,trifluoroethyl)benzoyl-1,3-bis(D-mannos+ ++-4-yloxy)-2- 
propylamine in the membranes was observed to be 40-70 and 15-30% of that of the 
wild-type GLUT1, respectively. The kinetic study of 2-deoxyglucose uptake 
revealed that the glycosylation-defective GLUT1 had a 2-2.5-fold greater Km 
value for 2-deoxyglucose uptake compared with the wild-type GLUT1. These 
observations strongly suggest that 1) N-glycosylation of GLUT1 glucose 
transporter is only on Asn 45 and 2) N-glycosylation plays an important role in 
maintaining a structure of glucose transporter with high affinity for glucose, 
thus, with high transport activity.

PMID: 1761560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]