1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007 Aug;17(8):667-78. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e328165249f.

Comparative and evolutionary pharmacogenetics of ABCB1: complex signatures of 
positive selection on coding and regulatory regions.

Wang H(1), Ding K, Zhang Y, Jin L, Kullo IJ, He F.

Author information:
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Center for Evolutionary 
Biology, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences 
and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: As a major mediator in the complex interplay between humans and the 
xenobiotic environment, the ABCBI transporter gene is an obvious candidate for 
comparative and evolutionary pharmacogenetic studies. It has been recently 
reported that common variants in its coding region, which are variously 
associated with drug response and disease susceptibility, may have conferred 
differential selective sweep in various populations. Fully profiling the alletic 
architecture and explicitly interrogating the natural selection at ABCBI are 
needed to understand its evolutionary population genetics.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a comprehensive single nucleotide polymorphism 
variants in coding and regulatory regions, as well as comparable genotype data 
from the Environmental Genome Project, we systematically characterized the 
extent and length of linkage disequilibrium throughout the ABCBI locus in three 
major ethnic populations (African, European, and Chinese). We observed 
pronounced signals of recent positive selection on the derived alleles of three 
common single nucleotide polymorphisms coding regions: e12/1236T, e21/2677T, and 
e26/3435T in the Chinese, as well as on extended haplotype homozygosity were 
also observed for two potentially functional common variants in the 5'f/-4489G 
(rs17149810) in the Chinese and 5'f/-693T (rs3213619) in the Africans, 
respectively, which may have shaped the phylogenetically inferred star-like 
haplotype structure of the 5'flanking region.
CONCLUSION: Our finding reveal complex signatures of natural selection on both 
coding and regulatory regions of the human ABCBI gene, point to potential 
functional relevance of its regulatory variants, and suggest that evolutionary 
dynamics and transcriptional regulation may underline the phenotypic variation 
in xenobiotic disposition and varying predisposition to complex in which 
xenobiotics play a role.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e328165249f
PMID: 17622943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]