1. Fam Cancer. 2007;6(4):483-90. doi: 10.1007/s10689-007-9151-y. Epub 2007 Jul
17.

Germline mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene PTEN are rare in 
high-risk non-BRCA1/2 French Canadian breast cancer families.

Guénard F(1), Labrie Y, Ouellette G, Beauparlant CJ, Bessette P, Chiquette J, 
Laframboise R, Lépine J, Lespérance B, Pichette R, Plante M, Durocher F; INHERIT 
BRCAs.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research 
Centre, CHUQ, Pavillon CHUL, Laval University, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Cowden syndrome is a disease associated with an increase in breast cancer 
susceptibility. Alleles in PTEN and other breast cancer susceptibility genes 
would be responsible for approximately 25% of the familial component of breast 
cancer risk, BRCA1 and BRCA2 being the two major genes responsible for this 
inherited risk. In order to evaluate the proportion of high-risk French Canadian 
non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast/ovarian cancer families potentially harboring a PTEN 
germline mutation, the whole coding and flanking intronic sequences were 
analyzed in a series of 98 breast cancer cases. Although no germline mutation 
has been identified in the coding region, our study led to the identification of 
four intronic variants. Further investigations were performed to analyze the 
effect of these variants, alone and/or in combination, on splicing and PTEN 
protein levels. Despite suggestive evidence emerging from in silico analyses, 
the presence of these intronic variants do not seem to alter RNA splicing or 
PTEN protein levels. In addition, as loss of PTEN or part of it has been 
reported, Western blot analysis has also been performed. No major deletion could 
be identified in our cohort. Therefore, assuming a Poisson distribution for the 
frequency of deleterious mutation in our cohort, if the frequency of such 
deleterious mutation was 2%, we would have had a 90% or greater chance of 
observing at least one such mutation. These results suggest that PTEN germline 
mutations are rare and are unlikely to account for a significant proportion of 
familial breast cancer cases in the French Canadian population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-007-9151-y
PMID: 17636424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]