1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2007 Sep;30(3):259-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2007.05.010. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Partial characterisation of the acrAB locus in two Citrobacter freundii clinical 
isolates.

Sánchez-Céspedes J(1), Vila J.

Author information:
(1)Servei de Microbiologia, Centre de Diagnòstic Biomèdic, Hospital Clínic, 
IDIBAPS, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Villarroel 170, 08036 
Barcelona, Spain.

We studied the mechanisms of resistance to fluoroquinolones in two Citrobacter 
freundii strains (1.44 and 1.38) isolated from the same patient and belonging to 
the same clone by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. This study allowed partial 
characterisation of the acrA and acrB genes of this microorganism. As previously 
reported, the two strains showed the same substitutions in the GyrA and ParC 
proteins (Thr-83-->Ile and Asp-87-->Tyr in GyrA and Ser-83-->Ile in ParC). 
However, differences were observed in the amount of ciprofloxacin accumulated, 
with strain 1.38 showing less accumulation. Expression of genes in both strains 
was analysed using DNA microarrays for Escherichia coli. Ten genes were 
overexpressed in strain 1.38 compared with strain 1.44, including genes acrA and 
acrB. Nucleotide similarity between the partially sequenced acrA and acrB genes 
of C. freundii and E. coli was 80.7% and 85%, respectively. The acrA and acrB 
genes of C. freundii are similar to those described in E. coli and their 
overexpression may play an important role in modulating the final minimum 
inhibitory concentration of fluoroquinolones in collaboration with mutations in 
the gyrA and parC genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2007.05.010
PMID: 17631985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]