1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009 Oct;24(10):1929-37. doi: 10.1007/s00467-007-0537-8. Epub
 2007 Jul 24.

Heritable forms of hypertension.

Vehaskari VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
New Orleans, LA 70118, USA. vvehas@lsuhsc.edu

Among the causes of secondary hypertension are a group of disorders with a 
Mendelian inheritance pattern. Recent advances in molecular biology have 
unveiled the pathogenesis of hypertension in many of these conditions. 
Remarkably, the mechanism in every case has proved to be upregulation of sodium 
(Na) reabsorption in the distal nephron, with accompanying expansion of 
extracellular volume. In one group, the mutations involve the Na-transport 
machinery in distal tubule cells themselves: the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) 
cell and the principal cell of the collecting duct. Examples include Liddle's 
syndrome, with an activating mutation of epithelial Na channel (ENaC); two types 
of Gordon's syndrome, with mutations in two regulatory kinases [with no lysine 
(K) serine/threonine protein kinases (WNK)1 or WNK4]; and apparent 
mineralocorticoid excess (AME), with an inactivating mutation in the 
glucocorticoid-metabolizing 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 enzyme 
(11HD2). In another group, abnormal adrenal steroid production leads to 
inappropriate stimulation of the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) in the distal 
nephron. The pathophysiology may involve inappropriate production of aldosterone 
[in glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA) and familial 
hyperaldosteronism type II (FH II)], of cortisol (in familial glucocorticoid 
resistance), or of other steroid metabolites (in congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
and GRA). In contrast to earlier beliefs, hypertension in many of the inherited 
disorders may be mild, and electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities are often not 
present. Monogenic hypertension should therefore enter the differential 
diagnosis of any child or adolescent with hypertension. Plasma renin activity 
(PRA) is the appropriate screening tool for all types of inherited hypertension.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-007-0537-8
PMCID: PMC2755789
PMID: 17647025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]