1. J Med Chem. 2007 Aug 23;50(17):4147-61. doi: 10.1021/jm070447j. Epub 2007 Jul 
26.

5-Substituted imidazole-4-acetic acid analogues: synthesis, modeling, and 
pharmacological characterization of a series of novel gamma-aminobutyric acid(C) 
receptor agonists.

Madsen C(1), Jensen AA, Liljefors T, Kristiansen U, Nielsen B, Hansen CP, Larsen 
M, Ebert B, Bang-Andersen B, Krogsgaard-Larsen P, Fr√∏lund B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

A series of ring-substituted analogues of imidazole-4-acetic acid (IAA, 4), a 
partial agonist at both GABAA and GABAC receptors (GABA = gamma-aminobutyric 
acid), have been synthesized. The synthesized compounds 8a-l have been evaluated 
as ligands for the alpha1beta2gamma2S GABAA receptors and the rho1 GABAC 
receptors using the FLIPR membrane potential (FMP) assay and by 
electrophysiology techniques. None of the tested compounds displayed activity at 
the GABAA receptors at concentrations up to 1000 microM. However, the 5-Me, 
5-Ph, 5-p-Me-Ph, and 5-p-F-Ph IAA analogues, 8a,c,f,g, displayed full agonist 
activities at the rho1 receptors in the FMP assay (EC50 in the range 22-420 
microM). Ligand-protein docking identified the Thr129 in the alpha1 subunit and 
the corresponding Ser168 residue in rho1 as determinants of the selectivity 
displayed by the 5-substituted IAA analogues. The fact that GABA, 4, and 8a 
displayed decreased agonist potencies at a rho1Ser168Thr mutant compared to the 
WT rho1 receptor strongly supported this hypothesis. However, in contrast to 
GABA and 4, which exhibited increased agonist potencies at a 
alpha1(Thr129Ser)beta2gamma2 mutant compared to WT GABAA receptor, the data 
obtained for 8a at the WT and mutant receptors were nonconclusive.

DOI: 10.1021/jm070447j
PMID: 17655213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]