1. Mamm Genome. 2007 Jul;18(6-7):431-43. doi: 10.1007/s00335-007-9030-8. Epub
2007  Jul 26.

The power of comparative and developmental studies for mouse models of Down 
syndrome.

Moore CS(1), Roper RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, 
Pennsylvania, 17604, USA. clara.moore@email.fandm.edu

Since the genetic basis for Down syndrome (DS) was described, understanding the 
causative relationship between genes at dosage imbalance and phenotypes 
associated with DS has been a principal goal of researchers studying trisomy 21 
(Ts21). Though inferences to the gene-phenotype relationship in humans have been 
made, evidence linking a specific gene or region to a particular congenital 
phenotype has been limited. To further understand the genetic basis for DS 
phenotypes, mouse models with three copies of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) 
orthologs have been developed. Mouse models offer access to every tissue at each 
stage of development, opportunity to manipulate genetic content, and ability to 
precisely quantify phenotypes. Numerous approaches to recreate trisomic 
composition and analyze phenotypes similar to DS have resulted in diverse 
trisomic mouse models. A murine intraspecies comparative analysis of different 
genetic models of Ts21 and specific DS phenotypes reveals the complexity of 
trisomy and important considerations to understand the etiology of and 
strategies for amelioration or prevention of trisomic phenotypes. By analyzing 
individual phenotypes in different mouse models throughout development, such as 
neurologic, craniofacial, and cardiovascular abnormalities, greater insight into 
the gene-phenotype relationship has been demonstrated. In this review we discuss 
how phenotype-based comparisons between DS mouse models have been useful in 
analyzing the relationship of trisomy and DS phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-007-9030-8
PMCID: PMC1998891
PMID: 17653795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]