1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 14;372(2):407-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.090. Epub
2007  Jul 12.

Differential interaction of HIV-1 integrase and JPO2 with the C terminus of 
LEDGF/p75.

Bartholomeeusen K(1), De Rijck J, Busschots K, Desender L, Gijsbers R, Emiliani 
S, Benarous R, Debyser Z, Christ F.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine, KULeuven and IRC KULAK, Leuven, Belgium.

The transcriptional co-activator lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF) 
has been shown to protect cells against environmental stress. The protein has 
been implicated in auto-immunity and cancer, and is present in cells as the p52 
or p75 splice variant. Recently, LEDGF/p75, but not p52, was identified as the 
prominent interaction partner of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
integrase. This interaction of HIV-1 integrase with the C-terminal 
integrase-binding domain of LEDGF/p75 is crucial for HIV-1 replication. To gain 
insight into the cell biology of LEDGF/p75, we were interested in identifying 
cellular binding partners of its C-terminal domain. By yeast-two-hybrid 
screening with a CEMC7 cDNA-library, we were able to identify JPO2 as a binding 
partner of the C-terminal part of LEDGF/p75. The specific interaction between 
JPO2 and LEDGF/p75 was verified by pull-down, AlphaScreen, and 
co-immunoprecipitation. Competition assays using recombinant proteins show a 
mutually exclusive binding of either JPO2 or HIV-1 integrase to LEDGF/p75. 
However, differing mechanisms of binding were suggested by continuing 
interaction of JPO2 with some LEDGF/p75 mutants (I365A, D366A, F406A) that are 
totally defective for interaction with HIV-1 integrase. This finding is of 
significance for the development of specific inhibitors targeting only the 
interaction between LEDGF/p75 and HIV-1 integrase, without disturbing 
interaction with other cellular factors. Over-expression of JPO2 resulted in a 
modest but reproducible inhibition of HIV-1 replication, consistent with 
competition between integrase and JPO2 for binding to LEDGF/p75. Furthermore, 
JPO2 over-expression activated transcription from the HIV-1 LTR.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.090
PMID: 17669426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]