1. Mod Pathol. 2007 Oct;20(10):1009-18. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800928. Epub 2007
 Jul 27.

Ultrastructural and molecular analysis in fatal neonatal interstitial pneumonia 
caused by a novel ABCA3 mutation.

Bruder E(1), Hofmeister J, Aslanidis C, Hammer J, Bubendorf L, Schmitz G, Rufle 
A, BÃ¼hrer C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 
elisabeth.bruder@unibas.ch

Pulmonary surfactant is essential to maintain alveolar patency, and invariably 
fatal neonatal lung disease has been recognized to involve mutations in the 
genes encoding surfactant protein-B or ATP-binding cassette transporter family 
member ABCA3. The lipid transporter ABCA3 targets surfactant phospholipids to 
lamellar bodies that are lysosomal-derived organelles of alveolar type II cells. 
ABCA3-/- mice have grossly reduced surfactant phosphatidyl glycerol levels and 
die of respiratory failure soon after birth. We studied lung biopsy samples of 
two siblings with a novel homozygous ABCA3 mutation at nucleotide position 578 
(c.578C>G), leading to a Pro193Arg amino-acid exchange, who died at 55 and 105 
days of age. Light microscopy revealed thickened alveolar septa with abundant 
myxoid interstitial matrix, marked hyperplasia of type II pneumocytes, 
desquamation of alveolar macrophages and focal alveolar proteinosis. Surfactant 
protein-B was detected by immunohistochemistry after antigen retrieval. 
Transmission electron microscopy showed rare cytoplasmic inclusions with 
concentric membranes and eccentrically placed electron-dense aggregates. These 
'fried-egg'-appearing lamellar bodies differed both from normal lamellar bodies 
and the larger, poorly formed composite bodies with multiple vesicular 
inclusions observed in surfactant protein-B deficiency. In conclusion, our 
findings underscore that the implications of interstitial lung disease in infant 
lungs differ from those in adults. In infants with a desquamative interstitial 
pneumonitis pattern, surfactant or ABCA3 mutations should be evaluated. 
Importantly, these findings support the notion that electron microscopy is 
useful in distinguishing between surfactant protein-B and ABCA3 deficiency, and 
has an important role in evaluating biopsies or autopsies of term infants with 
unexplained severe respiratory failure and interstitial lung disease.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.3800928
PMID: 17660803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]