1. Brain Nerve. 2007 Jul;59(7):747-53.

[Generation of mice with glial cell dysfunction].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka K(1), Lee HU, Ikenaka K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for 
Physiological Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji machi, Okazaki 444-8787, 
Japan.

To examine astrocytic function, we have developed model mice harboring 
astrocyte-specific disease causal gene and tried to examine astrocytic function 
in vivo. Alexander disease, megalencephalic leukodystrophy with subcortical 
cysts (MLC), and autistic spectrum disorder with neuroligin 3/4 mutations are 
known to be astrocyte-specific disease so far. First of all, we have established 
Alexander disease model mouse. Alexander disease is caused by coding mutation in 
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and mutant GFAP forms inclusion bodies, 
called Rosenthal fibers, in astrocytes. Its pathophysiology is still unknown. We 
generated transgenic mice that express human GFAP R239H mutant under the control 
of mouse GFAP promoter. Lines with single copy exhibited weak human GFAP 
expression in astrocytes that did not produce aggregates despite the existence 
of mutation, whereas lines with multi copies exhibited strong expression and the 
formation of aggregates, starting at P14. The line with aggregates showed higher 
sensitivity to kainate than the line without them, whose sensitivity was not 
different from the wild type mouse, suggesting that the presence of GFAP 
aggregates but not the presence of mutant GFAP altered the sensitivity. Changes 
in several electrophysiological parameters, including facilitation of LTP, were 
also observed in this model mouse. We believe that this transgenic line is a 
useful tool to study astrocytic function in vivo.

PMID: 17663146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]