1. Vet Res Commun. 2008 Feb;32(2):187-91. doi: 10.1007/s11259-007-9013-y. Epub
2007  Aug 1.

The T963C mutation of TP53 gene does not participate in the clonal origin of 
canine TVT.

Vázquez-Mota N(1), Simón-Martínez J, Córdova-Alarcon E, Lagunes L, Fajardo R.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados en Salud Animal, Facultad de 
Medicina Veterinaria y Zootecnia, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de México, 
Carretera de cuota Toluca-Atlacomulco, Kilómetro 15.5, C.P. 50200 Toluca Edo, 
Mexico.

In dogs, the canine transmissible venereal tumor (CTVT) is the only neoplasm 
which is not produced by neoplastic transformation of normal cells; the tumor is 
transmitted from the affected dog to healthy dogs by implantation of one or 
various clones of cancer cells. Thus, the CTVT of dogs analyzed in various 
countries reveals similar genetic characteristics and consequently CTVT is 
considered to have a clonal origin. The CTVTs obtained from dogs in Korea showed 
the T963C mutation on TP53 gene; this mutation was thought to be a molecular 
alteration which participates in the origin of the ancestral clone, CTVT. 
Nonetheless, this supposed mutation has not been identified in other studies 
which were carried out for the purpose of clarifying the clonal origin of CTVT. 
Thus we have considered it important to identify the role of the T963C mutation 
of the TP53 gene in the clonal origin of CTVT in dogs. Consequently the region 
which includes the mutation of the TP53 gene in twenty samples of CTVT obtained 
from various canine breeds was PCR amplified and afterwards its sequence of 
nucleotides was determined. We conclude that this mutation did not participate 
in the clonal origin of the tumor, but was acquired at a later stage.

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-007-9013-y
PMID: 17668284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]