1. Pharmacology. 2007;80(4):279-85. doi: 10.1159/000106554. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Beta-2-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and changes in lipids induced by 
metoprolol.

Isaza CA(1), Henao J, Sánchez JC, Porras GL, Cardona J, Bedoya G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Médica, Universidad Tecnológica de Pereira, Pereira, 
Colombia.

Polymorphisms Arg(16)Gly and Gln(27)Glu of the gene of adrenoreceptor 
beta(2)(ADRB2) are associated with altered sympathetic responses. This study 
evaluated the relationship between these polymorphisms and changes in lipids 
induced by metoprolol in hypertensive patients. 105 adults were enrolled. After 
serum lipid levels and genotype had been determined, metoprolol was administered 
orally. Genotyping was performed using a mini-sequencing technique. Allelic and 
genotypic frequencies were: Arg(16) (49.5%); Gly(16) (50.5%); Gln(27) (89%); 
Glu(27) (11%); Arg(16)Arg (28.6%); Arg(16)Gly (41.9%); Gly(16)Gly (29.5%); 
Gln(27)Gln (81%); Gln(27)Glu (16.1%), and Glu(27)Glu (2.9%). Ninety patients 
concluded the study. There were no significant differences between the 
demographic, pharmacological and biochemical variables evaluated, grouped by 
their genotype in positions 16 and 27 of the ADRB2 gene. We did not find 
differences in lipid profiles in the whole group, but when we compared these 
profiles within each genotypic subgroup, we found that total cholesterol 
diminished (p = 0.03) in the patients with the native Gln(27)Gln genotype, 
whereas in the Gln(27)Glu heterozygous triglycerides increased (p = 0.025). We 
only found 3 patients homozygous for Glu(27)Glu and 2 of them were treated with 
diet and antidyslipidemic drugs. These results suggest that the polymorphism of 
codon 27 constitutes the target of the changes in lipids induced by 
beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000106554
PMID: 17671401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]