1. Am J Cardiol. 2007 Aug 15;100(4):736-41. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.03.093. 
Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Prevalence and clinical significance of cardiovascular abnormalities in patients 
with the LEOPARD syndrome.

Limongelli G(1), Pacileo G, Marino B, Digilio MC, Sarkozy A, Elliott P, Versacci 
P, Calabro P, De Zorzi A, Di Salvo G, Syrris P, Patton M, McKenna WJ, 
Dallapiccola B, Calabro R.

Author information:
(1)Second University of Naples, Monaldi Hospital, Naples, Italy. 
limongelligiuseppe@libero.it

The aim of this study was to characterize cardiovascular involvement in a large 
number of patients with LEOPARD syndrome. Twenty-six patients (age range 0 to 63 
years, median age at the time of the study evaluation 17 years) underwent 
clinical and genetic investigations. Familial disease was ascertained in 9 
patients. Nineteen patients (73%) showed electrocardiographic abnormalities. 
Left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy was present in 19 patients (73%), including 9 
with LV outflow tract obstructions; right ventricular hypertrophy was present in 
8 patients (30%). Valve (57%) and coronary artery (15%) anomalies were also 
observed. Single patients showed LV apical aneurysm, LV noncompaction, isolated 
LV dilation, and atrioventricular canal defect. During follow-up (9.1 +/- 4.5 
years), 2 patients died suddenly, and 2 patients had cardiac arrest. These 
patients had LV hypertrophy. Despite the limited number of subjects studied, 
genotype-phenotype correlations were observed in familial cases. In conclusion, 
most patients with LEOPARD syndrome showed LV hypertrophy, often in association 
with other valvular or congenital defects. A spectrum of underrecognized cardiac 
anomalies were also observed. Long-term prognosis was benign, but the occurrence 
of 4 fatal events in patients with LV hypertrophy indicates that such patients 
require careful risk assessment and, in some cases, consideration for 
prophylaxis against sudden death.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.03.093
PMID: 17697839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]