1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2008 Jun;8(3):174-85. doi: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500473. Epub
2007  Aug 14.

Influence of UGT1A9 intronic I399C>T polymorphism on SN-38 glucuronidation in 
Asian cancer patients.

Sandanaraj E(1), Jada SR, Shu X, Lim R, Lee SC, Zhou Q, Zhou S, Goh BC, Chowbay 
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, Division of 
Medical Sciences, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Centre, Singapore.

Genetic polymorphisms in hepatically expressed UGT1A1 and UGT1A9 contribute to 
the interindividual variability i-n irinotecan disposition and toxicity. We 
screened UGT1A1 (UGT1A1*60, g.-3140G>A, UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*6) and UGT1A9 
(g.-118(T)(9>10) and I399C>T) genes for polymorphic variants in the promoter and 
coding regions, and the genotypic effect of UGT1A9 I399C>T polymorphism on 
irinotecan disposition in Asian cancer patients was investigated. Blood samples 
were collected from 45 patients after administration of irinotecan as a 90 min 
intravenous infusion of 375 mg/m(2) once in every 3 weeks. Genotypic-phenotypic 
correlates showed that cancer patients heterozygous or homozygous for the 
I399C>T allele had approximately 2-fold lower systemic exposure to SN-38 
(P<0.05) and a trend towards a higher relative extent of glucuronidation (REG) 
of SN-38 (P>0.05). UGT1A1-1A9 diplotype analysis showed that patients harbouring 
the H1/H2 (TG6GT(10)T/GG6GT(9)C) diplotype had 2.4-fold lower systemic exposure 
to SN-38 glucuronide (SN-38G) compared with patients harbouring the H1/H5 
(TG6GT(10)T/GG6GT(10)C) diplotype (P=0.025). In conclusion, this in vivo study 
supports the in vitro findings of Girard et al. and suggests that the UGT1A9 
I399C>T variant may be an important glucuronidating allele affecting the 
pharmacokinetics of SN-38 and SN-38G in Asian cancer patients receiving 
irinotecan chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.tpj.6500473
PMID: 17700594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]