1. Horm Metab Res. 2007 Aug;39(8):543-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-985131.

MTHFR C677T polymorphism and osteoporotic fractures.

Valero C(1), Alonso MA, Zarrabeitia MT, Viadero C, Hern√°ndez JL, Riancho JA.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital U. M. Valdecilla, University of 
Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

The C677T (rs1801133) polymorphism of MTHFR (methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase) has been associated with the risk of cardiovascular events, and also 
with osteoporosis in some studies. However, the results are controversial. Our 
objective was to determine the relationship of the polymorphism with 
osteoporotic fractures by means of a case-control study. C677T was analyzed in 
823 subjects (365 controls, 136 with vertebral fractures and 322 with hip 
fracture) by using a Taqman assay. The distribution of MTHFR genotypes was 
similar in patients and controls. In comparison with TC/CC genotypes, the 
age-adjusted OR for hip fractures of the TT genotype was 1.0 (95% confidence 
interval 0.6-1.7) in women and 0.7 (0.3-1.8) in men. The OR for vertebral 
fractures was 0.8 (0.4-1.7) in women and 1.7 (0.4-6.7) in men. A meta-analysis 
combining these data with previous reports confirmed the lack of association 
between MTHFR and fractures, with an OR of 1.1 (0.7-1.9, p=0.65) for vertebral 
fractures and 1.2 (0.7-2.0; p=0.45) for peripheral fractures, but there was 
significant heterogeneity among the results of individual studies, particularly 
about peripheral fractures. In conclusion, the C677T polymorphism of the MTHFR 
gene does not appear to be associated with the overall risk of osteoporotic 
fractures. However, given the heterogeneity of the results of published studies, 
further investigations are needed to evaluate its influence in specific 
population subgroups.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-985131
PMID: 17712717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]