1. J Med Chem. 2007 Oct 4;50(20):4939-52. doi: 10.1021/jm070435y. Epub 2007 Aug
29.

Novel ATP-competitive kinesin spindle protein inhibitors.

Parrish CA(1), Adams ND, Auger KR, Burgess JL, Carson JD, Chaudhari AM, Copeland 
RA, Diamond MA, Donatelli CA, Duffy KJ, Faucette LF, Finer JT, Huffman WF, 
Hugger ED, Jackson JR, Knight SD, Luo L, Moore ML, Newlander KA, Ridgers LH, 
Sakowicz R, Shaw AN, Sung CM, Sutton D, Wood KW, Zhang SY, Zimmerman MN, Dhanak 
D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Oncology Center of Excellence for Drug 
Discovery, GlaxoSmithKline, 1250 South Collegeville Road, Collegeville, 
Pennsylvania 19426, USA. cynthia.a.parrish@gsk.com

Kinesin spindle protein (KSP), an ATPase responsible for spindle pole separation 
during mitosis that is present only in proliferating cells, has become a novel 
and attractive anticancer target with potential for reduced side effects 
compared to currently available therapies. We report herein the discovery of the 
first known ATP-competitive inhibitors of KSP, which display a unique activity 
profile as compared to the known loop 5 (L5) allosteric KSP inhibitors that are 
currently under clinical evaluation. Optimization of this series led to the 
identification of biphenyl sulfamide 20, a potent KSP inhibitor with in vitro 
antiproliferative activity against human cells with either wild-type KSP 
(HCT116) or mutant KSP (HCT116 D130V). In a murine xenograft model with HCT116 
D130V tumors, 20 showed significant antitumor activity following intraperitoneal 
dosing, providing in vivo proof-of-principle of the efficacy of an 
ATP-competitive KSP inhibitor versus tumors that are resistant to the other 
known KSP inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/jm070435y
PMID: 17725339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]