1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Dec 8;576(1-3):7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.07.068. 
Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Conserved lysin and arginin residues in the extracellular loop of P2X(3) 
receptors are involved in agonist binding.

Fischer W(1), Zadori Z, Kullnick Y, Gr√∂ger-Arndt H, Franke H, Wirkner K, Illes 
P, Mager PP.

Author information:
(1)Rudolf-Boehm-Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Leipzig, 
D-04107 Leipzig, Germany.

Wild-type human (h) P2X(3) receptors expressed in HEK293 cells responded to the 
prototypic agonist alpha,beta-methylene ATP (alpha,beta-meATP) with rapidly 
desensitizing inward currents and an increase in the intracellular Ca(2+) 
concentration. In contrast to electrophysiological recordings, Ca(2+) 
microfluorimetry showed a lower maximum of the concentration-response curve of 
alpha,beta-meATP in the transiently than in the permanently transfected HEK293 
cells. However, the concentrations causing 50% of the maximum possible effect 
(EC(50) values) were identical, when measured with either method. In order to 
determine the role of certain conserved, positively charged amino acids in the 
nucleotide binding domains (NBD-1-4) of hP2X(3) receptors for agonist binding, 
the lysine-63, -65, -176 and -299 as well as the arginine-281 and -295 residues 
were substituted by the neutral amino acid alanine. We observed no effect of 
alpha,beta-meATP at the K63A, K176A, R295A, and K299A mutants, and a marked 
decrease of agonist potency at the K65A and R281A mutants. The P2X(3) receptor 
antagonist 2',3'-O-trinitrophenyl-ATP (TNP-ATP) blocked the effect of 
alpha,beta-meATP at the wild-type hP2X(3) receptor with lower affinity than at 
the mutant K65A, indicating an interference of this mutation with the docking of 
the antagonist with its binding sites. The use of confocal fluorescence 
microscopy in conjunction with an antibody raised against the extracellular loop 
of the hP2X(3) receptor documented the expression of all mutants in the plasma 
membrane of HEK293 cells. Eventually, we modelled the possible agonist and 
antagonist binding sites NBD-1-4 of the hP2X(3) subunit by using structural 
bioinformatics. This model is in complete agreement with the available data and 
integrates results from mutagenesis studies with geometry optimization of the 
tertiary structure predictions of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.07.068
PMID: 17764672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]