1. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 5;2(9):e844. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000844.

The N-Myc down regulated Gene1 (NDRG1) Is a Rab4a effector involved in vesicular 
recycling of E-cadherin.

Kachhap SK(1), Faith D, Qian DZ, Shabbeer S, Galloway NL, Pili R, Denmeade SR, 
DeMarzo AM, Carducci MA.

Author information:
(1)Prostate Cancer Program, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of 
America. kachhsu@jhmi.edu

Cell to cell adhesion is mediated by adhesion molecules present on the cell 
surface. Downregulation of molecules that form the adhesion complex is a 
characteristic of metastatic cancer cells. Downregulation of the N-myc down 
regulated gene1 (NDRG1) increases prostate and breast metastasis. The exact 
function of NDRG1 is not known. Here by using live cell confocal microscopy and 
in vitro reconstitution, we report that NDRG1 is involved in recycling the 
adhesion molecule E-cadherin thereby stabilizing it. Evidence is provided that 
NDRG1 recruits on recycling endosomes in the Trans Golgi network by binding to 
phosphotidylinositol 4-phosphate and interacts with membrane bound Rab4aGTPase. 
NDRG1 specifically interacts with constitutively active Rab4aQ67L mutant protein 
and not with GDP-bound Rab4aS22N mutant proving NDRG1 as a novel Rab4a effector. 
Transferrin recycling experiments reveals NDRG1 colocalizes with transferrin 
during the recycling phase. NDRG1 alters the kinetics of transferrin recycling 
in cells. NDRG1 knockdown cells show a delay in recycling transferrin, 
conversely NDRG1 overexpressing cells reveal an increase in rate of transferrin 
recycling. This novel finding of NDRG1 as a recycling protein involved with 
recycling of E-cadherin will aid in understanding NDRG1 role as a metastasis 
suppressor protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000844
PMCID: PMC1952073
PMID: 17786215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.