1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(21):7669-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00002-07. Epub 2007
Sep  4.

Mutation at the polymerase active site of mouse DNA polymerase delta increases 
genomic instability and accelerates tumorigenesis.

Venkatesan RN(1), Treuting PM, Fuller ED, Goldsby RE, Norwood TH, Gooley TA, 
Ladiges WC, Preston BD, Loeb LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7705, 
USA.

Mammalian DNA polymerase delta (Pol delta) is believed to replicate a large 
portion of the genome and to synthesize DNA in DNA repair and genetic 
recombination pathways. The effects of mutation in the polymerase domain of this 
essential enzyme are unknown. Here, we generated mice harboring an L604G or 
L604K substitution in highly conserved motif A in the polymerase active site of 
Pol delta. Homozygous Pold1(L604G/L604G) and Pold1(L604K/L604K) mice died in 
utero. However, heterozygous animals were viable and displayed no overall 
increase in disease incidence, indicative of efficient compensation for the 
defective mutant polymerase. The life spans of wild-type and heterozygous 
Pold1(+/L604G) mice did not differ, while that of Pold1(+/L604K) mice was 
reduced by 18%. Cultured embryonic fibroblasts from the heterozygous strains 
exhibited comparable increases in both spontaneous mutation rate and chromosome 
aberrations. We observed no significant increase in cancer incidence; however, 
Pold1(+/L604K) mice bearing histologically diagnosed tumors died at a younger 
median age than wild-type mice. Our results indicate that heterozygous mutation 
at L604 in the polymerase active site of DNA polymerase delta reduces life span, 
increases genomic instability, and accelerates tumorigenesis in an 
allele-specific manner, novel findings that have implications for human cancer.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00002-07
PMCID: PMC2169052
PMID: 17785453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]