1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32424-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703730200. Epub
2007  Sep 4.

Interaction of the adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein with the 
hormone-sensitive lipase: regulation by fatty acids and phosphorylation.

Smith AJ(1), Thompson BR, Sanders MA, Bernlohr DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, Imaging 
Center, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein (AFABP/aP2) forms a physical complex with 
the hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and AFABP/aP2-null mice exhibit reduced basal 
and hormone-stimulated lipolysis. To identify the determinants affecting the 
interaction fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) imaging was used in 
conjunction with a mutagenesis strategy to evaluate the roles AFABP/aP2 fatty 
acid binding and HSL phosphorylation have in complex formation as well as 
determine the HSL binding site on AFABP/aP2. The nonfatty acid binding mutant of 
AFABP/aP2 (R126Q) failed to form a FRET-competent complex with HSL either under 
basal or forskolin-stimulated conditions, indicating that lipid binding is 
required for association. Once bound to HSL and on the surface of the lipid 
droplet, YFP-AFABP/aP2 (but not YFP-HSL) exhibited energy transfer between the 
fusion protein and BODIPY-C12-labeled triacylglycerol. Serine to alanine 
mutations at the two PKA phosphorylation sites of HSL (659 and 660), or at the 
AMPK phosphorylation sites (565), blocked FRET between HSL and AFABP/aP2. 
Substitution of isoleucine for lysine at position 21 of AFABP/aP2 (K21I), but 
not 31 (K31I), resulted in a non-HSL-binding protein indicating that residues on 
helix alphaI of AFABP/aP2 define a component of the HSL binding site. These 
results indicate that the ligand-bound form of AFABP/aP2.interacts with the 
activated, phosphorylated HSL and that the association is likely to be 
regulatory; either delivering FA to inhibit HSL (facilitating feedback 
inhibition) or affecting multicomponent complex formation on the droplet 
surface.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703730200
PMID: 17785468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]