1. Eur J Intern Med. 2007 Oct;18(6):474-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2007.02.020. Epub
 2007 Jul 12.

Relation between plasma homocysteine, gene polymorphisms of homocysteine 
metabolism-related enzymes, and angiographically proven coronary artery disease.

Laraqui A(1), Allami A, Carrié A, Raisonnier A, Coiffard AS, Benkouka F, 
Bendriss A, Benjouad A, Bennouar N, El Kadiri N, Benomar A, Fellat S, Benomar M.

Author information:
(1)Ligue Nationale de Lutte Contre les Maladies Cardiovasculaires, Unité 
d'Etudes des Facteurs Métaboliques et Polymorphismes Génétiques, Rabat, Morocco; 
UFR Biochimie Immunologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université Mohamed V. Rabat, 
Morocco; Laboratoire de Biochimie Médicale A, Unité Fonctionnelle 
Endocrinologie-Moléculaire-Oncologie, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Hyperhomocyteinemia (HHcy) is a risk factor for coronary artery 
disease (CAD), and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methionine 
synthase (MTR), and methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) polymorphisms may 
contribute to plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) variation. We investigated the 
association of polymorphisms 1298A-->C in the MTHFR gene, 2756A-->G in the MTR 
gene, and 66A-->G in the MTRR gene with tHcy levels and with CAD in patients 
undergoing coronary angiography.
METHODS: CAD patients (n=151) and control subjects (n=79) were compared 
regarding the prevalence of the polymorphisms, risk factors, and biochemical 
parameters.
RESULTS: The mean tHcy concentration was significantly higher in CAD patients 
than in control subjects (P<0.001). HHcy (tHcy>/=15 mumol/l) conferred an OR of 
CAD of 4.1 (95% CI 2.2-7.5, P<0.001). In both cases and controls, smokers had a 
higher tHcy level than non-smokers and demonstrated a markedly increased risk 
for CAD (OR=2.5, 95% CI 1.7-3.3, P<0.001). The allele frequencies of the MTHFR 
1298A-->C, MTR 2756A-->G, and MTRR 66A-->G mutations were 36.7%, 15.7%, and 
36.6%, respectively. The 1298C allele frequency was significantly higher in the 
CAD group than in controls (P<0.05) and showed a significant association with 
CAD in heterozygote carriers. There was no statistically significant difference 
between cases and controls in the frequencies of the A2756G alleles/genotypes in 
the MTR gene and of the A66G alleles/genotypes in the MTRR gene. The 
contributions to tHcy levels of the three common mutations were statistically 
significant. The heterozygosity of the MTHFR 1298AC genotype, MTR 2756G allele, 
and MTRR 66G allele yielded an OR of 3.4, 2.0, and 2.1, respectively, for having 
HHcy.
CONCLUSION: We suggest that HHcy confers a risk for CAD, and smokers with tHcy 
are at a greatly increased risk. Our finding supports an important role of the 
MTHFR gene in CAD and provides evidence of polygenic regulation of tHcy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2007.02.020
PMID: 17822659