1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32480-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704314200. Epub
2007  Sep 6.

A caspase-3-cleaved fragment of the glial glutamate transporter EAAT2 is 
sumoylated and targeted to promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies in mutant 
SOD1-linked amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Gibb SL(1), Boston-Howes W, Lavina ZS, Gustincich S, Brown RH Jr, Pasinelli P, 
Trotti D.

Author information:
(1)Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Weinberg Unit for ALS Research, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, and Cecil B. Day 
Laboratory for Neuromuscular Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown 02129, USA.

EAAT2 (excitatory amino acid transporter 2) is a high affinity, Na+-dependent 
glutamate transporter of glial origin that is essential for the clearance of 
synaptically released glutamate and prevention of excitotoxicity. During the 
course of human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and in a transgenic mutant 
SOD1 mouse model of the disease, expression and activity of EAAT2 is remarkably 
reduced. We previously showed that some of the mutant SOD1 proteins exposed to 
oxidative stress inhibit EAAT2 by triggering caspase-3 cleavage of EAAT2 at a 
single defined locus. This gives rise to two fragments that we termed truncated 
EAAT2 and COOH terminus of EAAT2 (CTE). In this study, we report that analysis 
of spinal cord homogenates prepared from mutant G93A-SOD1 mice reveals CTE to be 
of a higher molecular weight than expected because it is conjugated with SUMO-1. 
The sumoylated CTE fragment (CTE-SUMO-1) accumulates in the spinal cord of these 
mice as early as presymptomatic stage (70 days of age) and not in other central 
nervous system areas unaffected by the disease. The presence and accumulation of 
CTE-SUMO-1 is specific to ALS mice, since it does not occur in the R6/2 mouse 
model for Huntington disease. Furthermore, using an astroglial cell line, 
primary culture of astrocytes, and tissue samples from G93A-SOD1 mice, we show 
that CTE-SUMO-1 is targeted to promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies. Since one 
of the proposed functions of promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies is regulation 
of gene transcription, we suggest a possible novel mechanism by which the glial 
glutamate transporter EAAT2 could contribute to the pathology of ALS.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M704314200
PMID: 17823119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]