1. Genomics. 1991 Dec;11(4):857-69. doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(91)90008-3.

Linkage mapping of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP1) to the 
pericentric region of human chromosome 8.

Blanton SH(1), Heckenlively JR, Cottingham AW, Friedman J, Sadler LA, Wagner M, 
Friedman LH, Daiger SP.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, Houston 77030.

Linkage mapping in a large, seven-generation family with type 2 autosomal 
dominant retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP) demonstrates linkage between the disease 
locus (RP1) and DNA markers on the short arm of human chromosome 8. Five markers 
were most informative for mapping ADRP in this family using two-point linkage 
analysis. The markers, their maximum lod scores, and recombination distances 
were ANK1 (ankyrin)--2.0 at 16%; D8S5 (TL11)--5.3 at 17%; D8S87 [a(CA)n 
repeat]--7.2 at 14%; LPL (lipoprotein lipase)--1.5 at 26%; and PLAT (plasminigen 
activator, tissue)--10.6 at 7%. Multipoint linkage analysis, using a simplified 
pedigree structure for the family (which contains 192 individuals and two 
inbreeding loops), gave a maximum lod score of 12.2 for RP1 at a distance 8.1 cM 
proximal to PLAT in the pericentric region of the chromosome. Based on linkage 
data from the CEPH (Paris) reference families and physical mapping information 
from a somatic cell hybrid panel of chromosome 8 fragments, the most likely 
order for four of these five loci and the diseases locus is 
8pter-LPL-D8S5-D8S87-PLAT-RP1. (The precise location of ANK1 relative to PLAT in 
this map is not established). The most likely location for RP1 is in the 
pericentric region of the chromosome. Recently, several families with ADRP with 
tight linkage to the rhodopsin locus at 3q21-q24 were reported and a number of 
specific rhodopsin mutations in families with ADRP have since been reported. In 
other ADRP families, including the one in this study, linkage to rhodopsin has 
been excluded. Thus mutations at two different loci, at least, have been shown 
to cause ADRP. There is no remarkable clinical disparity in the expression of 
disease caused by these different loci.

DOI: 10.1016/0888-7543(91)90008-3
PMID: 1783394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]