1. J Med Virol. 2007 Nov;79(11):1768-74. doi: 10.1002/jmv.20988.

Molecular characterization of G11P[25] and G3P[3] human rotavirus strains 
associated with asymptomatic infection in South India.

Banerjee I(1), Iturriza-Gomara M, Rajendran P, Primrose B, Ramani S, Gray JJ, 
Brown DW, Kang G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Sciences, Christian Medical College, Vellore, 
India.

Rotaviruses are the major etiological agents of diarrhea in children less than 5 
years of age. Two unusual rotavirus strains not previously reported in India, 
G11P[25] (CRI 10795) and G3P[3] (CRI 33594) were isolated from faecal samples of 
asymptomatic children in India. The strains were characterized by sequence 
analysis of the genes encoding the VP7, VP4, VP6, and NSP4. The G11P[25] strain 
was closely related to the human G11P[25] strains from Bangladesh (with 98% 
identity at the nucleotide [nt] level and the amino acid [aa] level for the VP7 
gene and 96% identity at the nt and 98% at the aa level for the VP4 gene). The 
G3P[3] strain was found to be related to a G3P[3] strain isolated in Thailand 
(CMH222; 88% identity at the nt level and 97% at aa level for the VP7 gene and 
84% identity at the nt level and 90% at the aa level for the VP4 gene). 
Phylogenetic analysis of the VP6 and the NSP4 genes revealed that the Vellore 
G11P[25] strain was of VP6 subgroup II and NSP4 genotype B. The G3P[3] strain 
was identified as NSP4 genotype C and the VP6 gene showed 97% identity at the 
deduced amino acid level with strain CMH222 (Thailand) strain but did not 
cluster with sequences of SGI, SGII, SGI+II or SG-nonI/nonII. Both strains had 
gene segments of animal rotavirus origin suggesting inter-species transmission 
of rotavirus, and in the case of G11P[25] possibly underwent reassortment 
subsequently with human strains resulting in an animal-human hybrid strain.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.20988
PMCID: PMC2465802
PMID: 17854037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]