1. Endocrine. 2007 Apr;31(2):149-53. doi: 10.1007/s12020-007-0024-9.

Two novel genotypes of the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter (SLC12A3) gene 
in patients with Gitelman's syndrome.

Aoi N(1), Nakayama T, Tahira Y, Haketa A, Yabuki M, Sekiyama T, Nakane C, Mano 
H, Kawachi H, Sato N, Soma M, Matsumoto K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Nihon 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Gitelman's syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder marked by salt wasting 
and hypokalaemia resulting from loss-of-function mutations in the SLC12A3 gene 
that codes for the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter. Gitelman's syndrome 
is usually distinguished from Bartter's syndrome by the presence of both 
hypomagnesaemia and hypocalciuria. Although recent advances in molecular 
genetics may make it possible to both diagnose and differentiate these diseases, 
the phenotypes sometimes overlap. Here we report two sporadic cases of 
Gitelman's syndrome and two novel genotypes of SLC12A3. Patient 1 was a compound 
heterozygote with a known missense mutation, L849H, and a novel mutation, R852H 
in exon 22. Patient 2 was homozygous for the missense mutation L849H. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report of a patient homozygous for 849H. 
Interestingly, both patients were affected with autoimmune thyroid disease. 
Patient 1 was affected with Hashimoto's disease, and Patient 2 was affected with 
Graves' disease. The symptoms of Patient 2 were more serious than those of 
Patient 1. Although the patients both carried the 849H allele (Patient 1 as a 
heterozygote and Patient 2 as a homozygous), their clinical symptoms differed. 
The difference in the clinical features may have been due both to phenotypic 
differences and the fact that Gitelman's syndrome is a complicated disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-007-0024-9
PMID: 17873326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]