1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 30;282(48):34952-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M705979200. Epub
2007  Sep 18.

Structural analysis of the bacterial HPr kinase/phosphorylase V267F mutant gives 
insights into the allosteric regulation mechanism of this bifunctional enzyme.

Chaptal V(1), Vincent F, Gueguen-Chaignon V, Monedero V, Poncet S, Deutscher J, 
Nessler S, Morera S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie Structurales, CNRS, 1 Avenue de 
Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur Yvette, France.

The HPr kinase/phosphorylase (HPrK/P) is a bifunctional enzyme that controls the 
phosphorylation state of the phospho-carrier protein HPr, which regulates the 
utilization of carbon sources in Gram-positive bacteria. It uses ATP or 
pyrophosphate for the phosphorylation of serine 46 of HPr and inorganic 
phosphate for the dephosphorylation of Ser(P)-46-HPr via a phosphorolysis 
reaction. HPrK/P is a hexameric protein kinase of a new type with a catalytic 
core belonging to the family of nucleotide-binding protein with Walker A motif. 
It exhibits no structural similarity to eukaryotic protein kinases. So far, 
HPrK/P structures have shown the enzyme in its phosphorylase conformation. They 
permitted a detailed characterization of the phosphorolysis mechanism. In the 
absence of a structure with bound nucleotide, we used the V267F mutant enzyme to 
assess the kinase conformation. Indeed, the V267F replacement was found to cause 
an almost entire loss of the phosphorylase activity of Lactobacillus casei 
HPrK/P. In contrast, the kinase activity remained conserved. To elucidate the 
structural alterations leading to this drastic change of activity, the x-ray 
structure of the catalytic domain of L. casei HPrK/P-V267F was determined at 
2.6A resolution. A comparison with the structure of the wild type enzyme showed 
that the mutation induces conformation changes compatible with the switch from 
phosphorylase to kinase function. Together with nucleotide binding fluorescence 
measurements, these results allowed us to decipher the cooperative behavior of 
the protein and to gain new insights into the allosteric regulation mechanism of 
HPrK/P.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M705979200
PMID: 17878158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]