1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2007 Oct-Nov;27(7):834-7. doi: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e31815584bf.

Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, venous and arterial thrombi, and the factor V Leiden 
mutation in a four-generation kindred.

Glueck CJ(1), Tracy T, Wang P.

Author information:
(1)Cholesterol Center, Jewish Hospital, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
glueckch@healthall.com

In a 4-generation kindred identified through a 12-year-old female proband with 
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease (LCPD) who was found to be heterozygous for the 
G1691A factor V Leiden mutation (FV), our specific aim was to assess 
associations of FV with LCPD and with venous and arterial thrombotic events. 
Despite lethal thromboembolism in 3 family members at ages 21, 35, and 38, 
retinal artery thrombosis, and deep venous thrombosis, no family members had 
previously been studied for the FV mutation until kindred screening-genetic 
counseling was prompted by the discovery of the FV mutation in a child proband 
with LCPD.
METHODS: In a 4-generation kindred identified through a 12-year-old female 
proband with LCPD and found to be heterozygous for the FV mutation, we assessed 
the FV genotype and its association with thromboembolism in 14 of 16 living 
first- and second-degree relatives.
RESULTS: There was 3-generation vertical and horizontal transmission of 
heterozygosity for the FV mutation. Of 14 living first- and second-degree 
relatives, 10 were heterozygous for the FV mutation, including the proband's 
sister, mother, and maternal grandmother. Of the 14 living relatives, 2 had 
thrombotic events (retinal artery thrombosis and deep venous thrombosis of the 
leg). The proband's maternal great-grandfather had a lethal pulmonary embolus at 
age 35, as did her maternal great aunt at age 38, and a female third cousin at 
age 21.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large kindred identified by a child with LCPD who was found to 
have the FV mutation, FV heterozygosity was found in 3 generations of previously 
undiagnosed family members and was associated with venous and arterial 
thrombosis throughout the kindred. We suggest that FV mutation be studied in 
children with LCPD facilitate diagnosis and genetic counseling for thrombophilia 
in their parents, siblings, and other kindred members, and because the proband 
LCPD child with the FV mutation is at increased risk for other thromboembolic 
abnormalities as an adult.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 1.

DOI: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e31815584bf
PMID: 17878795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]