1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007 Oct;17(10):867-72. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282e9a51e.

Association study of monoamine oxidase and catechol-O-methyltransferase genes 
with smoking behavior.

Tochigi M(1), Suzuki K, Kato C, Otowa T, Hibino H, Umekage T, Kato N, Sasaki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The genes of catalytic enzymes of dopamine, including monoamine 
oxidase (MAOA and MAOB) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), have been major 
candidates for genes that affect smoking behavior. In this study, we 
investigated the relationship between smoking behavior and four polymorphisms of 
these genes, the MAOA variable number tandem repeat polymorphism, the MAOA 1460 
T/C polymorphism, the MAOB intron 13 G/A polymorphism, and the COMT Val158Met 
polymorphism. The association between the MAOB polymorphism and personality 
traits was also explored.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: The polymorphisms were genotyped in 451 healthy 
Japanese volunteers. Data on smoking habits were obtained from structured 
interviews. In addition to testing the association between each polymorphism and 
smoking status, epistatic and additive effects between two polymorphisms were 
also investigated.
RESULTS: A significant association was observed between the COMT Val158Met 
polymorphism and smoking status. Male participants with the Val/Val genotype had 
a significantly higher risk of heavy smoking compared with those with other 
genotypes, although no significant association was observed in female 
participants. No evidence was obtained for an association between the MAO genes 
and smoking behavior, including epistatic or additive effects. No significant 
association was observed between the MAOB polymorphism and personality traits.
CONCLUSION: This study may suggest a role of the COMT Val158Met polymorphism in 
smoking behavior in Japanese individuals.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e3282e9a51e
PMID: 17885625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]