1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;45(6):413-6.

[Detection of new mutations in the dystrophin gene by denaturing 
high-performance liquid chromatography].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YN(1), Zhou X, Jin CL, Xu Y, Lin CK, Cao LH, Li N, Zhang X, Luo Y.

Author information:
(1)The Research Center for Human Genomics and MOH Key Laboratory of Cell 
Biology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

OBJECTIVE: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive disease 
caused by dystrophin gene mutations; 55%-65% of these pathogenic mutations are 
large deletion and duplication mutations that can be detected by multiplexed 
polymerase chain reaction. However, finding the remaining micro-mutations 
(substitutions, deletions or insertions of one or several nucleotides) cannot be 
achieved in this way. The aim of the present study was to detect mutations of 
the dystrophin gene in individuals with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) by 
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and to establish a 
rapid and sensitive screening platform for micro-mutations leading to DMD.
METHODS: Twenty patients negative for large deletions in the dystrophin gene by 
multiplex PCR were selected for further screening by DHPLC and 20 normal male 
without DMD family history as the control cohort. Dystrophin exons and their 
flanking sequences were individually amplified by genomic PCR and the amplicons 
showing abnormal DHPLC profile were directly sequenced to identify the position 
and the type of the mutations.
RESULTS: After screening 68 exons covering the two deletion hotspots and 3'UTR 
region, four pathogenic mutations, including c.6808_6811del TTAA, 
c.4959_4960insA, c.8656C > T and c.8608C > T, were found in four DMD patients. 
Moreover, c.6808_6811del TTAA, c.4959_4960ins and c.8656C > T have not been 
reported previously. The first two frameshift mutations were predicted to 
produce premature stop codons, p.Leu2270MetfsX9 and p.Ser1654LysfsX5, 
respectively. The remaining two were nonsense mutations, leading to p.R2886X and 
p.R2870X, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Three novel and one recurrent dystrophin mutations have been 
identified in Chinese DMD patients. This study has demonstrated that DHPLC is an 
effective screening method for micro-mutation associated with DMD.

PMID: 17880784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]