1. Peptides. 2007 Nov;28(11):2146-54. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2007.08.018. Epub 
2007 Aug 23.

Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) peptides and cycloretro-inverso 
peptides derived from bradykinin as substrates and inhibitors of prolyl 
oligopeptidase.

Gorrão SS(1), Hemerly JP, Lima AR, Melo RL, Szeltner Z, Polgár L, Juliano MA, 
Juliano L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Rua Três de Maio 100, 
São Paulo--SP 04044-020, Brazil.

Prolyl oligopeptidase (POP, EC 3.4.21.26) is a member of a family of serine 
peptidases with post-proline cleaving activity towards peptides. It is located 
in the cytosol in active form but without hydrolytic activity on proteins or 
peptides higher than 30 amino acids. Its function is not well defined, but it is 
involved in central nervous system disorders. Here, we studied the substrate 
specificity of wild type POP (POPwt) and its C255T variant lacking the 
non-catalytic Cys(255). This residue is located in the seven-bladed 
beta-propeller domain that regulates the activity of POP. Fluorescence resonance 
energy transfer (FRET) peptides were used with sequences derived from 
bradykinin-containing region of human kininogen and flanked by Abz 
(ortho-aminobenzoic acid) and EDDnp [N-ethylenediamine-(2,4-dinitrophenyl)]. The 
peptide Abz-GFSPFRQ-EDDnp was taken as leader substrate for the synthesis of 
five series of peptides modified at the P(3), P(2), P'(1), P'(2) and P'(3) 
residues. The optimal amino acids in each position for POPwt resulted in the 
sequence RRPYIR that is very similar to the C-terminal sequence of neurotensin. 
The cyclic peptides c(G((n))FSPFR) (n=1-4) were hydrolyzed by POP; their 
cycloretro and cycloretro-inverso analogues were inhibitors in the micromolar 
range. The differences between POPwt and its C255T mutant in the hydrolysis of 
the series derived from Abz-GFSPFRQ-EDDnp were restricted to the non-prime site 
of the substrates. The kinetic data of hydrolysis and inhibition by the cyclic 
peptides are consistent with the structures of POP-substrate/inhibitor complexes 
and with the substrate specificity data obtained with linear FRET peptides. All 
together, these results give information about the POP-substrate/inhibitor 
interactions that further complete knowledge of this important oligopeptidase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2007.08.018
PMID: 17904692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]