1. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Nov;20(5):703-7.

Association of a polymorphism of CYP3A4 with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Yamada Y(1), Matsuo H, Watanabe S, Kato K, Yajima K, Hibino T, Yokoi K, Ichihara 
S, Metoki N, Yoshida H, Satoh K, Nozawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie 
University, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan. yamada@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

Although several environmental factors, including a high-calorie diet and 
physical inactivity, influence the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
genetic factors have been shown to contribute to individual susceptibility to 
this condition. The purpose of the present study was to identify gene 
polymorphisms that confer susceptibility or resistance to type 2 diabetes 
mellitus, and thereby to contribute to assessment of the genetic risk for this 
condition. The study population comprised 5259 unrelated Japanese individuals 
(2980 men, 2279 women), including 1640 subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(1071 men, 569 women) and 3619 controls (1909 men, 1710 women). The genotypes 
for 94 polymorphisms of 67 genes were determined with a method that combines the 
polymerase chain reaction and sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes with 
suspension array technology. Evaluation of genotype distributions by the 
chi-square test revealed that the 13989-->G (Ile118Val) polymorphism of the 
cytochrome P450, subfamily IIIA, polypeptide 4 gene (CYP3A4) was significantly 
(false discovery rate, 0.000009) associated with the prevalence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Multivariable logistic regression analysis with adjustment 
for age and sex also revealed that the 13989-->G (Ile118Val) polymorphism of 
CYP3A4 was significantly (P=0.00002) associated with the prevalence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus, with the AG genotype being protective against this condition. 
Genotyping for CYP3A4 may thus prove informative for assessment of the genetic 
risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 17912464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]