1. Mol Cell Biochem. 1991 Oct 16;107(2):87-94. doi: 10.1007/BF00225511.

Cloning and expression of a new human polypeptide which regulates protein 
phosphorylation in Escherichia coli.

Daniele A(1), Altruda F, Ferrone M, Silengo L, Chiarantini L, Bianchi M, Stocchi 
V, Magnani M.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Chimica Medica, Universit√† di Torino, 
Italy.

A 1,820 bp full-length clone encoding for a new human protein was isolated from 
a lambda gt11 placental cDNA library using anti-human hexokinase antibodies. The 
cDNA complete sequence includes a 12 bp 5' non-coding region, a single open 
reading frame encoding a protein of 55 KDa (HP-10) and a 177 bp non-coding with 
two putative polyadenylation signals upstream of 3' poly(A)tail. The deduced 
amino acid sequence reveals a sequence of 492 amino acids that contains a 
stretch of 7 glutamic acid from position 169 and one potential glycosylation 
site at position 274. Although antibodies against hexokinase recognize the 
fusion protein and antibodies against the fusion protein recognize hexokinase, 
HP-10 is not human hexokinase, by a number of criteria including the alignment 
of determined amino acid sequences. In searching for a possible functional role 
of HP-10 its cDNA was inserted into a procaryotic vector which allows the 
expression of the non-fused protein. Bacteria expressing the HP-10 encoded 
protein were isolated and found to have a dramatic increase in endogenous 
phosphorylated proteins. Since HP-10 does not have a protein kinase activity per 
se it should be considered a new regulatory phosphorylation protein which is 
active in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00225511
PMID: 1791827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]