1. Doc Ophthalmol. 2008 May;116(3):193-205. doi: 10.1007/s10633-007-9082-9. Epub 
2007 Oct 6.

Effects of prolonged dark adaptation in patients with retinitis pigmentosa of 
Bothnia type: an electrophysiological study.

Burstedt MS(1), Sandgren O, Golovleva I, Wachtmeister L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Ophthalmology, University of Ume책, 901 85, 
Ume책, Sweden. Marie.Burstedt@ophthal.umu.se

Bothnia dystrophy (BD) is a variant of recessive retinitis punctata albescens 
(RPA), caused by the missense mutation R233W in cellular retinaldehyde-binding 
protein (CRALBP), which is localized in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and 
M체ller cells of the retina. The purpose of this study was, by examining the 
electrophysiological responses of the retina, to evaluate the capacity of 
recovery of the whole retinal area and different cell types induced by extremely 
prolonged dark adaptation (DA) in BD disease and to gain further understanding 
of the pathogenesis of BD. Six young patients underwent bilateral full-field 
ERGs after 24 h of DA in one eye and standard DA in the fellow eye. The results 
were also compared with the effect of prolonged DA (10 h), previously studied in 
the same patients. After extremely prolonged DA (24 h) the rod b-wave and the 
mixed rod-cone a-wave responses reached normal though delayed amplitudes. An 
increase, up to normal level, in the oscillatory response was found. There was 
no obvious recovery of the cone response. We conclude that in young BD patients 
during extremely prolonged DA there is a significant additional capacity of 
recovery of rod function and also significant gain of activity in the inner 
retinal layer. A continuous but slow regeneration of rod photopigment seems to 
occur at least up to 24 h. The visual process in the RPE is retarded and CRALBP 
acts in this process; also, the M체ller cells of the retina seem to be involved. 
The findings also support an extremely slow synthesis of photopigments and 
irreversibly disturbed cone function early in BD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-007-9082-9
PMID: 17922155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]