1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jan 15;17(2):303-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm306. Epub 2007
Oct  18.

A function retained by the common mutant CLN3 protein is responsible for the 
late onset of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.

Kitzm√ºller C(1), Haines RL, Codlin S, Cutler DF, Mole SE.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, UCL Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, UK.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are common neurodegenerative disorders 
of childhood and are classified as lysosomal storage diseases since affected 
cells exhibit lysosomes containing ceroid and lipofuscin-like material. CLN3 is 
the most widely conserved NCL gene, suggesting that it has a basic eukaryotic 
cell function; its loss might be expected to cause the earliest onset and/or 
most severe disease. However, mutations in CLN3 are linked to juvenile NCL 
(JNCL), the latest onset and mildest form of NCL in children. We sought to 
explain this paradox. Almost all patients with JNCL are homozygous or 
heterozygous for an intragenic 1 kb deletion within CLN3, hitherto presumed to 
be a null mutation. We hypothesized that the 1 kb mutation may allow CLN3 
residual function. We confirmed the presence of CLN3 transcripts in JNCL patient 
cells. When RNA silencing was used to deplete these transcripts in cells from 
JNCL patients, the lysosomes significantly increased in size, confirming the 
presence of functional protein in these cells. Consistently, overexpression of 
mutant CLN3 transcript caused lysosomes to decrease in size. We modelled the 
JNCL mutant transcripts and those corresponding to mouse models for Cln3 in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and confirmed that most transcripts retained 
significant function as we predicted. Therefore, we concluded that the common 
mutant CLN3 protein does indeed retain significant function and that JNCL is a 
mutation-specific disease phenotype. This finding has important consequences for 
recognition and diagnosis of disease caused by mutations in CLN3 and for the 
development of therapy for JNCL.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm306
PMID: 17947292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]