1. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 1;179(9):6097-106. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.9.6097.

Tobacco smoking inhibits expression of proinflammatory cytokines and activation 
of IL-1R-associated kinase, p38, and NF-kappaB in alveolar macrophages 
stimulated with TLR2 and TLR4 agonists.

Chen H(1), Cowan MJ, Hasday JD, Vogel SN, Medvedev AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Tobacco smoking has been associated with impaired pulmonary functions and 
increased incidence of infections; however, mechanisms that underlie these 
phenomena are poorly understood. In this study, we examined whether smokers' 
alveolar macrophages (AM) exhibit impaired sensing of bacterial components via 
TLR2 and TLR4 and determined the effect of smoking on expression levels of TLR2, 
TLR4 and coreceptors, and activation of signaling intermediates. Smokers' AMs 
exhibited reduced gene expression and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines 
(TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6) and chemokines (RANTES and IL-8) upon stimulation 
with TLR2 and TLR4 agonists, 
S-[2,3-bis(palmitoyloxy)-(2-RS)-propyl]-N-palmitoyl-(R)-Cys-(S)-Ser-Lys4-OH 
trihydrochloride (Pam(3)Cys), and LPS, whereas expression of anti-inflammatory 
cytokines (IL-10 and IL-1 receptor antagonist) was not affected. TLR3 activation 
with polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid led to comparable or even higher cytokine 
responses in smokers' AMs, indicating that smoking-induced suppression does not 
affect all TLRs. Comparable expression of cytokines and chemokines was detected 
in PBMC and purified monocytes obtained from smokers and nonsmokers, 
demonstrating that the suppressive effect of smoking is restricted to the lung. 
TLR2/4-inducible IL-1R-associated kinase-1 (IRAK-1) and p38 phosphorylation and 
NF-kappaB activation was suppressed in smokers' AMs, whereas TLR2, TLR4, CD14, 
MD-2 mRNA levels, and TLR4 protein expression were not altered. These data 
suggest that changes in expression and/or activities of signaling intermediates 
at the postreceptor level account for smoking-induced immunosuppression. Thus, 
exposure of AMs to tobacco smoke induces a hyporesponsive state similar to 
endotoxin tolerance as manifested by inhibited TLR2/4-induced expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and impaired activation of IRAK-1, p38, 
and NF-kappaB, resulting in suppressed expression of proinflammatory mediators.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.179.9.6097
PMID: 17947684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]