1. J Bone Miner Res. 1991 Oct;6(10):1051-7. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.5650061006.

Vitamin D analogs with low affinity for the vitamin D binding protein: enhanced 
in vitro and decreased in vivo activity.

Bouillon R(1), Allewaert K, Xiang DZ, Tan BK, van Baelen H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium voor Experimentele Geneeskunde en Endocrinologie, Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

The affinity of 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1 alpha,25-(OH)2D3] and analogs 
with side-chain modifications [MC 903 or calcipotriol, MC 1147 or 24,24-dihomo-1 
alpha,25-(OH)2D3 and 1,25-(OH)2-16ene-23yne-D3] for the vitamin D receptor and 
the serum vitamin D binding protein (DBP) were compared. The affinity of MC 903 
for the receptor from chick and rat duodenum or from human peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells or HL-60 cells varied between 60 and 100% relative to the 
affinity of 1,25-(OH)2D3. The relative affinity of 1,25-(OH)2-16ene-23yne-D3 and 
MC 1147 varied for the same receptors between 45-70 and 3.5-25%, respectively. 
The relative affinity of MC 903 for human DBP was 30-fold decreased, whereas the 
two other analogs did not bind to DBP at all even in more than 1000-fold excess. 
The in vitro biologic activity of 1 alpha,25-(OH)2D3 on 
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated normal human lymphocyte proliferation was markedly 
inhibited by the addition of physiologic amounts of DBP to the cell culture 
medium. No such inhibition was observed when MC 903 or 1147 was evaluated 
similarly. DBP therefore reversed the rank order of the in vitro potency of 
these analogs. Intramuscular injections for 10 consecutive days to vitamin 
D-deficient chicks demonstrated a greater than or equal to 100-fold lower 
biologic activity of MC 903, MC 1147, and 1,25-(OH)2-16ene-23yne-D3 compared to 
that of 1 alpha,25-(OH)2D3 as evaluated by serum calcium and osteocalcin 
concentrations, as well as by duodenal calbindin D28K and bone calcium 
content.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.5650061006
PMID: 1796753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]