1. J Lipid Res. 2008 Feb;49(2):369-75. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700399-JLR200. Epub 2007
 Nov 6.

Protective effect of an endothelial lipase gene variant on coronary artery 
disease in a Chinese population.

Tang NP(1), Wang LS, Yang L, Zhou B, Gu HJ, Sun QM, Cong RH, Zhu HJ, Wang B.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

The aim of the present study was to assess the influence of the endothelial 
lipase (EL) gene 584C/T variant, which results in a change at codon 111 of the 
EL gene from threonine to isoleucine, on the risk of coronary artery disease 
(CAD) in a Chinese population. The study population consisted of 265 CAD 
patients and 265 age- and sex-matched control subjects. The T allele frequency 
was significantly lower among CAD patients than among control subjects (18.3% 
vs. 29.8%; P < 0.001). In both the CAD and control groups, the T allele carriers 
had higher high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels than homozygote C 
allele carriers. In a multiple logistic regression model adjusted for age, sex, 
body mass index, smoking, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and low 
density lipoprotein cholesterol, a significantly decreased risk of developing 
CAD was found in subjects carrying a variant CT or TT genotype (odds ratio = 
0.496, 95% confidence interval = 0.341-0.723; P < 0.001), and the significance 
persisted after further adjustment for HDL-C. In conclusion, our observation 
that the EL 584T allele was associated with protection from CAD in this Chinese 
population replicates the findings in a Japanese study, which found a similar 
association of this allele with acute myocardial infarction, independent of 
HDL-C levels.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M700399-JLR200
PMID: 17986713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]