1. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2007 Dec;47(6):477-82. doi: 
10.1111/j.1479-828X.2007.00783.x.

Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene polymorphism in pre-eclampsia: a 
pilot study in North India.

Bhatnagar S(1), Bhattacharjee J, Vaid M, Madan T, Trivedi SS, Sarma PU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi, India. 
sonu123bhatnagar@yahoo.co.in

BACKGROUND: Pre-eclampsia is one of the most frequent complications of 
pregnancy, however, little is known about its aetiology.
AIMS: The objective of this study was to investigate the association between 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) genotypes and pre-eclampsia. We also 
measured the concentrations of tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), nitric 
oxide (NO) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) in patients with pre-eclampsia to 
evaluate their relations to the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) observed.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study included 30 pregnant women with 
pre-eclampsia and 30 healthy pregnant women. They were screened at 28th, 36th 
weeks of gestation and just after delivery (within 48 h), and their blood 
samples were analysed for NO, SOD, TNF-alpha and iNOS gene polymorphism.
RESULTS: Patients with pre-eclampsia at 36 weeks gestation showed significantly 
increased serum NO levels (P=0.007), whereas SOD activity was decreased 
significantly (P=0.004). A doublefold increase was observed in TNF-alpha levels 
at 36 weeks in patients with pre-eclampsia (P=0.003) which decreased 
significantly (P=0.001) after delivery. A total of four SNPs were observed, of 
which two (G300A exon 8 and G274T exon 16) showed statistically significant 
association with pre-eclampsia. When compared, G274T exon 16 SNP also showed 
association with TNF-alpha levels and SOD activity in pre-eclamptic patients.
CONCLUSION: As pre-eclampsia is a disease of multifactorial aetiopathology, NO, 
TNF-alpha, SOD activity and NOS2A polymorphism might play an intermingled role 
in its development.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-828X.2007.00783.x
PMID: 17991113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]