1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug 28;87(32):2285-8.

[Effect of calpain 1 on structural remodeling and contractile dysfunction in 
atrial fibrillation: experiment with dogs].

[Article in Chinese]

Xue HJ(1), Li WM, Li Y, Gong YT, Sheng L, Zhang L, Chu S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Clinical Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the causal relationship between calpain activation and atrial 
structural changes during atrial fibrillation (AF).
METHODS: The tip of a spiral mono-polar pacing lead was fixed to the right 
atrial appendages of 15 dogs randomly divided into 3 equal groups: calpain 
inhibitor group, undergoing continuous pacing with the impulse of 600 beats/min 
for 3 weeks and intravenous injection of N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-Met (ALLM), a calpain 
inhibitor for 3 weeks; control group, undergoing continuous pacing and 
intravenous injection of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; and sham operation group, 
given DMSO injection without pacing. Ultrasonography was used to observe the 
changes of the structures of left atrium and left atrial appendage and the heart 
function as well. Specimens of atrial muscles were obtained. Calpain 1 activity 
was detected by Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-7-amino-4-methyl-coumarin method. HE 
staining was conducted to observe the myolysis. Western blotting was used to 
detect the protein expression of troponin I (TnI) and myosin.
RESULTS: The left atrial ejection fraction (LAEF) of the ALLM group was (41 +/- 
6)%, significantly higher than that of the control group [(34 +/- 9)%, P < 
0.05]. The left atrial appendage ejection fraction (LAAEF) of the ALLM group was 
(41 +/- 6)%, significantly higher than that of the control group [(35 +/- 6)%, P 
< 0.05]. Myolysis was extensive in the control group [(71.5 +/- 10.2)%], 
relatively rare in the ALLM group [(12.3 +/- 16.5)%], and was not seen in the 
sham operation group, with significantly differences among the 3 groups (all P < 
0.01). The calpain 1 activity was positively correlated with the degree of 
myolysis (r(s) = 0.90 961, P < 0.01). The TnI level of the control group was (43 
+/- 12)% that of the sham operation group (P = 0.001), the TnI level of the ALLM 
group was (51 +/- 11)% that of the sham operation group (P = 0.002) and was 
significant higher than that of the control group (P = 0.01). The level of 
myosin of the control group was (51 +/- 11)% that of the sham operation group (P 
= 0.002), and that of the ALLM group was (149 +/- 33)% that of the control group 
(P = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: Activation of and upregulation of expression of calpain participate 
in the structural remodeling of left atrial cardiac muscle and contractile 
dysfunction. Calpain inhibitor suppresses the increased calpain activity and 
reverses the structural remodeling of sustained atrial fibrillation. Calpain 
inhibition may therefore provide a possibility for therapeutic intervention in 
AF.

PMID: 18001554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]