1. Res Vet Sci. 2008 Oct;85(2):359-67. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2007.10.007. Epub 2007
 Nov 26.

Molecular characterization of the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase gene of porcine 
rubulavirus isolates associated with neurological disorders in fattening and 
adult pigs.

Sánchez-Betancourt JI(1), Santos-López G, Alonso R, Doporto JM, Ramírez-Mendoza 
H, Mendoza S, Hernández J, Reyes-Leyva J, Trujillo ME.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal Cerdos, Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y 
Zootecnia, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Av. Universidad No. 
3000, Col. Copilco, Coyoacán, 04510 México, D.F., Mexico.

"Blue eye disease" is a viral infection of swine endemic in Mexico, which 
produces fatal encephalitis accompanied by respiratory signs and corneal opacity 
in suckling piglets. An atypical blue eye disease outbreak presented high rates 
of neurological signs in fattening and adult pigs from 2000 to 2003. In order to 
identify the basis of increased neurovirulence, the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase 
(HN) gene of several porcine rubulavirus isolates were sequenced and compared 
with that of La Piedad Michoacan virus and other isolates that did not produce 
neurological disorders in weaned pigs. Nine amino acid mutations distinguished 
the high neurovirulent PAC6-PAC9 viruses, whereas five mutations characterized 
the low neurovirulent PAC2 and PAC3 viruses. HN protein three-dimensional models 
showed that the main conformation and functional domains were preserved, 
although substitutions A223T and A291D occurred in PAC2 and PAC3 viruses, as 
well as A511K and E514K presented in PAC6-PAC9 viruses considerably modified the 
properties of the HN protein surface. The increased positive charge of the HN 
protein of PAC6-PAC9 viruses seems to be associated with their increased 
neurovirulence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2007.10.007
PMID: 18031776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]