1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Feb 2;580(1-2):43-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.058. 
Epub 2007 Oct 30.

5-hydroxytryptamine1B receptor and triptan response in migraine, lack of 
association with common polymorphisms.

Velati D(1), Viana M, Cresta S, Mantegazza P, Testa L, Bettucci D, Rinaldi M, 
Sances G, Tassorelli C, Nappi G, Canonico PL, Martignoni E, Genazzani AA.

Author information:
(1)DiSCAFF and DFB Center, Via Bovio, 6, 28100 Novara, Italy.

Triptans mediate vasoconstriction of meningeal vessels via stimulation of 
vascular 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(1B) receptors. These drugs are recommended 
for acute treatment in patients with moderate-to-severe migraine attacks and in 
those patients with mild-to-moderate headache that are not controlled adequately 
by other agents. Yet, approximately 25% of all migraine users and 40% of all 
attacks do not respond to triptan treatment. Among the hypothesis to explain 
this is the possibility that genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms that alter 
the receptor, for example changing the transcriptional rate and therefore the 
amount of target protein might change the clinical response to these drugs. In 
the present contribution, we therefore decided to evaluate whether single 
nucleotide polymorphisms on the 5-HT(1B) gene might contribute to 
inter-individual variability in clinical responses to triptans. Two 
polymorphisms in the promoter region of the 5-HT(1B) receptor (T-261G and 
A-161T) and the synonymous variation G861C in the coding region were genotyped 
by restriction fragment length polymorphism in 105 migraine patients. In our 
sample population, 71% of patients responded to triptans. Allelic and diplotype 
frequencies were not significantly different between responders and 
non-responders. On the other hand, extrapolation of in vitro data on promoter 
activity would suggest that patients with higher copy number of receptors 
respond slightly better. Our data therefore do not support the involvement of 
5-HT(1B) single nucleotide polymorphisms in mediating the inter-individual 
variability to triptans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.10.058
PMID: 18035351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]