1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2007 Dec;49(12):894-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00894.x.

Neurological complications of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome.

Yoon G(1), Rosenberg J, Blaser S, Rauen KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Canada. grace.yoon@utoronto.ca

Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a multiple congenital anomaly disorder 
characterized by craniofacial dysmorphia, ectodermal abnormalities, congenital 
heart defects, and developmental and growth delay. Neurological complications 
associated with CFC remain to be clearly defined. Recent discovery of causative 
mutations in genes of the MAPK pathway (BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2) now permit 
accurate molecular diagnosis of CFC. The aim of the study was to characterize 
neurological features of participants with molecularly-confirmed CFC. Medical 
records, and laboratory and imaging data were reviewed for 39 mutation-positive 
individuals with CFC. Participants with a clinical diagnosis of CFC but a 
negative result on mutation screening of the BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2 genes were 
excluded from the study. Mean age of participants was 9 years 4 months (range 18 
mo-24 y); there were 24 females and 15 males. Mutations in B RA F were present 
in 32 participants, MEK1 in five, and MEK2 in two participants. Hypotonia, motor 
delay, speech delay, and learning disability were universally present in this 
cohort. Macrocephaly was present in 13 participants, ptosis in 11, strabismus in 
14, and nystagmus in 11 of the 22 participants who underwent a neurological 
exam. Corticospinal tract findings were present in seven participants. 
Ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus was present in 14 of 32 participants who 
underwent brain imaging. Other findings on magnetic resonance imaging included 
prominent Virchow-Robin spaces (n=6), abnormal myelination (n=4), and structural 
anomalies (n=5). Seizures were present in 15 participants. No specific 
genotype-phenotype correlation was observed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2007.00894.x
PMID: 18039235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]