1. PLoS One. 2007 Nov 28;2(11):e1237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001237.

Tumor spectrum, tumor latency and tumor incidence of the Pten-deficient mice.

Lu TL(1), Chang JL, Liang CC, You LR, Chen CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National 
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Pten functionally acts as a tumor suppressor gene. Lately, 
tissue-specific ablation of Pten gene in mice has elucidated the role of Pten in 
different tumor progression models. However, a temporally controlled Pten loss 
in all adult tissues to examine susceptibility of various tissues to 
Pten-deficient tumorigenesis has not been addressed yet. Our goal was to explore 
the genesis of Pten-deficient malignancies in multiple tissue lineages of the 
adult mouse.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We utilized an inducible Cre/loxP system to delete Pten 
exon 5 in the systemic organs of ROSA26 (R26)-CreER(T);Pten(fx/fx) mice. On 
reaching 45 weeks 4OHT-induced Pten loss, we found that the 
R26-CreER(T);Pten(fx/fx) mice developed a variety of malignancies. Overall tumor 
mean latency was 17 weeks in the Pten-deficient mice. Interestingly, mutant 
females developed malignancies more quickly at 10 approximately 11 weeks 
compared with a tumor latency of 21 weeks for mutant males. Lymphoma incidence 
(76.9% in females; 40.0% in males) was higher than the other malignancies found 
in the mutant mice. Mutant males developed prostate (20.0%), intestinal cancer 
(35.0%) and squamous cell carcinoma (10.0%), whereas the mutant females 
developed squamous cell carcinoma (15.4%) and endometrial cancer (46.1%) in 
addition to lymphomas. Furthermore, we tested the pharmacological inhibition of 
the PTEN downstream effectors using LY294002 on Pten-deficient prostate 
hyperplasia. Our data revealed that, indeed, the prostate hyperplasia resulting 
from the induced Pten loss was significantly suppressed by LY294002 (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Through monitoring a variety of Pten-deficient tumor formation, our 
results revealed that the lymphoid lineages and the epithelium of the prostate, 
endometrium, intestine and epidermis are highly susceptible to tumorigenesis 
after the Pten gene is excised. Therefore, this R26-CreER(T); Pten(fx/fx) mouse 
model may provide an entry point for understanding the role of Pten in the 
tumorigenesis of different organs and extend the search for potential 
therapeutic approaches to prevent Pten-deficient malignancies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001237
PMCID: PMC2077932
PMID: 18043744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.