1. Diabetologia. 2008 Mar;51(3):458-63. doi: 10.1007/s00125-007-0887-6. Epub 2007
 Nov 27.

Replication of the association between variants in WFS1 and risk of type 2 
diabetes in European populations.

Franks PW(1), Rolandsson O, Debenham SL, Fawcett KA, Payne F, Dina C, Froguel P, 
Mohlke KL, Willer C, Olsson T, Wareham NJ, Hallmans G, Barroso I, Sandhu MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University Hospital, 
Umeå, Sweden. paul.franks@medicin.umu.se

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2008 Mar;51(3):523.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2008 Mar;51(3):391-3. doi: 10.1007/s00125-007-0920-9.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations at the gene encoding wolframin (WFS1) cause Wolfram 
syndrome, a rare neurological condition. Associations between single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) at WFS1 and type 2 diabetes have recently been reported. 
Thus, our aim was to replicate those associations in a northern Swedish 
case-control study of type 2 diabetes. We also performed a meta-analysis of 
published and previously unpublished data from Sweden, Finland and France, to 
obtain updated summary effect estimates.
METHODS: Four WFS1 SNPs (rs10010131, rs6446482, rs752854 and rs734312 [H611R]) 
were genotyped in a type 2 diabetes case-control study (n = 1,296/1,412) of 
Swedish adults. Logistic regression was used to assess the association between 
each WFS1 SNP and type 2 diabetes, following adjustment for age, sex and BMI. We 
then performed a meta-analysis of 11 studies of type 2 diabetes, comprising up 
to 14,139 patients and 16,109 controls, to obtain a summary effect estimate for 
the WFS1 variants.
RESULTS: In the northern Swedish study, the minor allele at rs752854 was 
associated with reduced type 2 diabetes risk [odds ratio (OR) 0.85, 95% CI 
0.75-0.96, p=0.010]. Borderline statistical associations were observed for the 
remaining SNPs. The meta-analysis of the four independent replication studies 
for SNP rs10010131 and correlated variants showed evidence for statistical 
association (OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.82-0.93, p=4.5 x 10(-5)). In an updated 
meta-analysis of all 11 studies, strong evidence of statistical association was 
also observed (OR 0.89, 95% CI 0.86-0.92; p=4.9 x 10(-11)).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In this study of WFS1 variants and type 2 diabetes 
risk, we have replicated the previously reported associations between SNPs at 
this locus and the risk of type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-007-0887-6
PMCID: PMC2670195
PMID: 18040659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]