1. Virol J. 2007 Nov 28;4:129. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-129.

Interspecies and intraspecies transmission of triple reassortant H3N2 influenza 
A viruses.

Yassine HM(1), Al-Natour MQ, Lee CW, Saif YM.

Author information:
(1)Food Animal Health Research Program, Ohio Agricultural Research and 
Development Center, The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, USA. 
yassine.2@osu.edu

The triple reassortant H3N2 viruses were isolated for the first time from pigs 
in 1998 and are known to be endemic in swine and turkey populations in the 
United States. In 2004, we isolated two H3N2 triple reassortant viruses from two 
turkey breeder flocks in Ohio and Illinois. Infected hens showed no clinical 
signs, but experienced a complete cessation of egg production. In this study, we 
evaluated three triple reassortant H3N2 isolates of turkey origin and one 
isolate of swine origin for their transmission between swine and turkeys. 
Although all 4 viruses tested share high genetic similarity in all 8 genes, only 
the Ohio strain (A/turkey/Ohio/313053/04) was shown to transmit efficiently both 
ways between swine and turkeys. One isolate, A/turkey/North Carolina/03, was 
able to transmit from pigs to turkeys but not vice versa. Neither of the other 
two viruses transmitted either way. Sequence analysis of the HA1 gene of the 
Ohio strain showed one amino acid change (D to A) at residue 190 of the receptor 
binding domain upon transmission from turkeys to pigs. The Ohio virus was then 
tested for intraspecies transmission in three different avian species. The virus 
was shown to replicate and transmit among turkeys, replicate but does not 
transmit among chickens, and did not replicate in ducks. Identifying viruses 
with varying inter- and intra-species transmission potential should be useful 
for further studies on the molecular basis of interspecies transmission.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-422X-4-129
PMCID: PMC2228287
PMID: 18045494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]