1. J Clin Immunol. 2008 May;28(3):207-13. doi: 10.1007/s10875-007-9156-1.

I kappa B alpha promoter polymorphisms in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Lin CH(1), Wang SC, Ou TT, Li RN, Tsai WC, Liu HW, Yen JH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical 
University Hospital, 100 Zihyou 1st Road, Kaohsiung City 807, Taiwan.

To investigate the associations of IkappaBalpha gene polymorphisms with the 
development and clinical manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
110 patients with SLE and 120 unrelated healthy controls were enrolled in this 
study. The IkappaBalpha -881 A/G, -826 C/T, -550 A/T, -519 C/T, and -297 C/T 
polymorphisms were determined by the polymerase chain reaction/reaction fragment 
length polymorphism method. The genotype frequency of IkappaBalpha -826 C/T in 
the patients with SLE was significantly higher than that of the controls (p = 
0.003, OR = 2.2, 95% CI = 1.3-3.9). The SLE patients also have significantly 
higher carriage rate of IkappaBalpha -826 T than the controls (p = 0.01, OR = 
2.0, 95% CI = 1.2-3.4). We also found that the estimated haplotype frequency of 
IkappaBalpha -881A -826T -550A -519C -297C was significantly increased in the 
patients with SLE in comparison with that of the controls. This study also 
demonstrated that the association of IkappaBalpha -826 T with SLE was 
independent of HLA-DR15, which is associated with susceptibility to SLE in 
Taiwan. Moreover, a synergistic effect could also be found between IkappaBalpha 
-826 T and HLA-DR15. IkappaBalpha -826 T is associated with the development of 
SLE in Taiwan. The IkappaBalpha -881A -826T -550A -519C -297C haplotype is also 
associated with susceptibility to SLE. This study also demonstrated that 
IkappaBalpha -881G was associated with the occurrence of vasculitis in SLE 
patients. IkappaBalpha -550T might be a protective factor for the development of 
malar rash.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-007-9156-1
PMID: 18071880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]