1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Dec;120(6):1332-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.09.037.

Filaggrin mutations confer susceptibility to atopic dermatitis but not to 
asthma.

Rogers AJ(1), CeledÃ³n JC, Lasky-Su JA, Weiss ST, Raby BA.

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 May;121(5):1294-5; author reply 1295-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2008.02.039.

BACKGROUND: Loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene (FLG) have been 
strongly associated with atopic dermatitis and allergic phenotypes in multiple 
populations. The role of these mutations in the development of asthma is less 
clear, particularly in patients who do not have coincident atopic dermatitis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether FLG mutations are associated with asthma or 
asthma-related intermediate phenotypes.
METHODS: We genotyped 2 loss-of-function FLG mutations (R501X and 2282del4) in 
white children (age 5-12 years) with mild to moderate asthma in the Childhood 
Asthma Management Program. We assessed the relationship of these mutations to 
asthma and allergy-related phenotypes in children with and without atopic 
dermatitis using both population-based and family-based tests of association.
RESULTS: Nearly 1/3 (185/646) of the participating children had atopic 
dermatitis. Although strong associations were observed between FLG mutations and 
atopic dermatitis (odds ratio, 2.4; P = 7.6 x 10(-5)) and between the mutations 
and total serum IgE level (P = .009 in the atopic dermatitis cohort), no 
association was noted with either asthma or asthma-related phenotypes, including 
FEV(1), FEV(1)/forced vital capacity, and methacholine PC(20) (P > .1 for all 
tests).
CONCLUSION: Although FLG loss-of-function mutations are consistently associated 
with atopic dermatitis and other allergic phenotypes, these mutations do not 
appear to influence either susceptibility to asthma or asthma severity 
phenotypes.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Filaggrin mutations that predispose to atopic dermatitis 
do not modulate the asthma phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2007.09.037
PMID: 18073125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]