1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):5004-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709357200. Epub
2007  Dec 14.

Specific citrullination causes assembly of a globular S100A3 homotetramer: a 
putative Ca2+ modulator matures human hair cuticle.

Kizawa K(1), Takahara H, Troxler H, Kleinert P, Mochida U, Heizmann CW.

Author information:
(1)Basic Research Laboratory, Kanebo Cosmetics Inc., 5-3-28 Kotobuki-cho, 
Odawara 250-0002, Japan. kizawa.kenji@kanebocos.co.jp

S100A3 is a unique member of the Ca2+-binding S100 protein family with the 
highest cysteine content and affinity for Zn2+. This protein is highly expressed 
in the differentiating cuticular cells within the hair follicle and organized 
into mature hair cuticles. Previous studies suggest a close association of 
S100A3 with epithelial differentiation, leading to hair shaft formation, but its 
molecular function is still unknown. By two-dimensional PAGE-Western blot 
analyses using a modified citrulline antibody, we discovered that more than half 
of the arginine residues of native S100A3 are progressively converted to 
citrullines by Ca2+-dependent peptidylarginine deiminases. Confocal 
immunofluorescent microscopy showed that the cytoplasmic S100A3 within the 
cuticular layer is mostly co-localized with the type III isoform of 
peptidylarginine deiminase (PAD3) but not with PAD1. Recombinant PAD1 and PAD2 
are capable of converting all 4 arginines in recombinant S100A3, whereas PAD3 
specifically converts only Arg-51 into citrulline. Gel filtration analyses 
showed that either enzymatic conversion of Arg-51 in S100A3 to citrulline or its 
mutational substitution with alanine (R51A) promotes a homotetramer assembly. 
Fluorescent titration of R51A suggested that its potential Ca2+ binding property 
increased during tetramerization. A prototype structural model of the globular 
Ca2+-bound S100A3 tetramer with citrulline residues is presented. High 
concentrations of S100A3 homotetramer might provide the millimolar level of Ca2+ 
required for hair cuticular barrier formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M709357200
PMID: 18083705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]