1. Pediatr Res. 2008 Feb;63(2):211-6. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31815ed62b.

Mutational analysis of the pro-opiomelanocortin gene in French obese children 
led to the identification of a novel deleterious heterozygous mutation located 
in the alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone domain.

Dubern B(1), Lubrano-Berthelier C, Mencarelli M, Ersoy B, Frelut ML, Bougl√© D, 
Costes B, Simon C, Tounian P, Vaisse C, Clement K.

Author information:
(1)Center of Research on Human Nutrition Ile de France, 75004 Paris, France.

The pro-opiomelanocotin (POMC) plays a key role in body weight regulation, where 
its derived peptides mediate leptin action via the hypothalamic melanocortin 4 
receptor (MC4R). The pathogenic effects of POMC mutations have been challenged 
in obesity. Our aim was to assess the relevance of POMC mutations in a cohort of 
French obese and nonobese children. Direct sequencing of the POMC gene was 
performed in 322 obese and 363 control unrelated children. Functional studies 
for the novel Phe144Leu mutation included the response to alpha-melanocyte 
stimulating hormone (alphaMSH) and a competitive binding assay. POMC mutations 
were identified in 3.72% of obese [95% confidence interval (CI): 1.66-5.80] and 
2.20% of control (95% CI: 0.69-3.71) subjects. The novel mutation located in the 
alphaMSH region of the POMC gene (Phe144Leu) was found in one obese child and 
was transmitted by the obese father. Functional studies showed that MC4R 
activation in response to Leu144alphaMSH was almost completely abolished due to 
a dramatically altered binding of Leu144alphaMSH to MC4R. The frequency of POMC 
mutations is not significantly different between obese and control children in 
our cohort. The novel heterozygous mutation Phe144Leu leading to the absence of 
melanocortin signaling was associated with early-onset obesity suggesting its 
pathogenic role.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31815ed62b
PMID: 18091355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]