1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 26;104(52):20990-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0710527105. Epub 2007 Dec 19.

Mutation of an A-kinase-anchoring protein causes long-QT syndrome.

Chen L(1), Marquardt ML, Tester DJ, Sampson KJ, Ackerman MJ, Kass RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs) recruit signaling molecules and present them 
to downstream targets to achieve efficient spatial and temporal control of their 
phosphorylation state. In the heart, sympathetic nervous system (SNS) regulation 
of cardiac action potential duration (APD), mediated by beta-adrenergic receptor 
(betaAR) activation, requires assembly of AKAP9 (Yotiao) with the I(Ks) 
potassium channel alpha subunit (KCNQ1). KCNQ1 mutations that disrupt this 
complex cause type 1 long-QT syndrome (LQT1), one of the potentially lethal 
heritable arrhythmia syndromes. Here, we report identification of (i) regions on 
Yotiao critical to its binding to KCNQ1 and (ii) a single putative LQTS-causing 
mutation (S1570L) in AKAP9 (Yotiao) localized to the KCNQ1 binding domain in 
1/50 (2%) subjects with a clinically robust phenotype for LQTS but absent in 
1,320 reference alleles. The inherited S1570L mutation reduces the interaction 
between KCNQ1 and Yotiao, reduces the cAMP-induced phosphorylation of the 
channel, eliminates the functional response of the I(Ks) channel to cAMP, and 
prolongs the action potential in a computational model of the ventricular 
cardiocyte. These reconstituted cellular consequences of the inherited 
S1570L-Yotiao mutation are consistent with delayed repolarization of the 
ventricular action potential observed in the affected siblings. Thus, we have 
demonstrated a link between genetic perturbations in AKAP and human disease in 
general and AKAP9 and LQTS in particular.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0710527105
PMCID: PMC2409254
PMID: 18093912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.