1. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Jun 1;63(11):1039-46. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.10.024.  Epub 2007 Dec 27.

The CHRNA5/A3/B4 gene cluster variability as an important determinant of early 
alcohol and tobacco initiation in young adults.

Schlaepfer IR(1), Hoft NR, Collins AC, Corley RP, Hewitt JK, Hopfer CJ, Lessem 
JM, McQueen MB, Rhee SH, Ehringer MA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Behavioral Genetics, Department of Integrative Physiology, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Isabel.Schlaepfer@colorado.edu

Erratum in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2011 May 1;69(9):905-6.

BACKGROUND: One potential site of convergence of the nicotine and alcohol 
actions is the family of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Our 
study examines the genetic association between variations in the genomic region 
containing the CHRNA5, A3, and B4 gene cluster (A5A3B4) and several phenotypes 
of alcohol and tobacco use in an ethnically diverse young adult sample. 
Significant results were then replicated in a separate adult 
population-representative sample.
METHODS: In a selected sample, nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were 
tested for association with various nicotine and alcohol phenotypes, including 
age of initiation and measures of frequency, quantity, and subjective responses 
to the substances. Analysis was conducted with the statistical genetics program 
WHAP in the full sample (1075 subjects) including ethnicities as covariates and 
within each ethnic group sub-sample. Replication of the significant results in a 
separate population-based sample was carried out with the PBAT statistical 
genetics program.
RESULTS: Two linked SNPs (rs8023462 and rs1948) located in a conserved region of 
the A5A3B4 gene cluster significantly predicted early age of initiation for 
tobacco with a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.35 (95% confidence interval [CI]1.08-1.70) 
for the CC genotype of rs8023462 and a HR of 1.29 (95% CI 1.01-1.63) for the TT 
genotype of rs1948 [corrected]. These findings were then replicated in a 
separate population-representative sample, showing rs1948 and rs8023462 to be 
associated with age of initiation for both tobacco and alcohol use (p < .01 and 
p < .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Variations in A5A3B4 genes might influence behaviors that promote 
early age of experimentation with drugs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.10.024
PMCID: PMC2526976
PMID: 18163978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]