1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5831-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709680200. Epub
2007  Dec 28.

p204 protein is a novel modulator of ras activity.

Ding B(1), Lengyel P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8024, USA.

The murine p200 family protein, p204, modulates cell proliferation and tissue 
differentiation. Many of its activities are exerted in the nucleus. However, in 
cardiac myocytes, p204 accumulated in the cytoplasm. A yeast two-hybrid assay 
revealed a p204-cytoplasmic Ras protein interaction. This was confirmed (i) by 
coimmunoprecipitation of p204 with Ras in mouse heart extract and with 
endogenous or ectopic H-Ras and K-Ras in cell lysates as well as (ii) by binding 
of purified H-Ras-GTP to purified p204 in vitro. p204 inhibited (i) the cleavage 
of RasGTP to RasGDP by RasGAP; (ii) the binding to RasGTP of Raf-1, 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and Ral-GDS, effectors of Ras signaling; and 
(iii) activation by the Ras pathway of the phosphorylation and thus activation 
of downstream targets (e.g. MEK, Akt, and p38 MAPK). Oncogenic Ras expression 
triggered the phosphorylation and translocation of p204 from the nucleus to the 
cytoplasm. This is expected to increase the interaction between the two 
proteins. Translocation triggered by Ras oncoprotein was blocked by the LY294002 
inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Ras did not promote phosphorylation 
or translocation to the cytoplasm of mutated p204 in which serine 179 was 
replaced by alanine. p204 overexpression inhibited the anchorage-independent 
proliferation of cells expressing Ras(Q61L) oncoprotein. Ras oncoprotein 
triggered in MEF3T3 cells the rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton and the 
enhancement of cell migration through a membrane. Overexpression of p204 
inhibited both. Ras oncoprotein or activated, wild-type Ras was described to 
increase Egr-1 transcription factor expression. We report that a sequence in the 
gene encoding p204 bound Egr-1, and Egr-1 activated p204 expression. Ras 
oncoprotein or activated wild-type Ras increased the expression in 3T3 cells of 
p204 together with that of Egr-1. Furthermore, the activation of expression of a 
single copy of K-ras oncogene in cultured murine embryonic cells induced the 
expression of a high level of p204 as well as its distribution between the 
nuclei and the cytoplasm. Thus, p204 may serve as a negative feedback inhibitor 
of Ras activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M709680200
PMID: 18165224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]