1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Sep 5;147B(6):914-7. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30682.

Association of DAO and G72(DAOA)/G30 genes with bipolar affective disorder.

Prata D(1), Breen G, Osborne S, Munro J, St Clair D, Collier D.

Author information:
(1)Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, 
London, UK.

There is growing evidence of partial aetiological overlap between schizophrenia 
and bipolar disorder (BP) from linkage analysis, genetic epidemiology and 
molecular genetics studies. In the present study we investigated whether 
individual polymorphisms or haplotypes of the DAO and G72(DAOA)/G30 genes, which 
have been previously implicated in schizophrenia, are also associated with 
bipolar disorder. For each gene, we genotyped 213 cases and 197 controls for 
SNPs previously associated with schizophrenia: rs2111902 (MDAAO-4), rs3918346 
(MDAAO-5), rs3741775 (MDAAO-6) and rs3918347 (MDAAO-7) in DAO and rs746187 (M7), 
rs3916966 (M13), rs2391191 (M15) and rs3916972 (M25) in G72. Although none of 
the individual SNPs in these genes reached statistical significance, we found 
haplotype wise associations with bipolar disorder for both genes. These included 
a two-SNP haplotype in DAO (rs2111902-A and rs3918346-T; global P = 0.003, 
individual P = 0.002, Z = 3.1) and a two-SNP haplotype for G72(DAOA)/G30 
(rs746187-G and rs3916972-G; global P = 0.05; individual P = 0.005, Z = 2.81). 
However, we found no evidence for an epistatic interaction between the SNPs 
and/or haplotypes of the two genes. In summary, our findings provide some 
support for the individual involvement of DAO and G72(DAOA)/G30 in the etiology 
of bipolar disorder.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30682
PMID: 18165970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]