1. J Immunol. 2008 Jan 15;180(2):1060-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.2.1060.

Polymorphisms in the CD3Z gene influence TCRzeta expression in systemic lupus 
erythematosus patients and healthy controls.

Gorman CL(1), Russell AI, Zhang Z, Cunninghame Graham D, Cope AP, Vyse TJ.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, Hammersmith Hospital, UK. c.gorman@imperial.ac.uk

TCRzeta (CD247) functions as an amplification module in the TCR signaling 
cascade and is essential for assembly and surface expression of the TCR/CD3 
complex. The TCRzeta-chain is down-regulated in many chronic infectious and 
inflammatory diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). It is 
unclear whether reduced TCRzeta expression is a cause or a consequence of 
chronic inflammatory responses. We have addressed this question by adopting a 
combined genetic and functional approach. We analyzed TCRzeta protein expression 
using a FACS-based expression index and documented considerable, but 
longitudinally stable, variation in TCRzeta expression in healthy individuals. 
The variation in TCRzeta expression was associated with polymorphisms in the 
CD3Z 3'-untranslated region (UTR) in SLE patients and healthy controls. Detailed 
mapping of the 3'-UTR revealed that the minor alleles of two single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in strong disequilibrium (rs1052230 and rs1052231) were the 
causal variants associated with low TCRzeta expression (p=0.015). Using allelic 
imbalance analysis, the minor alleles of these 3'-UTR SNPs were associated with 
one-third of the level of mRNA compared with the major allele. A family-based 
association analysis showed that the haplotype carrying the low-expression 
variants predisposes to SLE (p=0.033). This suggests that a genetically 
determined reduction in TCRzeta expression has functional consequences 
manifested by systemic autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.2.1060
PMID: 18178846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]