1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Apr 15;17(8):1109-19. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm383. Epub 2008
Jan  4.

Polycystin-2 is regulated by endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation.

Liang G(1), Li Q, Tang Y, Kokame K, Kikuchi T, Wu G, Chen XZ.

Author information:
(1)Membrane Protein Research Group, Department of Physiology, Faculty of 
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 
2H7.

Endoplasmic reticulum(ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) is an essential process 
for cell homeostasis and remains not well understood. During ERAD, misfolded 
proteins are recognized, ubiquitinated on ER and subsequently 
retro-translocated/dislocated from ER to the 26S proteasome in the cytosol for 
proteolytic elimination. Polycystin-2 (PC2), a member of the transient receptor 
potential superfamily of cation channels, is a Ca channel mainly located on ER 
and primary cilium membranes of cells. Mutations in PC2 are associated with 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). The cellular and molecular 
mechanisms underlying the PC2-associated pathogenesis remain unclear. Here we 
show that PC2 degradation is regulated by the ERAD pathway through the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system. PC2 interacted with ATPase p97, a well-known ERAD 
component extracting substrates from ER, and immobilized it in perinuclear 
regions. PC2 also interacted with Herp, an ubiquitin-like protein implicated in 
regulation of ERAD. We found that Herp is required for and promotes PC2 
degradation. ER stress accelerates the retro-translocation of PC2 for cytosolic 
degradation, at least in part through increasing the Herp expression. Thus, PC2 
is a novel ERAD substrate. Herp also promoted, to varied degrees, the 
degradation of PC2 truncation mutants, including two pathogenic mutants R872X 
and E837X, as long as they interact with Herp. In contrast, Herp did not 
interact with, and has no effect on the degradation of, PC2 mutant missing both 
the N- and C-termini. The ERAD machinery may thus be important for ADPKD 
pathogenesis because the regulation of PC2 expression by the ERAD pathway is 
altered by mutations in PC2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm383
PMID: 18178578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]