1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Jan 5;121(1):27-31.

Polymorphisms of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 gene associated with magnitude 
of left ventricular hypertrophy in male patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Wang SX(1), Fu CY, Zou YB, Wang H, Shi Y, Xu XQ, Chen JZ, Song XD, Huan TJ, Hui 
RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital and Cardiovascular Institute, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 
100037, China.

BACKGROUND: Even carrying an identical gene mutation, inter- and intra-family 
variations have been noticed worldwide in the presence and the severity of left 
ventricular hypertrophy and sudden death in patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy (HCM). Modifier genes may contribute to the diversity. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) gene has been established to be 
associated with parameters of left ventricular hypertrophy in community based 
male subjects. The objective of the present study was to investigate the 
association of ACE2 gene polymorphisms with the phenotype of HCM.
METHODS: A total of 261 consecutive HCM patients and 609 healthy controls were 
enrolled into this study. The polymorphism of rs2106809 and rs6632677 were 
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP) and confirmed by sequencing. Logistic regression model and 
multivariate analysis were used to determine the odds ratio (OR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) of variations of ACE2 for HCM.
RESULTS: The T allele of rs2106809 and C allele of rs6632677 conferred 
increasing risk for HCM (OR 1.34, 95% CI 1.01 - 1.77, P = 0.04; OR 1.11, 95% CI 
1.03 - 1.21, P = 0.002, respectively), and the 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) were in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD), the TC haplotype was 
independently associated with a higher OR for HCM (OR = 1.59, 95% CI 1.21 - 
1.87) after adjusted for conventional risk factors. And the risk alleles were 
associated with thicker interventricular septal thickness of HCM ((20.0 +/- 6.3) 
mm vs (17.9 +/- 5.5) mm, P = 0.03 and (21.3 +/- 5.9) mm vs (17.9 +/- 5.8) mm, P 
= 0.04, respectively). No association was found between the two polymorphisms 
with female patients with HCM.
CONCLUSION: Minor alleles of ACE2 gene might be the genetic modifier for the 
magnitude of left ventricular hypertrophy in male patients with HCM.

PMID: 18208662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]