1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;93(4):1129-34. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1328.
Epub  2008 Jan 22.

Association of a homozygous nonsense caveolin-1 mutation with Berardinelli-Seip 
congenital lipodystrophy.

Kim CA(1), Delépine M, Boutet E, El Mourabit H, Le Lay S, Meier M, Nemani M, 
Bridel E, Leite CC, Bertola DR, Semple RK, O'Rahilly S, Dugail I, Capeau J, 
Lathrop M, Magré J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Instituto da Criança, University of Sao Paulo, 
05403-900 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

CONTEXT: Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSCL) is a rare recessive 
disease characterized by near absence of adipose tissue, resulting in severe 
dyslipidemia and insulin resistance. In most reported cases, BSCL is due to 
alterations in either seipin, of unknown function, or 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase-beta (AGPAT2), which catalyzes the formation of phosphatidic 
acid.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the genetic origin of the unexplained cases of 
BSCL. We thus sequenced CAV1, encoding caveolin-1, as a candidate gene involved 
in insulin signaling and lipid homeostasis. CAV1 is a key structural component 
of plasma membrane caveolae, and Cav1-deficient mice display progressive loss of 
adipose tissue and insulin resistance.
DESIGN: We undertook phenotyping studies and molecular screening of CAV1 in four 
patients with BSCL with no mutation in the genes encoding either seipin or 
AGPAT2.
RESULTS: A homozygous nonsense mutation (p.Glu38X) was identified in CAV1 in a 
patient with BSCL born from a consanguineous union. This mutation affects both 
the alpha- and beta-CAV1 isoforms and ablates CAV1 expression in skin 
fibroblasts. Detailed magnetic resonance imaging of the proband confirmed near 
total absence of both sc and visceral adipose tissue, with only vestigial 
amounts in the dorsal sc regions. In keeping with the lack of adipose tissue, 
the proband was also severely insulin resistant and dyslipidemic. In addition, 
the proband had mild hypocalcemia likely due to vitamin D resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify CAV1 as a new BSCL-related gene and support 
a critical role for caveolins in human adipocyte function.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2007-1328
PMID: 18211975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]