1. J Vasc Res. 2008;45(4):314-22. doi: 10.1159/000113603. Epub 2008 Jan 22.

Mechanical and pharmacological approaches to investigate the pathogenesis of 
Marfan syndrome in the abdominal aorta.

Chung AW(1), Yang HH, Yeung KA, van Breemen C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science, Child and Family Research Institute, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. achung@mrl.ubc.ca

BACKGROUND: Occurrence of disease complications in the abdominal aorta in Marfan 
syndrome, a connective tissue disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding 
fibrillin-1, is relatively rare. We hypothesized that Marfan syndrome could 
affect the structure, vasomotor function and mechanical property of the 
abdominal aorta.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Abdominal aorta from mice at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months of age, 
heterozygous for the Fbn1 allele encoding a cysteine substitution 
(Fbn1(C1039G/+), Marfan mice, n = 50), were compared with those from age-matched 
control littermates (n = 50). Marfan abdominal aorta demonstrated pronounced 
elastic fiber degradation and disorganization, concomitant with an increased 
aortic stiffness during aging. In the isometric force measurement, 
vasoconstriction in response to membrane depolarization or phenylephrine 
stimulation was similar in both Marfan and control abdominal aorta. However, 
Marfan abdominal aorta was less sensitive to the inhibition of the 
phenylephrine-induced contraction by indomethacin and SQ-29548, during which the 
release of thromboxane A(2) was one half of that of the controls. Nevertheless, 
the protein expression of cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygenase-2 detected by 
Western immunoblotting was not different between the 2 strains.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that Marfan syndrome affected abdominal aorta with 
respect to matrix elastic fiber organization, aortic stiffness and release of 
thromboxane A(2).

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000113603
PMID: 18212506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]