1. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Mar 21;434(1):41-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.01.024.
Epub  2008 Jan 16.

Association between variation in the vesicular monoamine transporter 1 gene on 
chromosome 8p and anxiety-related personality traits.

Lohoff FW(1), Lautenschlager M, Mohr J, Ferraro TN, Sander T, Gallinat J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, University of Pennsylvania, USA. 
lohoff@mail.med.upenn.edu

Vesicular monoamine transporters are involved in the presynaptic packaging of 
norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin into storage vesicles. The vesicles 
release their content upon arrival of an action potential into the synaptic 
cleft. Dysregulation of monoaminergic neurotransmission has been long postulated 
to play a relevant role in the etiology of neuropsychiatric disorders. The gene 
encoding the vesicular monoamine transporter 1 (VMAT1/SLC18A1) maps to 
chromosome 8p21, a region where several linkage peaks overlap between 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and anxiety-related personality traits. In this 
study, we tested the hypothesis that the missence variation Thr136Ile in the 
VMAT1/SLC18A1 gene is associated with anxiety-related personality traits. We 
tested a total of 337 unrelated subjects of German descent (167 male, 170 
female). All participants were carefully screened for psychiatric disorders. The 
self-report State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) was completed by all subjects. 
Genotypes were obtained for the Thr136Ile (rs1390938) variation in the VMAT1 
gene for all subjects. Genotype effects on personality variables were computed 
with MANOVA including age as a co-variant and gender as independent factor 
(MANCOVA). Results show that STAI scores were significantly affected by genotype 
(F=3.108; d.f.=4,331; p=0.015) and age (F=7.233; d.f.=2,331; p=0.001) but not by 
gender. A gender-by-genotype effect was observed for both the STAI state 
(p=0.052) and trait score (p=0.035). Dissection of the group by gender and 
subsequent contrast analysis of the genotype effects performed within the female 
group showed significant results (STAI state: Thr/Ile vs. Ile/Ile: T=4.408, 
p=0.0004; STAI trait: Thr/Ile vs. Ile/Ile: T=3.074, p=0.009) but not in the male 
group. Our findings support the hypothesis that anxiety-related personality 
traits are associated with variation in the VMAT1/SLC18A1 gene.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.01.024
PMID: 18249496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]