1. Genetics. 2008 Mar;178(3):1595-603. doi: 10.1534/genetics.107.077123. Epub
2008  Feb 1.

Dietary change and adaptive evolution of enamelin in humans and among primates.

Kelley JL(1), Swanson WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA. jlkelley@u.washington.edu

Scans of the human genome have identified many loci as potential targets of 
recent selection, but exploration of these candidates is required to verify the 
accuracy of genomewide scans and clarify the importance of adaptive evolution in 
recent human history. We present analyses of one such candidate, enamelin, whose 
protein product operates in tooth enamel formation in 100 individuals from 10 
populations. Evidence of a recent selective sweep at this locus confirms the 
signal of selection found by genomewide scans. Patterns of polymorphism in 
enamelin correspond with population-level differences in tooth enamel thickness, 
and selection on enamel thickness may drive adaptive enamelin evolution in human 
populations. We characterize a high-frequency nonsynonymous derived allele in 
non-African populations. The polymorphism occurs in codon 648, resulting in a 
nonconservative change from threonine to isoleucine, suggesting that the allele 
may affect enamelin function. Sequences of exons from 12 primate species show 
evidence of positive selection on enamelin. In primates, it has been documented 
that enamel thickness correlates with diet. Our work shows that bursts of 
adaptive enamelin evolution occur on primate lineages with inferred dietary 
changes. We hypothesize that among primate species the evolved differences in 
tooth enamel thickness are correlated with the adaptive evolution of enamelin.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.107.077123
PMCID: PMC2278081
PMID: 18245370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]