1. J Neurochem. 2008 Jun;105(5):1901-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05275.x. 
Epub 2008 Feb 4.

HIF-1 alpha is an essential effector for purine nucleoside-mediated 
neuroprotection against hypoxia in PC12 cells and primary cerebellar granule 
neurons.

zur Nedden S(1), Tomaselli B, Baier-Bitterlich G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiochemistry, Medical University of Innsbruck, Biocenter, 
Innsbruck, Austria.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) and purine nucleosides adenosine 
and inosine are critical mediators of physiological responses to acute and 
chronic hypoxia. The specific aim of this paper was to evaluate the potential 
role of HIF-1alpha in purine-mediated neuroprotection. We show that adenosine 
and inosine efficiently rescued clonal rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells (up to 
43.6%) as well as primary cerebellar granule neurons (up to 25.1%) from hypoxic 
insult, and furthermore, that HIF-1alpha is critical for purine-mediated 
neuroprotection. Next, we studied hypoxia or purine nucleoside increased nuclear 
accumulation of HIF-1alpha in PC12 cells. As a possible result of increased 
protein stabilization or synthesis an up to 2.5-fold induction of HIF-1alpha 
accumulation was detected. In cerebellar granule neurons, purine nucleosides 
induced an up to 3.1-fold HIF-1alpha accumulation in cell lysates. Concomitant 
with these results, small interfering RNA-mediated reduction of HIF-1alpha 
completely abolished adenosine- and inosine-mediated protection in PC12 cells 
and severely hampered purine nucleoside-mediated protection in primary neurons 
(up to 94.2%). Data presented in this paper thus clearly demonstrate that 
HIF-1alpha is a key regulator of purine nucleoside-mediated rescue of hypoxic 
neuronal cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05275.x
PMCID: PMC2992945
PMID: 18248612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]