1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jun 1;17(11):1540-55. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn042. Epub 2008
Feb  14.

Autophagy induced by Alexander disease-mutant GFAP accumulation is regulated by 
p38/MAPK and mTOR signaling pathways.

Tang G(1), Yue Z, Talloczy Z, Hagemann T, Cho W, Messing A, Sulzer DL, Goldman 
JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Center for 
Parkinson's Disease and Other Movement Disorders, Columbia University, New York, 
NY 10032, USA.

Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is the principle intermediate filament 
(IF) protein in astrocytes. Mutations in the GFAP gene lead to Alexander disease 
(AxD), a rare, fatal neurological disorder characterized by the presence of 
abnormal astrocytes that contain GFAP protein aggregates, termed Rosenthal 
fibers (RFs), and the loss of myelin. All GFAP mutations cause the same 
histopathological defect, i.e. RFs, though little is known how the mutations 
affect protein accumulation as well as astrocyte function. In this study, we 
found that GFAP accumulation induces macroautophagy, a key clearance mechanism 
for prevention of aggregated proteins. This autophagic response is negatively 
regulated by mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). The activation of p38 MAPK by 
GFAP accumulation is in part responsible for the down-regulation of 
phosphorylated-mTOR and the subsequent activation of autophagy. Our study 
suggests that AxD mutant GFAP accumulation stimulates autophagy, in a manner 
regulated by p38 MAPK and mTOR signaling pathways. Autophagy, in turn, serves as 
a mechanism to reduce GFAP levels.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn042
PMCID: PMC2902290
PMID: 18276609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]