1. Cancer Sci. 2008 Feb;99(2):333-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00692.x.

Association of a missense single nucleotide polymorphism, Cys1367Arg of the WRN 
gene, with the risk of bone and soft tissue sarcomas in Japan.

Nakayama R(1), Sato Y, Masutani M, Ogino H, Nakatani F, Chuman H, Beppu Y, 
Morioka H, Yabe H, Hirose H, Sugimura H, Sakamoto H, Ohta T, Toyama Y, Yoshida 
T, Kawai A.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, 
Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Bone and soft tissue sarcomas (BSTSs) are rare malignant tumors of mesenchymal 
origin. Although BSTSs frequently occur in some hereditary cancer syndromes with 
germline mutations of DNA repair genes, genetic factors responsible for sporadic 
cases have not been determined. In the present study we undertook a case-control 
study and analyzed possible associations between the susceptibility to BSTS and 
the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA repair genes. Genomic DNAs 
extracted from case and control peripheral blood leukocytes were genotyped by 
pyrosequencing. For candidate polymorphisms, we chose 50 non-synonymous missense 
SNPs, which we have previously been identified by resequencing 36 DNA repair 
genes among the Japanese population. In the first screening, we analyzed 240 
cases and 685 controls and selected six SNPs at the significance level of P < 
0.1 (Fisher's exact test). The six SNPs were further analyzed in the second 
genotyping on an additional set of 304 cases and 834 controls. In the joint 
analysis (the first and second genotyping combined) of 544 cases and 1378 
controls, Cys1367Arg of the WRN gene was found to be a protective factor of BSTS 
(odds ratio = 0.66, 95% confidence interval = 0.49-0.88, P = 0.005). An 
exploratory subgroup analysis without multiple comparison adjustment suggested 
that the WRN-Cys1367Arg SNP is associated with soft tissue sarcomas, sarcomas 
with reciprocal chromosomal translocations and malignant fibrous histiocytoma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00692.x
PMCID: PMC11159914
PMID: 18271933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]