1. J Diabetes Complications. 2008 Mar-Apr;22(2):119-25. doi: 
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2006.12.002.

MTHFR gene polymorphism is susceptible to diabetic retinopathy but not to 
diabetic nephropathy in Japanese type 2 diabetic patients.

Maeda M(1), Yamamoto I, Fukuda M, Motomura T, Nishida M, Nonen S, Fujio Y, 
Kasayama S, Azuma J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Evaluation of Medicines and Therapeutics, Graduate 
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

AIMS: Previously, we have proposed that methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
(MTHFR) gene polymorphism (C677T) could be a risk factor for diabetic 
retinopathy. To support our suggestion, we examined in detail the association of 
MTHFR polymorphism with diabetic retinopathy and nephropathy in Japanese type 2 
diabetic patients.
METHODS: Subjects (n=190) were free of cardiovascular diseases and were not on 
hemodialysis. Retinopathy was assessed according to fundamental differentiation; 
nephropathy was determined according to urinary albumin level; and MTHFR 
genotype was determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. We also analyzed how hyperglycemia affected these three conditions 
in 131 patients with glycosylated hemoglobin > or =6.5% and fasting blood sugar 
> or =110 mg/dl.
RESULTS: The frequency of 677T/677T homozygous subjects with retinopathy was 
higher than the frequencies of the other two genotypes, and a significant 
difference was observed in the distribution of the genotypes (677C/677C, 41.9%; 
677C/677T, 31.1%; 677T/677T, 61.5%; P<.05). The susceptibility of 677T/677T 
homozygote to retinopathy approached significance [odds ratio (OR)=2.17; 95% 
confidence interval (95% CI)=0.87-5.42]. However, in the population with 
hyperglycemia, the 677T/677T homozygote modified the risk for retinopathy 
(OR=4.30; 95% CI=1.42-13.1), especially the risk for nonproliferative 
retinopathy. In contrast, the 677T/677T homozygote did not affect the risk for 
nephropathy (OR=1.17; 95% CI=0.45-3.05), even in subjects with hyperglycemia 
(OR=1.50; 95% CI=0.50-4.48).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are highly suggestive of an important role for MTHFR 
genotype in susceptibility to retinopathy under hyperglycemia, but not to 
nephropathy. Preventive therapies based on MTHFR polymorphism could delay the 
onset of retinopathy in type 2 diabetic patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2006.12.002
PMID: 18280442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]