1. Mol Cancer. 2008 Feb 18;7:21. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-21.

Correlation between beta-catenin mutations and expression of Wnt-signaling 
target genes in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Austinat M(1), Dunsch R, Wittekind C, Tannapfel A, Gebhardt R, Gaunitz F.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Leipzig, 
Johannisallee 30, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. Austinat_M@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Aberrant Wnt-signaling caused by mutants of beta-catenin, a key regulator of the 
canonical Wnt-signaling pathway, is frequently detected in cancer. Only 
recently, it was suggested that in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) the expression 
of the target gene glutamine synthetase (GS) is a highly reliable marker for the 
identification of beta-catenin mutations. In order to prove this hypothesis, 52 
samples from human hepatocellular carcinomas were analysed for the activation of 
beta-catenin and the expression of GS. In total, 45 samples stained positive for 
cytoplasmic/nuclear beta-catenin. A strong correlation between expression of GS 
and activated beta-catenin (100% of nuclear and 84% of cytosolic) was found. 
However, among 35 GS positive tumors that were analysed for beta-catenin 
mutations no mutations were detected in 25 GS-positive carcinomas although 24 
out of the 25 carcinomas exhibited at least abnormal expression of beta-catenin. 
Since the mutational analysis identified 9 different point mutations of the 
beta-catenin gene including the rare mutation H36P and the yet unknown mutation 
P44A it was asked whether these mutations may differently effect beta-catenin 
target genes. Therefore, expression plasmids for different mutations were 
constructed and cotransfected with the TOP-flash luciferase reporter and a 
reporter carrying the GS-5'-enhancer. The experiments confirmed that there are 
differences between different beta-catenin target sequences and different 
beta-catenin mutations. In addition, the failure that the endogenous expression 
of GS in GS-negative cells was not induced by the transient transfection 
experiment indicated that the effect of beta-catenin on the GS-5'-enhancer is 
only one aspect of gene activation induced by beta-catenin.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-21
PMCID: PMC2287186
PMID: 18282277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]