1. Photochem Photobiol. 2008 Mar-Apr;84(2):501-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1751-1097.2008.00294.x. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

The melanocortin 1 receptor and the UV response of human melanocytes--a shift in 
paradigm.

Abdel-Malek ZA(1), Knittel J, Kadekaro AL, Swope VB, Starner R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA. abdelmza@email.uc.edu

Cutaneous pigmentation is the major photoprotective mechanism against the 
carcinogenic and aging effects of UV. Epidermal melanocytes synthesize the 
pigment melanin, in the form of eumelanin or pheomelanin. Synthesis of the 
photoprotective eumelanin by human melanocytes is regulated mainly by the 
melanocortins alpha-melanocortin (alpha-MSH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH), which bind the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) and activate the cAMP 
pathway that is required for UV-induced tanning. Melanocortins stimulate 
proliferation and melanogenesis and inhibit UV-induced apoptosis of human 
melanocytes. Importantly, melanocortins reduce the generation of hydrogen 
peroxide and enhance repair of DNA photoproducts, independently of pigmentation. 
MC1R is a major contributor to the diversity of human pigmentation and a 
melanoma susceptibility gene. Certain allelic variants of this gene, namely 
R151C, R160W and D294H, are strongly associated with red hair phenotype and 
increased melanoma susceptibility. Natural expression of two of these variants 
sensitizes melanocytes to the cytotoxic effect of UV, and increases the burden 
of DNA damage and oxidative stress. We are designing potent melanocortin analogs 
that mimic the effects of alpha-MSH as a strategy to prevent skin cancer, 
particularly in individuals who express MC1R genotypes that reduce but do not 
abolish MC1R function, or mutations in other melanoma susceptibility genes, such 
as p16.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.2008.00294.x
PMID: 18282187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]