1. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Nov;201(1):138-47. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.002. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

The apolipoprotein(a) gene: linkage disequilibria at three loci differs in 
African Americans and Caucasians.

Rubin J(1), Kim HJ, Pearson TA, Holleran S, Berglund L, Ramakrishnan R.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States.

Lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) is an independent, genetically regulated cardiovascular 
risk factor. Lp(a) plasma levels are largely determined by the apolipoprotein(a) 
(apo(a)) component, and differ across ethnicity. Although a number of 
polymorphisms in the apo(a) gene have been identified, apo(a) genetic regulation 
is not fully understood. To study the relation between apo(a) gene variants, we 
constructed haplotypes and assessed linkage equilibrium in African Americans and 
Caucasians for three widely studied apo(a) gene polymorphisms (apo(a) size, +93 
C/T and pentanucleotide repeat region (PNR)). Apo(a) size allele frequency 
distributions were different across ethnicity (p<0.01). For African Americans, 
PNR frequencies were similar across apo(a) sizes, suggesting linkage 
equilibrium. For Caucasians, the PNR and the PNR-C/T haplotype frequencies 
differed for large and small apo(a), with the T and PNR 9 alleles associated 
with large apo(a) size (p<0.0002); also, the PNR 9 allele was more common on a T 
allele, while PNR 8 was more common on a C allele. On a C allele background, 
small PNR alleles were more common and the PNR 10 allele less common among 
African Americans than Caucasians (p<0.001). The ethnic difference in apo(a) 
size distribution remained controlling for C/T and PNR alleles (p=0.023). In 
conclusion, allele and haplotype frequencies and the nature of the linkage 
disequilibrium differed between African Americans and Caucasians at three apo(a) 
gene polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2008.01.002
PMCID: PMC2784197
PMID: 18304554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]