1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Mar;15(1):191-205. doi: 10.1677/ERC-07-0212.

BRAF(V600E) mutation and the biology of papillary thyroid cancer.

Frasca F(1), Nucera C, Pellegriti G, Gangemi P, Attard M, Stella M, Loda M, 
Vella V, Giordano C, Trimarchi F, Mazzon E, Belfiore A, Vigneri R.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Medicina Specialistica, 
University of Catania, PO Garibaldi Nesima, Via Palermo 636, Catania, Italy.

BRAF((V600E)) mutation is the most frequent genetic alteration in papillary 
thyroid carcinomas (PTCs) that are 80-90% of all thyroid cancers. We evaluated 
the relationship between BRAF((V600E)) and tumor, host, and environmental 
factors in PTCs from all geographical areas of Sicily. By PCR, BRAF((V600E)) was 
investigated in a series of 323 PTCs diagnosed in 2002-2005. The correlation 
between clinicopathological tumor, host, and environmental characteristics and 
the presence of BRAF((V600E)) were evaluated by both univariate and multivariate 
analyses. BRAF((V600E)) was found in 38.6% PTCs, with a 52% frequency in the 
classical PTCs and 26.4% in the tall cell variant. Univariate analysis indicated 
that BRAF((V600E)) was associated with greater tumor size (P=0.0048), 
extra-thyroid invasion (P<0.0001), and cervical lymph nodal metastases 
(P=0.0001). Multivariate logistic regression analysis confirmed that 
BRAF((V600E)) was an independent predictor of extra-thyroid invasion (P=0.0001) 
and cervical lymph nodal metastasis (P=0.0005). The association between 
BRAF((V600E)) and extra-thyroid invasion was also found in micro-PTCs (P=0.006). 
In 60 classical PTCs, BRAF((V600E)) was positively correlated with matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 expression (P=0.0047), suggesting a possible mechanism for 
BRAF((V600E)) effect on PTC invasiveness. No association was found between 
BRAF((V600E)) and patient age, gender, or iodine intake. In contrast, a strong 
association was found with residency in Eastern Sicily (P<0.0001 compared with 
Western Sicily). These results indicate that BRAF((V600E)) mutation is a marker 
of aggressive disease in both micro- and macro-PTCs. Moreover, for the first 
time, a possible link between BRAF((V600E)) mutation and environmental 
carcinogens is suggested.

DOI: 10.1677/ERC-07-0212
PMID: 18310287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]