1. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Aug;47(8):599-607. doi: 10.1002/mc.20415.

Simulated solar light-induced p53 mutagenesis in SKH-1 mouse skin: a 
dose-response assessment.

Verkler TL(1), Delongchamp RR, Miller BJ, Webb PJ, Howard PC, Parsons BL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic and Reproductive Toxicology, National Center for 
Toxicological Research (NCTR), USFDA, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA.

Sunlight and ultraviolet-induced mutation of the p53 gene is a frequent, 
possibly obligate step in skin cancer development, making quantitative 
measurement of p53 mutation an ideal biomarker for sunlight-induced skin 
carcinogenesis. To understand how the appearance of p53 mutation relates to skin 
tumor development, SKH-1 hairless mice were exposed 5 d per week to one of four 
different doses of simulated solar light (SSL; 0, 6.85, 13.70, 20.55 mJ x 
CIE/cm(2)) previously characterized for their tumorigenic potential. 
Allele-specific competitive blocker-PCR (ACB-PCR) was used to measure levels of 
p53 codon 270 CGT to TGT mutation within DNA isolated from dorsal skin of 
exposed mice. For each dose, p53 mutant fraction (MF) was measured after 4, 16, 
and 28 wk of exposure. Significant dose- and time-dependent increases in p53 MF 
were identified. All p53 MF measurements were integrated by relating the 
observed p53 MF to the cumulative dose of SSL. The increase in the logarithm of 
p53 MF was described by the linear function: log(10) MF = alpha + 0.0016 x d, 
where alpha is the spontaneous log(10) MF after a particular time point and d is 
the dose of SSL in mJ x CIE/cm(2). The p53 MF induced in nontumor bearing skin 
by 28 wk of exposure at the high dose of SSL was significantly lower than that 
found in skin tumors induced by approximately 32 wk of exposure to the same dose 
of SSL. p53 MF showed a strong negative correlation with tumor latency, 
suggesting this quantitative biomarker has the potential to predict 
tumorigenicity.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.20415
PMID: 18314877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]