1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Mar;87(3):744-52. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/87.3.744.

Postprandial triacylglycerol metabolism is modified by the presence of genetic 
variation at the perilipin (PLIN) locus in 2 white populations.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Yiannakouris N, Lopez-Miranda J, Arnett D, Tsai M, Galan E, 
Straka R, Delgado-Lista J, Province M, Ruano J, Borecki I, Hixson J, 
Garcia-Bailo B, Perez-Jimenez F, Ordovas JM.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, Jean Mayer-US Department of Agriculture 
Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, 
USA. pablopermar@yahoo.es

BACKGROUND: Several perilipin (PLIN) polymorphic sites have been studied for 
their potential use as markers for obesity and the metabolic syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to examine whether the presence of polymorphisms at the 
perilipin (PLIN) locus (PLIN1, 6209T-->C; PLIN4, 11482G-->A; PLIN5, 13041A-->G; 
and PLIN6, 14995A-->T) influence postprandial lipoprotein metabolism in 2 white 
populations.
DESIGN: Eighty-eight healthy Spanish men and 271 healthy US subjects (men and 
women) underwent an oral-fat-load test in 2 independent studies. Blood samples 
were taken in the fasting state and during the postprandial phase at regular 
intervals. Total cholesterol and triacylglycerol and triacylglycerol in 
triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins (TRL, large and small) were measured.
RESULTS: Carriers of the minor C allele at the PLIN1 variant displayed lower 
postprandial concentrations of large-TRL triacylglycerol (Spanish subjects: P = 
0.024; US subjects: P = 0.005) than did subjects carrying the T/T genotype. The 
same pattern was observed in the Spanish population at the PLIN4 locus (P = 
0.015), and both SNPs were in strong linkage disequilibrium. In both 
populations, subjects carrying the minor C and A alleles at PLIN1 and PLIN4, 
respectively, had significantly lower postprandial concentrations of plasma 
triacylglycerol (P < 0.05) and lower concentrations of small-TRL triacylglycerol 
than did those who were homozygous for the major alleles at PLIN1 and PLIN4 
(Spanish subjects: P = 0.020 and 0.008, respectively; US subjects: P = 0.021 and 
0.035, respectively).
CONCLUSION: These 2 studies suggest that the presence of the minor C and A 
alleles at PLIN1 and PLIN4, respectively, are associated with a lower 
postprandial response that may result in lower atherogenic risk for these 
persons.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/87.3.744
PMID: 18326614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]