1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 18;105(11):4247-52. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0800276105. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Distinct effects of the recurrent Mlh1G67R mutation on MMR functions, cancer, 
and meiosis.

Avdievich E(1), Reiss C, Scherer SJ, Zhang Y, Maier SM, Jin B, Hou H Jr, 
Rosenwald A, Riedmiller H, Kucherlapati R, Cohen PE, Edelmann W, Kneitz B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Mutations in the human DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene MLH1 are associated with 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome, HNPCC) and a 
significant proportion of sporadic colorectal cancer. The inactivation of MLH1 
results in the accumulation of somatic mutations in the genome of tumor cells 
and resistance to the genotoxic effects of a variety of DNA damaging agents. To 
study the effect of MLH1 missense mutations on cancer susceptibility, we 
generated a mouse line carrying the recurrent Mlh1(G67R) mutation that is 
located in one of the ATP-binding domains of Mlh1. Although the Mlh1(G67R) 
mutation resulted in DNA repair deficiency in homozygous mutant mice, it did not 
affect the MMR-mediated cellular response to DNA damage, including the apoptotic 
response of epithelial cells in the intestinal mucosa to cisplatin, which was 
defective in Mlh1(-/-) mice but remained normal in Mlh1(G67R/G67R) mice. Similar 
to Mlh1(-/-) mice, Mlh1(G67R/G67R) mutant mice displayed a strong cancer 
predisposition phenotype. However, in contrast to Mlh1(-/-) mice, 
Mlh1(G67R/G67R) mutant mice developed significantly fewer intestinal tumors, 
indicating that Mlh1 missense mutations can affect MMR tumor suppressor 
functions in a tissue-specific manner. In addition, Mlh1(G67R/G67R) mice were 
sterile because of the inability of the mutant Mlh1(G67R) protein to interact 
with meiotic chromosomes at pachynema, demonstrating that the ATPase activity of 
Mlh1 is essential for fertility in mammals.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0800276105
PMCID: PMC2393764
PMID: 18337503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.