1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1109-15. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30731.

A functional polymorphism, rs6280, in DRD3 is significantly associated with 
nicotine dependence in European-American smokers.

Huang W(1), Payne TJ, Ma JZ, Li MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22911, USA.

Nicotine enhances reward functions in the mesocorticolimbic dopamine system in 
general and the nucleus accumbens in particular. The genes encoding dopamine 
receptors are thus plausible candidates for involvement in nicotine dependence 
(ND). We investigated 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning a 
region of the dopamine D(3) receptor gene (DRD3) to determine whether DRD3 is 
associated with ND. We studied a set of 2,037 subjects in 602 nuclear families 
representing two distinct American populations using three ND measures, namely, 
smoking quantity (SQ), the Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI), and the Fagerstr√∂m 
Test for ND (FTND). In the family based association study, we found that SNP 
rs6280 showed a strong association with ND in European-Americans (EAs) and the 
pooled sample, whereas SNPs rs1486012 and rs963468 had weak associations with ND 
in African-Americans (AAs) and the pooled sample. Further haplotype analysis 
with all contiguous 3-SNP groups revealed relatively weak evidence for 
association of DRD3 with ND in the EA and pooled samples. The results indicate 
that DRD3 is significantly associated with ND in EAs, and that rs6280, a 
functional polymorphism causing an amino acid change of serine to glycine 
(Ser9Gly) in the N-terminal extracellular domain of the D(3) receptor, likely is 
causative of the association between DRD3 and ND.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30731
PMID: 18348205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]