1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Mar 21;4(3):e1000027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000027.

C. elegans model identifies genetic modifiers of alpha-synuclein inclusion 
formation during aging.

van Ham TJ(1), Thijssen KL, Breitling R, Hofstra RM, Plasterk RH, Nollen EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Inclusions in the brain containing alpha-synuclein are the pathological hallmark 
of Parkinson's disease, but how these inclusions are formed and how this links 
to disease is poorly understood. We have developed a C. elegans model that makes 
it possible to monitor, in living animals, the formation of alpha-synuclein 
inclusions. In worms of old age, inclusions contain aggregated alpha- synuclein, 
resembling a critical pathological feature. We used genome-wide RNA interference 
to identify processes involved in inclusion formation, and identified 80 genes 
that, when knocked down, resulted in a premature increase in the number of 
inclusions. Quality control and vesicle-trafficking genes expressed in the 
ER/Golgi complex and vesicular compartments were overrepresented, indicating a 
specific role for these processes in alpha-synuclein inclusion formation. 
Suppressors include aging-associated genes, such as sir-2.1/SIRT1 and 
lagr-1/LASS2. Altogether, our data suggest a link between alpha-synuclein 
inclusion formation and cellular aging, likely through an endomembrane-related 
mechanism. The processes and genes identified here present a framework for 
further study of the disease mechanism and provide candidate susceptibility 
genes and drug targets for Parkinson's disease and other alpha-synuclein related 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000027
PMCID: PMC2265412
PMID: 18369446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.