1. Clin Chim Acta. 2008 Jun;392(1-2):58-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2008.03.006. Epub 
2008 Mar 18.

Evaluation of a novel reverse-hybridization StripAssay for typing DNA variants 
useful in diagnosis of adult-type hypolactasia.

Tag CG(1), Oberkanins C, Kriegsh√§user G, Ingram CJ, Swallow DM, Gressner AM, 
Ledochowski M, Weiskirchen R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, RWTH-University 
Hospital, D-52074 Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Adult-type hypolactasia is a genetically determined inability to 
digest lactose after weaning. Two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (C-13910T, 
G-22018A) located upstream of the lactase gene (LCT) within the gene MCM6 are 
associated with the lactase persistence/non-persistence trait in patients of 
European descent. Therefore, the genotyping of these SNPs has been established 
as a diagnostic tool for adult-type hypolactasia. We have recently shown that 
several novel allelic variants located in close proximity to the C-13910T SNP 
interfere with the diagnostic accuracy of real-time PCR-based genotyping 
methods.
METHODS: We describe here the validation of a comprehensive 
reverse-hybridization teststrip-based assay for the detection of common and 
novel LCT SNPs (C-13907G, C-13910T, T-13913C, G-13914A, T-13915G, and G-22018A). 
This assay is based on multiplex DNA amplification and ready-to-use membrane 
teststrips containing variant-specific oligonucleotide probes immobilized as an 
array of parallel lines.
RESULTS: We evaluated the novel reverse-hybridization StripAssay on 125 DNA 
samples in comparison to LightCycler analysis and sequencing. The outcome of 
StripAssay genotyping was found to be completely concordant with that obtained 
by sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: The StripAssay represents an accurate and robust screening tool to 
identify multiple LCT/MCM6 variants in a rapid manner. It overcomes diagnostic 
pitfalls that were reported and allows the simultaneous genotyping of closely 
spaced LCT variant sites in a single-step diagnostic approach.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2008.03.006
PMID: 18396155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]