1. Exp Cell Res. 2008 May 1;314(8):1869-80. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.018.
Epub  2008 Mar 7.

Expression of the myodystrophic R453W mutation of lamin A in C2C12 myoblasts 
causes promoter-specific and global epigenetic defects.

HÃ¥kelien AM(1), Delbarre E, Gaustad KG, Buendia B, Collas P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Oslo, PO Box 1112 Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway.

Autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is characterized by 
muscle wasting and is caused by mutations in the LMNA gene encoding A-type 
lamins. Overexpression of the EDMD lamin A R453W mutation in C2C12 myoblasts 
impairs myogenic differentiation. We show here the influence of stable 
expression of the R453W and of the Dunnigan-type partial lipodystrophy R482W 
mutation of lamin A in C2C12 cells on transcription and epigenetic regulation of 
the myogenin (Myog) gene and on global chromatin organization. Expression of 
R453W-, but not R482W-lamin A, impairs activation of Myog and maintains a 
repressive chromatin state on the Myog promoter upon induction of 
differentiation, marked by H3 lysine (K) 9 dimethylation and failure to 
hypertrimethylate H3K4. Cells expressing WT-LaA also fail to hypertrimethylate 
H3K4. No defect occurs at the level of Myog promoter DNA methylation in any of 
the clones. Expression of R453W-lamin A and to a lesser extent R482W-lamin A in 
undifferentiated C2C12 cells redistributes H3K9me3 from pericentric 
heterochromatin. R453W-lamin A also elicits a redistribution of H3K27me3 from 
inactive X (Xi) and partial decondensation of Xi, but maintains Xist expression 
and coating of Xi, indicating that Xi remains inactivated. Our results argue 
that gene-specific and genome-wide chromatin rearrangements may constitute a 
molecular basis for laminopathies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.02.018
PMID: 18396274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]