1. Gastroenterology. 2008 Apr;134(4):1169-79. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.035. 
Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Keratin mutation predisposes to mouse liver fibrosis and unmasks differential 
effects of the carbon tetrachloride and thioacetamide models.

Strnad P(1), Tao GZ, Zhou Q, Harada M, Toivola DM, Brunt EM, Omary MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Palo Alto VA Medical Center, Palo Alto, California, 
USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Keratins 8 and 18 (K8/K18) are important hepatoprotective 
proteins. Animals expressing K8/K18 mutants show a marked susceptibility to 
acute/subacute liver injury. K8/K18 variants predispose to human end-stage liver 
disease and associate with fibrosis progression during chronic hepatitis C 
infection. We sought direct evidence for a keratin mutation-related 
predisposition to liver fibrosis using transgenic mouse models because the 
relationship between keratin mutations and cirrhosis is based primarily on human 
association studies.
METHODS: Mouse hepatofibrosis was induced by carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4)) or 
thioacetamide. Nontransgenic mice, or mice that over express either human 
Arg89-to-Cys (R89C mice) or wild-type K18 (WT mice) were used. The extent of 
fibrosis was evaluated by quantitative real-time reverse-transcription 
polymerase chain reaction of fibrosis-related genes, liver hydroxyproline 
measurement, and Picro-Sirius red staining and collagen immunofluorescence 
staining.
RESULTS: Compared with control animals, CCl(4) led to similar liver fibrosis but 
increased injury in K18 R89C mice. In contrast, thioacetamide caused more severe 
liver injury and fibrosis in K18 R89C as compared with WT and nontransgenic mice 
and resulted in increased messenger RNA levels of collagen, tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinase 1, matrix metalloproteinase 2, and matrix metalloproteinase 
13. Analysis in nontransgenic mice showed that thioacetamide and CCl(4) have 
dramatically different molecular expression responses involving cytoskeletal and 
chaperone proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Over expression of K18 R89C predisposes transgenic mice to 
thioacetamide- but not CCl(4)-induced liver fibrosis. Differences in the keratin 
mutation-associated fibrosis response among the 2 models raise the hypothesis 
that keratin variants may preferentially predispose to fibrosis in unique human 
liver diseases. Findings herein highlight distinct differences in the 2 widely 
used fibrosis models.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.035
PMCID: PMC2692280
PMID: 18395095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None