1. Purinergic Signal. 2006 Sep;2(3):499-507. doi: 10.1007/s11302-005-3980-7. Epub
 2006 Aug 11.

Stimulation of an alpha1-adrenergic receptor downregulates ecto-5' nucleotidase 
activity on the apical membrane of RPE cells.

Reigada D(1), Zhang X, Crespo A, Nguyen J, Liu J, Pendrak K, Stone RA, Laties 
AM, Mitchell C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Hamilton Walk, 
Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6085, USA.

The purines ATP and adenosine play an important role in the communication 
between the photoreceptors and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). While the 
RPE is known to release ATP into subretinal space, the source of extracellular 
adenosine is unclear. In other tissues, ecto-nucleotidases mediate the 
consecutive dephosphorylation of ATP to AMP, and AMP is converted to adenosine 
by ecto-5' nucleotidase (CD73). This study identifies ecto-5' nucleotidase on 
RPE cells and investigates modulation of enzyme activity. The RPE was the most 
active site of 5'AMP dephosphorylation in the posterior rat eye. The ecto-5' 
nucleotidase inhibitor alphabetamADP prevented the production adenosine by the 
apical membrane of the bovine RPE. Cultured human ARPE-19 cells expressed mRNA 
and protein for ecto-5' nucleotidase. The production of phosphate from 5'AMP by 
ARPE-19 cells was inhibited by alphabetamADP, but the ecto-alkaline phosphatase 
inhibitor levamisole had no effect. Degradation of 5'AMP was blocked by 
norepinephrine, epinephrine and phenylephrine, with inhibition by antagonists 
prazosin and corynanthine implicating the alpha1 adrenergic receptor. The block 
of enzyme activity by norepinephrine was rapid, occurring within 1 min, and was 
similar at both 4 and 37 degrees C, consistent with cleavage of the enzyme from 
its GPI anchor. HPLC measurements indicated norepinephrine reduced levels of 
adenosine in the bath. In the apical face of the bovine-RPE eyecup, 
norepinephrine reduced the production of phosphate from 5'AMP, suggesting that 
both receptor and enzyme face sub-retinal space. In conclusion, RPE cells 
express ecto-5' nucleotidase, with activity on the apical membrane, and 
stimulation of alpha-1 adrenergic receptors downregulates activity. As 
epinephrine is released at light onset, and adenosine can inhibit phagocytosis, 
the corresponding decrease in subretinal adenosine levels may contribute to the 
enhanced the phagocytosis of rod outer segments that occurs at this time.

DOI: 10.1007/s11302-005-3980-7
PMCID: PMC2104005
PMID: 18404487