1. Purinergic Signal. 2005 Dec;1(4):311-28. doi: 10.1007/s11302-005-1557-0. Epub 
2005 Dec 3.

ATP release via anion channels.

Sabirov RZ(1), Okada Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Physiology, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, 
Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan.

ATP serves not only as an energy source for all cell types but as an 
'extracellular messenger' for autocrine and paracrine signalling. It is released 
from the cell via several different purinergic signal efflux pathways. ATP and 
its Mg(2+) and/or H(+) salts exist in anionic forms at physiological pH and may 
exit cells via some anion channel if the pore physically permits this. In this 
review we survey experimental data providing evidence for and against the 
release of ATP through anion channels. CFTR has long been considered a probable 
pathway for ATP release in airway epithelium and other types of cells expressing 
this protein, although non-CFTR ATP currents have also been observed. 
Volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying (VSOR) chloride channels are found in 
virtually all cell types and can physically accommodate or even permeate ATP(4-) 
in certain experimental conditions. However, pharmacological studies are 
controversial and argue against the actual involvement of the VSOR channel in 
significant release of ATP. A large-conductance anion channel whose open 
probability exhibits a bell-shaped voltage dependence is also ubiquitously 
expressed and represents a putative pathway for ATP release. This channel, 
called a maxi-anion channel, has a wide nanoscopic pore suitable for nucleotide 
transport and possesses an ATP-binding site in the middle of the pore lumen to 
facilitate the passage of the nucleotide. The maxi-anion channel conducts ATP 
and displays a pharmacological profile similar to that of ATP release in 
response to osmotic, ischemic, hypoxic and salt stresses. The relation of some 
other channels and transporters to the regulated release of ATP is also 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11302-005-1557-0
PMCID: PMC2096548
PMID: 18404516