1. Purinergic Signal. 2006 Sep;2(3):559-71. doi: 10.1007/s11302-006-9012-4. Epub 
2006 Jul 8.

Characterization of human and rodent native and recombinant adenosine A(2B) 
receptors by radioligand binding studies.

Bertarelli DC(1), Diekmann M, Hayallah AM, Rüsing D, Iqbal J, Preiss B, Verspohl 
EJ, Müller CE.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Institute, Pharmaceutical Sciences Bonn (PSB), Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry Poppelsdorf, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Adenosine A(2B) receptors of native human and rodent cell lines were 
investigated using [(3)H]PSB-298 
[(8-{4-[2-(2-hydroxyethylamino)-2-oxoethoxy]phenyl}-1-propylxanthine] in 
radioligand binding studies. [(3)H]PSB-298 showed saturable and reversible 
binding. It exhibited a K(D) value of 60 +/- 1 nM and limited capacity (B(max) = 
3.511 fmol per milligram protein) at recombinant human adenosine A(2B) receptors 
expressed in human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293). The addition of sodium 
chloride (100 mM) led to a threefold increase in the number of binding sites 
recognized by the radioligand. The curve of the agonist 
5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA) was shifted to the right in the presence 
of NaCl, while the curve of the antagonist PSB-298 was shifted to the left, 
indicating that PSB-298 may be an inverse agonist at A(2B) receptors. Adenosine 
A(2B) receptors were shown to be the major adenosine A(2) receptor subtype on 
the mouse neuroblastoma x rat glioma hybrid cell line NG108-15 cells. Binding 
studies at rat INS-1 cells (insulin secreting cell line) demonstrated that 
[(3)H]PSB-298 is a selective radioligand for adenosine A(2B) binding sites in 
this cell line.

DOI: 10.1007/s11302-006-9012-4
PMCID: PMC2096648
PMID: 18404493