1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16830-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801778200. Epub
2008  Apr 11.

Crystal structure of human liver Delta4-3-ketosteroid 5beta-reductase (AKR1D1) 
and implications for substrate binding and catalysis.

Di Costanzo L(1), Drury JE, Penning TM, Christianson DW.

Author information:
(1)Roy and Diana Vagelos Laboratories, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6323, USA.

AKR1D1 (steroid 5beta-reductase) reduces all Delta(4)-3-ketosteroids to form 
5beta-dihydrosteroids, a first step in the clearance of steroid hormones and an 
essential step in the synthesis of all bile acids. The reduction of the 
carbon-carbon double bond in an alpha,beta-unsaturated ketone by 5beta-reductase 
is a unique reaction in steroid enzymology because hydride transfer from NADPH 
to the beta-face of a Delta(4)-3-ketosteroid yields a cis-A/B-ring configuration 
with an approximately 90 degrees bend in steroid structure. Here, we report the 
first x-ray crystal structure of a mammalian steroid hormone carbon-carbon 
double bond reductase, human Delta(4)-3-ketosteroid 5beta-reductase (AKR1D1), 
and its complexes with intact substrates. We have determined the structures of 
AKR1D1 complexes with NADP(+) at 1.79- and 1.35-A resolution (HEPES bound in the 
active site), NADP(+) and cortisone at 1.90-A resolution, NADP(+) and 
progesterone at 2.03-A resolution, and NADP(+) and testosterone at 1.62-A 
resolution. Complexes with cortisone and progesterone reveal productive 
substrate binding orientations based on the proximity of each steroid 
carbon-carbon double bond to the re-face of the nicotinamide ring of NADP(+). 
This orientation would permit 4-pro-(R)-hydride transfer from NADPH. Each 
steroid carbonyl accepts hydrogen bonds from catalytic residues Tyr(58) and 
Glu(120). The Y58F and E120A mutants are devoid of activity, supporting a role 
for this dyad in the catalytic mechanism. Intriguingly, testosterone binds 
nonproductively, thereby rationalizing the substrate inhibition observed with 
this particular steroid. The locations of disease-linked mutations thought to be 
responsible for bile acid deficiency are also revealed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801778200
PMCID: PMC2423251
PMID: 18407998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]