1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):15224-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800910200. Epub 
2008 Apr 9.

Growth factor-induced phosphorylation of sterol regulatory element-binding 
proteins inhibits sumoylation, thereby stimulating the expression of their 
target genes, low density lipoprotein uptake, and lipid synthesis.

Arito M(1), Horiba T, Hachimura S, Inoue J, Sato R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The destiny and activity of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) 
in the nucleus are regulated by modification with ubiquitin, small 
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO), or phosphorus. ERK-dependent phosphorylation 
causes an increase in their transcriptional activity, whereas SUMO modification 
halts it. We hypothesized a causal linkage between phosphorylation and 
sumoylation because their sites are very closely located in SREBP-1 and -2 
molecules. When Ser(455), a phosphorylation site in SREBP-2, was substituted 
with Ala, this SREBP-2 mutant was more efficiently modified by SUMO-1. On the 
other hand, substitution of Asp inhibited SUMO conjugation, mimicking 
phosphoserine. When cells were cultured with insulin-like growth factor-1, 
sumoylation of SREBP-2 was decreased with an increase in its phosphorylation, 
but SREBP-2(S455A) was continuously sumoylated. An ERK cascade inhibitor, U0126, 
inversely augmented SUMO modification of SREBP-2. Insulin-like growth factor-1 
treatment stimulated the expression of SREBP target genes such as the low 
density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, squalene synthase, and 
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA synthase genes. These results indicate that growth 
factor-induced phosphorylation of SREBP-2 inhibits sumoylation, thereby 
facilitating SREBP transcriptional activity. Glutathione S-transferase pulldown 
assays revealed that wild-type SREBP-2, but not a mutant lacking Lys(464), 
interacts with HDAC3 preferentially among the histone deacetylase family 
members. HDAC3 small interfering RNA induced gene expression of the LDL receptor 
and thereby augmented fluorescently labeled LDL uptake in HepG2 cells. In 
summary, growth factors inhibit sumoylation of SREBPs through their 
phosphorylation, thus avoiding the recruitment of an HDAC3 corepressor complex 
and stimulating the lipid uptake and synthesis required for cell growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800910200
PMCID: PMC3258893
PMID: 18403372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]