1. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):6385-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.9.6385.

A novel non-synonymous polymorphism (p.Arg240His) in C4b-binding protein is 
associated with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome and leads to impaired 
alternative pathway cofactor activity.

Blom AM(1), Bergström F, Edey M, Diaz-Torres M, Kavanagh D, Lampe A, Goodship 
JA, Strain L, Moghal N, McHugh M, Inward C, Tomson C, Frémeaux-Bacchi V, 
Villoutreix BO, Goodship TH.

Author information:
(1)Lund University, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Malmö University 
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a disorder characterized by 
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute renal failure. Mutations, 
polymorphisms, and copy number variation in complement factors and inhibitors 
are associated with aHUS. In this study, we report the first functional 
non-synonymous polymorphism in the complement inhibitor C4b-binding protein 
(C4BP) alpha-chain (c.719G>A; p.Arg240His), which is associated with aHUS. This 
heterozygous change was found in 6/166 aHUS patients compared with 5/542 normal 
(chi2 = 6.021; p = 0.014), which was replicated in a second cohort of aHUS 
patients in which we found 5/170 carriers. The polymorphism does not decrease 
expression efficiency of C4BP. p.Arg240His is equally efficient as the wild type 
in binding and supporting degradation of C4BP but its ability to bind C3b and 
act as cofactor to its degradation both in fluid phase and on surfaces is 
impaired. This observation supports the hypothesis that dysregulation of the 
alternative pathway of complement is pivotal for aHUS. Three of the patients 
carry also mutations in membrane cofactor protein and factor H strengthening the 
hypothesis that individuals may carry multiple susceptibility factors with an 
additive effect on the risk of developing aHUS.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.180.9.6385
PMID: 18424762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]