1. Diabetes. 2008 Jul;57(7):1926-34. doi: 10.2337/db07-1775. Epub 2008 Apr 21.

Protein engineering strategies for sustained glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor-dependent control of glucose homeostasis.

Picha KM(1), Cunningham MR, Drucker DJ, Mathur A, Ort T, Scully M, Soderman A, 
Spinka-Doms T, Stojanovic-Susulic V, Thomas BA, O'Neil KT.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, Centocor R&D, Radnor, Pennsylvania. USA.

OBJECTIVE: We have developed a novel platform for display and delivery of 
bioactive peptides that links the biological properties of the peptide to the 
pharmacokinetic properties of an antibody. Peptides engineered in the MIMETIBODY 
platform have improved biochemical and biophysical properties that are quite 
distinct from those of Fc-fusion proteins. CNTO736 is a glucagon-like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) receptor agonist engineered in our MIMETIBODY platform. It retains many 
activities of native GLP-1 yet has a significantly enhanced pharmacokinetic 
profile. Our goal was to develop a long-acting GLP-1 receptor agonist with 
sustained efficacy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In vitro and in vivo activity of CNTO736 was 
evaluated using a variety of rodent cell lines and diabetic animal models.
RESULTS: Acute pharmacodynamic studies in diabetic rodents demonstrate that 
CNTO736 reduces fasting and postprandial glucose, decreases gastric emptying, 
and inhibits food intake in a GLP-1 receptor-specific manner. Reduction of food 
intake following CNTO736 dosing is coincident with detection of the molecule in 
the circumventricular organs of the brain and activation of c-fos in regions 
protected by the blood-brain barrier. Diabetic rodents dosed chronically with 
CNTO736 have lower fasting and postprandial glucose and reduced body weight.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrate that CNTO736 produces a 
spectrum of GLP-1 receptor-dependent actions while exhibiting significantly 
improved pharmacokinetics relative to the native GLP-1 peptide.

DOI: 10.2337/db07-1775
PMCID: PMC2453616
PMID: 18426860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]