1. Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;123(5):495-506. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0501-0. Epub 2008 
Apr 26.

Substance dependence low-density whole genome association study in two distinct 
American populations.

Yu Y(1), Kranzler HR, Panhuysen C, Weiss RD, Poling J, Farrer LA, Gelernter J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Genetics Program), Boston University Schools of 
Medicine and Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

Cocaine and opioid dependence are common, complex disorders with high 
heritability that commonly co-occur with other substance dependence disorders. 
Improved insight into the genetic basis of substance dependence would help 
elucidate its etiology and could inform its prevention and treatment. To 
generate new hypotheses about the genetics of substance dependence, we genotyped 
5633 tagging single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers in 1699 subjects from 
339 African American (AA) families and 334 European American (EA) families 
ascertained through a sib pair meeting DSM-IV criteria for either cocaine or 
opioid dependence. The associations between genetic markers and five substance 
dependence traits (cocaine dependence, opioid dependence, cocaine-induced 
paranoia, alcohol dependence, and nicotine dependence) were assessed by family 
based association tests (FBAT). Results were ranked according to several 
criteria including statistical significance, concordance of results across 
population samples, and potential biological relevance of the implicated gene. 
The top-ranked result was an association of SNP rs1133503 in the MANEA gene with 
cocaine-induced paranoia (CIP). Our study provides an initial substance 
dependence trait-specific blueprint of associated regions for future candidate 
gene studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-008-0501-0
PMCID: PMC3428017
PMID: 18438686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]