1. J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1727-38. doi: 10.1172/JCI34944.

STAT3 and STAT1 mediate IL-11-dependent and inflammation-associated gastric 
tumorigenesis in gp130 receptor mutant mice.

Ernst M(1), Najdovska M, Grail D, Lundgren-May T, Buchert M, Tye H, Matthews VB, 
Armes J, Bhathal PS, Hughes NR, Marcusson EG, Karras JG, Na S, Sedgwick JD, 
Hertzog PJ, Jenkins BJ.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. Matthias.Ernst@ludwig.edu.au

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2008 May;118(5):1628-31. doi: 10.1172/JCI35344.

Deregulated activation of STAT3 is frequently associated with many human 
hematological and epithelial malignancies, including gastric cancer. While 
exaggerated STAT3 signaling facilitates an antiapoptotic, proangiogenic, and 
proproliferative environment for neoplastic cells, the molecular mechanisms 
leading to STAT3 hyperactivation remain poorly understood. Using the 
gp130(Y757F/Y757F) mouse model of gastric cancer, which carries a mutated gp130 
cytokine receptor signaling subunit that cannot bind the negative regulator of 
cytokine signaling SOCS3 and is characterized by hyperactivation of the 
signaling molecules STAT1 and STAT3, we have provided genetic evidence that 
IL-11 promotes chronic gastric inflammation and associated tumorigenesis. 
Expression of IL-11 was increased in gastric tumors in gp130(Y757F/Y757F) mice, 
when compared with unaffected gastric tissue in wild-type mice, while 
gp130(Y757F/Y757F) mice lacking the IL-11 ligand-binding receptor subunit 
(IL-11Ralpha) showed normal gastric STAT3 activation and IL-11 expression and 
failed to develop gastric tumors. Furthermore, reducing STAT3 activity in 
gp130(Y757F/Y757F) mice, either genetically or by therapeutic administration of 
STAT3 antisense oligonucleotides, normalized gastric IL-11 expression and 
alleviated gastric tumor burden. Surprisingly, the genetic reduction of STAT1 
expression also reduced gastric tumorigenesis in gp130(Y757F/Y757F) mice and 
coincided with reduced gastric inflammation and IL-11 expression. Collectively, 
our data have identified IL-11 as a crucial cytokine promoting chronic gastric 
inflammation and associated tumorigenesis mediated by excessive activation of 
STAT3 and STAT1.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI34944
PMCID: PMC2323192
PMID: 18431520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]