1. Pharmacogenetics. 1991 Nov;1(2):68-78. doi: 10.1097/00008571-199111000-00003.

Human AH locus polymorphism and cancer: inducibility of CYP1A1 and other genes 
by combustion products and dioxin.

Nebert DW(1), Petersen DD, Puga A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, 
OH 45267-0056.

The polymorphism of mammalian aromatic hydrocarbon (Ah) responsiveness appears 
to be correlated with genetic differences in risk of bronchogenic carcinoma 
caused by cigarette smoking. The human polymorphism has been uncovered, largely 
as the result of corresponding genetic differences characterized first in the 
mouse. The murine Ah locus has been defined as the gene encoding the aromatic 
hydrocarbon-responsive (Ah) receptor, responsible for the inducibility of a 
battery of at least six genes, two of which encode P450 enzymes. The 
high-affinity receptor and, hence, more highly induced levels of P450, can 
result in greater concentrations of polycyclic aromatic reactive intermediates 
that form DNA adducts and, ultimately, mutation fixation (tumour initiation). 
The Ah receptor is also likely to participate in growth and differentiation 
signal transduction pathways (tumour promotion). Positive and negative control 
regions flanking the murine Cyp 1a-1 and human CYP1A1 (cytochrome P(1)450) genes 
have been identified. A DNA motif approximately 1 kb upstream of the 
transcription start site appears to affect the translatability of the CYP1A1 
mRNA and activity of the enzyme. Expression of the CYP1A1 or CYP1A2 enzyme in 
mouse hepatoma Hepa-1 cells lacking endogenous CYP1A1 activity represses 
constitutive transcription of not only the endogenous Cyp1a-1 gene but other 
genes in the dioxin-inducible [Ah] battery. Human polymorphisms involving a Msp 
I site 450 bp downstream from the last CYP1A1 exon have been described in Japan, 
the Eastern Mediterranean, Norway and the USA. The '1.9 allele' is associated 
with an increased incidence of Kreyberg Type I bronchogenic carcinomas in Japan 
and has recently been correlated with a valine-to-isoleucine substitution at 
position 462 in the haeme-binding region. This allele is about 3 times more 
frequent in Japan than in Caucasians of Norway and the USA, in which no 
correlation has been found between this allele and lung cancer. More work is 
needed to clarify these findings. Isolation and sequencing of the human Ah 
receptor cDNA, and the subsequent screening of populations for polymorphisms, 
hold great promise for predicting interindividual risk of cancer caused by 
smoking and other environmental pollutants.

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-199111000-00003
PMID: 1844873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]