1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2008 Jul;20(7):909-16. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01746.x.  Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Temporal and spatial regulation of CRE recombinase expression in 
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neurones in the mouse.

Wolfe A(1), Divall S, Singh SP, Nikrodhanond AA, Baria AT, Le WW, Hoffman GE, 
Radovick S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287, USA. awolfe3@jhmi.edu

Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurones located within the brain are the 
final neuroendocrine output regulating the reproductive hormone axis. Their 
small number and scattered distribution in the hypothalamus make them 
particularly difficult to study in vivo. The Cre/loxP system is a valuable tool 
to delete genes in specific cells and tissues. We report the production of two 
mouse lines that express the CRE bacteriophage recombinase in a GnRH-specific 
manner. The first line, the GnRH-CRE mouse, contains a transgene in which CRE is 
under the control of the murine GnRH promoter and targets CRE expression 
specifically to GnRH neurones in the hypothalamus. The second line, the 
GnRH-CRETeR mouse, uses the same murine GnRH promoter to target CRE expression 
to GnRH neurones, but is modified to be constitutively repressed by a 
tetracycline repressor (TetR) expressed from a downstream tetracycline repressor 
gene engineered within the transgene. GnRH neurone-specific CRE expression can 
therefore be induced by treatment with doxycycline which relieves repression by 
TetR. These GnRH-CRE and GnRH-CRETeR mice can be used to study the function of 
genes expressed specifically in GnRH neurones. The GnRH-CRETeR mouse can be used 
to study genes that may have distinct roles in reproductive physiology during 
the various developmental stages.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01746.x
PMCID: PMC2658716
PMID: 18445125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]