1. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2009 Jul-Aug;15(4):435-42. doi: 
10.1177/1076029608316013. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Association of angiotensin-converting enzyme gene 2350G>A polymorphism with 
myocardial infarction in a Chinese population.

Min Pan(1), Jiang MH, Wei MF, Liu ZH, Jiang WP, Geng HH, Cui ZC, Zhang DL, Zhu 
JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 20 Xisi 
Road, Suzhou, China.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) gene 2350G>A polymorphism has the most 
significant effect on plasma ACE concentrations. But the association between 
this polymorphism and myocardial infarction (MI) is presently unknown. We 
carried out a case-control study in the Chinese Han population. ACE2350G>A 
genotypes of 231 patients with MI and 288 healthy controls were detected by 
PCR-RFLP. Differences in frequencies of ACE genotypes and alleles and their 
associations with clinical features were assessed. The distribution of the 
ACE2350G>A genotypes (GG, GA, and AA) was 20.78%, 51.08%, and 28.14% in the MI 
group and 31.60%, 46.53%, and 21.87% in controls, respectively (P = .0167).The 
frequency of the A allele in the MI group was significantly higher than that in 
controls (53.68% vs 45.14%, P = .0062). The A allele carriers (GA + AA 
genotypes) had approximately 2-fold increased risk of MI when compared with the 
GG genotype (odds ratio = 1.76; 95% confidence interval = 1.24-3.52). There were 
no significant differences among the 3 genotypes in plasma levels of lipids, 
apolipoproteins, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and soluble CD40 ligand in 
either the MI group or the control group (P > .05). No statistical difference 
was observed between ACE2350G>A polymorphism and severity of the coronary 
lesions (P > .05). These results suggest that ACE2350G>A polymorphism is 
associated with acute MI, and A allele carrier is an independent risk factor for 
acute MI in the Chinese Han population.

DOI: 10.1177/1076029608316013
PMID: 18445609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]