1. Br J Sports Med. 2009 May;43(5):357-65. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.048793. Epub
2008  Apr 28.

Variants within the COL5A1 gene are associated with Achilles tendinopathy in two 
populations.

September AV(1), Cook J, Handley CJ, van der Merwe L, Schwellnus MP, Collins M.

Author information:
(1)MRC/UCT Research Unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, University of 
Cape Town, Newlands 7725, South Africa.

Comment in
    Br J Sports Med. 2009 May;43(5):314-6. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.052191.

OBJECTIVES: A COL5A1 gene variant was shown to be associated with chronic 
Achilles tendinopathy in a South African population. The aim of this 
case-control genetic association study was to investigate the BstUI and DpnII 
restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP) in a second population from 
Australia and to identify a predisposing haplotype for Achilles tendinopathy in 
both populations.
METHODS: 85 Australian and 93 South African patients with tendinopathy, as well 
as 210 Australian and 132 white South African control subjects were genotyped 
for the BstUI (rs12722) and DpnII (rs13946) RFLP, as well as markers rs10858286, 
rs3196378, rs11103544, rs4504708 and rs3128575.
RESULTS: The BstUI RFLP (p<0.001) and marker rs3196378 (p = 0.016) were 
associated with chronic Achilles tendinopathy in Australian subjects. 
Individuals within both populations with a CC genotype for the BstUI RFLP had a 
significantly decreased risk of developing tendinopathy versus any other 
genotypes (Australian odds ratio 0.42, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.86, p = 0.017). The TC 
inferred haplotype (rs12722, rs3196378) was found to be overrepresented (global 
p = 0.008) in the South African tendinopathy group compared with all other 
haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: The BstUI RFLP is associated with chronic Achilles tendinopathy in a 
second population and a region within the COL5A1 3' untranslated region may 
predispose individuals to an increased risk of developing chronic Achilles 
tendinopathy.

DOI: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.048793
PMID: 18443036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]