1. Biochemistry. 2008 May 20;47(20):5523-35. doi: 10.1021/bi702366e. Epub 2008
Apr  30.

Critical role of arginine 160 of the EutB protein subunit for active site 
structure and radical catalysis in coenzyme B12-dependent ethanolamine 
ammonia-lyase.

Sun L(1), Groover OA, Canfield JM, Warncke K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The protein chemical, kinetic, and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and 
electron spin-echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) spectroscopic properties of 
ethanolamine ammonia-lyase (EAL) from Salmonella typhimurium with site-directed 
mutations in a conserved arginine residue (R160) of the active site containing 
EutB protein subunit have been characterized. R160 was predicted by a 
comparative model of EutB to play a critical role in protein structure and 
catalysis [Sun, L., and Warncke, K. (2006) Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 
64, 308-319]. R160I and R160E mutants fail to assemble into an EAL oligomer that 
can be isolated by the standard enzyme purification procedure. The R160K and 
R160A mutants assemble, but R160A EAL is catalytically inactive and reacts with 
substrates to form magnetically isolated Co(II) and unidentified radical 
species. R160A EAL activity is resurrected by externally added guanidinium to 
2.3% of wild-type EAL. R160K EAL displays catalytic turnover of aminoethanol, 
with a 180-fold lower value of k(cat)/ K(M) relative to wild-type enzyme. R160K 
EAL also forms Co(II)-substrate radical pair intermediate states during turnover 
on aminoethanol and (S)-2-aminopropanol substrates. Simulations of the X-band 
EPR spectra show that the Co(II)-substrate radical pair separation distances are 
increased by 2.1 +/- 1.0 A in R160K EAL relative to wild-type EAL, which 
corresponds to the predicted 1.6 A change in arginine versus lysine side chain 
length. 14N ESEEM from a hyperfine-coupled protein nitrogen in wild type is 
absent in R160K EAL, which indicates that a guanidinium 14N of R160 interacts 
directly with the substrate radical through a hydrogen bond. ESEEM of the 
2H-labeled substrate radical states in wild-type and R160K EAL shows that the 
native separation distances among the substrate C1 and C2, and coenzyme C5' 
reactant centers, are conserved in the mutant protein. The EPR and ESEEM 
measurements evince a protein-mediated force on the C5'-methyl center that is 
directed toward the reacting substrate species during the hydrogen atom transfer 
and radical rearrangement reactions. The results indicate that the positive 
charge at the residue 160 side chain terminus is required for proper folding of 
EutB, assembly of a stable EAL oligomer, and catalysis in the assembled 
oligomer.

DOI: 10.1021/bi702366e
PMID: 18444665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]