1. Neurology. 2008 Apr 29;70(18):1623-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000310986.48286.8e.

Phenotypic spectrum of neurodegeneration associated with mutations in the PLA2G6 
gene (PLAN).

Kurian MA(1), Morgan NV, MacPherson L, Foster K, Peake D, Gupta R, Philip SG, 
Hendriksz C, Morton JE, Kingston HM, Rosser EM, Wassmer E, Gissen P, Maher ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, 
Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) 
comprises a heterogeneous group of disorders in which disruption of cellular 
mechanisms leads to accumulation of iron in the basal ganglia. This group 
includes patients with recently discovered mutations in the PLA2G6 gene encoding 
a calcium-independent phospholipase A2 enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
glycerophospholipids. Previously, children with PLA2G6 mutations have been 
diagnosed with several different disorders and we wished to better define the 
phenotype of PLA2G6- associated neurodegeneration.
METHODS: Detailed review of the clinical and genetic features of 14 and 
radiologic features of 13 of these patients with PLA2G6 mutations was 
undertaken.
RESULTS: Median age of symptom presentation was 14 months. One third of the 
cohort presented following an intercurrent illness. The children had progressive 
cognitive and motor skill regression, with evidence of axial hypotonia, four 
limb spasticity, bulbar dysfunction, and strabismus. All patients developed 
cerebellar ataxia and dystonia. Most patients had optic atrophy. Brain imaging 
demonstrated cerebellar cortical atrophy and gliosis in all patients. Changes 
consistent with increased iron deposition were identified in the globus pallidus 
and substantia nigra. Novel corpus callosum changes are also reported.
CONCLUSION: We describe a cohort of patients with PLA2G6-associated 
neurodegeneration (PLAN). Although patients with PLAN have previously been 
diagnosed with infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, neurodegeneration associated 
with brain iron accumulation, and Karak syndrome, they display a characteristic 
clinical and radiologic phenotype. PLA2G6 mutational analysis will negate the 
need for more invasive diagnostic procedures such as tissue biopsy.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000310986.48286.8e
PMID: 18443314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]