1. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(8):2043-56. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern065. Epub 2008 May 2.

Low temperature and light regulate delta 12 fatty acid desaturases (FAD2) at a 
transcriptional level in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum).

Kargiotidou A(1), Deli D, Galanopoulou D, Tsaftaris A, Farmaki T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Agrobiotechnology, Center for Research and Technology, 6th Km 
Charilaou, Thermi Road, 570 01 Thermi, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Lipid modifying enzymes play a key role in the development of cold stress 
tolerance in cold-resistant plants such as cereals. However, little is known 
about the role of the endogenous enzymes in cold-sensitive species such as 
cotton. Delta 12 fatty acid desaturases (FAD2), known to participate in 
adaptation to low temperatures through acyl chain modifications were used in 
gene expression studies in order to identify parameters of plant response to low 
temperatures. The induction of microsomal delta 12 fatty acid desaturases at an 
mRNA level under cold stress in plants is shown here for first time. 
Quantitative PCR showed that though both delta 12 omega 6 fatty acid desaturase 
genes FAD2-3 and FAD2-4 identified in cotton are induced under cold stress, 
FAD2-4 induction is significantly higher than FAD2-3. The induction of both 
isoforms was light regulated, in contrast a third isoform FAD2-2 was not 
affected by cold or light. Stress tolerance and light regulatory elements were 
identified in the predicted promoters of both FAD2-3 and FAD2-4 genes. 
Di-unsaturated fatty acid species rapidly increased in the microsomal fraction 
isolated from cotton leaves, following cold stress. Expression analysis patterns 
were correlated with the observed increase in both total and microsomal fatty 
acid unsaturation levels suggesting the direct role of the FAD2 genes in 
membrane adaptation to cold stress.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ern065
PMCID: PMC2413273
PMID: 18453533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]