1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Jul;28(7):1407-12. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.167437. Epub 2008 May 1.

Polymorphisms of the IL1-receptor antagonist gene (IL1RN) are associated with 
multiple markers of systemic inflammation.

Reiner AP(1), Wurfel MM, Lange LA, Carlson CS, Nord AS, Carty CL, Rieder MJ, 
Desmarais C, Jenny NS, Iribarren C, Walston JD, Williams OD, Nickerson DA, 
Jarvik GP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Box 357236, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195, USA. apreiner@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Circulating levels of acute phase reactant proteins such as plasma 
C-reactive protein (CRP) are likely influenced by multiple genes regulating the 
innate immune response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened a set of 16 inflammation-related genes for 
association with CRP in a large population-based study of healthy young adults 
(n=1627). Results were validated in 2 independent studies (n=1208 and n=4310), 
including a pooled analysis of all 3 studies. In the pooled analysis, the minor 
allele of IL1RN 1018 (rs4251961) within the gene encoding interleukin (IL)-1 
receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) was significantly associated with higher mean 
plasma log(CRP) level (P<1 x 10(-4)). The same IL1RN 1018 allele was associated 
with higher mean plasma log(IL-6) levels (P=0.004). In the pooled analysis, the 
minor allele of IL1RN 13888 (rs2232354) was associated with higher fibrinogen, 
(P=0.001). The IL1RN 1018 and 13888 variant alleles tag a clade of IL1RN 
haplotypes linked to allele 1 of an 86-bp VNTR polymorphism. We confirmed that 
the IL1RN 1018 variant (rs4251961) was associated with decreased cellular IL-1RA 
production ex vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Common functional polymorphisms of the IL1RN gene are associated 
with several markers of systemic inflammation.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.167437
PMCID: PMC2748384
PMID: 18451331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]