1. PLoS Med. 2008 May 6;5(5):e97. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050097.

Synergistic effects of hypofibrinolysis and genetic and acquired risk factors on 
the risk of a first venous thrombosis.

Meltzer ME(1), Lisman T, Doggen CJ, de Groot PG, Rosendaal FR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we demonstrated that hypofibrinolysis, a decreased 
capacity to dissolve a blood clot as measured with an overall clot lysis assay, 
increases the risk of venous thrombosis. Here, we investigated the combined 
effect of hypofibrinolysis with established risk factors associated with 
hypercoagulability.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Fibrinolytic potential was determined with a plasma-based 
clot lysis assay in 2,090 patients with venous thrombosis and 2,564 control 
participants between 18 and 70 y of age enrolled in the Multiple Environmental 
and Genetic Assessment (MEGA) of risk factors for venous thrombosis study, a 
population-based case-control study on venous thrombosis. Participants completed 
a standardized questionnaire on acquired risk factors. Hypofibrinolysis alone, 
i.e., clot lysis time (CLT) in the fourth quartile (longest CLT) (in absence of 
the other risk factor of interest) increased thrombosis risk about 2-fold 
relative to individuals with CLT in the first quartile (shortest CLT). Oral 
contraceptive use in women with CLT in the first quartile gave an odds ratio 
(OR) of 2.6 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.6 to 4.0), while women with 
hypofibrinolysis who used oral contraceptives had an over 20-fold increased risk 
of venous thrombosis (OR 21.8, 95% CI 10.2 to 46.7). For immobilization alone 
the OR was 4.3 (95% CI 3.2 to 5.8) and immobilization with hypofibrinolysis 
increased the risk 10.3-fold (95% CI 7.7 to 13.8). Factor V Leiden alone 
increased the risk 3.5-fold (95% CI 2.3 to 5.5), and hypofibrinolysis in factor 
V Leiden carriers gave an OR of 8.1 (95% CI 5.3 to 12.3). The combination of 
hypofibrinolysis and the prothrombin 20210A mutation did not synergistically 
increase the risk. All ORs and 95% CIs presented are relative to individuals 
with CLT in the first quartile and without the other risk factor of interest.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of hypofibrinolysis with oral contraceptive use, 
immobilization, or factor V Leiden results in a risk of venous thrombosis that 
exceeds the sum of the individual risks.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050097
PMCID: PMC2365975
PMID: 18462012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.