1. Int J Biol Sci. 2008 Apr 23;4(2):96-102. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4.96.

Comparative understanding of UTS2 and UTS2R genes for their involvement in type 
2 diabetes mellitus.

Jiang Z(1), Michal JJ, Tobey DJ, Wang Z, Macneil MD, Magnuson NS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164-6351, USA. jiangz@wsu.edu

Several reports have shown that urotensin 2 (UTS2) and its receptor (UTS2R) are 
involved in glucose metabolism and insulin resistance, which lead to development 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in humans. In the present study, we annotated 
both bovine UTS2 and UTS2R genes and identified 5 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) for the former gene and 14 mutations for the latter gene. 
Four mutations were genotyped on a Wagyu x Limousin reference population, 
including 6 F(1 )bulls, 113 F(1 )dams and ~250 F(2 )progeny. Among 12 phenotypes 
related to fat deposition and fatty acid composition, we observed that the UTS2 
gene was significantly associated with the amount of skeletal saturated fatty 
acids, while its receptor (UTS2R) gene had significant effects on amounts of 
saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, Delta(9) desaturase activity for 
converting 16:0 into 16:1, muscle fat (marbling) score and Longissimus Dorsi 
muscle area. However, in this population, these markers were not associated with 
subcutaneous fat depth or percent kidney, pelvic and heart fat. We also found 
that mutations in the promoter regions altered the promoter activities in both 
genes and coding SNPs might affect the mRNA stability in the UTS2R gene. 
Overall, our present study provides the first evidence that both UTS2 and UTS2R 
genes regulate skeletal muscle fat accumulation and fatty acid metabolism, thus 
indicating their potential pathological functions related to obesity and T2DM in 
humans.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.4.96
PMCID: PMC2359900
PMID: 18463714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.