1. PLoS One. 2008 May 14;3(5):e2162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002162.

Expression of aquaporin 5 (AQP5) promotes tumor invasion in human non small cell 
lung cancer.

Chae YK(1), Woo J, Kim MJ, Kang SK, Kim MS, Lee J, Lee SK, Gong G, Kim YH, Soria 
JC, Jang SJ, Sidransky D, Moon C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America [corrected]

Erratum in
    PLoS ONE. 2008;3(6). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/9ae0d68c-71ee-46af-b157-07c34a89bc1f.

The aquaporins (AQP) are water channel proteins playing a major role in 
transcellular and transepithelial water movement. Recently, the role of AQPs in 
human carcinogenesis has become an area of great interest. Here, by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC), we have found an expression of AQP5 protein in 35.3% 
(IHC-score: > or = 1, 144/408) of the resected NSCLC tissue samples. Cases with 
AQP5-positive status (IHC-score: > or = 2) displayed a higher rate of tumor 
recurrence than negative ones in NSCLC (54.7% vs. 35.1%, p = 0.005) and worse 
disease-free survival (p = 0.033; OR = 1.52; 95%CI: 1.04-2.23). Further in vitro 
invasion assay using BEAS-2B and NIH3T3 cells stably transfected with 
overexpression constructs for full length wild-type AQP5 (AQP5) and its two 
mutants, N185D which blocks membrane trafficking and S156A which blocks 
phosphorylation on Ser156, showed that AQP5 induced cell invasions while both 
mutants did not. In BEAS-2B cells, the expression of AQP5 caused a spindle-like 
and fibroblastic morphologic change and losses of cell-cell contacts and cell 
polarity. Only cells with AQP5, not either of two mutants, exhibited a loss of 
epithelial cell markers and a gain of mesenchymal cell markers. In a human 
SH3-domains protein array, cellular extracts from BEAS-2B with AQP5 showed a 
robust binding activity to SH3-domains of the c-Src, Lyn, and Grap2 C-terminal. 
Furthermore, in immunoprecipitation assay, activated c-Src, phosphorylated on 
Tyr416, showed a stronger binding activity to cellular extracts from BEAS-2B 
with AQP5 compared with N185D or S156A mutant. Fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) analysis failed to show evidence of genomic amplification, 
suggesting AQP5 expression as a secondary event. Based on these clinical and 
molecular observations, we conclude that AQP5, through its phosphorylation on 
Ser156 and subsequent interaction with c-Src, plays an important role in NSCLC 
invasion and, therefore, may provide a unique opportunity for developing a novel 
therapeutic target as well as a prognostic marker in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002162
PMCID: PMC2364652
PMID: 18478076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: D.S. is a paid consultant 
to Cangen Biotechnology.