1. Int J Lab Hematol. 2008 Jun;30(3):240-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-553X.2007.00932.x.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the apo(a) kringle IV type 8 domain are not 
associated with atherothrombotic serum lipoprotein (a) concentration, in a 
Portuguese paediatric population.

Ferreira H(1), Costa E, Vieira E, Barbot J, Dos Santos R.

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Pediatria do Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Maria Pia, Portugal.

Lipoprotein (a) (Lp[a]) is a complex of apolipoprotein (a) (apo[a]) and 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL), associated with atherothrombotic disease. Most of 
the interindividual variations in plasma levels of Lp(a) can be attributed to 
sequence differences linked to the apo(a) gene locus. The aim of this study was 
to investigate a possible link between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the apo(a) kringle (K) IV type 8 domain and atherothrombotic serum Lp(a) 
concentrations. Direct sequencing of the two exons and flanking intronic 
sequences of the apo(a) K IV type 8 domain was performed in a group of 97 
paediatric patients, 51 with serum Lp(a) concentration above and 46 with 
concentration below 30 mg/dl,. We found three SNPs, two in exon 1 (c.66A>C and 
c.133G>A) and one in intron 1 (c.160+1G>A). The c.66A>C polymorphism was the 
most common with a heterozygosity frequency of 15.46%. The c.133G>A and 
c.160+1G>A polymorphisms were found at a frequency of 5.15% and 1.03%, 
respectively. No statistically significant difference was found in the genotype 
distribution between the two groups of patients. Our results suggest that these 
SNPs in the apo(a) K IV 8 domain are not directly associated with 
atherothrombotic serum Lp(a) concentration in our population.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2007.00932.x
PMID: 18479303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]