1. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2008;10(1):29-38. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2008.10.1/oksteinlein.

Genetics and epilepsy.

Steinlein OK(1).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich School of Medicine, Institute of 
Human Genetics, Goethestr. 29, 80336 Munich, Germany. 
Ortrud.Steinlein@med.uni-muenchen.de

The term "epilepsy" describes a heterogeneous group of disorders, most of them 
caused by interactions between several or even many genes and environmental 
factors. Much rarer are the genetic epilepsies that are due to single-gene 
mutations or defined structural chromosomal aberrations, such as microdeletions. 
The discovery of several of the genes underlying these rare genetic epilepsies 
has already considerably contributed to our understanding of the basic 
mechanisms in epileptogenesis. The progress made in the last 15 years in the 
genetics of epilepsy is providing new possibilities for diagnosis and therapy. 
Here, different genetic epilepsies are reviewed as examples, to demonstrate the 
various pathways that can lead from genes to seizures.

El término “epilepsia” describe un grupo heterogéneo de trastornos, la mayoria 
de los cuales son causados por interacciones entre algunos o incluso muchos 
genes, y factores ambientales. Son bastante más raras las epilepsias genéticas 
que se deben a mutaciones de un gen único o aberraciones cromosómicas 
estructurales definidas, como las microdeleciones, El descubrimiento de algunos 
de los genes que están a la base de estas raras epilepsias genéticas ya ha 
contribuido considerablemente a la comprensión de los mecanismos básicos en la 
epileptogénesis. El progreso que se ha llevado a cabo en los últimos 15 años en 
la genética de la epilepsia está aportando nuevas posibilidades diagnósticas y 
terapéuticas. En este artículo se revisan, a modo de ejemplo, diferentes 
epilepsias genéticas para demostrar las diversas vías que pueden llevar desde 
los genes a las convulsiones.

Le terme «épilepsie» décrit un groupe hétérogène de troubles dont la plupart 
sont dus à des interactions entre quelques, ou même de nombreux gènes et des 
facteurs environnementaux. Plus rares sont les épilepsies génétiques qui sont 
dues à des mutations d'un seul gène ou à des aberrations chromosomiques de 
structure définies comme les microdélétions. Notre compréhension des mécanismes 
de base de l'épileptogenèse a déjà été considérablement améliorée par la 
découverte de plusieurs de ces gènes impliqués dans ces épilepsies génétiques 
peu répandues. Les progrès effectués ces 15 dernières années dans la génétique 
de l'épilepsie ouvrent de nouvelles perspectives de diagnostic et de traitement. 
Dans cet article, nous passons en revue différentes épilepsies génétiques comme 
exemples illustrant les différentes voies qui mènent des gènes à l'apparition 
d'une crise comitiale.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2008.10.1/oksteinlein
PMCID: PMC3181863
PMID: 18472482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]