1. J Physiol. 2008 Jul 15;586(14):3405-23. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.154971.
Epub  2008 May 15.

Mouse models of human KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 mutations for benign familial neonatal 
convulsions show seizures and neuronal plasticity without synaptic 
reorganization.

Singh NA(1), Otto JF, Dahle EJ, Pappas C, Leslie JD, Vilaythong A, Noebels JL, 
White HS, Wilcox KS, Leppert MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, 
USA. nsingh@genetics.utah.edu

The childhood epilepsy syndrome of benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) 
exhibits the remarkable feature of clinical remission within a few weeks of 
onset and a favourable prognosis, sparing cognitive abilities despite persistent 
expression of the mutant KCNQ2 or KCNQ3 potassium channels throughout adulthood. 
To better understand such dynamic neuroprotective plasticity within the 
developing brain, we introduced missense mutations that underlie human BFNC into 
the orthologous murine Kcnq2 (Kv7.2) and Kcnq3 (Kv7.3) genes. Mutant mice were 
examined for altered thresholds to induced seizures, spontaneous seizure 
characteristics, hippocampal histology, and M-current properties of CA1 
hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Adult Kcnq2(A306T/+) and Kcnq3(G311V/+) 
heterozygous knock-in mice exhibited reduced thresholds to electrically induced 
seizures compared to wild-type littermate mice. Both Kcnq2(A306T/A306T) and 
Kcnq3(G311V/G311V) homozygous mutant mice exhibited early onset spontaneous 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures concurrent with a significant reduction in 
amplitude and increased deactivation kinetics of the neuronal M-current. Mice 
had recurrent seizures into adulthood that triggered molecular plasticity 
including ectopic neuropeptide Y (NPY) expression in granule cells, but without 
hippocampal mossy fibre sprouting or neuronal loss. These novel knocking mice 
recapitulate proconvulsant features of the human disorder yet show that 
inherited M-current defects spare granule cells from reactive changes in adult 
hippocampal networks. The absence of seizure-induced pathology found in these 
epileptic mouse models parallels the benign neurodevelopmental cognitive profile 
exhibited by the majority of BFNC patients.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.154971
PMCID: PMC2538806
PMID: 18483067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]