1. BMC Plant Biol. 2008 May 16;8:57. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-8-57.

Insight into the early steps of root hair formation revealed by the procuste1 
cellulose synthase mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Singh SK(1), Fischer U, Singh M, Grebe M, Marchant A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Forest Genetics and Plant Physiology, SLU, 901 83 Ume√•, Sweden. 
Sunil.Kumar.Singh@plantphys.umu.se

BACKGROUND: Formation of plant root hairs originating from epidermal cells 
involves selection of a polar initiation site and production of an initial hair 
bulge which requires local cell wall loosening. In Arabidopsis the polar 
initiation site is located towards the basal end of epidermal cells. However 
little is currently understood about the mechanism for the selection of the hair 
initiation site or the mechanism by which localised hair outgrowth is achieved. 
The Arabidopsis procuste1 (prc1-1) cellulose synthase mutant was studied in 
order to investigate the role of the cell wall loosening during the early stages 
of hair formation.
RESULTS: The prc1-1 mutant exhibits uncontrolled, preferential bulging of 
trichoblast cells coupled with mislocalised hair positioning. Combining the 
prc1-1 mutant with root hair defective6-1 (rhd6-1), which on its own is almost 
completely devoid of root hairs results in a significant restoration of root 
hair formation. The pEXPANSIN7::GFP (pEXP7::GFP) marker which is specifically 
expressed in trichoblast cell files of wild-type roots, is absent in the rhd6-1 
mutant. However, pEXP7::GFP expression in the rhd6-1/prc1-1 double mutant is 
restored in a subset of epidermal cells which have either formed a root hair or 
exhibit a bulged phenotype consistent with a function for EXP7 during the early 
stages of hair formation.
CONCLUSION: These results show that RHD6 acts upstream of the normal cell wall 
loosening event which involves EXP7 expression and that in the absence of a 
functional RHD6 the loosening and accompanying EXP7 expression is blocked. In 
the prc1-1 mutant background, the requirement for RHD6 during hair initiation is 
reduced which may result from a weaker cell wall structure mimicking the cell 
wall loosening events during hair formation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-8-57
PMCID: PMC2396171
PMID: 18485206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]