1. Hum Pathol. 2008 Jul;39(7):1059-63. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.11.013. Epub 
2008 May 20.

Frameshift mutation of UVRAG, an autophagy-related gene, in gastric carcinomas 
with microsatellite instability.

Kim MS(1), Jeong EG, Ahn CH, Kim SS, Lee SH, Yoo NJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2012 Jun;43(6):961-2. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.021.

Alteration of autophagy is involved in tumor development. Beclin1, an important 
regulator of autophagy, acts as a tumor suppressor. Ultraviolet (UV) radiation 
resistance-associated gene (UVRAG) binds with Beclin1 and induces autophagy. 
There is a polyadenine tract in UVRAG gene (A10 in exon 8) that is a target for 
frameshift mutations in colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability 
(MSI). Functionally, colon cancer cells with the frameshift mutation of UVRAG 
show reduced autophagy formation and increased tumorigenicity. The aim of this 
study was to determine whether the frameshift mutations of UVRAG are also 
present in gastric carcinomas with MSI. For this, we analyzed human UVRAG exon 8 
in 45 gastric carcinomas with MSI and 92 gastric carcinomas without MSI by a 
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Overall, we detected 3 
frameshift mutations of UVRAG in the polyadenine tract (3/45; 6.7%), and all of 
them were found in MSH-high (H) subtypes (3/32; 9.4%). The 3 mutations consisted 
of 2 c.708_709delA and 1 c.709delA which would result in premature stops of the 
UVRAG protein synthesis. The present data indicate that frameshift mutations in 
the polyadenine tract in UVRAG gene are present in gastric carcinomas as well 
and suggest that the affected gastric cancer cells with the mutations may have a 
reduced autophagy activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.11.013
PMID: 18495205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]