1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3765-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn120. Epub 2008
 May 19.

Structural polymorphism within a regulatory element of the human KRAS promoter: 
formation of G4-DNA recognized by nuclear proteins.

Cogoi S(1), Paramasivam M, Spolaore B, Xodo LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, School of Medicine, Ple. 
Kolbe 4, 33100 Udine and CRIBI Biotechnology Centre, University of Padova, Viale 
G. Colombo 3, 35121 Padova, Italy.

The human KRAS proto-oncogene contains a critical nuclease hypersensitive 
element (NHE) upstream of the major transcription initiation site. In this 
article, we demonstrate by primer-extension experiments, PAGE, chemical 
footprinting, CD, UV and FRET experiments that the G-rich strand of NHE (32R) 
folds into intra-molecular G-quadruplex structures. Fluorescence data show that 
32R in 100 mM KCl melts with a biphasic profile, showing the formation of two 
distinct G-quadruplexes with T(m) of approximately 55 degrees C (Q(1)) and 
approximately 72 degrees C (Q(2)). DMS-footprinting and CD suggest that Q(1) can 
be a parallel and Q(2) a mixed parallel/antiparallel G-quadruplex. When dsNHE 
(32R hybridized to its complementary) is incubated with a nuclear extract from 
Panc-1 cells, three DNA-protein complexes are observed by EMSA. The complex of 
slower mobility is competed by quadruplex 32R, but not by mutant 
oligonucleotides, which cannot form a quadruplex structure. Using paramagnetic 
beads coupled with 32R, we pulled down from the Panc-1 extract proteins with 
affinity for quadruplex 32R. One of these is the heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein A1, which was previously reported to unfold quadruplex DNA. 
Our study suggests a role of quadruplex DNA in KRAS transcription and provides 
the basis for the rationale design of molecular strategies to inhibit the 
expression of KRAS.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn120
PMCID: PMC2441797
PMID: 18490377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]