1. J Exp Med. 2008 Jun 9;205(6):1447-61. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071450. Epub 2008 May
 19.

Differential regulation of interleukin 12 and interleukin 23 production in human 
dendritic cells.

Gerosa F(1), Baldani-Guerra B, Lyakh LA, Batoni G, Esin S, Winkler-Pickett RT, 
Consolaro MR, De Marchi M, Giachino D, Robbiano A, Astegiano M, Sambataro A, 
Kastelein RA, Carra G, Trinchieri G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Section of Immunology, University of Verona, 37134 
Verona, Italy. franca.gerosa@univr.it

We analyzed interleukin (IL) 12 and IL-23 production by monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells (mono-DCs). Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv and zymosan 
preferentially induced IL-23. IL-23 but not IL-12 was efficiently induced by the 
combination of nucleotide-binding oligodimerization domain and Toll-like 
receptor (TLR) 2 ligands, which mimics activation by M. tuberculosis, or by the 
human dectin-1 ligand beta-glucan alone or in combination with TLR2 ligands, 
mimicking induction by zymosan. TLR2 ligands inhibited IL-12 and increased IL-23 
production. DC priming with interferon (IFN) gamma strongly increased IL-12 
production, but was not required for IL-23 production and inhibited IL-23 
production induced by beta-glucan. The pattern of IL-12 and IL-23 induction was 
reflected in accumulation of the IL-12p35 and IL-23p19 transcripts, 
respectively, but not IL-12/23p40. Although IL-23, transforming growth factor 
beta, and IL-6 contained in the supernatants of activated mono-DCs played a role 
in the induction of IL-17 by human CD4(+) T cells, IL-1beta, in combination with 
one or more of those factors, was required for IL-17 production, and its 
production determined the differential ability of the stimuli used to elicit 
mono-DCs to produce soluble factors directing IL-17 production. Thus, the 
differential ability of pathogens to induce antigen-presenting cells to produce 
cytokines regulates the immune response to infection.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20071450
PMCID: PMC2413040
PMID: 18490488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]