1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):F215-25. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00548.2007. Epub 2008 May 21.

Protein kinase B/Akt activity is involved in renal TGF-beta1-driven 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in vitro and in vivo.

Kattla JJ(1), Carew RM, Heljic M, Godson C, Brazil DP.

Author information:
(1)UCD Diabetic Research Centre, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, 
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The molecular pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy (DN), the leading cause of 
end-stage renal disease worldwide, is complex and not fully understood. 
Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta1) plays a critical role in many 
fibrotic disorders, including DN. In this study, we report protein kinase B 
(PKB/Akt) activation as a downstream event contributing to the pathophysiology 
of DN. We investigated the potential of PKB/Akt to mediate the profibrotic 
bioactions of TGF-beta1 in kidney. Treatment of normal rat kidney epithelial 
cells (NRK52E) with TGF-beta1 resulted in activation of phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K) and PKB/Akt as evidenced by increased Ser473 phosphorylation and 
GSK-3beta phosphorylation. TGF-beta1 also stimulated increased Smad3 
phosphorylation in these cells, a response that was insensitive to inhibition of 
PI3K or PKB/Akt. NRK52E cells displayed a loss of zona occludins 1 and 
E-cadherin and a gain in vimentin and alpha-smooth muscle actin expression, 
consistent with the fibrotic actions of TGF-beta1. These effects were blocked 
with inhibitors of PI3K and PKB/Akt. Furthermore, overexpression of PTEN, the 
lipid phosphatase regulator of PKB/Akt activation, inhibited TGF-beta1-induced 
PKB/Akt activation. Interestingly, in the Goto-Kakizaki rat model of type 2 
diabetes, we also detected increased phosphorylation of PKB/Akt and its 
downstream target, GSK-3beta, in the tubules, relative to that in control Wistar 
rats. Elevated Smad3 phosphorylation was also detected in kidney extracts from 
Goto-Kakizaki rats with chronic diabetes. Together, these data suggest that 
TGF-beta1-mediated PKB/Akt activation may be important in renal fibrosis during 
diabetic nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00548.2007
PMCID: PMC2494512
PMID: 18495798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]