1. Exp Diabetes Res. 2008;2008:576862. doi: 10.1155/2008/576862.

History and diagnostic significance of C-peptide.

Brandenburg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Research and Development, D-55116 Mainz, Germany. 
dietrich.brandenburg@t-online.de

Starting with the epoch-making discovery of proinsulin, C-peptide has played an 
important interdisciplinary role, both as part of the single-chain precursor 
molecule and as an individual entity. In the pioneering years, fundamental 
systematic experiments unravelled new biochemical mechanisms and chemical 
structures. After the first detection of C-peptide in human serum, it quickly 
became a most useful independent indicator of insulin biosynthesis and 
secretion, finding application in a rapidly growing number of clinical 
investigations. A prerequisite was the development of specific immuno assays for 
proinsulin and C-peptide. Further milestones were: the chemical synthesis of 
several C-peptides and the accomplishments in the synthesis of proinsulin; the 
detection of preproinsulin with its bearings on understanding protein 
biosynthesis; the pioneering role of insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide, and 
mini-C-peptides in the development of recombinant DNA technology; and the 
discovery of the enzymes for the endoproteolytic processing of proinsulin into 
insulin and C-peptide, completing the pathway of biosynthesis. Today, C-peptide 
continues to serve as a special diagnostic tool in Diabetology and related 
fields. Thus, its passive role is well established. Evidence for its active role 
in physiology and pathophysiology is more recent and is subject of the following 
contributions.

DOI: 10.1155/2008/576862
PMCID: PMC2396242
PMID: 18509495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]