1. J Med Genet. 2008 Aug;45(8):507-12. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.056481. Epub 2008
May  29.

A novel A121T mutation in human cationic trypsinogen associated with hereditary 
pancreatitis: functional data indicating a loss-of-function mutation influencing 
the R122 trypsin cleavage site.

Felderbauer P(1), Schnekenburger J, Lebert R, Bulut K, Parry M, Meister T, 
Schick V, Schmitz F, Domschke W, Schmidt WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, St Josef Hospital, Ruhr-University of 
Bochum, Gudrunstr. 54, 44791 Bochum, Germany. peter.felderbauer@rub.de

BACKGROUND: The understanding of genetic risk factors for chronic pancreatitis 
increased in the last decade with the discovery of mutations in the cationic 
trypsinogen gene (PRSS1). The first mutation was detected at the R122 
autocleavage site of the protein (R122H) and subsequently two other mutations in 
this region, R122C and V123M, were described that resulted in a similar 
phenotype of hereditary pancreatitis. This study reports a novel A121T mutation 
within this region and characterises the resulting molecular properties at the 
autocleavage site.
METHODS: Blood samples of a PRSS1 A121T carrier family were analysed for PRSS1 
mutations using melting point curve analysis, restriction endonucleases and DNA 
sequencing. Conformation dependent properties of the mutated sequence were 
analysed by molecular modelling. The autodegradation kinetic of the mutated 
trypsin sequence was measured by a novel fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) assay using designed 11 amino acid peptides from PRSS1 aa 118-aa 127 
containing the trypsin cleavage site at aa 122 coupled to a Dabcyl/EDANS FRET 
system. The kinetic of tryptic peptide cleavage was measured in a fluorescence 
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) reader.
RESULTS: DNA sequencing revealed a novel G to A transition at position 133279 of 
the published genomic sequence (#U66061 GenBank). The mutation results in an 
amino acid substitution of alanine by threonine at position 121 (A121T) of the 
cationic trypsinogen. Four additional mutation carriers could be identified 
among the relatives while only the first patient developed chronic pancreatitis. 
Molecular modelling of PRSS1 A121T revealed a change in the bond pattern between 
the R122 region and the calcium binding loop, whereas FRET assays showed an 
increased trypsin cleavage rate with a reaction kinetic elevated by more than 
80%.
CONCLUSION: The novel PRSS1 A121T mutation highlights the surface exposed region 
PRSS1 A121-R122-V123 as a hotspot for hereditary pancreatitis associated 
trypsinogen mutations. Molecular modelling and FRET assays provide evidence for 
an A121T mutation dependent increase in susceptibility to trypsin digestion at 
the R122 cleavage site suggesting an enhanced autodegradation and a 
loss-of-function at the autocleavage site.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.056481
PMID: 18511571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]