1. PLoS Genet. 2008 May 30;4(5):e1000085. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000085.

Systematic identification of genes that regulate neuronal wiring in the 
Drosophila visual system.

Berger J(1), Senti KA, Senti G, Newsome TP, Asling B, Dickson BJ, Suzuki T.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Martinsried, Germany.

Forward genetic screens in model organisms are an attractive means to identify 
those genes involved in any complex biological process, including neural circuit 
assembly. Although mutagenesis screens are readily performed to saturation, gene 
identification rarely is, being limited by the considerable effort generally 
required for positional cloning. Here, we apply a systematic positional cloning 
strategy to identify many of the genes required for neuronal wiring in the 
Drosophila visual system. From a large-scale forward genetic screen selecting 
for visual system wiring defects with a normal retinal pattern, we recovered 122 
mutations in 42 genetic loci. For 6 of these loci, the underlying genetic 
lesions were previously identified using traditional methods. Using SNP-based 
mapping approaches, we have now identified 30 additional genes. Neuronal 
phenotypes have not previously been reported for 20 of these genes, and no 
mutant phenotype has been previously described for 5 genes. The genes encode a 
variety of proteins implicated in cellular processes such as gene regulation, 
cytoskeletal dynamics, axonal transport, and cell signalling. We conducted a 
comprehensive phenotypic analysis of 35 genes, scoring wiring defects according 
to 33 criteria. This work demonstrates the feasibility of combining large-scale 
gene identification with large-scale mutagenesis in Drosophila, and provides a 
comprehensive overview of the molecular mechanisms that regulate visual system 
wiring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000085
PMCID: PMC2377342
PMID: 18516287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.