1. BMC Genet. 2008 May 29;9:38. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-9-38.

Sequencing and genotypic analysis of the triosephosphate isomerase (TPI1) locus 
in a large sample of long-lived Germans.

Ralser M(1), Nebel A, Kleindorp R, Krobitsch S, Lehrach H, Schreiber S, 
Reinhardt R, Timmermann B.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany. ralser@molgen.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Triosephosphate isomerase (TPI) is a central and conserved 
glycolytic enzyme. In humans, TPI is encoded by a single gene on 12p13, and 
associated with a rare genetic disorder, TPI deficiency. Reduced TPI activity 
can increase specific oxidant resistances of model organisms and TPI 
null-alleles have been hypothesized to promote a heterozygote advantage in man. 
However, comprehensive genetic information about the TPI1 locus is still 
lacking.
RESULTS: Here, we sequenced the TPI1 locus in a sample of 357 German long-lived 
individuals (LLI) aged 95 to 110 years. We identified 17 different 
polymorphisms, of which 15 were rare and previously unknown. The two remaining 
SNPs occurred at much higher frequency and were tested for association with the 
longevity phenotype in larger samples of LLI (n = 1422) and younger controls (n 
= 967). Neither of the two markers showed a statistically significant difference 
in allele or genotype frequency between LLI and control subjects.
CONCLUSION: This study marks the TPI1 locus as extraordinarily conserved, even 
when analyzing intronic and non-coding regions of the gene. None of the 
identified sequence variations affected the amino acid composition of the TPI 
protein and hence, are unlikely to impact the catalytic activity of the enzyme. 
Thus, TPI variants occur less frequent than expected and inactive alleles are 
not enriched in German centenarians.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-9-38
PMCID: PMC2424074
PMID: 18510744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]