1. Theor Appl Genet. 2008 Aug;117(4):565-73. doi: 10.1007/s00122-008-0800-9. Epub
 2008 May 30.

Allelic differentiation of Kunitz trypsin inhibitor in wild soybean (Glycine 
soja).

Wang KJ(1), Takahata Y, Kono Y, Kaizuma N.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, Morioka 020-8550, Japan.

Soybean Kunitz trypsin inhibitor (SKTI) has several polymorphic types, which are 
controlled by co-dominant multiple alleles at a single locus. Of these types, 
Tia and Tib are predominant types, and there are nine differences in amino acids 
between Tia and Tib. Recently, an intermediate transitional type (Tibi5) between 
them was detected. However, other transitional types have not been detected 
despite surveys of many cultivated and wild soybeans. One of the reasons why 
other transitional variants have not been found is inferred to be due to the 
difficulty of the detection of SKTI protein variants by polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (PAGE). To detect novel variants of SKTI, nucleotide sequence 
analysis in addition to PAGE was carried out. Four new variants were found from 
many Japanese wild soybeans. Of these variants, three (designated as Tiaa1, 
Tiaa2, Tiab1) were detected through gene sequence analysis on wild soybeans 
having the same electrophoretic mobility as Tia, and one (Tig) was detected 
through PAGE. The Tig variant showed a slightly lower electrophoretic mobility 
than Tic. The nucleotide sequences of Tig were identical to those of Tib except 
for one T-->C transitional mutation at position +340. The sequences of Tiaa1 and 
Tiaa2 genes were identical to those of Tia with the exception of a G-->A 
mutation at position +376 and a T-->C mutation at +404, respectively. The 
sequence of Tiab1 differed from Tia by three nucleotides: C-->A at position 
+331, T-->C at +459 and A-->G at +484. Of the three nucleotide changes, two were 
common to Tiab1, Tibi5 and Tib, suggesting that Tiab1 is an intermediate 
transitional type between Tia and Tib. Our results suggest that Tib type has 
been differentiated through a series of mutations from Tia before the 
domestication of cultivated soybean.

DOI: 10.1007/s00122-008-0800-9
PMID: 18512041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]