1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Oct;29(10):1228-36. doi: 10.1002/humu.20790.

Mutations in CNGA3 impair trafficking or function of cone cyclic 
nucleotide-gated channels, resulting in achromatopsia.

Reuter P(1), Koeppen K, Ladewig T, Kohl S, Baumann B, Wissinger B; Achromatopsia 
Clinical Study Group.

Collaborators: Ayuso C, Diaz J, Bennett C, Bitoun P, Blain D, Caruso RC, Farkas 
A, VarsÃ¡nyi B, Giorda R, Hamel C, Heckenlively JR, Khan NW, Hoyng CB, Jacobson 
SG, Jaegle H, Kellner U, Krastel H, Meschino WS, de Ravel T, Renner A, Rosenberg 
T, Sener EC, Tatlipinar S, Weleber RG, Zrenner E.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Molecular 
Genetics Laboratory, Tuebingen, Germany.

CNGA3 encodes the A-subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic nucleotide-gated 
(CNG) channel, which is a crucial component of the phototransduction cascade in 
cone outer segments. Mutations in the CNGA3 gene have been associated with 
complete and incomplete forms of achromatopsia (ACHR), a congenital, autosomal 
recessively inherited retinal disorder characterized by lack of color 
discrimination, reduced visual acuity, nystagmus, and photophobia. Here we 
report the identification of three novel CNGA3 missense mutations in ACHR 
patients: c.682G>A (p.E228 K), c.1315C>T (p.R439W), and c.1405G>A (p.A469 T), 
and the detailed functional analyses of these new as well as five previously 
reported mutations (R283Q, T291R, F547L, G557R, and E590 K), in conjunction with 
clinical data of patients carrying these mutations, to establish 
genotype-phenotype correlations. The functional characterization of mutant CNGA3 
channels was performed with calcium imaging and patch clamp recordings in a 
heterologous HEK293 cell expression system. Results were corroborated by 
immunostaining and colocalization experiments of the channel protein with the 
plasma membrane. Several mutations evoked pronounced alterations of the apparent 
cGMP sensitivity of mutant channels. These functional defects were fully or 
partially compensated by coexpressing the mutant CNGA3 subunit with the 
wild-type CNGB3 subunit for channels with the mutations R439W, A469 T, F547L, 
and E590 K. We could show that several mutant channels with agonist 
dose-response relationships similar to the wild-type exhibited severely impaired 
membrane targeting. In addition, this study presents the positive effect of 
reduced cell culture temperature on surface expression and functional 
performance of mutant CNG channels with protein folding or trafficking defects.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20790
PMID: 18521937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]