1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Sep-Oct;41(2):175-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.04.008.  Epub 2008 Jun 9.

Low serum levels of prohepcidin, but not hepcidin-25, are related to anemia in 
familial amyloidosis TTR V30M.

Beirão I(1), Almeida S, Swinkels D, Costa PM, Moreira L, Fonseca I, Freitas C, 
Cabrita A, Porto G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, HGSA, Santo António General Hospital, Porto, 
Portugal. bbeirao@iol.pt

Familial amyloidosis TTR V30M (FAP-I) usually presents as a sensorimotor and 
autonomic neuropathy. Anemia was first described in this disease more than 20 
years ago and classified as an anemia of chronic disease. However, so far no 
studies have addressed the role of inflammatory proteins in this disease. The 
anemia affects 24.8% of symptomatic FAP-I Portuguese patients, and is associated 
with low serum erythropoietin levels, independently of the presence of clinical 
nephropathy. In this study we evaluate the role of systemic inflammation on the 
erythropoietin production and anemia genesis in FAP-I. Data from 24 FAP-I 
patients (50% with anemia) and 33 healthy controls were analysed. Laboratory 
data included hemoglobin, hematocrit, ferritin, transferrin saturation, soluble 
transferrin receptors (sTR), prohepcidin, hepcidin-25, C-reactive protein (CRP), 
interleukin-6 and erythropoietin levels. In general, FAP-I patients presented 
significantly lower hemoglobin, hematocrit and observed/expected erythropoietin 
levels. Mean sTR was lower in FAP-I patients than in controls (2.36+/-1.3 vs 
2.96+/-0.8 mg/l, P=0.055) correlating with hemoglobin and hematocrit. As 
expected, sTR were positively correlated with erythropoietin both in controls 
and in FAP-I patients. No significant differences on CRP, interleukin-6, 
transferrin saturation, ferritin and hepcidin-25 were found between anemic and 
non-anemic FAP-I patients and between non-anemic FAP-I patients and healthy 
controls. In all groups, a positive correlation was observed between hepcidin-25 
and ferritin. Surprisingly, significantly lower prohepcidin levels were found in 
FAP-I patients, with or without anemia, not correlated with serum hepcidin-25 
levels. In general, the decreased observed/expected EPO levels in FAP-I 
correlated with the prohepcidin levels, therefore raising the possibility that a 
common defect in these two hormones may be somehow involved in the genesis of 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2008.04.008
PMID: 18544472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]