1. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 12;7:54. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-54.

Resistance of mitochondrial p53 to dominant inhibition.

Heyne K(1), Schmitt K, Mueller D, Armbruester V, Mestres P, Roemer K.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine I, Jos√©-Carreras-Research Center, Bldg, 45,3, University of 
Saarland Medical School, 66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany. kristinaheyne@aol.com

BACKGROUND: Mutation of a tumor suppressor allele leaves the second as backup. 
Not necessarily so with p53. This homo-tetrameric transcription factor can 
become contaminated with mutant p53 through hetero-tetramerization. In addition, 
it can be out-competed by the binding to p53 DNA recognition motifs of 
transactivation-incompetent isoforms (DeltaN and DeltaTA-isoforms) of the 
p53/p63/p73 family of proteins. Countermeasures against such dominant-negative 
or dominant-inhibitory action might include the evolutionary gain of novel, 
transactivation-independent tumor suppressor functions by the wild-type monomer.
RESULTS: Here we have studied, mostly in human HCT116 colon adenocarcinoma cells 
with an intact p53 pathway, the effects of dominant-inhibitory p53 mutants and 
of Deltaex2/3p73, a tumor-associated DeltaTA-competitor of wild-type p53, on the 
nuclear transactivation-dependent and extra-nuclear transactivation-independent 
functions of wild-type p53. We report that mutant p53 and Deltaex2/3p73, 
expressed from a single gene copy per cell, interfere with the stress-induced 
expression of p53-responsive genes but leave the extra-nuclear apoptosis by 
mitochondrial p53 largely unaffected, although both wild-type and mutant p53 
associate with the mitochondria. In accord with these observations, we present 
evidence that in contrast to nuclear p53 the vast majority of mitochondrial p53, 
be it wild-type or mutant, is consisting of monomeric protein.
CONCLUSION: The extra-nuclear p53-dependent apoptosis may constitute a fail-safe 
mechanism against dominant inhibition.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-54
PMCID: PMC2440547
PMID: 18547443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]