1. Proteomics. 2008 Jul;8(13):2735-49. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200700940.

Proteomics in Trypanosoma cruzi--localization of novel proteins to various 
organelles.

Ferella M(1), Nilsson D, Darban H, Rodrigues C, Bontempi EJ, Docampo R, 
Andersson B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology (CMB), Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. marcela.ferella@ki.se

The completion of the genome sequence of Trypanosoma cruzi has been followed by 
several studies of protein expression, with the long-term aim to obtain a 
complete picture of the parasite proteome. We report a proteomic analysis of an 
organellar cell fraction from T. cruzi CL Brener epimastigotes. A total of 396 
proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS. Of these, 138 were annotated as 
hypothetical in the genome databases and the rest could be assigned to several 
metabolic and biosynthetic pathways, transport, and structural functions. 
Comparative analysis with a whole cell proteome study resulted in the validation 
of the expression of 173 additional proteins. Of these, 38 proteins previously 
reported in other stages were not found in the only large-scale study of the 
total epimastigote stage proteome. A selected set of identified proteins was 
analyzed further to investigate gene copy number, sequence variation, 
transmembrane domains, and targeting signals. The genes were cloned and the 
proteins expressed with a c-myc epitope tag in T. cruzi epimastigotes. 
Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed the localization of these proteins in 
different cellular compartments such as ER, acidocalcisome, mitochondrion, and 
putative cytoplasmic transport or delivery vesicles. The results demonstrate 
that the use of enriched subcellular fractions allows the detection of T. cruzi 
proteins that are undetected by whole cell proteomic methods.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200700940
PMCID: PMC2706665
PMID: 18546153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]