1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 8;283(32):21890-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801047200. Epub
2008  Jun 10.

Regulation of the catalytic activity and structure of human thioredoxin 1 via 
oxidation and S-nitrosylation of cysteine residues.

Hashemy SI(1), Holmgren A.

Author information:
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The mammalian cytosolic/nuclear thioredoxin system, comprising thioredoxin 
(Trx), selenoenzyme thioredoxin reductase (TrxR), and NADPH, is the major 
protein-disulfide reductase of the cell and has numerous functions. The active 
site of reduced Trx comprises Cys(32)-Gly-Pro-Cys(35) thiols that catalyze 
target disulfide reduction, generating a disulfide. Human Trx1 has also three 
structural Cys residues in positions 62, 69, and 73 that upon diamide oxidation 
induce a second Cys(62)-Cys(69) disulfide as well as dimers and multimers. We 
have discovered that after incubation with H(2)O(2) only monomeric two-disulfide 
molecules are generated, and they are inactive but able to regain full activity 
in an autocatalytic process in the presence of NADPH and TrxR. There are 
conflicting results regarding the effects of S-nitrosylation on Trx antioxidant 
functions and which residues are involved. We found that 
S-nitrosoglutathione-mediated S-nitrosylation at physiological pH is critically 
dependent on the redox state of Trx. Starting from fully reduced human Trx, both 
Cys(69) and Cys(73) were nitrosylated, and the active site formed a disulfide; 
the nitrosylated Trx was not a substrate for TrxR but regained activity after a 
lag phase consistent with autoactivation. Treatment of a two-disulfide form of 
Trx1 with S-nitrosoglutathione resulted in nitrosylation of Cys(73), which can 
act as a trans-nitrosylating agent as observed by others to control caspase 3 
activity (Mitchell, D. A., and Marletta, M. A. (2005) Nat. Chem. Biol. 1, 
154-158). The reversible inhibition of human Trx1 activity by H(2)O(2) and NO 
donors is suggested to act in cell signaling via temporal control of reduction 
for the transmission of oxidative and/or nitrosative signals in thiol redox 
control.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801047200
PMID: 18544525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]