1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jul 18;380(4):648-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.05.022. Epub
2008  May 17.

Functional role of the "ionic lock"--an interhelical hydrogen-bond network in 
family A heptahelical receptors.

Vogel R(1), Mahalingam M, Lüdeke S, Huber T, Siebert F, Sakmar TP.

Author information:
(1)Biophysics Section, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Hermann-Herder-Strasse 9, D-79104 Freiburg, 
Germany. reiner.vogel@biophysik.uni-freiburg.de

Activation of family A G-protein-coupled receptors involves a rearrangement of a 
conserved interhelical cytoplasmic hydrogen bond network between the E(D)RY 
motif on transmembrane helix 3 (H3) and residues on H6, which is commonly termed 
the cytoplasmic "ionic lock." Glu134(3.49) of the E(D)RY motif also forms an 
intrahelical salt bridge with neighboring Arg135(3.50) in the dark-state crystal 
structure of rhodopsin. We examined the roles of Glu134(3.49) and Arg135(3.50) 
on H3 and Glu247(6.30) and Glu249(6.32) on H6 on the activation of rhodopsin 
using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of wild-type and mutant pigments 
reconstituted into lipid membranes. Activation of rhodopsin is pH-dependent with 
proton uptake during the transition from the inactive Meta I to the active Meta 
II state. Glu134(3.49) of the ERY motif is identified as the proton-accepting 
group, using the Fourier transform infrared protonation signature and the 
absence of a pH dependence of activation in the E134Q mutant. Neutralization of 
Arg135(3.50) similarly leads to pH-independent receptor activation, but with 
structural alterations in the Meta II state. Neutralization of Glu247(6.30) and 
Glu249(6.32) on H6, which are involved in interhelical interactions with H3 and 
H7, respectively, led to a shift toward Meta II in the E247Q and E249Q mutants 
while retaining the pH sensitivity of the equilibrium. Disruption of the 
interhelical interaction of Glu247(6.30) and Glu249(6.32) on H6 with H3 and H7 
plays its role during receptor activation, but neutralization of the 
intrahelical salt bridge between Glu134(3.49) and Arg135(3.50) is considerably 
more critical for shifting the photoproduct equilibrium to the active 
conformation. These conclusions are discussed in the context of recent 
structural data of the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.05.022
PMID: 18554610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]