1. Yi Chuan. 2008 Jun;30(6):760-4. doi: 10.3724/sp.j.1005.2008.00760.

[Genetic variance of duck preproinsulin gene and its correlations to the traits 
of carcasses].

[Article in Chinese]

Kong XJ(1), Liu XL, Wu Y, Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, College of 
Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A & F University, Yangling 712100, 
China. xiangjie1212@163.com

Genetic polymorphisms of exon 2 and partial intron of preproinsulin gene were 
studied in Peking duck and Cherry Valley duck by PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing 
technologies. Two single nucleotide mutations, T179C and C195T, were found, 
respectively. chi2 test reflects that the tested population of Peking duck and 
Cherry Valley duck were in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium state (P>0.05). The 
relationships between SNPs and the traits of carcasses were analyzed by the 
least square analysis, which showed that the genotype BB in three lines of 
Peking duck was significantly higher in carcass weight, carcass net weight and 
breast muscle weight than AA and BB (P<0.01) and significantly higher in leg 
muscle weight and sebum weight than AB (P<0.01). In addition, the genotype AA 
was significantly greater than AB in sebum rate (P<0.01) and carcass net weight 
(P<0.05), respectively. However, for Cherry Valley duck, only the genotype AB 
was significantly higher than AA in sebum weight and abdomen fat weight 
(P<0.05). The results indicated that there was significant correlation between 
the genetic polymorphisms of preproinsulin gene and the traits of duck carcasses 
and the allele B was valuable for increasing the carcass weight and breast 
muscle weight.

DOI: 10.3724/sp.j.1005.2008.00760
PMID: 18550500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]