1. Cereb Cortex. 2009 Mar;19(3):511-23. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn101. Epub 2008 Jun
 11.

Synapsin- and actin-dependent frequency enhancement in mouse hippocampal mossy 
fiber synapses.

Owe SG(1), Jensen V, Evergren E, Ruiz A, Shupliakov O, Kullmann DM, 
Storm-Mathisen J, Walaas SI, Hvalby Ã˜, Bergersen LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of 
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The synapsin proteins have different roles in excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
terminals. We demonstrate a differential role between types of excitatory 
terminals. Structural and functional aspects of the hippocampal mossy fiber (MF) 
synapses were studied in wild-type (WT) mice and in synapsin double-knockout 
mice (DKO). A severe reduction in the number of synaptic vesicles situated more 
than 100 nm away from the presynaptic membrane active zone was found in the 
synapsin DKO animals. The ultrastructural level gave concomitant reduction in 
F-actin immunoreactivity observed at the periactive endocytic zone of the MF 
terminals. Frequency facilitation was normal in synapsin DKO mice at low firing 
rates (approximately 0.1 Hz) but was impaired at firing rates within the 
physiological range (approximately 2 Hz). Synapses made by 
associational/commissural fibers showed comparatively small frequency 
facilitation at the same frequencies. Synapsin-dependent facilitation in MF 
synapses of WT mice was attenuated by blocking F-actin polymerization with 
cytochalasin B in hippocampal slices. Synapsin III, selectively seen in MF 
synapses, is enriched specifically in the area adjacent to the synaptic cleft. 
This may underlie the ability of synapsin III to promote synaptic depression, 
contributing to the reduced frequency facilitation observed in the absence of 
synapsins I and II.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhn101
PMCID: PMC2638812
PMID: 18550596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]