1. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4853-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6787.

Elevated CRAF as a potential mechanism of acquired resistance to BRAF inhibition 
in melanoma.

Montagut C(1), Sharma SV, Shioda T, McDermott U, Ulman M, Ulkus LE, 
Dias-Santagata D, Stubbs H, Lee DY, Singh A, Drew L, Haber DA, Settleman J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Therapeutics, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA.

Activating BRAF kinase mutations arise in approximately 7% of all human tumors, 
and preclinical studies have validated the RAF-mitogen-activated 
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase-ERK signaling cascade 
as a potentially important therapeutic target in this setting. Selective RAF 
kinase inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical development, and based on 
the experience with other kinase-targeted therapeutics, it is expected that 
clinical responses to these agents, if observed, will lead to the eventual 
emergence of drug resistance in most cases. Thus, it is important to establish 
molecular mechanisms underlying such resistance to develop effective therapeutic 
strategies to overcome or prevent drug resistance. To anticipate potential 
mechanisms of acquired resistance to RAF inhibitors during the course of 
treatment, we established drug-resistant clones from a human melanoma-derived 
cell line harboring the recurrent V600E activating BRAF mutation, which exhibits 
exquisite sensitivity to AZ628, a selective RAF kinase inhibitor. We determined 
that elevated CRAF protein levels account for the acquisition of resistance to 
AZ628 in these cells, associated with a switch from BRAF to CRAF dependency in 
tumor cells. We also found that elevated CRAF protein levels may similarly 
contribute to primary insensitivity to RAF inhibition in a subset of BRAF mutant 
tumor cells. Interestingly, AZ628-resistant cells demonstrating either primary 
drug insensitivity or acquired drug resistance exhibit exquisite sensitivity to 
the HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin. Geldanamycin effectively promotes the 
degradation of CRAF, thereby revealing a potential therapeutic strategy to 
overcome resistance to RAF inhibition in a subset of BRAF mutant tumors.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6787
PMCID: PMC2692356
PMID: 18559533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]