1. Fam Cancer. 2009;8(1):75-83. doi: 10.1007/s10689-008-9199-3. Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Major contribution from recurrent alterations and MSH6 mutations in the Danish 
Lynch syndrome population.

Nilbert M(1), Wikman FP, Hansen TV, Krarup HB, Orntoft TF, Nielsen FC, Sunde L, 
Gerdes AM, Cruger D, Timshel S, Bisgaard ML, Bernstein I, Okkels H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Centre and HNPCC-Register, Copenhagen University, Hvidovre 
University Hospital, Kettegård Allé 30, Hvidovre, 2650, Denmark. 
Mef.Nilbert@med.lu.se

An increasing number of mismatch-repair (MMR) gene mutations have been 
identified in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) or Lynch 
syndrome. This study presents the population-based Danish MMR gene mutation 
profile, which contains 138 different MMR gene alterations. Among these, 88 
mutations in 164 families are considered pathogenic and an additional 50 
variants from 76 families are considered to represent variants of unknown 
pathogenicity. The different MMR genes contribute to 40% (MSH2), 29% (MLH1), and 
22% (MSH6) of the mutations and the Danish population thus shows a considerably 
higher frequency of MSH6 mutations than previously described. Although 69/88 
(78%) pathogenic mutations were present in a single family, previously 
recognized recurrent/founder mutations were causative in 75/137 (55%) MLH1/MSH2 
mutant families. In addition, the Danish MLH1 founder mutation 
c.1667+2_1667_+8TAAATCAdelinsATTT was identified in 14/58 (24%) MLH1 mutant 
families. The Danish Lynch syndrome population thus demonstrates that MSH6 
mutations and recurrent/founder mutations have a larger contribution than 
previously recognized, which implies that the MSH6 gene should be included in 
routine diagnostics and suggests that directed analysis of recurrent/founder 
mutations may be feasible e.g. in families were diagnostic material is 
restricted to archival tissue.

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-008-9199-3
PMID: 18566915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]