1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Aug;190(16):5597-606. doi: 10.1128/JB.00587-08. Epub 2008
Jun  20.

Extracellular loops of lipid A 3-O-deacylase PagL are involved in recognition of 
aminoarabinose-based membrane modifications in Salmonella enterica serovar 
typhimurium.

Manabe T(1), Kawasaki K.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Doshisha Women's College, Kodo, 
Kyotanabe, Kyoto 610-0395, Japan.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium modifies its lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
including the lipid A portion, in response to changes in its environment 
including host tissues. The lipid A 3-O-deacylase PagL, the expression of which 
is promoted under a host-mimetic environment, exhibits latency in S. enterica; 
deacylation of lipid A is not usually observed in vivo, despite the expression 
of the outer membrane protein PagL. In contrast, PagL does not exhibit latency 
in S. enterica pmrA and pmrE mutants, both of which are deficient in the 
aminoarabinose-based modification of lipid A, indicating that 
aminoarabinose-modified LPS species were involved in the latency. In order to 
analyze the machinery for PagL's repression, we generated PagL mutants in which 
an amino acid residue located at four extracellular loops was replaced with 
alanine. Apparent lipid A 3-O deacylation was observed in S. enterica expressing 
the recombinant mutants PagL(R43A), PagL(R44A), PagL(C85A), and PagL(R135A), but 
not in S. enterica expressing wild-type PagL, suggesting that the point 
mutations released PagL from the latency. In addition, mutations at Arg-43, 
Arg-44, Cys-85, and Arg-135 did not affect lipid A 3-O-deacylase activity in an 
S. enterica pmrA mutant or in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3). These results, taken 
together, indicate that specific amino acid residues located at extracellular 
loops of PagL are involved in the recognition of aminoarabinose-modified LPS. 
Furthermore, S. enterica expressing the recombinant PagL(R43A) or PagL(R135A) 
mutant showed apparent growth arrest at 43 degrees C compared with S. enterica 
expressing wild-type PagL, indicating that the latency of PagL is important for 
bacterial growth.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00587-08
PMCID: PMC2519386
PMID: 18567660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]