1. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 18;3(6):e2458. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002458.

Critical involvement of the ATM-dependent DNA damage response in the apoptotic 
demise of HIV-1-elicited syncytia.

Perfettini JL(1), Nardacci R, Bourouba M, Subra F, Gros L, Séror C, Manic G, 
Rosselli F, Amendola A, Masdehors P, Chessa L, Novelli G, Ojcius DM, Siwicki JK, 
Chechlinska M, Auclair C, Regueiro JR, de Thé H, Gougeon ML, Piacentini M, 
Kroemer G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U848, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

DNA damage can activate the oncosuppressor protein ataxia telangiectasia mutated 
(ATM), which phosphorylates the histone H2AX within characteristic DNA damage 
foci. Here, we show that ATM undergoes an activating phosphorylation in syncytia 
elicited by the envelope glycoprotein complex (Env) of human immunodeficiency 
virus-1 (HIV-1) in vitro. This was accompanied by aggregation of ATM in discrete 
nuclear foci that also contained phospho-histone H2AX. DNA damage foci 
containing phosphorylated ATM and H2AX were detectable in syncytia present in 
the brain or lymph nodes from patients with HIV-1 infection, as well as in a 
fraction of blood leukocytes, correlating with viral status. Knockdown of ATM or 
of its obligate activating factor NBS1 (Nijmegen breakage syndrome 1 protein), 
as well as pharmacological inhibition of ATM with KU-55933, inhibited H2AX 
phosphorylation and prevented Env-elicited syncytia from undergoing apoptosis. 
ATM was found indispensable for the activation of MAP kinase p38, which 
catalyzes the activating phosphorylation of p53 on serine 46, thereby causing 
p53 dependent apoptosis. Both wild type HIV-1 and an HIV-1 mutant lacking 
integrase activity induced syncytial apoptosis, which could be suppressed by 
inhibiting ATM. HIV-1-infected T lymphoblasts from patients with inactivating 
ATM or NBS1 mutations also exhibited reduced syncytial apoptosis. Altogether 
these results indicate that apoptosis induced by a fusogenic HIV-1 Env follows a 
pro-apoptotic pathway involving the sequential activation of ATM, p38MAPK and 
p53.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002458
PMCID: PMC2423469
PMID: 18560558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.