1. J Immunotoxicol. 2008 Apr;5(2):189-99. doi: 10.1080/15476910802131477.

Development of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist mutants with enhanced 
antagonistic activity in vitro and improved therapeutic efficacy in 
collagen-induced arthritis.

Dahlén E(1), Barchan K, Herrlander D, Höjman P, Karlsson M, Ljung L, Andersson 
M, Bäckman E, Hager AC, Walse B, Joosten L, van den Berg W.

Author information:
(1)Alligator Bioscience AB, Lund, Sweden. evd@alligatorbioscience.com

Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) is a naturally occurring inhibitor of 
the pro-inflammatory interleukin-1-mediated activation of the interleukin-1 
receptor (IL-1R). Although wild-type IL-1Ra is used for treatment of 
inflammatory diseases, its effect is moderate and/or short-lived. The objective 
of this study was to generate IL-1Ra mutants with enhanced antagonistic activity 
for potential therapeutic use. Using a directed evolution approach in which 
libraries of IL-1Ra gene mutants were generated and screened in functional 
assays, mutants with desired properties were identified. Initially, diversity 
was introduced into the IL-1Ra using random mutagenesis. Mutations resulting in 
enhanced antagonistic activity were identified by screening in a reporter cell 
assay. To further enhance the antagonistic activity, selected mutations were 
recombined using the DNA recombination technology Fragment-INduced Diversity 
(FIND). Following three rounds of FIND recombination, several mutants with up to 
nine times enhanced antagonistic activity (mean IC50 +/- SEM value: 0.78 +/- 
0.050 vs. 6.8 +/- 1.1 ng/ml for mutant and wild-type, respectively) were 
identified. Sequence analysis identified the mutations D47N, E52R and E90Y as 
being most important for this effect, however, the mutations P38Y, H54R, Q129L 
and M136N further enhanced the antagonistic function. Analysis of identified 
mutations in protein models based on the crystal structure of the IL-1Ra/IL-1R 
complex suggested that mutations found to enhance the antagonistic activity had 
a stabilizing effect on the IL-1Ra mutants or increased the affinity for the 
IL-1R. Finally, the therapeutic effect of one mutant was compared to that of 
wild-type IL-1Ra in collagen-induced arthritis in mice. Indeed, the enhanced 
antagonistic effect of the mutants observed in vitro was also seen in vivo. In 
conclusion, these results demonstrate that directed evolution of IL-1Ra is an 
effective means of generating highly potent therapeutic proteins.

DOI: 10.1080/15476910802131477
PMID: 18569390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]