1. Biochemistry. 2008 Jul 15;47(28):7385-92. doi: 10.1021/bi8006127. Epub 2008
Jun  21.

Mapping the UDP-glucuronic acid binding site in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-1A10 
by homology-based modeling: confirmation with biochemical evidence.

Banerjee R(1), Pennington MW, Garza A, Owens IS.

Author information:
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1830, USA.

The UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) isozyme system is critical for protecting 
the body against endogenous and exogenous chemicals by linking glucuronic acid 
donated by UDP-glucuronic acid to a lipophilic acceptor substrate. UGTs convert 
metabolites, dietary constituents, and environmental toxicants to highly 
excretable glucuronides. Because of difficulties associated with purifying 
endoplasmic reticulum-bound UGTs for structural studies, we carried out 
homology-based computer modeling to aid analysis. The search found structural 
homology in Escherichia coli UDP-galactose 4-epimerase. Consistent with 
predicted similarities involving the common UDP moiety in substrate/inhibitor, 
UDP-glucose and UDP-hexanol amine caused competitive inhibition by 
Lineweaver-Burk plots. Among predicted binding sites N292, K314, K315, and K404 
in UGT1A10, two informative sets of mutants K314R/Q/A/E/G and K404R/E had null 
activities or 2.7-fold higher/50% less activity, respectively. Scatchard 
analysis of binding data of the affinity ligand, 5-azidouridine-[beta- 
(32)P]diphosphoglucuronic acid, to purified UGT1A10-His or UGT1A7-His revealed 
high- and low-affinity binding sites. 2-Nitro-5-thiocyanobenzoic acid-digested 
UGT1A10-His bound with the radiolabeled affinity ligand revealed an 11.3 and 
14.3 kDa peptide associated with K314 and K404, respectively, in a discontinuous 
SDS-PAGE system. Similar treatment of 1A10His-K314A bound with the ligand lacked 
both peptides; 1A10-HisK404R- and 1A10-HisK404E showed 1.3-fold greater and 50% 
less label in the 14.3 kDa peptide, respectively, compared to 1A10-His without 
affecting the 11.3 kDa peptide. Scatchard analysis of binding data of the 
affinity ligand to 1A10His-K404R and -K404E showed a 6-fold reduction and a 
large increase in K d, respectively. Our results indicate that K314 and K404 are 
required UDP-glcA binding sites in 1A10, that K404 controls activity and 
high-affinity sites, and that K314 and K404 are strictly conserved in 70 aligned 
UGTs, except for S321, equivalent to K314, in UGT2B15 and 2B17 and I321 in the 
inactive UGT8, which suggests UGT2B15 and 2B17 contain suboptimal activity. 
Hence our data strongly support UDP-glcA binding to K314 and K404 in UGT1A10.

DOI: 10.1021/bi8006127
PMCID: PMC2587317
PMID: 18570380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]