1. Glia. 2008 Aug 15;56(11):1250-62. doi: 10.1002/glia.20694.

Molecular basis of oncostatin M-induced SOCS-3 expression in astrocytes.

Baker BJ(1), Qin H, Benveniste EN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0005, USA.

Under neuropathological conditions, reactive astrocytes release cytokines and 
chemokines, which act in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion to modulate 
production of immunoregulatory factors from cells including microglia, 
astrocytes, and neurons. In this way, astrocytes play an important role in 
orchestrating immune responses within the central nervous system (CNS). 
Suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins are endogenous, negative 
regulators of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and function as attenuators of the 
immune and inflammatory responses. As such, SOCS proteins may have critical 
roles in the CNS under neuroinflammatory conditions. In the inflamed CNS, 
expression of IL-6 cytokine family member oncostatin M (OSM) is elevated; 
however, its functional effects are not well understood. We demonstrate that OSM 
is a potent inducer of SOCS-3 in astrocytes. Analysis of the SOCS-3 promoter 
revealed that an AP-1 element, two IFN-gamma activation sequence (GAS) elements, 
and a GC-rich region are crucial for SOCS-3 gene expression. Using small 
interfering RNA against STAT-3, as well as a STAT-3 dominant-negative construct, 
we demonstrate that STAT-3 activation is critical for OSM induction of SOCS-3 
expression. The ERK1/2 and JNK pathways also contribute to OSM-induced SOCS-3 
gene expression. OSM stimulation led to a time-dependent recruitment of the 
transcription factors STAT-3, c-Fos, c-Jun, and Sp1 and the coactivators 
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 to the endogenous SOCS-3 promoter. These 
data indicate that OSM-induced activation of STAT-3 and the ERK1/2 and JNK 
pathways are critical for astrocytic expression of SOCS-3, which provides for 
feedback inhibition of cytokine-induced inflammatory responses in the CNS.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.20694
PMCID: PMC2621074
PMID: 18571793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]