1. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8330-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00831-08. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

STAT2 is a primary target for measles virus V protein-mediated alpha/beta 
interferon signaling inhibition.

Ramachandran A(1), Parisien JP, Horvath CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.

Measles virus, a member of the Morbillivirus family, infects millions of people 
each year despite the availability of effective vaccines. The V protein of 
measles virus is an important virulence factor that can interfere with host 
innate immunity by inactivating alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) and 
IFN-gamma signaling through protein interactions with signal transducer and 
activator of transcription proteins STAT1 and STAT2. Here we demonstrate that 
although STAT1 interference results from protein interactions within a V protein 
N-terminal region encompassed by amino acids 110 to 130, detection of STAT1 
interaction and IFN-gamma signaling inhibition requires the presence of cellular 
STAT2. Cell-specific variability in STAT1 interference was observed to correlate 
with V protein expression level. A more direct target for measles virus V 
protein-mediated IFN-alpha/beta evasion is STAT2. Results indicate that the 
widely conserved C-terminal zinc finger domain of measles virus V protein is 
both necessary and sufficient to bind STAT2 and disrupt IFN-alpha/beta signal 
transduction. Mutagenesis and molecular modeling define a contact surface for 
STAT2 association that includes aspartic acid residue 248 as critical for STAT2 
interference and IFN antiviral immune suppression. These findings clearly define 
the molecular determinants for measles virus IFN evasion and validate specific 
targets as candidates for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00831-08
PMCID: PMC2519631
PMID: 18579593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]