1. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5023-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6189.

A syngeneic variance library for functional annotation of human variation: 
application to BRCA2.

Hucl T(1), Rago C, Gallmeier E, Brody JR, Gorospe M, Kern SE.

Author information:
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The enormous scope of natural human genetic variation is now becoming defined. 
To accurately annotate these variants, and to identify those with clinical 
importance, is often difficult to assess through functional assays. We explored 
systematic annotation by using homologous recombination to modify a native gene 
in hemizygous (wt/Deltaexon) human cancer cells, generating a novel syngeneic 
variance library (SyVaL). We created a SyVaL of BRCA2 variants: nondeleterious, 
proposed deleterious, deleterious, and of uncertain significance. We found that 
the null states BRCA2(Deltaex11/Deltaex11) and BRCA2(Deltaex11/Y3308X) were 
deleterious as assessed by a loss of RAD51 focus formation on genotoxic damage 
and by acquisition of toxic hypersensitivity to mitomycin C and etoposide, 
whereas BRCA2(Deltaex11/Y3308Y), BRCA2(Deltaex11/P3292L), and 
BRCA2(Deltaex11/P3280H) had wild-type function. A proposed phosphorylation site 
at codon 3291 affecting function was confirmed by substitution of an acidic 
residue (glutamate, BRCA2(Deltaex11/S3291E)) for the native serine, but in 
contrast to a prior report, phosphorylation was dispensable (alanine, 
BRCA2(Deltaex11/S3291A)) for BRCA2-governed cellular phenotypes. These results 
show that SyVaLs offer a means to comprehensively annotate gene function, 
facilitating numerical and unambiguous readouts. SyVaLs may be especially useful 
for genes in which functional assays using exogenous expression are toxic or 
otherwise unreliable. They also offer a stable, distributable cellular resource 
for further research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6189
PMCID: PMC2536704
PMID: 18593900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine has property rights in the 
materials (cell lines) reported in this article. T. Hucl and S.E. Kern are 
entitled as inventors to a share of the royalty received by the University for 
licensed uses of the materials by commercial entities. The terms of licensing 
agreement(s) are being managed by the Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine Committee on Conflict of Interest in accordance with its conflict of 
interest policy. (Licensing agreements covering the materials in this article 
total and inventors' interest of less than $10,000 in total.) The other authors 
disclosed no potential conflicts of interest.