1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Aug;32(8):1258-64. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31816be8b7.

First report of ovarian dysgerminoma in Cowden syndrome with germline PTEN 
mutation and PTEN-related 10q loss of tumor heterozygosity.

Cho MY(1), Kim HS, Eng C, Kim DS, Kang SJ, Eom M, Yi SY, Bronner MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Wonju College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, 
Korea.

We present the first report of ovarian dysgerminoma in Cowden syndrome, 
presenting in a 7-year-old girl. In her second decade, a hamartomatous soft 
tissue extremity mass and diffuse gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis with 
pathologic features suggestive of either juvenile, Peutz-Jeghers, or Cowden 
polyps were identified, along with diffuse esophageal glycogenic acanthosis and 
skin manifestations. During regular thyroid cancer surveillance under the 
provisional diagnosis of Cowden syndrome, papillary thyroid carcinoma and benign 
follicular nodules were diagnosed at age 23. PTEN mutational analysis revealed a 
novel germline nonsense point mutation of Q219X. Loss of PTEN heterozygosity was 
also present in the ovarian dysgerminoma. Parental mutation testing and 
phenotype screening were negative. The correct classification of Cowden syndrome 
is difficult because of its protean manifestations and overlapping phenotypes 
with other genetic and noninherited pathologies, particularly regarding various 
gastrointestinal polyposis syndromes. Despite the challenges, correct 
classification is critical to patient care because of the associated cancer 
predispositions and necessary surveillance programs. This is the first report of 
Cowden syndrome presenting with ovarian dysgerminoma, which implicates PTEN in 
the molecular pathogenesis of dysgerminoma and adds it to the phenotypic 
manifestations of Cowden syndrome.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31816be8b7
PMID: 18594467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]