1. Purinergic Signal. 2009 Mar;5(1):75-89. doi: 10.1007/s11302-008-9106-2. Epub 
2008 Jul 4.

Development of selective agonists and antagonists of P2Y receptors.

Jacobson KA(1), Ivanov AA, de Castro S, Harden TK, Ko H.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Recognition Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bldg. 8A, Rm. B1A-19, Bethesda, MD, USA, kajacobs@helix.nih.gov.

Although elucidation of the medicinal chemistry of agonists and antagonists of 
the P2Y receptors has lagged behind that of many other members of group A G 
protein-coupled receptors, detailed qualitative and quantitative 
structure-activity relationships (SARs) were recently constructed for several of 
the subtypes. Agonists selective for P2Y(1), P2Y(2), and P2Y(6) receptors and 
nucleotide antagonists selective for P2Y(1) and P2Y(12) receptors are now known. 
Selective nonnucleotide antagonists were reported for P2Y(1), P2Y(2), P2Y(6), 
P2Y(11), P2Y(12), and P2Y(13) receptors. At the P2Y(1) and P2Y(12) receptors, 
nucleotide agonists (5'-diphosphate derivatives) were converted into antagonists 
of nanomolar affinity by altering the phosphate moieties, with a focus 
particularly on the ribose conformation and substitution pattern. Nucleotide 
analogues with conformationally constrained ribose-like rings were introduced as 
selective receptor probes for P2Y(1) and P2Y(6) receptors. Screening chemically 
diverse compound libraries has begun to yield new lead compounds for the 
development of P2Y receptor antagonists, such as competitive P2Y(12) receptor 
antagonists with antithrombotic activity. Selective agonists for the P2Y(4), 
P2Y(11), and P2Y(13) receptors and selective antagonists for P2Y(4) and P2Y(14) 
receptors have not yet been identified. The P2Y(14) receptor appears to be the 
most restrictive of the class with respect to modification of the nucleobase, 
ribose, and phosphate moieties. The continuing process of ligand design for the 
P2Y receptors will aid in the identification of new clinical targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s11302-008-9106-2
PMCID: PMC2721770
PMID: 18600475