1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jul 11;4(7):e1000099. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000099.

RIG-I mediates the co-induction of tumor necrosis factor and type I interferon 
elicited by myxoma virus in primary human macrophages.

Wang F(1), Gao X, Barrett JW, Shao Q, Bartee E, Mohamed MR, Rahman M, Werden S, 
Irvine T, Cao J, Dekaban GA, McFadden G.

Author information:
(1)BioTherapeutics Research Group, Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, 
Canada.

The sensing of pathogen infection and subsequent triggering of innate immunity 
are key to controlling zoonotic infections. Myxoma virus (MV) is a cytoplasmic 
DNA poxvirus that in nature infects only rabbits. Our previous studies have 
shown that MV infection of primary mouse cells is restricted by virus-induced 
type I interferon (IFN). However, little is known about the innate sensor(s) 
involved in activating signaling pathways leading to cellular defense responses 
in primary human immune cells. Here, we show that the complete restriction of MV 
infection in the primary human fibroblasts requires both tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) and type I IFN. We also demonstrate that MV infection of primary human 
macrophages (pHMs) activates the cytoplasmic RNA sensor called retinoic acid 
inducible gene I (RIG-I), which coordinately induces the production of both TNF 
and type I IFN. Of note, RIG-I sensing of MV infection in pHMs initiates a 
sustained TNF induction through the sequential involvement of the downstream 
IFN-regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3 and IRF7). Thus, RIG-I-mediated 
co-induction of TNF and type I IFN by virus-infected pHMs represents a novel 
innate defense mechanism to restrict viral infection in human cells. These 
results also reveal a new regulatory mechanism for TNF induction following viral 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000099
PMCID: PMC2438611
PMID: 18617992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.