1. Endocr J. 2008 Dec;55(6):991-7. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.k08e-070. Epub 2008 Jul
10.

PGC-1alpha Gly482Ser polymorphism is associated with the plasma adiponectin 
level in type 2 diabetic men.

Okauchi Y(1), Iwahashi H, Okita K, Yuan M, Matsuda M, Tanaka T, Miyagawa J, 
Funahashi T, Horikawa Y, Shimomura I, Yamagata K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 alpha 
(PGC-1alpha) is a multifunctional transcriptional regulator for the pathways 
controlling mitochondrial biogenesis, oxidative metabolism, and glucose 
homeostasis. Genetic studies have suggested that Gly482Ser polymorphism of the 
PGC-1alpha gene is associated with a higher risk of type 2 diabetes, obesity, 
and hypertension. Adiponectin is an antidiabetic and antiatherogenic 
adipocytokine that is specifically produced by adipose tissue, and the 
transcription of the adiponectin gene is regulated by PPARgamma. In this study, 
we examined the effect of Gly482Ser polymorphism on the plasma adiponectin level 
in Japanese type 2 diabetics. The Gly482Ser genotype was associated with a lower 
plasma adiponectin level in type 2 diabetic men, but not in type 2 diabetic 
women. The impact of this variation on the adiponectin promoter was also 
assessed by a reporter gene assay, but there was no significant difference 
between activation by the wild type and Gly482Ser- PGC-1alpha proteins, 
indicating that this variation itself has no functional effect. Evaluation of 
the pattern of linkage disequilibrium revealed that the Gly482Ser polymorphism 
is located in the largest linkage disequilibrium block of the PGC-1alpha gene. 
Therefore the observed gender-specific association between PGC-1alpha and the 
plasma adiponectin level may reflect linkage disequilibrium of Gly482Ser 
polymorphism with other causative variations.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.k08e-070
PMID: 18614852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]