1. Thromb Haemost. 2008 Jul;100(1):101-9. doi: 10.1160/TH08-02-0127.

Protease activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) activation by thrombin is protective in 
human pulmonary artery endothelial cells if endothelial protein C receptor is 
occupied by its natural ligand.

Bae JS(1), Rezaie AR.

Author information:
(1)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St. Louis 
University School of Medicine, 1100 S. Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

We recently demonstrated that the occupancy of endothelial protein C receptor 
(EPCR) by its natural ligand activated protein C (APC)/protein C switches the 
protease activated receptor 1 (PAR-1)-dependent signaling specificity of 
thrombin from a disruptive to a protective effect in cultured human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells. Given the phenotypic differences between endothelial 
cells in venular and arterial beds, in this study we evaluated the signaling 
function of thrombin in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAECs) before 
and after treating them with PC-S195A which lacks catalytic activity but 
exhibits a normal affinity for EPCR. As expected, both thrombin and thrombin 
receptor agonist peptide (TRAP) enhanced the permeability barrier of HPAECs; 
however, both PAR-1 agonists exhibited a potent barrier protective effect when 
the cells were treated with PC-S195A prior to stimulation by the agonists. 
Interestingly, similar to APC, thrombin exhibited a potent cytoprotective 
activity in the LPS-induced permeability and TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis and 
adhesion assays in the PC-S195A treated HPAECs. Treatment of HPAECs with the 
cholesterol depleting molecule methyl-beta-cyclodextrin eliminated the 
protective effect of both APC and thrombin. These results suggest that the 
occupancy of EPCR by its natural ligand recruits PAR-1 to a protective signaling 
pathway within lipid rafts of HPAECs. Based on these results we conclude that 
the activation of PAR-1 by thrombin would initiate a protective response in 
intact arterial vascular cells expressing EPCR. These findings may have 
important ramifications for understanding the mechanism of the participation of 
the vascular PAR-1 in pathophysiology of the inflammatory disorders.

DOI: 10.1160/TH08-02-0127
PMCID: PMC2562749
PMID: 18612544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]