1. Neuropharmacology. 2008 Sep;55(4):483-90. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.06.038.  Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Functional interaction between adenosine A2A and group III metabotropic 
glutamate receptors to reduce parkinsonian symptoms in rats.

Lopez S(1), Turle-Lorenzo N, Johnston TH, Brotchie JM, Schann S, Neuville P, 
Amalric M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de la Cognition, CNRS UMR 6155, Aix-Marseille 
Universit√©, Case C, 3 Place Victor Hugo, 13331 Marseille Cedex 3, Marseille, 
France.

Non-dopaminergic drugs acting either on adenosine A2A or metabotropic glutamate 
(mGlu) receptors reduce motor impairment in animal models of Parkinson's disease 
(PD), suggesting a possible functional interaction between these receptors to 
regulate basal ganglia function. The present study therefore tested the 
behavioural effects of compounds acting selectively on A2A or on specific mGlu 
receptor subtypes, alone or in combination, in rodent models of PD. Acute 
administration of the adenosine A2A receptor antagonists CSC or MSX-3 at the 
highest doses tested (5 and 1.25mg/kg, respectively) significantly reduces 
haloperidol-induced catalepsy. Furthermore, the anticataleptic effect of MSX-3 
was enhanced by a 3-week treatment. Acute administration of the selective group 
III mGlu agonist ACPT-I produces potent anticataleptic effects and prolongs time 
on rotarod of 6-OHDA-lesioned rats. In contrast, acute or chronic administration 
of MPEP (mGlu5 receptor antagonist) has no anticataleptic action. Furthermore, 
the acute co-administration of ACPT-I 1mg/kg, but not 5mg/kg, with CSC markedly 
reduces catalepsy. Opposite effects are observed after a 3-week 
co-administration. The co-administration of ACPT-I with MSX-3 has anticataleptic 
effects both after acute or chronic treatment. In contrast, acute combination of 
subthreshold doses of CSC and MPEP has no effect. After a 3-week treatment, 
however, the combination of CSC and MPEP was found to reduce haloperidol-induced 
catalepsy. Altogether, these results show for the first time that systemic 
activation of group III mGlu receptors with ACPT-I provides benefits in 
parkinsonian rats and underlie a possible interaction with A2A receptors to 
regulate basal ganglia motor function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.06.038
PMID: 18625257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]