1. Brain Res. 2008 Sep 10;1229:118-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.086. Epub 
2008 Jul 2.

Spinal alpha3beta2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors tonically inhibit the 
transmission of nociceptive mechanical stimuli.

Young T(1), Wittenauer S, McIntosh JM, Vincler M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Medical 
Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

The presence of non-alpha4beta2, non-alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 
(nAChR) in the rat spinal cord has been suggested previously, but the identity 
of these nAChRs had not been shown. Intrathecal administration of the 
alpha3beta2*/alpha6beta2* selective alpha-conotoxin MII (alpha-CTX MII) dose- 
and time-dependently reduced paw withdrawal thresholds to mechanical pressure in 
normal rats. The pronociceptive effect of alpha-CTX MII was partially blocked by 
NMDA receptor antagonism and lost completely following ablation of C-fibers. The 
effect of spinal nerve ligation on alpha-CTX MII-induced mechanical 
hypersensitivity was also assessed. Sensitivity was lost in the hind paw 
ipsilateral to spinal nerve ligation, but maintained in the contralateral hind 
paw at control levels. Radioligand binding in spinal cord membranes revealed 
high and low affinity alpha-CTX MII binding sites. Spinal nerve ligation did not 
significantly alter alpha-CTX MII binding ipsilateral to ligation. Finally, no 
evidence for the presence of alpha6-containing nAChRs was identified. The 
results of these studies show the presence of 2 populations of alpha-CTX 
MII-sensitive nAChRs containing the alpha3 and beta2, but not the alpha6, 
subunits in the rat spinal cord that function to inhibit the transmission of 
nociceptive mechanical stimuli via inhibiting the release of glutamate from 
C-fibers. Spinal nerve ligation produces a unilateral loss of alpha-CTX 
MII-induced mechanical hypersensitivity without altering alpha-CTX MII binding 
sites. Our data support a peripheral injury-induced loss of a cholinergic 
inhibitory tone at spinal alpha3beta2* nAChRs, without the loss of the receptors 
themselves, which may contribute to mechanical hypersensitivity following spinal 
nerve ligation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.06.086
PMCID: PMC2596766
PMID: 18634758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]