1. J Rheumatol. 2008 Sep;35(9):1849-52. Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Single nucleotide polymorphism of COL6A1 in patients with ankylosing 
spondylitis.

Kim TH(1), Kim TJ, Lee HS, Uhm WS, Shin ES, Na YI, Jun JB.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic association between ankylosing spondylitis 
(AS) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of collagen 6A1 gene (COL6A1), 
the candidate gene for ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament.
METHODS: One-hundred thirty Korean patients with AS (M: 116, F: 14, age: 29.0 
+/- 4.6) and 130 age- and sex-matched healthy subjects were recruited. The SNP 
of G365G, IVS15+39 C/T, IVS21+18 A/C by Snap shot assay and the SNP of 
IVS32-29T/C, IVS33+15G/A, IVS33+20A/G, and IVS33+55A/G by direct sequencing were 
genotyped and analyzed. Bonferroni correction was applied to multiple 
comparisons.
RESULTS: The observed allelic frequencies for these SNP met Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium in all AS and controls. We also found an additional 2 SNP (R783Q and 
IVS33+88C/T) during direct sequencing. Therefore, a total of 9 SNP were analyzed 
in this study. There were no significant associations of allelic and genotype 
variations between AS and controls. The presence of uveitis was marginally 
associated with a haplotype (CC in G365G + IVS15+39 C/T). The variation of 
allele or haplotype of COL6A1 is not significantly associated with "more 
ossified disease."
CONCLUSION: Because the genetic variations of COL6A1 could not be correlated 
with the occurrence of AS in Koreans, we conclude that despite common clinical 
features, AS and ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament are not 
genetically related, and the hyperostotic condition seen in the 2 diseases might 
be regulated differently. Further SNP of COL6A1 were not related to radiographic 
progression of AS. However, we found that the occurrence of uveitis might be 
related to the genetic variations of COL6A1 in patients with AS.

PMID: 18634150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]