1. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jul 15;7(14):2199-207. doi: 10.4161/cc.7.14.6272. Epub 2008
May  12.

Aquaporin-4 expression is severely reduced in human sarcoglycanopathies and 
dysferlinopathies.

Assereto S(1), Mastrototaro M, Stringara S, Gazzerro E, Broda P, Nicchia GP, 
Svelto M, Bruno C, Nigro V, Lisanti MP, Frigeri A, Minetti C.

Author information:
(1)Muscular and Neurodegenerative Disease Unit, Department of Pediatrics of 
University of Genova, Department of Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, G. Gaslini 
Institute, Genoa, Italy.

Aquaporin-4 (AQP4) is the major water channel expressed in fast-twitch skeletal 
muscle fibers. AQP4 is reduced in Duchenne and Becker Muscular Dystrophies, but 
not in caveolinopathies, thus suggesting an interaction with dystrophin or with 
members of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex (DGC) rather than a nonspecific 
effect due to muscle membrane damage. To establish the role of sarcoglycans in 
AQP4 decrease occurring in muscular dystrophy, AQP4 expression was analyzed in 
muscle biopsies from patients affected by Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies 
(LGMDs) 2C-F genetically confirmed. In all the LGMD 2C-F (2alpha-, 1beta-, 
2gamma-, 1delta-deficiency), AQP4 was severely decreased. This effect was 
associated to a marked reduction in alpha1-syntrophin levels. In control muscle 
AQP4 did not show a direct interaction with any of the four sarcoglycans but, it 
co-immunoprecipitated with alpha1-syntrophin, indicating that this modular 
protein may link AQP4 levels with the DGC complex. To determine whether AQP4 
expression could be affected in other LGMDs due to the defect of a membrane 
protein not associated to the dystrophin complex, we examined AQP4 expression in 
6 patients affected by dysferlin deficiency genetically confirmed. All the 
patients displayed a reduction of the water channel, and AQP4 expression 
appeared to correlate with the severity of the muscle histopathological lesions. 
However, differently from what observed in the sarcoglycans, alpha1-syntrophin 
expression was normal or just slightly reduced. These results seem to indicate 
an additional mechanism of regulation of AQP4 levels in muscle cells. In 
accordance with a specific effect of membrane muscle disorders, AQP4 protein 
levels were not changed in 3 mitochondrial and 3 metabolic myopathies. In 
conclusion, AQP4 expression and membrane localization are markedly reduced in 
LGMD 2B-2F. The role of AQP4 in the degenerative mechanism occurring in these 
diseases will be the object of our future research.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.7.14.6272
PMID: 18641458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]