1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Sep 1;76(5):690-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.06.018.
Epub  2008 Jul 4.

A point mutation produced a class 3 aldehyde dehydrogenase with increased 
protective ability against the killing effect of cyclophosphamide.

Ho KK(1), Mukhopadhyay A, Li YF, Mukhopadhyay S, Weiner H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, 175 S. University Street, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907-2063, United States.

Cyclophosphamides are pro-drugs whose killing agent is produced from an aldehyde 
that is formed by the action of a P450 oxidation step. The mustard from the 
aldehyde can destroy bone marrow cells as well as the tumor. Aldehyde 
dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3) can oxidize the aldehyde and hence inactivate the 
cytotoxic intermediate but bone marrow has little, if any, of the enzyme. Others 
have shown that over-expression of the enzyme can afford protection of the 
marrow. A T186S mutant of the human stomach enzyme (ALDH3) that we developed has 
increased activity against the aldehyde compared to the native enzyme and HeLa 
cells transformed with the point mutant are better protected against the killing 
effect of the drug. It took threefold more drug to kill 90% of the cells 
transformed with the mutant compared to the native enzyme (15.8 compared to 
5.1mM of a precursor of the toxic aldehyde). Analysis of molecular models makes 
it appear that removing the methyl group of threonine in the T186S mutant allows 
the bulky aldehyde to bind better. The mutant was found to be a poorer enzyme 
when small substrates such as benzaldehyde derivatives were investigated. Thus, 
the enzyme appears to be better only with large substrates such as the one 
produced by cyclophosphamide.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.06.018
PMCID: PMC2573387
PMID: 18647600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]