1. J Dairy Sci. 2008 Aug;91(8):3190-200. doi: 10.3168/jds.2007-0930.

Impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms in leptin, leptin receptor, growth 
hormone receptor, and diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT1) gene loci on milk 
production, feed, and body energy traits of UK dairy cows.

Banos G(1), Woolliams JA, Woodward BW, Forbes AB, Coffey MP.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. 
banos@vet.auth.gr

The impact of 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the leptin (LEP), 
leptin receptor (LEPR), growth hormone receptor (GHR), and diacylglycerol 
acyltransferase (DGAT1) gene loci on daily milk production, feed intake, and 
feed conversion, and weekly measures of live weight, BCS, and body energy traits 
was evaluated using genetic and phenotypic data on 571 Holstein cows raised at 
the Langhill Dairy Cattle Research Center in Scotland. Six SNP were typed on the 
LEP gene and 1 on each of the other 3 loci. Of the 6 LEP SNP, 3 were in very 
high linkage disequilibrium, meaning there is little gain in typing all of them 
in the future. Seven LEP haplotypes were identified by parsimony-based analyses. 
Random-regression allele-substitution models were used to assess the impact of 
each SNP allele or haplotype on the traits of interest. Diacylglycerol 
acyltransferase had a significant effect on milk yield, whereas GHR 
significantly affected feed intake, feed conversion, and body energy traits. 
There was also evidence of dominance in allelic effects on milk yield and BCS. 
The LEP haplotype CCGTTT (corresponding to leptin SNP C207T, C528T, A1457G, 
C963T, A252T, and C305T, respectively) significantly affected milk yield and 
feed and dry matter intake. Animals carrying this haplotype produced 3.13 kg 
more milk daily and consumed 4.64 kg more feed. Furthermore, they tended to 
preserve more energy than average. Such results may be used to facilitate 
genetic selection in animal breeding programs.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2007-0930
PMID: 18650297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]