1. Hum Pathol. 2008 Dec;39(12):1849-53. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.04.014. Epub 
2008 Jul 25.

A gastrointestinal stromal tumor of the stomach morphologically resembling a 
neurofibroma: demonstration of a novel platelet-derived growth factor receptor 
alpha exon 18 mutation.

Liu T(1), Willmore-Payne C, Layfield LJ, Glasgow RE, Holden JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84132, USA. ting.liu@path.utah.edu

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are increasingly being recognized because of 
their characteristic expression of KIT (CD 117). Most KIT-positive 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors have activating mutations in the c-kit gene. A 
subgroup of gastrointestinal stromal tumors are negative for KIT expression, and 
in these tumors, activating mutations in platelet-derived growth factor receptor 
alpha are common. Most platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha 
mutation-positive gastrointestinal stromal tumors show an epithelioid histology 
and are located in the stomach. Herein, we describe an unusual gastric stromal 
tumor. The tumor was negative for KIT expression and the morphology did not show 
an epithelioid pattern but rather was composed of bland spindle cells 
reminiscent of a neurofibroma. Molecular analysis revealed a somatic mutation in 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha exon 18 (D842F). Aside from 
demonstrating a new platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha mutation, this 
case illustrates the usefulness of molecular testing as a diagnostic tool and 
clearly indicates the wide range of morphology that can be observed in 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.04.014
PMID: 18657298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]