1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Jul 25;4(7):e1000135. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000135.

Prediction by graph theoretic measures of structural effects in proteins arising 
from non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms.

Cheng TM(1), Lu YE, Vendruscolo M, Lio' P, Blundell TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom. tammy@cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk

Recent analyses of human genome sequences have given rise to impressive advances 
in identifying non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs). By 
contrast, the annotation of nsSNPs and their links to diseases are progressing 
at a much slower pace. Many of the current approaches to analysing 
disease-associated nsSNPs use primarily sequence and evolutionary information, 
while structural information is relatively less exploited. In order to explore 
the potential of such information, we developed a structure-based approach, 
Bongo (Bonds ON Graph), to predict structural effects of nsSNPs. Bongo considers 
protein structures as residue-residue interaction networks and applies graph 
theoretical measures to identify the residues that are critical for maintaining 
structural stability by assessing the consequences on the interaction network of 
single point mutations. Our results show that Bongo is able to identify 
mutations that cause both local and global structural effects, with a remarkably 
low false positive rate. Application of the Bongo method to the prediction of 
506 disease-associated nsSNPs resulted in a performance (positive predictive 
value, PPV, 78.5%) similar to that of PolyPhen (PPV, 77.2%) and PANTHER (PPV, 
72.2%). As the Bongo method is solely structure-based, our results indicate that 
the structural changes resulting from nsSNPs are closely associated to their 
pathological consequences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000135
PMCID: PMC2447880
PMID: 18654622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.