1. Toxicon. 2008 Sep 1;52(3):489-500. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2008.06.023. Epub
2008  Jul 9.

Evidence for multiple effects of ProTxII on activation gating in Na(V)1.5.

Edgerton GB(1), Blumenthal KM, Hanck DA.

Author information:
(1)Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Avenue, 
MC6094, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The peptide toxin ProTxII, recently isolated from the venom of the tarantula 
spider Thrixopelma pruriens, modifies gating in voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ 
channels. ProTxII is distinct from other known Na+ channel gating modifier 
toxins in that it affects activation, but not inactivation. It shifts activation 
gating positively and decreases current magnitude such that the dose-dependence 
of toxin action measured at a single potential reflects both effects. To test 
the extent to which these effects were independent, we tracked several different 
measures of current amplitude, voltage-dependent activation, and current 
kinetics in Na(V)1.5 in a range of toxin concentrations. Changes in voltage 
dependence and a decrease in G(max) appeared at relatively low concentrations 
(40-100 nM) while a positive shift in the voltage range of activation was 
apparent at higher toxin concentrations (> or =500 nM). Because ProTxII carries 
a net +4 charge we tested whether electrostatic interactions contributed to 
toxin action. We examined the effects of ProTxII in the presence of high 
extracellular Ba2+, known to screen and/or bind to surface charge. Some, but not 
all aspects of ProTxII modification were sensitive to the presence of Ba2+ 
indicating the contribution of an electrostatic, surface charge-like mechanism 
and supporting the idea of a multi-faceted toxin-channel interaction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2008.06.023
PMCID: PMC2613288
PMID: 18657562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]