1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Nov;36(11):2287-91. doi: 10.1124/dmd.108.021816. Epub 
2008 Jul 31.

Defective activity of recombinant cytochromes P450 3A4.2 and 3A4.16 in oxidation 
of midazolam, nifedipine, and testosterone.

Miyazaki M(1), Nakamura K, Fujita Y, Guengerich FP, Horiuchi R, Yamamoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Gunma University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Showa-machi 3-39-22, Maebashi 371-8511, Gunma, Japan.

Cytochrome P4503A4 (CYP3A4) is the most abundant cytochrome P450 in adult human 
liver and small intestine and oxidizes numerous clinically, physiologically, and 
toxicologically important compounds. The metabolic activity of CYP3A4 in 
patients varies at least 10-fold in vivo, and CYP3A4 genetic variants are 
considered one of the causes of individual differences. The cDNAs for the 
CYP3A4(*)2 (S222P), (*)7 (G56D), (*)16 (T185S), and (*)18 (L293P) mutant 
alleles, found in high frequencies in Caucasians or Asians, were constructed by 
site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in an Escherichia coli expression 
system. Midazolam (MDZ), testosterone (TST), and nifedipine (NIF) were used to 
assess the catalytic activities of the CYP3A4 wild type (CYP3A4.1) and its 
variants. The catalytic activities of CYP3A4.2 and CYP3A4.16 were reduced (lower 
V(max) and increased K(m) relative to CYP3A4.1) for all substrates. The CYP3A4.7 
showed lower V(max) values for MDZ and NIF (60 and 84%, respectively) and a 
higher K(m) (2-fold) for TST but not for MDZ or NIF. Although CYP3A4.18 showed 
low V(max) values for MDZ, NIF, and TST (88, 72, and 80% of CYP3A4.1, 
respectively), no significant differences were identified in the ratio 
V(max)(/K)(m). In summary, CYP3A4.2 and CYP3A4.16 exhibited significantly lower 
activity for MDZ, TST, and NIF oxidations than CYP3A4.1. Therefore, drugs 
metabolized by only CYP3A should be carefully administered to patients with 
these alleles.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.108.021816
PMID: 18669585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]