1. Nature. 2008 Sep 4;455(7209):109-13. doi: 10.1038/nature07159. Epub 2008 Jul
30.

Molecular architecture of native HIV-1 gp120 trimers.

Liu J(1), Bartesaghi A, Borgnia MJ, Sapiro G, Subramaniam S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The envelope glycoproteins (Env) of human and simian immunodeficiency viruses 
(HIV and SIV, respectively) mediate virus binding to the cell surface receptor 
CD4 on target cells to initiate infection. Env is a heterodimer of a 
transmembrane glycoprotein (gp41) and a surface glycoprotein (gp120), and forms 
trimers on the surface of the viral membrane. Using cryo-electron tomography 
combined with three-dimensional image classification and averaging, we report 
the three-dimensional structures of trimeric Env displayed on native HIV-1 in 
the unliganded state, in complex with the broadly neutralizing antibody b12 and 
in a ternary complex with CD4 and the 17b antibody. By fitting the known crystal 
structures of the monomeric gp120 core in the b12- and CD4/17b-bound 
conformations into the density maps derived by electron tomography, we derive 
molecular models for the native HIV-1 gp120 trimer in unliganded and CD4-bound 
states. We demonstrate that CD4 binding results in a major reorganization of the 
Env trimer, causing an outward rotation and displacement of each gp120 monomer. 
This appears to be coupled with a rearrangement of the gp41 region along the 
central axis of the trimer, leading to closer contact between the viral and 
target cell membranes. Our findings elucidate the structure and conformational 
changes of trimeric HIV-1 gp120 relevant to antibody neutralization and 
attachment to target cells.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07159
PMCID: PMC2610422
PMID: 18668044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]