1. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Aug 1;14(15):4726-34. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4921.

Improved identification of von Hippel-Lindau gene alterations in clear cell 
renal tumors.

Nickerson ML(1), Jaeger E, Shi Y, Durocher JA, Mahurkar S, Zaridze D, Matveev V, 
Janout V, Kollarova H, Bencko V, Navratilova M, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Mates D, 
Mukeria A, Holcatova I, Schmidt LS, Toro JR, Karami S, Hung R, Gerard GF, 
Linehan WM, Merino M, Zbar B, Boffetta P, Brennan P, Rothman N, Chow WH, Waldman 
FM, Moore LE.

Author information:
(1)Transgenomic, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: To provide a comprehensive, thorough analysis of somatic mutation and 
promoter hypermethylation of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene in the cancer 
genome, unique to clear cell renal cancer (ccRCC). Identify relationships 
between the prevalence of VHL gene alterations and alteration subtypes with 
patient and tumor characteristics.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: As part of a large kidney cancer case-control study 
conducted in Central Europe, we analyzed VHL mutations and promoter methylation 
in 205 well-characterized, histologically confirmed patient tumor biopsies using 
a combination of sensitive, high-throughput methods (endonuclease scanning and 
Sanger sequencing) and analysis of 11 CpG sites in the VHL promoter.
RESULTS: We identified mutations in 82.4% of cases, the highest VHL gene 
mutation prevalence reported to date. Analysis of 11 VHL promoter CpG sites 
revealed that 8.3% of tumors were hypermethylated and all were mutation 
negative. In total, 91% of ccRCCs exhibited alteration of the gene through 
genetic or epigenetic mechanisms. Analysis of patient and tumor characteristics 
revealed that certain mutation subtypes were significantly associated with 
Fuhrman nuclear grade, metastasis, node positivity, and self-reported family 
history of RCC.
CONCLUSION: Detection of VHL gene alterations using these accurate, sensitive, 
and practical methods provides evidence that the vast majority of histologically 
confirmed ccRCC tumors possess genetic or epigenetic alteration of the VHL gene 
and support the hypothesis that VHL alteration is an early event in ccRCC 
carcinogenesis. These findings also indicate that VHL molecular subtypes can 
provide a sensitive marker of tumor heterogeneity among histologically similar 
ccRCC cases for etiologic, prognostic, and translational studies.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4921
PMCID: PMC2629664
PMID: 18676741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]