1. Transl Res. 2008 Aug;152(2):49-58. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2008.06.003. Epub 2008 
Jul 23.

Effect of common KCNE1 and SCN5A ion channel gene variants on T-wave alternans, 
a marker of cardiac repolarization, during clinical exercise stress test: the 
Finnish Cardiovascular Study.

Koskela J(1), Kähönen M, Fan M, Nieminen T, Lehtinen R, Viik J, Nikus K, Niemelä 
K, Kööbi T, Turjanmaa V, Pörsti I, Lehtimäki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tampere University Hospital and Medical 
School at the University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. jenni.k.koskela@uta.fi

Comment in
    Transl Res. 2008 Aug;152(2):47-8. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2008.06.004.

T-wave alternans (TWA) in electrocardiography (ECG) is a marker of cardiac 
repolarization, the molecular regulation of which is incompletely understood. 
High TWA and prolonged QT intervals are both associated with ventricular 
arrhythmias and sudden death. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis of whether the 
same mutations that influence the QT interval also affect TWA variation. We 
examined the effect of 3 ion channel gene single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs), rs1805127, rs727957 KCNE1, and rs1805124 SCN5A, on TWA during a clinical 
exercise test. A total of 2008 subjects from the Finnish Cardiovascular Study 
underwent an exercise test with online ECG recording. TWA was measured by using 
the time-domain, modified moving average method. Maximum values at rest, during 
maximal exercise, and during recovery were used as outcome measures in 
statistical analysis. Moreover, 4-year survival data were collected and ion 
channel SNPs were determined. TWA was lowest in subjects with the TT genotype of 
rs1805127 during all phases of the exercise test (RANOVA main effect for 
genotype, P = 0.018). The result remained significant after adjustment for age, 
existing coronary heart disease, and beta-blocker medication status (RANCOVA, P 
= 0.035). Of the polymorphisms studied, only rs1805127 had a significant 
association with mortality (P = 0.047). The most common G-C haplotype, formed by 
rs727957 and rs1805127, was associated with TWA (RANOVA, P = 0.007) but not with 
mortality. The rs1805124 polymorphism was not associated with TWA. The common 
KCNE1 gene variant rs1805127 is associated with TWA during an exercise test in a 
Finnish population, which provides additional evidence that KCNE1 genetics may 
influence cardiac repolarization and cardiovascular mortality.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2008.06.003
PMID: 18674739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]