1. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Aug 1;4(8):e1000117. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000117.

Legionella eukaryotic-like type IV substrates interfere with organelle 
trafficking.

de Felipe KS(1), Glover RT, Charpentier X, Anderson OR, Reyes M, Pericone CD, 
Shuman HA.

Author information:
(1)Integrated Program in Cellular, Molecular, and Biophysical Studies, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2010;6(3). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/c7438c1b-5b65-4f4c-aaa3-062909e89525.
    PLoS Pathog. 2010;6(3). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/f079872b-7bce-41fe-bc16-c2e45d44b19e.

Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaires' disease, evades 
phago-lysosome fusion in mammalian and protozoan hosts to create a suitable 
niche for intracellular replication. To modulate vesicle trafficking pathways, 
L. pneumophila translocates effector proteins into eukaryotic cells through a 
Type IVB macro-molecular transport system called the Icm-Dot system. In this 
study, we employed a fluorescence-based translocation assay to show that 33 
previously identified Legionella eukaryotic-like genes (leg) encode substrates 
of the Icm-Dot secretion system. To assess which of these proteins may 
contribute to the disruption of vesicle trafficking, we expressed each gene in 
yeast and looked for phenotypes related to vacuolar protein sorting. We found 
that LegC3-GFP and LegC7/YlfA-GFP caused the mis-secretion of CPY-Invertase, a 
fusion protein normally restricted to the yeast vacuole. We also found that 
LegC7/YlfA-GFP and its paralog LegC2/YlfB-GFP formed large structures around the 
yeast vacuole while LegC3-GFP localized to the plasma membrane and a fragmented 
vacuole. In mammalian cells, LegC2/YlfB-GFP and LegC7/YlfA-GFP were found within 
large structures that co-localized with anti-KDEL antibodies but excluded the 
lysosomal marker LAMP-1, similar to what is observed in Legionella-containing 
vacuoles. LegC3-GFP, in contrast, was observed as smaller structures which had 
no obvious co-localization with KDEL or LAMP-1. Finally, LegC3-GFP caused the 
accumulation of many endosome-like structures containing undigested material 
when expressed in the protozoan host Dictyostelium discoideum. Our results 
demonstrate that multiple Leg proteins are Icm/Dot-dependent substrates and that 
LegC3, LegC7/YlfA, and LegC2/YlfB may contribute to the intracellular 
trafficking of L. pneumophila by interfering with highly conserved pathways that 
modulate vesicle maturation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000117
PMCID: PMC2475511
PMID: 18670632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.