1. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 6;3(8):e2890. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002890.

Up-regulation of mitochondrial activity and acquirement of brown adipose 
tissue-like property in the white adipose tissue of fsp27 deficient mice.

Toh SY(1), Gong J, Du G, Li JZ, Yang S, Ye J, Yao H, Zhang Y, Xue B, Li Q, Yang 
H, Wen Z, Li P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore.

Fsp27, a member of the Cide family proteins, was shown to localize to lipid 
droplet and promote lipid storage in adipocytes. We aimed to understand the 
biological role of Fsp27 in regulating adipose tissue differentiation, insulin 
sensitivity and energy balance. Fsp27(-/-) mice and Fsp27/lep double deficient 
mice were generated and we examined the adiposity, whole body metabolism, BAT 
and WAT morphology, insulin sensitivity, mitochondrial activity, and gene 
expression changes in these mouse strains. Furthermore, we isolated mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from wildtype and Fsp27(-/-) mice, followed by 
their differentiation into adipocytes in vitro. We found that Fsp27 is expressed 
in both brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) and its levels 
were significantly elevated in the WAT and liver of leptin-deficient ob/ob mice. 
Fsp27(-/-) mice had increased energy expenditure, lower levels of plasma 
triglycerides and free fatty acids. Furthermore, Fsp27(-/-)and Fsp27/lep 
double-deficient mice are resistant to diet-induced obesity and display 
increased insulin sensitivity. Moreover, white adipocytes in Fsp27(-/-) mice 
have reduced triglycerides accumulation and smaller lipid droplets, while levels 
of mitochondrial proteins, mitochondrial size and activity are dramatically 
increased. We further demonstrated that BAT-specific genes and key metabolic 
controlling factors such as FoxC2, PPAR and PGC1alpha were all markedly 
upregulated. In contrast, factors inhibiting BAT differentiation such as Rb, 
p107 and RIP140 were down-regulated in the WAT of Fsp27(-/-) mice. Remarkably, 
Fsp27(-/-) MEFs differentiated in vitro show many brown adipocyte 
characteristics in the presence of the thyroid hormone triiodothyronine (T3). 
Our data thus suggest that Fsp27 acts as a novel regulator in vivo to control 
WAT identity, mitochondrial activity and insulin sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002890
PMCID: PMC2483355
PMID: 18682832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.