1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2008 Nov 1;7(11):1824-34. doi:
10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.07.007.  Epub 2008 Aug 30.

Catalytic mechanism of human DNA polymerase lambda with Mg2+ and Mn2+ from ab 
initio quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical studies.

Cisneros GA(1), Perera L, García-Díaz M, Bebenek K, Kunkel TA, Pedersen LG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park (RTP), NC 27709, USA. cisnero1@niehs.nih.gov

DNA polymerases play a crucial role in the cell cycle due to their involvement 
in genome replication and repair. Understanding the reaction mechanism by which 
these polymerases carry out their function can provide insights into these 
processes. Recently, the crystal structures of human DNA polymerase lambda 
(Pollambda) have been reported both for pre- and post-catalytic complexes 
[García-Díaz et al., DNA Repair 3 (2007), 1333]. Here we employ the 
pre-catalytic complex as a starting structure for the determination of the 
catalytic mechanism of Pollambda using ab initio quantum mechanical/molecular 
mechanical methods. The reaction path has been calculated using Mg(2+) and 
Mn(2+) as the catalytic metals. In both cases the reaction proceeds through a 
two-step mechanism where the 3'-OH of the primer sugar ring is deprotonated by 
one of the conserved Asp residues (D490) in the active site before the 
incorporation of the nucleotide to the nascent DNA chain. A significant charge 
transfer is observed between both metals and some residues in the active site as 
the reaction proceeds. The optimized reactant and product structures agree with 
the reported crystal structures. In addition, the calculated reaction barriers 
for both metals are close to experimentally estimated barriers. Energy 
decomposition analysis to explain individual residue contributions suggests that 
several amino acids surrounding the active site are important for catalysis. 
Some of these residues, including R420, R488 and E529, have been implicated in 
catalysis by previous mutagenesis experiments on the homologous residues on 
Polbeta. Furthermore, Pollambda residues R420 and E529 found to be important 
from the energy decomposition analysis, are homologous to residues R183 and E295 
in Polbeta, both of which are linked to cancer. In addition, residues R386, 
E391, K422 and K472 appear to have an important role in catalysis and could be a 
potential target for mutagenesis experiments. There is partial conservation of 
these residues across the Pol X family of DNA polymerases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2008.07.007
PMCID: PMC2586819
PMID: 18692600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.