1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 17;283(42):28392-400. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801801200. Epub 
2008 Aug 11.

Phosphorylation of MyoGEF on Thr-574 by Plk1 promotes MyoGEF localization to the 
central spindle.

Asiedu M(1), Wu D, Matsumura F, Wei Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, 
USA.

We reported previously that a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, MyoGEF, 
localizes to the central spindle, activates RhoA, and is required for 
cytokinesis. In this study, we have found that Plk1 (polo-like kinase 1) can 
phosphorylate MyoGEF, thereby recruiting MyoGEF to the central spindle as well 
as enhancing MyoGEF activity toward RhoA. The in vitro kinase assay shows that 
Plk1 can phosphorylate MyoGEF on threonine 574. Immunoprecipitation/immunoblot 
analysis demonstrates that mutation of threonine 574 to alanine dramatically 
decreases threonine phosphorylation of MyoGEF in transfected HeLa cells, 
suggesting that threonine 574 is phosphorylated in vivo. Consistent with these 
observations, immunofluorescence shows that Plk1 and MyoGEF colocalize at the 
spindle pole and central spindle during mitosis and cytokinesis. Importantly, 
RNA interference-mediated depletion of Plk1 interferes with the localization of 
MyoGEF at the spindle pole and central spindle. Moreover, mutation of threonine 
574 to alanine in MyoGEF or depletion of Plk1 by RNA interference leads to a 
decrease in MyoGEF activity toward RhoA in HeLa cells. Therefore, our results 
suggest that Plk1 can regulate MyoGEF activity and localization, contributing to 
the regulation of cytokinesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801801200
PMCID: PMC2568926
PMID: 18694934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]