1. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Oct;70(2):281-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06393.x. 
Epub 2008 Aug 11.

Developmentally regulated sphingolipid synthesis in African trypanosomes.

Sutterwala SS(1), Hsu FF, Sevova ES, Schwartz KJ, Zhang K, Key P, Turk J, 
Beverley SM, Bangs JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, 1550 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Sphingolipids are essential components of eukaryotic membranes, and many 
unicellular eukaryotes, including kinetoplastid protozoa, are thought to 
synthesize exclusively inositol phosphorylceramide (IPC). Here we characterize 
sphingolipids from Trypanosoma brucei, and a trypanosome sphingolipid synthase 
gene family (TbSLS1-4) that is orthologous to Leishmania IPC synthase. Procyclic 
trypanosomes contain IPC, but also sphingomyelin, while surprisingly 
bloodstream-stage parasites contain sphingomyelin and ethanolamine 
phosphorylceramide (EPC), but no detectable IPC. In vivo fluorescent ceramide 
labelling confirmed stage-specific biosynthesis of both sphingomyelin and IPC. 
Expression of TbSLS4 in Leishmania resulted in production of sphingomyelin and 
EPC suggesting that the TbSLS gene family has bi-functional synthase activity. 
RNAi silencing of TbSLS1-4 in bloodstream trypanosomes led to rapid growth 
arrest and eventual cell death. Ceramide levels were increased more than 
threefold by silencing suggesting a toxic downstream effect mediated by this 
potent intracellular messenger. Topology predictions support a revised 
six-transmembrane domain model for the kinetoplastid sphingolipid synthases 
consistent with the proposed mammalian sphingomyelin synthase structure. This 
work reveals novel diversity and regulation in sphingolipid metabolism in this 
important group of human parasites.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06393.x
PMCID: PMC2629665
PMID: 18699867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]