1. Clin Genet. 2008 Dec;74(6):502-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01068.x. Epub
 2008 Jun 11.

LAMA2 gene analysis in a cohort of 26 congenital muscular dystrophy patients.

Oliveira J(1), Santos R, Soares-Silva I, Jorge P, Vieira E, Oliveira ME, Moreira 
A, Coelho T, Ferreira JC, Fonseca MJ, Barbosa C, Prats J, Aríztegui ML, Martins 
ML, Moreno T, Heinimann K, Barbot C, Pascual-Pascual SI, Cabral A, Fineza I, 
Santos M, Bronze-da-Rocha E.

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Dr Jacinto 
Magalhães, INSARJ, Porto, Portugal. jorge.oliveira@igm.min-saude.pt

Congenital muscular dystrophy type 1A (MDC1A) is caused by mutations in the 
LAMA2 gene encoding laminin-alpha2. We describe the molecular study of 26 
patients with clinical presentation, magnetic resonance imaging and/or 
laminin-alpha2 expression in muscle, compatible with MDC1A. The combination of 
full genomic sequencing and complementary DNA analysis led to the particularly 
high mutation detection rate of 96% (50/52 disease alleles). Besides 22 
undocumented polymorphisms, 18 different mutations were identified in the course 
of this work, 14 of which were novel. In particular, we describe the first fully 
characterized gross deletion in the LAMA2 gene, encompassing exon 56 
(c.7750-1713_7899-2153del), detected in 31% of the patients. The only two 
missense mutations detected were found in heterozygosity with nonsense or 
truncating mutations in the two patients with the milder clinical presentation 
and a partial reduction in muscle laminin-alpha2. Our results corroborate the 
previous few genotype/phenotype correlations in MDC1A and illustrate the 
importance of screening for gross rearrangements in the LAMA2 gene, which may be 
underestimated in the literature.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01068.x
PMID: 18700894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]