1. J Exp Med. 2008 Sep 1;205(9):1967-73. doi: 10.1084/jem.20071632. Epub 2008 Aug
 25.

Stimulation of Toll-like receptor 3 and 4 induces interleukin-1beta maturation 
by caspase-8.

Maelfait J(1), Vercammen E, Janssens S, Schotte P, Haegman M, Magez S, Beyaert 
R.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Signal Transduction in Inflammation, Department for 
Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.

The cytokine interleukin (IL)-1beta is a key mediator of the inflammatory 
response and has been implicated in the pathophysiology of acute and chronic 
inflammation. IL-1beta is synthesized in response to many stimuli as an inactive 
pro-IL-1beta precursor protein that is further processed by caspase-1 into 
mature IL-1beta, which is the secreted biologically active form of the cytokine. 
Although stimulation of membrane-bound Toll-like receptors (TLRs) up-regulates 
pro-IL-1beta expression, activation of caspase-1 is believed to be mainly 
initiated by cytosolic Nod-like receptors. In this study, we show that 
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) and lipopolysaccharide stimulation 
of macrophages induces pro-IL-1beta processing via a Toll/IL-1R 
domain-containing adaptor-inducing interferon-beta-dependent signaling pathway 
that is initiated by TLR3 and TLR4, respectively. Ribonucleic acid interference 
(RNAi)-mediated knockdown of the intracellular receptors NALP3 or MDA5 did not 
affect poly(I:C)-induced pro-IL-1beta processing. Surprisingly, poly(I:C)- and 
LPS-induced pro-IL-1beta processing still occurred in caspase-1-deficient cells. 
In contrast, pro-IL-1beta processing was inhibited by caspase-8 peptide 
inhibitors, CrmA or vFLIP expression, and caspase-8 knockdown via RNAi, 
indicating an essential role for caspase-8. Moreover, recombinant caspase-8 was 
able to cleave pro-IL-1beta in vitro at exactly the same site as caspase-1. 
These results implicate a novel role for caspase-8 in the production of 
biologically active IL-1beta in response to TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20071632
PMCID: PMC2526192
PMID: 18725521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]