1. J Anim Breed Genet. 2008 Aug;125(4):258-64. doi: 
10.1111/j.1439-0388.2008.00723.x.

Study on association of single nucleotide polymorphism of CAPN1 gene with muscle 
fibre and carcass traits in quality chicken populations.

Zhang ZR(1), Liu YP, Jiang X, Du HR, Zhu Q.

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agriculture University, 
Ya'an, Sichuan, PR China.

This study was aimed at investigating the effect of the calpain 1 (CAPN1) gene 
on carcass and meat quality traits in eight meat-type chicken populations, 
including five pure lines (developed from Chinese local breeds) and three 
cross-breeds. Primer pairs for the Coding Sequence (CDS) region in CAPN1 were 
designed from the chicken genomic sequence database. Polymorphisms were detected 
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism 
(SSCP) and DNA sequencing. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP; C2546T, 
G3535A and C7198A) were detected among individuals in each population. The 
associations of their haplotypes (H1 = CGA, H2 = CGC, H3 = CAA, H4 = CAC, H5 = 
TGA and H7 = TAA) with chicken breast muscle fibre and carcass traits were 
analysed. Results showed that the haplotypes were associated with live weight 
(LW), carcass weight (CW), breast muscle weight (BMW) and leg muscle weight 
(LMW) (p < 0.05), and were also related to eviscerated percentage (%EP) and 
breast muscle fibre density (p < 0.01). H1H3 haplotype was dominant for LW, CW 
and BMW; H1H5 haplotype was dominant for EP; H3H4 haplotype was dominant for LMW 
and H1H1 haplotype was dominant for BFD. It was concluded that the CAPN1 gene 
may be a major gene affecting meat quality traits of chicken or it is linked 
with the major gene. H1H3, H1H5 and H3H4 were the most advantageous haplotypes 
for carcass traits whereas H1H1 was the positive haplotype for breast muscle 
fibre trait.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0388.2008.00723.x
PMID: 18727211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]