1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 24;283(43):29312-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803801200. Epub 
2008 Aug 22.

A novel mechanism of G protein-coupled receptor functional selectivity. 
Muscarinic partial agonist McN-A-343 as a bitopic orthosteric/allosteric ligand.

Valant C(1), Gregory KJ, Hall NE, Scammells PJ, Lew MJ, Sexton PM, Christopoulos 
A.

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery Biology Laboratory, Monash University, 3800 Victoria, 
Australia.

Many G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) possess allosteric binding sites 
distinct from the orthosteric site utilized by their cognate ligands, but most 
GPCR allosteric modulators reported to date lack signaling efficacy in their own 
right. McN-A-343 (4-(N-(3-chlorophenyl)carbamoyloxy)-2-butynyltrimethylammonium 
chloride) is a functionally selective muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) 
partial agonist that can also interact allosterically at the M(2) mAChR. We 
hypothesized that this molecule simultaneously utilizes both an allosteric and 
the orthosteric site on the M(2) mAChR to mediate these effects. By synthesizing 
progressively truncated McN-A-343 derivatives, we identified two, which 
minimally contain 3-chlorophenylcarbamate, as pure allosteric modulators. These 
compounds were positive modulators of the orthosteric antagonist 
N-[(3)H]methylscopolamine, but in functional assays of M(2) mAChR-mediated 
ERK1/2 phosphorylation and guanosine 5'-3-O-([(35)S]thio)triphosphate binding, 
they were negative modulators of agonist efficacy. This negative allosteric 
effect was diminished upon mutation of Y177A in the second extracellular (E2) 
loop of the M(2) mAChR that is known to reduce prototypical allosteric modulator 
potency. Our results are consistent with McN-A-343 being a bitopic 
orthosteric/allosteric ligand with the allosteric moiety engendering partial 
agonism and functional selectivity. This finding suggests a novel and largely 
unappreciated mechanism of "directed efficacy" whereby functional selectivity 
may be engendered in a GPCR by utilizing an allosteric ligand to direct the 
signaling of an orthosteric ligand encoded within the same molecule.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803801200
PMCID: PMC2662018
PMID: 18723515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]