1. J Med Chem. 2008 Sep 25;51(18):5575-84. doi: 10.1021/jm800278k.

Molecular engineering of conotoxins: the importance of loop size to 
alpha-conotoxin structure and function.

Jin AH(1), Daly NL, Nevin ST, Wang CI, Dutertre S, Lewis RJ, Adams DJ, Craik DJ, 
Alewood PF.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 
4072 Australia.

Alpha-conotoxins are competitive antagonists of nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors (nAChRs). The majority of currently characterized alpha-conotoxins 
have a 4/7 loop size, and the major features of neuronal alpha-conotoxins 
include a globular disulfide connectivity and a helical structure centered 
around the third of their four cysteine residues. In this study, a novel 
"molecular pruning" approach was undertaken to define the relationship between 
loop size, structure, and function of alpha-conotoxins. This involved the 
systematic truncation of the second loop in the alpha-conotoxin [A10L]PnIA 
[4/7], a potent antagonist of the alpha7 nAChR. The penalty for truncation was 
found to be decreased conformational stability and increased susceptibility to 
disulfide bond scrambling. Truncation down to 4/4[A10L]PnIA maintained helicity 
and did not significantly reduce electrophysiological activity at alpha7 nAChRs, 
whereas 4/3[A10L]PnIA lost both alpha7 nAChR activity and helicity. In contrast, 
all truncated analogues lost approximately 100-fold affinity at the AChBP, a 
model protein for the extracellular domain of the nAChR. Docking simulations 
identified several hydrogen bonds lost upon truncation that provide an 
explanation for the reduced affinities observed at the alpha7 nAChR and AChBP.

DOI: 10.1021/jm800278k
PMID: 18754612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]