1. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 15;181(6):4406-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.6.4406.

CD8+ T cells targeting a single immunodominant epitope are sufficient for 
elimination of established SV40 T antigen-induced brain tumors.

Tatum AM(1), Mylin LM, Bender SJ, Fischer MA, Vigliotti BA, Tevethia MJ, 
Tevethia SS, Schell TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Immunotherapy of established solid tumors is rarely achieved, and the mechanisms 
leading to success remain to be elucidated. We previously showed that extended 
control of advanced-stage autochthonous brain tumors is achieved following 
adoptive transfer of naive C57BL/6 splenocytes into sublethally irradiated line 
SV11 mice expressing the SV40 T Ag (T Ag) oncoprotein, and was associated with 
in vivo priming of CD8(+) T cells (T(CD8)) specific for the dominant epitope IV 
(T Ag residues 404-411). Using donor lymphocytes derived from mice that are 
tolerant to epitope IV or a newly characterized transgenic mouse line expressing 
an epitope IV-specific TCR, we show that epitope IV-specific T(CD8) are a 
necessary component of the donor pool and that purified naive epitope 
IV-specific T(CD8) are sufficient to promote complete and rapid regression of 
established tumors. While transfer of naive TCR-IV cells alone induced some 
initial tumor regression, increased survival of tumor-bearing mice required 
prior conditioning of the host with a sublethal dose of gamma irradiation and 
was associated with complete tumor eradication. Regression of established tumors 
was associated with rapid accumulation of TCR-IV T cells within the brain 
following initial priming against the endogenous T Ag in the peripheral lymphoid 
organs. Additionally, persistence of functional TCR-IV cells in both the brain 
and peripheral lymphoid organs was associated with long-term tumor-free 
survival. Finally, we show that production of IFN-gamma, but not perforin or 
TNF-alpha, by the donor lymphocytes is critical for control of autochthonous 
brain tumors.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.181.6.4406
PMCID: PMC2631553
PMID: 18768900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]