1. J Cell Sci. 2008 Oct 1;121(Pt 19):3155-66. doi: 10.1242/jcs.020404. Epub 2008 
Sep 2.

Clathrin-independent endocytosis of ErbB2 in geldanamycin-treated human breast 
cancer cells.

Barr DJ(1), Ostermeyer-Fay AG, Matundan RA, Brown DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, NY 11794-5215, USA.

The epidermal growth factor (EGF)-receptor family member ErbB2 is commonly 
overexpressed in human breast cancer cells and correlates with poor prognosis. 
Geldanamycin (GA) induces the ubiquitylation, intracellular accumulation and 
degradation of ErbB2. Whether GA stimulates ErbB2 internalization is 
controversial. We found that ErbB2 was internalized constitutively at a rate 
that was not affected by GA in SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells. Instead, GA 
treatment altered endosomal sorting, causing the transport of ErbB2 to lysosomes 
for degradation. In contrast to earlier work, we found that ErbB2 
internalization occurred by a clathrin- and tyrosine-kinase-independent pathway 
that was not caveolar, because SK-BR-3 cells lack caveolae. Similar to cargo of 
the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein-enriched early endosomal 
compartment (GEEC) pathway, internalized ErbB2 colocalized with cholera toxin B 
subunit, GPI-anchored proteins and fluid, and was often seen in short tubules or 
large vesicles. However, in contrast to the GEEC pathway in other cells, 
internalization of ErbB2 and fluid in SK-BR-3 cells did not require Rho-family 
GTPase activity. Accumulation of ErbB2 in vesicles containing constitutively 
active Arf6-Q67L occurred only without GA treatment; Arf6-Q67L did not slow 
transport to lysosomes in GA-treated cells. Further characterization of this 
novel clathrin-, caveolae- and Rho-family-independent endocytic pathway might 
reveal new strategies for the downregulation of ErbB2 in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.020404
PMCID: PMC2707784
PMID: 18765569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]