1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Nov;95(3):182-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.07.009. Epub 
2008 Aug 29.

Case report of familial Carney complex due to novel frameshift mutation c.597del 
C (p.Phe200LeufsX6) in PRKAR1A.

Sasaki A(1), Horikawa Y, Suwa T, Enya M, Kawachi S, Takeda J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Division of Molecule and Structure, 
Gifu University School of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

Carney complex is an autosomal dominantly inherited disease characterized by 
skin pigmentation, myxoma, primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease 
(PPNAD), and acromegaly. However, only a few incidences of PPNAD combined with 
acromegaly are observed in patients. The type 1alpha regulatory subunit of 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PRKAR1A) has been identified in patients as a 
causative gene for Carney complex by a positional cloning approach. Here, we 
report a female patient diagnosed with Cushing's syndrome and a GH-producing 
pituitary adenoma without otherwise evident acromegaly that could be diagnosed 
only by specialized endocrinological tests. Based on family history of 
acromegaly (mother and sister) and the fact that the combination of both 
diseases is very rare, genetic diagnosis involving Carney complex was considered 
to be appropriate. The 10 exons and flanking regions of PRKAR1A were screened 
for mutations by direct DNA sequencing. The patient and her mother and sister 
were found to have the same, novel frameshift mutation resulting from a single 
base deletion in exon 6 coding cAMP-binding domain A, denoted c.597delC in 
PRKAR1A. This single base deletion generated an immature stop codon at the sixth 
codon (p.Phe200LeufsX6). Even family members with the same mutation can show 
distinct phenotypes, suggesting that Carney complex is a multifactorial disorder 
comprising various genetic and environmental factors. Genetic diagnosis makes it 
possible to prepare more effective therapeutic strategies for patients and gene 
carriers and to avoid unnecessary tests for non-carriers in the family of the 
patient.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.07.009
PMID: 18760947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]