1. PLoS Genet. 2008 Sep 5;4(9):e1000176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000176.

Somatic pairing of chromosome 19 in renal oncocytoma is associated with 
deregulated EGLN2-mediated [corrected] oxygen-sensing response.

Koeman JM(1), Russell RC, Tan MH, Petillo D, Westphal M, Koelzer K, Metcalf JL, 
Zhang Z, Matsuda D, Dykema KJ, Houseman HL, Kort EJ, Furge LL, Kahnoski RJ, 
Richard S, Vieillefond A, Swiatek PJ, Teh BT, Ohh M, Furge KA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Germline Modification and Cytogenetics, Van Andel Research 
Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2008 Jul;4(7). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/7f57058f-cc02-45a6-bfab-a835619e3916.

Chromosomal abnormalities, such as structural and numerical abnormalities, are a 
common occurrence in cancer. The close association of homologous chromosomes 
during interphase, a phenomenon termed somatic chromosome pairing, has been 
observed in cancerous cells, but the functional consequences of somatic pairing 
have not been established. Gene expression profiling studies revealed that 
somatic pairing of chromosome 19 is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality in renal 
oncocytoma, a neoplasia of the adult kidney. Somatic pairing was associated with 
significant disruption of gene expression within the paired regions and resulted 
in the deregulation of the prolyl-hydroxylase EGLN2 [corrected] a key protein 
that regulates the oxygen-dependent degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor 
(HIF). Overexpression of EGLN2 [corrected] in renal oncocytoma increased 
ubiquitin-mediated destruction of HIF and concomitantly suppressed the 
expression of several HIF-target genes, including the pro-death BNIP3L gene. The 
transcriptional changes that are associated with somatic pairing of chromosome 
19 mimic the transcriptional changes that occur following DNA amplification. 
Therefore, in addition to numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities, 
alterations in chromosomal spatial dynamics should be considered as genomic 
events that are associated with tumorigenesis. The identification of EGLN2 as a 
significantly deregulated gene that maps within the paired chromosome region 
directly implicates defects in the oxygen-sensing network to the biology of 
renal oncocytoma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000176
PMCID: PMC2518213
PMID: 18773095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.