1. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Sep 15;102(6):726-32. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.04.070. 
Epub 2008 Jul 25.

Impact of beta1-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms on susceptibility to heart 
failure, arrhythmogenesis, prognosis, and response to beta-blocker therapy.

Biolo A(1), Clausell N, Santos KG, Salvaro R, Ashton-Prolla P, Borges A, Rohde 
LE.

Author information:
(1)Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Unit, Cardiology Division, Hospital de 
Cl√≠nicas de Porto Alegre, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil.

Beta1-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms have been implicated with inconsistent 
results in the pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and prognosis of patients 
with heart failure (HF). The impact of 2 functional polymorphisms 
(beta1-Arg389Gly and beta1-Ser49Gly) on HF susceptibility, arrhythmogenesis, and 
prognosis was evaluated in Brazilian outpatients. Genotyping at codons 389 and 
49 was performed using polymerase chain reaction with restriction fragment 
length polymorphism analysis in 201 outpatients with systolic HF and 141 
apparently healthy controls. Enrolled patients were followed up at the HF 
clinic, and vital status was evaluated using electronic hospital records, 
telephone contact, and a local death certificate database. Allele frequencies 
were similar between patients with HF and controls, with neither polymorphism 
related to HF susceptibility. The beta1-389Gly homozygotes had significantly 
less nonsustained ventricular tachycardia on Holter monitoring (17% vs 48% for 
Arg/Arg patients; p = 0.015) and improved HF-related survival, with no events 
after a median follow-up of 40 months (log-rank statistics = 0.025). The 
negative impact of beta1-389Arg allele on HF-related survival was substantially 
reduced using high-dose beta-blocker therapy (80% survival for high-dose vs 42% 
for low-dose beta blockers or nonusers; log-rank statistics = 0.0003). The 
beta1-Ser49Gly polymorphism was not associated with nonsustained ventricular 
tachycardia or HF prognosis. In conclusion, beta1-Arg389Gly and beta1-Ser49Gly 
polymorphisms had no influence on HF susceptibility. However, the Gly389 allele 
was associated with a lower prevalence of ventricular arrhythmias and better 
HF-related survival. A pharmacogenetic interaction is suggested because beta 
blockers were more effective in beta1-389Arg allele carriers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.04.070
PMID: 18773997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]