1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Sep;88(3):797-800. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/88.3.797.

Association of the melanocortin-4 receptor V103I polymorphism with dietary 
intake in severely obese persons.

Pichler M(1), Kollerits B, Heid IM, Hunt SC, Adams TD, Hopkins PN, Kronenberg F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular 
and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have reported that carriers of the 103I allele of 
the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene had lower body weight than did persons 
with the wild-type genotype. A recent study found an association of the MC4R 
103I variant with carbohydrate intake, which may mediate some of the association 
of this variant with leanness.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to investigate the association between 
the MC4R V103I polymorphism and the dietary intake of persons with severe 
obesity, which was derived by using the Willett food-frequency questionnaire.
DESIGN: The MC4R V103I polymorphism was genotyped in a group of 1029 severely 
obese white subjects with an average body mass index (BMI; in kg/m(2)) of 46.0 
(range: 33-92).
RESULTS: Carriers of the 103I allele had significantly higher daily energy (364 
kcal/d or 19%; P = 0.03) and carbohydrate (57 g/d or 27%; P = 0.01) intakes than 
did noncarriers, but there was no relation with BMI. No notable association of 
this polymorphism with lipid and glucose variables of the metabolic syndrome was 
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The higher dietary intake of carbohydrates in severely obese 
persons with the MC4R 103I variant is in line with previous findings. It may 
indicate a differential effect on body size measures in extremely obese subjects 
as compared with the general population.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/88.3.797
PMCID: PMC3246117
PMID: 18779298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none