1. Mol Ther. 2008 Dec;16(12):1968-76. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.199. Epub 2008 Sep 16.

A large U3 deletion causes increased in vivo expression from a nonintegrating 
lentiviral vector.

Bayer M(1), Kantor B, Cockrell A, Ma H, Zeithaml B, Li X, McCown T, Kafri T.

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The feasibility of using nonintegrating lentiviral vectors has been demonstrated 
by recent studies showing their ability to maintain transgene expression both in 
vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) vectors 
packaged with a mutated integrase were able to correct retinal disease in a 
mouse model. Interestingly, these results differ from earlier studies in which 
first-generation nonintegrating lentiviral vectors yielded insignificant levels 
of transduction. However, to date, a rigorous characterization of transgene 
expression from the currently used self-inactivating (SIN) nonintegrating 
lentiviral vectors has not been published. In this study, we characterize 
transgene expression from SIN nonintegrating lentiviral vectors. Overall, we 
found that nonintegrating vectors express transgenes at a significantly lower 
level than their integrating counterparts. Expression from nonintegrating 
vectors was improved upon introducing a longer deletion in the vector's U3 
region. A unique shuttle-vector assay indicated that the relative abundance of 
the different episomal forms was not altered by the longer U3 deletion. 
Interestingly, the longer U3 deletion did not enhance expression in the corpus 
callosum of the rat brain, suggesting that the extent of silencing of episomal 
transcription is influenced by tissue-specific factors. Finally, and for the 
first time, episomal expression in the mouse liver was potent and sustained.

DOI: 10.1038/mt.2008.199
PMCID: PMC2587457
PMID: 18797449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]