1. Rev Diabet Stud. 2008 Summer;5(2):64-72. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2008.5.64. Epub 2008
 Aug 10.

Genetic Basis of Type 1 Diabetes: Similarities and Differences between East and 
West.

Ikegami H(1), Noso S, Babaya N, Hiromine Y, Kawabata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Kinki University School 
of Medicine, Osaka-sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

Type 1 diabetes is a multifactorial disease caused by a complex interaction of 
genetic and environmental factors. The genetic factors involved consist of 
multiple susceptibility genes, at least five of which, HLA, INS, CTLA4, PTPN22 
and IL2RA/CD25, have been shown to be associated with type 1 diabetes in 
Caucasian (Western) populations, as has recently been confirmed by genome-wide 
association studies. It has been proposed, however, that the contribution of 
these genes to type 1 diabetes susceptibility may be different in Asian 
(Eastern) populations. HLA and INS genes are consistently associated with type 1 
diabetes in both Caucasian and Asian populations, but apparent differences in 
disease-associated alleles and haplotypes are observed between Japanese and 
Caucasian subjects. The association of CTLA4 with type 1 diabetes is 
concentrated in a subset of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) in 
both Japanese and Caucasian populations, while the association of PTPN22 with 
type 1 diabetes in Japanese and most Asian populations is not as clear as in 
Caucasians. IL2RA/CD25 genes seem to be similarly distributed in type 1 diabetes 
patients in the two populations, whereas genetic heterogeneity may exist 
regarding SUMO4, with an association of the M55V variant with type 1 diabetes 
observed in Asians, but not in Caucasians. Genome-wide association studies (GWA) 
are largely outstanding for Asian populations but they are now underway in 
Japan. This review reports on the discovered similarities and differences in 
susceptibility genes for type 1 diabetes between East and West and discusses the 
most recent observations made by the involved investigators.

DOI: 10.1900/RDS.2008.5.64
PMCID: PMC2556443
PMID: 18795209