1. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Mar;129(3):615-21. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.274. Epub
2008  Sep 18.

Mechanisms of loss of heterozygosity in neurofibromatosis type 1-associated 
plexiform neurofibromas.

Steinmann K(1), Kluwe L, Friedrich RE, Mautner VF, Cooper DN, Kehrer-Sawatzki H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Germany.

Plexiform neurofibromas constitute a serious burden for patients with 
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), a common autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by pigmentary changes and tumorous skin lesions (neurofibromas). 
Despite the prominence of these benign tumors in NF1 patients, the mechanisms 
underlying the tumor-associated loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in plexiform 
neurofibromas have not been extensively studied. We performed LOH analysis on 43 
plexiform neurofibromas from 31 NF1 patients, the largest study of its kind to 
date. A total of 13 (30%) plexiform neurofibromas exhibited LOH involving 17q 
markers. In three tumors, LOH was found to be confined to the NF1 gene region. 
However, in none of the tumors was a somatic NF1 microdeletion, mediated by 
non-allelic homologous recombination between either NF1-REPs or SUZ12 genes, 
detected. Thus, NF1 microdeletions do not appear to be frequent somatic events 
in plexiform neurofibromas. Determination of NF1 gene copy number by multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification indicated that although tumors with 
smaller regions of LOH were characterized by 17q deletions, no NF1 gene copy 
number changes were detected in six plexiform neurofibromas with more extensive 
LOH. To our knowledge, mitotic recombination has not previously been reported to 
be a frequent cause of LOH in plexiform neurofibromas.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2008.274
PMID: 18800150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]