1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2009 Mar;20(2):157-63. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2008.00751.x. Epub 2008 Sep 22.

Association of TNF-alpha with severe respiratory syncytial virus infection and 
bronchial asthma.

Puthothu B(1), Bierbaum S, Kopp MV, Forster J, Heinze J, Weckmann M, Krueger M, 
Heinzmann A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-)alpha is a proinflammatory cytokine that is 
important in the innate host defence and thus in the defence of infectious 
agents. However, in excess it provokes the development of chronic inflammatory 
diseases. The aim of this study was to test association of TNF with severe RSV 
bronchiolitis as example of an infectious disease and asthma as representative 
for a chronic inflammatory condition. The following study populations were 
genotyped for 4 polymorphisms within TNF-beta (rs909253) and TNF-alpha 
(rs1799964, rs1799724, rs1800629): 322 asthmatic children, 151 children with 
severe respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) bronchiolitis and 270 controls. 
Furthermore, serum TNF-alpha levels were measured by a FlowCytomix Assay. Asthma 
showed association with two TNF-alpha polymorphisms as well as with TNF 
haplotypes (p = 0.0050). In contrast, RSV bronchiolitis was associated with TNF 
haplotypes (p < 0.00001) but not with any single polymorphism. In addition, 
TNF-alpha serum levels correlated with rs1799724 (p = 0.034). A genetically 
mediated up-regulation of TNF-alpha expression might provoke a pronounced 
inflammation of the airways and thus a more severe course of RSV infection as 
well as the onset of asthma. It remains to be elucidated whether severe RSV 
bronchiolitis starts TNF-alpha upregulation and is one first step in the 
direction to asthma later in life, or whether both diseases are independent from 
each other and supported by TNF-alpha upregulation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3038.2008.00751.x
PMID: 18811622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]