1. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):799-805. doi: 10.3892/ijo_00000067.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of NO-donating aspirin in F344 rats.

Rao CV(1), Joseph S, Gao L, Patlolla JM, Choi CI, Kopelovich L, Steele VE, Rigas 
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology Section, University of Oklahoma 
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Nitric oxide-donating aspirin (NO-ASA) represents class of promising 
chemopreventive NO-NSAIDs. NO-ASA combines the beneficial effects of ASA and the 
gut-sparing effect of the NO moiety. There is, however, limited information on 
its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects in vivo. Herein, experiments 
were designed to identify the optimal dose, the effective route of 
administration, and targeted markers in plasma and colonic tissues of male F344 
rats. Seven weeks old male F344 rats were randomized into 9 groups (16/group) 
and fed the control diet. At eight weeks of age, groups 2-5 were each 
administered one of four different doses of NO-ASA by gavage (33, 66, 132 and 
264 mg/kg) and each of groups 6-9 were fed diets containing NO-ASA (35, 700, 
1,400 and 2,800 ppm) for two weeks. Rats were sacrificed 2 and 10 h after 
completion of the two weeks of treatment with NO-ASA and plasma and colonic 
mucosa were collected and analyzed for NO-ASA, its metabolites, and PGE2 and 
TXB2 levels. Our results indicate that NO-ASA is rapidly metabolized, 
predominantly to salicylic acid; no intact NO-ASA was detected in plasma. 
Compared to diet-fed NO-ASA, gavaging generated much higher salicylic acid 
levels over a wide range of doses and a relatively broad time period (10 h). 
Regardless of its route of administration, NO-ASA lowered the levels of PGE2 in 
colonic tissues and plasma, as well as TxB2 in plasma in a dose- and 
time-dependent manner. These findings may have practical utility for the 
administration of NO-ASA to humans.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo_00000067
PMCID: PMC2579329
PMID: 18813794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]