1. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Jul;43(7):494-8.

[Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms of GATA3 with allergic rhinitis 
phenotypes in Chinese].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XD(1), Zhang L, Duan H, She WY, Zhao Y, Liu S, Han DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNP) of GATA3 and Chinese with allergic rhinitis.
METHODS: This study included 109 patients with allergic rhinitis and 112 healthy 
control people. SNP of two loci with restriction fragment length polymorphism 
was detected, rs1269486 at promoter region and rs2229360 located 92 bp 
downstream of STOP codon. Total IgE and specific IgE of Der p and Der f with 
different genotypes of the two loci were compared.
RESULTS: There was SNP at both loci of rs1269486 and rs2229360. The genotypes of 
rs1269486 were GG, GA and AA, and the genotypes of rs2229360 were CC, CT and TT. 
The frequency of genotype GG and allele G in patient group was significantly 
higher than that in control group (chi2 = 13.75, P <0.01; chi2 = 12.91, P 
<0.01), and the frequency of genotype GA and allele A in patient group was 
significantly lower than that in control group (chi2 = 11.90, P <0.01; chi2 
=12.91, P <0.01). There were no significant differences between patient group 
and control group for the frequencies of genotypes and alleles at rs2229360 (P > 
0.05). The haplotype frequency of GC in patient group was significantly higher 
than that in control group (chi2 = 114.59, P < 0.01), and the haplotype 
frequency of AC in patient group was significantly lower than that in control 
group (chi2 = 87.52, P <0.01). There was no significant difference of the levels 
of serum total IgE and specific IgE to Der p and Der f with the genotypes at the 
two loci (P >0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The SNP at rs1269486 of GATA3 is associated with allergic rhinitis 
in Chinese.

PMID: 18826115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]