1. Brain Res Rev. 2009 Mar;59(2):278-92. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2008.09.001. 
Epub 2008 Sep 12.

Toll-like receptors in neurodegeneration.

Okun E(1), Griffioen KJ, Lathia JD, Tang SC, Mattson MP, Arumugam TV.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research 
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The key roles of toll-like receptors (TLRs) as mediators of the detection and 
responses of immune cells to invading pathogens are well known. There are at 
least 13 mammalian TLRs which are integral membrane proteins with a leucine-rich 
extracellular domain and a cytoplasmic domain similar to that of the 
interleukin-1 receptor which initiates downstream signaling through kinases to 
activate transcription factors such as AP-1 and NFkappaB. TLRs are activated in 
glial cells (microglia, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes) and lymphocytes that 
infiltrate the nervous system in response to inflammation caused by infectious 
agents, tissue injury or autoimmune conditions. By inducing the production of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and cell adhesion molecules in immune cells, TLRs may 
indirectly damage neurons in conditions such as ischemic stroke and multiple 
sclerosis. Recent findings suggest that neurons also express a subset of TLRs 
and that their activation promotes neuronal degeneration in experimental models 
of stroke and Alzheimer's disease. TLRs may also play roles in regulating the 
processes of neurogenesis and neurite outgrowth, suggesting roles in neuronal 
plasticity. A better understanding of the molecular and cellular biology of TLRs 
in the normal and diseased nervous system, may lead to novel approaches for 
preventing neuronal degeneration and promoting recovery of function in an array 
of neurodegenerative conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2008.09.001
PMCID: PMC2679904
PMID: 18822314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]