1. Hum Genet. 2008 Nov;124(4):431-6. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0567-8. Epub 2008
Sep  27.

Association of SIRT1 gene variation with visceral obesity.

Peeters AV(1), Beckers S, Verrijken A, Mertens I, Roevens P, Peeters PJ, Van Hul 
W, Van Gaal LF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Center for Medical Genetics, University of 
Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, Wilrijk, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium. 
armand.peeters@ua.ac.be

The sirtuin SIRT1 is an important regulator of energy metabolism through its 
impact on glucose and lipid metabolism and therefore we tested the hypothesis 
that genetic variation in SIRT1 may have an effect on adiposity in a Belgian 
case/control association study. This study included 1,068 obese patients (BMI > 
or = 30 kg/m(2)) from the outpatient obesity clinic and 313 lean controls (BMI 
between 18.5 and 25 kg/m(2)). Anthropometrics were assessed by classical methods 
and visceral (VFA), subcutaneous (SFA) and total abdominal (TFA) fat areas were 
determined by a CT scan. The extent of linkage disequilibrium in SIRT1 allowed 
us to reduce the number of SNPs to two, sufficient to cover the entire gene. The 
two tagSNPs (rs7069102 and rs3818292) were analyzed by LightSNiP assays in all 
subjects. Rs3818292 genotypes were similarly distributed in cases and controls, 
whereas rs7069102 was different for the additive (P = 0.007) and dominant (P = 
0.01) model. The variant C-allele of rs7069102 reduced obesity risk with an OR 
of 0.74 (P = 0.025; 95% CI 0.57-0.96) under a dominant model. In obese male 
subjects, this variant allele was associated with increased waist circumference 
(P = 0.04), WHR (P = 0.02), TFA (P = 0.03) and VFA (P = 0.005) (dominant model; 
adjusted for age and BMI). Rs3818292 was related to VFA (P = 0.005; adjusted for 
age and BMI) in obese males while in obese women, no significant associations 
were detected. Our data suggest that genetic variation in SIRT1 increases the 
risk for obesity, and that SIRT1 genotype correlates with visceral obesity 
parameters in obese men.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-008-0567-8
PMID: 18820948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]