1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;17(4):420-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.188. Epub 2008
Oct  15.

Multiple giant cell lesions in patients with Noonan syndrome and 
cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome.

Neumann TE(1), Allanson J, Kavamura I, Kerr B, Neri G, Noonan J, Cordeddu V, 
Gibson K, Tzschach A, Krüger G, Hoeltzenbein M, Goecke TO, Kehl HG, Albrecht B, 
Luczak K, Sasiadek MM, Musante L, Laurie R, Peters H, Tartaglia M, Zenker M, 
Kalscheuer V.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

Noonan syndrome (NS) and cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS) are related 
developmental disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding various components 
of the RAS-MAPK signaling cascade. NS is associated with mutations in the genes 
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, or KRAS, whereas CFCS can be caused by mutations in BRAF, 
MEK1, MEK2, or KRAS. The NS phenotype is rarely accompanied by multiple giant 
cell lesions (MGCL) of the jaw (Noonan-like/MGCL syndrome (NL/MGCLS)). PTPN11 
mutations are the only genetic abnormalities reported so far in some patients 
with NL/MGCLS and in one individual with LEOPARD syndrome and MGCL. In a cohort 
of 75 NS patients previously tested negative for mutations in PTPN11 and KRAS, 
we detected SOS1 mutations in 11 individuals, four of whom had MGCL. To explore 
further the relevance of aberrant RAS-MAPK signaling in syndromic MGCL, we 
analyzed the established genes causing CFCS in three subjects with MGCL 
associated with a phenotype fitting CFCS. Mutations in BRAF or MEK1 were 
identified in these patients. All mutations detected in these seven patients 
with syndromic MGCL had previously been described in NS or CFCS without apparent 
MGCL. This study demonstrates that MGCL may occur in NS and CFCS with various 
underlying genetic alterations and no obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. 
This suggests that dysregulation of the RAS-MAPK pathway represents the common 
and basic molecular event predisposing to giant cell lesion formation in 
patients with NS and CFCS rather than specific mutation effects.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2008.188
PMCID: PMC2986220
PMID: 18854871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]