1. Virology. 1991 Oct;184(2):687-94. doi: 10.1016/0042-6822(91)90438-h.

Oligomerization and transport of the envelope protein of Moloney murine leukemia 
virus-TB and of ts1, a neurovirulent temperature-sensitive mutant of MoMuLV-TB.

Kamps CA(1), Lin YC, Wong PK.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville 78957.

Ts1, a temperature-sensitive mutant of Moloney murine leukemia virus-TB 
(MoMuLV-TB), causes a progressive hindlimb paralytic disease in susceptible 
strains of mice. Previously, it has been shown that a single amino acid 
substitution, Val-25----Ile in gPr80env, is responsible for the temperature 
sensitivity, inefficient transport, and processing of gPr80env at the 
restrictive temperature and the neurovirulence of ts1. Since the neurovirulence 
of ts1 is associated with inefficient transport and processing of gPr80env and 
since in other systems involving viral envelope proteins it has been shown that 
correct folding and oligomerization of envelope monomers are required for 
efficient transport, we have investigated the ability of gPr80env derived from 
either wild-type MoMuLV-TB or ts1 to associate into oligomeric complexes. In 
these experiments, we establish that at both the restrictive and the 
nonrestrictive temperatures gPr80env molecules derived from MoMuLV-TB associate 
to form oligomeric complexes and these oligomers are most likely trimers. 
gPr80env molecules derived from ts1 also oligomerize at both temperatures; 
however, at the restrictive temperature, most of the molecules within the 
trimeric complexes remain as gPr80env and are not processed to gp70 and Prp15E. 
These results indicate that lack of oligomerization of gPr80env is not 
responsible for the transport defect of ts1. Therefore, by interacting 
specifically with critical sites within target cells, oligomers of mutant 
gPr80env rather than "tangles" of monomeric viral envelope proteins may be 
involved in the neurodegenerative disorder produced by ts1.

DOI: 10.1016/0042-6822(91)90438-h
PMID: 1887590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]