1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Dec;16(12):2717-22. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.441. 
Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Lp(a) and risk of recurrent cardiac events in obese postinfarction patients.

Corsetti JP(1), Ryan D, Rainwater DL, Moss AJ, Zareba W, Block RC, Sparks CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester 
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA. 
James_Corsetti@urmc.rochester.edu

Studies of recurrent coronary events in obese postinfarction patients show mixed 
results despite potential importance of obesity-related pathophysiologic 
processes and associated markers in establishing and predicting risk. The study 
aim was to determine specific markers of recurrent risk in obese postinfarction 
patients. Nondiabetic patients of the Thrombogenic Factors and Recurrent 
Coronary Events (THROMBO) postinfarction study were classified according to BMI 
as normal weight (<25 kg/m(2)), overweight (25.0-29.9 kg/m(2)), and obese (> or 
= 30 kg/m(2)). Cox multivariable regression with adjustment for significant 
clinical covariates was performed in each group monitoring outcome (cardiac 
death, myocardial infarction (MI), or unstable angina with 26 months follow-up) 
as a function of 17 thrombogenic, inflammatory, and metabolic blood markers and 
17 cardiovascular disease-associated genetic polymorphisms. Results revealed no 
statistically significant genetic or blood marker variables in normal or 
overweight patients. For obese postinfarction patients, elevated lipoprotein(a) 
(Lp(a))was found to be a highly significant risk marker with hazard ratio and 
95% confidence interval of 3.94 (2.11-7.35), P = 0.000017 (upper tertile vs. 
lower two tertiles). Additionally, elevated Lp(a) was found to interact with the 
-75G>A polymorphism of the apolipoprotein A-I gene and the -250G>A polymorphism 
of the hepatic lipase gene in establishing risk. We conclude that interactions 
of elevated Lp(a) with polymorphisms of the apolipoprotein A-I and hepatic 
lipase genes, primarily reflective of altered lipoprotein metabolism, play an 
important role in the establishment of recurrent coronary event risk in obese, 
nondiabetic postinfarction patients. These findings suggest close monitoring and 
consideration of weight reduction for obese postinfarction patients with 
elevated Lp(a) levels.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2008.441
PMID: 18927546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]