1. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(5):R86. doi: 10.1186/bcr2156. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Redefining prognostic factors for breast cancer: YB-1 is a stronger predictor of 
relapse and disease-specific survival than estrogen receptor or HER-2 across all 
tumor subtypes.

Habibi G(1), Leung S, Law JH, Gelmon K, Masoudi H, Turbin D, Pollak M, Nielsen 
TO, Huntsman D, Dunn SE.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Oncogenomic Research, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Experimental Medicine, Child and Family Research Institute, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Gene expression analysis is used to subtype breast cancers such 
that the most aggressive tumors are identified, but translating this into 
clinical practice can be cumbersome. Our goal is to develop a universal 
biomarker that distinguishes patients at high risk across all breast cancer 
subtypes. We previously reported that Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1), a 
transcription/translation factor, was a marker of poor prognosis in a cohort of 
490 patients with breast cancer, but the study was not large enough to subtype 
the cancers. We therefore investigated whether YB-1 identifies patients at risk 
for either reduced relapse free survival or decreased r breast cancer specific 
survival (BCSS) across all tumor subtypes by evaluating 4,049 cases.
METHODS: Tumor tissue microarrays, representing 4,049 cases of invasive breast 
cancers with 20 years of follow up, were subtyped by the expression profiles of 
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or HER-2. We then addressed whether 
YB-1 expression identified patients at higher risk for relapse and/or lower 
BCSS.
RESULTS: We found YB-1 to be a highly predictive biomarker of relapse (P < 2.5 x 
10(-20)) and poor survival (P < 7.3 x 10(-26)) in the entire cohort and across 
all breast cancer subtypes. Patients with node-positive or node-negative cancer 
were more likely to die from the disease if YB-1 was expressed. This was further 
substantiated using a Cox regression model, which revealed that it was 
significantly associated with relapse and poor survival in a subtype independent 
manner (relapse patients, hazard ratio = 1.28, P < 8 x 10(-3); all patients, 
hazard ratio = 1.45, P < 6.7 x 10(-7)). Moreover, YB-1 was superior to estrogen 
receptor and HER-2 as a prognostic marker for relapse and survival. For a subset 
of patients who were originally considered low risk and were therefore not given 
chemotherapy, YB-1 was indicative of poor survival (P < 7.1 x 10 (-17)). 
Likewise, YB-1 was predictive of decreased BCSS in tamoxifen-treated patients (P 
= 0.001); in this setting a Cox regression model once again demonstrated it to 
be an independent biomarker indicating poor survival (hazard ratio = 1.70, P = 
0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of YB-1 universally identifies patients at high risk 
across all breast cancer subtypes and in situations where more aggressive 
treatment may be needed. We therefore propose that YB-1 may re-define high-risk 
breast cancer and thereby create opportunities for individualized therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr2156
PMCID: PMC2614522
PMID: 18925950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]