1. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Dec 20;511(6):724-35. doi: 10.1002/cne.21858.

Sustained delivery of NT-3 from lens fiber cells in transgenic mice reveals 
specificity of neuroprotection in retinal degenerations.

Lavail MM(1), Nishikawa S, Duncan JL, Yang H, Matthes MT, Yasumura D, Vollrath 
D, Overbeek PA, Ash JD, Robinson ML.

Author information:
(1)Beckman Vision Center, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California 94143-0730, USA.

Several neurotrophic factors (NTFs) are effective in protecting retinal 
photoreceptor cells from the damaging effects of constant light and slowing the 
rate of inherited photoreceptor degenerations. It is currently unclear whether, 
if continuously available, all NTFs can be protective for many or most retinal 
degenerations (RDs). We used transgenic mice that continuously overexpress the 
neurotrophin NT-3 from lens fibers under the control of the alphaA-crystallin 
promoter to test for neuroprotection in light-damage experiments and in four 
naturally occurring or transgenically induced RDs in mice. Lens-specific 
expression of NT-3 mRNA was demonstrated both by in situ hybridization in 
embryos and by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in adult 
mice. Furthermore, NT-3 protein was found in abundance in the lens, ocular 
fluids, and retina by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and 
immunocytochemistry. Overexpression of NT-3 had no adverse effects on the 
structure or function of the retina for up to at least 14 months of age. Mice 
expressing the NT-3 transgene were protected from the damaging effects of 
constant light to a much greater degree than those receiving bolus injections of 
NT-3. When the NT-3 transgene was transferred into rd/rd, Rds/+, Q344ter mutant 
rhodopsin or Mertk knockout mice, overexpression of NT-3 had no protective 
effect on the RDs in these mice. Thus, specificity of the neuroprotective effect 
of NT-3 is clearly demonstrated, and different molecular mechanisms are inferred 
to mediate the protective effect in light-induced and inherited RDs.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.21858
PMCID: PMC2702994
PMID: 18925574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]