1. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003415. Epub 2008 Oct
15.

Gene expression profiling of two distinct neuronal populations in the rodent 
spinal cord.

Ryge J(1), Westerdahl AC, Alstr√∏m P, Kiehn O.

Author information:
(1)Mammalian Locomotor Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. jesper.ryge@ki.se

BACKGROUND: In the field of neuroscience microarray gene expression profiles on 
anatomically defined brain structures are being used increasingly to study both 
normal brain functions as well as pathological states. Fluorescent tracing 
techniques in brain tissue that identifies distinct neuronal populations can in 
combination with global gene expression profiling potentially increase the 
resolution and specificity of such studies to shed new light on neuronal 
functions at the cellular level.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examine the microarray gene expression 
profiles of two distinct neuronal populations in the spinal cord of the neonatal 
rat, the principal motor neurons and specific interneurons involved in motor 
control. The gene expression profiles of the respective cell populations were 
obtained from amplified mRNA originating from 50-250 fluorescently identified 
and laser microdissected cells. In the data analysis we combine a new microarray 
normalization procedure with a conglomerate measure of significant differential 
gene expression. Using our methodology we find 32 genes to be more expressed in 
the interneurons compared to the motor neurons that all except one have not 
previously been associated with this neuronal population. As a validation of our 
method we find 17 genes to be more expressed in the motor neurons than in the 
interneurons and of these only one had not previously been described in this 
population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We provide an optimized experimental protocol that 
allows isolation of gene transcripts from fluorescent retrogradely labeled cell 
populations in fresh tissue, which can be used to generate amplified aRNA for 
microarray hybridization from as few as 50 laser microdissected cells. Using 
this optimized experimental protocol in combination with our microarray analysis 
methodology we find 49 differentially expressed genes between the motor neurons 
and the interneurons that reflect the functional differences between these two 
cell populations in generating and transmitting the motor output in the rodent 
spinal cord.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003415
PMCID: PMC2566599
PMID: 18923679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.