1. Oncol Rep. 2008 Nov;20(5):1181-7.

The C1772T genetic polymorphism in human HIF-1alpha gene associates with 
expression of HIF-1alpha protein in breast cancer.

Kim HO(1), Jo YH, Lee J, Lee SS, Yoon KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical 
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical 
Science Institute, School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is an important genetic component involved in 
the cellular response to hypoxia. HIF-1 is also linked to the regulation of 
tumor development and growth. In previous studies, the C1772T (P582S) or the 
G1790A (A588T) polymorphisms of the HIF-1alpha gene have been identified in 
renal cell carcinoma, head and neck and esophageal squamous cell carcinomas as 
well as colorectal and prostate cancers. In our study, we investigated whether 
polymorphisms of the HIF-1alpha gene may account for the expression patterns of 
HIF-1alpha protein and impact of clinical progression in breast cancer. We also 
examined the impact of prognosis of HIF-1alpha gene polymorphism and protein 
expression in the prediction of biological behavior. We performed polymerase 
chain reaction and direct sequencing to detect polymorphisms in exon 12 of 
HIF-1alpha from 90 breast cancer patients and 102 healthy controls. The 
expression of HIF-1alpha was measured in paraffin-embedded specimens from 
patients by immunohistochemistry. We associated its expression with known 
prognostic factors. The frequency of the T allele for C1772T in breast cancer 
patients and healthy controls was 5.6 vs. 4.4%, whereas, the frequency of the A 
allele for G1790A was 1.7 vs. 4.4%. HIF-1alpha was overexpressed in 56.7% (51 of 
90) of the patients. Its overexpression associated with the T1772 polymorphic 
allele (p=0.04). Elevated levels of HIF-1alpha protein were found in cases of 
breast cancer with lymph node metastasis (p=0.041), high histological grade 
(p=0.001) and increased Ki-67 index (p=0.031). These results suggest the 
potential use of C1772T (P582S) polymorphism and expression analysis in 
providing a new prognostic factor for unfavorable disease outcomes and may help 
for clinical decision-making in the treatment of breast cancer patients.

PMID: 18949419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]