1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 31;384(5):1086-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.025. Epub 
2008 Oct 17.

Mismatched base-pair simulations for ASFV Pol X/DNA complexes help interpret 
frequent G*G misincorporation.

Sampoli Ben√≠tez BA(1), Arora K, Balistreri L, Schlick T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Marymount Manhattan College, 
221 East 71st Street, New York, NY 10021, USA.

DNA polymerase X (pol X) from the African swine fever virus is a 174-amino-acid 
repair polymerase that likely participates in a viral base excision repair 
mechanism, characterized by low fidelity. Surprisingly, pol X's insertion rate 
of the G*G mispair is comparable to that of the four Watson-Crick base pairs. 
This behavior is in contrast with another X-family polymerase, DNA polymerase 
beta (pol beta), which inserts G*G mismatches poorly, and has higher DNA repair 
fidelity. Using molecular dynamics simulations, we previously provided support 
for an induced-fit mechanism for pol X in the presence of the correct incoming 
nucleotide. Here, we perform molecular dynamics simulations of pol X/DNA 
complexes with different incoming incorrect nucleotides in various orientations 
[C*C, A*G, and G*G (anti) and A*G and G*G (syn)] and compare the results to 
available kinetic data and prior modeling. Intriguingly, the simulations reveal 
that the G*G mispair with the incoming nucleotide in the syn configuration 
undergoes large-scale conformational changes similar to that observed in the 
presence of correct base pair (G*C). The base pairing in the G*G mispair is 
achieved via Hoogsteen hydrogen bonding with an overall geometry that is well 
poised for catalysis. Simulations for other mismatched base pairs show that an 
intermediate closed state is achieved for the A*G and G*G mispair with the 
incoming dGTP in anti conformation, while the protein remains near the open 
conformation for the C*C and the A*G syn mismatches. In addition, catalytic site 
geometry and base pairing at the nascent template-incoming nucleotide 
interaction reveal distortions and misalignments that range from moderate for 
A*G anti to worst for the C*C complex. These results agree well with kinetic 
data for pol X and provide a structural/dynamic basis to explain, at atomic 
level, the fidelity of this polymerase compared with other members of the X 
family. In particular, the more open and pliant active site of pol X, compared 
to pol beta, allows pol X to accommodate bulkier mismatches such as guanine 
opposite guanine, while the more structured and organized pol beta active site 
imposes higher discrimination, which results in higher fidelity. The possibility 
of syn conformers resonates with other low-fidelity enzymes such as Dpo4 (from 
the Y family), which readily accommodate oxidative lesions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.10.025
PMCID: PMC2644343
PMID: 18955064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]