1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8861-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1902.

Modification of cysteine residue in p65 subunit of nuclear factor-kappaB 
(NF-kappaB) by picroliv suppresses NF-kappaB-regulated gene products and 
potentiates apoptosis.

Anand P(1), Kunnumakkara AB, Harikumar KB, Ahn KS, Badmaev V, Aggarwal BB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, Cytokine Research Laboratory, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Retraction in
    Cancer Res. 2018 Sep 1;78(17):5187. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-18-1824.

Picroliv, an iridoid glycoside derived from the plant Picrorhiza kurroa, is used 
traditionally to treat fever, asthma, hepatitis, and other inflammatory 
conditions. However, the exact mechanism of its therapeutic action is still 
unknown. Because nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation plays a major role 
in inflammation and carcinogenesis, we postulated that picroliv must interfere 
with this pathway by inhibiting the activation of NF-kappaB-mediated signal 
cascade. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that pretreatment with 
picroliv abrogated tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced activation of NF-kappaB. 
The glycoside also inhibited NF-kappaB activated by carcinogenic and 
inflammatory agents, such as cigarette smoke condensate, phorbol 12-myristate 
13-acetate, okadaic acid, hydrogen peroxide, lipopolysaccharide, and epidermal 
growth factor. When examined for the mechanism of action, we found that picroliv 
inhibited activation of IkappaBalpha kinase, leading to inhibition of 
phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaBalpha. It also inhibited 
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of p65. Further studies revealed that 
picroliv directly inhibits the binding of p65 to DNA, which was reversed by the 
treatment with reducing agents, suggesting a role for a cysteine residue in 
interaction with picroliv. Mutation of Cys(38) in p65 to serine abolished this 
effect of picroliv. NF-kappaB inhibition by picroliv leads to suppression of 
NF-kappaB-regulated proteins, including those linked with cell survival 
(inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, survivin, and TNF 
receptor-associated factor 2), proliferation (cyclin D1 and cyclooxygenase-2), 
angiogenesis (vascular endothelial growth factor), and invasion (intercellular 
adhesion molecule-1 and matrix metalloproteinase-9). Suppression of these 
proteins enhanced apoptosis induced by TNF. Overall, our results show that 
picroliv inhibits the NF-kappaB activation pathway, which may explain its 
anti-inflammatory and anticarcinogenic effects.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1902
PMCID: PMC2673720
PMID: 18974130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]