1. Nature. 2008 Dec 4;456(7222):648-52. doi: 10.1038/nature07428. Epub 2008 Oct
29.

Incorporation of a non-human glycan mediates human susceptibility to a bacterial 
toxin.

Byres E(1), Paton AW, Paton JC, LÃ¶fling JC, Smith DF, Wilce MC, Talbot UM, Chong 
DC, Yu H, Huang S, Chen X, Varki NM, Varki A, Rossjohn J, Beddoe T.

Author information:
(1)Protein Crystallography Unit and ARC Centre of Excellence for Structural and 
Functional Microbial Genomics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

AB(5) toxins comprise an A subunit that corrupts essential eukaryotic cell 
functions, and pentameric B subunits that direct target-cell uptake after 
binding surface glycans. Subtilase cytotoxin (SubAB) is an AB(5) toxin secreted 
by Shiga toxigenic Escherichia coli (STEC), which causes serious 
gastrointestinal disease in humans. SubAB causes haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome-like pathology in mice through SubA-mediated cleavage of BiP/GRP78, an 
essential endoplasmic reticulum chaperone. Here we show that SubB has a strong 
preference for glycans terminating in the sialic acid N-glycolylneuraminic acid 
(Neu5Gc), a monosaccharide not synthesized in humans. Structures of SubB-Neu5Gc 
complexes revealed the basis for this specificity, and mutagenesis of key SubB 
residues abrogated in vitro glycan recognition, cell binding and cytotoxicity. 
SubAB specificity for Neu5Gc was confirmed using mouse tissues with a human-like 
deficiency of Neu5Gc and human cell lines fed with Neu5Gc. Despite lack of 
Neu5Gc biosynthesis in humans, assimilation of dietary Neu5Gc creates 
high-affinity receptors on human gut epithelia and kidney vasculature. This, and 
the lack of Neu5Gc-containing body fluid competitors in humans, confers 
susceptibility to the gastrointestinal and systemic toxicities of SubAB. 
Ironically, foods rich in Neu5Gc are the most common source of STEC 
contamination. Thus a bacterial toxin's receptor is generated by metabolic 
incorporation of an exogenous factor derived from food.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07428
PMCID: PMC2723748
PMID: 18971931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]