1. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003593. Epub 2008 Oct
31.

Growth arrest of BCR-ABL positive cells with a sequence-specific 
polyamide-chlorambucil conjugate.

Chou CJ(1), O'Hare T, Lefebvre S, Alvarez D, Tyner JW, Eide CA, Druker BJ, 
Gottesfeld JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by the presence of a 
constitutively active Abl kinase, which is the product of a chimeric BCR-ABL 
gene, caused by the genetic translocation known as the Philadelphia chromosome. 
Imatinib, a selective inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase, has 
significantly improved the clinical outcome of patients with CML. However, 
subsets of patients lose their response to treatment through the emergence of 
imatinib-resistant cells, and imatinib treatment is less durable for patients 
with late stage CML. Although alternative Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
have been developed to overcome drug resistance, a cocktail therapy of different 
kinase inhibitors and additional chemotherapeutics may be needed for complete 
remission of CML in some cases. Chlorambucil has been used for treatment of B 
cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin's and Hodgkin's disease. Here we 
report that a DNA sequence-specific pyrrole-imidazole polyamide-chlorambucil 
conjugate, 1R-Chl, causes growth arrest of cells harboring both unmutated 
BCR-ABL and three imatinib resistant strains. 1R-Chl also displays selective 
toxicities against activated lymphocytes and a high dose tolerance in a murine 
model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003593
PMCID: PMC2571993
PMID: 18974832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.