1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Dec;8(6):527-33. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283184210.

Hyper IgE syndrome: an update on clinical aspects and the role of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3.

Paulson ML(1), Freeman AF, Holland SM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hyper IgE syndrome (HIES) is a primary immunodeficiency 
characterized by eczema, recurrent skin and lung infections, elevated serum IgE, 
and connective tissue and skeletal abnormalities. We present newly recognized 
aspects of the clinical phenotype and discuss recent genetic and immunologic 
findings.
RECENT FINDINGS: In 2007, mutations in signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 3 (STAT3) were determined to be the cause of autosomal-dominant 
HIES. Mutations lead to disruption of STAT3-dependent pathways, which are 
crucial for signaling of many cytokines, including IL-6 and IL-10. On the one 
hand, cells from STAT3-defective patients have a proinflammatory profile with 
elevated TNFalpha and IFNgamma; on the other hand, STAT3 mutations result in the 
inability to produce IL-17 or form Th17 cells.
SUMMARY: HIES was previously defined on the basis of clinical manifestations and 
laboratory markers that were not specific to the disease. With the 
identification of STAT3 mutations as the cause of HIES, we can definitively 
characterize the disease at molecular and immunologic levels. Future study of 
HIES and STAT3 will help us understand eczema, IgE regulation, infection 
susceptibility, coronary artery disease, scoliosis, and bronchiectasis as well 
as provide mechanistic insights into treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e3283184210
PMID: 18978467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]