1. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Feb 1;81(2):353-61. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn302. Epub 2008
Nov  5.

Expression and vasoconstrictor function of anorexigenic peptides neuromedin U-25 
and S in the human cardiovascular system.

Mitchell JD(1), Maguire JJ, Kuc RE, Davenport AP.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Centre for Clinical Investigation, Box 110, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB22QQ, UK. 
jdm50@cam.ac.uk

AIMS: Neuromedin U-25 (NMU-25), a brain-gut peptide with anorexigenic actions, 
was paired with the G-protein-coupled receptors NMU1 and NMU2 in 2000. NMU-25 
elicited a potent hypertensive effect in rats but little is known about its 
cardiovascular effects in humans. We examined the hypothesis that NMU fulfils 
the criteria for controlling vascular reactivity within the human cardiovascular 
system.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The radioligand [125I]-NMU-25 demonstrated specific, 
saturable, and high affinity (K(D) = 0.26 +/- 0.06 nM) binding in the human left 
ventricle and coronary artery, and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction revealed that mRNA encoding NMU1 predominated in these tissues. 
NMU-25-like immunoreactivity was detected in human plasma, left ventricle, 
coronary artery, saphenous vein, and epicardial adipose tissue, and both NMU-25 
and a related peptide, neuromedin S (NMS), were identified by high-performance 
liquid chromatography in the left ventricle. NMU receptor and peptide were 
localized to endothelial cells, with the receptor also present on vascular 
smooth muscle cells. NMU-25 was a potent vasoconstrictor of isolated rings of 
human coronary and mammary artery and saphenous vein. Compared with NMU-25, NMS 
had a significantly reduced maximum response in saphenous vein, and the 
Arg165Trp variant of NMU-25, associated with childhood-onset obesity, was 
without effect. NMU-25 precursor mRNA was upregulated in the left ventricle from 
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and ischaemic heart disease.
CONCLUSION: We have detected the expression of both NMU receptor and peptide in 
human cardiovascular tissues and have shown that NMU-25 and NMS act as potent 
vasoconstrictors in human vascular beds.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvn302
PMID: 18987052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]