1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 15;266(2):740-6.

Sulfation of Tyr1680 of human blood coagulation factor VIII is essential for the 
interaction of factor VIII with von Willebrand factor.

Leyte A(1), van Schijndel HB, Niehrs C, Huttner WB, Verbeet MP, Mertens K, van 
Mourik JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Coagulation, Central Laboratory of The Netherlands Red 
Cross Blood Transfusion Service, Amsterdam.

The acidic region of the Factor VIII light chain was studied with regard to 
structural requirements for the formation of a functional von Willebrand factor 
(vWF)-binding site. Factor VIII mutants lacking the B domain, with additional 
deletions and an amino acid replacement within the sequence 1649-1689 were 
constructed using site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in Cos-1 cells. These 
mutants, which were recovered as single-chain molecules with similar specific 
activities, were compared in their binding to immobilized vWF. Deletion of amino 
acids 741-1648 or 741-1668 did not affect the binding of Factor VIII to vWF. 
However, a mutant with a deletion of residues 741-1689 was no longer capable of 
interacting with vWF. This indicates a role for residues within the sequence 
1669-1689 in the formation of a vWF-binding site. When recombinant Factor VIII 
was expressed in the presence of chlorate, an inhibitor of protein sulfation, 
the resulting Factor VIII displayed strongly reduced binding to vWF. vWF binding 
was completely abolished when within the sequence 1669-1689 the tyrosine residue 
Tyr1680, which is part of a consensus tyrosine sulfation sequence, was replaced 
by phenylalanine. The Factor VIII sequence 1673-1689 was identified as a high 
affinity substrate for tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase (Km = 57 microM) in 
cell-free sulfation studies. It is concluded that sulfation of Tyr1680 is 
required for the interaction of Factor VIII with vWF. Two synthetic peptides 
that represent the sequence 1673-1689, but differ with respect to sulfation of 
Tyr1680 are shown to have vWF binding affinity that is considerably lower than 
the Factor VIII protein. Several models to accommodate our findings are 
discussed.

PMID: 1898735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]