1. Protein Expr Purif. 2009 Mar;64(1):82-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.10.005. Epub 
2008 Oct 19.

Refolding and kinetic characterization of the phosphodiesterase-8A catalytic 
domain.

Yan Z(1), Wang H, Cai J, Ke H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structure Biology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase-8 (PDE8) hydrolyzes the second messenger 
cAMP and is involved in many biological processes such as testosterone 
production. Although the bacterial and mammalian expression systems have been 
extensively tried, production of large quantity of soluble and active PDE8 
remains to be a major hurdle for pharmacological and structural studies. 
Reported here is a detailed protocol of refolding and purification of large 
quantity of the PDE8A1 catalytic domain (residues 480-820) and kinetic 
characterization of the refolded protein. This protocol yielded about 8 mg of 
the PDE8A catalytic domain from 2l Escherichia coli culture, which has at least 
40-fold higher activity than those reported in literature. The PDE8A1 catalytic 
domain has k(cat) of 4.0 s(-1) for Mn(2+) and 2.9s(-1) for Mg(2+), and the K(M) 
values of 1-1.8 microM. In addition, the PDE8A1 (205-820) fragment that contains 
both PAS and catalytic domains was expressed in E. coli and refolded. This 
PDE8A1 (205-820) fragment has k(cat) of 1.1 s(-1) and K(M) of 0.28 microM, but 
aggregated at high concentration. The K(M) of PDE8A1 (205-820) is 2- to 7-fold 
higher than the K(M) values of 40-150 nM for the full-length PDE8s in 
literature, but about 6-fold lower than that of the catalytic domain. Thus, the 
K(M) difference likely implies an allosteric regulation of the PDE8A activity by 
its PAS domain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2008.10.005
PMCID: PMC2677826
PMID: 18984055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]