1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(22):e150. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn691. Epub 2008
Nov  4.

Errors in the bisulfite conversion of DNA: modulating inappropriate- and 
failed-conversion frequencies.

Genereux DP(1), Johnson WC, Burden AF, St√∂ger R, Laird CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
genereux@u.washington.edu

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Aug;37(15):5235.

Bisulfite treatment can be used to ascertain the methylation states of 
individual cytosines in DNA. Ideally, bisulfite treatment deaminates 
unmethylated cytosines to uracils, and leaves 5-methylcytosines unchanged. Two 
types of bisulfite-conversion error occur: inappropriate conversion of 
5-methylcytosine to thymine, and failure to convert unmethylated cytosine to 
uracil. Conventional bisulfite treatment requires hours of exposure to 
low-molarity, low-temperature bisulfite ('LowMT') and, sometimes, thermal 
denaturation. An alternate, high-molarity, high-temperature ('HighMT') protocol 
has been reported to accelerate conversion and to reduce inappropriate 
conversion. We used molecular encoding to obtain validated, individual-molecule 
data on failed- and inappropriate-conversion frequencies for LowMT and HighMT 
treatments of both single-stranded and hairpin-linked oligonucleotides. After 
accounting for bisulfite-independent error, we found that: (i) 
inappropriate-conversion events accrue predominantly on molecules exposed to 
bisulfite after they have attained complete or near-complete conversion; (ii) 
the HighMT treatment is preferable because it yields greater homogeneity among 
sites and among molecules in conversion rates, and thus yields more reliable 
data; (iii) different durations of bisulfite treatment will yield data 
appropriate to address different experimental questions; and (iv) conversion 
errors can be used to assess the validity of methylation data collected without 
the benefit of molecular encoding.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn691
PMCID: PMC2602783
PMID: 18984622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]