1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1604-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806499200. Epub
2008  Nov 5.

Annexin A2 binding to endosomes and functions in endosomal transport are 
regulated by tyrosine 23 phosphorylation.

Morel E(1), Gruenberg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, Sciences II, 30 Quai E. 
Ansermet, 1211 Geneva-4, Switzerland.

The phospholipid-binding annexin A2 (AnxA2) is known to play a role in the 
regulation of membrane and actin dynamics, in particular in the endocytic 
pathway. The protein is present on early endosomes, where it regulates membrane 
traffic, including the biogenesis of multivesicular transport intermediates 
destined for late endosomes. AnxA2 membrane association depends on the protein N 
terminus and membrane cholesterol but does not involve the AnxA2 ligand 
p11/S100A10. However, the precise mechanisms that control AnxA2 membrane 
association and function are not clear. In the present study, we have 
investigated the role of AnxA2 N-terminal phosphorylation in controlling 
association to endosomal membranes and functions. We found that endosomal AnxA2 
was partially tyrosine-phosphorylated and that mutation of Tyr-23 to Ala 
(AnxA2Y23A), but not of Ser-25 to Ala, impaired AnxA2 endosome association. We 
then found that the AnxA2Y23A mutant was unable to bind endosomes in vivo, 
whereas a phospho-mimicking AnxA2 mutant (Y23D) showed efficient endosome 
binding capacity. Similarly, we found that AnxA2Y23D interacted more efficiently 
with liposomes in vitro when compared with AnxA2Y23A. To investigate the role of 
Tyr-23 in vivo, AnxA2 was knocked down with small interfering RNAs, and then 
cells were recomplemented with RNA interference-resistant forms of the protein. 
Using this strategy, we could show that AnxA2Y23D, but not AnxA2Y23A, could 
restore early-to-late endosome transport after AnxA2 depletion. We conclude that 
phosphorylation of Tyr-23 is essential for proper endosomal association and 
function of AnxA2, perhaps because it stabilizes membrane-associated protein via 
a conformational change.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M806499200
PMID: 18990701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]