1. Mutat Res. 2009 Jan 15;660(1-2):12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.001. Epub
 2008 Oct 15.

Colon tumor mutations and epigenetic changes associated with genetic 
polymorphism: insight into disease pathways.

Slattery ML(1), Wolff RK, Curtin K, Fitzpatrick F, Herrick J, Potter JD, Caan 
BJ, Samowitz WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. 
marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Variation in genes associated with serum levels of proteins may be useful for 
examining specific disease pathways. Using data from a large study of colon 
cancer, we examine genetic variants in insulin, inflammation, estrogen, 
metabolizing enzymes, and energy homeostasis genes to explore associations with 
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG Island methylator phenotype (CIMP), 
mutations of p53 in exons 5 through 8, and mutations in codons 12 and 13 of 
Ki-ras. Insulin-related genes were associated with CIMP-positive and MSI tumors, 
with the strongest associations among aspirin users. The Fok1 vitamin D receptor 
(VDR) polymorphism was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors; the 
Poly A and CDX2 VDR polymorphisms were associated only with Ki-ras-mutated 
tumors. NAT2 was associated with CIMP-positive/Ki-ras-mutated tumors but not 
with MSI tumors. The TCF7L2 rs7903146 polymorphism was associated with p53 
mutated tumors. Most associations varied by recent aspirin/NSAID use: IL6 
rs1800796 and rs1800795 polymorphisms were associated inversely with tumor 
mutations in the presence of aspirin/NSAIDs; POMC significantly reduced risk of 
Ki-ras-mutated tumors when aspirin/NSAIDs were not used; the TCF7L2 rs7903146 
was associated with reduced risk of Ki-ras-mutated tumors in the presence of 
aspirin and increased risk in the absence of aspirin. These data, although 
exploratory, identify specific tumor subsets that may be associated with 
specific exposures/polymorphism combinations. The important modifying effects of 
aspirin/NSAIDs on associations with genetic polymorphisms reinforce the 
underlying role of inflammation in the etiology of colon cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.10.001
PMCID: PMC2907671
PMID: 18992263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]