1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Nov;17(11):3268-73. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0073.

Correlation between circadian gene variants and serum levels of sex steroids and 
insulin-like growth factor-I.

Chu LW(1), Zhu Y, Yu K, Zheng T, Chokkalingam AP, Stanczyk FZ, Gao YT, Hsing AW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
6120 Executive Boulevard, MSC 7234, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
chulisa@mail.nih.gov

A variety of biological processes, including steroid hormone secretion, have 
circadian rhythms, which are influenced by nine known circadian genes. 
Previously, we reported that certain variants in circadian genes were associated 
with risk for prostate cancer. To provide some biological insight into these 
findings, we examined the relationship of five variants of circadian genes, 
including NPAS2 (rs2305160:G > A), PER1 (rs2585405:G > C), CSNK1E (rs1005473:A > 
C), PER3 (54-bp repeat length variant), and CRY2 (rs1401417:G > C), with serum 
levels of sex steroids and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and IGF-binding 
protein 3 (IGFBP3) in 241 healthy elderly Chinese men (mean age of 71.5). 
Age-adjusted and waist-to-hip ratio-adjusted ANOVA followed by likelihood ratio 
tests (LRT) showed that the NPAS2 variant A allele was associated with lower 
free and bioavailable testosterone (P(LRT) = 0.02 and 0.01, respectively) 
compared with the GG genotype. In addition, the PER1 variant was associated with 
higher serum levels of sex hormone-binding globulin levels (Ptrend = 0.03), 
decreasing 5alpha-androstane-3alpha, 17beta-diol glucuronide levels (Ptrend = 
0.02), and decreasing IGFBP3 levels (Ptrend = 0.05). Furthermore, the CSNK1E 
variant C allele was associated with higher testosterone to dihydrotestosterone 
ratios (P(LRT) = 0.01) compared with the AA genotype, whereas the longer PER3 
repeat was associated with higher serum levels of IGF-I (P(LRT) = 0.03) and 
IGF-I to IGFBP3 ratios (P(LRT) = 0.04). The CRY2 polymorphism was not associated 
with any biomarkers analyzed. Our findings, although in need of confirmation, 
suggest that variations in circadian genes are associated with serum hormone 
levels, providing biological support for the role of circadian genes in 
hormone-related cancers.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0073
PMID: 18990770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]