1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):759-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806314200. Epub 2008 
Nov 12.

The stability and transactivation potential of the mammalian MafA transcription 
factor are regulated by serine 65 phosphorylation.

Guo S(1), Burnette R, Zhao L, Vanderford NL, Poitout V, Hagman DK, Henderson E, 
Ozcan S, Wadzinski BE, Stein R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The level of the MafA transcription factor is regulated by a variety of 
effectors of beta cell function, including glucose, fatty acids, and insulin. 
Here, we show that phosphorylation at Ser(65) of mammalian MafA influences both 
protein stability and transactivation potential. Replacement of Ser(65) with Glu 
to mimic phosphorylation produced a protein that was as unstable as the wild 
type, whereas Asp or Ala mutation blocked degradation. Analysis of MafA chimeric 
and deletion constructs suggests that protein phosphorylation at Ser(65) alone 
represents the initial degradation signal, with ubiquitinylation occurring 
within the C terminus (amino acids 234-359). Although only wild type MafA and 
S65E were polyubiquitinylated, both S65D and S65E potently stimulated 
transactivation compared with S65A. Phosphorylation at Ser(14) also enhanced 
activation, although it had no impact on protein turnover. The mobility of MafA 
S65A was profoundly affected upon SDS-PAGE, with the S65E and S65D mutants 
influenced less due to their ability to serve as substrates for glycogen 
synthase kinase 3, which acts at neighboring N-terminal residues after Ser(65) 
phosphorylation. Our observations not only illustrate the sensitivity of the 
cellular transcriptional and degradation machinery to phosphomimetic mutants at 
Ser(65), but also demonstrate the singular importance of phosphorylation at this 
amino acid in regulating MafA activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M806314200
PMCID: PMC2613637
PMID: 19004825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]