1. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 12;28(46):12052-61. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2913-08.2008.

Effects of TNFalpha-converting enzyme inhibition on amyloid beta production and 
APP processing in vitro and in vivo.

Kim ML(1), Zhang B, Mills IP, Milla ME, Brunden KR, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) is a proinflammatory cytokine that is 
elevated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. Because TNFalpha is released from 
cell membranes by the TNFalpha-converting enzyme (TACE), inhibition of TACE has 
the potential to mitigate TNFalpha effects in AD brain. TACE also cleaves 
amyloid precursor protein (APP) and generates sAPPalpha, precluding the 
formation of potentially harmful amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides by beta-site APP 
cleaving enzymes (BACE). Hence, the anti-inflammatory benefits of TACE 
inhibition might be offset by an increase in Abeta. We have examined the effects 
of the highly selective TACE inhibitor, BMS-561392, on APP processing in vitro 
and in vivo. In Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing APP, BMS-561392 
significantly reduced secretion of sAPPalpha without a corresponding increase in 
Abeta production. Conversely, a BACE inhibitor decreased sAPPbeta and Abeta 
peptides with no change in the secretion of sAPPalpha. These data indicate an 
absence of TACE and BACE competition for the APP substrate. Despite this, we 
observed competition for APP when TACE activity was enhanced via phorbol ester 
treatment or if APP was modified such that it was retained within the 
trans-Golgi network (TGN). These results suggest that BACE and TACE share a 
common TGN localization, but under normal conditions do not compete for APP. To 
confirm this finding in vivo, BMS-561392 was infused into the brains of Tg2576 
and wild-type mice. Although decreased brain sAPPalpha levels were observed, 
steady-state Abeta levels were not significantly changed. Accordingly, it is 
possible that TACE inhibitors could reduce TNFalpha levels without increasing 
Abeta levels within the AD brain.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2913-08.2008
PMCID: PMC2646261
PMID: 19005070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]