1. Int J Cancer. 2009 Feb 1;124(3):734-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23972.

Genetic and epigenetic inactivation of LPL gene in human prostate cancer.

Kim JW(1), Cheng Y, Liu W, Li T, Yegnasubramanian S, Zheng SL, Xu J, Isaacs WB, 
Chang BL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is in chromosome 8p22, site of one of the most common 
somatic deletions in prostate tumors. Additionally, a CpG island (CGI) was 
identified in the LPL promoter region. To test the hypothesis that LPL is a 
tumor suppressor gene, which is inactivated by somatic deletion and 
hypermethylation in prostate cancer, we evaluated somatic DNA deletion and 
methylation status at LPL in 56 pairs of DNA samples isolated from prostate 
cancer tissues and matching normal controls and 11 prostate cell lines. We found 
that the DNA in 21 of 56 primary cancers (38%) was methylated in the LPL 
promoter CGI, whereas no methylation was detected in any normal samples. In 
addition, we found a hemizygous deletion at LPL in 38 of the 56 tumors (68%). 
When the results of deletion and methylation were considered together, we found 
LPL promoter CGI methylation occurred in 45% of LPL deleted tumors and in 22% of 
LPL retained tumors. Within several clinical characteristics tested, the 
preoperative PSA levels were found to be significantly higher in subjects with 
LPL promoter CGI methylation compared with subjects without LPL promoter 
methylation (p=0.0012). Additionally, demethylation of the LPL promoter CGI was 
accompanied by transcriptional reactivation of LPL in the prostate cancer cell 
lines DU145 and PC3. In summary, we report a novel finding that the LPL gene is 
commonly methylated in prostate tumors, and our results suggest that biallelic 
inactivation of LPL by chromosomal deletion and promoter hypermethylation may 
play a role in human prostate cancer.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23972
PMCID: PMC3667349
PMID: 19004026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]