1. J Neuroimaging. 2009 Oct;19(4):353-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2008.00326.x.

HOXA1 A218G polymorphism is associated with smaller cerebellar volume in healthy 
humans.

Canu E(1), Boccardi M, Ghidoni R, Benussi L, Duchesne S, Testa C, Binetti G, 
Frisoni GB.

Author information:
(1)LENITEM Laboratory of Epidemiology, Neuroimaging, and Telemedicin-IRCCS 
Centro S Giovanni di Dio-FBF, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The Homeobox A1 (HOXA1) gene plays a critical role 
during development of the hindbrain in mice. Little is currently known about the 
relation between this gene and human brain development. The HOXA1 A218G 
polymorphism has been found to be associated with autism and larger head 
circumference in autistic patients. Similar effects were revealed also in 
healthy children but not in adult controls. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the role of the A218G polymorphism on the hindbrain structure of 
healthy adults.
METHODS: Healthy persons from two independent groups underwent 3-dimensional 
high resolution magnetic resonance (MR) exam. Group A was made of 80 persons (27 
G allele carriers and 53 non-carriers) and Group B of 72 (26 carriers and 46 
non-carriers). Statistical parametric mapping 2 (SPM2) were used to perform 
voxel-based analysis of the gray matter (GM) of the hindbrain in carriers and 
non. Significance threshold was set at .05 with small volume correction using a 
cerebellar mask.
RESULTS: In Group A, G carriers exhibited decreased GM volume in the superior 
posterior and anterior lobe of the cerebellum bilaterally. In Group B, decreased 
GM volume were found across the entire left cerebellar cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism may affect 
cerebellar development in humans.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2008.00326.x
PMID: 19018953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]