1. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Nov 12;9:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-100.

SIRT1 genetic variants associate with the metabolic response of Caucasians to a 
controlled lifestyle intervention--the TULIP Study.

Weyrich P(1), Machicao F, Reinhardt J, Machann J, Schick F, Tschritter O, Stefan 
N, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, 
Vascular Disease, Nephrology and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen, 
Germany. peter.weyrich@med.uni-tuebingen.de

BACKGROUND: Sirtuin1 (SIRT1) regulates gene expression in distinct metabolic 
pathways and mediates beneficial effects of caloric restriction in animal 
models. In humans, SIRT1 genetic variants associate with fasting energy 
expenditure. To investigate the relevance of SIRT1 for human metabolism and 
caloric restriction, we analyzed SIRT1 genetic variants in respect to the 
outcome of a controlled lifestyle intervention in Caucasians at risk for type 2 
diabetes.
METHODS: A total of 1013 non-diabetic Caucasians from the Tuebingen Family Study 
(TUEF) were genotyped for four tagging SIRT1 SNPs (rs730821, rs12413112, 
rs7069102, rs2273773) for cross-sectional association analyses with prediabetic 
traits. SNPs that associated with basal energy expenditure in the TUEF cohort 
were additionally analyzed in 196 individuals who underwent a controlled 
lifestyle intervention (Tuebingen Lifestyle Intervention Program; TULIP). 
Multivariate regressions analyses with adjustment for relevant covariates were 
performed to detect associations of SIRT1 variants with the changes in 
anthropometrics, weight, body fat or metabolic characteristics (blood glucose, 
insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion and liver fat, measured by magnetic 
resonance techniques) after the 9-month follow-up test in the TULIP study.
RESULTS: Minor allele (X/A) carriers of rs12413112 (G/A) had a significantly 
lower basal energy expenditure (p = 0.04) and an increased respiratory quotient 
(p = 0.02). This group (rs12413112: X/A) was resistant against lifestyle-induced 
improvement of fasting plasma glucose (GG: -2.01%, X/A: 0.53%; p = 0.04), had 
less increase in insulin sensitivity (GG: 17.3%, X/A: 9.6%; p = 0.05) and an 
attenuated decline in liver fat (GG: -38.4%, X/A: -7.5%; p = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: SIRT1 plays a role for the individual lifestyle intervention 
response, possibly owing to decreased basal energy expenditure and a lower 
lipid-oxidation rate in rs12413112 X/A allele carriers. SIRT1 genetic variants 
may, therefore, represent a relevant determinant for the response rate of 
individuals undergoing caloric restriction and increased physical activity.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-100
PMCID: PMC2626584
PMID: 19014491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]