1. Hum Genet. 2009 Jan;124(6):633-47. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0591-8. Epub 2008
Nov  15.

Increased constraints on MC4R during primate and human evolution.

Hughes DA(1), Hinney A, Brumm H, Wermter AK, Biebermann H, Hebebrand J, 
Stoneking M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. hughes@eva.mpg.de

The melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) is routinely investigated for the role it 
plays in human obesity, as mutations in MC4R are the most common dominantly 
inherited form of the disease. As little is known about the evolutionary history 
of this locus, we investigated patterns of variation at MC4R in a worldwide 
sample of 1,015 humans from 51 populations, and in 8 central chimpanzees. There 
is a significant paucity of diversity at MC4R in humans, but not in chimpanzees. 
The spectrum of mutations in humans, combined with the overall low level of 
diversity, suggests that most (if not all) of the observed non-synonymous 
polymorphisms are likely to be transient deleterious mutations. The MC4R coding 
region was resequenced in 12 primate species and sequences from an additional 29 
vertebrates were included in molecular evolutionary analyses. MC4R is highly 
conserved throughout vertebrate evolution, and has apparently been subject to 
high levels of continuous purifying selection that increased approximately 
threefold during primate evolution. Furthermore, the strong selection extends to 
codon usage bias, where most silent mutations are expected to be either quickly 
fixed or removed from the population, which may help explain the unusually low 
levels of silent polymorphisms in humans. Finally, there is a significant 
tendency for non-synonymous mutations that impact MC4R function to occur 
preferentially at sites that are identified by evolutionary analyses as being 
subject to very strong purifying selection. The information from this study 
should help inform future epidemiological investigations of MC4R.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-008-0591-8
PMCID: PMC9947067
PMID: 19011902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]