1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2009 Jan;290(1):105-13. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2008.01414.x. Epub 2008 Nov 13.

Characterization of AtlL, a bifunctional autolysin of Staphylococcus lugdunensis 
with N-acetylglucosaminidase and N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase activities.

Bourgeois I(1), Camiade E, Biswas R, Courtin P, Gibert L, GÃ¶tz F, 
Chapot-Chartier MP, Pons JL, Pestel-Caron M.

Author information:
(1)Groupe de Recherche sur les Antimicrobiens et les Microorganismes, Rouen 
University Hospital, Rouen, France.

The nucleotide sequence of atlL, a gene encoding a putative Staphylococcus 
lugdunensis peptidoglycan hydrolase, was determined using degenerate consensus 
PCR and genome walking. This 3837-bp gene encodes a protein, AtlL, that appears 
as a putative bifunctional autolysin with a 29-amino acid putative signal 
peptide and two enzymatic putative centres (N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase 
and N-acetylglucosaminidase) interconnected with three imperfect repeated 
sequences displaying glycine-tryptophan motifs. In order to determine whether 
both lytic domains were functional, and verify their exact enzymatic activities, 
gene fragments harbouring both putative domains, AM (N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine 
amidase enzymatic centre plus two repeated sequences) and GL 
(N-acetylglucosaminidase enzymatic centre plus one repeated sequence), were 
isolated, subcloned, and expressed in Escherichia coli. Purified recombinant AM 
and GL protein truncations exhibited cell wall lytic activity in zymograms 
performed with cell walls of Micrococcus lysodeikticus, Bacillus subtilis, and 
S. lugdunensis. AtlL is expressed during the whole growth, with an 
overexpression in the early-exponential stage. Liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry analysis of muropeptides generated by digestion of B. subtilis cell 
walls demonstrated the hydrolytic bond specificities and confirmed both of the 
acetyl domains' activities as predicted by sequence homology data. AtlL is the 
first autolysin described in S. lugdunensis, with a bifunctional enzymatic 
activity involved in peptidoglycan hydrolysis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2008.01414.x
PMID: 19025571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]