1. Anim Reprod Sci. 2009 Aug;114(1-3):157-66. doi: 
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2008.10.003. Epub 2008 Oct 11.

Doppel gene polymorphisms in Portuguese sheep breeds: insights on ram fertility.

Pereira RM(1), Mesquita P, Batista M, Baptista MC, Barbas JP, Pimenta J, Santos 
IC, Marques MR, Vasques MI, Silva Pereira M, Santos Silva F, Oliveira Sousa MC, 
Fontes CM, Horta AE, Prates JA, Marques CC.

Author information:
(1)L-INIA, Quinta da Fonte Boa, 2005-048 Vale de SantarÃ©m, Portugal. 
rosalnp@gmail.com

Transgenic knockout of the gene encoding the prion-like protein Doppel leads to 
male infertility in mice. The precise role of Doppel in male fertility is still 
unclear, but sperm from Doppel-deficient mice appear to be unable to undergo the 
normal acrosome reaction necessary to penetrate the zona pellucida of the 
oocyte. The objective of this study was to characterize Doppel (Prnd) gene 
polymorphisms in eight Portuguese sheep breeds and to determine a possible 
relationship between these polymorphisms and ram fertility. Ovine genomic DNA of 
364 animals of different breeds (Bordaleira entre Douro e Minho, Churra Badana, 
Churra Galega Mirandesa, Churra Mondegueira, Merino da Beira Baixa, Merino 
Branco, Saloia and Serra da Estrela) were analysed by multiple restriction 
fragment-single-strand conformation polymorphism (MRF-SSCP). This analysis 
revealed a synonymous substitution G-->A in codon 26 of Prnd gene. Churra Galega 
Mirandesa and Saloia breeds were more polymorphic (P=0.005 and P=0.04, 
respectively) than the overall population, while Serra da Estrela and Merino 
Branco animals were less polymorphic (P=0.007 and P=0.04). No polymorphism was 
found in Churra Mondegueira breed. Semen from 11 rams of Churra Galega Mirandesa 
breed (7 homozygous wildtype GG and 4 heterozygous GA) routinely used in the 
Portuguese Animal Germoplasm Bank was collected and frozen for fertility tests. 
A classification function was estimated, using data from post-swim-up semen 
motility and concentration and Day 6 embryo production rate, allowing the 
identification of the Doppel homozygous GG genotype with 86.7% of accuracy. This 
preliminary study detected the presence of only one polymorphism in codon 26 of 
Prnd gene in the Portuguese sheep breeds. In the polymorphic Churra Galega 
Mirandesa breed, GG genotype could be characterized through a model using three 
fertility traits, suggesting a relationship with male reproduction. Any future 
research should investigate not only AA genotype and its influence on ram 
fertility but also the possible consequences of the European Community selection 
program to eradicate Scrapie on the Prnd genotypes and indirectly on sheep 
breed's viability and preservation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2008.10.003
PMID: 19028030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]