1. Schizophr Res. 2009 Feb;107(2-3):242-8. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.10.010.
Epub  2008 Nov 20.

A possible association between schizophrenia and GRIK3 polymorphisms in a 
multicenter sample of Scandinavian origin (SCOPE).

Djurovic S(1), Kähler AK, Kulle B, Jönsson EG, Agartz I, Le Hellard S, Hall H, 
Jakobsen KD, Hansen T, Melle I, Werge T, Steen VM, Andreassen OA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, University of Oslo, and Department of Medical 
Genetics, Division of Psychiatry, Ulleval University Hospital Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway. srdjan.djurovic@medisin.uio.no

There is considerable evidence of altered glutamatergic signalling in 
schizophrenia and a polymorphic variant of the GRIK3 glutamate receptor gene on 
1p34-33 has previously been associated to this psychotic disorder. We therefore 
conducted a systematic association study with 30 HapMap-selected tagging SNPs 
across GRIK3 in three independent samples of Scandinavian origin from the 
Scandinavian Collaboration of Psychiatric Etiology (SCOPE), including a total of 
839 cases with schizophrenia spectrum and 1473 healthy controls. Four markers 
(rs6671364, rs17461259, rs472188, and rs535620) attained nominally significant 
P-values in both the genotypic (0.002, 0.02, 0.03, and 0.05, respectively) and 
allelic (0.001, 0.006, 0.03, and 0.02, respectively) association tests for the 
combined sample, and 2 additional markers (rs481047and rs1160751) displayed 
significance for the genotype (P-values: 0.03 and 0.04). Several haplotypes, 
that all included at least one of the four SNPs implicated by the single marker 
analysis, remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing using 
permutations with 10,000 shuffles. In addition we observed an association for 
two of the four significant GRIK3 markers (rs472188 and rs535620) to scores for 
negative symptoms on the PANSS scale. The present results, although not robust, 
support the importance of more extensive investigations of GRIK3, given its 
potential role in mediating risk for schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.10.010
PMID: 19022628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]