1. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003800. Epub 2008 Nov
24.

Crystal structures of the FAK kinase in complex with TAE226 and related 
bis-anilino pyrimidine inhibitors reveal a helical DFG conformation.

Lietha D(1), Eck MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase required for cell 
migration, proliferation and survival. FAK overexpression has been documented in 
diverse human cancers and is associated with a poor clinical outcome. Recently, 
a novel bis-anilino pyrimidine inhibitor, TAE226, was reported to efficiently 
inhibit FAK signaling, arrest tumor growth and invasion and prolong the life of 
mice with glioma or ovarian tumor implants. Here we describe the crystal 
structures of the FAK kinase bound to TAE226 and three related bis-anilino 
pyrimidine compounds. TAE226 induces a conformation of the N-terminal portion of 
the kinase activation loop that is only observed in FAK, but is distinct from 
the conformation in both the active and inactive states of the kinase. This 
conformation appears to require a glycine immediately N-terminal to the "DFG 
motif", which adopts a helical conformation stabilized by interactions with 
TAE226. The presence of a glycine residue in this position contributes to the 
specificity of TAE226 and related compounds for FAK. Our work highlights the 
fact that kinases can access conformational space that is not necessarily 
utilized for their native catalytic regulation, and that such conformations can 
explain and be exploited for inhibitor specificity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003800
PMCID: PMC2582962
PMID: 19030106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.