1. Hum Immunol. 2009 Feb;70(2):130-3. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.10.012. Epub
2008  Nov 24.

The -2518A>G promoter polymorphism in the CCL2 gene is not associated with 
systemic sclerosis susceptibility or phenotype: results from a multicenter study 
of European Caucasian patients.

Radstake TR(1), Vonk MC, Dekkers M, Schijvenaars MM, Treppichio WL, Lafyatis R, 
Riemekasten G, van den Hoogen F, Coenen MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Centre, The 
Netherlands. T.Radstake@reuma.umcn.nl

A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the gene encoding monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1, CCL2) has previously been suggested to be 
involved in the susceptibility of systemic sclerosis (SSc). Here we have tested 
whether the -2518A>G CCL2 variant is associated with SSc susceptibility and/or 
phenotype using a cohort of SSc patients (n = 345). Clinical data from SSc 
patients attending rheumatology clinics in the Netherlands and Germany was 
collected DNA was obtained after informed consent. The control group used (n = 
272) was randomly recruited from comparable geographic regions. The -2518A>G SNP 
in CCL2 (rs1024611) was determined using a Taqman SNP Genotyping assay. The 
genotype distribution was found to be similarly distributed among SSc patients 
and healthy controls. In addition, no association could be detected between the 
genotype and the presence of antinuclear antibodies, anticentromere antibodies, 
and antitopoisomerase antibodies or pulmonary involvement. Our results 
demonstrate that the functional variant -2518A>G of CCL2 is not implicated in 
the susceptibility or phenotype of SSc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2008.10.012
PMID: 19032966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]