1. JAMA. 2008 Nov 26;300(20):2389-97. doi: 10.1001/jama.2008.649.

Interaction between poor glycemic control and 9p21 locus on risk of coronary 
artery disease in type 2 diabetes.

Doria A(1), Wojcik J, Xu R, Gervino EV, Hauser TH, Johnstone MT, Nolan D, Hu FB, 
Warram JH.

Author information:
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. alessandro.doria@joslin.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;5(4):192-3. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.47.

CONTEXT: A common allele on chromosome 9p21 has been repeatedly associated with 
increased risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) in the general population. 
However, the magnitude of this effect in the population with diabetes has not 
been well characterized.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of the 9p21 variant with CAD in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes and evaluate its interaction with poor glycemic 
control.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: (1) Case-control study of 734 type 2 diabetes 
patients (322 with angiographically diagnosed CAD and 412 with no evidence of 
CAD) who were recruited between 2001 and 2006 at the Joslin Clinic, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center; and (2) independent cohort study of 475 type 2 
diabetes patients from the Joslin Clinic whose survival status was monitored 
from their recruitment between 1993 and 1996 until December 31, 2004. 
Participants for both studies were genotyped for a representative 
single-nucleotide polymorphism at 9p21 (rs2383206) and characterized for their 
long-term glycemic control by averaging multiple hemoglobin A(1c) (HbA(1c)) 
measurements taken in the years before study entry.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: For the case-control study, association between 
single-nucleotide polymorphism rs2383206 and CAD defined as angiographically 
documented stenosis greater than 50% in a major coronary artery or a main branch 
thereof was assessed and for the cohort study, cumulative 10-year mortality was 
documented.
RESULTS: Individuals who were homozygous for the risk allele were significantly 
more frequent among case than control participants (42.3% vs 28.9P = .0002). 
This association was unaffected by adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors, 
but the effect of the risk genotype was significantly magnified (adjusted P for 
interaction = .048) in the presence of poor glycemic control (worst tertile of 
the distribution of HbA(1c) at examination). Relative to the CAD risk for 
patients with neither a 9p21 risk allele nor poor glycemic control, the CAD odds 
for participants having 2 risk alleles but not poor glycemic control were 
increased 2-fold (odds ratio [OR], 1.99; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
1.17-3.41), whereas the odds for study participants with the same genotype and 
with poor glycemic control were increased 4-fold (OR, 4.27; 95% CI, 2.26-8.01). 
The interaction was stronger (adjusted P = .005) when a measure of long-term 
glycemic control (7-year average rather than most recent HbA(1c)) was used with 
ORs of 7.83 (95% CI, 3.49-17.6) for participants having 2 risk alleles and a 
history of poor glycemia and 1.54 (95% CI, 0.72-3.30) for participants with the 
same genotype but without this exposure. A similar interaction between 9p21 
variant and poor glycemic control was observed with respect to cumulative 
10-year mortality in the cohort study (43.6% in patients with 2 risk alleles and 
poor glycemic control, 23.1% in individuals with only the 2 risk alleles, 30.0% 
in individuals with only poor glycemic control, and 31.6% in individuals with 
neither factor, P for interaction, = .036).
CONCLUSION: In this study population, the CAD risk associated with the 9p21 
variant was increased in the presence of poor glycemic control in type 2 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2008.649
PMCID: PMC2762126
PMID: 19033589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors do not report 
conflicts of interest with this research.