1. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 1;14(23):7717-25. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0827.

Targeted inhibition of cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase-4 promotes brain tumor 
regression.

Goldhoff P(1), Warrington NM, Limbrick DD Jr, Hope A, Woerner BM, Jackson E, 
Perry A, Piwnica-Worms D, Rubin JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 May 1;15(9):3238; author reply 3238-9. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0097.

PURPOSE: As favorable outcomes from malignant brain tumors remain limited by 
poor survival and treatment-related toxicity, novel approaches to cure are 
essential. Previously, we identified the cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) 
inhibitor Rolipram as a potent antitumor agent. Here, we investigate the role of 
PDE4 in brain tumors and examine the utility of PDE4 as a therapeutic target.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression 
pattern of a subfamily of PDE4, PDE4A, in multiple brain tumor types. To 
evaluate the effect of PDE4A on growth, a brain-specific isoform, PDE4A1 was 
overexpressed in xenografts of Daoy medulloblastoma and U87 glioblastoma cells. 
To determine therapeutic potential of PDE4 inhibition, Rolipram, temozolomide, 
and radiation were tested alone and in combination on mice bearing intracranial 
U87 xenografts.
RESULTS: We found that PDE4A is expressed in medulloblastoma, glioblastoma, 
oligodendroglioma, ependymoma, and meningioma. Moreover, when PDE4A1 was 
overexpressed in Daoy medulloblastoma and U87 glioblastoma cells, in vivo 
doubling times were significantly shorter for PDE4A1-overexpressing xenografts 
compared with controls. In long-term survival and bioluminescence studies, 
Rolipram in combination with first-line therapy for malignant gliomas 
(temozolomide and conformal radiation therapy) enhanced the survival of mice 
bearing intracranial xenografts of U87 glioblastoma cells. Bioluminescence 
imaging indicated that whereas temozolomide and radiation therapy arrested 
intracranial tumor growth, the addition of Rolipram to this regimen resulted in 
tumor regression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that PDE4 is widely expressed in brain tumors and 
promotes their growth and that inhibition with Rolipram overcomes tumor 
resistance and mediates tumor regression.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0827
PMCID: PMC2615415
PMID: 19047098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]