1. J Neurochem. 2009 Feb;108(3):634-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05791.x.
Epub  2008 Nov 19.

Tau phosphorylation at threonine-175 leads to fibril formation and enhanced cell 
death: implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with cognitive impairment.

Gohar M(1), Yang W, Strong W, Volkening K, Leystra-Lantz C, Strong MJ.

Author information:
(1)The Robarts Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, 
Ontario, Canada.

Although amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) can be associated with cognitive 
impairment (ALSci) as a reflection of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, the 
basis of this process is unknown. The observation of neuronal and extraneuronal 
tau deposition in ALSci in addition to a unique tau phosphorylation at Thr175 
has suggested that ALSci can be associated with alterations in tau metabolism. 
We have examined the association between phosphorylation at Thr175 and tau 
fibril formation. Both soluble and insoluble tau was purified from control, 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), ALS without cognitive impairment, and 
ALSci and the tendency to fibril formation assayed ex vivo using the thioflavin 
S fluorescence assay. The extent of fibril formation was significantly greater 
in tau derived from ALSci, with ALS-derived tau being intermediate between 
control and AD-derived tau. Using both Neuro2A and human embryonic kidney 
(HEK293T) cells, we expressed full-length tau constructs harboring either a 
pseudophosphorylation at Thr175 (Thr175-Asp-tau), inhibition of Thr175 
phosphorylation (Thr175-Ala-tau) or intact tau (wild-type tau). Both tau fibril 
formation and cell death were significantly enhanced in the presence of 
Thr175-Asp-tau, regardless of the tau isoform, suggesting that phosphorylation 
of Thr175 is associated with tau fibril formation in ALSci.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05791.x
PMID: 19046355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]