1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Mar 1;77(5):781-93. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.11.007.
Epub  2008 Nov 18.

Inhibiting the function of ABCB1 and ABCG2 by the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
AG1478.

Shi Z(1), Tiwari AK, Shukla S, Robey RW, Kim IW, Parmar S, Bates SE, Si QS, 
Goldblatt CS, Abraham I, Fu LW, Ambudkar SV, Chen ZS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Allied Health 
Professions, St. John's University, Jamaica, NY 11439, USA.

The tyrphostin 4-(3-chloroanilino)-6,7-dimethoxyquinazoline (AG1478) is a potent 
and specific EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI); its promising pre-clinical 
results have led to clinical trials. Overexpression of ATP-binding cassette 
(ABC) transporters such as ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 is one of the main causes of 
multidrug resistance (MDR) and usually results in the failure of cancer 
chemotherapy. However, the interaction of AG1478 with these ABC transporters is 
still unclear. In the present study, we have investigated this interaction and 
found that AG1478 has differential effects on these transporters. In 
ABCB1-overexpressing cells, non-toxic doses of AG1478 were found to partially 
inhibit resistance to ABCB1 substrate anticancer drugs as well as increase 
intracellular accumulation of [3H]-paclitaxel. Similarly, in 
ABCG2-overexpressing cells, AG1478 significantly reversed resistance to ABCG2 
substrate anticancer drugs and increased intracellular accumulation of 
[3H]-mitoxantrone as well as fluorescent compound BODIPY-prazosin. AG1478 also 
profoundly inhibited the transport of [3H]-E(2)17betaG and [3H]-methotrexate by 
ABCG2. We also found that AG1478 slightly stimulated ABCB1 ATPase activity and 
significantly stimulated ABCG2 ATPase activity. Interestingly, AG1478 did not 
inhibit the photolabeling of ABCB1 or ABCG2 with [125I]-iodoarylazidoprazosin. 
Additionally, AG1478 did not alter the sensitivity of parental, ABCB1- or 
ABCG2-overexpressing cells to non-ABCB1 and non-ABCG2 substrate drug and had no 
effect on the function of ABCC1. Overall, we conclude that AG1478 is able to 
inhibit the function of ABCB1 and ABCG2, with a more pronounced effect on ABCG2. 
Our findings provide valuable contributions to the development of safer and more 
effective EGFR TKIs for use as anticancer agents in the clinic.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.11.007
PMCID: PMC2843910
PMID: 19059384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]