1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(2):431-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn955. Epub 2008
Dec  2.

Dynamic interaction between WT1 and BASP1 in transcriptional regulation during 
differentiation.

Green LM(1), Wagner KJ, Campbell HA, Addison K, Roberts SG.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, The Michael Smith Building University of Manchester 
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

The Wilms' tumour suppressor protein WT1 plays a central role in the development 
of the kidney and also other organs. WT1 can act as a transcription factor with 
highly context-specific activator and repressor functions. We previously 
identified Brain Acid Soluble Protein 1 (BASP1) as a transcriptional 
cosuppressor that can block the transcriptional activation function of WT1. WT1 
and BASP1 are co-expressed during nephrogenesis and both proteins ultimately 
become restricted to the podocyte cells of the adult kidney. Here, we have 
analysed the WT1/BASP1 complex in a podocyte precursor cell line that can be 
induced to differentiate. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that WT1 and 
BASP1 occupy the promoters of the Bak, c-myc and podocalyxin genes in podocyte 
precursor cells. During differentiation-dependent upregulation of podocalyxin 
expression BASP1 occupancy of the podocalyxin promoter is reduced compared to 
that of WT1. In contrast, the repressive WT1/BASP1 occupancy of the c-myc and 
Bak promoters is maintained and these genes are downregulated during the 
differentiation process. We provide evidence that the regulation of BASP1 
promoter occupancy involves the sumoylation of BASP1. Our results reveal a 
dynamic cooperation between WT1 and BASP1 in the regulation of gene expression 
during differentiation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkn955
PMCID: PMC2632906
PMID: 19050011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]