1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Jan 1;188(1):26-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.013.

Association of DNA repair gene XRCC1 and lung cancer susceptibility among 
nonsmoking Chinese women.

Yin J(1), Vogel U, Ma Y, Qi R, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Environment and Population Health of University in Liaoning 
Province, Shenyang Medical College, Shenyang 110034, Liaoning Province, PR 
China. yinjyf@yahoo.com.cn

Nonsmokers who develop lung cancer provide a good model for investigating the 
effect of genetic polymorphisms. XRCC1 is one of the major DNA repair proteins 
involved in the base-excision repair pathway. XRCC1 gene variations may lead to 
lower DNA repair capacity and thus confer inherited predisposition to cancer 
risk. To address this question in more detail, we conducted a hospital-based 
case-control study consisting of 55 lung cancer cases and 74 cancer-free 
controls matched on age and ethnicity among nonsmoking Chinese women. We 
analyzed five coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the XRCC1 gene: 
Agr194Trp, Arg280His, Arg399Gln, Pro206Pro, and Gln632Gln. Polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was used for genotyping. 
Carriers of the variant T-allele of Arg194Trp had a lower lung cancer risk than 
carriers of CC genotypes [odds ratio (OR)=0.46, 95% confidence interval 
(CI)=0.22-0.96, P=0.04], and carriers of the variant G-allele of Pro206Pro were 
at almost fourfold (OR=3.93, 95%CI=1.47-10.52, P=0.004) higher risk of lung 
cancer than carriers of the AA genotype. Furthermore, we observed that 
individuals with haplotype 1(194(T)-206(A)-280(G)-399(G)-632(G)) had decreased 
risk of lung cancer (OR=0.51, 95%CI= 0.27-0.97, P=0.04) and subjects with 
haplotype 2 (194(C)-206(G)280(G)-399(G)- 632(A)) had almost a threefold 
increased risk of lung cancer (OR=3.01, 95%CI=1.01-8.92, P=0.04). These findings 
further suggest that the polymorphisms XRCC1 Arg194Trp and Pro206Pro or the 
haplotype encompassing the variant alleles may contribute to susceptibility of 
lung cancer in a Chinese population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.08.013
PMID: 19061777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]