1. Res Vet Sci. 2009 Jun;86(3):443-52. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2008.10.011. Epub 2008
 Dec 4.

Transient inhibition of foot-and-mouth disease virus replication by siRNAs 
silencing VP1 protein coding region.

Lv K(1), Guo Y, Zhang Y, Wang K, Li K, Zhu Y, Sun S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, 800 
XiangYin Road, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) is the causative agent of foot-and-mouth 
disease, a severe, clinically acute, vesicular disease of cloven-hoofed animals. 
RNA interference (RNAi) is a mechanism for silencing gene expression 
post-transcriptionally that is being exploited as a rapid antiviral strategy. To 
identify efficacious small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to inhibit the replication 
of FMDV, candidate siRNAs corresponding to FMDV VP1 gene were designed and 
synthesized in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase. In reporter assays, five siRNAs 
showed significant sequence-specific silencing effects on the expression of 
VP1-EGFP fusion protein from plasmid pVP1-EGFP-N1, which was cotransfected with 
siRNA into 293T cells. Furthermore, using RT-qPCR, viral titration and viability 
assay, we identified VP1-siRNA517, VP1-siRNA113 and VP1-siRNA519 that 
transiently acted as potent inhibitors of FMDV replication when BHK-21 cells 
were infected with FMDV. In addition, variations within multiple regions of the 
quasispecies of FMDV were retrospectively revealed by sequencing of FMDV genes, 
and a single nucleotide substitution was identified as the main factor in 
resistance to RNAi. Our data demonstrated that the three siRNA molecules 
synthesized with T7 RNA polymerase could have transient inhibitory effects on 
the replication of FMDV.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2008.10.011
PMCID: PMC7127796
PMID: 19062053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]