1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Dec;17(12):3482-9. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0594.

Common single-nucleotide polymorphisms in DNA double-strand break repair genes 
and breast cancer risk.

Pooley KA(1), Baynes C, Driver KE, Tyrer J, Azzato EM, Pharoah PD, Easton DF, 
Ponder BA, Dunning AM.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Strangeways Research 
Laboratory, Worts Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, United Kingdom. 
karenp@srl.cam.ac.uk

The proteins involved in homologous recombination are instrumental in the 
error-free repair of dsDNA breakages, and common germ-line variations in these 
genes are, therefore, potential candidates for involvement in breast cancer 
development and progression. We carried out a search for common, low-penetrance 
susceptibility alleles by tagging the common variation in 13 genes in this 
pathway in a two-stage case-control study. We genotyped 100 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP), tagging the 655 common SNPs in these genes, in up to 4,470 
cases and 4,560 controls from the SEARCH study. None of these tagging SNPs was 
associated with breast cancer risk, with the exception of XRCC2 rs3218536, 
R188H, which showed some evidence of a protective association for the rare 
allele [per allele odds ratio, 0.89; 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), 
0.80-0.99; P trend = 0.03]. Further analyses showed that this effect was 
confined to a risk of progesterone receptor positive tumors (per rare allele 
odds ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.66-0.91; P trend = 0.002). Several other SNPs also 
showed receptor status-specific susceptibility and evidence of roles in 
long-term survival, with the rare allele of BRIP1 rs2191249 showing evidence of 
association with a poorer prognosis (hazard ratio per minor allele, 1.20; 95% 
CI, 1.07-1.36; P trend = 0.002). In summary, there was little evidence of breast 
cancer susceptibility with any of the SNPs studied, but larger studies would be 
needed to confirm subgroup effects.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0594
PMID: 19064565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]