1. PLoS Med. 2008 Dec 9;5(12):e239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050239.

Analysis of germline GLI1 variation implicates hedgehog signalling in the 
regulation of intestinal inflammatory pathways.

Lees CW(1), Zacharias WJ, Tremelling M, Noble CL, Nimmo ER, Tenesa A, Cornelius 
J, Torkvist L, Kao J, Farrington S, Drummond HE, Ho GT, Arnott ID, Appelman HD, 
Diehl L, Campbell H, Dunlop MG, Parkes M, Howie SE, Gumucio DL, Satsangi J.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) are polygenic 
chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) of high prevalence that are associated 
with considerable morbidity. The hedgehog (HH) signalling pathway, which 
includes the transcription factor glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), 
plays vital roles in gastrointestinal tract development, homeostasis, and 
malignancy. We identified a germline variation in GLI1 (within the IBD2 linkage 
region, 12q13) in patients with IBD. Since this IBD-associated variant encodes a 
GLI1 protein with reduced function and our expression studies demonstrated 
down-regulation of the HH response in IBD, we tested whether mice with reduced 
Gli1 activity demonstrate increased susceptibility to chemically induced 
colitis.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Using a gene-wide haplotype-tagging approach, germline 
GLI1 variation was examined in three independent populations of IBD patients and 
healthy controls from Northern Europe (Scotland, England, and Sweden) totalling 
over 5,000 individuals. On log-likelihood analysis, GLI1 was associated with 
IBD, predominantly UC, in Scotland and England (p < 0.0001). A nonsynonymous SNP 
(rs2228226C-->G), in exon 12 of GLI1 (Q1100E) was strongly implicated, with 
pooled odds ratio of 1.194 (confidence interval = 1.09-1.31, p = 0.0002). GLI1 
variants were tested in vitro for transcriptional activity in luciferase assays. 
Q1100E falls within a conserved motif near the C terminus of GLI1; the variant 
GLI protein exhibited reduced transactivation function in vitro. In 
complementary expression studies, we noted the colonic HH response, including 
GLI1, patched (PTCH), and hedgehog-interacting protein (HHIP), to be 
down-regulated in patients with UC. Finally, Gli1(+/lacZ) mice were tested for 
susceptibility to dextran sodium sulphate (DSS)-induced colitis. Clinical 
response, histology, and expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
were recorded. Gli1(+/lacZ) mice rapidly developed severe intestinal 
inflammation, with considerable morbidity and mortality compared with wild type. 
Local myeloid cells were shown to be direct targets of HH signals and cytokine 
expression studies revealed robust up-regulation of IL-12, IL-17, and IL-23 in 
this model.
CONCLUSIONS: HH signalling through GLI1 is required for appropriate modulation 
of the intestinal response to acute inflammatory challenge. Reduced GLI1 
function predisposes to a heightened myeloid response to inflammatory stimuli, 
potentially leading to IBD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050239
PMCID: PMC2596854
PMID: 19071955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Lauri Diehl is a paid 
employee of Genentech, Inc and a stockholder in that company. While this paper 
does not describe any Genentech product, it is possible that these findings may 
be relevant to a pathway or pathways of interest to the company for current or 
future therapeutic agents. None of the other authors have any competing 
interests to declare.