1. J Exp Med. 2008 Dec 22;205(13):3031-40. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081915. Epub 2008
Dec  15.

Involvement of Artemis in nonhomologous end-joining during immunoglobulin class 
switch recombination.

Du L(1), van der Burg M, Popov SW, Kotnis A, van Dongen JJ, Gennery AR, 
Pan-Hammarstr√∂m Q.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet 
at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) introduced in the switch (S) regions are 
intermediates during immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR). These 
breaks are subsequently recognized, processed, and joined, leading to 
recombination of the two S regions. Nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) is believed 
to be the principle mechanism involved in DSB repair during CSR. One important 
component in NHEJ, Artemis, has however been considered to be dispensable for 
efficient CSR. In this study, we have characterized the S recombinational 
junctions from Artemis-deficient human B cells. Smu-Salpha junctions could be 
amplified from all patients tested and were characterized by a complete lack of 
"direct" end-joining and a remarkable shift in the use of an alternative, 
microhomology-based end-joining pathway. Smu-Sgamma junctions could only be 
amplified from one patient who carries "hypomorphic" mutations. Although these 
Smu-Sgamma junctions appear to be normal, a significant increase of an unusual 
type of sequential switching from immunoglobulin (Ig)M, through one IgG 
subclass, to a different IgG subclass was observed, and the Sgamma-Sgamma 
junctions showed long microhomologies. Thus, when the function of Artemis is 
impaired, varying modes of CSR junction resolution may be used for different S 
regions. Our findings strongly link Artemis to the predominant NHEJ pathway 
during CSR.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20081915
PMCID: PMC2605234
PMID: 19075292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]