1. J Bacteriol. 2009 Feb;191(4):1268-77. doi: 10.1128/JB.01289-08. Epub 2008 Dec 
12.

The YjbH protein of Bacillus subtilis enhances ClpXP-catalyzed proteolysis of 
Spx.

Garg SK(1), Kommineni S, Henslee L, Zhang Y, Zuber P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental and Biomolecular Systems, Department of Science and 
Engineering, School of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Beaverton, Oregon 97006, USA.

The global transcriptional regulator Spx of Bacillus subtilis is controlled at 
several levels of the gene expression process. It is maintained at low 
concentrations during unperturbed growth by the ATP-dependent protease ClpXP. 
Under disulfide stress, Spx concentration increases due in part to a reduction 
in ClpXP-catalyzed proteolysis. Recent studies of Larsson and coworkers (Mol. 
Microbiol. 66:669-684, 2007) implicated the product of the yjbH gene as being 
necessary for the proteolytic control of Spx. In the present study, yeast 
two-hybrid analysis and protein-protein cross-linking showed that Spx interacts 
with YjbH. YjbH protein was shown to enhance the proteolysis of Spx in reaction 
mixtures containing ClpXP protease but not ClpCP protease. An N-terminal 
truncated form of YjbH with a deletion of residues 1 to 24 (YjbH(Delta1-24)) 
showed no proteolysis enhancement activity. YjbH is specific for Spx as it did 
not accelerate proteolysis of the ClpXP substrate green fluorescent protein 
(GFP)-SsrA, a GFP derivative with a C-terminal SsrA tag that is recognized by 
ClpXP. Using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy and 
4-(2-pyridylazo) resorcinol release experiments, YjbH was found to contain zinc 
atoms. Zinc analysis of YjbH(Delta1-24) revealed that the N-terminal 
histidine-rich region is indispensable for the coordination of at least one Zn 
atom. A Zn atom coordinated by the N-terminal region was rapidly released from 
the protein upon treatment with a strong oxidant. In conclusion, YjbH is 
proposed to be an adaptor for ClpXP-catalyzed Spx degradation, and a model of 
YjbH redox control involving Zn dissociation is presented.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01289-08
PMCID: PMC2632004
PMID: 19074380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]