1. Biochemistry. 1991 Sep 10;30(36):8891-8. doi: 10.1021/bi00100a024.

Structure-function relationships in human epidermal growth factor studied by 
site-directed mutagenesis and 1H NMR.

Hommel U(1), Dudgeon TJ, Fallon A, Edwards RM, Campbell ID.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, U.K.

In order to elucidate the mechanism of interaction between human epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) and its receptor, selected variants of EGF, differing by 
single amino acid substitutions, have been made by site-directed mutagenesis. 
The receptor affinity of these mutants was determined by a receptor binding 
competition assay, and the effects of the substitution on the structure of the 
protein were assessed by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. Various 
substitutions of Arg-41 resulted in substantial reduction in receptor affinity 
of EGF whereas change of Tyr-13 did not affect binding to the receptor. The 1H 
resonances of all nonexchangeable protons of the Tyr-13----Leu, Arg-41----His, 
and Leu-47----Glu variants were assigned and compared in order to assess the 
structural integrity of these mutants, which possess very different spectral and 
biological properties. In the case of the Leu-47----Glu mutant, only minor 
localized spectral changes were observed, confirming that the tertiary structure 
of the protein is preserved upon mutation. In contrast, for both the 
Arg-41----His and Tyr-13----Leu variants, significant and strikingly similar 
spectra changes were observed for many residues located far away from the 
mutated residues. This implies that similar structural alterations have taken 
place in both proteins, an idea further supported by hydrogen-exchange 
experiments where the exchange rates of hydrogen-bonded amide protons for both 
the Tyr-13----Leu and the Arg-41----His mutants were found to be about 4 times 
faster than in the wild-type protein.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00100a024
PMID: 1909576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]