1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2008 Oct;31(10):893-9. doi: 10.1007/BF03346438.

RAD52 polymorphisms contribute to the development of papillary thyroid cancer 
susceptibility in Middle Eastern population.

Siraj AK(1), Al-Rasheed M, Ibrahim M, Siddiqui K, Al-Dayel F, Al-Sanea O, Uddin 
S, Al-Kuraya K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Cancer Genomics Research, Research Centre, KFNCCC & R, 
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Genetic polymorphisms of DNA repair genes seem to determine the DNA repair 
capacity. We hypothesized that polymorphisms of genes responsible for DNA repair 
may be associated with risk of thyroid cancer. To evaluate the role of genetic 
polymorphisms of DNA repair genes in thyroid cancer, we conducted a 
hospital-based case-control study in Saudi population. Two hundred and 
twenty-three incident papillary thyroid cancer cases and 229 controls recruited 
from Saudi Arabian population were analyzed for 21 loci in 8 selected DNA repair 
genes by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism including non-homologous 
end joining pathway genes LIGIV (LIGlV ASP62HIS, PRO231SER, TRP46TER), XRCC4 
Splice 33243301G>A and XRCC7 ILE3434THR; homologous recombination pathway genes 
XRCC3 ARG94HIS and THR241MET, RAD51 UTR 15452658T>C, 15455419A>G, RAD52 2259 and 
GLN221GLU, conserved DNA damage response gene Tp53 PRO47SER, PRO72ARG, Tp53 UTR 
7178189A>C and base excision repair gene XRCC1 ARG194TRP, ARG280HIS, ARG399GLN, 
ARG559GLN. RAD52 GLN221GLU genotypes CG and variants carrying G allele showed 
statistical significance and very high risk of developing thyroid cancer 
compared to wild type [CG vs CC; p<0.001, odds ratio (OR)=15.57, 95% confidence 
interval (CI)=6.56-36.98, CG+GG vs CC; p<0.001, OR=17.58, 95% CI=7.44-41.58]. 
Similarly, RAD52 2259 genotypes CT and variant allele T showed a significant 
difference in terms of risk estimation (CT vs CC; p<0.05, OR=1.53, 95% 
CI=1.03-2.28, CT+TT vs CC; p<0.001, OR=1.922, 95% CI=1.31-2.82). Remaining loci 
demonstrated no significance with risk. Of the 21 loci screened, RAD52 2259 and 
RAD52 GLN221GLU may be of importance to disease process and may be associated 
with papillary thyroid cancer risk in Saudi Arabian population.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03346438
PMID: 19092295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]