1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Feb;46(2):115-9.

[Spectrum of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene mutations and genotype-phenotype 
correlation in the patients with phenylketonuria in Beijing area of China].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu YJ(1), Song F, Jin YW, Wang H, Zhang YM, Qin JL, Qiu L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing 
100020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the mutation spectrum and the distribution of 
minihaplotypes (STR/VNTR) of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and explore 
the correlations between genotype and phenotype of patients with phenylketonuria 
(PKU) in Beijing area of China.
METHOD: (1) Fifty cases with PKU were involved in this study. PKU was identified 
by the Neonatal Screening Center of Beijing. All 13 exons and their flanking 
intronic sequences of PAH gene of these patients were amplified and then 
subjected to SSCP analysis and direct sequencing. (2) The distribution of 
polymorphic locus of short tandem repeat (STR) and variable number tandem repeat 
(VNTR) was analyzed by PCR and denaturing gel electrophoresis. (3) The 
correlations between genotype and phenotype were studied by analysis of the 
matching rate between the expected and observed phenotypes. The predicted 
phenotype was determined on the basis of the sum of the assigned values of the 
two mutant alleles.
RESULTS: (1) A total of 34 different mutations were detected with the relative 
frequency of 95% among 50 PKU patients. The prevalent mutations in this study 
were: R243Q (20%), EX6-96A > G (11%), Y356X (9%), and V399V (7%). The next 
common mutations were R111X (5%), R413P (5%), R252Q (3%) and A434D (3%). 
Thirty-four detected mutations were distributed throughout the whole PAH gene, 
except exon 1, 8 and 13. Exon 7 and 11, with the mutant rate 34% and 19% 
respectively, seemed to be the hot mutant areas/regions of PAH gene. (2) The 
minihaplotypes (STR/VNTR) of 34 mutations were identified in this research. The 
STR and VNTR showed 8 and 3 alleles, respectively. Among them, 244 bp (44%) and 
240 bp (34%) were the prevalent STR alleles. Meanwhile, the VNTR3 (83%) was the 
most common VNTR allele in PKU patients. (3) A better consistency (81.5%) 
between expected and observed phenotypes was revealed by analysis of correlation 
between genotype and phenotype. Especially in classic PKU, the consistency rate 
was up to 87.5%.
CONCLUSION: (1) The frequency distribution of common PAH gene mutations in 
Beijing region was close to that of Tianjin and Yunnan regions, while it was 
different from that of Southern regions of China, such as Guangzhou, especially 
Taiwan. The PAH mutation with a highly heterogeneous trait was also demonstrated 
in this study. (2) STR and VNTR minihaplotype will prove helpful to trace the 
origins of PAH mutations and to analyze the genetic drift. However, the most 
minihaplotypes of the STR/VNTR are similar, so it is necessary to associate some 
other polymorphic loci with the STR/VNTR minihaplotype to analyze the different 
mutations. (3) The fact that a better consistency existed between phenotypes and 
genotype with most PKU patients suggested that the study of the genotype of PKU 
patients would be helpful to the individualized treatment and to genetic 
counseling for their families.

PMID: 19099685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]