1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2009 Feb;84(2):97-102. doi: 10.1007/s00223-008-9200-z. Epub
 2008 Dec 18.

Association of adenylate cyclase 10 (ADCY10) polymorphisms and bone mineral 
density in healthy adults.

Ichikawa S(1), Koller DL, Curry LR, Lai D, Xuei X, Edenberg HJ, Hui SL, Peacock 
M, Foroud T, Econs MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 541 North 
Clinical Drive, Clinical Building 459, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5121, USA.

Phenotypic variation in bone mineral density (BMD) among healthy adults is 
influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. Sequence variations in the 
adenylate cyclase 10 (ADCY10) gene, which is also called soluble adenylate 
cyclase, have previously been associated with low spinal BMD in hypercalciuric 
patients. Since ADCY10 is located in the region linked to spinal BMD in our 
previous linkage analysis, we tested whether polymorphisms in this gene are also 
associated with normal BMD variation in healthy adults. Sixteen 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed throughout ADCY10 were 
genotyped in two healthy groups of American whites: 1692 premenopausal women and 
715 men. Statistical analyses were performed in the two groups to test for 
association between these SNPs and the femoral neck and lumbar spine areal BMD. 
We observed significant evidence of association (p < 0.01), with one SNP each in 
men and women. Genotypes at these SNPs accounted for <1% of hip BMD variation in 
men but 1.5% of spinal BMD in women. However, adjacent SNPs did not corroborate 
the association in either men or women. In conclusion, we found a modest 
association between an ADCY10 polymorphism and the spinal areal BMD in 
premenopausal white women.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-008-9200-z
PMCID: PMC2822658
PMID: 19093065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]