1. J Neurosci. 2008 Dec 17;28(51):13727-37. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5741-07.2008.

Overexpressed transient receptor potential vanilloid 3 ion channels in skin 
keratinocytes modulate pain sensitivity via prostaglandin E2.

Huang SM(1), Lee H, Chung MK, Park U, Yu YY, Bradshaw HB, Coulombe PA, Walker 
JM, Caterina MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21025, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2009 Jan 21;29(3):29.

The ability to sense changes in the environment is essential for survival 
because it permits responses such as withdrawal from noxious stimuli and 
regulation of body temperature. Keratinocytes, which occupy much of the skin 
epidermis, are situated at the interface between the external environment and 
the body's internal milieu, and have long been appreciated for their barrier 
function against external insults. The recent discovery of temperature-sensitive 
transient receptor potential vanilloid (TRPV) ion channels in keratinocytes has 
raised the possibility that these cells also actively participate in acute 
temperature and pain sensation. To address this notion, we generated and 
characterized transgenic mice that overexpress TRPV3 in epidermal keratinocytes 
under the control of the keratin 14 promoter. Compared with wild-type controls, 
keratinocytes overexpressing TRPV3 exhibited larger currents as well as 
augmented prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) release in response to two TRPV3 agonists, 
2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2APB) and heat. Thermal selection behavior and 
heat-evoked withdrawal behavior of naive mice overexpressing TRPV3 were not 
consistently altered. Upon selective pharmacological inhibition of TRPV1 with 
JNJ-17203212 [corrected], however, the keratinocyte-specific TRPV3 transgenic 
mice showed increased escape responses to noxious heat relative to their 
wild-type littermates. Coadministration of the cyclooxygenase inhibitor, 
ibuprofen, with the TRPV1 antagonist decreased inflammatory thermal hyperalgesia 
in transgenic but not wild-type animals. Our results reveal a previously 
undescribed mechanism for keratinocyte participation in thermal pain 
transduction through keratinocyte TRPV3 ion channels and the intercellular 
messenger PGE(2).

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5741-07.2008
PMCID: PMC2676929
PMID: 19091963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]