1. Leuk Res. 2009 Jun;33(6):759-63. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.11.005. Epub 2008
 Dec 19.

DNA repair gene XPD and XRCC1 polymorphisms and the risk of childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Batar B(1), Güven M, Bariş S, Celkan T, Yildiz I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey. bahadirbatar@gmail.com

Polymorphisms have been identified in several DNA repair genes. These 
polymorphisms may effect DNA repair capacity and modulate cancer susceptibility. 
In this study, we aimed to determine the four polymorphisms in two DNA repair 
genes, xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group D (XPD) and X-ray repair 
cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1), in a sample of Turkish patients with 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and evaluate their association 
with childhood ALL development. We used polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), to analyze XPD Asp312Asn, XPD 
Lys751Gln, XRCC1 Arg194Trp, and XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphisms in 70 patients 
with childhood ALL and in 75 disease-free controls, who were of a similar age. 
No significant differences were observed among the study groups with regard to 
the XPD codon 312, XPD codon 751, XRCC1 codon 194, and XRCC1 codon 399 
polymorphisms. However, the combined XRCC1 Arg194Trp/Trp194Trp variant genotypes 
were associated with increased risk for ALL in females (OR=5.47; 95% 
CI=1.49-20.10; p=0.008). This finding indicates that females carrying XRCC1 
194Trp allele are at increased risk of developing childhood ALL. These results 
suggest that the risk of childhood ALL may be associated with DNA repair 
mechanisms, and understanding these mechanisms will help identify individuals at 
increased risk of developing childhood ALL, and also should be lead to improved 
treatment of ALL.

DOI: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.11.005
PMID: 19101034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]