1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Jan;8(2):118-24. doi: 10.4161/cbt.8.2.7086. Epub 2009
Feb  1.

The HIF-1alpha C1772T polymorphism may be associated with susceptibility to 
clinically localised prostate cancer but not with elevated expression of hypoxic 
biomarkers.

Foley R(1), Marignol L, Thomas AZ, Cullen IM, Perry AS, Tewari P, O'Grady A, Kay 
E, Dunne B, Loftus B, Watson WR, Fitzpatrick JM, Woodson K, Lehman T, Hollywood 
D, Lynch TH, Lawler M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology and Academic Unit of Clinical and Molecular 
Oncology, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Dublin, Ireland.

We investigated the role of the C1772T polymorphisms in exon 12 of the 
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) gene C1772T genotype in prostate 
cancer (PCa) and amplification of the hypoxic response. We identified the 
heterozygous germline CT genotype as an increased risk factor for clinically 
localised prostate cancer (Odds ratio = 6.2; p < 0.0001). While immunostaining 
intensity for HIF-1alpha and VEGF was significantly enhanced in 75% of PCa 
specimens when compared to matched benign specimens (p < 0.0001), the CT 
genotype did not modulate the kinetics of HIF-1alpha protein expression in 
hypoxia in vitro, and was not associated with enhanced expression of hypoxic 
biomarkers. This study provides the first evidence of an increased risk for 
clinically localised prostate cancer in men carrying the C1772T HIF-1alpha gene 
polymorphism. Although our results did not suggest an association between 
expression of hypoxic biomarkers and genotype status, the correlation may merit 
further investigation.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.8.2.7086
PMID: 19106642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]