1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e4070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004070. Epub 2008 Dec 30.

Akt regulates drug-induced cell death through Bcl-w downregulation.

Garofalo M(1), Quintavalle C, Zanca C, De Rienzo A, Romano G, Acunzo M, Puca L, 
Incoronato M, Croce CM, Condorelli G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology, Federico II 
University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2022 Apr 20;17(4):e0267621. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0267621.

Expression of concern in
    PLoS One. 2019 Mar 19;14(3):e0213701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213701.

Akt is a serine threonine kinase with a major role in transducing survival 
signals and regulating proteins involved in apoptosis. To find new interactors 
of Akt involved in cell survival, we performed a two-hybrid screening in yeast 
using human full-length Akt c-DNA as bait and a murine c-DNA library as prey. 
Among the 80 clones obtained, two were identified as Bcl-w. Bcl-w is a member of 
the Bcl-2 family that is essential for the regulation of cellular survival, and 
that is up-regulated in different human tumors, such as gastric and colorectal 
carcinomas. Direct interaction of Bcl-w with Akt was confirmed by 
immunoprecipitation assays. Subsequently, we addressed the function of this 
interaction: by interfering with the activity or amount of Akt, we have 
demonstrated that Akt modulates the amount of Bcl-w protein. We have found that 
inhibition of Akt activity may promote apoptosis through the downregulation of 
Bcl-w protein and the consequential reduction in interaction of Bcl-w with 
pro-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family. Our data provide evidence that Bcl-w 
is a new member of the Akt pathway and that Akt may induce anti-apoptotic 
signals at least in part through the regulation of the amount and activity of 
Bcl-w.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004070
PMCID: PMC2603590
PMID: 19114998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.