1. Biochemistry. 1991 Oct 15;30(41):9882-91. doi: 10.1021/bi00105a011.

Effects of proline mutations on the unfolding and refolding of human lysozyme: 
the slow refolding kinetic phase does not result from proline cis-trans 
isomerization.

Herning T(1), Yutani K, Taniyama Y, Kikuchi M.

Author information:
(1)Protein Engineering Research Institute, Osaka, Japan.

The unfolding and refolding kinetics of six proline mutants of the human 
lysozyme (h-lysozyme) were carried out and compared to that of the wild-type 
protein. Our results show that the slow refolding phase observed in the 
h-lysozyme refolding kinetics cannot be ascribed to proline isomerization 
reactions. The h-lysozyme contains two proline residues at positions 71 and 103, 
both in the trans conformation in the native state. The refolding kinetics of 
the P71G/P103G mutant, in which both prolines have been replaced by a glycine, 
were found to be similar to those of the wild-type protein. The same slow phase 
amplitude of about 10% was found for both proteins, and the slow phase rate 
constants were also identical within experimental error. Other mutants such as 
P103G or P71G, in which only one of the two prolines has been replaced by a 
glycine, and A47P with its three prolines, gave identical slow refolding phases. 
The X-ray structure analysis and scanning microcalorimetric study of each 
protein (Herning et al., unpublished experiments) have confirmed that none of 
the considered mutations affects significantly protein structure and that no 
major changes in protein stability were brought about by these mutations. 
Therefore, comparison of the properties of the mutant and wild-type proteins is 
legitimate. Interestingly, the refolding kinetics of the V110P mutant, in which 
a proline residue has been introduced at position 110 (N-terminus of an 
alpha-helix), were clearly triphasic. For this mutant an additional very slow 
phase with properties similar to those expected from the proline hypothesis was 
detected. Equilibrium denaturation studies were conducted for each protein, and 
the refolding pathway of h-lysozyme is partly presented. We also discuss the 
effect of proline mutations on the energetics of the folding pathway of the 
h-lysozyme in water.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00105a011
PMID: 1911779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]