1. J Neuroimmunol. 2009 Feb 15;207(1-2):18-23. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.11.008.  Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Deletion of the G2A receptor fails to attenuate experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis.

Osmers I(1), Smith SS, Parks BW, Yu S, Srivastava R, Wohler JE, Barnum SR, 
Kabarowski JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35294, USA.

Lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) is a chemotactic lysolipid produced during 
inflammation by the hydrolytic action of phospholipase A(2) enzymes. LPC 
stimulates chemotaxis of T cells in vitro through activation of the G 
protein-coupled receptor, G2A. This has led to the proposition that G2A 
contributes to the recruitment of T cells to sites of inflammation and thus 
promotes chronic inflammatory autoimmune diseases associated with the generation 
and subsequent tissue infiltration of auto-antigen-specific effector T cells. 
However, one study suggests that G2A may negatively regulate T cell 
proliferative responses to antigen receptor engagement and thereby attenuates 
autoimmunity by reducing the generation of autoreactive T cells. To address the 
relative contribution of these G2A-mediated effects to the pathophysiology of T 
cell-mediated autoimmune disease, we examined the impact of G2A inactivation on 
the onset and severity of murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE), a model of multiple sclerosis (MS). Wild type (G2A(+/+)) and 
G2A-deficient (G2A(-/-)) C57BL/6J mice exhibited a similar incidence and onset 
of disease following immunization with MOG(35-55) peptide. Disease severity was 
only moderately reduced in G2A(-/-) mice. Similar numbers of MOG(35-55) specific 
T cells were generated in secondary lymphoid organs of MOG(35-55)-immunized 
G2A(+/+) and G2A(-/-) mice. Comparable numbers of T cells were detected in 
spinal cords of G2A(+/+) and G2A(-/-) mice. We conclude that the proposed 
anti-proliferative and chemotactic functions of G2A are not manifested in vivo 
and therefore therapeutic targeting of G2A is unlikely to be beneficial in the 
treatment of MS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2008.11.008
PMCID: PMC2692575
PMID: 19135725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]