1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Mar;42(3):239-47. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0108. Epub 2009
Jan  8.

The combinations of polymorphisms in vitamin D receptor, osteoprotegerin and 
tumour necrosis factor superfamily member 11 genes are associated with bone 
mineral density.

Mencej-Bedrac S(1), Prezelj J, Kocjan T, Teskac K, Ostanek B, Smelcer M, Marc J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) upregulates tumour necrosis factor superfamily 
member 11 (TNFSF11) that codes for the receptor activator of nuclear factor 
kappaB ligand (RANKL), and downregulates osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression. We 
have analyzed the individual effects of polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor 
gene (VDR), OPG and TNFSF11, and searched for interactions between them. Six 
hundred and forty one subjects were evaluated: 239 osteoporotic and 228 
non-osteoporotic post-menopausal, 57 pre-menopausal women and 117 elderly men. 
The subjects were genotyped for BsmI, FokI and Cdx2 in VDR, K3N in OPG and 
-290C>T, -643C>T and -693G>C in TNFSF11 gene. Bone mineral density (BMD) and 
biochemical markers were measured. In the osteoporotic women, femoral neck BMD 
(BMD-fn) showed associations with BsmI(VDR) and Cdx2(VDR) (P=0.015 and 0.047 
respectively), and lumbar spine BMD (BMD-ls) with K3N(OPG) and -290C>T(TNFSF11) 
(P=0.021 and 0.017). No association with BMD was found in the non-osteoporotic 
women. In the pre-menopausal women, the Cdx2(VDR) polymorphism was associated 
with BMD-fn and total hip BMD (P=0.011 and 0.011). In elderly men, FokI(VDR) was 
associated with BMD-fn and BMD-ls (P=0.040 and 0.036). Interestingly, the 
-290C>T(TNFSF11)-K3N(OPG) combination was associated with BMD-th (P=0.041) in 
the osteoporotic women. In the non-osteoporotic women, the combination 
K3N(OPG)-Cdx2(VDR) was associated with BMD-ls, BMD-th and BMD-fn (P=0.032, 0.049 
and 0.022), and the combination -290C>T(TNFSF11)-K3N(OPG) with BMD-fn (P=0.029). 
For the first time, the presence of gene-gene interactions between VDR, OPG and 
TNFSF11 genes was studied. Our results strongly suggest further confirmation of 
their combined influence on larger cohorts.

DOI: 10.1677/JME-08-0108
PMID: 19131500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]