1. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;11(2):154-61. doi: 10.1038/ncb1823. Epub 2009 Jan 11.

Interaction between TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 and RCAN1-calcineurin defines a signalling 
nodal control point.

Liu Q(1), Busby JC, Molkentin JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cincinnati, 
Ohio 45229, USA.

The calcium-activated protein phosphatase calcineurin is controlled by regulator 
of calcineurin (RCAN) in organisms ranging from yeast to mammals. Here we 
performed a yeast two-hybrid screen with RCAN1 as bait, identifying TAK1 binding 
protein 2 (TAB2) as an interacting partner. TAB2 interacted directly with RCAN1 
in vitro and in vivo, recruiting TAK1, TAB1 and calcineurin, forming a 
macromolecular signalling complex. Overexpression of TAK1 and TAB1, or active 
TAK1(DeltaN), promoted direct phosphorylation of RCAN1 in vitro and in vivo. 
TAK1 phosphorylated RCAN1 at Ser 94 and Ser 136, converting RCAN1 from an 
inhibitor to a facilitator of calcineurin-NFAT signalling, and enhancing NFATc1 
nuclear translocation, NFAT transcriptional activation and the hypertrophic 
growth of cultured cardiomyocytes. The TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 and the calcineurin-NFAT 
signalling modules did not interact in Rcan1/2- or Tab2-deficient mouse 
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cultures. Calcineurin activation also 
dephosphorylated and inhibited TAK1 and TAB1, an effect that was absent in 
Rcan1/2 deficient MEFs. Functionally, TAK1 was indispensable for the 
cardiomyocyte growth response induced by pro-hypertrophic stimuli through 
calcineurin. These results describe a signalling relationship between two 
central regulatory pathways in which TAK1-TAB1-TAB2 selectively induces 
calcineurin-NFAT signalling through direct phosphorylation of RCAN1, while 
calcineurin activation diminishes TAK1 signalling by dephosphorylation of TAK1 
and TAB1.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1823
PMCID: PMC2656285
PMID: 19136967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]