1. Dev Biol. 2009 Mar 1;327(1):216-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.019. Epub
2008  Dec 25.

Increased thymus- and decreased parathyroid-fated organ domains in Splotch 
mutant embryos.

Griffith AV(1), Cardenas K, Carter C, Gordon J, Iberg A, Engleka K, Epstein JA, 
Manley NR, Richie ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Science Park Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

Embryos that are homozygous for Splotch, a null allele of Pax3, have a severe 
neural crest cell (NCC) deficiency that generates a complex phenotype including 
spina bifida, exencephaly and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities. Contrary to 
the widely held perception that thymus aplasia or hypoplasia is a characteristic 
feature of Pax3(Sp/Sp) embryos, we find that thymic rudiments are larger and 
parathyroid rudiments are smaller in E11.5-12.5 Pax3(Sp/Sp) compared to 
Pax3(+/+) embryos. The thymus originates from bilateral third pharyngeal pouch 
primordia containing endodermal progenitors of both thymus and parathyroid 
glands. Analyses of Foxn1 and Gcm2 expression revealed a dorsal shift in the 
border between parathyroid- and thymus-fated domains at E11.5, with no change in 
the overall cellularity or volume of each shared primordium. The border shift 
increases the allocation of third pouch progenitors to the thymus domain and 
correspondingly decreases allocation to the parathyroid domain. Initial 
patterning in the E10.5 pouch was normal suggesting that the observed change in 
the location of the organ domain interface arises during border refinement 
between E10.5 and E11.5. Given the well-characterized NCC defects in Splotch 
mutants, these findings implicate NCCs in regulating patterning of third pouch 
endoderm into thymus- versus parathyroid-specified domains, and suggest that 
organ size is determined in part by the number of progenitor cells specified to 
a given fate.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.12.019
PMCID: PMC2643307
PMID: 19135046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]