1. Biochemistry. 2009 Feb 10;48(5):850-62. doi: 10.1021/bi801897p.

Effects of Ca2+, Mg2+, and myristoylation on guanylyl cyclase activating protein 
1 structure and stability.

Lim S(1), Peshenko I, Dizhoor A, Ames JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, California 95616, 
USA.

Guanylyl cyclase activating protein 1 (GCAP1), a member of the neuronal calcium 
sensor (NCS) subclass of the calmodulin superfamily, confers Ca(2+)-dependent 
activation of retinal guanylyl cylcase (RetGC) during phototransduction in 
vision. Here we analyze the energetics of Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) binding to the 
individual EF-hands, characterize metal-induced conformational changes, and 
evaluate structural effects of myristoylation as studied by isothermal titration 
calorimetry (ITC), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR). GCAP1 binds cooperatively to Ca(2+) at EF3 and EF4 (DeltaH(EF3) 
= -3.5 kcal/mol, and DeltaH(EF4) = -0.9 kcal/mol) with nanomolar affinity 
(K(EF3) = 80 nM, and K(EF4) = 200 nM), and a third Ca(2+) binds entropically at 
EF2 (DeltaH(EF2) = 3.1 kcal/mol, and K(EF2) = 0.9 microM). GCAP1 binds 
functionally to Mg(2+) at EF2 (DeltaH(EF2) = 4.3 kcal/mol, and K(EF2) = 0.7 mM) 
required for RetGC activation. Ca(2+) and/or Mg(2+) binding to GCAP1 
dramatically alters DSC and NMR spectra, indicating metal-induced protein 
conformational changes in EF2, EF3, and EF4. Myristoylation of GCAP1 does not 
significantly alter its metal binding energetics or NMR spectra, suggesting that 
myristoylation does not influence the structure of the metal-binding EF-hands. 
Myristoylation also has almost no effect on protein folding stability measured 
by DSC. NMR resonances of myristate attached to GCAP1 are exchange-broadened, 
upfield-shifted, and insensitive to Ca(2+), consistent with the myristoyl group 
being sequestered inside the protein as seen in the crystal structure. We 
conclude that the protein environment near the myristate is not influenced by 
Mg(2+) or Ca(2+) binding but instead is constitutively dynamic and may play a 
role in promoting interactions of GCAP1 with the cyclase.

DOI: 10.1021/bi801897p
PMCID: PMC2637916
PMID: 19143494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]