1. Oncol Rep. 2009 Feb;21(2):483-9.

The epidermal growth factor tyrosine kinase inhibitor AG1478 and erlotinib 
reverse ABCG2-mediated drug resistance.

Shi Z(1), Parmar S, Peng XX, Shen T, Robey RW, Bates SE, Fu LW, Shao Y, Chen YM, 
Zang F, Chen ZS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. John's University, Jamaica, NY 
11439, USA.

ABCG2 is an important member of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter shown to 
confer drug resistance in cancer cells. Recent studies show that an epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), gefitinib, is 
able to modulate the function of ABCG2 and reverse ABCG2-mediated multidrug 
resistance (MDR) in cancer cells. Additionally, ABCG2 expression has been shown 
to impact treatment efficacy and development of side-effects in patients 
receiving gefitinib. However, it is unclear whether other EGFR TKIs interact 
with ABCG2 in a similar manner. In the present study, we investigated the 
interaction of two other EGFR TKIs, AG1478 and erlotinib, with ABCG2. Our data 
show that AG1478 and erlotinib potently sensitized drug-resistant cells 
overexpressing either wild-type or mutated ABCG2 to the ABCG2 substrate 
anti-cancer drugs flavopiridol and mitoxantrone. Neither AG1478 nor erlotinib 
sensitized ABCG2-overexpressing cells to drugs that are not substrates of ABCG2 
nor did they impact drug sensitivity of parental cells. Furthermore, AG1478 and 
erlotinib were able to significantly enhance the intracellular accumulation of 
mitoxantrone in cells expressing either wild-type or mutated ABCG2. 
Additionally, they did not alter the protein expression of ABCG2 in the 
ABCG2-overexpressing cells. Taken together, we conclude that AG1478 and 
erlotinib potently reverse ABCG2-mediated MDR through directly inhibiting the 
drug efflux function of ABCG2 in the ABCG2-overexpressing cells. These results 
will be useful in the development of novel and more effective EGFR TKIs as well 
as the development of combinational chemotherapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2845641
PMID: 19148526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]