1. Nature. 2009 Mar 12;458(7235):219-22. doi: 10.1038/nature07652. Epub 2009 Jan 
21.

Cdc14 inhibits transcription by RNA polymerase I during anaphase.

Clemente-Blanco A(1), Mayán-Santos M, Schneider DA, Machín F, Jarmuz A, 
Tschochner H, Aragón L.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College, Du Cane 
Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Chromosome condensation and the global repression of gene transcription are 
features of mitosis in most eukaryotes. The logic behind this phenomenon is that 
chromosome condensation prevents the activity of RNA polymerases. In budding 
yeast, however, transcription was proposed to be continuous during mitosis. Here 
we show that Cdc14, a protein phosphatase required for nucleolar segregation and 
mitotic exit, inhibits transcription of yeast ribosomal genes (rDNA) during 
anaphase. The phosphatase activity of Cdc14 is required for RNA polymerase I 
(Pol I) inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Moreover Cdc14-dependent inhibition 
involves nucleolar exclusion of Pol I subunits. We demonstrate that 
transcription inhibition is necessary for complete chromosome disjunction, 
because ribosomal RNA (rRNA) transcripts block condensin binding to rDNA, and 
show that bypassing the role of Cdc14 in nucleolar segregation requires in vivo 
degradation of nascent transcripts. Our results show that transcription 
interferes with chromosome condensation, not the reverse. We conclude that 
budding yeast, like most eukaryotes, inhibit Pol I transcription before 
segregation as a prerequisite for chromosome condensation and faithful genome 
separation.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07652
PMCID: PMC4445138
PMID: 19158678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]