1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7505-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809019200. Epub
2009  Jan 16.

FANCJ uses its motor ATPase to destabilize protein-DNA complexes, unwind 
triplexes, and inhibit RAD51 strand exchange.

Sommers JA(1), Rawtani N, Gupta R, Bugreev DV, Mazin AV, Cantor SB, Brosh RM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health, 
National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, Maryland 
21224, USA.

Mutations in the FANCJ helicase predispose individuals to breast cancer and are 
genetically linked to the Fanconi anemia (FA) complementation group J. FA is a 
chromosomal instability disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies, 
progressive bone marrow failure, and high cancer risk. FANCJ has been proposed 
to function downstream of FANCD2 monoubiquitination, a critical event in the FA 
pathway. Evidence supports a role for FANCJ in a homologous recombination 
pathway of double strand break repair. In an effort to understand the molecular 
functions of FANCJ, we have investigated the ability of purified FANCJ 
recombinant protein to use its motor ATPase function for activities in addition 
to unwinding of conventional duplex DNA substrates. These efforts have led to 
the discovery that FANCJ ATP hydrolysis can be used to destabilize protein-DNA 
complexes and unwind triple helix alternate DNA structures. These novel 
catalytic functions of FANCJ may be important for its role in cellular DNA 
repair, recombination, or resolving DNA structural obstacles to replication. 
Consistent with this, we show that FANCJ can inhibit RAD51 strand exchange, an 
activity that is likely to be important for its role in controlling DNA repair 
through homologous recombination.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M809019200
PMCID: PMC2658046
PMID: 19150983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]