1. Pflugers Arch. 2009 Jun;458(2):303-14. doi: 10.1007/s00424-008-0628-9. Epub
2009  Jan 17.

Mass spectrometric analysis reveals a functionally important PKA phosphorylation 
site in a Kir3 channel subunit.

Rusinova R(1), Shen YM, Dolios G, Padovan J, Yang H, Kirchberger M, Wang R, 
Logothetis DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Phosphorylation of the Kir3 channel by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) 
potentiates activity and strengthens channel-PIP(2) interactions, whereas 
phosphorylation by protein kinase C (PKC) exerts the opposite effects (Keselman 
et al., Channels 1:113-123, 2007; Lopes et al., Channels 1:124-134, 2007). 
Unequivocal identification of phosphorylated residues in ion channel proteins 
has been difficult, but recent advances in mass spectrometry techniques have 
allowed precise identification of phosphorylation sites (Park et al., Science 
313:976-979, 2006). In this study, we utilized mass spectrometry to identify 
phosphorylation sites within the Kir3.1 channel subunit. We focused on the 
Kir3.1 C-terminal cytosolic domain that has been reported to be regulated by 
several modulators. In vitro phosphorylation by PKA exhibited a convincing 
signal upon treatment with a phosphoprotein stain. The phosphorylated C terminus 
was subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using matrix-assisted lased 
desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectroscopy (MS). Peptides whose mass 
underwent a shift corresponding to addition of a phosphate group were then 
subjected to tandem MS (MS/MS) in order to confirm the modification and 
determine its precise location. Using this approach, we identified S385 as an in 
vitro phosphorylation site. Mutation of this residue to alanine resulted in a 
reduced sensitivity of Kir3.1* currents to H89 and Forskolin, confirming an in 
vivo role for this novel site of the Kir3.1 channel subunit in its regulation by 
PKA.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-008-0628-9
PMCID: PMC2852689
PMID: 19151997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]