1. Mod Pathol. 2009 Mar;22(3):359-65. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.236. Epub 2009 
Jan 16.

TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions are infrequent in prostatic ductal adenocarcinomas.

Lotan TL(1), Toubaji A, Albadine R, Latour M, Herawi M, Meeker AK, DeMarzo AM, 
Platz EA, Epstein JI, Netto GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 
21231, USA.

Comment in
    Mod Pathol. 2009 Oct;22(10):1398-9; author reply 1399-40. doi: 
10.1038/modpathol.2009.100.

Ductal adenocarcinoma of the prostate is an unusual subtype that may be 
associated with a more aggressive clinical course, and is less responsive to 
conventional therapies than the more common prostatic acinar adenocarcinoma. 
However, given its frequent association with an acinar component at 
prostatectomy, some have challenged the concept of prostatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma as a distinct clinicopathologic entity. We studied the occurrence 
of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion, in 40 surgically resected ductal adenocarcinoma 
cases, and in their associated acinar component using fluorescence in situ 
hybridization. A group of 38 'pure' acinar adenocarcinoma cases matched with the 
ductal adenocarcinoma group for pathological grade and stage was studied as a 
control. Compared with the matched acinar adenocarcinoma cases, the TMPRSS2-ERG 
gene fusion was significantly less frequently observed in ductal adenocarcinoma 
(45 vs 11% of cases, P=0.002, Fisher's exact test). Here, of the ductal 
adenocarcinoma cases with the gene fusion, 75% were fused through deletion, and 
the remaining case was fused through translocation. The TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion 
was also rare in the acinar component of mixed ductal-acinar tumors when 
compared with the pure acinar adenocarcinoma controls (5 vs 45%, P=0.001, 
Fisher's exact test). In 95% of the ductal adenocarcinoma cases in which a 
concurrent acinar component was analyzed, there was concordance for 
presence/absence of the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion between the different histologic 
subtypes. In the control group of pure acinar adenocarcinoma cases, 59% were 
fused through deletion and 41% were fused through translocation. The presence of 
the TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion in some cases of prostatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
supports the concept that ductal adenocarcinoma and acinar adenocarcinoma may be 
related genetically. However, the significantly lower rate of the gene fusion in 
pure ductal adenocarcinoma cases underscores the fact that genetic and biologic 
differences exist between these two tumors that may be important for future 
therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.236
PMCID: PMC3484370
PMID: 19151660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors have no 
disclosures/conflicts of interest to declare.