1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jul;1790(7):615-28. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.12.001. Epub 2008 Dec 29.

Amyloid precursor protein and alpha synuclein translation, implications for iron 
and inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases.

Cahill CM(1), Lahiri DK, Huang X, Rogers JT.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry-Neuroscience, 
Massachusetts General Hospital (East), Harvard Medical School, CNY2, Building 
149, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Recent studies that alleles in the hemochromatosis gene may accelerate the onset 
of Alzheimer's disease by five years have validated interest in the model in 
which metals (particularly iron) accelerate disease course. Biochemical and 
biophysical measurements demonstrated the presence of elevated levels of 
neurotoxic copper zinc and iron in the brains of AD patients. Intracellular 
levels of APP holoprotein were shown to be modulated by iron by a mechanism that 
is similar to the translation control of the ferritin L- and H mRNAs by 
iron-responsive element (IRE) RNA stem loops in their 5' untranslated regions 
(5'UTRs). More recently a putative IRE-like sequence was hypothesized present in 
the Parkinsons's alpha synuclein (ASYN) transcript (see [A.L. Friedlich, R.E. 
Tanzi, J.T. Rogers, The 5'-untranslated region of Parkinson's disease 
alpha-synuclein messenger RNA contains a predicted iron responsive element, Mol. 
Psychiatry 12 (2007) 222-223. [6]]). Together with the demonstration of metal 
dependent translation of APP mRNA, the involvement of metals in the plaque of AD 
patients and of increased iron in striatal neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) 
of Parkinson's disease patients have stimulated the development of metal 
attenuating agents and iron chelators as a major new therapeutic strategy for 
the treatment of these neurodegenerative diseases. In the case of AD, metal 
based therapeutics may ultimately prove more cost effective than the use of an 
amyloid vaccine as the preferred anti-amyloid therapeutic strategy to ameliorate 
the cognitive decline of AD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.12.001
PMCID: PMC3981543
PMID: 19166904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]