1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009 Jun;34(5):752-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.12.007. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Possible association between the androgen receptor gene and autism spectrum 
disorder.

Henningsson S(1), Jonsson L, Ljunggren E, Westberg L, Gillberg C, Råstam M, 
Anckarsäter H, Nygren G, Landén M, Thuresson K, Betancur C, Leboyer M, Gillberg 
C, Eriksson E, Melke J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Pharmacology, 
Gothenburg University, Box 431, 40530 Göteborg, Sweden. 
susanne.henningsson@pharm.gu.se

Autism is a highly heritable disorder but the specific genes involved remain 
largely unknown. The higher prevalence of autism in men than in women, in 
conjunction with a number of other observations, has led to the suggestion that 
prenatal brain exposure to androgens may be of importance for the development of 
this condition. Prompted by this hypothesis, we investigated the potential 
influence of variation in the androgen receptor (AR) gene on the susceptibility 
for autism. To this end, 267 subjects with autism spectrum disorder and 617 
controls were genotyped for three polymorphisms in exon 1 of the AR gene: the 
CAG repeat, the GGN repeat and the rs6152 SNP. In addition, parents and affected 
siblings were genotyped for 118 and 32 of the cases, respectively. Case-control 
comparisons revealed higher prevalence of short CAG alleles as well as of the A 
allele of the rs6152 SNP in female cases than in controls, but revealed no 
significant differences with respect to the GGN repeat. Analysis of the 118 
families using transmission disequilibrium test, on the other hand, suggested an 
association with the GGN polymorphism, the rare 20-repeat allele being 
undertransmitted to male cases and the 23-repeat allele being overtransmitted to 
female cases. Sequencing of the AR gene in 46 patients revealed no mutations or 
rare variants. The results lend some support for an influence of the studied 
polymorphisms on the susceptibility for autism, but argue against the 
possibility that mutations in the AR gene are common in subjects with this 
condition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.12.007
PMID: 19167832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]