1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 27;284(13):8233-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809338200. Epub
2009  Jan 28.

Molecular mechanisms of thioredoxin and glutaredoxin as hydrogen donors for 
Mammalian s phase ribonucleotide reductase.

Zahedi Avval F(1), Holmgren A.

Author information:
(1)Medical Nobel Institute for Biochemistry, Department of Medical Biochemistry 
and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in 
deoxyribonucleotide synthesis essential for DNA replication and repair. RNR in S 
phase mammalian cells comprises a weak cytosolic complex of the catalytic R1 
protein containing redox active cysteine residues and the R2 protein harboring 
the tyrosine free radical. Each enzyme turnover generates a disulfide in the 
active site of R1, which is reduced by C-terminally located shuttle dithiols 
leaving a disulfide to be reduced. Electrons for reduction come ultimately from 
NADPH via thioredoxin reductase and thioredoxin (Trx) or glutathione reductase, 
glutathione, and glutaredoxin (Grx), but the mechanism has not been clarified 
for mammalian RNR. Using recombinant mouse RNR, we found that Trx1 and Grx1 had 
similar catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K(m)). With 4 mm GSH, Grx1 showed a higher 
affinity (apparent K(m) value, 0.18 microm) compared with Trx1 which displayed a 
higher apparent k(cat), suggesting its major role in S phase DNA replication. 
Surprisingly, Grx activity was strongly dependent on GSH concentrations 
(apparent K(m) value, 3 mm) and a Grx2 C40S mutant was active despite only one 
cysteine residue in the active site. This demonstrates a GSH-mixed disulfide 
mechanism for glutaredoxin catalysis in contrast to the dithiol mechanism for 
thioredoxin. This may be an advantage with the low levels of RNR for DNA repair 
or in tumor cells with high RNR and no or low Trx expression. Our results 
demonstrate mechanistic differences between the mammalian and canonical 
Escherichia coli RNR enzymes, which may offer an explanation for the 
nonconserved shuttle dithiol sequences in the C terminus of the R1.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M809338200
PMCID: PMC2659180
PMID: 19176520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]