1. Biochemistry. 2009 Feb 10;48(5):917-28. doi: 10.1021/bi801382v.

Characterization of the peroxidase mechanism upon reaction of prostacyclin 
synthase with peracetic acid. Identification of a tyrosyl radical intermediate.

Yeh HC(1), Gerfen GJ, Wang JS, Tsai AL, Wang LH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prostacyclin synthase (PGIS) is a membrane-bound class III cytochrome P450 that 
catalyzes an isomerization of prostaglandin H(2), an endoperoxide, to 
prostacyclin. We report here the characterization of the PGIS intermediates in 
reactions with other peroxides, peracetic acid (PA), and iodosylbenzene. 
Rapid-scan stopped-flow experiments revealed an intermediate with an absorption 
spectrum similar to that of compound ES (Cpd ES), which is an oxo-ferryl 
(Fe(IV)O) plus a protein-derived radical. Cpd ES, formed upon reaction with PA, 
has an X-band (9 GHz) EPR signal of g = 2.0047 and a half-saturation power, 
P(1/2), of 0.73 mW. High-field (130 GHz) EPR reveals the presence of two species 
of tyrosyl radicals in Cpd ES with their g-tensor components (g(x), g(y), g(z)) 
of 2.00970, 2.00433, 2.00211 and 2.00700, 2.00433, 2.00211 at a 1:2 ratio, 
indicating that one is involved in hydrogen bonding and the other is not. The 
line width of the g = 2 signal becomes narrower, while its P(1/2) value becomes 
smaller as the reaction proceeds, indicating migration of the unpaired electron 
to an alternative site. The rate of electron migration ( approximately 0.2 
s(-1)) is similar to that of heme bleaching, suggesting the migration is 
associated with the enzymatic inactivation. Moreover, a g = 6 signal that is 
presumably a high-spin ferric species emerges after the appearance of the amino 
acid radical and subsequently decays at a rate comparable to that of enzymatic 
inactivation. This loss of the g = 6 species thus likely indicates another 
pathway leading to enzymatic inactivation. The inactivation, however, was 
prevented by the exogenous reductant guaiacol. The studies of PGIS with PA 
described herein provide a mechanistic model of a peroxidase reaction catalyzed 
by the class III cytochromes P450.

DOI: 10.1021/bi801382v
PMCID: PMC2849756
PMID: 19187034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]