1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;84(2):178-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.015. Epub 
2009 Jan 29.

Searching for genotype-phenotype structure: using hierarchical log-linear models 
in Crohn disease.

Chapman JM(1), Onnie CM, Prescott NJ, Fisher SA, Mansfield JC, Mathew CG, Lewis 
CM, Verzilli CJ, Whittaker JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK.

There has been considerable recent success in the detection of gene-disease 
associations. We consider here the development of tools that facilitate the more 
detailed characterization of the effect of a genetic variant on disease. We 
replace the simplistic classification of individuals according to a single 
binary disease indicator with classification according to a number of 
subphenotypes. This more accurately reflects the underlying biological 
complexity of the disease process, but it poses additional analytical 
difficulties. Notably, the subphenotypes that make up a particular disease are 
typically highly associated, and it becomes difficult to distinguish which genes 
might be causing which subphenotypes. Such problems arise in many complex 
diseases. Here, we concentrate on an application to Crohn disease (CD). We 
consider this problem as one of model selection based upon log-linear models, 
fitted in a Bayesian framework via reversible-jump Metropolis-Hastings approach. 
We evaluate the performance of our suggested approach with a simple simulation 
study and then apply the method to a real data example in CD, revealing a sparse 
disease structure. Most notably, the associated NOD2.908G-->R mutation appears 
to be directly related to more severe disease behaviors, whereas the other two 
associated NOD2 variants, 1007L-->FS and 702R-->W, are more generally related to 
disease in the small bowel (ileum and jejenum). The ATG16L1.300T-->A variant 
appears to be directly associated with only disease of the small bowel.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.12.015
PMCID: PMC2668013
PMID: 19185283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]