1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 24;106(8):2717-22. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0812304106. Epub 2009 Feb 5.

Integrity of the AID serine-38 phosphorylation site is critical for class switch 
recombination and somatic hypermutation in mice.

Cheng HL(1), Vuong BQ, Basu U, Franklin A, Schwer B, Astarita J, Phan RT, Datta 
A, Manis J, Alt FW, Chaudhuri J.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 2;110(14):5731.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is a single-stranded (ss) 
DNA-specific cytidine deaminase that initiates Ig heavy chain (IgH) class switch 
recombination (CSR) and Ig somatic hypermutation (SHM) by deaminating cytidines 
within, respectively, IgH switch (S) regions and Ig variable region (V) exons. 
AID that is phosphorylated on serine residue 38 interacts with replication 
protein A (RPA), a ssDNA binding protein, to promote deamination of transcribed 
double-stranded DNA in vitro, which, along with other evidence, suggests that 
AID may similarly gain access to transcribed S regions and V exons in vivo. 
However, the physiological role of AID phosphorylation at serine residue 38 
(S38), and even the requirement for the S38 residue, with respect to CSR or SHM 
has been debated. To address this issue, we used gene targeting to generate an 
endogenous mouse AID locus that produces AID in which S38 is substituted with 
alanine (AID(S38A)), a mutant form of AID that retains similar catalytic 
activity on ssDNA as WT AID (AID(WT)). B cells homozygous for the AID(S38A) 
mutation show substantially impaired CSR and SHM, correlating with inability of 
AID(S38A) to interact with endogenous RPA. Moreover, mice haploinsufficient for 
AID(S38A) have even more severely impaired CSR when compared with mice 
haploinsufficient for AID(WT), with CSR levels reduced to nearly background 
levels. These results unequivocally demonstrate that integrity of the AID S38 
phosphorylation site is required for normal CSR and SHM in mice and strongly 
support a role for AID phosphorylation at S38 and RPA interaction in regulating 
CSR and SHM.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0812304106
PMCID: PMC2650332
PMID: 19196992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.