1. J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Jan;79(2):163-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2008.10.006. Epub 
2009 Feb 6.

Gene polymorphisms of Toll-like and related recognition receptors in relation to 
the vaginal carriage of Gardnerella vaginalis and Atopobium vaginae.

Verstraelen H(1), Verhelst R, Nuytinck L, Roelens K, De Meester E, De Vos D, Van 
Thielen M, Rossau R, Delva W, De Backer E, Vaneechoutte M, Temmerman M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine & Health 
Sciences, Ghent University, De Pintelaan 185, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
Hans.Verstraelen@UGent.be

Host genetic factors have previously been found to act as determinants of 
differential susceptibility to major infectious diseases. It is less clear 
whether such polymorphisms may also impose on pathogen recognition in mucosal 
overgrowth conditions such as bacterial vaginosis, an anaerobic overgrowth 
condition characterised by the presence of a vaginal biofilm consisting of the 
Gram-positive anaerobes Gardnerella vaginalis and Atopobium vaginae. We selected 
34 single nucleotide polymorphisms pertaining to 9 genes involved with Toll-like 
receptor-mediated pathogen recognition and/or regulation (LBP, CD14, TLR1, TLR2, 
TLR4, TLR6, MD2, CARD15 and SIGIRR) and assessed in a nested case-control study 
their putative association with bacterial vaginosis, as diagnosed by Gram 
staining, and with the vaginal carriage of A. vaginae and G. vaginalis, as 
determined by species-specific PCR, among 144 pregnant women. Carriage of G. 
vaginalis during early pregnancy was associated with the -1155A>G substitution 
in the promoter region of the MD2 gene (p=0.041). The presence of A. vaginae 
during the first half of the pregnancy was significantly associated with the 
CD14 intron 2 1342G>T (p=0.039), the TLR1 exon 4 743A>G (p=0.038), and the 
CARD15 exon 4 14772A>T (p=0.012) polymorphisms, and marginally significantly 
associated with the LBP exon13 26842C>T (p=0.056), the CD14 promoter -260C>T 
(p=0.052), and the TLR1 promoter -7202A>G (p=0.062) polymorphisms. However, no 
association between gene polymorphisms and bacterial vaginosis as such could be 
documented. Our data suggest that some degree of genetic susceptibility 
involving pathogen recognition may occur with the key bacterial vaginosis 
organism, A. vaginae.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jri.2008.10.006
PMID: 19200604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]