1. Biochemistry. 2009 Mar 31;48(12):2675-83. doi: 10.1021/bi801993x.

Mutational analysis of the substrate specificity of Escherichia coli penicillin 
binding protein 4.

Clarke TB(1), Kawai F, Park SY, Tame JR, Dowson CG, Roper DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK. 
clarket@mail.med.upenn.edu

Escherichia coli PBP4 is the archetypal class C, low molecular mass penicillin 
binding protein (LMM-PBP) and possesses both dd-carboxypeptidase and 
dd-endopeptidase activity. In contrast to other classes of PBP, class C LMM-PBPs 
show high dd-carboxypeptidase activity and rapidly hydrolyze synthetic fragments 
of peptidoglycan. The recently solved X-ray crystal structures of three class C 
LMM-PBPs (E. coli PBP4, Bacillus subtilis PBP4a, and Actinomadura R39 
dd-peptidase) have identified several residues that form a pocket in the active 
site unique to this class of PBP. The X-ray cocrystal structure of the 
Actinomadura R39 DD-peptidase with a cephalosporin bearing a 
peptidoglycan-mimetic side chain showed that residues of this pocket interact 
with the third position meso-2,6-diaminopimelic acid residue of the 
peptidoglycan stem peptide. Equivalent residues of E. coli PBP4 (Asp155, Phe160, 
Arg361, and Gln422) were mutated, and the effect on both DD-carboxypeptidase and 
DD-endopeptidase activities was determined. Using 
N-acetylmuramyl-L-alanyl-gamma-D-glutamyl-meso-2,6-diaminopimelyl-D-alanyl-D-alanine 
as substrate, mutation of Asp155, Phe160, Arg361, and Gln422 to alanine reduced 
k(cat)/K(m) by 12.7-, 1.9-, 24.5-, and 13.8-fold, respectively. None of the 
k(cat) values deviated significantly from wild-type PBP4. PBP4 DD-endopeptidase 
activity was also affected, with substitution of Asp155, Arg361, and Gln422 
reducing specific activity by 22%, 56%, and 40%, respectively. This provides the 
first direct demonstration of the importance of residues forming a subsite to 
accommodate meso-2,6-diaminopimelic acid in both the DD-carboxypeptidase and 
DD-endopeptidase activities of a class C LMM-PBP.

DOI: 10.1021/bi801993x
PMID: 19209901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]