1. Genet Epidemiol. 2009 Jul;33(5):394-405. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20393.

On the adjustment for covariates in genetic association analysis: a novel, 
simple principle to infer direct causal effects.

Vansteelandt S(1), Goetgeluk S, Lutz S, Waldman I, Lyon H, Schadt EE, Weiss ST, 
Lange C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Ghent University, 
Belgium.

In genetic association studies, different complex phenotypes are often 
associated with the same marker. Such associations can be indicative of 
pleiotropy (i.e. common genetic causes), of indirect genetic effects via one of 
these phenotypes, or can be solely attributable to non-genetic/environmental 
links between the traits. To identify the phenotypes with the inducing genetic 
association, statistical methodology is needed that is able to distinguish 
between the different causes of the genetic associations. Here, we propose a 
simple, general adjustment principle that can be incorporated into many standard 
genetic association tests which are then able to infer whether an SNP has a 
direct biological influence on a given trait other than through the SNP's 
influence on another correlated phenotype. Using simulation studies, we show 
that, in the presence of a non-marker related link between phenotypes, standard 
association tests without the proposed adjustment can be biased. In contrast to 
that, the proposed methodology remains unbiased. Its achieved power levels are 
identical to those of standard adjustment methods, making the adjustment 
principle universally applicable in genetic association studies. The principle 
is illustrated by an application to three genome-wide association analyses.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20393
PMCID: PMC5621606
PMID: 19219893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]