1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 May;29(5):739-45. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.169367. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

Bradykinin-induced dilation of human coronary arterioles requires NADPH 
oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species.

Larsen BT(1), Bubolz AH, Mendoza SA, Pritchard KA Jr, Gutterman DD.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 
53226, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing 
factor in human coronary arterioles (HCAs). H2O2 mediates bradykinin 
(BK)-induced vasodilation and reduces bioavailability of epoxyeicosatrienoic 
acids (EETs); however, the cellular and enzymatic source of H2O2 is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: NADPH oxidase expression was determined by 
immunohistochemistry. Superoxide and H2O2 production was assayed in HCAs and 
human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs) using dihydroethidium and 
dichlorodihydrofluorescein histofluorescence, respectively. Superoxide was 
quantified by HPLC separation of dihydroethidium products. Diameter changes of 
HCAs were measured by videomicroscopy. NADPH oxidase subunits Nox1, Nox2, Nox4, 
p22, p47, and p67 were each expressed in HCA endothelium. In HCAs or HCAECs 
incubated with dihydroethidium and dichlorodihydrofluorescein, BK induced 
superoxide and H2O2 formation, which was inhibited by gp91ds-tat or apocynin but 
not by gp91scram-tat or rotenone. HPLC analysis confirmed that BK specifically 
induced superoxide production. Gp91ds-tat reduced vasodilation to BK but not to 
papaverine. 14,15-EEZE (an EET antagonist) further reduced the residual dilation 
to BK in the presence of gp91ds-tat, but had no effect in the presence of 
gp91scram-tat, suggesting that NADPH oxidase-derived ROS modulate EET 
bioavailability.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that endothelial NADPH oxidase is a functionally 
relevant source of H2O2 that mediates agonist-induced dilation in the human 
heart.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.169367
PMCID: PMC2727937
PMID: 19213944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]