1. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004440. Epub 2009 Feb
12.

Inoculation of scrapie with the self-assembling RADA-peptide disrupts prion 
accumulation and extends hamster survival.

Hnasko R(1), Bruederle CE.

Author information:
(1)United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Agricultural Research Service 
(ARS), Pacific West Area (PWA), Western Regional Research Center, Foodborne 
Contaminants Research Unit (WRRC-FCR), Albany, CA, USA. 
Robert.Hnasko@ars.usda.gov

Intracerebral inoculation of 263K Scrapie brain homogenate (PrPsc) with a 
self-assembling RADA-peptide (RADA) significantly delayed disease onset and 
increased hamster survival. Time of survival was dependent on the dose of RADA 
and pre-incubation with PrPsc prior to inoculation. RADA treatment resulted in 
the absence of detectable PrPsc at 40 d followed by an increased rate of PrPsc 
accumulation at 75 d up to sacrifice. In all PrPsc inoculated animals, clinical 
symptoms were observed approximately 10 d prior to sacrifice and brains showed 
spongiform degeneration with Congo red positive plaques. A time-dependent 
increase in reactive gliosis was observed in both groups with more GFAP detected 
in RADA treated animals at all time points. The PrP protein showed 
dose-dependent binding to RADA and this binding was competitively inhibited by 
Congo Red. We conclude that RADA disrupts the efficacy of prion transmission by 
altering the rate of PrPsc accumulation. This is the first demonstration that a 
self-assembling biomolecular peptide can interact with PrPsc, disrupt the course 
of Scrapie disease process, and extend survival.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004440
PMCID: PMC2636877
PMID: 19212437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.