1. J Neurochem. 2009 Apr;109(2):551-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.05989.x.
Epub  2009 Feb 13.

In vitro glutaminase regulation and mechanisms of glutamate generation in 
HIV-1-infected macrophage.

Erdmann N(1), Tian C, Huang Y, Zhao J, Herek S, Curthoys N, Zheng J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurotoxicology at the Center for Neurovirology and 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5880, USA.

Mononuclear phagocyte (MP, macrophages and microglia) dysfunction plays a 
significant role in the pathogenesis of HIV-1-associated dementia (HAD) through 
the production and release of soluble neurotoxic factors including glutamate. 
Glutamate production is greatly increased following HIV-1 infection of cultured 
MP, a process dependent upon the glutamate-generating enzyme glutaminase. 
Glutaminase inhibition was previously found to significantly decrease 
macrophage-mediated neurotoxicity. Potential mechanisms of glutaminase-mediated 
excitotoxicity including enzyme up-regulation, increased enzyme activity and 
glutaminase localization were investigated in this report. RNA and protein 
analysis of HIV-infected human primary macrophage revealed up-regulation of the 
glutaminase isoform GAC, yet identified no changes in the kidney-type 
glutaminase isoform over the course of infection. Glutaminase is a mitochondrial 
protein, but was found to be released into the cytosol and extracellular space 
following infection. This released enzyme is capable of rapidly converting the 
abundant extracellular amino acid glutamine into excitotoxic levels of glutamate 
in an energetically favorable process. These findings support glutaminase as a 
potential component of the HAD pathogenic process and identify a possible 
therapeutic avenue for the treatment of neuroinflammatory states such as HAD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.05989.x
PMCID: PMC2668921
PMID: 19222703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]