1. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Feb;5(2):e1000304. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000304. Epub 
2009 Feb 20.

Differential ligand binding to a human cytomegalovirus chemokine receptor 
determines cell type-specific motility.

Vomaske J(1), Melnychuk RM, Smith PP, Powell J, Hall L, DeFilippis V, Fr√ºh K, 
Smit M, Schlaepfer DD, Nelson JA, Streblow DN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and The Vaccine and Gene 
Therapy Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

While most chemokine receptors fail to cross the chemokine class boundary with 
respect to the ligands that they bind, the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-encoded 
chemokine receptor US28 binds multiple CC-chemokines and the CX(3)C-chemokine 
Fractalkine. US28 binding to CC-chemokines is both necessary and sufficient to 
induce vascular smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration in response to HCMV 
infection. However, the function of Fractalkine binding to US28 is unknown. In 
this report, we demonstrate that Fractalkine binding to US28 not only induces 
migration of macrophages but also acts to inhibit RANTES-mediated SMC migration. 
Similarly, RANTES inhibits Fractalkine-mediated US28 migration in macrophages. 
While US28 binding of both RANTES and Fractalkine activate FAK and ERK-1/2, 
RANTES signals through Galpha12 and Fractalkine through Galphaq. These findings 
represent the first example of differential chemotactic signaling via a multiple 
chemokine family binding receptor that results in migration of two different 
cell types. Additionally, the demonstration that US28-mediated chemotaxis is 
both ligand-specific and cell type-specific has important implications in the 
role of US28 in HCMV pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000304
PMCID: PMC2637432
PMID: 19229316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OHSU and investigators D. Streblow and J. Nelson 
have a financial interest in Virogenomics, Inc., a company that has rights to 
US28. The potential conflict of interest has been reviewed and managed by the 
OHSU Conflict of Interest in Research Committee.