1. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 1;182(5):2909-18. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803545.

Preferential use of B7.2 and not B7.1 in priming of vaccinia virus-specific CD8 
T cells.

Salek-Ardakani S(1), Arens R, Flynn R, Sette A, Schoenberger SP, Croft M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and 
Immunology, 9420 Athena Circle, La Jolla, San Diego, CA 92037, USA. 
ssalek@liai.org

Recent studies have demonstrated that CD28 provides critical costimulatory 
signals required for optimal CD8 T cell expansion and effector function in 
response to several viruses, including influenza, HSV, and vaccinia virus 
(VACV). CD28 has two ligands expressed largely on professional APC, named B7.1 
(CD80) and B7.2 (CD86). Although some results suggest that these ligands are 
equivalent and both promote CD28 signaling, it is not clear whether they are 
equally important for priming of antiviral T cells. Herein we show that B7.2 is 
critical for early CD8 T cell responses to both dominant and subdominant VACV 
epitopes, correlating with its strong induction on CD8alpha(+) dendritic cells. 
In contrast, B7.1 plays no significant role. Signals from an exogenously applied 
adjuvant can recruit B7.1 activity and lead to further enhanced priming of 
VACV-reactive CD8 T cells. However, during a natural infection, B7.1 is not 
functional, likely related to inefficient up-regulation or active suppression by 
VACV. These studies provide evidence that B7.2 is the major ligand for the CD28 
receptor on VACV-specific CD8 T cells, that B7.2 can promote efficient CD8 T 
cell priming without B7.1, and that B7.1 and B7.2 can be differentially utilized 
during antiviral responses.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803545
PMCID: PMC2707928
PMID: 19234186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]