1. Nature. 2009 Apr 23;458(7241):1039-42. doi: 10.1038/nature07811. Epub 2009 Feb
 25.

Identification of IFRD1 as a modifier gene for cystic fibrosis lung disease.

Gu Y(1), Harley IT, Henderson LB, Aronow BJ, Vietor I, Huber LA, Harley JB, 
Kilpatrick JR, Langefeld CD, Williams AH, Jegga AG, Chen J, Wills-Karp M, Arshad 
SH, Ewart SL, Thio CL, Flick LM, Filippi MD, Grimes HL, Drumm ML, Cutting GR, 
Knowles MR, Karp CL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research 
Foundation and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, 
Ohio 45229, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2009 Aug;76(2):148-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01247_2.x.

Lung disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis, 
an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in CFTR. In cystic fibrosis, 
chronic infection and dysregulated neutrophilic inflammation lead to progressive 
airway destruction. The severity of cystic fibrosis lung disease has 
considerable heritability, independent of CFTR genotype. To identify genetic 
modifiers, here we performed a genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism scan 
in one cohort of cystic fibrosis patients, replicating top candidates in an 
independent cohort. This approach identified IFRD1 as a modifier of cystic 
fibrosis lung disease severity. IFRD1 is a histone-deacetylase-dependent 
transcriptional co-regulator expressed during terminal neutrophil 
differentiation. Neutrophils, but not macrophages, from Ifrd1-deficient mice 
showed blunted effector function, associated with decreased NF-kappaB p65 
transactivation. In vivo, IFRD1 deficiency caused delayed bacterial clearance 
from the airway, but also less inflammation and disease-a phenotype primarily 
dependent on haematopoietic cell expression, or lack of expression, of IFRD1. In 
humans, IFRD1 polymorphisms were significantly associated with variation in 
neutrophil effector function. These data indicate that IFRD1 modulates the 
pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis lung disease through the regulation of 
neutrophil effector function.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07811
PMCID: PMC2841516
PMID: 19242412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]