1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Oct 1;88(19):8769-73. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.88.19.8769.

Engineering the substrate specificity of glutathione reductase toward that of 
trypanothione reduction.

Henderson GB(1), Murgolo NJ, Kuriyan J, Osapay K, Kominos D, Berry A, Scrutton 
NS, Hinchliffe NW, Perham RN, Cerami A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Biochemistry, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10021.

Glutathione reductase (EC 1.6.4.2; CAS registry number 9001-48-3) and 
trypanothione reductase (CAS registry number 102210-35-5), which are related 
flavoprotein disulfide oxidoreductases, have marked specificities for 
glutathione and trypanothione, respectively. A combination of primary sequence 
alignments and molecular modeling, together with the high-resolution crystal 
structure of human glutathione reductase, identified certain residues as 
potentially being responsible for substrate discrimination. Site-directed 
mutagenesis of Escherichia coli glutathione reductase was used to test these 
predictions. The mutation of Asn-21 to Arg demonstrated that this single change 
was insufficient to generate the greater discrimination against trypanothione 
shown by human glutathione reductase compared with the E. coli enzyme. However, 
the mutation of Ala-18, Asn-21, and Arg-22 to the amino acid residues (Glu, Trp, 
and Asn, respectively) in corresponding positions in Trypanosoma congolense 
trypanothione reductase confirmed that this region of polypeptide chain is 
intimately involved in substrate recognition. It led to a mutant form of E. coli 
glutathione reductase that possessed essentially no activity with glutathione 
but that was able to catalyze trypanothione reduction with a kcat/Km value that 
was 10% of that measured for natural trypanothione reductases. These results 
should be of considerable importance in the design of trypanocidal drugs 
targeted at the differences between glutathione and trypanothione metabolism in 
trypanosomatids and their hosts.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.19.8769
PMCID: PMC52591
PMID: 1924337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]