1. J Neurosci. 2009 Feb 25;29(8):2588-96. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5832-08.2009.

Developmental shift of cyclophilin D contribution to hypoxic-ischemic brain 
injury.

Wang X(1), Carlsson Y, Basso E, Zhu C, Rousset CI, Rasola A, Johansson BR, 
Blomgren K, Mallard C, Bernardi P, Forte MA, Hagberg H.

Author information:
(1)Perinatal Center, University of Gothenburg, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. 
xiaoyang.wang@fysiologi.gu.se

Cyclophilin D (CypD), a regulator of the mitochondrial membrane permeability 
transition pore (PTP), enhances Ca(2+)-induced mitochondrial permeabilization 
and cell death in the brain. However, the role of CypD in hypoxic-ischemic (HI) 
brain injury at different developmental ages is unknown. At postnatal day (P) 9 
or P60, littermates of CypD-deficient [knock-out (KO)], wild-type (WT), and 
heterozygous mice were subjected to HI, and brain injury was evaluated 7 d after 
HI. CypD deficiency resulted in a significant reduction of HI brain injury at 
P60 but worsened injury at P9. After HI, caspase-dependent and -independent cell 
death pathways were more induced in P9 CypD KO mice than in WT controls, and 
apoptotic activation was minimal at P60. The PTP had a considerably higher 
induction threshold and lower sensitivity to cyclosporin A in neonatal versus 
adult mice. On the contrary, Bax inhibition markedly reduced caspase activation 
and brain injury in immature mice but was ineffective in the adult brain. Our 
findings suggest that CypD/PTP is critical for the development of brain injury 
in the adult, whereas Bax-dependent mechanisms prevail in the immature brain. 
The role of CypD in HI shifts from a predominantly prosurvival protein in the 
immature to a cell death mediator in the adult brain.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5832-08.2009
PMCID: PMC3049447
PMID: 19244535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]