1. Mol Neurodegener. 2009 Feb 25;4:12. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-4-12.

Increased DJ-1 expression under oxidative stress and in Alzheimer's disease 
brains.

Baulac S(1), Lu H, Strahle J, Yang T, Goldberg MS, Shen J, Schlossmacher MG, 
Lemere CA, Lu Q, Xia W.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
wxia@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

Mutations in the DJ-1 gene have been linked to autosomal recessive familial 
Parkinson's disease. To understand the function of DJ-1, we determined the DJ-1 
expression in both zebrafish and post mortem human brains. We found that DJ-1 
was expressed early during zebrafish development and throughout adulthood. Knock 
down (KD) of DJ-1 by injection of morpholino did not cause dramatic morphologic 
alterations during development, and no loss of dopaminergic neurons was observed 
in embryos lacking DJ-1. However, DJ-1 KD embryos were more susceptible to 
programmed cell death. While a slight reduction in staining for islet-1 positive 
neurons was observed in both DJ-1 KD and H2O2 treated embryos, the number of 
apoptotic cells was significantly increased in both KD and H2O2 treated embryos. 
Interestingly, DJ-1 expression was increased in brains of zebrafish under 
conditions of oxidative stress, indicating that DJ-1 is a part of 
stress-responsive machinery. Since oxidative stress is one of the major 
contributors to the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD), we also examined 
DJ-1 expression in AD brains. Using DJ-1 specific antibodies, we failed to 
detect a robust staining of DJ-1 in brain tissues from control subjects. 
However, DJ-1 immunoreactivity was detected in hippocampal pyramidal neurons and 
astrocytes of AD brains. Therefore, our results strongly suggest that DJ-1 
expression is not necessary during zebrafish development but can be induced in 
zebrafish exposed to oxidative stress and is present in human AD brains.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-4-12
PMCID: PMC2654450
PMID: 19243613