1. J Neurol. 2009 Feb;256(2):194-7. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-0961-8. Epub 2009 Mar
 1.

Migraine and tumour necrosis factor gene polymorphism. An association study in a 
Sardinian sample.

Asuni C(1), Stochino ME, Cherchi A, Manchia M, Congiu D, Manconi F, Squassina A, 
Piccardi MP, Del Zompo M.

Author information:
(1)Headache Centre Franco Tocco, Section of Clinical Pharmacology, Dept. of 
Neurosciences BB Brodie, University of Cagliari, PO San Giovanni di Dio, Via 
Ospedale 46, 09124 Cagliari, Italy.

To assess the possibility of an association between TNF gene polymorphisms and 
migraine without aura, a case-control study was performed in a Sardinian sample. 
Migraine without aura is a complex genetic disease in which susceptibility and 
environmental factors contribute towards its development. Several studies 
suggest that tumour necrosis factors (TNF) (TNF-alpha and lymphotoxin-alpha or 
TNF-ss) may be involved in the pathophysiology of migraine. The TNF-alpha and 
TNF-ss genes are located on chromosome 6p21.3 in the human leukocyte antigene 
(HLA) class III region. We evaluated 299 patients affected by migraine without 
aura (I.H.S. criteria 2004) and 278 migraine-free controls. The polymorphisms 
G308A of the TNF- alpha gene, and G252A of TNF-beta gene were determined by NcoI 
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. We found a statistically 
significant difference in allele (p = 0.018; OR = 1.46 95 % CI: 1.066 to 2.023) 
and genotype (trend chi2 = 5.46, df = 1, p = 0.019) frequencies of TNF-beta 
gene, between cases and controls. Allele and genotype frequencies of TNF-alpha 
polymorphism did not differ significantly between the two groups. These data 
suggest that subjects with the TNFB2 allele have a low risk of developing 
migraine without aura and/or that the polymorphism of the TNF-beta gene is in 
linkage disequilibrium with other migraine responsible genes in the HLA region.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-0961-8
PMID: 19253056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]