1. Clin Chim Acta. 2009 Jun 27;404(2):95-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2009.02.015. Epub 
2009 Mar 3.

Novel mutations in ETFDH gene in Chinese patients with riboflavin-responsive 
multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Law LK(1), Tang NL, Hui J, Fung SL, Ruiter J, Wanders RJ, Fok TF, Lam CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD, OMIM 231680) or 
glutaric aciduria type II (GAII) is an inherited autosomal recessive disease 
affecting fatty acid, amino acid and choline metabolism, due to mutations in one 
of three genes namely, electron transfer flavoprotein alpha-subunit, ETFA (OMIM 
608053), electron transfer flavoprotein beta-subunit, ETFB (OMIM 130410) and 
electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase, ETFDH (OMIM 231675). Some MADD 
patients are responsive to riboflavin treatment with an excellent prognosis. 
Recently, mutations in ETFDH were found to be responsible for all 
riboflavin-responsive MADD patients. In this study, we present the clinical 
features and molecular studies of 2 Chinese families with riboflavin-responsive 
MADD.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples or skin 
fibroblast cultures from the patients and normal controls. The thirteen exons of 
ETFDH were amplified by PCR. PCR products were sequenced in both forward and 
reverse directions. To rule out mutations in other genes, phenotype segregation 
was studied in the families by microsatellite markers in the proximity of the 3 
genes, ETFA, ETFB and ETFDH.
RESULTS: Four novel mutations in ETFDH were detected in the 2 families. In 
family 1, a frame shift mutation, c.1355delG which introduced a 
premature-termination codon (PTC), I454X in exon 11 of ETFDH was found. Another 
mutation was a c.250G>A transition in exon 3 of ETFDH, A84T. In family 2, two 
novel missense mutations were identified, P137S, in exon 4 and G467R in exon 11. 
No carrier of these four mutations was identified from about 150 alleles of 
healthy Chinese control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Four novel mutations (3 missenses and 1 deletion) in ETFDH were 
found in Chinese families that presented with riboflavin-responsive MADD, which 
further expands the list of mutations found in patients with 
riboflavin-responsive MADD. Furthermore, we illustrated the utility of 
phenotype-genotype segregation in MADD families to prioritize genes for 
sequencing or to rule out the presence of disease causing mutation in other 
genes in MADD and other diseases caused by multiple genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2009.02.015
PMID: 19265687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]