1. Bipolar Disord. 2009 Mar;11(2):215-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2009.00667.x.

Association study in a Sardinian sample between bipolar disorder and the nuclear 
receptor REV-ERBalpha gene, a critical component of the circadian clock system.

Severino G(1), Manchia M, Contu P, Squassina A, Lampus S, Ardau R, Chillotti C, 
Del Zompo M.

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Neurosciences, University of 
Cagliari, P.O. San Giovanni di Dio, Via Ospedale 46, Cagliari, Italy. 
severino@unica.it

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to investigate the association between 
REV-ERBalpha gene (NR1D1) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and bipolar 
disorder (BP) in a case-control sample of Sardinian ancestry and evaluate its 
effect on age at onset (AAO) of BP.
METHODS: We genotyped SNPs rs12941497 (SNP1) and rs939347 (SNP2), located, 
respectively, in the first intron and in the 5'UTR region of the gene, in a 
sample comprised of 300 bipolar patients and 300 healthy controls of Sardinian 
ancestry. We also studied AAO by means of admixture analysis, obtaining a cutoff 
point of age 22 and then carrying out association analysis between the two AAO 
groups.
RESULTS: In the case-control comparison, single marker analysis showed no 
association for any of the SNPs tested. Haplotype analysis showed a nominally 
significant association for two haplotypes of SNPs 1-2. Comparing the early- and 
later-onset groups, nominal association was found for SNP1. Haplotype analysis 
showed that one haplotype was nominally associated with the later-onset group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results, indicating a nominal association of the REV-ERBalpha 
gene with BP, suggest a possible role of REV-ERBalpha in the pathogenesis of BP. 
Further investigation of larger independent samples and different populations is 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2009.00667.x
PMID: 19267705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]