1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 1;284(18):11781-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808703200. Epub
2009  Mar 4.

Ligand-independent thrombopoietin mutant receptor requires cell surface 
localization for endogenous activity.

Marty C(1), Chalign√© R, Lacout C, Constantinescu SN, Vainchenker W, Villeval JL.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U790, Villejuif 94805, France.

The activating W515L mutation in the thrombopoietin receptor (MPL) has been 
identified in primary myelofibrosis and essential thrombocythemia. MPL belongs 
to a subset of the cytokine receptor superfamily that requires the JAK2 kinase 
for signaling. We examined whether the ligand-independent MPL(W515L) mutant 
could signal intracellularly. Addition of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
retention KDEL sequence to the receptor C terminus efficiently locked MPL(W515L) 
within its natural ER/Golgi maturation pathway. In contrast to cells expressing 
the parental MPL(W515L), MPL(W515L)-KDEL-expressing FDC-P1 cells were unable to 
grow autonomously and to produce tumors in nude mice. When observed, tumor 
nodules resulted from in vivo selection of cells leaking the receptor at their 
surface. JAK2 co-immunoprecipitated with MPL(W515L)-KDEL but was not 
phosphorylated. We generated disulfide-bonded MPL(W515L) homodimers by the S402C 
substitution, both in the normal and KDEL context. Unlike MPL(W515L)-KDEL, 
MPL(W515L-S402C)-KDEL signaled constitutively and exhibited cell surface 
localization. These data establish that MPL(W515L) with appended JAK2 matures 
through the ER/Golgi system in an inactive conformation and suggest that the 
MPL(W515L)/JAK2 complex requires membrane localization for JAK2 phosphorylation, 
resulting in autonomous receptor signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M808703200
PMCID: PMC2673247
PMID: 19261614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]