1. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Apr;9(4):231-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.12.010. Epub 
2009 Jan 19.

Characterization of spatial and temporal expression pattern of SCG10 during 
zebrafish development.

Burzynski GM(1), Delalande JM, Shepherd I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

SCG10 (Superior Cervical Ganglia 10, STMN2) is a member of the stathmin family 
of proteins. Stathmins regulate microtubule dynamics by inhibiting 
polymerization and promoting their depolymerization. SCG10 is believed to be a 
neuronal-specific stathmin that is enriched in the growth cones of developing 
neurons and plays a role in regulating neurite outgrowth. In all species 
examined so far, SCG10 is expressed in both the CNS and PNS. We have cloned two 
zebrafish SCG10 homologues and have determined the temporal and spatial 
expression pattern of both of these genes by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. 
RT-PCR shows that both transcripts are expressed maternally and zygotically 
through at least 5 days. In situ hybridization analysis reveals that both SCG10 
orthologues have dynamic, spatial expression patterns that are nearly identical 
to each other. Initially, these orthologues are expressed in discrete areas of 
the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain, as well as in the anterior and posterior 
lateral line ganglia and transiently in the spinal cord Rohon-Beard neurons. 
From 48hpf onwards, the level of expression of both genes increases and becomes 
mainly restricted to the anterior CNS (the forebrain region, retina, optic 
tectum, and hindbrain), and to the cranial ganglia. From 72 to 96hpf, SCG10 
genes are also expressed in the developing neurons in the gut and in the 
surrounding intestinal mesenchyme. Our results provide a starting point for 
future studies that will investigate the in vivo function of SCG10 orthologues 
in zebrafish neural development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.12.010
PMCID: PMC2670952
PMID: 19272335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]