1. Exp Neurol. 2009 Aug;218(2):333-46. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.02.015. Epub
 2009 Mar 9.

The mitochondrial permeability transition pore in motor neurons: involvement in 
the pathobiology of ALS mice.

Martin LJ(1), Gertz B, Pan Y, Price AC, Molkentin JD, Chang Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2196, USA. martinl@jhmi.edu

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of 
motor neurons (MNs) that causes paralysis. Some forms of ALS are inherited, 
caused by mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene. The mechanisms of 
human mutant SOD1 (mSOD1) toxicity to MNs are unresolved. Mitochondria in MNs 
might be key sites for ALS pathogenesis, but cause-effect relationships between 
mSOD1 and mitochondriopathy need further study. We used transgenic mSOD1 mice to 
test the hypothesis that the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) 
is involved in the MN degeneration of ALS. Components of the multi-protein mPTP 
are expressed highly in mouse MNs, including the voltage-dependent anion 
channel, adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT), and cyclophilin D (CyPD), and 
are present in mitochondria marked by manganese SOD. MNs in pre-symptomatic 
mSOD1-G93A mice form swollen megamitochondria with CyPD immunoreactivity. Early 
disease is associated with mitochondrial cristae remodeling and matrix 
vesiculation in ventral horn neuron dendrites. MN cell bodies accumulate 
mitochondria derived from the distal axons projecting to skeletal muscle. 
Incipient disease in spinal cord is associated with increased oxidative and 
nitrative stress, indicated by protein carbonyls and nitration of CyPD and ANT. 
Reducing the levels of CyPD by genetic ablation significantly delays disease 
onset and extends the lifespan of G93A-mSOD1 mice expressing high and low levels 
of mutant protein in a gender-dependent pattern. These results demonstrate that 
mitochondria have causal roles in the disease mechanisms in MNs in ALS mice. 
This work defines a new mitochondrial mechanism for MN degeneration in ALS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.02.015
PMCID: PMC2710399
PMID: 19272377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]