1. Free Radic Res. 2009 Apr;43(4):385-9. doi: 10.1080/10715760902783293. Epub
2009  Mar 9.

An association study between catalase -262C>T gene polymorphism, sodium-lithium 
countertransport activity, insulin resistance, blood lipid parameters and their 
response to atorvastatin, in Greek dyslipidaemic patients and normolipidaemic 
controls.

Kosmidou M(1), Hatzitolios AI, Molyva D, Raikos N, Savopoulos C, Daferera N, 
Kokkas V, Goulas A.

Author information:
(1)1st Propedeutic Clinic, AHEPA University Hospital, Aristotle University 
Medical School, Thessaloniki 54124, Greece.

This study attempted to examine the effect of a functional catalase gene 
polymorphism, CAT -262C>T, on sodium-lithium countertransport (Na-Li CT) 
activity, insulin resistance determined as the homeostasis model assessment 
index (HOMA-IR), blood lipid parameters (cholesterol, triglycerides, low density 
lipoprotein cholesterol, high density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoprotein B, 
apolipoprotein A-I) and their response to atorvastatin, in previously 
characterized Greek dyslipidaemic patients and normolipidaemic controls. 
Putative associations were examined by running univariate analyses with a 
general linear model, using age, sex, smoking and hypertension as covariates. 
While no statistically significant associations were detected between the CAT 
-262C>T polymorphism and either baseline values or their modulation by 
atorvastatin in the patient group, HOMA-IR values were significantly (p=0.028) 
lower among CAT -262CC controls compared to their T allele carrier counterparts. 
A trend towards higher plasma triglyceride values among CAT -262CC genotypes was 
also detected, in both dyslipidaemic patients and normolipidaemic controls.

DOI: 10.1080/10715760902783293
PMID: 19274593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]