1. Exp Neurol. 2009 Jun;217(2):258-68. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.02.017. Epub
 2009 Mar 11.

A soluble activin type IIB receptor improves function in a mouse model of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Morrison BM(1), Lachey JL, Warsing LC, Ting BL, Pullen AE, Underwood KW, Kumar 
R, Sako D, Grinberg A, Wong V, Colantuoni E, Seehra JS, Wagner KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurologic disease characterized by 
progressive weakness that results in death within a few years of onset by 
respiratory failure. Myostatin is a member of the TGF-beta superfamily that is 
predominantly expressed in muscle and acts as a negative regulator of muscle 
growth. Attenuating myostatin has previously been shown to produce increased 
muscle mass and strength in normal and disease animal models. In this study, a 
mouse model of ALS (SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice) was treated with a soluble 
activin receptor, type IIB (ActRIIB.mFc) which is a putative endogenous 
signaling receptor for myostatin in addition to other ligands of the TGF-beta 
superfamily. ActRIIB.mFc treatment produces a delay in the onset of weakness, an 
increase in body weight and grip strength, and an enlargement of muscle size 
whether initiated pre-symptomatically or after symptom onset. Treatment with 
ActRIIB.mFc did not increase survival or neuromuscular junction innervation in 
SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice. Pharmacologic treatment with ActRIIB.mFc was 
superior in all measurements to genetic deletion of myostatin in SOD1(G93A) 
transgenic mice. The improved function of SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice following 
treatment with ActRIIB.mFc is encouraging for the development of TGF-beta 
pathway inhibitors to increase muscle strength in patients with ALS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.02.017
PMID: 19285073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]