1. Biophys J. 2009 Mar 18;96(6):2045-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.12.3907.

Relaxation dispersion NMR spectroscopy as a tool for detailed studies of protein 
folding.

Neudecker P(1), Lundstr√∂m P, Kay LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 
1A8, Canada.

Characterization of the mechanisms by which proteins fold into their native 
conformations is important not only for protein structure prediction and design 
but also because protein misfolding intermediates may play critical roles in 
fibril formation that are commonplace in neurodegenerative disorders. In 
practice, the study of folding pathways is complicated by the fact that for the 
most part intermediates are low-populated and short-lived so that biophysical 
studies are difficult. Due to recent methodological advances, relaxation 
dispersion NMR spectroscopy has emerged as a particularly powerful tool to 
obtain high-resolution structural information about protein folding events on 
the millisecond timescale. Applications of the methodology to study the folding 
of SH3 domains have shown that folding proceeds via previously undetected 
on-pathway intermediates, sometimes stabilized by nonnative long-range 
interactions. The relaxation dispersion approach provides a detailed kinetic and 
thermodynamic description of the folding process as well as the promise of 
obtaining an atomic level structural description of intermediate states. We 
review the concerted application of a variety of recently developed NMR 
relaxation dispersion experiments to obtain a "high-resolution" picture of the 
folding pathway of the A39V/N53P/V55L Fyn SH3 domain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2008.12.3907
PMCID: PMC2717354
PMID: 19289032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]