1. Proteome Sci. 2009 Mar 16;7:7. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-7-7.

Discovery and identification of potential biomarkers of pediatric acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Shi L(#)(1)(2), Zhang J(#)(3), Wu P(1), Feng K(3), Li J(1)(2), Xie Z(1), Xue 
P(1), Cai T(1), Cui Z(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), Hou J(1)(2), Zhang J(3), Yang F(1).

Author information:
(1)Proteomic Platform, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100101, PR China.
(2)Graduate University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR 
China.
(3)Center for Experimental Medicine, 306 Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100101, PR 
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a common form of cancer in 
children. Currently, bone marrow biopsy is used for diagnosis. Noninvasive 
biomarkers for the early diagnosis of pediatric ALL are urgently needed. The aim 
of this study was to discover potential protein biomarkers for pediatric ALL.
METHODS: Ninety-four pediatric ALL patients and 84 controls were randomly 
divided into a "training" set (45 ALL patients, 34 healthy controls) and a test 
set (49 ALL patients, 30 healthy controls and 30 pediatric acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) patients). Serum proteomic profiles were measured using 
surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight mass spectroscopy 
(SELDI-TOF-MS). A classification model was established by Biomarker Pattern 
Software (BPS). Candidate protein biomarkers were purified by HPLC, identified 
by LC-MS/MS and validated using ProteinChip immunoassays.
RESULTS: A total of 7 protein peaks (9290 m/z, 7769 m/z, 15110 m/z, 7564 m/z, 
4469 m/z, 8937 m/z, 8137 m/z) were found with differential expression levels in 
the sera of pediatric ALL patients and controls using SELDI-TOF-MS and then 
analyzed by BPS to construct a classification model in the "training" set. The 
sensitivity and specificity of the model were found to be 91.8%, and 90.0%, 
respectively, in the test set. Two candidate protein peaks (7769 and 9290 m/z) 
were found to be down-regulated in ALL patients, where these were identified as 
platelet factor 4 (PF4) and pro-platelet basic protein precursor (PBP). Two 
other candidate protein peaks (8137 and 8937 m/z) were found up-regulated in the 
sera of ALL patients, and these were identified as fragments of the complement 
component 3a (C3a).
CONCLUSION: Platelet factor (PF4), connective tissue activating peptide III 
(CTAP-III) and two fragments of C3a may be potential protein biomarkers of 
pediatric ALL and used to distinguish pediatric ALL patients from healthy 
controls and pediatric AML patients. Further studies with additional populations 
or using pre-diagnostic sera are needed to confirm the importance of these 
findings as diagnostic markers of pediatric ALL.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-7-7
PMCID: PMC2662805
PMID: 19291297