1. Biochem Genet. 2009 Jun;47(5-6):397-411. doi: 10.1007/s10528-009-9235-5. Epub 
2009 Mar 17.

Novel mutations of the FASN gene and their effect on fatty acid composition in 
Japanese Black beef.

Abe T(1), Saburi J, Hasebe H, Nakagawa T, Misumi S, Nade T, Nakajima H, Shoji N, 
Kobayashi M, Kobayashi E.

Author information:
(1)National Livestock Breeding Center, 1 Odakurahara, Nishigo, Fukushima, Japan. 
t0abe@nlbc.go.jp

Eight novel and four known mutations were detected in the coding sequence of the 
bovine fatty acid synthase (FASN) gene of an F2 population from Japanese Black 
and Limousin cattle. Two mutations, g.16024A>G and g.16039T>C, detected in exon 
34, which determine amino acid substitutions of threonine (T) to alanine (A) and 
tryptophan (W) to arginine (R), were clearly separated in the parental breeds. 
The haplotypes (TW and AR) segregated in F2 individuals and had a significant 
effect on the fatty acid composition of backfat, intermuscular fat, and 
intramuscular fat. The TW haplotype was associated with increasing C18:0 and 
C18:1 content and the ratio of monounsaturated to saturated fatty acids, and 
decreasing C14:0, C14:1, C16:0, and C16:1 content. The two mutations were 
screened in two commercial Japanese Black half-sibling populations and similarly 
determined the contribution to the fatty acid composition of intramuscular fat. 
The frequency of the TW haplotype was markedly higher in Japanese Black (0.67) 
than in Holstein (0.17), Angus (0.02), and Hereford (0.07). We conclude that 
these mutations may contribute to the characteristic fatty acid composition of 
Japanese Black beef.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-009-9235-5
PMID: 19291389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]