1. J Neurosci. 2009 Mar 18;29(11):3529-37. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6173-08.2009.

Nuclear factor kappa B signaling regulates neuronal morphology and cocaine 
reward.

Russo SJ(1), Wilkinson MB, Mazei-Robison MS, Dietz DM, Maze I, Krishnan V, 
Renthal W, Graham A, Birnbaum SG, Green TA, Robison B, Lesselyong A, Perrotti 
LI, Bola√±os CA, Kumar A, Clark MS, Neumaier JF, Neve RL, Bhakar AL, Barker PA, 
Nestler EJ.

Author information:
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New 
York, New York 10029, USA.

Although chronic cocaine-induced changes in dendritic spines on nucleus 
accumbens (NAc) neurons have been correlated with behavioral sensitization, the 
molecular pathways governing these structural changes, and their resulting 
behavioral effects, are poorly understood. The transcription factor, nuclear 
factor kappa B (NFkappaB), is rapidly activated by diverse stimuli and regulates 
expression of many genes known to maintain cell structure. Therefore, we 
evaluated the role of NFkappaB in regulating cocaine-induced dendritic spine 
changes on medium spiny neurons of the NAc and the rewarding effects of cocaine. 
We show that chronic cocaine induces NFkappaB-dependent transcription in the NAc 
of NFkappaB-Lac transgenic mice. This induction of NFkappaB activity is 
accompanied by increased expression of several NFkappaB genes, the promoters of 
which show chromatin modifications after chronic cocaine exposure consistent 
with their transcriptional activation. To study the functional significance of 
this induction, we used viral-mediated gene transfer to express either a 
constitutively active or dominant-negative mutant of Inhibitor of kappa B kinase 
(IKKca or IKKdn), which normally activates NFkappaB signaling, in the NAc. We 
found that activation of NFkappaB by IKKca increases the number of dendritic 
spines on NAc neurons, whereas inhibition of NFkappaB by IKKdn decreases basal 
dendritic spine number and blocks the increase in dendritic spines after chronic 
cocaine. Moreover, inhibition of NFkappaB blocks the rewarding effects of 
cocaine and the ability of previous cocaine exposure to increase an animal's 
preference for cocaine. Together, these studies establish a direct role for 
NFkappaB pathways in the NAc to regulate structural and behavioral plasticity to 
cocaine.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6173-08.2009
PMCID: PMC2677656
PMID: 19295158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]