1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Aug;17(8):1549-53. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.75.
Epub  2009 Mar 19.

A rare variant in the visfatin gene (NAMPT/PBEF1) is associated with protection 
from obesity.

Blakemore AI(1), Meyre D, Delplanque J, Vatin V, Lecoeur C, Marre M, Tichet J, 
Balkau B, Froguel P, Walley AJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, 
London, UK.

Visfatin was recently reported as a novel adipokine encoded by the NAMPT (PBEF1) 
gene. This study was aimed at investigation of the possibility that 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the visfatin gene are associated with 
either obesity or type 2 diabetes (T2D). A set of eight "tag-SNPs" were selected 
and ABI SNPlex assays designed for genotyping purposes. A total of 1,709 
severely obese subjects were typed (896 class III obese adults and 813 children) 
together with 2,367 T2D individuals and 2,850 controls. For quantitative trait 
analysis, an additional 2,362 subjects were typed for rs10487818 from a general 
population sample. One rare SNP, rs10487818, located in intron 4 of NAMPT was 
associated with severe obesity, with a minor allele frequency of 1.6% in 
controls, 0.4% in the class III obese adults and, remarkably, 0% in the severely 
obese children. A highly significant association was observed for the presence 
or absence of the rare allele, i.e., (A,A) vs. (A,T + T,T) genotypes, in 
children (P = 6 x 10(-9)) and in adults (P = 8 x 10(-5)). No other significant 
(P < 0.05) association was observed with obesity or T2D for this or any other 
SNP. No association with BMI or waist-to-hip ratio was observed in a general 
population sample (n = 5,212). This is one of the first rare SNPs shown to be 
protective against a common polygenic disease and provides further evidence that 
rare alleles of strong effect can contribute to complex diseases such as severe 
obesity.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2009.75
PMID: 19300429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]