1. J Bacteriol. 2009 May;191(9):3076-85. doi: 10.1128/JB.01060-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
20.

Characterization of a novel thermostable carboxylesterase from Geobacillus 
kaustophilus HTA426 shows the existence of a new carboxylesterase family.

Montoro-García S(1), Martínez-Martínez I, Navarro-Fernández J, Takami H, 
García-Carmona F, Sánchez-Ferrer A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology-A, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Murcia, Campus Espinardo, E30011 Murcia, Spain.

The gene GK3045 (741 bp) from Geobacillus kaustophilus HTA426 was cloned, 
sequenced, and overexpressed into Escherichia coli Rosetta (DE3). The deduced 
protein was a 30-kDa monomeric esterase with high homology to carboxylesterases 
from Geobacillus thermoleovorans NY (99% identity) and Geobacillus 
stearothermophilus (97% identity). This protein suffered a proteolytic cut in E. 
coli, and the problem was overcome by introducing a mutation in the gene (K212R) 
without affecting the activity. The resulting Est30 showed remarkable 
thermostability at 65 degrees C, above the optimum growth temperature of G. 
kaustophilus HTA426. The optimum pH of the enzyme was 8.0. In addition, the 
purified enzyme exhibited stability against denaturing agents, like organic 
solvents, detergents, and urea. The protein catalyzed the hydrolysis of 
p-nitrophenyl esters of different acyl chain lengths, confirming the esterase 
activity. The sequence analysis showed that the protein contains a catalytic 
triad formed by Ser93, Asp192, and His222, and the Ser of the active site is 
located in the conserved motif Gly91-X-Ser93-X-Gly95 included in most esterases 
and lipases. However, this carboxylesterase showed no more than 17% sequence 
identity with the closest members in the eight families of microbial 
carboxylesterases. The three-dimensional structure was modeled by sequence 
alignment and compared with others carboxylesterases. The topological 
differences suggested the classification of this enzyme and other 
Geobacillus-related carboxylesterases in a new alpha/beta hydrolase family 
different from IV and VI.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01060-08
PMCID: PMC2681792
PMID: 19304850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]