1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Feb;13(1):127-31. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0092.

Prenatal diagnosis of Cockayne syndrome type A based on the identification of 
two novel mutations in the ERCC8 gene.

Conte C(1), D'Apice MR, Botta A, Sangiuolo F, Novelli G.

Author information:
(1)Fondazione Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. chiaraconte@yahoo.it

Back Cockayne syndrome (CS; MIM 133540-216400) is a rare autosomal recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive growth failure, 
microcephaly, mental retardation, retinal pigmentary degeneration, deafness, 
photosensitivity, accelerated systemic degeneration of somatic tissue, and 
premature death. Complementation assays have defined Cockayne syndrome group A 
(CSA) and Cockayne syndrome group B (CSB), caused by mutations in ERCC8 and 
ERCC6. The aim of this work was to perform a molecular analysis in a family with 
an affected son, who died at the age of 12, presenting clinical features typical 
of CSA. Molecular analysis of ERCC8 allowed us to characterize two novel 
mutations: a maternally inherited deletion encompassing exons 5 and 6, and a 
nonsense mutation located in exon 4, segregating from the father. Based on this 
molecular characterization, we successively performed a prenatal diagnosis on 
chorionic villus sampling, at 11th week of pregnancy. Molecular prenatal 
analysis of the ERCC8 was done by analyzing fetal DNA and RNA, looking for both 
mutations identified in the proband. A linkage analysis was performed using 
microsatellite markers located on chromosome 5q11 with the purpose to follow the 
segregation of the mutated alleles within the family. The fetal genotype at CSA 
locus resulted wild type and was confirmed at birth on biological material 
isolated from placenta. This study documents for the first time a molecular 
prenatal diagnosis of CSA, which results in the preferred approach if the 
mutation within the family is identified in a timely manner.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0092
PMID: 19309286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]