1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Jun;29(6):837-42. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.186163. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Overexpression of human 15(S)-lipoxygenase-1 in RAW macrophages leads to 
increased cholesterol mobilization and reverse cholesterol transport.

Weibel GL(1), Joshi MR, Alexander ET, Zhu P, Blair IA, Rothblat GH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, 3615 Civic Center Blvd, ARC1102, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4399, USA. 
weibel@email.chop.edu

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of 
15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1) on cholesterol mobilization from macrophages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Overexpression of human 15-LO-1 in RAW mouse macrophages 
led to enhanced cholesterol efflux, increased cholesteryl ester (CE) hydrolysis, 
and increased reverse cholesterol transport (RCT). Efflux studies comparing 
15-LO-1 overexpressing cells to mock-transfected RAW macrophages resulted in a 
3- to 7-fold increase in cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein A-I and a modest 
increase in efflux to HDL. Additional experiments revealed an increase in mRNA 
and protein levels of ABCA1 and ABCG1 in the RAW expressing 15-LO-1 compared to 
controls. Efforts to examine whether the arachidonic acid metabolite of 15-LO-1, 
(15S)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (HETE), was responsible for the enhanced 
efflux revealed this eicosanoid metabolite did not play a role. Enhanced steryl 
ester hydrolysis was observed in 15-LO-1 overexpressing cells suggesting that 
the CE produced in the 15-LO-1 expressing cells was readily mobilized. To 
measure RCT, RAW macrophages overexpressing 15-LO-1 or mock-transfected cells 
were cholesterol enriched by exposure to acetylated low-density lipoprotein and 
[(3)H]-cholesterol. These macrophages were injected into wild-type animals and 
RCT was measured as a percent of injected dose of (3)H appearing in the feces at 
48 hours. We found 7% of the injected (3)H in the feces of mice that received 
macrophages overexpressing 15-LO-1 and 4% in the feces of mice that received 
mock-transfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data are consistent with a model in which overexpression of 
human 15-LO-1 in RAW macrophages promotes RCT through increased CE hydrolysis 
and ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.186163
PMCID: PMC2759530
PMID: 19325142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]