1. Int J Parasitol. 2009 Sep;39(11):1215-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.03.001. 
Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Identification of an Ascaris G protein-coupled acetylcholine receptor with 
atypical muscarinic pharmacology.

Kimber MJ(1), Sayegh L, El-Shehabi F, Song C, Zamanian M, Woods DJ, Day TA, 
Ribeiro P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, 
USA.

Acetylcholine (ACh) is a neurotransmitter/neuromodulator in the nematode nervous 
system and induces its effects through interaction with both ligand-gated ion 
channels (LGICs) and G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). The structure, 
pharmacology and physiological importance of LGICs have been appreciably 
elucidated in model nematodes, including parasitic species where they are 
targets for anthelmintic drugs. Significantly less, however, is understood about 
nematode ACh GPCRs, termed GARs (G protein-linked ACh receptors). What is known 
comes from the free-living Caenorhabditis elegans as no GARs have been 
characterized from parasitic species. Here we clone a putative GAR from the pig 
gastrointestinal nematode Ascaris suum with high structural homology to the C. 
elegans receptor GAR-1. Our GPCR, dubbed AsGAR-1, is alternatively spliced and 
expressed in the head and tail of adult worms but not in dorsal or ventral body 
wall muscle, or the ovijector. ACh activated AsGAR-1 in a 
concentration-dependent manner but the receptor was not activated by other small 
neurotransmitters. The classical muscarinic agonists carbachol, arecoline, 
oxotremorine M and bethanechol were also AsGAR-1 agonists but pilocarpine was 
ineffective. AsGAR-1 activation by ACh was partially antagonized by the 
muscarinic blocker atropine but pirenzepine and scopolamine were largely 
ineffective. Certain biogenic amine GPCR antagonists were also found to block 
AsGAR-1. Our conclusion is that Ascaris possesses G protein-coupled ACh 
receptors that are homologous in structure to those present in C. elegans, and 
that although they have some sequence homology to vertebrate muscarinic 
receptors, their pharmacology is atypically muscarinic.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2009.03.001
PMCID: PMC2713365
PMID: 19327362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]