1. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(12):6161-70. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02488-08. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Fas-mediated apoptotic signaling in the mouse brain following reovirus 
infection.

Clarke P(1), Beckham JD, Leser JS, Hoyt CC, Tyler KL.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, University of Colorado Denver Health Sciences 
Programs, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA. 
Penny.Clarke@uchsc.edu

Type 3 (T3) reovirus strains induce apoptotic neuronal cell death and lethal 
encephalitis in infected mice. T3 strain Dearing (T3D)-induced apoptosis in 
primary neuronal cultures occurs by a Fas-mediated mechanism and requires the 
activation of caspase 8. We now show that Fas mRNA is upregulated in the brains 
of mice infected with encephalitic reovirus T3D and T3 strain Abney (T3A) but 
not following infection with nonencephalitic reovirus type 1 strain Lang. Fas is 
upregulated in regions of the brain that are injured during infection with T3 
reovirus strains and colocalizes with virus antigen in individual neurons. In 
contrast, levels of FasL mRNA induced by encephalitic and nonencephalitic 
reovirus strains do not differ significantly. Caspase 8, the initiator caspase 
associated with Fas-mediated apoptosis, is activated in the cortex and 
hippocampal regions of both T3D- and T3A-infected mice. Furthermore, Bid 
cleavage and the activation of caspase 9 in the brains of T3D-infected mice 
suggest that the caspase 8-dependent activation of mitochondrial apoptotic 
signaling contributes to virus-induced apoptosis. We have previously shown that 
the inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling blocks T3D-induced 
apoptosis and improves the outcome of virus-induced encephalitis. We now show 
that the reovirus-induced upregulation of Fas requires JNK signaling, thereby 
providing a link between reovirus-induced death receptor signaling and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and a potential mechanism for the 
therapeutic action of JNK inhibition.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02488-08
PMCID: PMC2687381
PMID: 19321603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]