1. Hum Genet. 2009 Jun;125(5-6):615-26. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0656-3. Epub 2009
 Mar 26.

Analysis of FTO gene variants with measures of obesity and glucose homeostasis 
in the IRAS Family Study.

Wing MR(1), Ziegler J, Langefeld CD, Ng MC, Haffner SM, Norris JM, Goodarzi MO, 
Bowden DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Multiple studies have identified FTO gene variants associated with measures of 
adiposity in European-derived populations. The objective of the study was to 
determine whether FTO variants were associated with adiposity, including 
visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue (VAT, SAT), and glucose homeostasis 
measures in the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Family Study (IRASFS). A 
total of 27 SNPs in FTO intron 1, including SNPs prominent in the literature 
(rs9939609, rs8050136, rs1121980, rs17817449, rs1421085, and rs3751812), were 
genotyped in 1,424 Hispanic Americans and 604 African Americans. Multiple SNPs 
were associated with BMI and SAT (P values ranging from 0.001 to 0.033), and 
trending or associated with waist circumference (P values ranging from 0.008 to 
0.099) in the Hispanic Americans. No association was observed with VAT, 
illustrating that FTO variants are associated with overall fat mass instead of 
specific fat depots. For the glucose homeostasis measures, variants were 
associated with fasting insulin but, consistent with other studies, after BMI 
adjustment, no evidence of association remained. The lack of association of FTO 
SNPs with insulin sensitivity is consistent with the lack of association with 
VAT, since these traits are strongly correlated. In the African Americans, only 
rs8050136 and rs9939609 were associated with BMI and WAIST (P values of 0.011 
and 0.034), and associated or trending towards association with SAT (P values of 
0.038 and 0.058). These results confirm that FTO variants are associated with 
adiposity measures, predisposing individuals to obesity by increasing overall 
fat mass in Hispanic Americans and to a lesser degree in African Americans.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-009-0656-3
PMCID: PMC2792578
PMID: 19322589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]