1. Brain Dev. 2010 Mar;32(3):171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.02.011. Epub
2009  Mar 27.

Comprehensive genetic analyses of PLP1 in patients with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher 
disease applied by array-CGH and fiber-FISH analyses identified new mutations 
and variable sizes of duplications.

Shimojima K(1), Inoue T, Hoshino A, Kakiuchi S, Watanabe Y, Sasaki M, Nishimura 
A, Takeshita-Yanagisawa A, Tajima G, Ozawa H, Kubota M, Tohyama J, Sasaki M, Oka 
A, Saito K, Osawa M, Yamamoto T.

Author information:
(1)International Research and Educational Institute for Integrated Medical 
Sciences (IREIIMS), Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, 
Shinjuku-ward, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD; MIM#312080) is a rare X-linked recessive 
neurodegenerative disorder. The main cause of PMD is alterations in the 
proteolipid protein 1 gene (PLP1) on chromosome Xq22.2. Duplications and point 
mutations of PLP1 have been found in 70% and 10-25% of all patients with PMD, 
respectively, with a wide clinical spectrum. Since the underlining genomic 
abnormalities are heterogeneous in patients with PMD, clarification of the 
genotype-phenotype correlation is the object of this study. Comprehensive 
genetic analyses using microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) 
analysis and genomic sequencing were applied to fifteen unrelated male patients 
with a clinical diagnosis of PMD. Duplicated regions were further analyzed by 
fiber-fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. Four novel and one 
known nucleotide alterations were identified in five patients. Five 
microduplications including PLP1 were identified by aCGH analysis with the sizes 
ranging from 374 to 951-kb. The directions of five PLP1 duplications were 
further investigated by fiber-FISH analysis, and all showed tandem duplications. 
The common manifestations of the disease in patients with PLP1 mutations or 
duplications in this study were nystagmus in early infancy, dysmyelination 
revealed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and auditory brain response 
abnormalities. Although the grades of dysmyelination estimated by MRI findings 
were well correlated to the clinical phenotypes of the patients, there is no 
correlation between the size of the duplications and the phenotypic severity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.02.011
PMID: 19328639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]