1. J Nutr. 2009 May;139(5):993-1001. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.101691. Epub 2009 Mar
25.

The protective association of high plasma enterolactone with breast cancer is 
reasonably robust in women with polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and 
beta genes.

Sonestedt E(1), Ivarsson MI, Harlid S, Ericson U, Gullberg B, Carlson J, Olsson 
H, Adlercreutz H, Wirfält E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Nutrition Epidemiology, Lund University, 
SE-20502 Malmö, Sweden. Emily.Sonestedt@med.lu.se

It is plausible that polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and beta genes 
(ESR1 and ESR2) may modulate the association between enterolactone and breast 
cancer. Seven polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs827422, rs1709184, rs2347867, rs3020328, 
rs72207, rs2982896, and rs2234693) and 5 polymorphisms in ESR2 (rs915057, 
rs1269056, rs1256033, rs3020450, and rs3020443) were selected. The risk of 
breast cancer for these polymorphisms was estimated among 542 cases and 1076 
matched controls from the population-based Malmö Diet and Cancer cohort. The 
joint effect of these polymorphisms and enterolactone was estimated among those 
individuals about whom we had information on enterolactone blood concentration 
(365 cases and 728 controls). Breast cancer risk was not significantly 
associated with any of the selected polymorphisms. We found a tendency for an 
interaction between a polymorphism in intron 3 of ESR1 (rs2347867) and 
enterolactone concentration (P = 0.07). Breast cancer and enterolactone 
concentration were not associated among those homozygous for the major allele 
(A) (P = 0.93), whereas we found an inverse association among carriers of the 
minor allele (G) (P = 0.007). None of the other polymorphisms seem to modify the 
association between enterolactone and breast cancer. This study suggests that 
the protective association of enterolactone is reasonably robust across the 
investigated genotypes. The suggested interaction between enterolactone 
concentration and rs2347867 needs to be confirmed in larger samples.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.108.101691
PMID: 19321582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]