1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jun;94(6):1938-44. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-0354.
Epub  2009 Mar 31.

Head and neck paragangliomas in von Hippel-Lindau disease and multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 2.

Boedeker CC(1), Erlic Z, Richard S, Kontny U, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Cascon A, 
Robledo M, de Campos JM, van Nederveen FH, de Krijger RR, Burnichon N, Gaal J, 
Walter MA, Reschke K, Wiech T, Weber J, RÃ¼ckauer K, Plouin PF, Darrouzet V, 
Giraud S, Eng C, Neumann HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg 
D-79106, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck paragangliomas (HNPs) occur as sporadic or familial 
entities, the latter mostly in association with germline mutations of the SDHB, 
SDHC, or SDHD (SDHx) genes. Heritable non-SDHx HNP might occur in von 
Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL, VHL gene), multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
(MEN2, RET gene), and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1, NF1 gene). Reports of 
non-SDHx HNP presentations are scarce and guidance for genetic testing 
nonexistent.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: An international consortium registered patients with HNPs 
and performed mutation analyses of the SDHx, VHL, and RET genes. Those with SDHx 
germline mutations were excluded for purposes of this study. Personal and family 
histories were evaluated for paraganglial tumors, for the major tumor 
manifestations, and for family history of VHL, MEN2, or NF1.
RESULTS: Twelve patients were found to have hereditary non-SDHx HNPs of a total 
of 809 HNP and 2084 VHL registrants, 11 in the setting of germline VHL mutations 
and one of a RET mutation. The prevalence of hereditary HNP is five in 1000 VHL 
patients and nine in 1000 non-SDHx HNP patients. Comprehensive literature review 
revealed previous reports of HNPs in five VHL, two MEN2, and one NF1 patient. 
Overall, 11 here presented HNP cases, and four previously reported VHL-HNPs had 
lesions characteristic for VHL and/or a positive family history for VHL.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations provide evidence that molecular genetic testing 
for VHL or RET germline mutations in patients with HNP should be done only if 
personal and/or family history shows evidence for one of these syndromes.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2009-0354
PMCID: PMC2690424
PMID: 19336503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]