1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Nov;15(9):649-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.03.002. Epub 2009 Apr 3.

A chemical chaperone, sodium 4-phenylbutyric acid, attenuates the pathogenic 
potency in human alpha-synuclein A30P + A53T transgenic mice.

Ono K(1), Ikemoto M, Kawarabayashi T, Ikeda M, Nishinakagawa T, Hosokawa M, 
Shoji M, Takahashi M, Nakashima M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Fukuoka University, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka, 814-0180, Japan. kazu-ono@fukuoka-u.ac.jp

Aggregation and cytotoxicity of misfolded alpha-synuclein are postulated to be 
crucial in the disease processes of Parkinson's disease (PD) and other 
synucleinopathies. Mutations in the alpha-synuclein gene in some pedigrees of 
familial PD have been reported. The mutant alpha-synuclein has been reported to 
form fibrillar aggregates resulting in biochemical abnormalities that are 
responsible for the onset of familial PD. Thus, any agent that effectively 
prevents the development of misfolded and aggregated alpha-synuclein would be a 
disease modifying therapeutic candidate. We examined the efficacy of sodium 
4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA), one of the chemical chaperons, in transgenic (Tg) 
mice overexpressing human alpha-synuclein containing a double mutation (A30P + 
A53T). To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy, bradykinesia and motor coordination 
were assessed using a pole test and a rotarod treadmill task, respectively. 
After PBA treatment, these motor deteriorations gradually improved. In 
immunohistochemical examinations, both a loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive 
neurons and an increase of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein in the substantia 
nigra were inhibited, resulting in no depletion of the striatal dopamine 
content. These data suggest that PBA might be one of the therapeutic reagents 
for neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.03.002
PMID: 19345133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]