1. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jun;30(6):1016-23. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp082. Epub 2009 
Apr 9.

Lung tumor promotion by curcumin.

Dance-Barnes ST(1), Kock ND, Moore JE, Lin EY, Mosley LJ, D'Agostino RB Jr, 
McCoy TP, Townsend AJ, Miller MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest 
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Erratum in
    Carcinogenesis. 2010 Oct;31(10):1903. Dosage error in published abstract; 
MEDLINE/PubMed abstract corrected; Dosage error in article text.

Curcumin exhibits anti-inflammatory and antitumor activity and is being tested 
in clinical trials as a chemopreventive agent for colon cancer. Curcumin's 
chemopreventive activity was tested in a transgenic mouse model of lung cancer 
that expresses the human Ki-ras(G12C) allele in a doxycycline (DOX) inducible 
and lung-specific manner. The effects of curcumin were compared with the lung 
tumor promoter, butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), and the lung cancer 
chemopreventive agent, sulindac. Treatment of DOX-induced mice with dietary 
curcumin increased tumor multiplicity (36.3 +/- 0.9 versus 24.3 +/- 0.2) and 
progression to later stage lesions, results which were similar to animals that 
were co-treated with DOX/BHT. Microscopic examination showed that the percentage 
of lung lesions that were adenomas and adenocarcinomas increased to 66% in 
DOX/BHT, 66% in DOX/curcumin and 49% in DOX/BHT/curcumin-treated groups relative 
to DOX only treated mice (19%). Immunohistochemical analysis also showed 
increased evidence of inflammation in DOX/BHT, DOX/curcumin and DOX/BHT/curcumin 
mice relative to DOX only treated mice. In contrast, co-treatment of DOX/BHT 
mice with 200 p.p.m. [DOSAGE ERROR CORRECTED] of sulindac inhibited the 
progression of lung lesions and reduced the inflammation. Lung tissue from 
DOX/curcumin-treated mice demonstrated a significant increase (33%; P = 0.01) in 
oxidative damage, as assessed by the levels of carbonyl protein formation, 
relative to DOX-treated control mice after 1 week on the curcumin diet. These 
results suggest that curcumin may exhibit organ-specific effects to enhance 
reactive oxygen species formation in the damaged lung epithelium of smokers and 
ex-smokers. Ongoing clinical trials thus may need to exclude smokers and 
ex-smokers in chemopreventive trials of curcumin.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgp082
PMCID: PMC2691137
PMID: 19359593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]