1. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 May;131(5):738-43. doi: 10.1309/AJCP3CX3AUVRBHCF.

Plasma level of growth arrest-specific 6 (GAS6) protein and genetic variations 
in the GAS6 gene in patients with acute coronary syndrome.

Jiang L(1), Liu CY, Yang QF, Wang P, Zhang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430022, R. P. 
China.

Growth arrest-specific gene 6 (GAS6) encodes a vitamin K-dependent protein that 
regulates inflammation, angiogenesis, and atherosclerotic plaque formation. The 
level of GAS6 expression is associated with plaque stability and stroke. We 
explored the role of GAS6 in cardiovascular disease, particularly in acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS). We determined the plasma levels of GAS6 protein by 
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method and investigated the role of 
the single nucleotide polymorphism (c.834+7G>A) in ACS. The median 
(interquartile range) plasma GAS6 levels were 16.9 microg/L (13-28 microg/L) in 
healthy control subjects and 10.65 microg/L (5.7-27.5 microg/L) in patients with 
ACS. The genotype frequencies for GG, AG, and AA, respectively, in patients with 
ACS were 66% (37/56), 29% (16/56), and 5% (3/56) and were 35% (14/40), 45% 
(18/40), 20% (8/40) in the control group. The AA genotype and A allele were less 
frequent in patients with ACS than in control subjects (P < .001). Our study 
indicates that GAS6 plasma concentrations at admission reflect the presence of 
common cardiovascular risk factors and can predict cardiovascular events. In 
addition, the AA genotype and A allele of the GAS6 gene relate to ACS, which may 
have a protective role against ACS.

DOI: 10.1309/AJCP3CX3AUVRBHCF
PMID: 19369636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]