1. Br J Cancer. 2009 Apr 21;100(8):1303-14. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604975. Epub
2009  Mar 24.

Differential tissue-specific protein markers of vaginal carcinoma.

Hellman K(1), Alaiya AA, Becker S, Lomnytska M, Schedvins K, Steinberg W, 
Hellstr√∂m AC, Andersson S, Hellman U, Auer G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecologic Oncology, Radiumhemmet, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Kristina.Hellman@ki.se

The objective was to identify proteins differentially expressed in vaginal 
cancer to elucidate relevant cancer-related proteins. A total of 16 fresh-frozen 
tissue biopsies, consisting of 5 biopsies from normal vaginal epithelium, 6 from 
primary vaginal carcinomas and 5 from primary cervical carcinomas, were analysed 
using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and MALDI-TOF mass 
spectrometry. Of the 43 proteins identified with significant alterations in 
protein expression between non-tumourous and tumourous tissue, 26 were 
upregulated and 17 were downregulated. Some were similarly altered in vaginal 
and cervical carcinoma, including cytoskeletal proteins, tumour suppressor 
proteins, oncoproteins implicated in apoptosis and proteins in the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Three proteins were uniquely altered in vaginal 
carcinoma (DDX48, erbB3-binding protein and biliverdin reductase) and five in 
cervical carcinoma (peroxiredoxin 2, annexin A2, sarcomeric tropomyosin kappa, 
human ribonuclease inhibitor and prolyl-4-hydrolase beta). The identified 
proteins imply involvement of multiple different cellular pathways in the 
carcinogenesis of vaginal carcinoma. Similar protein alterations were found 
between vaginal and cervical carcinoma suggesting common tumourigenesis. 
However, the expression level of some of these proteins markedly differs among 
the three tissue specimens indicating that they might be useful molecular 
markers.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604975
PMCID: PMC2676541
PMID: 19367286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]