1. Hum Reprod. 2009 Aug;24(8):2023-8. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep090. Epub 2009 Apr
10.

A large-scale association study to assess the impact of known variants of the 
human INHA gene on premature ovarian failure.

Corre T(1), Schuettler J, Bione S, Marozzi A, Persani L, Rossetti R, Torricelli 
F, Giotti I, Vogt P, Toniolo D; Italian Network for the study of Ovarian 
Dysfunctions.

Collaborators: Biondi M, Bruni V, Brigante C, Cisternino M, Colombo I, 
Crosignani PG, D'Avanzo MG, DalprÃ  L, Danesino C, Di Prospero F, Donti E, 
Falorni A, Fusi F, Lanzi R, Larizza D, Locatelli N, Madaschi S, Maghnie M, 
Marzotti S, Migone N, Nappi R, Palli D, Patricelli MG, Pisani C, Prontera P, 
Petraglia F, Renieri A, Ricca I, Ripamonti A, Russo G, Russo S, Tibiletti MG, 
Tonacchera M, Vegetti W, Villa N, Vineis P, Zuffardi O.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
4A2, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Three variants of the human INHA gene have been reported to be 
associated with premature ovarian failure (POF) in case-control studies 
involving a small number of patients and controls. Since inhibin has a 
fundamental role in the control of ovarian function, it is important to 
establish the relevance of the reported variants for disease risk.
METHODS: Three independent POF cohorts, recruited in Northern and Central Italy 
and in Germany consisting of a total of 611 patients and 1084 matched controls, 
were genotyped for the three variants: -16C > T, -124A > G and 769G > A.
RESULTS: No significant difference was detected between allelic frequencies of 
the INHA promoter variants between POF patients and controls. The rare allele in 
the coding variant appeared to be more frequent among the control populations.
CONCLUSIONS: The association between the INHA promoter variants and POF could 
not be replicated, and our results suggest that this discrepancy is likely to be 
due to the small sample size of previous studies. The rare allele of the coding 
variant seems to exert a protective effect against loss of ovarian function, 
which should be confirmed in additional large and ethnically diverse cohorts.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dep090
PMID: 19363042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]