1. Eur J Neurol. 2009 Mar;16(3):297-309. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02513.x.

Tauopathies with parkinsonism: clinical spectrum, neuropathologic basis, 
biological markers, and treatment options.

Ludolph AC(1), Kassubek J, Landwehrmeyer BG, Mandelkow E, Mandelkow EM, Burn DJ, 
Caparros-Lefebvre D, Frey KA, de Yebenes JG, Gasser T, Heutink P, HÃ¶glinger G, 
Jamrozik Z, Jellinger KA, Kazantsev A, Kretzschmar H, Lang AE, Litvan I, Lucas 
JJ, McGeer PL, Melquist S, Oertel W, Otto M, Paviour D, Reum T, Saint-Raymond A, 
Steele JC, Tolnay M, Tumani H, van Swieten JC, Vanier MT, Vonsattel JP, Wagner 
S, Wszolek ZK; Reisensburg Working Group for Tauopathies With Parkinsonism.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
albert.ludolph@rku.de

Tauopathies with parkinsonism represent a spectrum of disease entities unified 
by the pathologic accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau protein fragments 
within the central nervous system. These pathologic characteristics suggest 
shared pathogenetic pathways and possible molecular targets for 
disease-modifying therapeutic interventions. Natural history studies, for 
instance, in progressive supranuclear palsy, frontotemporal dementia with 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, corticobasal degeneration, and 
Niemann-Pick disease type C as well as in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/Parkinson-dementia complex permit clinical characterization of the 
disease phenotypes and are crucial to the development and validation of 
biological markers for differential diagnostics and disease monitoring, for 
example, by use of neuroimaging or proteomic approaches. The wide pathologic and 
clinical spectrum of the tauopathies with parkinsonism is reviewed in this 
article, and perspectives on future advances in the understanding of the 
pathogenesis are given, together with potential therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02513.x
PMCID: PMC2847416
PMID: 19364361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]