1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Apr 16;10:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-108.

dbSMR: a novel resource of genome-wide SNPs affecting microRNA mediated 
regulation.

Hariharan M(1), Scaria V, Brahmachari SK.

Author information:
(1)GN Ramachandran Knowledge Center for Genome Informatics, Institute of 
Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR), Delhi, India. mh.manoj@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate several biological processes through 
post-transcriptional gene silencing. The efficiency of binding of miRNAs to 
target transcripts depends on the sequence as well as intramolecular structure 
of the transcript. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) can contribute to 
alterations in the structure of regions flanking them, thereby influencing the 
accessibility for miRNA binding.
DESCRIPTION: The entire human genome was analyzed for SNPs in and around 
predicted miRNA target sites. Polymorphisms within 200 nucleotides that could 
alter the intramolecular structure at the target site, thereby altering 
regulation were annotated. Collated information was ported in a MySQL database 
with a user-friendly interface accessible through the URL: 
(http://miracle.igib.res.in/dbSMR).
CONCLUSION: The database has a user-friendly interface where the information can 
be queried using either the gene name, microRNA name, polymorphism ID or 
transcript ID. Combination queries using 'AND' or 'OR' is also possible along 
with specifying the degree of change of intramolecular bonding with and without 
the polymorphism. Such a resource would enable researchers address questions 
like the role of regulatory SNPs in the 3' UTRs and population specific 
regulatory modulations in the context of microRNA targets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-108
PMCID: PMC2676258
PMID: 19371411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]