1. Endocrine. 2009 Jun;35(3):347-55. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9178-y. Epub 2009
Apr  28.

Mutations and polymorphisms in the SDHB, SDHD, VHL, and RET genes in sporadic 
and familial pheochromocytomas.

Waldmann J(1), Langer P, Habbe N, Fendrich V, Ramaswamy A, Rothmund M, Bartsch 
DK, Slater EP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Giessen and Marburg, 
Baldingerstrasse, Marburg 35037, Germany. jwaldman@med.uni-marburg.de

The prevalence of germ line mutations within the RET-protooncogene and the tumor 
suppressor genes SDHB, SDHD, and VHL in pheochromocytomas (PC) varies in recent 
studies from 12 to 24%, if one look at them collectively. DNA was extracted from 
frozen tumor tissue as well as from blood leukocytes of 36 PC (26 sporadic/10 
MEN2). Exons 1-8 of the SDHB-gene, 1-4 of the SDHD-gene, 1-3 of the VHL-gene, 
and exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 16 of the RET-gene were amplified by PCR and analyzed 
by DHPLC with the Transgenomic WAVE-System. Samples with aberrant wave profiles 
were subjected to direct sequencing. Genetic aberrations were correlated to 
clinical characteristics. Germ line mutations in sporadic PC were identified in 
four patients (11%) whereas somatic mutations were observed in two (5%) 
patients. Nine coding polymorphisms (PM) were identified in seven (19%) 
patients. Intronic variants were observed in six (17%) patients and were all 
located in the SHDB gene. Patients with wild type alleles in all assessed genes 
were older (53 vs. 37 years, P = 0.007) and presented with an increased tumor 
size (49 vs. 32 mm, P = 0.003) compared to patients with mutations. Malignant PC 
revealed multiple (>2) genetic alterations more frequently than benign PC (4/7 
vs. 4/29, P = 0.03). Interestingly intronic variants of the SDHB gene occur more 
frequently in malignant than in benign PC (3/7 vs. 2/29, P = 0.04). The 
frequency of germ line mutations in sporadic pheochromocytomas was lower in our 
cohort than previously reported. Polymorphisms of the RET gene are common (17%) 
and occur in familial and sporadic PC. Multiple genetic alterations including 
mutations, polymorphisms and intronic variants are more frequently observed in 
malignant PC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-009-9178-y
PMID: 19399650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]