1. J Mol Biol. 2009 Jun 26;389(5):833-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.040. Epub
2009  Apr 23.

Prion protein NMR structure from tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) shows that 
the beta2-alpha2 loop is modulated by long-range sequence effects.

Christen B(1), Hornemann S, Damberger FF, WÃ¼thrich K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.

NMR structures are presented for the recombinant construct of residues 121-230 
from the tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) prion protein (PrP) twPrP(121-230) 
and for the variant mouse PrPs mPrP[Y225A,Y226A](121-231) and 
mPrP[V166A](121-231) at 20 degrees C and pH 4.5. All three proteins exhibit the 
same global architecture as seen in other recombinant PrP(C)s (cellular isoforms 
of PrP) and shown to prevail in natural bovine PrP(C). Special interest was 
focused on a loop that connects the beta2-strand with helix alpha2 in the PrP(C) 
fold, since there are indications from in vivo experiments that this local 
structural feature affects the susceptibility of transgenic mice to 
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. This beta2-alpha2 loop and helix 
alpha3 form a solvent-accessible contiguous epitope, which has been proposed to 
be the recognition area for a hypothetical chaperone, the "protein X". This 
hypothetical chaperone would affect the conversion of PrP(C) into the 
disease-related scrapie form (PrP(Sc)) by moderating intermolecular interactions 
related to the transmission barrier of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies 
between different species. In contrast to mPrP(121-231) and most other mammalian 
PrP(C)s, the beta2-alpha2 loop is well defined at 20 degrees C in tammar wallaby 
PrP and in the two aforementioned variants of mPrP, showing that long-range 
interactions with helix alpha3 can have an overriding influence on the 
structural definition of the beta2-alpha2 loop. Further NMR studies with two 
variant mPrPs, mPrP[Y225A](121-231) and mPrP[Y226A](121-231), showed that these 
interactions are dominantly mediated by close contacts between residues 166 and 
225. The results of the present study then lead to the intriguing indication 
that well-defined long-range intramolecular interactions could act as regulators 
of the functional specificity of PrP(C).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.04.040
PMID: 19393664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]