1. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005302. Epub 2009 Apr
23.

Lung cancer susceptibility model based on age, family history and genetic 
variants.

Young RP(1), Hopkins RJ, Hay BA, Epton MJ, Mills GD, Black PN, Gardner HD, 
Sullivan R, Gamble GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Auckland Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand. 
roberty@adhb.govt.nz

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological and pedigree studies suggest that lung cancer 
results from the combined effects of age, smoking, impaired lung function and 
genetic factors. In a case control association study of healthy smokers and lung 
cancer cases, we identified genetic markers associated with either 
susceptibility or protection to lung cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We screened 157 candidate single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) in a discovery cohort of 439 subjects (200 controls and 239 
lung cancer cases) and identified 30 SNPs associated with either the healthy 
smokers (protective) or lung cancer (susceptibility) phenotype. After genotyping 
this 30 SNP panel in a validation cohort of 491 subjects (248 controls and 207 
lung cancers) and, using the same protective and susceptibility genotypes from 
our discovery cohort, a 20 SNP panel was selected based on replication of SNP 
associations in the validation cohort. Following multivariate logistic 
regression analyses, including the selected SNPs from runs 1 and 2, we found age 
and family history of lung cancer to be significantly and independently 
associated with lung cancer. Numeric scores were assigned to both the SNP and 
demographic data, and combined to form a simple algorithm of risk.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Significant differences in the distribution of the 
lung cancer susceptibility score was found between normal controls and lung 
cancer cases, which remained after accounting for differences in lung function. 
Validation in other case-control and prospective cohorts are underway to further 
define the potential clinical utility of this model.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005302
PMCID: PMC2668761
PMID: 19390575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Robert Young is a 
Scientific Advisor to Synergenz BioSciences who has, through the University of 
Auckland, helped sponsor this study.