1. Biochemistry. 2009 Jun 23;48(24):5573-81. doi: 10.1021/bi900325k.

The loop connecting metal-binding domains 3 and 4 of ATP7B is a target of a 
kinase-mediated phosphorylation.

Bartee MY(1), Ralle M, Lutsenko S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Cu-ATPase ATP7B (Wilson's disease protein) transports copper into the 
trans-Golgi network for biosynthetic incorporation into ceruloplasmin and 
sequesters excess copper to endocytic vesicles for further export out of the 
cell. The activity and intracellular location of ATP7B are regulated by copper 
levels; the trafficking of ATP7B between cellular compartments is coupled to 
changes in the level of protein phosphorylation. Neither the nature of the 
kinase(s) phosphorylating ATP7B nor the location of phosphorylation sites is 
known. We demonstrate that the membrane-bound ATP7B is phosphorylated by an 
ATP-dependent, GTP-independent kinase that can be either soluble or 
membrane-associated. Mg(2+) or Mn(2+) is necessary for kinase activity. We 
further show that the recombinant N-terminal domain of ATP7B (N-ATP7B) is a 
specific target for a kinase-mediated phosphorylation in vitro and in cells. 
Although exogenous addition of copper is not required for kinase activity, 
copper binding to N-ATP7B markedly alters the exposure of loops connecting the 
metal-binding subdomains (MBDs) to proteolysis and facilitates phosphorylation 
by 25-30%. MBD1-2 and MBD4-5 linkers become protected, while MBD2-3 and MBD3-4 
regions remain exposed. A significant, 5-fold increase in the level of 
phosphorylation is also observed for the ATP7B variant that lacks the 29 kDa 
N-terminal fragment (mostly likely comprised of MBD1-3). Analysis of 
phosphorylated peptides by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass 
spectrometry points to the loop connecting MBD3 and MBD4 as a region of 
phosphorylation. Altogether, the results suggest a mechanism in which 
kinase-mediated phosphorylation of ATP7B is controlled by a conformational state 
of N-ATP7B.

DOI: 10.1021/bi900325k
PMCID: PMC2832749
PMID: 19405516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]