1. Microbes Infect. 2009 Jul-Aug;11(8-9):753-61. doi:
10.1016/j.micinf.2009.04.018.  Epub 2009 May 4.

Biofilm formation in clinical Candida isolates and its association with 
virulence.

Hasan F(1), Xess I, Wang X, Jain N, Fries BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.

Biofilm formation, an important virulence trait of Candida species was measured 
in 107 Candida isolates from 32 candidemic patients by XTT [2,3-bis 
(2-methoxy-4nitro-5-sulfo-phenyl)-2H-tetra-zolium-5-carboxanilide] activity and 
compared to biofilm formation of Candida isolates from oropharyngeal lesions of 
19 AIDS patients. Biofilm formation by XTT varied among species and C. albicans; 
C. lusitaniae and C. krusei produced more biofilm than the other Candida 
species. C. tropicalis was the most dominant species isolated from blood 
followed by C. albicans, and other non-albicans species whereas only C. albicans 
was recovered from oral lesions. Importantly, though Biofilm formation was 
variable within a species it was stable in sequential isolates during chronic 
infection. Sequential isolates exhibited identical Karyotype pattern or RAPD 
patterns unless patients were co-infected with more than one strain. High 
biofilm formation was associated with slow growth rate but not with adherence. 
Murine infection studies demonstrated that, degree of in-vitro biofilm formation 
was associated with virulence in mice, as mice infected both with no and low 
biofilm formers survived longer than mice infected with high biofilm former C. 
albicans (p< or =0.001). We conclude that biofilm formation is a stable but 
strain specific characteristic that can greatly vary among C. albicans and 
non-albicans strains, and plays an important role in persistence of infection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2009.04.018
PMCID: PMC2715444
PMID: 19409507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]