1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Aug;1794(8):1234-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2009.04.008. Epub 2009 May 3.

Effects of cross-linking and zero-link polymerization on oxygen transport and 
redox chemistry of bovine hemoglobin.

Jia Y(1), Alayash AI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Vascular Biology (LBVB), Division of 
Hematology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), MD 20892, USA. yiping.jia@fda.hhs.gov

Cross-linked hemoglobins (Hbs) were found to have enhanced oxidative reactions 
which compromise the ability of cell-free Hb to carry oxygen. Zero-link bovine 
Hb (ZL-HbBv), also known as OxyVita, a large polymer held together by 
pseudopeptide bonds on the surface of adjacent tetramers, provides a model in 
which these reactions can be evaluated. The oxygen affinity of ZL-HbBv was 
greatly increased, whereas the oxygen binding cooperativity (n(50)) as well as 
the regulatory responses to pH and chloride ions was diminished. Rapid mixing 
kinetic studies revealed faster carbon monoxide (CO) and nitric oxide (NO) 
binding to ZL-HbBv, consistent with a more accessible heme pocket conformation. 
The rate of autoxidation of ferrous ZL-HbBv was 3 folds faster than the 
unmodified HbBv (control) but only slightly suppressed by the presence of 
superoxide dismutase and catalase enzymes. The peroxide (H(2)O(2)) reaction 
rates of ferric ZL-HbBv and its degradation were comparable to that of the 
control. The rate of heme loss from ZL-HbBv to a mutant apomyoglobin (H64Y/V68F) 
was also very close to that of the control. Taken together, allosteric and redox 
reactions of this protein are altered due to heme accessibility to solvent, 
however, the compact tetramer to tetramer interaction of the ZL-HbBv polymer 
appears to restrict heme loss even in the presence of excess H(2)O(2).

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2009.04.008
PMID: 19409516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]