1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 19;284(25):16752-16758. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014316.
Epub  2009 Apr 30.

Kinome siRNA screen identifies SMG-1 as a negative regulator of 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha in hypoxia.

Chen RQ(1), Yang QK(1), Chen YL(1), Oliveira VA(2), Dalton WS(2), Fearns C(3), 
Lee JD(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Immunology and Microbial Science, La Jolla, 
California 92037.
(2)Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037.
(3)Department of Experimental Therapeutics and Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. 
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, Florida 33612.
(4)From the Departments of Immunology and Microbial Science, La Jolla, 
California 92037. Electronic address: jdlee@scripps.edu.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) plays a central role in tumor progression by 
regulating genes involved in proliferation, glycolysis, angiogenesis, and 
metastasis. To improve our understanding of HIF-1 regulation by kinome, we 
screened a kinase-specific small interference RNA library using a 
hypoxia-response element (HRE) luciferase reporter assay under hypoxic 
conditions. This screen determined that depletion of cellular SMG-1 kinase most 
significantly modified cellular HIF-1 activity in hypoxia. SMG-1 is the newest 
and least studied member of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase family, 
which consists of ATM, ATR, DNA-PKcs, mTOR, and SMG-1. We individually depleted 
members of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase family, and only SMG-1 
deficiency significantly augmented HIF-1 activity in hypoxia. We subsequently 
discovered that SMG-1 kinase activity was activated by hypoxia, and depletion of 
SMG-1 up-regulated MAPK activity under low oxygen. Suppressing cellular MAPK by 
silencing ERK1/2 or by treatment with U0126, a MAPK inhibitor, partially blocked 
the escalation of HIF-1 activity resulting from SMG-1 deficiency in hypoxic 
cells. Increased expression of SMG-1 but not kinase-dead SMG-1 effectively 
inhibited the activity of HIF-1alpha. In addition, cellular SMG-1 deficiency 
increased secretion of the HIF-1alpha-regulated angiogenic factor, vascular 
epidermal growth factor, and survival factor, carbonic anhydrase IX (CA9), as 
well as promoted the hypoxic cell motility. Taken together, we discovered that 
SMG-1 negatively regulated HIF-1alpha activity in hypoxia, in part through 
blocking MAPK activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014316
PMCID: PMC2719310
PMID: 19406746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]