1. Neurosci Lett. 2009 May 22;455(3):191-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.03.066.
Epub  2009 Mar 25.

Leptin inhibits glycogen synthase kinase-3beta to prevent tau phosphorylation in 
neuronal cells.

Greco SJ(1), Sarkar S, Casadesus G, Zhu X, Smith MA, Ashford JW, Johnston JM, 
Tezapsidis N.

Author information:
(1)Research & Development, Neurotez, Inc., Bridgewater, NJ 08807, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that Leptin reduces extracellular amyloid beta 
(Abeta) protein both in vitro and in vivo, and intracellular tau phosphorylation 
in vitro. Further, we have shown that these effects are dependent on activation 
of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in vitro. Herein, we investigated 
downstream effectors of AMPK signaling directly linked to tau phosphorylation. 
One such target, of relevance to Alzheimer's disease (AD), may be GSK-3beta, 
which has been shown to be inactivated by Leptin. We therefore dissected the 
role of GSK-3beta in mediating Leptin's ability to reduce tau phosphorylation in 
neuronal cells. Our data suggest that Leptin regulates tau phosphorylation 
through a pathway involving both AMPK and GSK-3beta. This was based on the 
following: Leptin and the cell-permeable AMPK activator, 
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxyamide ribonucleoside (AICAR), reduced tau 
phosphorylation at AD-relevant sites similarly to the GSK-3beta inhibitor, 
lithium chloride (LiCl). Further, this reduction of tau phosphorylation was 
mimicked by the downregulation of GSK-3beta, achieved using siRNA technology and 
antagonized by the ectopic overexpression of GSK-3beta. These studies provide 
further insight into Leptin's mechanism of action in suppressing AD-related 
pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.03.066
PMCID: PMC2681253
PMID: 19429119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]