1. Brain. 2009 Jun;132(Pt 6):1545-52. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp065. Epub 2009 May
11.

Splice mutations preserve myophosphorylase activity that ameliorates the 
phenotype in McArdle disease.

Vissing J(1), Duno M, Schwartz M, Haller RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology 2082, University of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, 
Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen, Denmark. vissing@rh.dk

Over 100 mutations in the myophosphorylase gene, which cause McArdle disease, 
are known. All these mutations have resulted in a complete block of muscle 
glycogenolysis, and accordingly, no genotype-phenotype correlation has been 
identified in this condition. We evaluated physiologic and genetic features of 
two patients with a variant form of McArdle disease, associated with unusually 
high exercise capacity. Physiologic findings were compared to those in 47 
patients with typical McArdle disease, and 17 healthy subjects. Subjects 
performed an ischaemic forearm exercise test to assess lactate and ammonia 
production. Peak oxidative capacity (VO2max) and cardiac output were determined, 
using cycle ergometry as the exercise modality. The two patients with atypical 
McArdle disease carried common mutations on one allele (R50X and G205S), and 
novel splice mutations in introns 3 [IVS3-26A>G (c.425-26A>G)] and 5 
[IVS5-601G>A (c.856-601G>A)] on the other allele. Plasma lactate after ischaemic 
exercise decreased in all typical McArdle patients, but increased in the two 
atypical McArdle patients (10% of that in healthy subjects). Peak workload and 
oxidative capacity were 2-fold higher in patients with atypical McArdle disease 
compared to typical McArdle patients. Oxygen uptake, relative to cardiac output, 
was severely impaired in the 47 patients with typical McArdle disease, and 
partially normalized in the milder affected McArdle patients. These findings 
identify the first distinct genotype-phenotype relationship in McArdle disease, 
and indicate that minimal myophosphorylase activity ameliorates the typical 
McArdle disease phenotype by augmenting muscle oxidative capacity. The milder 
form of McArdle disease provides important clues to the level of functional 
myophosphorylase needed to support muscle oxidative metabolism.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp065
PMID: 19433441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]