1. Anal Biochem. 2009 Aug 15;391(2):106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2009.05.012. Epub 
2009 May 12.

Quantification of regional DNA methylation by liquid chromatography/tandem mass 
spectrometry.

Liu Z(1), Wu J, Xie Z, Liu S, Fan-Havard P, Huang TH, Plass C, Marcucci G, Chan 
KK.

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Promoter hypermethylation-associated tumor suppressor gene (TSG) silencing has 
been explored as a therapeutic target for hypomethylating agents. Promoter 
methylation change may serve as a pharmacodynamic endpoint for evaluation of the 
efficacy of these agents and predict the patient's clinical response. Here a 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) assay has been 
developed for quantitative regional DNA methylation analysis using the molar 
ratio of 5-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine (5mdC) to 2'-deoxycytidine (2dC) in the 
enzymatic hydrolysate of fully methylated bisulfite-converted polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) amplicons as the methylation indicator. The assay can 
differentiate 5% of promoter methylation level with an intraday precision 
ranging from 3 to 16% using two TSGs: HIN-1 and RASSF1A. This method was applied 
to characterize decitabine-induced promoter DNA methylation changes of these two 
TSGs in a breast cancer MCF-7 cell line. Promoter methylation of these TSGs was 
found to decrease in a dose-dependent manner. Correspondingly, the expression of 
these TSGs was enhanced. The sensitivity and reproducibility of the method make 
it a valuable tool for specific gene methylation analysis that could aid 
characterization of hypomethylating activity on specific genes by 
hypomethylating agents in a clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2009.05.012
PMCID: PMC3939067
PMID: 19442645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]