1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18685-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.015131. Epub 
2009 May 15.

Regulation of translation by the redox state of elongation factor G in the 
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Kojima K(1), Motohashi K, Morota T, Oshita M, Hisabori T, Hayashi H, Nishiyama 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Science 
and Engineering, Saitama University, 255 Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama 
338-8570, Japan.

Elongation factor G (EF-G), a key protein in translational elongation, was 
identified as a primary target of inactivation by reactive oxygen species within 
the translational machinery of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 
(Kojima, K., Oshita, M., Nanjo, Y., Kasai, K., Tozawa, Y., Hayashi, H., and 
Nishiyama, Y. (2007) Mol. Microbiol. 65, 936-947). In the present study, we 
found that inactivation of EF-G (Slr1463) by H(2)O(2) was attributable to the 
oxidation of two specific cysteine residues and formation of a disulfide bond. 
Substitution of these cysteine residues by serine residues protected EF-G from 
inactivation by H(2)O(2) and allowed the EF-G to mediate translation in a 
translation system in vitro that had been prepared from Synechocystis. The 
disulfide bond in oxidized EF-G was reduced by thioredoxin, and the resultant 
reduced form of EF-G regained the activity to mediate translation in vitro. 
Western blotting analysis showed that levels of the oxidized form of EF-G 
increased under strong light in a mutant that lacked NADPH-thioredoxin 
reductase, indicating that EF-G is reduced by thioredoxin in vivo. These 
observations suggest that the translational machinery is regulated by the redox 
state of EF-G, which is oxidized by reactive oxygen species and reduced by 
thioredoxin, a transmitter of reducing signals generated by the photosynthetic 
transport of electrons.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.015131
PMCID: PMC2707220
PMID: 19447882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]