1. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Oct;15(10):1006-15. doi: 10.1038/mp.2009.42. Epub 2009
May  19.

Genome-wide linkage in Utah autism pedigrees.

Allen-Brady K(1), Robison R, Cannon D, Varvil T, Villalobos M, Pingree C, 
Leppert MF, Miller J, McMahon WM, Coon H.

Author information:
(1)Utah Autism Research Project, Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.

Genetic studies of autism over the past decade suggest a complex landscape of 
multiple genes. In the face of this heterogeneity, studies that include large 
extended pedigrees may offer valuable insights, as the relatively few 
susceptibility genes within single large families may be more easily discerned. 
This genome-wide screen of 70 families includes 20 large extended pedigrees of 
6-9 generations, 6 moderate-sized families of 4-5 generations and 44 smaller 
families of 2-3 generations. The Center for Inherited Disease Research (CIDR) 
provided genotyping using the Illumina Linkage Panel 12, a 6K single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) platform. Results from 192 subjects with an autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) and 461 of their relatives revealed genome-wide significance on 
chromosome 15q, with three possibly distinct peaks: 15q13.1-q14 (heterogeneity 
LOD (HLOD)=4.09 at 29 459 872 bp); 15q14-q21.1 (HLOD=3.59 at 36 837 208 bp); and 
15q21.1-q22.2 (HLOD=5.31 at 55 629 733 bp). Two of these peaks replicate earlier 
findings. There were additional suggestive results on chromosomes 2p25.3-p24.1 
(HLOD=1.87), 7q31.31-q32.3 (HLOD=1.97) and 13q12.11-q12.3 (HLOD=1.93). Affected 
subjects in families supporting the linkage peaks found in this study did not 
reveal strong evidence for distinct phenotypic subgroups.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2009.42
PMCID: PMC4023913
PMID: 19455147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]