1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2009 Mar;16(2):140-6. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3283257ab2.

Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for patients with myelofibrosis.

Zang DY(1), Deeg HJ.

Author information:
(1)Hallym University Medical Center and the Hallym University College of 
Medicine, Anyang, South Korea.

Comment in
    Curr Opin Hematol. 2009 Mar;16(2):63. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3283279a76.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) offers potentially 
curative therapy for patients with myelofibrosis. What is the current status?
RECENT FINDINGS: Changes in transplant strategies allow offering HCT to patients 
who, because of age or comorbid conditions, were not considered transplant 
candidates in the past. The omission of high-dose total body irradiation, 
adjusting doses of busulfan to achieve defined target levels, using fludarabine 
instead of cyclophosphamide as an immunosuppressive agent, the addition of 
melphalan, and the incorporation of antithymocyte globulin all appear to have 
contributed to better tolerability of new regimens. Reduced-intensity 
conditioning regimens are associated with a decrease in nonrelapse mortality and 
allow for successful HCT, even in patients 60-70 years of age. Some 50-75% of 
patients are cured by HCT. Emerging concepts include new prognostic scoring 
systems and novel molecular markers such as Janus kinase 2 mutations, which may 
aid in making treatment decisions and assessing remission status.
SUMMARY: Modifications of transplant-conditioning regimens have reduced 
transplant-related mortality and allow carrying out successful HCT in 
increasingly older patients. The selection of patients who should be 
transplanted, the optimal timing for transplantation, and pretransplant and 
posttransplant strategies remain challenging problems.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3283257ab2
PMCID: PMC2687524
PMID: 19468277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]