1. Peptides. 2009 Jun;30(6):1197-202. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.02.017. Epub 
2009 Mar 13.

Protective effect of S14G-humanin against beta-amyloid induced LTP inhibition in 
mouse hippocampal slices.

Zhang W(1), Miao J, Hao J, Li Z, Xu J, Liu R, Cao F, Wang R, Chen J, Li Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an City, Shaanxi Province, China.

Synaptic dysfunction induced by amyloid-beta protein (Abeta) has been shown to 
play a critical role in cognitive deficits of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Currently, however there is no clinical causative therapy for the disease. 
S14G-humanin (HNG) is best known for its strong neuroprotective ability against 
AD-related insults in vitro, and several in vivo studies have shown its 
effectiveness in ameliorating the cognitive impairment, but the precise 
mechanism of HNG on neuroprotection still remains to be elucidated. The present 
study examined the effects of HNG on Abeta-induced inhibition of hippocampal 
long-term potentiation (LTP) in mouse hippocampal slices. The results disclosed 
that soluble Abeta(25-35) significantly inhibited the induction of early-phase 
LTP (E-LTP) and late-phase LTP (L-LTP) in the hippocampal CA1 region without 
affecting the basal synaptic transmission, while HNG significantly ameliorated 
such inhibition of E-LTP and L-LTP in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, the 
reduction of phosphorylated CREB trigged by Abeta(25-35) was restored by HNG 
during L-LTP induction, possibly attributing to the improvement of the L-LTP 
inhibition. Collectively, our findings add to the evidence that soluble 
Abeta-induced LTP inhibition may represent an early pathological event of AD, 
and demonstrate for the first time that HNG may improve LTP inhibition by 
subneurotoxic concentration of soluble Abeta, suggesting that HNG may have 
therapeutic potential for Abeta-induced synaptic dysfunction closely associated 
with cognitive deficits in the early stage of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.peptides.2009.02.017
PMID: 19463756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]