1. Protein Sci. 2009 Jul;18(7):1507-20. doi: 10.1002/pro.141.

Probing the conformation of the resting state of a bacterial multidrug ABC 
transporter, BmrA, by a site-directed spin labeling approach.

Do Cao MA(1), Crouzy S, Kim M, Becchi M, Cafiso DS, Di Pietro A, Jault JM.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, UMR 5086 CNRS-Université Lyon I 
and IFR 128, 7 passage du Vercors, 69367 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Previously published 3-D structures of a prototypic ATP-binding cassette (ABC) 
transporter, MsbA, have been recently corrected revealing large rigid-body 
motions possibly linked to its catalytic cycle. Here, a closely related 
multidrug bacterial ABC transporter, BmrA, was studied using site-directed spin 
labeling by focusing on a region connecting the transmembrane domain and the 
nucleotide-binding domain (NBD). Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra 
of single spin-labeled cysteine mutants suggests that, in the resting state, 
this sub-domain essentially adopts a partially extended conformation, which is 
consistent with the crystal structures of MsbA and Sav1866. Interestingly, one 
of the single point mutants (Q333C) yielded an immobilized EPR spectrum that 
could arise from a direct interaction with a vicinal tyrosine residue. 
Inspection of different BmrA models pointed to Y408, within the NBD, as the 
putative interacting partner, and its mutation to a Phe residue indeed 
dramatically modified the EPR spectra of the spin labeled Q333C. Moreover, 
unlike the Y408F mutation, the Y408A mutation abolished both ATPase activity and 
drug transport of BmrA, suggesting that a nonpolar bulky residue is required at 
this position. The spatial proximity of Q333 and Y408 was also confirmed by 
formation of a disulfide bond when both Q333 and T407 (or S409) were replaced 
jointly by a cysteine residue. Overall, these results indicate that the two 
regions surrounding Q333 and Y408 are close together in the 3-D structure of 
BmrA and that residues within these two sub-domains are essential for proper 
functioning of this transporter.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.141
PMCID: PMC2775218
PMID: 19479721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]