1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Jul;192(1):30-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.03.002.

Somatic mitochondrial mutations in pilocytic astrocytoma.

Lueth M(1), Wronski L, Giese A, Kirschner-Schwabe R, Pietsch T, von Deimling A, 
Henze G, Kurtz A, Driever PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

The most common brain tumors in childhood and adolescence are low grade 
pilocytic astrocytomas (PA). Given that an increasing number of mitochondrial 
defects have been related to brain tumors and cancer in general, we asked 
whether PAs harbor mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Sequencing analysis 
of the complete mitochondrial genome of tumor tissue and corresponding blood 
samples from 19 patients with PA was performed. Of the 19 PA tissue samples, 16 
(84%) showed somatic mtDNA mutations, and a total of 34 different somatic mtDNA 
mutations were identified. Of the 34 mtDNA mutations, 17 (50%) were found in 
genomic regions involved in pathways of oxidative phosphorylation. Three of the 
missense mutations in protein coding regions involved change of one amino acid: 
M60 V in ATP synthase subunit 6, L236I in cytochrome b, and L112 M in cytochrome 
c oxidase subunit 1. We were able to demonstrate that mtDNA mutations occur in 
PA and that they are frequently located in protein coding regions. The PA tumors 
were found to have the highest percentage of mitochondrial mutations of any of 
the neuroectodermal tumor entities studied to date. To reveal the prognostic 
importance of these mutations in the tumor biology of PA, larger series need to 
be studied prospectively.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.03.002
PMID: 19480934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]