1. J Agric Food Chem. 2009 Jun 24;57(12):5279-86. doi: 10.1021/jf803712a.

Limonin methoxylation influences the induction of glutathione S-transferase and 
quinone reductase.

Perez JL(1), Jayaprakasha GK, Valdivia V, Munoz D, Dandekar DV, Ahmad H, Patil 
BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Horticultural Sciences, Vegetable and Fruit Improvement Center, 
Texas A&M University, College Station Texas 77843-2119, USA.

Previous studies have indicated the chemopreventive potential of citrus 
limonoids due to the induction of phase II detoxifying enzymes. In the present 
study, three citrus limonoids were purified and identified from sour orange 
seeds as limonin, limonin glucoside (LG), and deacetylnomilinic acid glucoside 
(DNAG). In addition, limonin was modified to defuran limonin and limonin 
7-methoxime. The structures of these compounds were confirmed by NMR studies. 
These five compounds were used to investigate the influence of phase II enzymes 
in female A/J mice. Our results indicated the highest induction of glutathione 
S-transferase (GST) activity against 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB) by DNAG 
(67%) in lung homogenates followed by limonin-7-methoxime (32%) in treated liver 
homogenates. Interestingly, limonin-7-methoxime showed the highest GST activity 
(270%) in liver against 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4NQO), while the same compound 
in the stomach induced GST by 51% compared to the control. The DNAG treated 
group induced 55% in stomach homogenates. Another phase II enzyme, quinone 
reductase (QR), was significantly induced by limonin-7-methoxime by 65 and 32% 
in liver and lung homogenates, respectively. Defuran limonin induced QR in lung 
homogenates by 45%. Our results indicated that modification of limonin has 
differential induction of phase II enzymes. These findings are indicative of a 
possible mechanism for the prevention of cancer by aiding in the detoxification 
of xenobiotics.

DOI: 10.1021/jf803712a
PMCID: PMC2730739
PMID: 19480426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]