1. Biochem J. 2009 Jul 29;422(1):171-80. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090471.

Cul3-mediated Nrf2 ubiquitination and antioxidant response element (ARE) 
activation are dependent on the partial molar volume at position 151 of Keap1.

Eggler AL(1), Small E, Hannink M, Mesecar AD.

Author information:
(1)Center for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and the Department of Medicinal 
Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60607, USA. 
aeggler@uic.edu

Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2) is a transcription factor 
that activates transcription of a battery of cytoprotective genes by binding to 
the ARE (antioxidant response element). Nrf2 is repressed by the cysteine-rich 
Keap1 (kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) protein, which targets Nrf2 for 
ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by a Cul3 (cullin 3)-mediated 
ubiquitination complex. We find that modification of Cys(151) of human Keap1, by 
mutation to a tryptophan, relieves the repression by Keap1 and allows activation 
of the ARE by Nrf2. The Keap1 C151W substitution has a decreased affinity for 
Cul3, and can no longer serve to target Nrf2 for ubiquitination, though it 
retains its affinity for Nrf2. A series of 12 mutant Keap1 proteins, each 
containing a different residue at position 151, was constructed to explore the 
chemistry required for this effect. The series reveals that the extent to which 
Keap1 loses the ability to target Nrf2 for degradation, and hence the ability to 
repress ARE activation, correlates well with the partial molar volume of the 
residue. Other physico-chemical properties do not appear to contribute 
significantly to the effect. Based on this finding, a structural model is 
proposed whereby large residues at position 151 cause steric clashes that lead 
to alteration of the Keap1-Cul3 interaction. This model has significant 
implications for how electrophiles which modify Cys(151), disrupt the repressive 
function of Keap1.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20090471
PMCID: PMC3865926
PMID: 19489739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]