1. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2009;72(11-12):698-705. doi: 
10.1080/15287390902841029.

XPD polymorphisms, cigarette smoking, and bladder cancer risk: a meta-analysis.

Wang M(1), Gu D, Zhang Z, Zhou J, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular and Genetic Toxicology, Cancer Center of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Genetic polymorphisms in DNA repair genes may be involved in increased risk for 
bladder cancer. Association studies on the XPD Asp312Asn and Lys751Gln 
polymorphisms with bladder cancer development reported conflicting results. A 
meta-analysis from eligible cancer case-control studies was performed to assess 
potential associations. In total, eight studies were used with a fixed effects 
model or a random effects model to estimate the odds ratio (OR) for XPD 
polymorphisms and occurrence of bladder cancer. The overall risk for the variant 
homozygote Asn/Asn and genotype (Asp/Asn + Asn/Asn) of Asp312Asn polymorphism 
showed a significant correlation with increased bladder cancer occurrence 
compared to wild genotype Asp/Asp (OR = 1.23, 95% CI = 1.02-1.49 for Asn/Asn vs. 
Asp/Asp; OR = 1.14, 95% CI = 1.01-1.28 for Asp/Asn + Asn/Asn vs. Asp/Asp). In 
contrast, no significant association with elevated risk of bladder cancer was 
found for Lys751Gln polymorphism. In the stratification analysis, there was no 
significant association between increased risk of bladder cancer in the XPD 
polymorphisms among Caucasians. Similarly, XPD polymorphisms did not show a 
significant increased risk among never-smokers or ever-smokers. This 
meta-analysis suggested that the XPD Asp312Asn but not Lys751Gln polymorphism 
may be more genetically susceptible to bladder cancer development. Further 
studies based on larger populations and gene-environment interactions are needed 
to determine the role of XPD polymorphisms in bladder cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1080/15287390902841029
PMID: 19492231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]