1. Anal Chem. 2009 Jul 1;81(13):5524-32. doi: 10.1021/ac900853k.

Identification of cross-linked peptides after click-based enrichment using 
sequential collision-induced dissociation and electron transfer dissociation 
tandem mass spectrometry.

Chowdhury SM(1), Du X, ToliÄ‡ N, Wu S, Moore RJ, Mayer MU, Smith RD, Adkins JN.

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Division and Environmental and Molecular Science 
Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99352, 
USA.

Chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry can be a powerful 
approach for the identification of protein-protein interactions and for 
providing constraints on protein structures. However, enrichment of cross-linked 
peptides is crucial to reduce sample complexity before mass spectrometric 
analysis. In addition compact cross-linkers are often preferred to provide short 
spacer lengths, surface accessibility to the protein complexes, and must have 
reasonable solubility under conditions where the native complex structure is 
stable. In this study, we present a novel compact cross-linker that contains two 
distinct features: (1) an alkyne tag and (2) a small molecule detection tag 
(NO(2)) to maintain reasonable solubility in water. The alkyne tag enables 
enrichment of the cross-linked peptides after proteolytic cleavage and coupling 
of an affinity tag using alkyne-azido click chemistry. Neutral loss of the small 
NO(2) moiety provides a secondary means of detecting cross-linked peptides in 
MS/MS analyses, providing additional confidence in peptide identifications. We 
show the labeling efficiency of this cross-linker, which we termed CLIP 
(click-enabled linker for interacting proteins) using ubiquitin. The enrichment 
capability of CLIP is demonstrated for cross-linked ubiquitin in highly complex 
E. coli cell lysates. Sequential collision-induced dissociation tandem mass 
spectrometry (CID-MS/MS) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD)-MS/MS of 
intercross-linked peptides (two peptides connected with a cross-linker) are also 
demonstrated for improved automated identification of cross-linked peptides.

DOI: 10.1021/ac900853k
PMCID: PMC2907912
PMID: 19496583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]