1. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Sep;86(3):319-27. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2009.83. Epub
2009  Jun 3.

UGT1A9 -275T>A/-2152C>T polymorphisms correlate with low MPA exposure and acute 
rejection in MMF/tacrolimus-treated kidney transplant patients.

van Schaik RH(1), van Agteren M, de Fijter JW, Hartmann A, Schmidt J, Budde K, 
Kuypers D, Le Meur Y, van der Werf M, Mamelok R, van Gelder T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus University Medical Centre, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. r.vanschaik@erasmusmc.nl

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is an immunosuppressive drug commonly used in the 
context of kidney transplantation. Exposure to the active metabolite 
mycophenolic acid (MPA) is associated with risk of allograft rejection. MPA 
pharmacokinetics varies between individuals, the potential cause being the 
presence of genetic polymorphisms in key enzymes. We genotyped 338 kidney 
transplant patients for UGT1A8, UGT1A9, UGT2B7, and MRP2 polymorphisms and 
recorded MPA exposure and biopsy-proven acute rejections (BPARs) during a 1-year 
follow-up. Tacrolimus-treated patients who were UGT1A9 -275T>A and/or -2152C>T 
carriers displayed a 20% lower MPA area under the concentration-time curve from 
0 to 12 h (AUC(0-12)) (P = 0.012). UGT1A9*3 carriers displayed a 49% higher MPA 
AUC(0-12) when treated with tacrolimus and a 54% higher MPA AUC(0-12) when 
treated with cyclosporine (P < 0.005). Cyclosporine-treated UGT1A8*2/*2 (518GG) 
patients had an 18% higher MPA AUC(0-12) compared with noncarriers. Carrying the 
UGT1A9 -275T>A and/or -2152C>T polymorphism significantly predicted acute 
rejection in fixed-dose (FD) MMF-treated patients receiving tacrolimus (odds 
ratio 13.3, 95% confidence interval 1.1-162.3; P < 0.05). UGT1A9 -275T>A and/or 
-2152C>T genotyping may identify patients at risk of MPA underexposure and acute 
rejection when receiving treatment with MMF and tacrolimus.

DOI: 10.1038/clpt.2009.83
PMID: 19494809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]