1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Environ Microbiol. 2009 Jul;11(7):1815-26. doi: 
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01906.x. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

The Escherichia coli ycbQRST operon encodes fimbriae with laminin-binding and 
epithelial cell adherence properties in Shiga-toxigenic E.  coli O157:H7.

Samadder P(1), Xicohtencatl-Cortes J, Saldaña Z, Jordan D, Tarr PI, Kaper JB, 
Girón JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ  85724, USA.

Retraction in
    Environ Microbiol. 2024 Jan;26(1):e16547. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.16547.

The human pathogen Shiga-toxigenic Escherichia coli (STEC) O157:H7 contains a 
ycbQRST fimbrial-like operon, which shares significant homology to the family of 
F17 fimbrial biogenesis genes f17ADCG found in enterotoxigenic E.  coli. We 
report that growth of STEC O157:H7 strain EDL933 in minimal Minca medium at 37°C 
and during adherence to epithelial cells led to the production of fine 
peritrichous fimbriae, which were found to be composed of a major subunit of 18  
kDa whose N-terminal amino acid sequence matched the predicted protein product 
of the ycbQ gene; and showed significant homology to the F17a-A fimbrin. Similar 
to the F17 fimbriae, the purified STEC fimbriae and the recombinant YcbQ protein 
fused to a His peptide tag bound laminin, but not fibronectin or collagen. Thus, 
we propose the name E.  coli YcbQ laminin-binding fimbriae (ELF) to designate 
the fimbriae encoded by the ycbQRST operon. The role of ELF as an adherence 
factor of STEC to cultured epithelial cells was investigated. We provide 
compelling evidence demonstrating that ELF contributes to adherence of STEC to 
human intestinal epithelial cells and to cow and pig gut tissue in vitro. 
Deletion in the fimbrin subunit gene elfA (or ycbQ) in STEC strain EDL933 led to 
an isogenic strain, which showed significant reduction (60%) in adherence to 
HEp-2 cells in comparison with the parental strain. In addition, antibodies 
against the purified ELF also partially blocked adherence of two STEC O157:H7 
strains. These observations suggest that ELF functions as an accessory adherence 
factor that, along with other known redundant adhesins, contributes to the 
overall adhesive properties of STEC O157:H7 providing these organisms with 
ecological advantages to survive in different hosts and in the environment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01906.x
PMCID: PMC2888687
PMID: 19508558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]