1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2009 Sep;33(9):1589-95. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00990.x. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

The relationship between serotonin receptor 1B polymorphisms A-161T and alcohol 
dependence.

Lee SY(1), Lin WW, Huang SY, Kuo PH, Wang CL, Wu PL, Chen SL, Wu JY, Ko HC, Lu 
RB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Behavioral Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that the serotonin receptor 1B gene 
(5HT1B) may be important in the pathogenesis of alcohol dependence (alcoholism; 
ALC; AD). We examined whether 5HT1B gene A-161T polymorphisms (rs130058) are a 
susceptibility factor for total AD and subgroups of AD. We further explored 
correlation of this 5HT1B gene variant between anxiety-depression alcoholism 
(ANX/DEP ALC) and antisocial alcoholism (antisocial ALC) subgroups because of 
the high comorbidity of anxiety-depression, antisocial personality disorder, and 
AD.
METHODS: We recruited 522 Han Chinese in Taiwan for this study: 322 AD patients 
and 200 controls. The patient group was recruited primarily from medical 
teaching hospitals; patients with antisocial alcoholism were recruited from 
Taiwanese prisons. Individuals with AD were classified into 3 homogeneous 
clinical subgroups -- pure alcoholism (pure ALC), ANX/DEP ALC, and antisocial 
ALC -- using DSM-IV diagnosis. The 5HT1B gene A-161T polymorphism was determined 
using PCR-RFLP.
RESULTS: No significant differences in genotypic and allelic frequencies were 
found between controls and the total AD group or between controls and the 3 AD 
subgroups. However, there were significant differences in the 5HT1B gene A-161T 
polymorphism at both the genotype and allelic levels between the ANX/DEP ALC and 
antisocial ALC subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the 5HT1B gene A-161T polymorphism alone 
is not a risk factor for increasing susceptibility to either AD or its subtypes. 
However, 5HT1B gene A-161T polymorphisms might be one of the common genetic 
factors between the ANX/DEP ALC and antisocial ALC subgroups.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00990.x
PMID: 19519719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]