1. J Physiol. 2009 Aug 1;587(Pt 15):3777-93. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.173401. 
Epub 2009 Jun 15.

Claudin-16 affects transcellular Cl- secretion in MDCK cells.

Günzel D(1), Amasheh S, Pfaffenbach S, Richter JF, Kausalya PJ, Hunziker W, 
Fromm M.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Klinische Physiologie, Charité Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, 
Hindenburgdamm 30, 12203 Berlin, Germany. dorothee.guenzel@charite.de

Claudin-16 (paracellin-1) is a tight junction protein localized mainly in the 
thick ascending limb of Henle's loop and also in the distal nephron. Its defect 
causes familial hypomagnesaemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. This 
had been taken as an indication that claudin-16 conveys paracellular Mg(2+) and 
Ca(2+) transport; however, evidence is still conflicting. We studied 
paracellular ion permeabilities as well as effects of claudin-16 on the driving 
forces for passive ion movement. MDCK-C7 cells were stably transfected with 
wild-type (wt) and mutant (R146T, T233R) claudin-16. Results indicated that 
paracellular permeability to Mg(2+) but not to Ca(2+) is increased in cells 
transfected with wt compared to mutant claudin-16 and control cells. Increased 
basolateral Mg(2+) concentration activated a transcellular Cl(-) current which 
was greatly enhanced in cells transfected with wt and T233R claudin-16, as 
compared to R146T claudin-16-transfected or control cells. This current was 
triggered by the basolateral calcium-sensing receptor causing Ca(2+) release 
from internal stores, thus activating apical Ca(2+)-sensitive Cl(-) channels and 
basolateral Ca(2+)-sensitive K(+) channels. Immunohistochemical data suggest 
that the Cl(-) channel involved is bestrophin. We conclude that claudin-16 
itself possesses only moderate paracellular Mg(2+) permeability but governs 
transcellular Cl(-) currents by interaction with apical Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) 
channels, presumably bestrophin. As the transepithelial voltage generated by 
such a current alters the driving force for all ions, this may be the major 
mechanism to regulate Mg(2+) and Ca(2+) absorption in the kidney.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.173401
PMCID: PMC2746610
PMID: 19528248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]