1. Ther Drug Monit. 2009 Aug;31(4):527-30. doi: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e3181ad74a4.

Pharmacokinetics of plasma efavirenz and CYP2B6 polymorphism in southern 
Chinese.

To KW(1), Liu ST, Cheung SW, Chan DP, Chan RC, Lee SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6) is the main metabolizing pathway for efavirenz 
(EFV), the prescription of which is associated with neurologic side effects. The 
authors conducted a study on the prevalence of CYP2B6 polymorphism, profile of 
side effects, and pharmacokinetics of EFV in a group of human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)-infected southern Chinese. Patients with HIV were recruited at the 
Shenzhen City Third People's Hospital, China. The prevalence of CYP2B6 G516T and 
plasma EFV concentration were determined. Pharmacokinetics was assessed using 
blood samples of selected patients at time 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours after 
the last dose of EFV. Between October 2007 and June 2008, 79 Chinese patients 
with HIV were recruited. Sequencing of CYP2B6 at position 516 gave 42 GG, 34 GT, 
and 3 TT genotypes, with corresponding mean spot plasma EFV level of 3.4, 4.1, 
and 8.1 mg/L, respectively. The allelic frequency of 516 G>T was 0.25. 
Univariate analysis showed that plasma EFV level correlated with genotype (P = 
0.02). Eighteen patients completed the pharmacokinetic study: TT genotype gave 
the longest half-life (t 1/2), highest plasma EFV concentration, and largest 
area under the curve. The volume of distribution per surface area (Vd ss), total 
clearance (Cltot), and elimination rate constant (ke) were the lowest. There was 
no association between the occurrence of side effects and the EFV concentration 
(chi2 test, P > 0.05). The EFV pharmacokinetics of TT genotype differed 
significantly from GG and GT genotypes. Accumulation of EFV may potentially 
occur over time, causing toxicity in TT and GT genotypes.

DOI: 10.1097/FTD.0b013e3181ad74a4
PMID: 19531981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]