1. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 18;4(6):e5953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005953.

Attenuated AMPA receptor expression allows glioblastoma cell survival in 
glutamate-rich environment.

van Vuurden DG(1), Yazdani M, Bosma I, Broekhuizen AJ, Postma TJ, Heimans JJ, 
van der Valk P, Aronica E, Tannous BA, WÃ¼rdinger T, Kaspers GJ, Cloos J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells secrete large amounts of 
glutamate that can trigger AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs). This commonly 
results in Na(+) and Ca(2+)-permeability and thereby in excitotoxic cell death 
of the surrounding neurons. Here we investigated how the GBM cells themselves 
survive in a glutamate-rich environment.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In silico analysis of published reports shows 
down-regulation of all ionotropic glutamate receptors in GBM as compared to 
normal brain. In vitro, in all GBM samples tested, mRNA expression of AMPAR 
subunit GluR1, 2 and 4 was relatively low compared to adult and fetal total 
brain mRNA and adult cerebellum mRNA. These findings were in line with primary 
GBM samples, in which protein expression patterns were down-regulated as 
compared to the normal tissue. Furthermore, mislocalized expression of these 
receptors was found. Sequence analysis of GluR2 RNA in primary and established 
GBM cell lines showed that the GluR2 subunit was found to be partly unedited.
CONCLUSIONS: Together with the lack of functional effect of AMPAR inhibition by 
NBQX our results suggest that down-regulation and afunctionality of AMPARs, 
enable GBM cells to survive in a high glutamate environment without going into 
excitotoxic cell death themselves. It can be speculated that specific AMPA 
receptor inhibitors may protect normal neurons against the high glutamate 
microenvironment of GBM tumors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005953
PMCID: PMC2693929
PMID: 19536293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.