1. Mol Brain. 2009 Jun 18;2:19. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-2-19.

Abnormal social behavior, hyperactivity, impaired remote spatial memory, and 
increased D1-mediated dopaminergic signaling in neuronal nitric oxide synthase 
knockout mice.

Tanda K(1), Nishi A, Matsuo N, Nakanishi K, Yamasaki N, Sugimoto T, Toyama K, 
Takao K, Miyakawa T.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Engineering and Functional Genomics Group, Horizontal Medical 
Research Organization, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan. tanda@hmro.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) is involved in the regulation 
of a diverse population of intracellular messenger systems in the brain. In 
humans, abnormal NOS/nitric oxide metabolism is suggested to contribute to the 
pathogenesis and pathophysiology of some neuropsychiatric disorders, such as 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Mice with targeted disruption of the nNOS 
gene exhibit abnormal behaviors. Here, we subjected nNOS knockout (KO) mice to a 
battery of behavioral tests to further investigate the role of nNOS in 
neuropsychiatric functions. We also examined the role of nNOS in 
dopamine/DARPP-32 signaling in striatal slices from nNOS KO mice and the effects 
of the administration of a dopamine D1 receptor agonist on behavior in nNOS KO 
mice.
RESULTS: nNOS KO mice showed hyperlocomotor activity in a novel environment, 
increased social interaction in their home cage, decreased depression-related 
behavior, and impaired spatial memory retention. In striatal slices from nNOS KO 
mice, the effects of a dopamine D1 receptor agonist, SKF81297, on the 
phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and AMPA receptor subunit GluR1 at protein kinase A 
sites were enhanced. Consistent with the biochemical results, intraperitoneal 
injection of a low dose of SKF81297 significantly decreased prepulse inhibition 
in nNOS KO mice, but not in wild-type mice.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that nNOS KO upregulates dopamine D1 
receptor signaling, and induces abnormal social behavior, hyperactivity and 
impaired remote spatial memory. nNOS KO mice may serve as a unique animal model 
of psychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-6606-2-19
PMCID: PMC2711944
PMID: 19538708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]