1. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 17;9:35. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-35.

The DEAD-box protein MEL-46 is required in the germ line of the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Minasaki R(1), Puoti A, Streit A.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, TÃ¼bingen, Germany. 
minasaki@mpi-cbg.de

BACKGROUND: In the hermaphrodite of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the 
first germ cells differentiate as sperm. Later the germ line switches to the 
production of oocytes. This process requires the activity of a genetic 
regulatory network that includes among others the fem, fog and mog genes. The 
function of some of these genes is germline specific while others also act in 
somatic tissues. DEAD box proteins have been shown to be involved in the control 
of gene expression at different steps such as transcription and pre-mRNA 
processing.
RESULTS: We show that the Caenorhabditis elegans gene mel-46 (maternal effect 
lethal) encodes a DEAD box protein that is related to the mammalian 
DDX20/Gemin3/DP103 genes. mel-46 is expressed throughout development and 
mutations in mel-46 display defects at multiple developmental stages. Here we 
focus on the role of mel-46 in the hermaphrodite germ line. mel-46(yt5) mutant 
hermaphrodites are partially penetrant sterile and fully penetrant maternal 
effect lethal. The germ line of mutants shows variable defects in oogenesis. 
Further, mel-46(yt5) suppresses the complete feminization caused by mutations in 
fog-2 and fem-3, two genes that are at the top and the center, respectively, of 
the genetic germline sex determining cascade, but not fog-1 that is at the 
bottom of this cascade.
CONCLUSION: The C. elegans gene mel-46 encodes a DEAD box protein that is 
required maternally for early embryogenesis and zygotically for postembryonic 
development. In the germ line, it is required for proper oogenesis. Although it 
interacts genetically with genes of the germline sex determination machinery its 
primary function appears to be in oocyte differentiation rather than sex 
determination.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-35
PMCID: PMC2711086
PMID: 19534797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]