1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):438-446. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30998.

Association of MET with social and communication phenotypes in individuals with 
autism spectrum disorder.

Campbell DB(1)(2)(3), Warren D(2), Sutcliffe JS(2)(4), Lee EB(2)(5), Levitt 
P(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and the Behavioral Sciences, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(6)Department of Cell & Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California.

Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder diagnosed by impairments in 
social interaction, communication, and behavioral flexibility. Autism is highly 
heritable, but it is not known whether a genetic risk factor contributes to all 
three core domains of the disorder or autism results from the confluence of 
multiple genetic risk factors for each domain. We and others reported previously 
association of variants in the gene encoding the MET receptor tyrosine kinase in 
five independent samples. We further described enriched association of the MET 
promoter variant rs1858830 C allele in families with co-occurring autism and 
gastrointestinal conditions. To test the contribution of this functional MET 
promoter variant to the domains of autism, we analyzed its association with 
quantitative scores derived from three instruments used to diagnose and describe 
autism phenotypes: the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R), the Autism 
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), and both the parent and the teacher 
report forms of the Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS). In 748 individuals from 
367 families, the transmission of the MET C allele from parent to child was 
consistently associated with both social and communication phenotypes of autism. 
Stratification by gastrointestinal conditions revealed a similar pattern of 
association with both social and communication phenotypes in 242 individuals 
with autism from 118 families with co-occurring gastrointestinal conditions, but 
a lack of association with any domain in 181 individuals from 96 families with 
ASD and no co-occurring gastrointestinal condition. These data indicate that the 
MET C allele influences at least two of the three domains of the autism triad.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30998
PMCID: PMC7076810
PMID: 19548256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]