1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Oct;1793(10):1540-70. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2009.06.001. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Regulation of mitochondrial respiratory chain biogenesis by estrogens/estrogen 
receptors and physiological, pathological and pharmacological implications.

Chen JQ(1), Cammarata PR, Baines CP, Yager JD.

Author information:
(1)Breast Cancer Research Laboratory, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 
19111, USA. jinqiang.chen@fccc.edu

There has been increasing evidence pointing to the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain (MRC) as a novel and important target for the actions of 17beta-estradiol 
(E(2)) and estrogen receptors (ER) in a number of cell types and tissues that 
have high demands for mitochondrial energy metabolism. This novel E(2)-mediated 
mitochondrial pathway involves the cooperation of both nuclear and mitochondrial 
ERalpha and ERbeta and their co-activators on the coordinate regulation of both 
nuclear DNA- and mitochondrial DNA-encoded genes for MRC proteins. In this 
paper, we have: 1) comprehensively reviewed studies that reveal a novel role of 
estrogens and ERs in the regulation of MRC biogenesis; 2) discussed their 
physiological, pathological and pharmacological implications in the control of 
cell proliferation and apoptosis in relation to estrogen-mediated 
carcinogenesis, anti-cancer drug resistance in human breast cancer cells, 
neuroprotection for Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease in brain, 
cardiovascular protection in human heart and their beneficial effects in lens 
physiology related to cataract in the eye; and 3) pointed out new research 
directions to address the key questions in this important and newly emerging 
area. We also suggest a novel conceptual approach that will contribute to 
innovative regimens for the prevention or treatment of a wide variety of medical 
complications based on E(2)/ER-mediated MRC biogenesis pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2009.06.001
PMCID: PMC2744640
PMID: 19559056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]