1. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 15;8(14):2146-51. doi: 10.4161/cc.8.14.9089. Epub 2009
Jul  21.

Transcription factors LSF and E2Fs: tandem cyclists driving G0 to S?

Hansen U(1), Owens L, Saxena UH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Program in Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and 
Biochemistry, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA. uhansen@bu.edu

Cell cycle progression in mammalian cells from G(1) into S phase requires 
sensing and integration of multiple inputs, in order to determine whether to 
continue to cellular DNA replication and subsequently, to cell division. Passage 
to S requires transition through the restriction point, which at a molecular 
level consists of a bistable switch involving E2Fs and pRb family members. At 
the G(1)/S boundary, a number of genes essential for DNA replication and cell 
cycle progression are upregulated, promoting entry into S phase. Although the 
activating E2Fs are the most extensively characterized transcription factors 
driving G(1)/S expression, LSF is also a transcription factor essential for 
stimulating G(1)/S gene expression. A critical LSF target gene at this stage, 
Tyms, encodes thymidylate synthetase. In investigating how LSF is activated in a 
cell cycle-dependent manner, we recently identified a novel time delay mechanism 
for regulating its activity during G(1) progression, which is apparently 
independent of the E2F/pRb axis. This involves inhibition of LSF in early G(1) 
by two major proliferative signaling pathways: ERK and cyclin C/CDK, followed by 
gradual dephosphorylation during mid- to late-G(1). Whether LSF and E2F act 
independently or in concert to promote G(1)/S progression remains to be 
determined.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.8.14.9089
PMCID: PMC2796248
PMID: 19556876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]