1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2009 Jul;19(7):481-4. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2009.05.001. Epub
 2009 Jun 23.

Severe nemaline myopathy associated with consecutive mutations E74D and H75Y on 
a single ACTA1 allele.

Garcia-Angarita N(1), Kirschner J, Heiliger M, Thirion C, Walter MC, 
Schnittfeld-Acarlioglu S, Albrecht M, Müller K, Wieczorek D, Lochmüller H, 
Krause S.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich-Baur-Institute and Department of Neurology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Marchioninistrasse 17, Munich, Germany.

Nemaline myopathy is among the most common congenital myopathies. We describe 
for the first time a novel double de novo mutation in two adjacent codons 
resulting in two amino acid changes E74D and H75Y in the ACTA1 gene. The 
hypotonic male infant was the first son of healthy unrelated parents with no 
family history of neuromuscular disorders. Pregnancy was complicated: decreased 
fetal movements were noted on the 25th week of gestation, premature labour pains 
were present from the 29th week onwards and because of breech presentation a 
Caesarian section was carried out in the 39th week. The patient presented with 
multiple congenital fractures and joint contractures. He was dependent on 
ventilatory support until his death at 2 months. Muscle biopsy revealed severely 
atrophic and rounded muscle fibers with considerable variation in diameter and 
pronounced disorganization of the myofibers. Electron microscopy indicated a 
distinct disturbance of the myofibrillar architecture and nemaline rods. In view 
of previously described cases carrying different single missense mutations of 
the amino acid residues E74 or H75, we suggest that the particular genotype 
E74D/H75Y is compatible with the severity of the patient's phenotype. The 
possibility of germ cell mosaicism should be taken into account in genetic 
counseling.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2009.05.001
PMID: 19553116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]