1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1560-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.75. Epub 2009 
Jun 24.

CRTAP mutations in lethal and severe osteogenesis imperfecta: the importance of 
combining biochemical and molecular genetic analysis.

Van Dijk FS(1), Nesbitt IM, Nikkels PG, Dalton A, Bongers EM, van de Kamp JM, 
Hilhorst-Hofstee Y, Den Hollander NS, Lachmeijer AM, Marcelis CL, Tan-Sindhunata 
GM, van Rijn RR, Meijers-Heijboer H, Cobben JM, Pals G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Cen, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. fs.vandijk2@vumc.nl

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1692.

Autosomal recessive lethal and severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by 
the deficiency of cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP) and prolyl-3-hydroxylase 
1 (P3H1) because of CRTAP and LEPRE1 mutations. We analyzed five families in 
which 10 individuals had a clinical diagnosis of lethal and severe OI with an 
overmodification of collagen type I on biochemical testing and without a 
mutation in the collagen type I genes. CRTAP mutations not described earlier 
were identified in the affected individuals. Although it seems that one 
important feature of autosomal recessive OI due to CRTAP mutations is the higher 
consistency of radiological features with OI type II-B/III, differentiation 
between autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive OI on the basis of clinical, 
radiological and biochemical investigations proves difficult in the affected 
individuals reported here. These observations confirm that once a clinical 
diagnosis of OI has been made in an affected individual, biochemical testing for 
overmodification of collagen type I should always be combined with molecular 
genetic analysis of the collagen type I genes. If no mutations in the collagen 
type I genes are found, additional molecular genetic analysis of the CRTAP and 
LEPRE1 genes should follow. This approach will allow proper identification of 
the genetic cause of lethal or severe OI, which is important in providing 
prenatal diagnosis, preimplantation genetic diagnosis and estimating recurrence 
risk.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.75
PMCID: PMC2987020
PMID: 19550437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]