1. BMC Plant Biol. 2009 Jun 24;9:77. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-9-77.

Characterization and isolation of a T-DNA tagged banana promoter active during 
in vitro culture and low temperature stress.

Santos E(1), Remy S, Thiry E, Windelinckx S, Swennen R, SÃ¡gi L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Tropical Crop Improvement, Division of Crop Biotechnics, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 13, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium. 
efren.santos@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Next-generation transgenic plants will require a more precise 
regulation of transgene expression, preferably under the control of native 
promoters. A genome-wide T-DNA tagging strategy was therefore performed for the 
identification and characterization of novel banana promoters. Embryogenic cell 
suspensions of a plantain-type banana were transformed with a promoterless, 
codon-optimized luciferase (luc+) gene and low temperature-responsive luciferase 
activation was monitored in real time.
RESULTS: Around 16,000 transgenic cell colonies were screened for baseline 
luciferase activity at room temperature 2 months after transformation. After 
discarding positive colonies, cultures were re-screened in real-time at 26 
degrees C followed by a gradual decrease to 8 degrees C. The baseline activation 
frequency was 0.98%, while the frequency of low temperature-responsive 
luciferase activity was 0.61% in the same population of cell cultures. 
Transgenic colonies with luciferase activity responsive to low temperature were 
regenerated to plantlets and luciferase expression patterns monitored during 
different regeneration stages. Twenty four banana DNA sequences flanking the 
right T-DNA borders in seven independent lines were cloned via PCR walking. 
RT-PCR analysis in one line containing five inserts allowed the identification 
of the sequence that had activated luciferase expression under low temperature 
stress in a developmentally regulated manner. This activating sequence was fused 
to the uidA reporter gene and back-transformed into a commercial dessert banana 
cultivar, in which its original expression pattern was confirmed.
CONCLUSION: This promoter tagging and real-time screening platform proved 
valuable for the identification of novel promoters and genes in banana and for 
monitoring expression patterns throughout in vitro development and low 
temperature treatment. Combination of PCR walking techniques was efficient for 
the isolation of candidate promoters even in a multicopy T-DNA line. Qualitative 
and quantitative GUS expression analyses of one tagged promoter in a commercial 
cultivar demonstrated a reproducible promoter activity pattern during in vitro 
culture. Thus, this promoter could be used during in vitro selection and 
generation of commercial transgenic plants.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-9-77
PMCID: PMC2709630
PMID: 19552803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]