1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010 Mar 5;153B(2):428-437. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30996.

Impact of Neuritin 1 (NRN1) polymorphisms on fluid intelligence in 
schizophrenia.

Chandler D(1)(2), DragoviÄ‡ M(2), Cooper M(1)(3), Badcock JC(2), Mullin BH(4), 
Faulkner D(2), Wilson SG(4), Hallmayer J(5), Howell S(2), Rock D(2), Palmer 
LJ(3), Kalaydjieva L(1), Jablensky A(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Medical Research/Western Australian Institute for Medical 
Research, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(2)Centre for Clinical Research in Neuropsychiatry and School of Psychiatry and 
Clinical Neurosciences, Graylands Hospital, The University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Australia.
(3)Centre for Genetic Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, Australia.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital and 
School of Medicine and Pharmacology, The University of Western Australia, Perth, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, California.

Neuritin 1 (NRN1), an activity-regulated gene with multiple roles in 
neurodevelopment and synaptic plasticity, is located within the 6p24-p25 
interval on chromosome 6, previously identified as linked to a subtype of 
schizophrenia (SZ) characterized by pervasive cognitive deficit (CD). We have 
tested the effect of NRN1 sequence variation on susceptibility to SZ and on 
general cognitive ability in patients and non-psychiatric control subjects by 
re-sequencing the coding regions of NRN1 and its flanking sequences, and 
genotyping 19 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 336 SZ patients and 172 
healthy control individuals. All participants completed comprehensive 
neurocognitive assessment, including tests estimating premorbid/prior IQ and 
current IQ. Logistic regression analyses found no significant association for 
any of the 19 SNPs with SZ or its CD subtype. However, linear regression 
analysis gave significant association (P = 0.024 and P = 0.027 after correction 
for multiple testing) for polymorphisms rs1475157 and rs9405890 with current IQ 
in the patient group. In SZ, the rs1475157-rs9405890 haplotypes revealed a 
highly significant association with the abstraction component of current 
("fluid") intelligence (P = 0.0014), and with percentage loss of IQ points 
between premorbid and current intelligence (P = 0.0041). Results in the control 
group were not significant after correction. This is the first analysis of 
association between variation in NRN1 and SZ. The findings suggest a role of 
NRN1 as a modifier of cognitive functioning in SZ, with implications for future 
research into the impact of the environment on the development and maintenance 
of "fluid" intelligence.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30996
PMID: 19569075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]