1. Cell Signal. 2009 Nov;21(11):1569-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.06.003. Epub
 2009 Jun 26.

A conserved hydrophobic surface of the LARG pleckstrin homology domain is 
critical for RhoA activation in cells.

Aittaleb M(1), Gao G, Evelyn CR, Neubig RR, Tesmer JJ.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2216, 
USA.

Leukemia associated Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor (LARG) activates RhoA 
in response to signals received by specific classes of cell surface receptors. 
The catalytic core of LARG is a Dbl homology (DH) domain whose activity is 
modulated by an adjacent pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. In this study, we used 
a transcriptional assay and confocal microscopy to examine the roles of several 
novel structural features of the LARG DH/PH domains, including a conserved and 
exposed hydrophobic patch on the PH domain that mediates protein-protein 
interactions in crystal structures of LARG and its close homolog PDZ-RhoGEF. 
Mutation of the hydrophobic patch has no effect on nucleotide exchange activity 
in vitro, but abolished the ability of LARG to activate RhoA and to induce 
stress fiber formation in cultured cells. The activity of these mutants could be 
rescued by fusion with exogenous membrane-targeting domains. However, because 
membrane recruitment by activated G alpha(13) subunits was not sufficient to 
rescue activity of a hydrophobic patch mutant, the LARG PH domain cannot solely 
contribute to membrane targeting. Instead, it seems likely that the domain is 
involved in regulatory interactions with other proteins near the membrane 
surface. We also show that the hydrophobic patch of the PH domain is likely 
important for the activity of all Lbc subfamily RhoGEFs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.06.003
PMCID: PMC2735620
PMID: 19560536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]