1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2009 Oct;33(10):1731-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.01010.x. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Upregulation of serotonin transporter by alcohol in human dendritic cells: 
possible implication in neuroimmune deregulation.

Babu DK(1), Diaz A, Samikkannu T, Rao KV, Saiyed ZM, Rodriguez JW, Nair MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Medicine, Institute of NeuroImmune 
Pharmacology, Florida International University, Miami, Florida 33199, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol is the most widely abused substance and its chronic 
consumption causes neurobehavioral disorders. It has been shown that alcohol 
affects the function of immune cells. Dendritic cells (DC) serve as the first 
line of defense against infections and are known to accumulate neurotransmitters 
such as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). The enzyme monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) 
degrades 5-HT that is associated with clinical depression and other neurological 
disorders. 5-HT is selectively transported into neurons through the serotonin 
transporter (SERT), which is a member of the sodium- and chloride-dependent 
neurotransmitter transporter (SLC6) family. SERT also serves as a receptor for 
psychostimulant recreational drugs. It has been demonstrated that several drugs 
of abuse such as amphetamine and cocaine inhibit the SERT expression; however, 
the role of alcohol is yet to be elucidated. We hypothesize that alcohol can 
modulate SERT and MAO-A expression in DC, leading to reciprocal downregulation 
of 5-HT in extracellular medium.
METHODS: Dendritic cells were treated with different concentrations (0.05% to 
0.2%v/v) of alcohol for 24-72 hours and processed for SERT and MAO-A expression 
using Q-PCR and Western blots analysis. In addition, SERT function in DC treated 
with alcohol both in the presence and absence of imipramine, a SERT inhibitor 
was measured using 4-[4-(dimethylamino)styryl]-1-methylpyridinium iodide uptake 
assay. 5-HT levels in culture supernatant and intracellular 5-hydroxy indole 
acetic acid (5-HIAA) and cyclic AMP were also quantitated using ELISA.
RESULTS: Dendritic cells treated with 0.1% alcohol for 24 hours showed 
significant upregulation of SERT and MAO-A expression compared with untreated 
DC. We also observed that 0.1% alcohol enhanced the function of SERT and 
decreased extracellular 5-HT levels compared with untreated DC cultures, and 
this was associated with the elevation of intracellular 5-HIAA and cyclic AMP 
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that alcohol upregulates SERT and MAO-A by 
elevating cyclic AMP, which may lead to decreased concentration of 5-HT in the 
extracellular medium. As 5-HT is a major neurotransmitter and an inflammatory 
mediator, its alcohol-mediated depletion may cause both neurological and 
immunological deregulation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.01010.x
PMCID: PMC3764918
PMID: 19572987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]