1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2009 Jul;129(7):843-9. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.129.843.

Preliminary study to identify the predictive factors for the response to 
methotrexate therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Inoue S(1), Hashiguchi M, Takagi K, Kawai S, Mochizuki M.

Author information:
(1)Division for Evaluation and Analysis of Drug Information, Keio University 
Faculty of Pharmacy, Tokyo, Japan.

To identify the major factors predicting the response to Methotrexate (MTX) 
therapy in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, we evaluated the relationship 
between the response to MTX and factors such as the concentration of 
MTX-polyglutamates (MTX-PGs) in erythrocytes (RBCs), genotypes of thymidylate 
synthase (TYMS) 5'-UTR (2R/3R) and 3'-UTR (-6/+6), 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and A1298C, and other 
patient-related factors. Thirty-six Japanese RA patients were enrolled in this 
cohort study. The concentrations of MTX-PGs in RBCs were measured, and 
polymorphisms were determined using PCR-RFLP method. As an indicator of the 
accumulated capacity of MTX-PGs in the RBCs of each patient, the MTX 
dose/MTX-PGs (AC-MPG, l/week) was calculated. The response to MTX therapy was 
assessed using the MTX dose for a>or=50% decrease in CRP level (MTX dose for 
50%CRP, mg/week), and the relationships between MTX dose for 50%CRP and various 
other factors were evaluated using multiple linear regression analysis. The MTX 
dose was 6.9+/-0.3 mg/week and the MTX-PGs concentration in RBCs was 97.3+/-8.1 
nmol/l (n=36, blood samples=95, mean+/-S.D.). The range of MTX dose for 50%CRP 
was 2.0-13.0 mg/week. Most individual AC-MPG levels showed no change during the 
evaluation period (coefficient of variation=5.9%). Based on the results of 
multiple linear regression analysis, AC-MPG, TYMS 3'-UTR (-6/+6), and ESR at the 
start of MTX therapy were associated with the MTX dose for 50%CRP. AC-MPG, TYMS 
3'-UTR (-6/+6), and ESR might be the major predictive factors for the response 
to MTX therapy in Japanese RA patients.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.129.843
PMID: 19571519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]