1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Aug;13(4):515-9. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2009.0017.

Prenatal identification of a novel R937P L1CAM missense mutation.

Wilson PL(1), Kattman BB, Mulvihill JJ, Li S, Wilkins J, Wagner AF, Goodman JR.

Author information:
(1)Section of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Prenatal Diagnostic Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104-5417, USA. pwilson2@ouhsc.edu

The L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM) is a protein encoded by a gene that has 
been localized to Xq28, is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of 
neuronal cell adhesion molecules, and plays a role in CNS development and 
maturation. L1CAM is expressed in neurons and Schwann cells, where it is active 
in neurite overgrowth, adhesion fasciculation, migration, myelination, and axon 
guidance. Mutations within the gene have been associated with phenotypic changes 
that include hydrocephalus due to aqueductal stenosis, agenesis or hypoplasia of 
the corpus callosum and corticospinal tracts, mental retardation, spastic 
paraplegia, and adducted thumbs. Here, we present a 19-year-old primigravida 
Caucasian woman who was referred to us in the 27th week of the pregnancy because 
of fetal polyhydramnios and ventriculomegaly. Our evaluation identified a male 
fetus with hydrocephalus, ventriculomegaly, aqueductal stenosis, and 
polyhydramnios. An amniocentesis was performed, and isolated fetal DNA revealed 
a hemizygous G > C mutation in codon 2809 of exon 21 of the L1CAM gene. The 
patient was later tested and identified to be a carrier of the same mutation. 
The fetus was delivered during the 38th week. Neonatal physical examination 
revealed marked frontal bossing, contractures of the feet with rocker bottom 
appearance, and hyperactive reflexes with ankle and knee clonus. He died at 4 
months of life.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2009.0017
PMID: 19594370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]