1. Virology. 2009 Sep 1;391(2):284-92. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.06.016.

Functional role of Alix in HIV-1 replication.

Fujii K(1), Munshi UM, Ablan SD, Demirov DG, Soheilian F, Nagashima K, Stephen 
AG, Fisher RJ, Freed EO.

Author information:
(1)Virus-Cell Interaction Section, HIV Drug Resistance Program, National Cancer 
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21701-1201, USA.

Retroviral Gag proteins encode small peptide motifs known as late domains that 
promote the release of virions from infected cells by interacting directly with 
host cell factors. Three types of retroviral late domains, with core sequences 
P(T/S)AP, YPX(n)L, and PPPY, have been identified. HIV-1 encodes a primary 
P(T/S)AP-type late domain and an apparently secondary late domain sequence of 
the YPX(n)L type. The P(T/S)AP and YPX(n)L motifs interact with the endosomal 
sorting factors Tsg101 and Alix, respectively. Although biochemical and 
structural studies support a direct binding between HIV-1 p6 and Alix, the 
physiological role of Alix in HIV-1 biology remains undefined. To elucidate the 
function of the p6-Alix interaction in HIV-1 replication, we introduced a series 
of mutations in the p6 Alix binding site and evaluated the effects on virus 
particle production and virus replication in a range of cell types, including 
physiologically relevant primary T cells and macrophages. We also examined the 
effects of the Alix binding site mutations on virion morphogenesis and 
single-cycle virus infectivity. We determined that the p6-Alix interaction plays 
an important role in HIV-1 replication and observed a particularly severe impact 
of Alix binding site mutations when they were combined with mutational 
inactivation of the Tsg101 binding site.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.06.016
PMCID: PMC2744943
PMID: 19596386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]