1. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Aug;193(1):19-28. doi: 
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.03.016.

Chromosomal copy number changes of locally advanced rectal cancers treated with 
preoperative chemoradiotherapy.

Grade M(1), Gaedcke J, Wangsa D, Varma S, Beckmann J, Liersch T, Hess C, Becker 
H, Difilippantonio MJ, Ried T, Ghadimi BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medicine, 
Georg-August-University, Robert Koch Str. 40, 37075 GÃ¶ttingen, Germany.

Standard treatment of rectal cancer patients comprises preoperative 
chemoradiotherapy followed by radical surgery. However, clinicians are faced 
with the problem that response rates vary from one individual to another. 
Predictive biomarkers would therefore be helpful. To identify genomic imbalances 
that might assist in stratifying tumors into responsive or nonresponsive 
categories, we used metaphase comparative genomic hybridization to prospectively 
analyze pretherapeutic biopsies from 42 patients with locally advanced rectal 
cancers. These patients were subsequently treated with 5-fluorouracil-based 
preoperative chemoradiotherapy. Based on downsizing of the T-category, 21 rectal 
cancers were later classified as responsive, while the other 21 were 
nonresponsive. Comparing these two groups, we could show that gains of 
chromosomal regions 7q32 approximately q36 and 7q11 approximately q31, as well 
as amplifications of 20q11 approximately q13, were significantly associated with 
responsiveness to preoperative chemoradiotherapy (P<0.05). However, the 
probability of detecting these copy number changes by chance is high (P=0.21). 
Our primary results suggest that pretherapeutic evaluation of chromosomal copy 
number changes may be of value for response prediction of rectal cancers to 
preoperative chemoradiotherapy. This will require validation in a larger cohort 
of patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.03.016
PMCID: PMC2714587
PMID: 19602460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]