1. Andrologia. 2009 Aug;41(4):257-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2009.00921.x.

Phenotype, hormonal profile and genotype of subjects with partial androgen 
insensitivity syndrome: report of a family with four adult males and one child 
with disorder of sexual differentiation.

Kulshreshtha B(1), Philibert P, Eunice M, Audran F, Paris F, Khurana ML, Ammini 
AC, Charles S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi 110029, India.

There is little information on the molecular basis of intrafamilial and 
inter-familial phenotypic heterogeneity with the same androgen receptor (AR) 
mutation in patients with partial androgen insensitivity syndrome. A genetic 
analysis was performed in a large kindred with ambiguous genitalia and the 
genotype-phenotype correlations were analysed. The index case was brought for 
sex assignment. Family history revealed four other affected members who had 
hypospadias and varying degrees of virilisation. All the affected males had 
hemizygous mutations in the third exon of the AR gene (A596T). One was also 
found to have a heterozygous mutation in the fourth exon of the 5 alpha 
reductase type 2 gene (G196S). This affected male with double mutations was 
better virilised compared with the other affected members with a single 
mutation. The degree of virilisation correlated with serum testosterone levels. 
Gynaecomastia was not present in any of these subjects. It is concluded that the 
subject with dual gene defects also had higher levels of testosterone and 
pubertal virilsation. Testosterone levels possibly govern the degree of pubertal 
virilisation in subjects with A596T gene defects. It is not clear whether the 
better pubertal virilsation and higher testosterone are in any way causally 
related to the SRD5A2 gene defect.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2009.00921.x
PMID: 19601939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]