1. Eur J Haematol. 2009 Dec 1;83(6):535-40. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01319.x.  Epub 2009 Jul 14.

The -509C/T polymorphism of transforming growth factor-beta1 is associated with 
increased risk for development of chronic idiopathic neutropenia.

Eliopoulos DG(1), Mavroudi I, Pontikoglou C, Ximeri M, Stavroulaki E, Pyrovolaki 
K, Velegraki M, Spanoudakis M, Goulielmos G, Papadaki HA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Crete School of Medicine, Heraklion, 
Crete.

OBJECTIVE: Impaired granulopoiesis in chronic idiopathic neutropenia (CIN) has 
been associated with an inflammatory bone marrow (BM) microenvironment 
consisting of pro-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic mediators, such as tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1, and 
Fas-Ligand (Fas-L). In this study, we evaluated the frequency of TNF-alpha, 
TGF-beta1 and Fas-L gene polymorphisms in CIN patients and explored their role 
in excessive cytokine production and their association with CIN development.
METHODS: The TNF-alpha-308G/A, TGF-beta1 -509C/T, +869T/C, +915G/C, and Fas-L 
-844T/C polymorphisms were studied in 57 CIN patients, and 100 healthy controls 
from Crete, a well-defined area with genetically homogeneous population, using a 
polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism assay.
RESULTS: The mutant genotype C/T or T/T of TGF-beta1 -509C/T polymorphism was 
more common in CIN patients than in controls (P = 0.033). Compared to wild-type 
genotype, the TT genotype was associated with increased risk for CIN development 
(OR: 5.7; 95% CI: 1.18-27.26; P = 0.033). Compared to controls, patients with CT 
and TT genotypes displayed increased TGF-beta1 levels in serum (P < 0.0001 and P 
= 0.0002, respectively) and BM (P < 0.0001 and P = 0.0002, respectively). No 
significant difference was found between patients and controls in the frequency 
of TNF-alpha-308G/A, TGF-beta1 +869T/C and +915G/C and Fas-L -844T/C 
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: The TGF-beta1 -509C/T polymorphism is associated with increased 
risk for CIN and contributes to the pathophysiology of the disorder by inducing 
TGF-beta1 overproduction. This is the first study providing evidence that 
genetic factors may predispose to CIN and may have a role in the pathophysiology 
of the disorder.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01319.x
PMID: 19614955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]