1. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jan;51(1):192-201. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900336-JLR200.

Intramembrane glycine mediates multimerization of Insig-2, a requirement for 
sterol regulation in Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Lee PC(1), DeBose-Boyd RA.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center Dallas TX 75390-9046, USA.

Sterol-induced binding of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane proteins Insig-1 
and Insig-2 to SREBP cleavage-activating protein (Scap) and HMG-CoA reductase 
triggers regulatory events that limit cholesterol synthesis in animal cells. 
Binding of Insigs to Scap prevents proteolytic activation of sterol-regulatory 
element binding proteins (SREBPs), membrane-bound transcription factors that 
enhance cholesterol synthesis, by trapping Scap-SREBP complexes in the ER. Insig 
binding to reductase causes ubiquitination and subsequent proteasome-mediated 
degradation of the enzyme from ER membranes, slowing a rate-limiting step in 
cholesterol synthesis. Here, we report the characterization of mutant Chinese 
hamster ovary cells, designated SRD-20, that are resistant to 
25-hydroxycholesterol, which potently inhibits SREBP activation and stimulates 
degradation of reductase. SRD-20 cells were produced by mutagenesis of 
Insig-1-deficient SRD-14 cells, followed by selection in 25-hydroxycholesterol. 
DNA sequencing reveals that SRD-20 cells harbor a point mutation in one Insig-2 
allele that results in production of a truncated, nonfunctional protein, whereas 
the other allele contains a point mutation that results in substitution of 
glutamic acid for glycine-39. This glycine residue localizes to the first 
membrane-spanning segment of Insig-2 and is also present in the corresponding 
region of Insig-1. Mutant forms of Insig-1 and Insig-2 containing the Glu-to-Gly 
substitution fail to confer sterol regulation upon overexpressed Scap and 
reductase. These studies identify the intramembrane glycine as a key residue for 
normal sterol regulation in animal cells.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M900336-JLR200
PMCID: PMC2789779
PMID: 19617589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]