1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009 Oct;8(10):2308-20. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M900178-MCP200. 
Epub 2009 Jul 20.

A mediator of Rho-dependent invasion moonlights as a methionine salvage enzyme.

Kabuyama Y(1), Litman ES, Templeton PD, Metzner SI, Witze ES, Argast GM, Langer 
SJ, Polvinen K, Shellman Y, Chan D, Shabb JB, Fitzpatrick JE, Resing KA, Sousa 
MC, Ahn NG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
Colorado 80309-0215, USA.

RhoA controls changes in cell morphology and invasion associated with cancer 
phenotypes. Cell lines derived from melanoma tumors at varying stages revealed 
that RhoA is selectively activated in cells of metastatic origin. We describe a 
functional proteomics strategy to identify proteins regulated by RhoA and report 
a previously uncharacterized human protein, named "mediator of RhoA-dependent 
invasion (MRDI)," that is induced in metastatic cells by constitutive RhoA 
activation and promotes cell invasion. In human melanomas, MRDI localization 
correlated with stage, showing nuclear localization in nevi and early stage 
tumors and cytoplasmic localization with plasma membrane accentuation in late 
stage tumors. Consistent with its role in promoting cell invasion, MRDI 
localized to cell protrusions and leading edge membranes in cultured cells and 
was required for cell motility, tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion 
kinase, and modulation of actin stress fibers. Unexpectedly MRDI had enzymatic 
function as an isomerase that converts the S-adenosylmethionine catabolite 
5-methylribose 1-phosphate into 5-methylribulose 1-phosphate. The enzymatic 
function of MRDI was required for methionine salvage from S-adenosylmethionine 
but distinct from its function in cell invasion. Thus, mechanisms used by signal 
transduction pathways to control cell movement have evolved from proteins with 
ancient function in amino acid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M900178-MCP200
PMCID: PMC2758758
PMID: 19620624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]