1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 2;387(4):688-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.084. Epub 2009 Jul 19.

Genetic associations of common deletion polymorphisms in families with Avellino 
corneal dystrophy.

Park M(1), Kim DJ, Kim KJ, Hong CB, Kim YJ, Cheong HS, Shin HD, Lee EJ, Kim HN, 
Chung HW, Kim EK, Lee JY, Kim HL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genome Sciences, National Institute of Health, Tongil-Lo, 
Eunpyung-Gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. mpark@nih.go.kr

Although the locations of many common deletion variants in the human genome are 
unknown, such deletions may be causative in rare disorders. Deletions can be 
mapped through the identification of Mendelian inconsistencies in pedigrees. 
Data for a total of 341,577 SNPs from an ACD family cohort (n=551) and 341,039 
SNPs from a Korean-Vietnamese family cohort (n=554) were collected for a 
genome-wide association study using Illumina 370K-Duo Beadchips((R)). In the 
present study, a Mendelian inconsistency analysis of genotype data identified 
1029 deletion variants in Korean and Korean-Vietnam family cohorts of 404 trios 
comprising 1105 individuals. Small-deletion copy number variations adjacent to 
10 deletion variants were then validated by the real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. The expected copy numbers of each deletion variant 
were directly matched to its genotype cluster image. Deletion variants were also 
in strong linkage disequilibrium with nearby SNPs. To determine the overall 
contribution of the 1029 deletion variants, we analyzed case-control trio 
associations with the risk for Avellino corneal dystrophy. One SNP marker 
(rs885945) neighboring the gene encoding major histocompatibility complex class 
I F (HLA-F) was significantly associated with the risk of Avellino corneal 
dystrophy (P=0.0003). rs885945 showed high LD with SNPs within the HLA-F gene. 
Therefore, HLA-F may be a potential candidate gene for Avellino corneal 
dystrophy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.07.084
PMID: 19622345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]