1. Rev Med Chil. 2009 Mar;137(3):321-8. Epub 2009 Jun 15.

[+49 A/G genetic polymorphism of cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen 4 
(CTLA-4) in type 7 diabetes: association with autoantibodies and cytokines].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez B F(1), Codner D E, Angel B B, Balic N I, Carrasco P E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Epidemiología Nutricional, Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología 
de los Alimentos, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. fperez@inta.cl

BACKGROUND: Cytotoxic T lymphocyte associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) has been one 
ofthe non HLA genes more commonly studied in type 1 diabetes mellitus (TID). 
CTLA-4 is a co-stimulation protein that has a key role in the negative 
regulation ofT cells and is related with a functional cytokine imbalance, 
generating a T helper (Th) 1 over Th2 dominance.
AIM: To analyze the association of +49 A/G polymorphism of CTLA-4 and its 
relationship with autoantibodies and cytokine expression in recently diagnosed 
TID patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: CTLA-4 genetic variants and auto-antibody levéis were 
studied in 260 chiídren with TID and 255 healthy chiídren matched by age and 
gender +49 A/G polymorphism of CTLA-4 was studied by polymerase chain reaction 
and restriction fragmentpolymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Autoantibody levéis were 
measured by conventional ELISA. A panel of60 cytokines was studied 
simultaneously by serum array analysis in 15 TID and 15 healthy controls 
stratified according CTLA-4 genotype.
RESULTS: The +49 A/G genetic frequency was similar in TID cases and healthy 
chiídren. A positive anti-GAD65 and anti-IA-2 level was observed in 673% of TID 
group. This percentage was increased among GG carriers (79.4% to GAD65 and 70.6% 
to IA-2). Finally, TID patients carrying this genotype showed a high expression 
of interleukin 2, 10, tumor necrosis factor alpha and interferon gamma.
CONCLUSIONS: The +49 A/G polymorphism of CTLA-4 was similar in diabetic and 
control chiídren. Among patients with TID and carriers of GG genotype, a higher 
frequency of anti-GAD65 and a preferential Thl cytokine expression profile was 
observed.

PMID: 19621172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]