1. J Virol Methods. 2009 Dec;162(1-2):40-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.07.004. 
Epub 2009 Jul 26.

Simultaneous detection of respiratory viruses in children with acute respiratory 
infection using two different multiplex reverse transcription-PCR assays.

Wang W(1), Ren P, Sheng J, Mardy S, Yan H, Zhang J, Hou L, Vabret A, Buchy P, 
Freymuth F, Deubel V.

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

A 4-tube multiplex RT-PCR (mRT-PCR), which showed higher sensitivity over 
conventional methods, was previously developed for the diagnosis of 14 viral 
pathogens of the respiratory tract. Herein the mRT-PCR was compared to the 
commercial Luminex mPCR-microsphere flow cytometry assay (Resplex II) which 
allows the detection of 12 different viruses. Eleven different viruses were 
identified in 91 nasopharyngeal swabs of children with acute respiratory 
infection, influenza A (IAV) and B, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), human 
rhinovirus (hRhV), human echovirus, parainfluenza viruses (PIV) 1, 2, 3 and 4, 
human metapneumovirus (hMPV), and human coronavirus NL63. The results of the two 
techniques showed 53 and 40 positive patients by the Resplex II assay and 
mRT-PCR, respectively, with a concordance in 35 positive and 33 negative 
patients (74.7%). Individual RT-PCR tests were performed to control viruses not 
simultaneously detected by the two multiplex assays. The major virus 
misdiagnosed by mRT-PCR was IAV whereas the major viruses misdiagnosed by 
Resplex II were PIV1, 3 and 4. The mRT-PCR remains a simple, rapid, and specific 
assay for the specific detection of respiratory viruses, and can be easily 
implemented with standards in clinical laboratories at a low cost.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2009.07.004
PMCID: PMC7119720
PMID: 19638288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]