1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Aug;8(8):2461-9. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0857.
Epub  2009 Aug 11.

Aurora A is a negative prognostic factor and a new therapeutic target in human 
neuroblastoma.

Shang X(1), Burlingame SM, Okcu MF, Ge N, Russell HV, Egler RA, David RD, 
Vasudevan SA, Yang J, Nuchtern JG.

Author information:
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Michael E DeBakey Department of Surgery, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We studied expression of the Aurora A gene and its clinical significance in a 
cohort of neuroblastoma patients. In addition, we investigated the antitumor 
activity of MLN8054, a novel small-molecule inhibitor of Aurora A kinase, on 
cultured NB cell lines in vitro. Aurora A mRNA expression was assessed by 
quantitative real-time PCR in tumor tissue specimens from 67 patients at 
diagnosis and in 9 human neuroblastoma cell lines. Western blot assays for 
Aurora A protein were done on tumor tissue of 53 patients. The results were 
correlated with various prognostic factors of neuroblastoma. Aurora A mRNA and 
protein expression were identified in 9 of 9 neuroblastoma cell lines. 
Overexpression of Aurora A mRNA in neuroblastoma tumor tissue is associated with 
high risk (P = 0.019), high-stage (International Neuroblastoma Staging System 
III and IV) tumors (P = 0.007), unfavorable histology (P = 0.007), MYCN 
amplification (P = 0.017), disease relapse (P = 0.019), and decreased 
progression-free survival (P < 0.0001) but not correlated with the age at 
diagnosis (P = 0.877). Similarly, Aurora A protein expression also significantly 
correlated with high risk (P = 0.011), high stage (P = 0.0028), unfavorable 
histology (P = 0.0006), MYCN amplification (P = 0.0029), and disease relapse (P 
= 0.044). Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of the endogenous Aurora A 
gene causes a proliferation defect and enhances chemosensitivity in human 
neuroblastoma cell lines. In support of these observations, the Aurora A kinase 
inhibitor, MLN8054, markedly inhibited growth of cultured neuroblastoma cell 
lines through an apoptosis-dependent pathway. Overexpression of Aurora A is 
associated with disease progression in neuroblastoma. Inhibition of this kinase 
is a promising modality for neuroblastoma treatment.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0857
PMCID: PMC3966113
PMID: 19671766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.