1. Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Mar;41(1):45-9. doi: 10.4143/crt.2009.41.1.45. Epub
2009  Mar 31.

Cancer of unknown primary finally revealed to be a metastatic prostate cancer: a 
case report.

Cho JY(1), Shim EJ, Kim IS, Nam EM, Choi MY, Lee KE, Mun YC, Seoung CM, Lee SN, 
Song DE, Han WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, 
Seoul, Korea.

The vast majority of patients with metastatic prostate cancer present with bone 
metastases and high prostate specific antigen (PSA) level. Rarely, prostate 
cancer can develop in patients with normal PSA level. Here, we report a patient 
who presented with a periureteral tumor of unknown primary site that was 
confirmed as prostate adenocarcinoma after three years with using specific 
immunohistochemical examination. A 64-year old man was admitted to our hospital 
with left flank pain associated with masses on the left pelvic cavity with left 
hydronephrosis. All tumor markers including CEA, CA19-9, and PSA were within the 
normal range. After an exploratory mass excision and left nephrectomy, the 
pelvic mass was diagnosed as poorly differentiated carcinoma without specific 
positive immunohistochemical markers. At that time, we treated him as having a 
cancer of unknown primary site. After approximately three years later, he 
revisited the hospital with a complaint of right shoulder pain. A right scapular 
mass was newly detected with a high serum PSA level (101.7 ng/ml). Tissues from 
the scapular mass and prostate revealed prostate cancer with positive 
immunoreactivity for P504S, a new prostate cancer-specific gene. The 
histological findings were the same as the previous pelvic mass; however, 
positive staining for PSA was observed only in the prostate mass. This case 
demonstrates a patient with prostate cancer and negative serological test and 
tissue staining that turned out to be positive during progression. We suggest 
the usefulness of newly developed immunohistochemical markers such as P504S to 
determine the specific primary site of metastatic poorly differentiated 
adenocarcinoma in men.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2009.41.1.45
PMCID: PMC2699091
PMID: 19688071