1. Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;126(6):779-89. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0731-9.

KATP channel Kir6.2 E23K variant overrepresented in human heart failure is 
associated with impaired exercise stress response.

Reyes S(1), Park S, Johnson BD, Terzic A, Olson TM.

Author information:
(1)Marriott Heart Disease Research Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.

ATP-sensitive K+ (K(ATP)) channels maintain cardiac homeostasis under stress, as 
revealed by murine gene knockout models of the KCNJ11-encoded Kir6.2 pore. 
However, the translational significance of K(ATP) channels in human cardiac 
physiology remains largely unknown. Here, the frequency of the minor K23 allele 
of the common functional Kir6.2 E23K polymorphism was found overrepresented in 
115 subjects with congestive heart failure compared to 2,031 community-based 
controls (69 vs. 56%, P < 0.001). Moreover, the KK genotype, present in 18% of 
heart failure patients, was associated with abnormal cardiopulmonary exercise 
stress testing. In spite of similar baseline heart rates at rest among genotypic 
subgroups (EE: 72.2 ± 2.3, EK: 75.0 ± 1.8 and KK:77.1 ± 3.0 bpm), subjects with 
the KK genotype had a significantly reduced heart rate increase at matched 
workload (EE: 32.8 ± 2.7%, EK: 28.8 ± 2.1%, KK: 21.7 ± 2.6%, P < 0.05), at 75% 
of maximum oxygen consumption (EE: 53.9 ± 3.9%, EK: 49.9 ± 3.1%, KK: 36.8 ± 
5.3%, P < 0.05), and at peak V(O2) (EE: 82.8 ± 6.0%, EK: 80.5 ± 4.7%, KK: 59.7 ± 
8.1%, P < 0.05). Molecular modeling of the tetrameric Kir6.2 pore structure 
revealed the E23 residue within the functionally relevant intracellular slide 
helix region. Substitution of the wild-type E residue with an oppositely 
charged, bulkier K residue would potentially result in a significant structural 
rearrangement and disrupted interactions with neighboring Kir6.2 subunits, 
providing a basis for altered high-fidelity K(ATP) channel gating, particularly 
in the homozygous state. Blunted heart rate response during exercise is a risk 
factor for mortality in patients with heart failure, establishing the clinical 
relevance of Kir6.2 E23K as a biomarker for impaired stress performance and 
underscoring the essential role of K(ATP) channels in human cardiac physiology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-009-0731-9
PMCID: PMC3771654
PMID: 19685080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]