1. PLoS Genet. 2009 Aug;5(8):e1000610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000610. Epub
2009  Aug 21.

A claudin-9-based ion permeability barrier is essential for hearing.

Nakano Y(1), Kim SH, Kim HM, Sanneman JD, Zhang Y, Smith RJ, Marcus DC, 
Wangemann P, Nessler RA, BÃ¡nfi B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, 
USA.

Hereditary hearing loss is one of the most common birth defects, yet the 
majority of genes required for audition is thought to remain unidentified. 
Ethylnitrosourea (ENU)-mutagenesis has been a valuable approach for generating 
new animal models of deafness and discovering previously unrecognized gene 
functions. Here we report on the characterization of a new ENU-induced mouse 
mutant (nmf329) that exhibits recessively inherited deafness. We found a 
widespread loss of sensory hair cells in the hearing organs of nmf329 mice after 
the second week of life. Positional cloning revealed that the nmf329 strain 
carries a missense mutation in the claudin-9 gene, which encodes a tight 
junction protein with unknown biological function. In an epithelial cell line, 
heterologous expression of wild-type claudin-9 reduced the paracellular 
permeability to Na+ and K+, and the nmf329 mutation eliminated this ion barrier 
function without affecting the plasma membrane localization of claudin-9. In the 
nmf329 mouse line, the perilymphatic K+ concentration was found to be elevated, 
suggesting that the cochlear tight junctions were dysfunctional. Furthermore, 
the hair-cell loss in the claudin-9-defective cochlea was rescued in vitro when 
the explanted hearing organs were cultured in a low-K+ milieu and in vivo when 
the endocochlear K+-driving force was diminished by deletion of the pou3f4 gene. 
Overall, our data indicate that claudin-9 is required for the preservation of 
sensory cells in the hearing organ because claudin-9-defective tight junctions 
fail to shield the basolateral side of hair cells from the K+-rich endolymph. In 
the tight-junction complexes of hair cells, claudin-9 is localized specifically 
to a subdomain that is underneath more apical tight-junction strands formed by 
other claudins. Thus, the analysis of claudin-9 mutant mice suggests that even 
the deeper (subapical) tight-junction strands have biologically important ion 
barrier function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000610
PMCID: PMC2720454
PMID: 19696885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.