1. Metabolism. 2009 Dec;58(12):1809-11. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.06.012. Epub 
2009 Aug 28.

Preliminary report: genetic variation within the GPBAR1 gene is not associated 
with metabolic traits in white subjects at an increased risk for type 2 diabetes 
mellitus.

Müssig K(1), Staiger H, Machicao F, Machann J, Schick F, Schäfer SA, Claussen 
CD, Holst JJ, Gallwitz B, Stefan N, Fritsche A, Häring HU.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Angiology, Nephrology, and Clinical 
Chemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Tübingen, 
72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Bile acids are signaling molecules with important endocrine functions. Some of 
these, including the induction of energy expenditure in brown adipose tissue and 
skeletal muscle as well as the stimulation of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) 
production in enteroendocrine L-cells, are mediated by the G-protein-coupled 
bile acid receptor 1 (GPBAR1). Therefore, we investigated in a cohort of white 
subjects at increased risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus whether a genetic 
variation within the GPBAR1 gene contributes to prediabetic phenotypes, such as 
disproportionate fat distribution, insulin resistance, or beta-cell dysfunction. 
We genotyped 1576 subjects (1043 women, 533 men) for the single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs3731859 in the GPBAR1 gene. All subjects underwent an oral 
glucose tolerance test; a subset additionally had a hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic 
clamp. Regional fat distribution, ectopic hepatic and intramyocellular lipids 
were determined by magnetic resonance techniques. Peak aerobic capacity, a 
surrogate parameter for oxidative capacity of skeletal muscle, was measured by 
an incremental exercise test on a motorized treadmill. Total GLP-1 and gastric 
inhibitory peptide levels were determined by radioimmunoassay. After appropriate 
adjustment and Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, rs3731859 was not 
significantly associated with regional or ectopic fat distribution, peak aerobic 
capacity, levels of incretins, insulin sensitivity, or indices of insulin 
secretion. Nominal associations were found between rs3731859 and body mass 
index, waist circumference, fasting GLP-1 levels, and intramyocellular lipids in 
the soleus muscle (P = .02, P = .02, P = .05, and P = .03, respectively). Our 
data suggest that a common genetic variation within the GPBAR1 gene may not play 
a major role in the development of prediabetic phenotypes in our white 
population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.06.012
PMID: 19716570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]