1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009 Nov;64(5):1071-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkp317. Epub 
2009 Aug 26.

Atazanavir pharmacokinetics in genetically determined CYP3A5 expressors versus 
non-expressors.

Anderson PL(1), Aquilante CL, Gardner EM, Predhomme J, McDaneld P, Bushman LR, 
Zheng JH, Ray M, MaWhinney S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado-Denver, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA. Peter.anderson@ucdenver.edu

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to compare atazanavir 
pharmacokinetics in genetically determined CYP3A5 expressors versus 
non-expressors.
METHODS: HIV-negative adult volunteers were pre-screened for CYP3A5 *3, *6 and 
*7 polymorphisms and enrollment was balanced for CYP3A5 expressor status, gender 
and race (African-American versus non-African-American). Participants received 
atazanavir 400 mg daily for 7 days followed by atazanavir/ritonavir 300 mg/100 
mg daily for 7 days with pharmacokinetic studies on days 7 and 14. Other 
measures collected were bilirubin, UGT1A1 *28, and ABCB1 1236C > T, 2677G > T/A 
and 3435C > T genotypes. Data analyses utilized least squares regression.
RESULTS: Fifteen CYP3A5 expressors and 16 non-expressors participated. The day 7 
atazanavir oral clearance (CL/F) was 1.39-fold faster (0.25 versus 0.18 L/h/kg; 
P = 0.045) and the C(min) was half (87 versus 171 ng/mL; P = 0.044) in CYP3A5 
expressors versus non-expressors. Non-African-American CYP3A5 expressor males 
had 2.1-fold faster CL/F (P = 0.003) and <20% the C(min) (P = 0.0001) compared 
with non-African-American non-expressor males. No overall CYP3A5 expressor 
effects were observed during the ritonavir phase. One or two copies of wild-type 
ABCB1 haplotype (1236C/2677G/3435C) was predictive of slower atazanavir and 
ritonavir CL/F compared with zero copies (P < 0.06). Indirect bilirubin 
increased 1.6- to 2.8-fold more in subjects with UGT1A1 *28/*28 versus *1/*28 or 
*1/*1.
CONCLUSIONS: CYP3A5 expressors had faster atazanavir CL/F and lower C(min) than 
non-expressors. The effect was most pronounced in non-African-American men. 
Ritonavir lessened CYP3A5 expressor effects. The wild-type ABCB1 CGC haplotype 
was associated with slower CL/F and the UGT1A1 *28 genotype was associated with 
increased bilirubin. Thus, CYP3A5, ABCB1 and UGT1A1 polymorphisms are associated 
with atazanavir pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkp317
PMCID: PMC2760462
PMID: 19710077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]