1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2009 Oct;20(7):503-10. doi: 
10.1097/MBC.0b013e32832f5d7a.

Prevalence of factor V Leiden and prothrombin G20210A mutation in a large French 
population selected for nonthrombotic history: geographical and age 
distribution.

Mazoyer E(1), Ripoll L, Gueguen R, Tiret L, Collet JP, dit Sollier CB, Roussi J, 
Drouet L; FITENAT Study Group.

Collaborators: Lenain, Isorez, Fantino, Didelot, Locuty, Lafraise, Renée, 
Varsat, Lemasson, Pouchard, Mayer, Vassal, Vergne, Jude, Hanss, Alliaud, 
Lecompte, Freyssinaud, Drouet, Mazoyer, Boinot, Berthier, Wiesel, Boneu, Drouet, 
Hanss, Juhan-Vague, Jude, Mazoyer, Ripoll, Lemasson, Renée, Cambien, Tiret, 
Giordanella, Gueguen, Siest, Seret, Vanhove.

Author information:
(1)Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France. 
elisabeth.mazoyer@avc.aphp.fr

Among inherited risk factors for venous thrombosis, the most common are the 
FV-G1691A and FII-G20210A polymorphisms. The FV-G1691A polymorphism is 
preferentially observed in Europe, with differences between European countries. 
The FII-G20210A polymorphism is observed all over the world. The study was 
designed to compare the prevalence of the FV-G1691A and FII-G20210A 
polymorphisms in a large French population of unrelated individuals with no 
thrombotic disease history and to determine the age and geographical 
distributions. Over a period of 18 months, 6154 individuals were included 
throughout France and FV-G1691A and FII-G20210A polymorphisms were determined. 
The FV-G1691A prevalence was 3.84% (95% confidence interval 3.35-4.33) and the 
FII-G20210A prevalence was 3.07% (95% CI 2.63-3.51). A north-east/south-west 
gradient was observed in the FV-G1691A geographical distribution. No difference 
was observed in the geographical distribution of FII-G20210A polymorphism nor in 
the age distribution of the two polymorphisms. The prevalence of the two 
polymorphisms was similar whatever the blood group (O or non-O). Plasma D-dimers 
were significantly higher in healthy individuals with FV-G1691A but not in 
individuals with FII-G20210A. Thirty percent of variation in plasma prothrombin 
level was explained by environmental factors (serum cholesterol, age, oral 
contraception, hormonal replacement therapy, body mass index, sex) and genetic 
factors (FII-G20210A). As expected, individuals with FII-G20210A displayed 
higher plasma prothrombin level compared with individuals with wild type. 
However, this was not associated with a modification of the fibrin clot elastic 
modulus. This study shows a differential distribution of the two polymorphisms 
among the French territory. These polymorphisms confer a very mild 
hypercoagulable state as shown by the limited increased in basal D-dimers in 
mutated FV-G1691A populations and only a trend that does not reach statistical 
significance for FII-G20210A population.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0b013e32832f5d7a
PMID: 19730248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]