1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Oct 7;101(19):1308-24. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp280. Epub
 2009 Sep 8.

Biomarkers predicting clinical outcome of epidermal growth factor 
receptor-targeted therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer.

Siena S(1), Sartore-Bianchi A, Di Nicolantonio F, Balfour J, Bardelli A.

Author information:
(1)The Falck Division of Medical Oncology, Ospedale Niguarda Ca' Granda, Piazza 
Ospedale Maggiore 3, 20162 Milan, Italy. salvatore.siena@ospedaleniguarda.it

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Apr 21;102(8):573; author reply 573-5. doi: 
10.1093/jnci/djq064.

The monoclonal antibodies panitumumab and cetuximab that target the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) have expanded the range of treatment options for 
metastatic colorectal cancer. Initial evaluation of these agents as monotherapy 
in patients with EGFR-expressing chemotherapy-refractory tumors yielded response 
rates of approximately 10%. The realization that detection of positive EGFR 
expression by immunostaining does not reliably predict clinical outcome of 
EGFR-targeted treatment has led to an intense search for alternative predictive 
biomarkers. Oncogenic activation of signaling pathways downstream of the EGFR, 
such as mutation of KRAS, BRAF, or PIK3CA oncogenes, or inactivation of the PTEN 
tumor suppressor gene is central to the progression of colorectal cancer. Tumor 
KRAS mutations, which may be present in 35%-45% of patients with colorectal 
cancer, have emerged as an important predictive marker of resistance to 
panitumumab or cetuximab treatment. In addition, among colorectal tumors 
carrying wild-type KRAS, mutation of BRAF or PIK3CA or loss of PTEN expression 
may be associated with resistance to EGFR-targeted monoclonal antibody 
treatment, although these additional biomarkers require further validation 
before incorporation into clinical practice. Additional knowledge of the 
molecular basis for sensitivity or resistance to EGFR-targeted monoclonal 
antibodies will allow the development of new treatment algorithms to identify 
patients who are most likely to respond to treatment and could also provide 
rationale for combining therapies to overcome primary resistance. The use of 
KRAS mutations as a selection biomarker for anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody (eg, 
panitumumab or cetuximab) treatment is the first major step toward 
individualized treatment for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djp280
PMCID: PMC2758310
PMID: 19738166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]