1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jun 15;126(12):2935-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24892.

Polymorphisms in genes of the steroid receptor superfamily modify postmenopausal 
breast cancer risk associated with menopausal hormone therapy.

MARIE-GENICA Consortium on Genetic Susceptibility for Menopausal Hormone Therapy 
Related Breast Cancer Risk.

Collaborators: Abbas S, Beckmann L, Chang-Claude J, Hein R, Kropp S, Parthimos 
M, Dünnebier T, Hamann U, Brors B, Eils R, Zapatka M, Brauch H, Justenhoven C, 
Flesch-Janys D, Braendle W, Brüning T, Pesch B, Spickenheuer A, Baisch C, Ko YD, 
Dahmen N.

Menopausal hormone therapy (HT) is associated with increased breast cancer risk 
among postmenopausal women. Nuclear receptors are involved in steroid hormone- 
and xenobiotic-mediated signal transduction playing a crucial role in regulating 
gene expression. Therefore, variations within these genes may influence 
HT-associated breast cancer risk. We investigated 3,149 postmenopausal breast 
cancer patients and 5,489 controls from 2 German population-based case-control 
studies. Thirty-three polymorphisms selected on the basis of known or putative 
functional relevance located in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, PXR and AR were genotyped. 
Conditional logistic regression was used to assess multiplicative statistical 
interaction between polymorphisms and duration of estrogen-progestagen therapy 
and of estrogen monotherapy with regard to breast cancer risk assuming 
log-additive and codominant modes of inheritance. We observed an increased risk 
for women carrying short AR_(CAG) alleles of <22 repeats associated with 
combined estrogen-progestagen therapy compared with those with long alleles (> 
or =22 repeats) (p(interaction) = 0.03). Additionally, risk associated with 
combination therapy use was significantly modified by 2 PXR polymorphisms with 
reduction of risk effects in carriers of the minor PXR_rs6785049_G and 
PXR_rs1054191_A alleles (p(interaction) = 0.04 and 0.05, respectively). Variants 
in both ESR1 and ESR2 modified risk associated with estrogen monotherapy use. 
Higher risk were observed in homozygotes for the major ESR1_rs910416_T allele 
(p(interaction) < 0.01) and in homozygotes for the minor ESR2_rs1271572_T, major 
ESR2_rs4986938_G and minor ESR2_rs928554_G alleles (p(interaction) = 0.02, 0.05, 
0.02, respectively). Risk effect modification by ESR1_rs910416 and AR_(CAG)n 
polymorphisms remained significant after correction for multiple testing. We 
conclude that genetic variants in nuclear receptor genes may modify 
HT-associated postmenopausal breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.24892
PMID: 19739075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]