1. N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 10;361(11):1067-74. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0904267.

Asymptomatic reactivation of JC virus in patients treated with natalizumab.

Chen Y(1), Bord E, Tompkins T, Miller J, Tan CS, Kinkel RP, Stein MC, Viscidi 
RP, Ngo LH, Koralnik IJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Pathogenesis, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 May 12;364(19):1882.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Sep 10;361(11):1041-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp0906248.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 17;361(25):2487-8; author reply 2489-90. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc0909622.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 17;361(25):2488-9; author reply 2489-90.
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 17;361(25):2489; author reply 2489-90.

BACKGROUND: Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) occurs in a 
fraction of patients with multiple sclerosis who were treated with natalizumab. 
Most adults who are infected with the JC virus, the etiologic agent in PML, do 
not have symptoms. We sought to determine whether exposure to natalizumab causes 
subclinical reactivation and neurotropic transformation of JC virus.
METHODS: We followed 19 consecutive patients with multiple sclerosis who were 
treated with natalizumab over an 18-month period, performing quantitative 
polymerase-chain-reaction assays in blood and urine for JC virus reactivation; 
BK virus, a JC virus-related polyomavirus, was used as a control. We determined 
JC virus-specific T-cell responses by means of an enzyme-linked immunospot assay 
and antibody responses by means of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and 
analyzed JC virus regulatory-region sequences.
RESULTS: After 12 months of natalizumab therapy, the prevalence of JC virus in 
the urine of the 19 patients increased from a baseline value of 19% to 63% 
(P=0.02). After 18 months of treatment, JC virus was detectable in 3 of 15 
available plasma samples (20%) and in 9 of 15 available samples of 
peripheral-blood mononuclear cells (60%) (P=0.02). JC virus regulatory-region 
sequences in blood samples and in most of the urine samples were similar to 
those usually found in PML. Conversely, BK virus remained stable in urine and 
was undetectable in blood. The JC virus-specific cellular immune response 
dropped significantly between 6 and 12 months of treatment, and variations in 
the cellular immune response over time tended to be greater in patients in whom 
JC viremia developed. None of the patients had clinical or radiologic signs of 
PML.
CONCLUSIONS: Subclinical reactivation of JC virus occurs frequently in 
natalizumab-treated patients with multiple sclerosis. Viral shedding is 
associated with a transient drop in the JC virus-specific cellular immune 
response.

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa0904267
PMCID: PMC3077718
PMID: 19741227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No other potential conflict of interest relevant 
to this article was reported.