1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 13;284(46):31532-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.059246. Epub 
2009 Sep 15.

Proximity-based protein thiol oxidation by H2O2-scavenging peroxidases.

Gutscher M(1), Sobotta MC, Wabnitz GH, Ballikaya S, Meyer AJ, Samstag Y, Dick 
TP.

Author information:
(1)Redox Regulation Research Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ/A160), 
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg.

H(2)O(2) acts as a signaling molecule by oxidizing critical thiol groups on 
redox-regulated target proteins. To explain the efficiency and selectivity of 
H(2)O(2)-based signaling, it has been proposed that oxidation of target proteins 
may be facilitated by H(2)O(2)-scavenging peroxidases. Recently, a 
peroxidase-based protein oxidation relay has been identified in yeast, namely 
the oxidation of the transcription factor Yap1 by the peroxidase Orp1. It has 
remained unclear whether the protein oxidase function of Orp1 is a singular 
adaptation or whether it may represent a more general principle. Here we show 
that Orp1 is in fact not restricted to oxidizing Yap1 but can also form a highly 
efficient redox relay with the oxidant target protein roGFP (redox-sensitive 
green fluorescent protein) in mammalian cells. Orp1 mediates near quantitative 
oxidation of roGFP2 by H(2)O(2), and the Orp1-roGFP2 redox relay effectively 
converts physiological H(2)O(2) signals into measurable fluorescent signals in 
living cells. Furthermore, the oxidant relay phenomenon is not restricted to 
Orp1 as the mammalian peroxidase Gpx4 also mediates oxidation of proximal roGFP2 
in living cells. Together, these findings support the concept that certain 
peroxidases harbor an intrinsic and powerful capacity to act as 
H(2)O(2)-dependent protein thiol oxidases when they are recruited into proximity 
of oxidizable target proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.059246
PMCID: PMC2797222
PMID: 19755417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]