1. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;15(18):5646-61. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0377.

Lung cancer in never smokers: molecular profiles and therapeutic implications.

Rudin CM(1), Avila-Tang E, Harris CC, Herman JG, Hirsch FR, Pao W, Schwartz AG, 
Vahakangas KH, Samet JM.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, David H. Koch Cancer Research 
Building, Room 544, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. 
rudin@jhmi.edu

The majority of lung cancers are caused by long term exposure to the several 
classes of carcinogens present in tobacco smoke. Although a significant fraction 
of lung cancers in never smokers may also be attributable to tobacco, many such 
cancers arise in the absence of detectable tobacco exposure, and may follow a 
very different cellular and molecular pathway of malignant transformation. 
Recent studies summarized here suggest that lung cancers arising in never 
smokers have a distinct natural history, profile of oncogenic mutations, and 
response to targeted therapy. The majority of molecular analyses of lung cancer 
have focused on genetic profiling of pathways responsible for metabolism of 
primary tobacco carcinogens. Limited research has been conducted evaluating 
familial aggregation and genetic linkage of lung cancer, particularly among 
never smokers in whom such associations might be expected to be strongest. Data 
emerging over the past several years show that lung cancers in never smokers are 
much more likely to carry activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR), a key oncogenic factor and direct therapeutic target of several 
newer anticancer drugs. EGFR mutant lung cancers may represent a distinct class 
of lung cancers, enriched in the never-smoking population, and less clearly 
linked to direct tobacco carcinogenesis. These insights followed initial testing 
and demonstration of efficacy of EGFR-targeted drugs. Focused analysis of 
molecular carcinogenesis in lung cancers in never smokers is needed, and may 
provide additional biologic insight with therapeutic implications for lung 
cancers in both ever smokers and never smokers.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0377
PMCID: PMC2950319
PMID: 19755392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]