1. Virology. 2009 Nov 25;394(2):243-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.08.007. Epub
2009  Sep 16.

Select resistance-associated mutations in blood are associated with lower CSF 
viral loads and better neuropsychological performance.

Hightower GK(1), Letendre SL, Cherner M, Gibson SA, Ellis RJ, Wolfson TJ, Gamst 
AC, Ignacio CC, Heaton RK, Grant I, Richman DD, Smith DM; HNRC Group.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 
ghightow@ucsd.edu

BACKGROUND: When antiretroviral therapy does not fully suppress HIV replication, 
suboptimal levels of antiretrovirals can select for antiretroviral resistant 
variants of HIV. These variants may exhibit reduced replication capacity and 
result in lower viral loads in blood. Our study evaluated whether antiretroviral 
resistance was associated with viral loads in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and 
better neuropsychological (NP) performance.
METHODS: We enrolled 94 participants and each participant underwent a 
comprehensive neuromedical evaluation that used structured clinical assessments 
of medical history, ART and other medication use, comprehensive NP testing, and 
neurological and general physical signs of disease. Blood was collected by 
venipuncture, and all participants were offered lumbar puncture. Univariate and 
multivariate statistical methods were used to analyze the relationship between 
antiretroviral resistance, blood and CSF HIV RNA levels, substance use, and NP 
performance.
RESULTS: Antiretroviral resistance, detected in blood, was associated with lower 
CSF viral loads (p<0.01) and better NP performance (p=0.04) in multivariate 
analyses, independent of past and current ARV use and blood viral loads (model: 
p<0.01). However, HIV RNA levels in CSF did not independently correlate with NP 
performance. Low viral loads in the CSF limited our ability to investigate the 
relationship between antiretroviral resistance detected in CSF and NP 
performance.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in the absence of ART, antiretroviral resistance-associated 
mutations correlate with better NP performance possibly because these mutations 
reflect reduced neurovirulence compared with wild-type HIV.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.08.007
PMCID: PMC3046809
PMID: 19762060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest: None