1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;85(4):427-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.08.018. Epub 
2009 Sep 24.

Rare, evolutionarily unlikely missense substitutions in ATM confer increased 
risk of breast cancer.

Tavtigian SV(1), Oefner PJ, Babikyan D, Hartmann A, Healey S, Le Calvez-Kelm F, 
Lesueur F, Byrnes GB, Chuang SC, Forey N, Feuchtinger C, Gioia L, Hall J, 
Hashibe M, Herte B, McKay-Chopin S, Thomas A, Vall√©e MP, Voegele C, Webb PM, 
Whiteman DC; Australian Cancer Study; Breast Cancer Family Registries (BCFR); 
Kathleen Cuningham Foundation Consortium for Research into Familial Aspects of 
Breast Cancer (kConFab); Sangrajrang S, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Andrulis IL, John 
EM, Chenevix-Trench G.

Author information:
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, 69372 Lyon, France.

The susceptibility gene for ataxia telangiectasia, ATM, is also an 
intermediate-risk breast-cancer-susceptibility gene. However, the spectrum and 
frequency distribution of ATM mutations that confer increased risk of breast 
cancer have been controversial. To assess the contribution of rare variants in 
this gene to risk of breast cancer, we pooled data from seven published ATM 
case-control mutation-screening studies, including a total of 1544 breast cancer 
cases and 1224 controls, with data from our own mutation screening of an 
additional 987 breast cancer cases and 1021 controls. Using an in silico 
missense-substitution analysis that provides a ranking of missense substitutions 
from evolutionarily most likely to least likely, we carried out analyses of 
protein-truncating variants, splice-junction variants, and rare missense 
variants. We found marginal evidence that the combination of ATM 
protein-truncating and splice-junction variants contribute to breast cancer 
risk. There was stronger evidence that a subset of rare, evolutionarily unlikely 
missense substitutions confer increased risk. On the basis of subset analyses, 
we hypothesize that rare missense substitutions falling in and around the FAT, 
kinase, and FATC domains of the protein may be disproportionately responsible 
for that risk and that a subset of these may confer higher risk than do 
protein-truncating variants. We conclude that a comparison between the graded 
distributions of missense substitutions in cases versus controls can complement 
analyses of truncating variants and help identify susceptibility genes and that 
this approach will aid interpretation of the data emerging from new sequencing 
technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.08.018
PMCID: PMC2756555
PMID: 19781682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]