1. Int J Dermatol. 2009 Oct;48(10):1078-81. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-4632.2009.04136.x.

A rare connexin 26 mutation in a patient with a forme fruste of 
keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome.

Neoh CY(1), Chen H, Ng SK, Lane EB, Common JE.

Author information:
(1)National Skin Center, Institute of Medical Biology, 1 Mandalay Road, 
Singapore. mailcyneoh@yahoo.com.sg

BACKGROUND: Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome is a rare ectodermal 
dysplasia characterized by generalized erythrokeratotic plaques, sensorineural 
hearing loss, and vascularizing keratitis. Cutaneous changes and hearing loss 
typically present in early childhood, whereas ocular symptoms present later. 
Mutations in the connexin (Cx) 26 gene, GJB2, are now established to underlie 
many of the affected cases, with the majority of patients harboring the p.D50N 
mutation.
METHODS: A rare patient demonstrating features of incomplete KID syndrome 
associated with an uncommon Cx26 gene mutation is described.
RESULTS: The patient presented late in adolescence with partial features of KID 
syndrome. There was limited cutaneous involvement and the rare association of 
cystic acne. Both hearing impairment and ophthalmic involvement were mild in 
severity. Genetic mutation analysis revealed a previously described, rare 
mutation in GJB2, resulting in a glycine to arginine change at codon 12 
(p.G12R).
CONCLUSIONS: This report describes a patient exhibiting characteristics 
suggestive of a late-onset, incomplete form of KID syndrome with the GJB2 
mutation (p.G12R). The p.G12R mutation has only been described in one other 
patient with KID syndrome, whose clinical presentation was not characterized.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2009.04136.x
PMID: 19785089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]