1. Am J Pathol. 2009 Nov;175(5):1984-92. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080515. Epub
2009  Oct 1.

Contribution of macrophages to angiogenesis induced by vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor-3-specific ligands.

Chung ES(1), Chauhan SK, Jin Y, Nakao S, Hafezi-Moghadam A, van Rooijen N, Zhang 
Q, Chen L, Dana R.

Author information:
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)-2 is a major stimulator of 
hemangiogenesis (HA), whereas VEGFR-3 stimulates lymphangiogenesis (LA). 
Contrary to this understanding, we demonstrate that implantation of pellets 
containing VEGFR-3-specific ligands (VEGF-C156S and recombinant murine VEGF-D) 
into the corneal stroma induce not only LA but also robust HA characterized by 
blood vessels that are positive for VEGFR-3 expression. The implantation of 
pellets containing VEGFR-3-specific ligands also leads to the recruitment of 
VEGF-A-secreting macrophages. Depletion of these infiltrating macrophages using 
clodronate-liposome administration shows a significant reduction in HA as well 
as LA. Blockade of either VEGFR-2 or VEGFR-3 signaling reduces both HA and LA; 
however, the percent reduction of HA is greater in the VEGFR-2 blockade group. 
In addition, in the VEGFR-3 blockade group, the percent reduction of HA is 
significantly greater with VEGFR-3-specific ligands than that by VEGF-A or 
VEGF-C. Collectively, our data suggest that VEGFR-3-specific signaling can 
induce new blood vessels, to which macrophages contribute a major role, and 
signify its potential as an additional therapeutic target to the existing 
VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 signaling-based antiangiogenesis strategies.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080515
PMCID: PMC2774062
PMID: 19808642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]