1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 15;106(37):15738-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0904346106. Epub 2009 Sep 1.

Phosphorylation of WASp is a key regulator of activity and stability in vivo.

Blundell MP(1), Bouma G, Metelo J, Worth A, Calle Y, Cowell LA, Westerberg LS, 
Moulding DA, Mirando S, Kinnon C, Cory GO, Jones GE, Snapper SB, Burns SO, 
Thrasher AJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Wolfson Centre for Gene Therapy of Childhood 
Disease and Centre for Immunodeficiency, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, 
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp) is a key cytoskeletal regulator in 
hematopoietic cells. Covalent modification of a conserved tyrosine by 
phosphorylation has emerged as an important potential determinant of activity, 
although the physiological significance remains uncertain. In a murine knockin 
model, mutation resulting in inability to phosphorylate Y293 (Y293F) mimicked 
many features of complete WASp-deficiency. Although a phosphomimicking mutant 
Y293E conferred enhanced actin-polymerization, the cellular phenotype was 
similar due to functional dysregulation. Furthermore, steady-state levels of 
Y293E-WASp were markedly reduced compared to wild-type WASp and Y293F-WASp, 
although partially recoverable by treatment of cells with proteasome inhibitors. 
Consequently, tyrosine phosphorylation plays a critical role in normal 
activation of WASp in vivo, and is indispensible for multiple tasks including 
proliferation, phagocytosis, chemotaxis, and assembly of adhesion structures. 
Furthermore, it may target WASp for proteasome-mediated degradation, thereby 
providing a default mechanism for self-limiting stimulation of the Arp2/3 
complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0904346106
PMCID: PMC2736139
PMID: 19805221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.