1. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 12;4(10):e7379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007379.

Mutations in the DNA-binding domain of NR2E3 affect in vivo dimerization and 
interaction with CRX.

Roduit R(1), Escher P, Schorderet DF.

Author information:
(1)IRO, Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Sion, Switzerland. 
raphael.roduit@irovision.ch

BACKGROUND: NR2E3 (PNR) is an orphan nuclear receptor essential for proper 
photoreceptor determination and differentiation. In humans, mutations in NR2E3 
have been associated with the recessively inherited enhanced short wavelength 
sensitive (S-) cone syndrome (ESCS) and, more recently, with autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). NR2E3 acts as a suppressor of the cone generation 
program in late mitotic retinal progenitor cells. In adult rod photoreceptors, 
NR2E3 represses cone-specific gene expression and acts in concert with the 
transcription factors CRX and NRL to activate rod-specific genes. NR2E3 and CRX 
have been shown to physically interact in vitro through their respective 
DNA-binding domains (DBD). The DBD also contributes to homo- and 
heterodimerization of nuclear receptors.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed NR2E3 homodimerization and NR2E3/CRX 
complex formation in an in vivo situation by Bioluminescence Resonance Energy 
Transfer (BRET(2)). NR2E3 wild-type protein formed homodimers in transiently 
transfected HEK293T cells. NR2E3 homodimerization was impaired in presence of 
disease-causing mutations in the DBD, except for the p.R76Q and p.R104W mutant 
proteins. Strikingly, the adRP-linked p.G56R mutant protein interacted with CRX 
with a similar efficiency to that of NR2E3 wild-type and p.R311Q proteins. In 
contrast, all other NR2E3 DBD-mutant proteins did not interact with CRX. The 
p.G56R mutant protein was also more effective in abolishing the potentiation of 
rhodospin gene transactivation by the NR2E3 wild-type protein. In addition, the 
p.G56R mutant enhanced the transrepression of the M- and S-opsin promoter, while 
all other NR2E3 DBD-mutants did not.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest different disease mechanisms in 
adRP- and ESCS-patients carrying NR2E3 mutations. Titration of CRX by the p.G56R 
mutant protein acting as a repressor in trans may account for the severe 
clinical phenotype in adRP patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007379
PMCID: PMC2757917
PMID: 19823680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.