1. Retrovirology. 2009 Oct 16;6:92. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-92.

Lack of evidence for xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus(XMRV) in 
German prostate cancer patients.

Hohn O(1), Krause H, Barbarotto P, Niederstadt L, Beimforde N, Denner J, Miller 
K, Kurth R, Bannert N.

Author information:
(1)Robert Koch-Institute, Centre for Biological Safety 4, Nordufer 20, 13353 
Berlin, Germany. HohnO@rki.de

BACKGROUND: A novel gammaretrovirus named xenotropic murine leukemia 
virus-related virus (XMRV) has been recently identified and found to have a 
prevalence of 40% in prostate tumor samples from American patients carrying a 
homozygous R462Q mutation in the RNaseL gene. This mutation impairs the function 
of the innate antiviral type I interferon pathway and is a known susceptibility 
factor for prostate cancer. Here, we attempt to measure the prevalence of XMRV 
in prostate cancer cases in Germany and determine whether an analogous 
association with the R462Q polymorphism exists.
RESULTS: 589 prostate tumor samples were genotyped by real-time PCR with regard 
to the RNaseL mutation. DNA and RNA samples from these patients were screened 
for the presence of XMRV-specific gag sequences using a highly sensitive nested 
PCR and RT-PCR approach. Furthermore, 146 sera samples from prostate tumor 
patients were tested for XMRV Gag and Env antibodies using a newly developed 
ELISA assay. In agreement with earlier data, 12.9% (76 samples) were shown to be 
of the QQ genotype. However, XMRV specific sequences were detected at neither 
the DNA nor the RNA level. Consistent with this result, none of the sera 
analyzed from prostate cancer patients contained XMRV-specific antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate a much lower prevalence (or even complete 
absence) of XMRV in prostate tumor patients in Germany. One possible reason for 
this could be a geographically restricted incidence of XMRV infections.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4690-6-92
PMCID: PMC2770519
PMID: 19835577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]