1. Physiol Behav. 2010 Jan 12;99(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.10.002.

Sex-specific effects of CNTF, IL6 and UCP2 polymorphisms on weight gain.

Heidema AG(1), Wang P, van Rossum CT, Feskens EJ, Boer JM, Bouwman FG, Van't 
Veer P, Mariman EC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Biology, Maastricht University, PO Box 616 6200 MD 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. geert.heidema@wur.nl

The human proteins ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and interleukin-6 (IL6) 
and their receptors share structural homology with leptin and its receptor. In 
addition, uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2) has been shown to participate the 
regulation of leptin on food intake. All three proteins are active in the 
hypothalamus. Experiments have shown that CNTF and IL6, like leptin, can 
influence body weight in humans and animals, while the effect of UCP2 is not 
consistent. In a Dutch general population (n=545) we investigated associations 
of CNTF (null G/A, rs1800169), IL6 (174 G/C, rs1800795) and UCP2 (A55V, rs660339 
and del/ins) polymorphisms with weight gain using interaction graphs and 
logistic regression analysis. The average follow-up period was 6.9 years. 
Individuals who gained weight (n=264) were compared with individuals who 
remained stable in weight (n=281). In women the CNTF polymorphism (odds ratio 
(OR)=2.15, 95%CI: 1.27-3.64, p=0.004) and in men the IL6 polymorphism by itself 
(OR=2.26, 95%CI: 1.08-4.75, p=0.03) or in combination with the CNTF 
polymorphism, were associated with weight gain. Furthermore, CNTF and IL6 
polymorphisms in interaction with UCP2 polymorphisms had similar strong effects 
on weight gain in women and men, respectively. All observed effects were 
statistically shown to be independent of serum leptin level. These results are 
incorporated in a biological model for weight regulation with upstream effects 
of CNTF and IL6, and downstream effects of UCP2. The results of this study 
suggest a novel mechanism for weight regulation that is active in both women and 
men, but strongly influenced by sex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.10.002
PMID: 19833146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]