1. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Mar;162(3):508-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09488.x. 
Epub 2009 Sep 1.

FGFR3 and PIK3CA mutations in stucco keratosis and dermatosis papulosa nigra.

Hafner C(1), Landthaler M, Mentzel T, Vogt T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 
christian.hafner@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

BACKGROUND: Stucco keratosis (STK) and dermatosis papulosa nigra (DPN) are 
referred to as variants of seborrhoeic keratosis. However, the genetic 
alterations involved in the pathogenesis of these benign tumours are unknown.
OBJECTIVES: Because FGFR3 and PIK3CA mutations have been reported to be involved 
in the pathogenesis of seborrhoeic keratosis, we analysed whether these 
mutations are also present in STK and DPN. Methods A SNaPshot multiplex assay 
was used for analysis of 11 previously described FGFR3 hotspot mutations. PIK3CA 
mutations were analysed by a SNaPshot assay covering five PIK3CA hotspot 
mutations.
RESULTS: Five STK and two DPN samples were analysed. Three of five STK samples 
revealed a PIK3CA mutation (E542K, E545K), but no FGFR3 mutation was found. In 
contrast, both DPN samples harboured an FGFR3 mutation (R248C, S249C) but no 
PIK3CA mutation. Control tissues available for three samples did not show PIK3CA 
or FGFR3 mutations, excluding germline mutations and indicating a strong 
genotype-phenotype correlation between the mutation and the lesion.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that FGFR3 and PIK3CA mutations are involved 
in the pathogenesis of STK and DPN. The molecular genetic findings furthermore 
support the concept that both skin lesions are specific variants of seborrhoeic 
keratosis, sharing a common genetic background.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2009.09488.x
PMID: 19845664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]