1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;18(4):490-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.182. Epub 2009
Oct  21.

Polymorphisms in TLR4 and TLR2 genes, cytokine production and survival in rural 
Ghana.

May L(1), van Bodegom D, Fr√∂lich M, van Lieshout L, Slagboom PE, Westendorp RG, 
Kuningas M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are involved in the induction of an adequate immune 
response on infection. We hypothesized that genetic variation in TLR4 and TLR2 
genes could influence this response and lead to variability in cytokine 
production and survival. We tested this hypothesis in 4292 participants who were 
followed up for all-cause mortality for 6 years and live under adverse 
environmental conditions in the Upper-East region of Ghana, where malaria is 
endemic. In 605 participants, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-10 
(IL10) production, after stimulation with lipopolysaccharide and zymosan, was 
measured. In addition, 34 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TLR4 and 12 
SNPs in TLR2 were genotyped and tested for association with cytokine production, 
malaria infection and mortality. In this comprehensive gene-wide approach, we 
identified novel SNPs in the TLR4 gene that influence cytokine production. From 
the analyzed SNPs, rs7860896 associated the strongest with IL10 production 
(P=0.0005). None of the SNPs in this study associated with malaria or overall 
mortality risks. In conclusion, we demonstrate that genetic variation within the 
TLR4 gene influences cytokine production capacity, but in an endemic area does 
not influence the susceptibility to malaria infection or mortality.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.182
PMCID: PMC2987239
PMID: 19844258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]