1. Pharmacogenomics. 2009 Oct;10(10):1657-74. doi: 10.2217/pgs.09.118.

Genetic factors influencing cytarabine therapy.

Lamba JK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. lamba004@umn.edu

The mainstay of acute myeloid leukemia chemotherapy is the nucleoside analog 
cytarabine (ara-C). Numerous studies suggest that the intracellular 
concentrations of the ara-C active metabolite, ara-CTP, vary widely among 
patients and, in turn, are associated with variability in clinical response to 
acute myeloid leukemia treatment. Thus, genetic variation in key genes in the 
ara-C metabolic pathway--specifically, deoxycytidine kinase (a rate-limiting 
activating enzyme), 5 nucleotidase, cytidine deaminase and deoxycytidylate 
deaminase (all three are inactivating enzymes), human equilibrative nucleoside 
transporter (ara-C uptake transporter) and ribonucleotide reductase (RRM1 and 
RRM2--enzymes regulating intracellular deoxycytidine triphosphate pools)--form 
the molecular basis of the interpatient variability observed in intracellular 
ara-CTP concentrations and response to ara-C. Understanding genetic variants in 
the key candidate genes involved in the metabolic activation of ara-C, as well 
as the pharmacodynamic targets of ara-C, will provide an opportunity to identify 
patients at an increased risk of adverse reactions or decreased likelihood of 
response, based upon their genetic profile, which in future could help in dose 
optimization to reduce drug toxicity without compromising efficacy. The 
pharmacogenetic studies on ara-C would also be equally applicable to other 
nucleoside analogs, such as gemcitabine, decitabine, clofarabine and so on, 
which are metabolized by the same pathway.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs.09.118
PMCID: PMC2828057
PMID: 19842938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]