1. Anal Biochem. 2010 Mar 1;398(1):15-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2009.10.031. Epub
2009  Oct 21.

Optimization of time-resolved fluorescence assay for detection of 
europium-tetraazacyclododecyltetraacetic acid-labeled ligand-receptor 
interactions.

De Silva CR(1), Vagner J, Lynch R, Gillies RJ, Hruby VJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Lanthanide-based luminescent ligand binding assays are superior to traditional 
radiolabel assays due to improving sensitivity and affordability in 
high-throughput screening while eliminating the use of radioactivity. Despite 
significant progress using lanthanide(III)-coordinated chelators such as 
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) derivatives, dissociation-enhanced 
lanthanide fluoroimmunoassays (DELFIAs) have not yet been successfully used with 
more stable chelators (e.g., tetraazacyclododecyltetraacetic acid [DOTA] 
derivatives) due to the incomplete release of lanthanide(III) ions from the 
complex. Here a modified and optimized DELFIA procedure incorporating an acid 
treatment protocol is introduced for use with Eu(III)-DOTA-labeled peptides. 
Complete release of Eu(III) ions from DOTA-labeled ligands was observed using 
hydrochloric acid (2.0M) prior to the luminescent enhancement step. 
[Nle(4),d-Phe(7)]-alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (NDP-alpha-MSH) labeled 
with Eu(III)-DOTA was synthesized, and the binding affinity to cells 
overexpressing the human melanocortin-4 (hMC4) receptor was evaluated using the 
modified protocol. Binding data indicate that the Eu(III)-DOTA-linked peptide 
bound to these cells with an affinity similar to its DTPA analogue. The modified 
DELFIA procedure was further used to monitor the binding of an 
Eu(III)-DOTA-labeled heterobivalent peptide to the cells expressing both hMC4 
and cholecystokinin-2 (CCK-2) receptors. The modified assay provides superior 
results and is appropriate for high-throughput screening of ligand libraries.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2009.10.031
PMCID: PMC2830854
PMID: 19852924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]