1. Biochemistry. 2009 Dec 1;48(47):11312-8. doi: 10.1021/bi901154t.

pH-Dependent configurations of a 5-chlorouracil-guanine base pair.

Theruvathu JA(1), Kim CH, Darwanto A, Neidigh JW, Sowers LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma 
Linda, California 92350, USA.

Hypochlorous acid (HOCl) from activated neutrophils at sites of inflammation can 
react with and damage biological molecules, including nucleic acids. The 
reaction of HOCl with cytosine analogues can generate multiple products, 
including 5-chlorouracil (ClU). In this paper, we have constructed 
oligonucleotides containing ClU paired opposite guanine (ClU-G). Melting studies 
indicate that oligonucleotide duplexes containing the ClU-G mispair are 
substantially less stable than those containing a ClU-A base pair. The melting 
temperature of the ClU-G mispair is not experimentally distinguishable from that 
of a T-G pair. NMR studies indicate that the ClU-G base pair adopts a wobble 
geometry at neutral pH, similar to a T-G mispair. The exchangeable protons of 
the ClU-G mispair broaden rapidly with an increase in temperature, indicating 
that the ClU-G mispair is less stable and opens more easily than the surrounding 
adjacent base pairs. Unlike the ClU-A base pair studied previously [Theruvathu, 
J. A., et al. (2009) Biochemistry 48, 7539-7546], the ClU-G mispair undergoes a 
pH-dependent structural change, assuming an ionized base pair configuration that 
approximates a Watson-Crick base pair at higher pH. Ionization of ClU in a DNA 
template could promote mispair formation and mutation, in accord with previous 
studies on other 5-halouracil analogues. The electron-withdrawing 5-chloro 
substituent facilitates ionization of the ClU N3 proton, promoting mispair 
formation, but it also renders the glycosidic bond susceptible to base cleavage 
by DNA repair glycosylases.

DOI: 10.1021/bi901154t
PMCID: PMC3985288
PMID: 19863157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]