1. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Dec;30(12):2047-52. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp258.

Genetic variations in PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway and bladder cancer risk.

Chen M(1), Cassidy A, Gu J, Delclos GL, Zhen F, Yang H, Hildebrandt MA, Lin J, 
Ye Y, Chamberlain RM, Dinney CP, Wu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Genetic variations in phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) pathway may affect critical cellular functions and increase an 
individual's cancer risk. We systematically evaluate 231 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 19 genes in the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling pathway as 
predictors of bladder cancer risk. In individual SNP analysis, four SNPs in 
regulatory associated protein of mTOR (RAPTOR) remained significant after 
correcting for multiple testing: rs11653499 [odds ratio (OR): 1.79, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.24-2.60, P = 0.002], rs7211818 (OR: 2.13, 95% CI: 
1.35-3.36, P = 0.001), rs7212142 (OR: 1.57, 95% CI: 1.19-2.07, P = 0.002) and 
rs9674559 (OR: 2.05, 95% CI: 1.31-3.21, P = 0.002), among which rs7211818 and 
rs9674559 are within the same haplotype block. In haplotype analysis, compared 
with the most common haplotypes, haplotype containing the rs7212142 wild-type 
allele showed a protective effect of bladder cancer (OR: 0.83, 95% CI: 
0.70-0.97). In contrast, the haplotype containing the rs7211818 variant allele 
showed a 1.32-fold elevated bladder cancer risk (95% CI: 1.09-1.60). In combined 
analysis of three independent significant RAPTOR SNPs (rs11653499, rs7211818 and 
rs7212142), a significant trend was observed for increased risk with an increase 
in the number of unfavorable genotypes (P for trend <0.001). Compared with the 
subjects without any of the unfavorable genotypes, those carrying all three 
unfavorable genotypes showed a 2.22-fold (95% CI: 1.33-3.71) increased bladder 
cancer risk. This is the first study to evaluate the role of germ line genetic 
variations in PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway as cancer susceptibility factors that will 
help us identify high-risk individuals for bladder cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgp258
PMCID: PMC2792319
PMID: 19875696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]