1. Infect Immun. 2010 Jan;78(1):453-60. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00895-09. Epub 2009 Nov
2.

A novel functional variant in the stem cell growth factor promoter protects 
against severe malarial anemia.

Ouma C(1), Keller CC, Davenport GC, Were T, Konah S, Otieno MF, Hittner JB, 
Vulule JM, Martinson J, Ong'echa JM, Ferrell RE, Perkins DJ.

Author information:
(1)University of New Mexico/KEMRI Laboratories of Parasitic and Viral Diseases, 
Centre for Global Health Research, Kenya Medical Research Institute, Kisumu, 
Kenya.

Plasmodium falciparum malaria is a leading global cause of infectious disease 
burden. In areas in which P. falciparum transmission is holoendemic, such as 
western Kenya, severe malarial anemia (SMA) results in high rates of pediatric 
morbidity and mortality. Although the pathophysiological basis of SMA is 
multifactorial, we recently discovered that suppression of unexplored 
hematopoietic growth factors that promote erythroid and myeloid colony 
development, such as stem cell growth factor (SCGF) (C-type lectin domain family 
member 11A [CLEC11A]), was associated with enhanced development of SMA and 
reduced erythropoietic responses. To extend these investigations, the 
relationships between a novel SCGF promoter variant (-539C/T, rs7246355), SMA 
(hemoglobin [Hb] < 6.0 g/dl), and reduced erythropoietic responses (reticulocyte 
production index [RPI], <2.0) were investigated with Kenyan children (n = 486) 
with falciparum malaria from western Kenya. Circulating SCGF was positively 
correlated with hemoglobin levels (r = 0.251; P = 0.022) and the reticulocyte 
production index (RPI) (r = 0.268; P = 0.025). Children with SMA also had lower 
SCGF levels than those in the non-SMA group (P = 0.005). Multivariate logistic 
regression analyses controlling for covariates demonstrated that individuals 
with the homologous T allele were protected against SMA (odds ratio, 0.57; 95% 
confidence interval [95% CI] 0.34 to 0.94; P = 0.027) relative to CC (wild-type) 
carriers. Carriers of the TT genotype also had higher SCGF levels in circulation 
(P = 0.018) and in peripheral blood mononuclear cell culture supernatants (P = 
0.041), as well as an elevated RPI (P = 0.005) relative to individuals with the 
CC genotype. The results presented here demonstrate that homozygous T at -539 in 
the SCGF promoter is associated with elevated SCGF production, enhanced 
erythropoiesis, and protection against the development of SMA in children with 
falciparum malaria.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00895-09
PMCID: PMC2798205
PMID: 19884328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]