1. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Nov 15;15(22):7036-44. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1544.  Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Effect of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor on circulating CD8+ 
and CD4+ T-cell responses to a multipeptide melanoma vaccine: outcome of a 
multicenter randomized trial.

Slingluff CL Jr(1), Petroni GR, Olson WC, Smolkin ME, Ross MI, Haas NB, Grosh 
WW, Boisvert ME, Kirkwood JM, Chianese-Bullock KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery/Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Public 
Health Sciences, and Department of Medicine/Division of Hematology-Oncology, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

PURPOSE: Granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) administered 
locally together with vaccines can augment T-cell responses in animal models. 
Human experience has been limited to small and uncontrolled trials. Thus, a 
multicenter randomized phase II trial was done to determine whether local 
administration of GM-CSF augments immunogenicity of a multipeptide vaccine. It 
also assessed immunogenicity of administration in one versus two vaccine sites.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred twenty-one eligible patients with resected 
stage IIB to IV melanoma were vaccinated with 12 MHC class I-restricted melanoma 
peptides to stimulate CD8+ T cells plus a HLA-DR-restricted tetanus helper 
peptide to stimulate CD4+ T cells, emulsified in incomplete Freund's adjuvant, 
with or without 110 microg GM-CSF. Among 119 evaluable patients, T-cell 
responses were assessed by IFN-gamma ELIspot assay and tetramer analysis. 
Clinical outcomes were recorded.
RESULTS: CD8+ T-cell response rates to the 12 MHC class I-restricted melanoma 
peptides (by day 50) with or without GM-CSF were 34% and 73%, respectively (P < 
0.001), by direct ELIspot assay. Tetramer analyses corroborated the functional 
data. CD4+ T-cell responses to tetanus helper peptide were higher without GM-CSF 
(95% versus 77%; P = 0.005). There was no significant difference by number of 
vaccine sites. Three-year overall and disease-free survival estimates (95% 
confidence interval) were 76% (67-83%) and 52% (43-61%), respectively, with too 
few events to assess differences by study group.
CONCLUSIONS: High immune response rates for this multipeptide vaccine were 
achieved, but CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell responses were lower when administered with 
GM-CSF. These data challenge the value of local GM-CSF as a vaccine adjuvant in 
humans.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1544
PMCID: PMC2778314
PMID: 19903780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]