1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):170-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.026. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Engineered drug-resistant immunocompetent cells enhance tumor cell killing 
during a chemotherapy challenge.

Dasgupta A(1), McCarty D, Spencer HT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Establishment of immunocompetent cell mediated anti-tumor immunity is often 
mitigated by the myelosuppressive effects during administration of chemotherapy. 
We hypothesized that protecting these immune cells from drug induced toxicities 
may allow for the combined administration of immunotherapy and chemotherapy. 
Using a SIV-based lentiviral gene transfer system we delivered the 
drug-resistant variant P140KMGMT into the immunocompetent cell lines NK-92 and 
TALL-104, and the myelogenous leukemia cell line, K562, which is a target for 
both NK-92 and TALL-104 cells. Genetically engineered immunocompetent cells 
developed significant resistance to temozolomide compared to non-modified cells, 
and genetic modification of these cells did not affect their ability to kill 
K562 cells. We then evaluated the effectiveness of drug-resistant 
immunocompetent cell mediated killing of tumor cells in the presence and absence 
of chemotherapy. During a chemotherapy challenge the cytotoxic activity of 
non-modified immunocompetent cells was dramatically impaired. However, when 
combined with chemotherapy, genetically-modified immune cells retained their 
cytotoxic activities and efficiently killed non-modified target cells. These 
results show that engineering immunocompetent cells to withstand chemotherapy 
challenges can enhance tumor cell killing when chemotherapy is applied in 
conjunction with cell-based immunotherapy.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.026
PMCID: PMC2812687
PMID: 19903457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]