1. Metabolism. 2010 Apr;59(4):581-6. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.08.021. Epub
2009  Nov 14.

Gly482Ser polymorphism in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
coactivator-1alpha gene is associated with oxidative stress and abdominal 
obesity.

Weng SW(1), Lin TK, Wang PW, Chen IY, Lee HC, Chen SD, Chuang YC, Liou CW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, 
Kaohsiung 83305, Taiwan.

The objective of the study was to o investigate the relationship of the 
Gly482Ser (G482S) polymorphism in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma coactivator-1alpha (PPARGC1A) gene and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), 
obesity, and oxidative status in Chinese adults. We enrolled 276 T2DM patients 
and 1049 nondiabetic subjects aged at least 35 years. The G482S variant was 
detected using polymerase chain reaction and restriction enzyme digestion. The 
levels of thiobarbituric acid reactive substance, an indicator of lipid 
peroxidation, were measured in plasma samples. The homeostasis model 
assessment-estimated insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index was determined for 
nondiabetic subjects. P values were adjusted for age, sex, and body mass index 
by using a generalized linear model. In this series, there was no association 
between G482S polymorphism and T2DM and obesity (body mass index >25 kg/m(2)). 
However, the plasma fasting insulin levels and HOMA-IR indices were 
significantly higher in nondiabetic subjects harboring the variant (S/S) 
genotype than in those with the heterozygous (G/S) genotype. With regard to the 
effect of the different genotypes on body fat distribution, overweight 
nondiabetic subjects harboring the S/S or G/S genotype had a significantly 
higher waist-to-hip ratio than those with the wild-type (G/G) genotype. 
Furthermore, subjects with the S/S genotype had significantly higher serum 
thiobarbituric acid reactive substance levels than those with the G/G genotype; 
the diabetic group mainly contributed to this significant association (P < 
.001). In overweight, nondiabetic Chinese adults, G482S polymorphism in the 
PPARGC1A gene is associated with hyperinsulinemia, HOMA-IR indices, and 
abdominal obesity. Furthermore, in hyperglycemia, the S482 allele is related to 
increased oxidative stress.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.08.021
PMID: 19913841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]