1. Curr Pharm Des. 2009;15(32):3782-95. doi: 10.2174/138161209789649475.

Use of cell lines in the investigation of pharmacogenetic loci.

Zhang W(1), Dolan ME.

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Drug response and toxicity, complex traits that are often highly varied among 
individuals, likely involve multiple genetic and non-genetic factors. 
Pharmacogenomic research aims to individualize therapy in an effort to maximize 
efficacy and minimize toxicity for each patient. Cell lines can be used as a 
model system for cellular pharmacologic effects, which include, but are not 
limited to, drug-induced cytotoxicity or apoptosis, biochemical effects and 
enzymatic reactions. Because severe toxicities may be associated with drugs such 
as chemotherapeutics, cell lines derived from healthy individuals or patients 
provide a convenient model to study how human genetic variation alters response 
to these drugs that would be unsafe or unethical to administer to human 
volunteers. In addition to the traditional candidate gene approaches that focus 
on well-understood candidate genes and pathways, the availability of extensive 
genotypic and phenotypic data on some cell line models has begun to allow 
genome-wide association (GWA) studies to simultaneously test the entire human 
genome for associations with drug response and toxicity. Though with some 
important limitations, the use of these cell lines in pharmacogenomic discovery 
demonstrates the promise of constructing a more comprehensive model that may 
ultimately integrate both genetic and non-genetic factors to predict individual 
response and toxicity to anticancer drugs.

DOI: 10.2174/138161209789649475
PMCID: PMC2782819
PMID: 19925429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]