1. Auton Neurosci. 2010 Apr 19;154(1-2):30-41. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2009.10.002.
 Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Neuroanatomic relationships between the GABAergic and serotonergic systems in 
the developing human medulla.

Broadbelt KG(1), Paterson DS, Rivera KD, Trachtenberg FL, Kinney HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
kevin.broadbelt@childrens.harvard.edu

gamma-Amino butyric (GABA) critically influences serotonergic (5-HT) neurons in 
the raphé and extra-raphé of the medulla oblongata. In this study we hypothesize 
that there are marked changes in the developmental profile of markers of the 
human medullary GABAergic system relative to the 5-HT system in early life. We 
used single- and double-label immunocytochemistry and tissue receptor 
autoradiography in 15 human medullae from fetal and infant cases ranging from 15 
gestational weeks to 10 postnatal months, and compared our findings with an 
extensive 5-HT-related database in our laboratory. In the raphé obscurus, we 
identified two subsets of GABAergic neurons using glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD65/67) immunostaining: one comprised of small, round neurons; the other, 
medium, spindle-shaped neurons. In three term medullae cases, positive 
immunofluorescent neurons for both tryptophan hydroxylase and GAD65/67 were 
counted within the raphé obscurus. This revealed that approximately 6% of the 
total neurons counted in this nucleus expressed both GAD65/67 and TPOH 
suggesting co-production of GABA by a subset of 5-HT neurons. The distribution 
of GABA(A) binding was ubiquitous across medullary nuclei, with highest binding 
in the raphé obscurus. GABA(A) receptor subtypes alpha1 and alpha3 were 
expressed by 5-HT neurons, indicating the site of interaction of GABA with 5-HT 
neurons. These receptor subtypes and KCC2, a major chloride transporter, were 
differentially expressed across early development, from midgestation (20 weeks) 
and thereafter. The developmental profile of GABAergic markers changed 
dramatically relative to the 5-HT markers. These data provide baseline 
information for medullary studies of human pediatric disorders, such as sudden 
infant death syndrome.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2009.10.002
PMCID: PMC2844926
PMID: 19926534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]