1. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2010 Apr;54(4):543-50. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.200900085.

PPARalpha L162V polymorphism alters the potential of n-3 fatty acids to increase 
lipoprotein lipase activity.

Rudkowska I(1), Caron-Dorval D, Verreault M, Couture P, Deshaies Y, Barbier O, 
Vohl MC.

Author information:
(1)Lipid Research Center, CHUL Research Center, Sainte-Foy, Qu√©bec, Canada.

Omega-3 fatty acids (FAs) may accelerate plasma triglyceride (TG) clearance by 
altering lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity. Yet, the ability of n-3 FAs to 
increase LPL activity is dependent on transcription factors such as peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha). The objective was to examine 
the effects of n-3 FAs on LPL activity considering the occurrence of PPARalpha 
L162V polymorphism. First, 14 pairs of men either L162 homozygotes or carriers 
of the V162 allele were supplemented with n-3 FAs. Second, transient 
transfections in HepG2 cells, for the L162- and V162-PPARalpha variants with the 
peroxisome proliferator-response element from the human LPL gene, were 
transactivated with n-3 FAs. In vivo results demonstrate that the LPL activity 
increased non-significantly by 14.4% in L162 homozygotes compared with 6.6% in 
carriers of the PPARalpha-V162 allele, after n-3 FA supplementation. 
Additionally, the L162 homozygotes tended towards an inverse correlation between 
LPL activities and plasma TG levels. Conversely, carriers of the V162 allele 
showed no such relationship. In vitro data demonstrates that transcription rates 
of LPL tended to be higher for the L162-PPARalpha than V162-PPARalpha after n-3 
FAs activation. Overall, these results indicate that n-3 FA supplementation 
increases the transcription rate of LPL to a greater extent in L162-PPARalpha 
than V162-PPARalpha.

DOI: 10.1002/mnfr.200900085
PMID: 19937854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]