1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010 Aug;25(8):2520-3. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp632. Epub 
2009 Nov 23.

MEFV gene compound heterozygous mutations in familial Mediterranean fever 
phenotype: a retrospective clinical and molecular study.

Caglayan AO(1), Demiryilmaz F, Ozyazgan I, Gumus H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kayseri Education and Research Hospital, 
Kayseri, Turkey. aocaglayan@erciyes.edu.tr

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive 
inherited inflammatory disease caused by mutations in the MEFV gene that encodes 
pyrin/marenostrin. It is characterized by recurrent short episodes of fever, 
abdominal pain and serositis affecting mainly Mediterranean and Middle Eastern 
populations. We determined the frequency of the compound heterozygous mutations 
which has been rarely reported. The present study not only investigated clinical 
features of child-onset FMF patients with compound heterozygous mutations but 
also determined whether there is a phenotype-genotype correlation in the same 
patient population.
METHODS: The medical records of 66 heterozygous patients with FMF were 
retrospectively reviewed and assessed. Patients were investigated regarding the 
mutation type, clinical characteristics at the time of inflammatory attacks such 
as fever, abdominal pain, arthritis, chest pain, erysipelas-like erythema and 
oedema, epidemiological data, consanguinity, severity score and family history 
of FMF and amyloidosis.
RESULTS: The most frequent mutation was M694V, identified in 32% of the alleles 
examined, followed by E148Q in 20.6%, V726A in 17% and M680I in 14.5%, 
respectively. Consequently, we determined that P369S (n = 10; 8%) was the most 
frequent rare mutation in Turkish FMF patients. Frequency of the other rare 
mutations were R761H (3%), F479L (3%), A744S (1.5%) and K695R (0.7%). Fever was 
seen in 96.5%, abdominal pain in 98.5%, arthralgia in 85%, chest pain in 45.5% 
and erysipelas-like lesions in 23%. None of these patients had amyloidosis, but 
16 had a family history of chronic renal failure, 44% had vomiting and 35% had 
diarrhoea during the attack. Although regular colchicine treatment was effective 
in 83% of the patients, the percentage of patients that did not start colchicine 
therapy was 18%. In addition, the patients were divided into four groups 
according to the presence of the mutation types and we compared 
genotype-phenotype correlations.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that regular colchicine therapy may be administered to 
symptomatic patients with MEVF gene compound heterozygous mutations, regardless 
of the mutation type.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfp632
PMID: 19934083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]