1. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan 1;28(1):160-5. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.4491. Epub 2009
 Nov 23.

Cytidine deaminase residual activity in serum is a predictive marker of early 
severe toxicities in adults after gemcitabine-based chemotherapies.

Ciccolini J(1), Dahan L, AndrÃ© N, Evrard A, Duluc M, Blesius A, Yang C, 
Giacometti S, Brunet C, Raynal C, Ortiz A, Frances N, Iliadis A, Duffaud F, 
Seitz JF, Mercier C.

Author information:
(1)Md, Medical Oncology Unit, La Timone University Hospital, 205 Rue St Pierre, 
13385, Marseille, cedex 05, France.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 May 10;28(14):e221-2; author reply e223-5. doi: 
10.1200/JCO.2009.27.4928.

PURPOSE Anticipating toxicities with gemcitabine is an ongoing story, and 
deregulation in cytidine deaminase (CDA) could be associated with increased risk 
of developing early severe toxicities on drug exposure. PATIENTS AND METHODS A 
simple test to evaluate CDA phenotypic status was first validated in an animal 
model investigating relationships between CDA activity and gemcitabine-related 
toxicities. Next, relevance of this test as a marker for toxicities was 
retrospectively tested in a first subset of 64 adult patients treated with 
gemcitabine alone, then it was tested in a larger group of 130 patients who 
received gemcitabine either alone or combined with other drugs and in 20 
children. Additionally, search for the 435 T>C, 208 G>A and 79 A>C mutations on 
the CDA gene was performed. Results In mice, CDA deficiency impacted on 
gemcitabine pharmacokinetics and had subsequent lethal toxicities. In human, 12% 
of adult patients experienced early severe toxicities after gemcitabine 
administration. A significant difference in CDA activities was observed between 
patients with and without toxicities (1.2 +/- 0.8 U/mg v 4 +/- 2.6 U/mg; P < 
.01). Conversely, no genotype-to-phenotype relationships were found. Of note, 
the patients who displayed particularly reduced CDA activity all experienced 
strong toxicities. Gemcitabine was well tolerated in children, and no CDA 
deficiency was evidenced. CONCLUSION Our data suggest that CDA functional 
testing could be a simple and easy marker to discriminate adult patients at risk 
of developing severe toxicities with gemcitabine. Particularly, this study 
demonstrates that CDA deficiency, found in 7% of adult patients, is associated 
with a maximum risk of developing early severe toxicities with gemcitabine.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.4491
PMID: 19933910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]