1. Iran Biomed J. 2009 Oct;13(4):199-206.

Association between HIC1 and RASSF1A promoter hypermethylation with MTHFD1 
G1958A polymorphism and clinicopathological features of breast cancer in Iranian 
patients.

Rasti M(1), Tavasoli P(1), Monabati A(2), Entezam M(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Medical School, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Dept. of Pathology, Medical School, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ras-associated domain family 1 (RASSF1A) and hypermethylated in 
cancer (HIC1) genes are methylated more frequently in breast cancer. Genetic 
factors that alter the DNA methylation levels in normal and tumor tissues could 
therefore influence the susceptibility to this tumor phenotype. We determined 
the frequency of aberrant methylation of HIC1 and RASSF1A gene promoters and 
their association with methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (MTHFD1) G1958A 
polymorphism and major clinical and pathological features of breast cancer in 
Iranian women.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from 81 primary breast tumors and 100 control blood 
samples. Gene promoter methylation was analyzed by methylation-specific 
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Eighty four percent of the breast cancer samples showed total 
methylation in at least one of two tested loci. We detected HIC1 
hypermethylation in 79% of invasive and metastasis tumors and RASSF1A gene 
hypermethylation in 51% of them. We found no association between HIC1 and 
RASSF1A gene hypermethylation and MTHFD1 G1958A polymorphism, but a significant 
correlation between methylation of HIC1 and RASSF1A promoters was indicated (r = 
0.24, P = 0.02). There was a combination between hypermethylation of HIC1 locus 
and nodal involvement in the studied population (p=0.03). We found a significant 
association between total methylation and nodal involvement (P = 0.01) as well 
as tumor size more than 2 cm in all cases (P = 0.02).
CONCLUSION: Methylation of HIC1 and RASSF1A promoters can be used as epigenetic 
markers to detect the malignant progression of breast carcinoma in Iranian women 
patients.

PMID: 19946345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]