1. J Thromb Haemost. 2010 Feb;8(2):369-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03700.x.
 Epub 2009 Nov 23.

VAMP8/endobrevin is overexpressed in hyperreactive human platelets: suggested 
role for platelet microRNA.

Kondkar AA(1), Bray MS, Leal SM, Nagalla S, Liu DJ, Jin Y, Dong JF, Ren Q, 
Whiteheart SW, Shaw C, Bray PF.

Author information:
(1)Thomas Jefferson University, The Cardeza Foundation for Hematologic Research 
and the Department of Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Variation in platelet reactivity contributes to disorders of 
hemostasis and thrombosis, but the molecular mechanisms are not well understood.
OBJECTIVES: To discover associations between interindividual platelet 
variability and the responsible platelet genes, and to begin to define the 
molecular mechanisms altering platelet gene expression.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Two hundred and eighty-eight healthy subjects were phenotyped 
for platelet responsiveness. Platelet RNA from subjects demonstrating 
hyperreactivity (n=18) and hyporeactivity (n=11) was used to screen the human 
transcriptome.
RESULTS: Distinctly different mRNA profiles were observed between subjects with 
differing platelet reactivity. Increased levels of mRNA for VAMP8/endobrevin, a 
critical v-SNARE involved in platelet granule secretion, were associated with 
platelet hyperreactivity (Q=0.0275). Validation studies of microarray results 
showed 4.8-fold higher mean VAMP8 mRNA levels in hyperreactive than hyporeactive 
platelets (P=0.0023). VAMP8 protein levels varied 13-fold among platelets from 
these normal subjects, and were 2.5-fold higher in hyperreactive platelets 
(P=0.05). Among our cohort of 288 subjects, a VAMP8 single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (rs1010) was associated with platelet reactivity in an 
age-dependent manner (P<0.003). MicroRNA-96 was predicted to bind to the 
3'-untranslated regionof VAMP8 mRNA and was detected in platelets. 
Overexpression of microRNA-96 in VAMP8-expressing cell lines caused a 
dose-dependent decrease in VAMP8 protein and mRNA, suggesting a role in VAMP8 
mRNA degradation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support a role for VAMP8/endobrevin in the 
heterogeneity of platelet reactivity, and suggest a role for microRNA-96 in the 
regulation of VAMP8 expression.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03700.x
PMCID: PMC3312605
PMID: 19943878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Conflict of Interests The authors 
state that they have no conflict of interest.