1. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Feb 28;42(2):81-6. doi: 10.3858/emm.2010.42.2.009.

Exon deletions of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in Italian 
hyperphenylalaninemics.

Cali F(1), Ruggeri G, Vinci M, Meli C, Carducci C, Leuzzi V, Pozzessere S, 
Schinocca P, Ragalmuto A, Chiavetta V, Micciche S, Romano V.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Associazione Oasi Maria SS. (I.R.C.C.S.), 
Troina (EN), Italy.

A consistent finding of many studies describing the spectrum of mutant 
phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) alleles underlying hyperphenylalaninemia is the 
impossibility of achieving a 100% mutation ascertainment rate using conventional 
gene-scanning methods. These methods include denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis (DGGE), denaturing high performance liquid chromatography 
(DHPLC), and direct sequencing. In recent years, it has been shown that a 
significant proportion of undetermined alleles consist of large deletions 
overlapping one or more exons. These deletions have been difficult to detect in 
compound heterozygotes using gene-scanning methods due to a masking effect of 
the non-deleted allele. To date, no systematic search has been carried out for 
such exon deletions in Italian patients with phenylketonuria or mild 
hyperphenylalaninemia. We used multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 
(MLPA), comparative multiplex dosage analysis (CMDA), and real-time PCR to 
search for both large deletions and duplications of the phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene in Italian hyperphenylalaninemia patients. Four deletions 
removing different phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene exons were identified in 
12 patients. Two of these deletions involving exons 4-5-6-7-8 (systematic name 
c.353-?_912+?del) and exon 6 (systematic name c.510-?_706+?del) have not been 
reported previously. In this study, we show that exon deletion of the PAH gene 
accounts for 1.7% of all mutant PAH alleles in Italian hyperphenylalaninemics.

DOI: 10.3858/emm.2010.42.2.009
PMCID: PMC2827832
PMID: 19946181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]