1. J Korean Med Sci. 2009 Dec;24(6):1004-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.6.1004.
Epub  2009 Nov 7.

Association of cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 gene polymorphisms and HLA class 
II alleles with the development of type 1 diabetes in Korean children and 
adolescents.

Jung MH(1), Yu J, Shin CH, Suh BK, Yang SW, Lee BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

We studied the association of cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 gene (CTLA4) 
polymorphisms with the development of type 1 diabetes (T1D) in Korean children 
and adolescents. A total of 176 Korean subjects (92 females and 84 males) with 
childhood-onset T1D were studied. The A/G polymorphism at position 49 in CTLA4 
exon 1 and the C/T polymorphism at position -318 in the CTLA4 promoter were 
analyzed by PCR-RFLP methods. The genotype and allele frequencies of the CTLA4 
polymorphisms in the T1D patients were not different from those in the controls. 
These polymorphisms were not associated with the clinical characteristics or the 
development of autoimmune thyroid disease in the T1D patients. The frequency of 
the A allele was significantly higher in the patients that did not have two out 
of the three susceptible HLA-DRB1 alleles, which were DRB1*0301, *0405 and 
*09012, compared to the controls (P<0.05). These results suggest that CTLA4 
polymorphisms do not directly confer any susceptibility to T1D. However, a 
CTLA4-mediated susceptibility effect on the development of T1D might be 
significant in children and adolescents that do not have susceptible HLA class 
II alleles.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.6.1004
PMCID: PMC2775844
PMID: 19949652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]