1. J Neurosci. 2009 Dec 2;29(48):15145-54. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4259-09.2009.

The role of rhodopsin glycosylation in protein folding, trafficking, and 
light-sensitive retinal degeneration.

Tam BM(1), Moritz OL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Centre for Macular 
Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Several mutations in the N terminus of the G-protein-coupled receptor rhodopsin 
disrupt NXS/T consensus sequences for N-linked glycosylation (located at N2 and 
N15) and cause sector retinitis pigmentosa in which the inferior retina 
preferentially degenerates. Here we examined the role of rhodopsin glycosylation 
in biosynthesis, trafficking, and retinal degeneration (RD) using transgenic 
Xenopus laevis expressing glycosylation-defective human rhodopsin mutants. 
Although mutations T4K and T4N caused RD, N2S and T4V did not, demonstrating 
that glycosylation at N2 was not required for photoreceptor viability. In 
contrast, similar mutations eliminating glycosylation at N15 (N15S and T17M) 
caused rod death. Expression of T17M was more toxic than T4K to transgenic 
photoreceptors, further suggesting that glycosylation at N15 plays a more 
important physiological role than glycosylation at N2. Together, these results 
indicate that the structure of the rhodopsin N terminus must be maintained by an 
appropriate amino acid sequence surrounding N2 and may require a carbohydrate 
moiety at N15. The mutant rhodopsins were rendered less toxic in their dark 
inactive states, because RD was abolished or significantly reduced when 
transgenic tadpoles expressing T4K, T17M, and N2S/N15S were protected from light 
exposure. Regardless of their effect on rod viability, all of the mutants 
primarily localized to the outer segment and Golgi and showed little or no 
endoplasmic reticulum accumulation. Thus, glycosylation was not crucial for 
rhodopsin biosynthesis or trafficking. Interestingly, expression of similar 
bovine rhodopsin mutants did not cause rod cell death, possibly attributable to 
greater stability of bovine rhodopsin.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4259-09.2009
PMCID: PMC6665958
PMID: 19955366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]