1. Genome. 2009 Dec;52(12):1001-11. doi: 10.1139/G09-078.

Molecular cloning, sequence characteristics, and polymorphism analyses of the 
tyrosinase-related protein 2 / DOPAchrome tautomerase gene of black-boned sheep 
(Ovis aries).

Deng W(1), Tan Y, Wang X, Xi D, He Y, Yang S, Mao H, Gao S.

Author information:
(1)Yunnan Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed, Faculty of 
Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, 
China.

Tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TYRP2) plays a pivotal role in the biosynthesis of 
eumelanin. Black-boned sheep have excessive melanin and eumelanin, resulting in 
dark (black) muscles and organs. This study was designed to investigate the 
effects of variants of the TYRP2 gene on black traits and coat colour of 
black-boned sheep. Melanin traits were measured in three populations of sheep 
(Nanping black-boned, Nanping normal, and Romney Marsh) and compared in this 
study. From the TYRP2 cDNA, all 8 exons and their flanking regions were 
amplified and characterized. Fifteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were 
identified in the exons and their flanking regions. Five exonic polymorphic 
sites, including two synonymous (c.93T>G and c.1140C>T) and three non-synonymous 
mutations (c.163C>T (p.R55W), c.605G>A (p.R202H), and c.1141A>G (p.T381A)), were 
retrieved. PCR-RFLP analysis of c.605G>A showed that the frequencies of allele G 
in the Nanping black-boned, Nanping normal, and Romney Marsh sheep were 0.632, 
0.603, and 0.886, respectively. Sheep with the GG genotype had significantly (P 
< 0.05) lower tyrosinase activity, alkali-soluble melanin content, and ratio of 
eumelanin : total melanin than sheep with GA and AA genotypes when measured 
across all investigated samples but not when samples within each population of 
sheep were compared. However, there was no association of TYRP2 genotype at a 
single SNP position with coat colour across populations. Nonetheless, the two 
breeds with higher overall tyrosinase activity did produce darker and more 
varied coat colours than the breed with lower tyrosinase activity.

DOI: 10.1139/G09-078
PMID: 19953128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]