1. J Neurosci. 2009 Dec 2;29(48):15155-60. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4416-09.2009.

The tumor suppressor p53 transcriptionally regulates cGKI expression during 
neuronal maturation and is required for cGMP-dependent growth cone collapse.

Tedeschi A(1), Nguyen T, Steele SU, Feil S, Naumann U, Feil R, Di Giovanni S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurology, Laboratory for NeuroRegeneration and Repair, University 
of Tuebingen, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

The cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I (cGKI) has multiple functions including 
a role in axonal growth and pathfinding of sensory neurons, and counteracts 
Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A)-induced growth cone collapse. Within the nervous system, 
however, the transcriptional regulation of cGKI is still obscure. Recently, the 
transcription factor and tumor suppressor p53 has been reported to promote 
neurite outgrowth by regulating the gene expression of factors that promote 
growth cone extension, but specific p53 targets genes that may counteract growth 
cone collapse have not been identified so far. Here, we show that p53 promotes 
cGKI expression in neuronal-like PC-12 cells and primary neurons by occupying 
specific regulatory elements in a chromatin environment during neuronal 
maturation. Importantly, we demonstrate that p53-dependent expression of cGKI is 
required for the ability of cGMP to counteract growth cone collapse. Growth cone 
retraction mediated by Sema3A is overcome by cGMP only in wild-type, but not in 
p53-null dorsal root ganglia. Reconstitution of p53 levels is sufficient to 
recover both cGKI expression and the ability of cGMP to counteract growth cone 
collapse, while cGKI overexpression rescues growth cone collapse in p53-null 
primary neurons. In conclusion, this study identifies p53 as a transcription 
factor that regulates the expression of cGKI during neuronal maturation and 
cGMP-dependent inhibition of growth cone collapse.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4416-09.2009
PMCID: PMC2822954
PMID: 19955367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]