1. J Neurosci. 2009 Dec 2;29(48):15031-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0574-09.2009.

Progressive changes in synaptic inputs to motoneurons in adult sacral spinal 
cord of a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Jiang M(1), Schuster JE, Fu R, Siddique T, Heckman CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. m-jiang@northwestern.edu

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by progressive degeneration 
of motoneurons. One potential mechanism is excitotoxicity. We studied the 
behaviors of spinal neurons using an in vitro preparation of the sacral cord 
from the G93A SOD1 mouse model of ALS. Measurements were conducted at 
presymptomatic [approximately postnatal day 50 (approximately P50)], early 
(approximately P90), and late (>P120) stages of the disease. Short-latency 
reflexes (SRs) in ventral roots, presumably monosynaptic, were evoked by 
electrical stimulation of a dorsal root. The fraction of motoneurons capable of 
responding to this activation was evaluated by measuring the compound action 
potential [total motor activity (TMA)] evoked by antidromic stimulation of the 
distal ventral root. In mutant SOD1 (mSOD1) mice, both the SR and the TMA 
decreased with age compared with nontransgenic littermates, ruling out the SR as 
a source of increasing excitotoxicity. Spinal interneuron activity was assessed 
using the synchronized ventral root bursts generated by both bath application of 
blockers of inhibitory neurotransmitters (glycine, GABA(A)) and agonists of 
glutamate receptors (especially NMDA receptors). After symptom onset, a higher 
percentage of preparations from mSOD1 mice exhibited bursting, and these bursts 
exhibited more sub-bursts and a more disorganized pattern. In mSOD1 mice with 
clear muscle tremor, the ventral roots exhibited spontaneous synchronized 
bursts, which were highly sensitive to the blockade of NMDA receptors. These 
data suggest that although short-latency sensory input does not increase as 
symptoms develop, interneuron activity does increase and may contribute to 
excitotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0574-09.2009
PMCID: PMC3000669
PMID: 19955354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]