1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Mar;38(4):1123-34. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1070. Epub 2009
 Dec 3.

Hierarchy of lesion processing governs the repair, double-strand break formation 
and mutability of three-lesion clustered DNA damage.

Eccles LJ(1), Lomax ME, O'Neill P.

Author information:
(1)CRUK-MRC Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology and Biology, University of 
Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK.

Ionising radiation induces clustered DNA damage sites which pose a severe 
challenge to the cell's repair machinery, particularly base excision repair. To 
date, most studies have focussed on two-lesion clusters. We have designed 
synthetic oligonucleotides to give a variety of three-lesion clusters containing 
abasic sites and 8-oxo-7, 8-dihydroguanine to investigate if the hierarchy of 
lesion processing dictates whether the cluster is cytotoxic or mutagenic. 
Clusters containing two tandem 8-oxoG lesions opposing an AP site showed 
retardation of repair of the AP site with nuclear extract and an elevated 
mutation frequency after transformation into wild-type or mutY Escherichia coli. 
Clusters containing bistranded AP sites with a vicinal 8-oxoG form DSBs with 
nuclear extract, as confirmed in vivo by transformation into wild-type E. coli. 
Using ung1 E. coli, we propose that DSBs arise via lesion processing rather than 
stalled replication in cycling cells. This study provides evidence that it is 
not only the prompt formation of DSBs that has implications on cell survival but 
also the conversion of non-DSB clusters into DSBs during processing and 
attempted repair. The inaccurate repair of such clusters has biological 
significance due to the ultimate risk of tumourigenesis or as potential 
cytotoxic lesions in tumour cells.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkp1070
PMCID: PMC2831305
PMID: 19965771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]