1. Curr Biol. 2009 Dec 29;19(24):2126-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.10.070. Epub
2009  Dec 10.

Preferential ethanol consumption in Drosophila models features of addiction.

Devineni AV(1), Heberlein U.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-2822, USA. 
anita.devineni@ucsf.edu

Alcohol addiction is a common affliction with a strong genetic component [1]. 
Although mammalian studies have provided significant insight into the molecular 
mechanisms underlying ethanol consumption [2], other organisms such as 
Drosophila melanogaster are better suited for unbiased, forward genetic 
approaches to identify novel genes. Behavioral responses to ethanol, such as 
hyperactivity, sedation, and tolerance, are conserved between flies and mammals 
[3, 4], as are the underlying molecular pathways [5-9]. However, few studies 
have investigated ethanol self-administration in flies [10]. Here we 
characterize ethanol consumption and preference in Drosophila. Flies prefer to 
consume ethanol-containing food over regular food, and this preference increases 
over time. Flies are attracted to the smell of ethanol, which partially mediates 
ethanol preference, but are averse to its taste. Preference for consuming 
ethanol is not entirely explained by attraction to either its sensory or caloric 
properties. We demonstrate that flies can exhibit features of alcohol addiction. 
First, flies self-administer ethanol to pharmacologically relevant 
concentrations. Second, flies will overcome an aversive stimulus in order to 
consume ethanol. Third, flies rapidly return to high levels of ethanol 
consumption after a period of imposed abstinence. Thus, ethanol preference in 
Drosophila provides a new model for studying aspects of addiction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.10.070
PMCID: PMC2805771
PMID: 20005106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]