1. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Jan 13;132(1):157-67. doi: 10.1021/ja904818z.

Influence of the nitrogen donors on nonheme iron models of superoxide reductase: 
high-spin Fe(III)-OOR complexes.

Namuswe F(1), Hayashi T, Jiang Y, Kasper GD, Sarjeant AA, MoÃ«nne-Loccoz P, 
Goldberg DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, 
USA.

A new five-coordinate, (N(4)S(thiolate))Fe(II) complex, containing tertiary 
amine donors, [Fe(II)(Me(4)[15]aneN(4))(SPh)]BPh(4) (2), was synthesized and 
structurally characterized as a model of the reduced active site of superoxide 
reductase (SOR). Reaction of 2 with tert-butyl hydroperoxide (tBuOOH) at -78 
degrees C led to the generation of the alkylperoxo-iron(III) complex 
[Fe(III)(Me(4)[15]aneN(4))(SPh)(OOtBu)](+) (2a). The nonthiolate-ligated 
complex, [Fe(II)(Me(4)[15]aneN(4))(OTf)(2)] (3), was also reacted with tBuOOH 
and yielded the corresponding alkylperoxo complex 
[Fe(III)(Me(4)[15]aneN(4))(OTf)(OOtBu)](+) (3a) at an elevated temperature of 
-23 degrees C. These species were characterized by low-temperature UV-vis, EPR, 
and resonance Raman spectroscopies. Complexes 2a and 3a exhibit distinctly 
different spectroscopic signatures than the analogous alkylperoxo complexes 
[Fe(III)([15]aneN(4))(SAr)(OOR)](+), which contain secondary amine donors. 
Importantly, alkylation at nitrogen leads to a change from low-spin (S = 1/2) to 
high-spin (S = 5/2) of the iron(III) center. The resonance Raman data reveal 
that this change in spin state has a large effect on the nu(Fe-O) and nu(O-O) 
vibrations, and a comparison between 2a and the nonthiolate-ligated complex 3a 
shows that axial ligation has an additional significant impact on these 
vibrations. To our knowledge this study is the first in which the influence of a 
ligand trans to a peroxo moiety has been evaluated for a structurally equivalent 
pair of high-spin/low-spin peroxo-iron(III) complexes. The implications of spin 
state and thiolate ligation are discussed with regard to the functioning of SOR.

DOI: 10.1021/ja904818z
PMCID: PMC2868585
PMID: 20000711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]