1. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 14;4(12):e8280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008280.

Genetic variance in the spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (ATXN2) gene in children 
with severe early onset obesity.

Figueroa KP(1), Farooqi S, Harrup K, Frank J, O'Rahilly S, Pulst SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

BACKGROUND: Expansion of a CAG repeat in the coding region of exon 1 in the 
ATXN2 gene located in human chromosome 12q24.1 causes the neurodegenerative 
disease spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2). In contrast to other polyglutamine 
(polyQ) disorders, the SCA2 repeat is not highly polymorphic in central European 
(CEU) controls with Q22 representing 90% of alleles, and Q23 contributing 
between 5-7% of alleles. Recently, the ATXN2 CAG repeat has been identified as a 
target of adaptive selection in the CEU population. Mouse lines deficient for 
atxn2 develop marked hyperphagia and obesity raising the possibility that 
loss-of-function mutations in the ATXN2 gene may be related to energy balance in 
humans. Some linkage studies of obesity related phenotypes such as antipsychotic 
induced weight gain have reported significant lod scores on chromosome 12q24. We 
tested the hypothesis that rare loss-of-function ATXN2 variants cause obesity 
analogous to rare mutations in the leptin, leptin receptor and MC4R genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We sequenced the coding region of ATXN2 
including intron-exon boundaries in 92 severely obese children with a body mass 
index (BMI) >3.2 standard deviations above age- and gender-adjusted means. We 
confirmed five previously identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 
three new SNPs resulting in two synonymous substitutions and one intronic 
polymorphism. Alleles encoding >Q22 were overrepresented in our sample of obese 
children and contributed 15% of alleles in children identified by their parents 
as white. SNP rs695872 closely flanking the CAG repeat showed a greatly 
increased frequency of C/C homozygotes and G/C heterozygotes compared with 
reported frequencies in the CEU population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although we did not identify variants leading to novel 
amino acid substitutions, nonsense or frameshift mutations, this study warrants 
further examination of variation in the ATXN2 gene in obesity and related 
phenotypes in a larger case-control study with emphasis on rs695872 and CAG 
repeat structure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008280
PMCID: PMC2791421
PMID: 20016785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.