1. Syst Synth Biol. 2010 Mar;4(1):35-53. doi: 10.1007/s11693-009-9047-2. Epub
2009  Dec 10.

A new multicompartmental reaction-diffusion modeling method links transient 
membrane attachment of E. coli MinE to E-ring formation.

Arjunan SN, Tomita M.

Many important cellular processes are regulated by reaction-diffusion (RD) of 
molecules that takes place both in the cytoplasm and on the membrane. To model 
and analyze such multicompartmental processes, we developed a lattice-based 
Monte Carlo method, Spatiocyte that supports RD in volume and surface 
compartments at single molecule resolution. Stochasticity in RD and the excluded 
volume effect brought by intracellular molecular crowding, both of which can 
significantly affect RD and thus, cellular processes, are also supported. We 
verified the method by comparing simulation results of diffusion, irreversible 
and reversible reactions with the predicted analytical and best available 
numerical solutions. Moreover, to directly compare the localization patterns of 
molecules in fluorescence microscopy images with simulation, we devised a 
visualization method that mimics the microphotography process by showing the 
trajectory of simulated molecules averaged according to the camera exposure 
time. In the rod-shaped bacterium Escherichia coli, the division site is 
suppressed at the cell poles by periodic pole-to-pole oscillations of the Min 
proteins (MinC, MinD and MinE) arising from carefully orchestrated RD in both 
cytoplasm and membrane compartments. Using Spatiocyte we could model and 
reproduce the in vivo MinDE localization dynamics by accounting for the 
previously reported properties of MinE. Our results suggest that the MinE ring, 
which is essential in preventing polar septation, is largely composed of MinE 
that is transiently attached to the membrane independently after recruited by 
MinD. Overall, Spatiocyte allows simulation and visualization of complex spatial 
and reaction-diffusion mediated cellular processes in volumes and surfaces. As 
we showed, it can potentially provide mechanistic insights otherwise difficult 
to obtain experimentally.
ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: The online version of this article 
(doi:10.1007/s11693-009-9047-2) contains supplementary material, which is 
available to authorized users.

DOI: 10.1007/s11693-009-9047-2
PMCID: PMC2816228
PMID: 20012222