1. Nature. 2010 Jan 14;463(7278):191-6. doi: 10.1038/nature08658. Epub 2009 Dec
16.

A comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from a human cancer genome.

Pleasance ED(1), Cheetham RK, Stephens PJ, McBride DJ, Humphray SJ, Greenman CD, 
Varela I, Lin ML, Ordóñez GR, Bignell GR, Ye K, Alipaz J, Bauer MJ, Beare D, 
Butler A, Carter RJ, Chen L, Cox AJ, Edkins S, Kokko-Gonzales PI, Gormley NA, 
Grocock RJ, Haudenschild CD, Hims MM, James T, Jia M, Kingsbury Z, Leroy C, 
Marshall J, Menzies A, Mudie LJ, Ning Z, Royce T, Schulz-Trieglaff OB, Spiridou 
A, Stebbings LA, Szajkowski L, Teague J, Williamson D, Chin L, Ross MT, Campbell 
PJ, Bentley DR, Futreal PA, Stratton MR.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

All cancers carry somatic mutations. A subset of these somatic alterations, 
termed driver mutations, confer selective growth advantage and are implicated in 
cancer development, whereas the remainder are passengers. Here we have sequenced 
the genomes of a malignant melanoma and a lymphoblastoid cell line from the same 
person, providing the first comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from an 
individual cancer. The catalogue provides remarkable insights into the forces 
that have shaped this cancer genome. The dominant mutational signature reflects 
DNA damage due to ultraviolet light exposure, a known risk factor for malignant 
melanoma, whereas the uneven distribution of mutations across the genome, with a 
lower prevalence in gene footprints, indicates that DNA repair has been 
preferentially deployed towards transcribed regions. The results illustrate the 
power of a cancer genome sequence to reveal traces of the DNA damage, repair, 
mutation and selection processes that were operative years before the cancer 
became symptomatic.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08658
PMCID: PMC3145108
PMID: 20016485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]