1. Endocrinology. 2010 Feb;151(2):660-70. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0826. Epub 2009
Dec  18.

Role of asparagine-linked glycosylation in cell surface expression and function 
of the human adrenocorticotropin receptor (melanocortin 2 receptor) in 293/FRT 
cells.

Roy S(1), Perron B, Gallo-Payet N.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie, Département de Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, 
3001, 12 Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Asparagine-linked glycosylation (N-glycosylation) of G protein-coupled receptors 
may be necessary for functions ranging from agonist binding, folding, 
maturation, stability, and internalization. Human melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R) 
possesses putative N-glycosylation sites in its N-terminal extracellular domain; 
however, to date, the role of MC2R N-glycosylation has yet to be investigated. 
The objective of the present study is to examine whether N-glycosylation is 
essential or not for cell surface expression and cAMP production in native and 
MC2R accessory protein (MRAP alpha, -beta, or -dCT)-expressing cells using 
293/FRT transfected with Myc-MC2R. Western blot analyses performed with or 
without endoglycosidase H, peptide:N-glycosidase F or tunicamycin treatments and 
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that MC2R was glycosylated in the N-terminal 
domain at its two putative N-glycosylation sites (Asn(12)-Asn(13)-Thr(14) and 
Asn(17)-Asn(18)-Ser(19)). In the absence of human MRAP coexpression, 
N-glycosylation of at least one of the two sites was necessary for MC2R cell 
surface expression. However, when MRAP was present, cell surface expression of 
MC2R mutants was either rescued entirely with the N17-18Q (QQNN) and N12-13Q 
(NNQQ) mutants or partially with the unglycosylated N12-13, 17-18Q (QQQQ) 
mutant. Functional and expression analyses revealed a discrepancy between 
wild-type (WT) and QQQQ cell surface receptor levels and maximal cAMP production 
with a 4-fold increase in EC(50) values. Taken together, these results indicate 
that the absence of MC2R N-glycosylation abrogates to a large extent MC2R cell 
surface expression in the absence of MRAPs, whereas when MC2R is N-glycosylated, 
it can be expressed at the plasma membrane without MRAP assistance.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2009-0826
PMID: 20022931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]