1. Clin J Pain. 2010 Jan;26 Suppl 10(Suppl 10):S3-9. doi: 
10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181c49d2e.

Molecular insights into mu opioid pharmacology: From the clinic to the bench.

Pasternak GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York 10065, USA. 
pasterng@mskcc.org

Most of the opioids used in clinical practice exert their effects through mu 
opioid receptors. Yet, subtle but important pharmacological differences have 
been observed among the mu opioids. Their potency, effectiveness, and adverse 
effects can vary unpredictably among patients. These clinical differences among 
the mu opioids strongly argue against a single receptor mediating their actions. 
The cloning of the mu opioid receptor has greatly enhanced our understanding of 
the complexity of this system and has provided possible mechanisms to explain 
these observations. A single mu opioid receptor gene has been identified, but we 
now know that it generates a multitude of different mu opioid receptor subtypes 
through a mechanism commonly used to enhance protein diversity, alternative 
splicing. Early studies identified a number of splice variants involving the tip 
of the C-terminus. This region of the receptor is far away from the binding 
pocket, explaining why these variants still exhibit the same selectivity for mu 
opioids. However, the differences in structure at the C-terminus influence the 
activation patterns of the mu opioids. In addition, a second series of variants 
has been isolated that involves alternative splicing at the N-terminus. 
Together, these sets of mu opioid receptor splice variants may help explain the 
clinical variability of the mu drugs among patients and provide insights into 
why it is so important to individualize therapy for every patient in pain.

DOI: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181c49d2e
PMCID: PMC2810866
PMID: 20026962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Dr. Pasternak reports no conflicts 
of interest related to this paper.