1. Mol Immunol. 2010 Mar;47(6):1292-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.11.029.

Targeting the cysteine-stabilized fold of Art v 1 for immunotherapy of Artemisia 
pollen allergy.

Gadermaier G(1), Jahn-Schmid B, Vogel L, Egger M, Himly M, Briza P, Ebner C, 
Vieths S, Bohle B, Ferreira F.

Author information:
(1)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Allergy Diagnosis and Therapy, Department of 
Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria. 
Gabriele.Gadermaier@sbg.ac.at

Plants of the genus Artemisia domestic in Northern and Central Europe, USA and 
parts of Asia are a major cause of allergic symptoms from late summer to autumn. 
Art v 1, the major mugwort pollen allergen appears as two-domain glycoprotein, 
consisting of an N-terminal defensin-like and a proline/hydroxyproline-rich 
C-terminal part. Patients sensitized to Art v 1 commonly display IgE antibodies 
against the cysteine-stabilized defensin fold. Site-directed mutagenesis of 
eight cysteines was used to disrupt disulfide bonds to generate molecules with 
altered IgE-binding capacity. Engineered constructs were expressed in E. coli 
and recombinant proteins were tested for their allergenic and T cell reactivity 
as well as for their physicochemical characteristics. Three cysteine variants 
(C22S, C47S, and C49S) exhibited extremely low IgE-binding activity in 
immunoblot and ELISA using sera from Art v 1-allergic patients. Mediator release 
assays using rat basophil leukemia cells showed that these variants displayed a 
1x10(5)-fold reduced allergenic potency as compared to wild-type protein. All 
variants were able to activate allergen-specific T cells in PBMC, as well as Art 
v 1-specific T cell lines and clones. Variant C49S displayed an increased 
hydrophobic surface potential which correlated with an advanced activation of 
allergen-specific T cells. The low allergenicity and high immunogenic activity 
of Art v 1 variant C49S renders the molecule an attractive candidate for 
hypoallergen-based immunotherapy of Artemisia pollen allergy.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.11.029
PMID: 20022115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]