1. Biomark Insights. 2009 Oct 13;4:123-33. doi: 10.4137/bmi.s3453.

Biomarkers of adiponectin: plasma protein variation and genomic DNA 
polymorphisms.

Gu HF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Hospital, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Email: harvest.gu@ki.se.

Adiponectin is secreted by white adipose tissue and exists as the most abundant 
adipokine in the human plasma. Recent research has indicated that plasma 
adiponectin levels are inversely correlated with body mass index (BMI) and 
insulin resistance. Reduction of plasma adiponectin levels is commonly observed 
in the patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and/or in those who are obese in 
comparison with healthy control individuals. The adiponectin (AdipoQ) gene has a 
moderate linkage disequilibrium (LD), but two small LD blocks are observed, 
respectively, in the promoter region and the boundary of exon 2-intron 2. 
Genetic association studies have demonstrated that single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) +45G15G(T/G) in exon 2 and +276G/T in intron 2 of the 
AdipoQ gene confer the risk susceptibility to the development of T2D, obesity 
and diabetic nephropathy (DN). The SNPs in the promoter region, including 
-11426A/G, -11377C/G and -11391G/A, are found to be associated with T2D and DN. 
Recent research has indicated that the promoter polymorphisms interfere with the 
AdipoQ promoter activity. The haplotypes constructed by the promoter 
polymorphisms and SNP +276G/T in intron 2 are associated with circulating 
adiponectin levels. This review summarises genetic and pathophysiological 
relevancies of adiponectin and discusses about the biomarkers of adiponectin 
plasma protein variation and genomic DNA polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.4137/bmi.s3453
PMCID: PMC2796863
PMID: 20029651