1. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Mar 19;184(1-2):189-95. doi:
10.1016/j.cbi.2009.12.017.  Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Human benzene metabolism following occupational and environmental exposures.

Rappaport SM(1), Kim S, Lan Q, Li G, Vermeulen R, Waidyanatha S, Zhang L, Yin S, 
Smith MT, Rothman N.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-7356, 
USA. srappaport@berkeley.edu

We previously reported evidence that humans metabolize benzene via two enzymes, 
including a hitherto unrecognized high-affinity enzyme that was responsible for 
an estimated 73% of total urinary metabolites [sum of phenol (PH), hydroquinone 
(HQ), catechol (CA), E,E-muconic acid (MA), and S-phenylmercapturic acid (SPMA)] 
in nonsmoking females exposed to benzene at sub-saturating (ppb) air 
concentrations. Here, we used the same Michaelis-Menten-like kinetic models to 
individually analyze urinary levels of PH, HQ, CA and MA from 263 nonsmoking 
Chinese women (179 benzene-exposed workers and 84 control workers) with 
estimated benzene air concentrations ranging from less than 0.001-299 ppm. One 
model depicted benzene metabolism as a single enzymatic process (1-enzyme model) 
and the other as two enzymatic processes which competed for access to benzene 
(2-enzyme model). We evaluated model fits based upon the difference in values of 
Akaike's Information Criterion (DeltaAIC), and we gauged the weights of evidence 
favoring the two models based upon the associated Akaike weights and Evidence 
Ratios. For each metabolite, the 2-enzyme model provided a better fit than the 
1-enzyme model with DeltaAIC values decreasing in the order 9.511 for MA, 7.379 
for PH, 1.417 for CA, and 0.193 for HQ. The corresponding weights of evidence 
favoring the 2-enzyme model (Evidence Ratios) were: 116.2:1 for MA, 40.0:1 for 
PH, 2.0:1 for CA and 1.1:1 for HQ. These results indicate that our earlier 
findings from models of total metabolites were driven largely by MA, 
representing the ring-opening pathway, and by PH, representing the 
ring-hydroxylation pathway. The predicted percentage of benzene metabolized by 
the putative high-affinity enzyme at an air concentration of 0.001 ppm was 88% 
based upon urinary MA and was 80% based upon urinary PH. As benzene 
concentrations increased, the respective percentages of benzene metabolized to 
MA and PH by the high-affinity enzyme decreased successively to 66 and 77% at 
0.1 ppm, 20 and 58% at 1 ppm, and 2.7 and 17% at 10 ppm. This indicates that the 
putative high-affinity enzyme was active primarily below 1 ppm and favored the 
ring-opening pathway.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.12.017
PMCID: PMC3072712
PMID: 20026321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: S.M.R. has received 
consulting and expert testimony fees from law firms representing plaintiffsâ€™ 
cases involving exposure to benzene and has received research support from the 
American Petroleum Institute and the American Chemistry Council. G.L. has 
received funds from the American Petroleum Institute for consulting on 
benzene-related health research. M.T.S. has received consulting and expert 
testimony fees from law firms representing both plaintiffs and defendants in 
cases involving exposure to benzene.