1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Feb;51(2):275-8. doi: 10.3109/10428190903503446.

Kinase domain mutations of BCR-ABL identified at diagnosis before imatinib-based 
therapy are associated with progression in patients with high Sokal risk chronic 
phase chronic myeloid leukemia.

Carella AM(1), Garuti A, Cirmena G, Catania G, Rocco I, Palermo C, Pica G, 
Pierri I, Miglino M, Ballestrero A, Gobbi M, Patrone F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San Martino, L.go 
R. Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, Italy. angelomichele.carella@hsanmartino.it

Acquired resistance to imatinib in the advanced phase of chronic myeloid 
leukemia (CML) has been associated with mutations in the kinase domain (KD) of 
BCR-ABL. On the contrary, the prognostic implication of KD mutations in early 
chronic phase (CP) patients at diagnosis before imatinib-based therapy has not 
yet been established. We have reviewed the status of mutations in 43 patients 
with early CP-CML on the samples collected at diagnosis. Mutations were 
identified by direct sequencing (DS) with BidDye Terminator v 1.1. cycle 
sequencing kit and analyzed with a 3130 ABI capillary electrophoresis system. 
Eight out 13 (61.5%) high Sokal risk patients showed the following mutations: 
Y253C, S265R, E255K, F359Y, N374S, E255V, E255V, E255V. Three patients 
progressed during imatinib and second-line inhibitors and died of blastic phase 
CML at 23, 33, and 69 months. Another patient with intermediate Sokal risk 
showed D363G mutation at diagnosis, progressed under imatinib, was allografted 
and he is now alive in major molecular remission (MMR). No low-risk patient 
carried KD mutation at diagnosis. In conclusion, KD mutations conferring 
high-level imatinib resistance are present in patients with de novo CML and in 
some of them lead to disease progression.

DOI: 10.3109/10428190903503446
PMID: 20038234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]