1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2009 Oct;2(5):442-9. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.861955. Epub 2009 Jul 24.

Sarcomere mutations in cardiomyopathy with left ventricular hypertrabeculation.

Dellefave LM(1), Pytel P, Mewborn S, Mora B, Guris DL, Fedson S, Waggoner D, 
Moskowitz I, McNally EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the genes encoding sarcomere proteins have been 
associated with both hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy. Recently, 
mutations in myosin heavy chain (MYH7), cardiac actin (ACTC), and troponin T 
(TNNT2) were associated with left ventricular noncompaction, a form of 
cardiomyopathy characterized with hypertrabeculation that may also include 
reduced function of the left ventricle.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used clinically available genetic testing on 3 cases 
referred for evaluation of left ventricular dysfunction and noncompaction of the 
left ventricle and found that all 3 individuals carried sarcomere mutations. The 
first patient presented with neonatal heart failure and was referred for left 
ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy. Genetic testing found 2 different 
mutations in MYBPC3 in trans. The first mutation, 3776delA, Q1259fs, rendered a 
frame shift at 1259 of cardiac myosin-binding protein C and the second mutation 
was L1200P. The frameshift mutation was also found in this mother who displayed 
mild echocardiographic features of cardiomyopathy, with only subtle increase in 
trabeculation and an absence of hypertrophy. A second pediatric patient 
presented with heart failure and was found to carry a de novo MYH7 R369Q 
mutation. The third case was an adult patient with dilated cardiomyopathy 
referred for ventricular hypertrabeculation. This patient had a family history 
of congestive heart failure, including pediatric onset cardiomyopathy where 3 
individuals in the family were found to have the MYH7 mutation R1250W.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic testing should be considered for cardiomyopathy with 
hypertrabeculation.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.861955
PMID: 20031619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]