1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2010 Apr 6;51(5):1120-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2009.11.020.
 Epub 2009 Nov 26.

Biopharmaceutical and pharmacokinetic characterization of matrine as determined 
by a sensitive and robust UPLC-MS/MS method.

Yang Z(1), Gao S, Yin T, Kulkarni KH, Teng Y, You M, Hu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Science, College of 
Pharmacy, University of Houston, 1441 Moursund Street, Houston, TX 77030, United 
States.

The purpose of this research was to develop a sensitive and reproducible 
UPLC-MS/MS method to analyze matrine, an anticancer compound, and to use it to 
investigate its biopharmaceutical and pharmacokinetic behaviors in rats. A 
sensitive and fast UPLC-MS/MS method was successfully applied to determine 
matrine in rat plasma, intestinal perfusate, bile, microsomes, and cell 
incubation media. The absolute oral bioavailability of matrine is 17.1+/-5.4% at 
a dose of 2mg/kg matrine. Matrine at 10microM was shown to have good 
permeability (42.5x10(-6)cm/s) across the Caco-2 cell monolayer, and the ratio 
of P(A-B) to P(B-A) was approximately equal to 1 at two different concentrations 
(1 and 10microM). Perfusion study showed that matrine displayed significant 
differences (P<0.05) in permeability at different intestinal regions. The rank 
order of permeability was ileum (highest, P(w)=6.18), followed by colon 
(P(w)=2.07), duodenum (P(w)=0.61) and jejunum (P(w)=0.52). Rat liver microsome 
studies showed that CYP and UGTs were not involved in matrine metabolism. In 
conclusion, a sensitive and reliable method capable of measuring matrine in a 
variety of matrixes was developed and successfully used to determine absolute 
oral bioavailability of matrine in rats, transport across Caco-2 cell 
monolayers, absorption in rat intestine, and metabolism in rat liver microsomes.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2009.11.020
PMCID: PMC2859310
PMID: 20034755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]