1. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Mar 15;67(6):543-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.11.004.
 Epub 2009 Dec 30.

The interleukin 1 beta (IL1B) gene is associated with failure to achieve 
remission and impaired emotion processing in major depression.

Baune BT(1), Dannlowski U, Domschke K, Janssen DG, Jordan MA, Ohrmann P, Bauer 
J, Biros E, Arolt V, Kugel H, Baxter AG, Suslow T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychiatric Neuroscience, James Cook University, 
Queensland, Australia. bernhard.baune@jcu.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests the involvement of inflammatory 
processes and cytokines in particular in the pathophysiology of major depression 
(MDD) and resistance to antidepressant treatment. Furthermore, amygdala and 
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) responsiveness to emotional stimuli has been 
suggested as a predictor of treatment response. This study investigated the 
association between genetic variants of the interleukin 1 beta (IL1B) gene and 
amygdala and ACC responsiveness to emotional stimuli and response to 
antidepressant treatment.
METHODS: In this analysis, 256 Caucasian patients with MDD (145 women, 111 men) 
were genotyped for variants rs16944, rs1143643, and rs1143634 in the IL1B gene 
(2q14). Response to antidepressant treatment over 6 weeks was defined as 
remission (< or = 7 on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression-21-question) and 
response (>50% decrease on Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression-21-question). 
Brain activity under visual presentation of emotional faces was assessed in a 
subsample of 32 depressed patients by means of functional magnetic resonance 
imaging at 3 T.
RESULTS: Pharmacogenetic analyses show significant associations of the GG 
genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs16944 (odds ratio = 1.74; 
95% confidence interval 1.2-4.3) and rs1143643 (odds ratio = 3.1; 95% confidence 
interval 1.3-7.8) (compared with the AA genotype) with nonremission after 6 
weeks. The imaging analyses show that the number of G-alleles in both SNPs 
(rs16944 and rs1143643) was associated with reduced responsiveness of the 
amygdala and ACC to emotional stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests a negative effect of the IL1B gene on 
pharmacological response and amygdala and ACC function involving the same 
genotypes of two SNPs (rs16944, rs116343), which taken together increase the 
risk of nonremission over 6 weeks of antidepressant treatment in MDD.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.11.004
PMID: 20044070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]