1. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 Apr;99(4):417-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.12.004. Epub
 2010 Jan 6.

Very low penetrance of Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy in five Han Chinese 
families carrying the ND1 G3460A mutation.

Tong Y(1), Sun YH, Zhou X, Zhao F, Mao Y, Wei QP, Yang L, Qu J, Guan MX.

Author information:
(1)School of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical College, 
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

We report here the clinical, genetic, and molecular characterization of five Han 
Chinese families with Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). Strikingly, 
there were very low penetrances of visual impairment in these Chinese families, 
ranging from 4.2% to 22.2%, with an average of 10.2%. In particular, only 7 (4 
males/3 females) of 106 matrilineal relatives in these families exhibited the 
variable severity and age-at-onset in visual dysfunction. The age-at-onset for 
visual impairment in matrilineal relatives in these families, varied from 20 to 
25 years, with an average of 21.8 years old. Molecular analysis of mitochondrial 
genomes identified the homoplasmic ND1 G3460A mutation and distinct sets of 
variants, belonging to the Asian haplogroups B5b, C4a1, D5, F1, and R9, 
respectively. This suggests that the G3640A mutation occurred sporadically and 
multiplied through evolution of the mtDNA in China. However, there was the 
absence of known secondary LHON-associated mtDNA mutations in these Chinese 
families. Very low penetrance of visual loss in these five Chinese pedigrees 
strongly indicated that the G3640A mutation was itself insufficient to develop 
the optic neuropathy. The absence of secondary LHON mtDNA mutations suggest that 
these mtDNA haplogroup-specific variants may not play an important role in the 
phenotypic expression of the G3640A mutation in those Chinese families with low 
penetrance of vision loss. However, nuclear modifier genes, epigenetic and 
environmental factors appear to be modifier factors for the phenotypic 
manifestation of the G3640A mutation in these Chinese families.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2009.12.004
PMCID: PMC2839065
PMID: 20053576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]