1. Int J Mol Sci. 2009 Nov 20;10(10):4437-4473. doi: 10.3390/ijms10104437.

Robustness in regulatory interaction networks. A generic approach with 
applications at different levels: physiologic, metabolic and genetic.

Demongeot J(1), Ben Amor H(1), Elena A(1), Gillois P(1), Noual M(2)(3), Sené 
S(4)(3).

Author information:
(1)Université J. Fourier de Grenoble, TIMC-IMAG, CNRS UMR 5525, Faculté de 
Médecine, 38700 La Tronche, France.
(2)Université de Lyon, École Normale Supérieure Lyon, LIP, CNRS UMR 5668, 69007 
Lyon, France.
(3)IXXI, Institut rhône-alpin des systèmes complexes, 69007 Lyon, France.
(4)Université d'Evry Val d'Essonne, IBISC, CNRS FRE 3190, 91000 Evry, France.

Regulatory interaction networks are often studied on their dynamical side 
(existence of attractors, study of their stability). We focus here also on their 
robustness, that is their ability to offer the same spatiotemporal patterns and 
to resist to external perturbations such as losses of nodes or edges in the 
networks interactions architecture, changes in their environmental boundary 
conditions as well as changes in the update schedule (or updating mode) of the 
states of their elements (e.g., if these elements are genes, their synchronous 
coexpression mode versus their sequential expression). We define the generic 
notions of boundary, core, and critical vertex or edge of the underlying 
interaction graph of the regulatory network, whose disappearance causes dramatic 
changes in the number and nature of attractors (e.g., passage from a bistable 
behaviour to a unique periodic regime) or in the range of their basins of 
stability. The dynamic transition of states will be presented in the framework 
of threshold Boolean automata rules. A panorama of applications at different 
levels will be given: brain and plant morphogenesis, bulbar cardio-respiratory 
regulation, glycolytic/oxidative metabolic coupling, and eventually cell cycle 
and feather morphogenesis genetic control.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms10104437
PMCID: PMC2790118
PMID: 20057955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]