1. Biochemistry. 2010 Feb 16;49(6):1281-9. doi: 10.1021/bi902001a.

Mechanism and inhibition of the FabV enoyl-ACP reductase from Burkholderia 
mallei.

Lu H(1), Tonge PJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Department of Chemistry, 
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3400, USA.

Enoyl-ACP reductases catalyze the final step in the elongation cycle of the 
bacterial fatty acid biosynthesis (FAS-II) pathway. At present, four distinct 
enoyl-ACP reductases have been identified, which are the products of the fabI, 
fabL, fabK, and fabV genes. The FabV enoyl-ACP reductase is the most recent 
member of this enzyme class and was originally identified in Vibrio cholerae by 
Cronan and co-workers [Massengo-Tiasse, R. P., and Cronan, J. E. (2008) Vibrio 
cholerae FabV defines a new class of enoyl-acyl carrier protein reductase. J. 
Biol. Chem. 283, 1308-1316]. In this work, a detailed kinetic analysis of the 
mechanism of the FabV enzyme from Burkholderia mallei (bmFabV) has been 
undertaken, which reveals that bmFabV catalyzes a sequential bi-bi mechanism 
with NADH binding first and NAD(+) dissociating last. The enzyme is a member of 
the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase superfamily in which the catalytic 
tyrosine (Y235) and lysine (K244) residues are organized in the consensus 
Tyr-(Xaa)(8)-Lys motif. The role of these active site residues has been 
investigated using site-directed mutagenesis which has shown that both Y235 and 
K244 are involved in acid-base chemistry during substrate reduction. Sequence 
alignment and site-directed mutagenesis also identify a second lysine in the 
active site (K245) that has an important role in binding of the enoyl substrate. 
Because of interests in developing inhibitors of bmFabV, a detailed analysis of 
the inhibition of the enzyme by triclosan has been conducted showing that 
triclosan is a competitive inhibitor with respect to NADH and an uncompetitive 
inhibitor with respect to the substrate 2-dodecenoyl-CoA (K(i) = 0.4 muM). In 
combination with fluorescence binding experiments, we conclude that triclosan 
binds to the enzyme-NAD(+) product complex which is in rapid and reversible 
equilibrium with other intermediates on the reaction pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/bi902001a
PMCID: PMC2892189
PMID: 20055482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]