1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Jun;18(6):685-93. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.234. Epub 2010 
Jan 13.

A genome-wide association study for age-related hearing impairment in the Saami.

Van Laer L(1), Huyghe JR, Hannula S, Van Eyken E, Stephan DA, MÃ¤ki-Torkko E, 
Aikio P, Fransen E, Lysholm-Bernacchi A, Sorri M, Huentelman MJ, Van Camp G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

This study aimed at contributing to the elucidation of the genetic basis of 
age-related hearing impairment (ARHI), a common multifactorial disease with an 
important genetic contribution as demonstrated by heritability studies. We 
conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in the Finnish Saami, a small, 
ancient, genetically isolated population without evidence of demographic 
expansion. The choice of this study population was motivated by its anticipated 
higher extent of LD, potentially offering a substantial power advantage for 
association mapping. DNA samples and audiometric measurements were collected 
from 352 Finnish Saami individuals, aged between 50 and 75 years. To reduce the 
burden of multiple testing, we applied principal component (PC) analysis to the 
multivariate audiometric phenotype. The first three PCs captured 80% of the 
variation in hearing thresholds, while maintaining biologically important 
audiometric features. All subjects were genotyped with the Affymetrix 100 K 
chip. To account for multiple levels of relatedness among subjects, as well as 
for population stratification, association testing was performed using a mixed 
model. We summarised the top-ranking association signals for the three traits 
under study. The top-ranked SNP, rs457717 (P-value 3.55 x 10(-7)), was 
associated with PC3 and was localised in an intron of the IQ motif-containing 
GTPase-activating-like protein (IQGAP2). Intriguingly, the SNP rs161927 (P-value 
0.000149), seventh-ranked for PC1, was positioned immediately downstream from 
the metabotropic glutamate receptor-7 gene (GRM7). As a previous GWAS of a 
European and Finnish sample set already suggested a role for GRM7 in ARHI, this 
study provides further evidence for the involvement of this gene.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.234
PMCID: PMC2987344
PMID: 20068591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]