1. Blood. 2010 Mar 18;115(11):2241-50. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-164582. Epub
2010  Jan 12.

Bortezomib induces apoptosis in primitive chronic myeloid leukemia cells 
including LTC-IC and NOD/SCID repopulating cells.

Heaney NB(1), Pellicano F, Zhang B, Crawford L, Chu S, Kazmi SM, Allan EK, 
Jorgensen HG, Irvine AE, Bhatia R, Holyoake TL.

Author information:
(1)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, Medical Faculty, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is treated effectively with tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs); however, 2 key problems remain-the insensitivity of CML stem 
and progenitor cells to TKIs and the emergence of TKI-resistant BCR-ABL 
mutations. BCR-ABL activity is associated with increased proteasome activity and 
proteasome inhibitors (PIs) are cytotoxic against CML cell lines. We demonstrate 
that bortezomib is antiproliferative and induces apoptosis in chronic phase (CP) 
CD34+ CML cells at clinically achievable concentrations. We also show that 
bortezomib targets primitive CML cells, with effects on CD34+38(-), long-term 
culture-initiating (LTC-IC) and nonobese diabetic/severe combined 
immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) repopulating cells. Bortezomib is not selective for 
CML cells and induces apoptosis in normal CD34+38(-) cells. The effects against 
CML cells are seen when bortezomib is used alone and in combination with 
dasatinib. Bortezomib causes proteasome but not BCR-ABL inhibition and is also 
effective in inhibiting proteasome activity and inducing apoptosis in cell lines 
expressing BCR-ABL mutations, including T315I. By targeting both TKI-insensitive 
stem and progenitor cells and TKI-resistant BCR-ABL mutations, we believe that 
bortezomib offers a potential therapeutic option in CML. Because of known 
toxicities, including myelosuppression, the likely initial clinical application 
of bortezomib in CML would be in resistant and advanced disease.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-164582
PMCID: PMC2844011
PMID: 20068223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]