1. J Neurochem. 2010 Mar;112(6):1584-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06573.x. 
Epub 2010 Jan 8.

Temporal requirement of RPE-derived VEGF in the development of choroidal 
vasculature.

Le YZ(1), Bai Y, Zhu M, Zheng L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine Endocrinology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A or VEGF) is a potent growth factor 
for the development of retinal and choroidal vasculatures. To define the 
temporal requirement of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE)-derived VEGF in 
choroidal vascular development, we generated conditional VEGF knockout mice 
using an inducible Cre/lox system. The loss of the RPE-derived VEGF was 
confirmed with immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Retinal function and 
structure were assessed with electroretinography and histology, respectively. 
Choroidal vascular density was analyzed with computer-assisted semi-quantitative 
assay using fluorescently labeled choroidal flat-mounts. Induction of 
RPE-specific VEGF disruption at embryonic day 10 (E10) or E13 for 2 days caused 
regulatable decreases in choroidal vascular density, photoreceptor function, and 
photoreceptor outer nuclear layer thickness. The loss of the RPE-produced VEGF 
after E15 did not cause detectable defects in choroidal vasculatures and 
photoreceptor function and morphology. These results suggest that the 
RPE-derived VEGF plays a critical role in choroidal vascular development during 
organogenesis before E15.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06573.x
PMCID: PMC2933813
PMID: 20067573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Authors declare no conflict 
interests relevant to this study.