1. J Bacteriol. 2010 Mar;192(6):1498-510. doi: 10.1128/JB.01167-09. Epub 2010 Jan
 8.

PepD participates in the mycobacterial stress response mediated through MprAB 
and SigE.

White MJ(1), He H, Penoske RM, Twining SS, Zahrt TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and Center for 
Biopreparedness and Infectious Diseases, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226-0509, USA.

Currently, one-third of the world's population is believed to be latently 
infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The mechanisms by which M. 
tuberculosis establishes latent infection remain largely undefined. mprAB 
encodes a two-component signal transduction system required by M. tuberculosis 
for aspects of persistent infection. MprAB regulates a large and diverse group 
of genetic determinants in response to membrane stress, including the 
extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor sigE and the HtrA-like serine 
protease pepD. Recent studies have demonstrated that PepD functions as both a 
protease and chaperone in vitro. In addition, inactivation of pepD alters the 
virulence of M. tuberculosis in a mouse model system of infection. Here, we 
demonstrate that PepD plays an important role in the stress response network of 
Mycobacterium mediated through MprAB and SigE. In particular, we demonstrate 
that the protease activity of PepD requires the PDZ domain, in addition to the 
catalytic serine at position 317. pepD expression initiates from at least three 
promoters in M. tuberculosis, including one that is regulated by SigE and is 
located upstream of the mprA coding sequence. Deletion of pepD or mprAB in 
Mycobacterium smegmatis and M. tuberculosis alters the stress response 
phenotypes of these strains, including increasing sensitivity to SDS and cell 
wall antibiotics and upregulating the expression of stress-responsive 
determinants, including sigE. Taking these data together, we hypothesize that 
PepD utilizes its PDZ domain to recognize and process misfolded proteins at the 
cell membrane, leading to activation of the MprAB and SigE signaling pathways 
and subsequent establishment of a positive feedback loop that facilitates 
bacterial adaptation.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01167-09
PMCID: PMC2832534
PMID: 20061478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]