1. Blood. 2010 Mar 18;115(11):2311-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-237768. Epub
2010  Jan 12.

Donor and recipient chemokine receptor CCR5 genotype is associated with survival 
after bone marrow transplantation.

McDermott DH(1), Conway SE, Wang T, Ricklefs SM, Agovi MA, Porcella SF, Tran HT, 
Milford E, Spellman S, Abdi R.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Signaling Section, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Despite continual improvement, morbidity and mortality after hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation (HSCT) remain high. The importance of chemokines in HSCT 
lies in their regulation of immune responses that determine transplantation 
outcomes. We investigated the role of recipient and donor chemokine system gene 
polymorphisms by using a candidate gene approach on the incidence of 
graft-versus-host disease and posttransplantation outcomes in 1370 extensively 
human leukocyte antigen-matched, unrelated donor-recipient pairs by using 
multivariate Cox regression models. Our analysis identified that recipients 
homozygous for a common CCR5 haplotype (H1/H1) had better disease-free survival 
(DFS; P = .005) and overall survival (P = .021). When the same genotype of both 
the donor and recipient were considered in the models, a highly significant 
association with DFS and overall survival was noted (P < .001 and P = .007, 
respectively) with absolute differences in survival of up to 20% seen between 
the groups at 3 years after transplantation (50% DFS for pairs with recipient 
CCR5 H1/H1 vs 30% for pairs with donor CCR5 H1/H1). This finding suggests that 
donor and/or recipient CCR5 genotypes may be associated with HSCT outcome and 
suggests new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for optimizing therapy.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-08-237768
PMCID: PMC2844018
PMID: 20068218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]