1. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 13;30(2):694-702. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3696-09.2010.

Dysregulation of mTOR signaling in fragile X syndrome.

Sharma A(1), Hoeffer CA, Takayasu Y, Miyawaki T, McBride SM, Klann E, Zukin RS.

Author information:
(1)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, New York, New York 10461, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2010 May 26;30(21):7121-3. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1298-10.2010.

Fragile X syndrome, the most common form of inherited mental retardation and 
leading genetic cause of autism, is caused by transcriptional silencing of the 
Fmr1 gene. The fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP), the gene product of 
Fmr1, is an RNA binding protein that negatively regulates translation in 
neurons. The Fmr1 knock-out mouse, a model of fragile X syndrome, exhibits 
cognitive deficits and exaggerated metabotropic glutamate receptor 
(mGluR)-dependent long-term depression at CA1 synapses. However, the molecular 
mechanisms that link loss of function of FMRP to aberrant synaptic plasticity 
remain unclear. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling cascade 
controls initiation of cap-dependent translation and is under control of mGluRs. 
Here we show that mTOR phosphorylation and activity are elevated in hippocampus 
of juvenile Fmr1 knock-out mice by four functional readouts: (1) association of 
mTOR with regulatory associated protein of mTOR; (2) mTOR kinase activity; (3) 
phosphorylation of mTOR downstream targets S6 kinase and 4E-binding protein; and 
(4) formation of eukaryotic initiation factor complex 4F, a critical first step 
in cap-dependent translation. Consistent with this, mGluR long-term depression 
at CA1 synapses of FMRP-deficient mice is exaggerated and rapamycin insensitive. 
We further show that the p110 subunit of the upstream kinase 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and its upstream activator PI3K enhancer 
PIKE, predicted targets of FMRP, are upregulated in knock-out mice. Elevated 
mTOR signaling may provide a functional link between overactivation of group I 
mGluRs and aberrant synaptic plasticity in the fragile X mouse, mechanisms 
relevant to impaired cognition in fragile X syndrome.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3696-09.2010
PMCID: PMC3665010
PMID: 20071534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]