1. Cell Signal. 2010 May;22(5):770-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.01.001. Epub 
2010 Jan 13.

Characterization of P-Rex1 for its role in fMet-Leu-Phe-induced superoxide 
production in reconstituted COS(phox) cells.

Nie B(1), Cheng N, Dinauer MC, Ye RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois, Chicago, 60612, United 
States.

P-Rex1 (phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent Rac exchanger 1) is a 
Rac-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor activated by Gbetagamma subunits 
and by PtdIns((3,4,5))P(3). Recent studies indicate that P-Rex1 plays an 
important role in signaling downstream of neutrophil chemoattractant receptors. 
Here we report that heterologous expression of P-Rex1, but not Vav1, 
reconstitutes formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1)-mediated NADPH oxidase activation 
in the transgenic COS(phox) cells expressing gp91(phox), p22(phox), p67(phox) 
and p47(phox). A successful reconstitution requires the expression of a 
full-length P-Rex1 with intact DH and PH domains, and is accompanied by P-Rex1 
membrane localization as well as Rac1 activation. P-Rex1-dependent superoxide 
generation in the reconstituted COS(phox) cells was further enhanced by 
expression of the novel PKC isoform PKCdelta and by overexpression of Akt. 
Heterologous expression of P-Rex1 in COS(phox) cells potentiated 
fMet-Leu-Phe-induced Akt phosphorylation, whereas expression of a constitutively 
active form of Akt enhanced Rac1 activation. In contrast, a dominant negative 
Akt mutant reduced the fMet-Leu-Phe stimulated superoxide generation as well as 
Rac1 activation. These results demonstrate that in COS(phox) cells, P-Rex1 is a 
critical component for FPR1-mediated signaling leading to NADPH oxidase 
activation, and there is a crosstalk between the P-Rex1-Rac pathway and Akt in 
superoxide generation.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.01.001
PMCID: PMC3282168
PMID: 20074642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]