1. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Apr 2;208(2):584-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.01.004.
Epub  2010 Jan 14.

WIN55,212-2 induced deficits in spatial learning are mediated by cholinergic 
hypofunction.

Robinson L(1), Goonawardena AV, Pertwee R, Hampson RE, Platt B, Riedel G.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, College of Life Science and Medicine, University 
of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK.

Cannabinoids acting on CB(1) receptors induce learning and memory impairments. 
However, the identification of novel non-CB(1) receptors which are insensitive 
to the psychoactive ingredient of marijuana, Delta(9)-tetrahydrocannabinol 
(Delta(9)-THC) but sensitive to synthetic cannabinoids such as WIN55,212-2 
(WIN-2) or endocannabinoids like anandamide lead us to question whether WIN-2 
induced learning and memory deficits are indeed mediated by CB(1) receptor 
activation. Given the relative paucity of receptor subtype specific antagonists, 
a way forward would be to determine the transmitter systems, which are modulated 
by the respective cannabinoids. This study set out to evaluate this proposition 
by determination of the effects of WIN-2 on acquisition of spatial reference 
memory using the water maze in rats. Particular weight was given to performance 
in trial 1 of each daily session as an index of between-session long-term 
memory, and in trial 4 as an index of within-session short-term memory. 
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) administration of WIN-2 (1 mg/kg and 3 mg/kg) prior to 
training impaired long-term, but not short-term memory. This deficit was not 
reversed by the CB(1) antagonists/inverse agonists Rimonabant (3mg/kg i.p.) and 
AM281 (0.5 mg/kg i.p.), but recovered in the presence of the cholinesterase 
inhibitor rivastigmine (1 mg/kg). Reversal by rivastigmine was specific to 
WIN-2, as it failed to reverse MK801 (0.08 mg/kg) induced learning impairments. 
Collectively, these data suggest that in this spatial reference memory task 
WIN-2 causes a reduction in cholinergic activation, possibly through a 
non-CB(1)-like mechanism, which affects long-term but not short-term spatial 
memory.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.01.004
PMCID: PMC3151156
PMID: 20079375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]