1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2010 Mar;17(2):125-32. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3283366c59.

Systemic mastocytosis in adults: a review on prognosis and treatment based on 
342 Mayo Clinic patients and current literature.

Pardanani A(1), Tefferi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA. pardanani.animesh@mayo.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Systemic mastocytosis is a neoplastic disease of mast cells 
that often harbors a KIT mutation and involves the bone marrow. The current 
review provides an update on prognosis and treatment of systemic mastocytosis, 
including investigational drug therapy.
RECENT FINDINGS: We have recently examined survival data and treatment outcome 
in 342 adult patients with systemic mastocytosis seen at our institution. Life 
expectancy in indolent systemic mastocytosis was not significantly different 
than that of the control population; however, prognosis was not as good in the 
WHO indolent systemic mastocytosis variant of smoldering mastocytosis. Prognosis 
in systemic mastocytosis associated with another myeloid malignancy was 
significantly better in the absence of morphological features of myelodysplasia 
or monocytosis. On the contrary, although prevalent, eosinophilia had little 
prognostic impact. Cladribine and interferon alpha were therapeutically the most 
effective drugs. Current experience suggests limited treatment success with 
either imatinib mesylate or other anti-KIT D816V kinase inhibitors. TET2 
mutations have recently been described in approximately 29% of patients with 
systemic mastocytosis, but their pathogenetic or treatment relevance is unknown.
SUMMARY: Primary data from a large series of patients have enabled delineation 
of well defined prognostic groups in systemic mastocytosis and clarification of 
the merits of conventional drugs for aggressive systemic mastocytosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e3283366c59
PMID: 20075725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]