1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Apr;333(1):161-73. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.161711.
Epub  2010 Jan 19.

The angiotensin IV analog Nle-Tyr-Leu-psi-(CH2-NH2)3-4-His-Pro-Phe (norleual) 
can act as a hepatocyte growth factor/c-Met inhibitor.

Yamamoto BJ(1), Elias PD, Masino JA, Hudson BD, McCoy AT, Anderson ZJ, Varnum 
MD, Sardinia MF, Wright JW, Harding JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary and Comparative Anatomy, Pharmacology, and 
Physiology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, USA.

Erratum in
    J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015 Feb;352(2):379.

The angiotensin (Ang) IV analog norleual 
[Nle-Tyr-Leu-psi-(CH2-NH2)(3-4)-His-Pro-Phe] exhibits structural homology with 
the hinge (linker) region of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and is hypothesized 
to act as a hinge region mimic. Norleual competitively inhibited the binding of 
HGF to its receptor c-Met in mouse liver membranes, with an IC(50) value of 3 
pM. Predictably, norleual was able to inhibit HGF-dependent signaling, 
proliferation, migration, and invasion in multiple cell types at concentrations 
in the picomolar range. Ex vivo studies demonstrated that norleual exhibited 
potent antiangiogenic activity, an attribute that would be predicted for a 
HGF/c-Met antagonist. Furthermore, norleual suppressed pulmonary colonization by 
B16-F10 murine melanoma cells, which are characterized by an overactive 
HGF/c-Met system. Together, these data suggest that AngIV analogs exert at least 
some of their biological activity through interference with the HGF/c-Met system 
and may have utility as therapeutic agents in disorders that are dependent on an 
intact HGF/c-Met system. Finally, the ability of norleual to induce marked 
biological responses in human embryonic kidney cells, which do not express 
insulin-responsive aminopeptidase (IRAP), coupled with the observed effects of 
norleual on the HGF/c-Met system, casts doubt on the physiological significance 
of AngIV-dependent inhibition of IRAP. [Corrected]

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.109.161711
PMCID: PMC2846015
PMID: 20086056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]