1. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 14;5(1):e8715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008715.

Analysis of the potential role of GluA4 carboxyl-terminus in PDZ interactions.

Coleman SK(1), Cai C, Kalkkinen N, Korpi ER, Kein√§nen K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Division of Biochemistry, Viikki Biocenter, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Specific delivery to synapses of 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate (AMPA) receptors with 
long-tailed subunits is believed to be a key event in many forms of 
activity-dependent changes in synaptic strength. GluA1, the best characterized 
long-tailed AMPA receptor subunit, contains a C-terminal class I PDZ binding 
motif, which mediates its interaction with scaffold and trafficking proteins, 
including synapse-associated protein 97 (SAP97). In GluA4, another long-tailed 
subunit implicated in synaptic plasticity, the PDZ motif is blocked by a single 
proline residue. This feature is highly conserved in vertebrates, whereas the 
closest invertebrate homologs of GluA4 have a canonical class I PDZ binding 
motif. In this work, we have examined the role of GluA4 in PDZ interactions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Deletion of the carboxy-terminal proline residue 
of recombinant GluA4 conferred avid binding to SAP97 in cultured cells as shown 
by coimmunoprecipitation, whereas wild-type GluA4 did not associate with SAP97. 
Native GluA4 and SAP97 coimmunoprecipitated from mouse brain independently of 
the GluA1 subunit, supporting the possibility of in vivo PDZ interaction. To 
obtain evidence for or against the exposure of the PDZ motif by carboxyterminal 
processing of native GluA4 receptors, we generated an antibody reagent specific 
for proline-deleted GluA4 C-terminus. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric 
analyses indicated that the carboxyl-terminus of native GluA4 AMPA receptors is 
intact and that the postulated single-residue cleavage does not occur to any 
significant extent.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that native GluA4 receptors are not capable 
of canonical PDZ interactions and that their association with SAP97 is likely to 
be indirect.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008715
PMCID: PMC2806832
PMID: 20090852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.