1. Diabetes Care. 2010 Apr;33(4):706-13. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1711. Epub 2010 Jan
22.

Collaborative care management of major depression among low-income, 
predominantly Hispanic subjects with diabetes: a randomized controlled trial.

Ell K(1), Katon W, Xie B, Lee PJ, Kapetanovic S, Guterman J, Chou CP.

Author information:
(1)School of Social Work, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA. ell@usc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether evidence-based socioculturally adapted 
collaborative depression care improves receipt of depression care and depression 
and diabetes outcomes in low-income Hispanic subjects.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This was a randomized controlled trial of 387 
diabetic patients (96.5% Hispanic) with clinically significant depression 
recruited from two public safety-net clinics from August 2005 to July 2007 and 
followed over 18 months. Intervention (INT group) included problem-solving 
therapy and/or antidepressant medication based on a stepped-care algorithm; 
first-line treatment choice; telephone treatment response, adherence, and 
relapse prevention follow-up over 12 months; plus systems navigation assistance. 
Enhanced usual care (EUC group) included standard clinic care plus patient 
receipt of depression educational pamphlets and a community resource list.
RESULTS: INT patients had significantly greater depression improvement (> or 
=50% reduction in Symptom Checklist-20 depression score from baseline; 57, 62, 
and 62% vs. the EUC group's 36, 42, and 44% at 6, 12, and 18 months, 
respectively; odds ratio 2.46-2.57; P < 0.001). Mixed-effects linear regression 
models showed a significant study group-by-time interaction over 18 months in 
diabetes symptoms; anxiety; Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form Health Survey 
(SF-12) emotional, physical, and pain-related functioning; Sheehan disability; 
financial situation; and number of social stressors (P = 0.04 for disability and 
SF-12 physical functioning, P < 0.001 for all others) but no study group-by-time 
interaction in A1C, diabetes complications, self-care management, or BMI.
CONCLUSIONS: Socioculturally adapted collaborative depression care improved 
depression, functional outcomes, and receipt of depression treatment in 
predominantly Hispanic patients in safety-net clinics.

DOI: 10.2337/dc09-1711
PMCID: PMC2845010
PMID: 20097780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]