1. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 19;5(1):e8764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008764.

Concordant association of insulin degrading enzyme gene (IDE) variants with IDE 
mRNA, Abeta, and Alzheimer's disease.

Carrasquillo MM(1), Belbin O, Zou F, Allen M, Ertekin-Taner N, Ansari M, Wilcox 
SL, Kashino MR, Ma L, Younkin LH, Younkin SG, Younkin CS, Dincman TA, Howard ME, 
Howell CC, Stanton CM, Watson CM, Crump M, Vitart V, Hayward C, Hastie ND, Rudan 
I, Campbell H, Polasek O, Brown K, Passmore P, Craig D, McGuinness B, Todd S, 
Kehoe PG, Mann DM, Smith AD, Beaumont H, Warden D, Holmes C, Heun R, KÃ¶lsch H, 
Kalsheker N, Pankratz VS, Dickson DW, Graff-Radford NR, Petersen RC, Wright AF, 
Younkin SG, Morgan K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, 
Florida, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The insulin-degrading enzyme gene (IDE) is a strong functional and 
positional candidate for late onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We examined conserved regions of IDE and its 10 
kb flanks in 269 AD cases and 252 controls thereby identifying 17 putative 
functional polymorphisms. These variants formed eleven haplotypes that were 
tagged with ten variants. Four of these showed significant association with IDE 
transcript levels in samples from 194 LOAD cerebella. The strongest, rs6583817, 
which has not previously been reported, showed unequivocal association (p = 
1.5x10(-8), fold-increase = 2.12,); the eleven haplotypes were also 
significantly associated with transcript levels (global p = 0.003). Using an in 
vitro dual luciferase reporter assay, we found that rs6583817 increases reporter 
gene expression in Be(2)-C (p = 0.006) and HepG2 (p = 0.02) cell lines. 
Furthermore, using data from a recent genome-wide association study of two 
Croatian isolated populations (n = 1,879), we identified a proxy for rs6583817 
that associated significantly with decreased plasma Abeta40 levels (ss = -0.124, 
p = 0.011) and total measured plasma Abeta levels (b = -0.130, p = 0.009). 
Finally, rs6583817 was associated with decreased risk of LOAD in 3,891 AD cases 
and 3,605 controls. (OR = 0.87, p = 0.03), and the eleven IDE haplotypes (global 
p = 0.02) also showed significant association.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, a previously unreported variant unequivocally associated with 
increased IDE expression was also associated with reduced plasma Abeta40 and 
decreased LOAD susceptibility. Genetic association between LOAD and IDE has been 
difficult to replicate. Our findings suggest that targeted testing of expression 
SNPs (eSNPs) strongly associated with altered transcript levels in autopsy brain 
samples may be a powerful way to identify genetic associations with LOAD that 
would otherwise be difficult to detect.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008764
PMCID: PMC2808243
PMID: 20098734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.