1. Biochemistry. 1991 Apr 2;30(13):3169-78. doi: 10.1021/bi00227a003.

Stereochemistry of the concerted enolization catalyzed by delta 5-3-ketosteroid 
isomerase.

Kuliopulos A(1), Mullen GP, Xue L, Mildvan AS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

The reaction catalyzed by delta 5-3-ketosteroid isomerase has been shown to 
occur via the concerted enolization of the delta 5-3-ketosteroid substrate to 
form a dienolic intermediate, brought about by Tyr-14, which hydrogen bonds to 
and protonates the 3-keto group, and Asp-38, which removes and axial (beta) 
proton from C-4 of the substrate, in the same rate-limiting step [Xue, L., 
Talalay, P., & Mildvan, A.S. (1990) Biochemistry 29, 7491-7500; Kuliopulos, A., 
Mildvan, A.S., Shortle, D., & Talalay, P. (1989) Biochemistry 26, 3927-3937]. 
Since the axial C-4 proton is removed by Asp-38 from above the substrate, a 
determination of the complete stereochemistry of this rapid, concerted 
enolization requires information on the direction of approach of Tyr-14 to the 
enzyme-bound steroid. The double mutant enzyme, Y55F + Y88F, which retains 
Tyr-14 as the sole Tyr residue, was prepared and showed only a 4.5-fold decrease 
in kcat (12,000 s-1) and a 3.6-fold decrease in KM (94 microM) for delta 
5-androstene-3, 17,dione, in comparison with the wild-type enzyme. Deuteration 
of the aromatic rings of the 10 Phe residues further facilitated the assignment 
of the aromatic proton resonances of Tyr-14 in the 600-MHz TOCSY spectrum at 
6.66 +/- 0.01 ppm (3,5H) and at 6.82 +/- 0.01 ppm (2,6H). Variation of the pH 
from 4.9 to 10.9 did not alter these shifts, indicating that the pKa of Tyr-14 
exceeds 10.9. Resonances assigned to the three His residues titrated with pKa 
values very similar to those found with the wild-type enzyme. The binding of 
19-nortestosterone, a product analogue and substrate of the reverse isomerase 
reaction, induced downfield shifts of -0.12 and -0.06 ppm of the 3,5-and 
2,6-proton resonances of Tyr-14, respectively, possibly due to deshielding by 
the 3-keto group of the steroid, but also induced +0.29 to -0.41 ppm changes in 
the chemical shifts of 8 of the 10 Phe residues and smaller changes in 10 of the 
12 ring-shifted methyl resonances, indicating a steroid-induced conformation 
change in the enzyme. NOESY spectra in H2O revealed strong negative Overhauser 
effects from the 3,5-proton resonance of Tyr-14 to the overlapping 2 alpha-, 2 
beta-, or 6 beta-proton resonances of the bound steroid but no NOE's to the 4- 
or 6 alpha-protons of the steroid.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00227a003
PMID: 2009258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]