1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 May 1;19(9):1828-39. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq041. Epub 2010
Jan  27.

Independent and population-specific association of risk variants at the IRGM 
locus with Crohn's disease.

Prescott NJ(1), Dominy KM, Kubo M, Lewis CM, Fisher SA, Redon R, Huang N, 
Stranger BE, Blaszczyk K, Hudspith B, Parkes G, Hosono N, Yamazaki K, Onnie CM, 
Forbes A, Dermitzakis ET, Nakamura Y, Mansfield JC, Sanderson J, Hurles ME, 
Roberts RG, Mathew CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London School of 
Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK. 
natalie.prescott@genetics.kcl.ac.uk

DNA polymorphisms in a region on chromosome 5q33.1 which contains two genes, 
immunity related GTPase related family, M (IRGM) and zinc finger protein 300 
(ZNF300), are associated with Crohn's disease (CD). The deleted allele of a 20 
kb copy number variation (CNV) upstream of IRGM was recently shown to be in 
strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the CD-associated single nucleotide 
polymorphisms and is itself associated with CD (P < 0.01). The deletion was 
correlated with increased or reduced expression of IRGM in transformed cells in 
a cell line-dependent manner, and has been proposed as a likely causal variant. 
We report here that small insertion/deletion polymorphisms in the promoter and 
5' untranslated region of IRGM are, together with the CNV, strongly associated 
with CD (P = 1.37 x 10(-5) to 1.40 x 10(-9)), and that the CNV and the 
5'-untranslated region variant -308(GTTT)(5) contribute independently to CD 
susceptibility (P = 2.6 x 10(-7) and P = 2 x 10(-5), respectively). We also show 
that the CD risk haplotype is associated with a significant decrease in IRGM 
expression (P < 10(-12)) in untransformed lymphocytes from CD patients. Further 
analysis of these variants in a Japanese CD case-control sample and of IRGM 
expression in HapMap populations revealed that neither the IRGM 
insertion/deletion polymorphisms nor the CNV was associated with CD or with 
altered IRGM expression in the Asian population. This suggests that the 
involvement of the IRGM risk haplotype in the pathogenesis of CD requires 
gene-gene or gene-environment interactions which are absent in Asian 
populations, or that none of the variants analysed are causal, and that the true 
causal variants arose after the European-Asian split.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq041
PMCID: PMC2850616
PMID: 20106866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]