1. Blood. 2010 May 13;115(19):3923-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-249722. Epub
2010  Jan 25.

Genetic variation in the folate metabolic pathway and risk of childhood 
leukemia.

Lightfoot TJ(1), Johnston WT, Painter D, Simpson J, Roman E, Skibola CF, Smith 
MT, Allan JM, Taylor GM; United Kingdom Childhood Cancer Study.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology & Genetics Unit, Department of Health Sciences, University of 
York, York, UK. tracy.lightfoot@egu.york.ac.uk

Studies of childhood leukemia and the potential etiologic role of genetic 
variation in folate metabolism have produced conflicting findings and have often 
been based on small numbers. We investigated the association between 
polymorphisms in key folate metabolism enzymes (MTHFR 677 C>T, MTHFR 1298 A>C, 
SHMT1 1420 C>T, MTR 2756 A>G, TS 1494del6, and TS 28bp repeat) in 939 cases of 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 89 cases of acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) recruited into the United Kingdom Childhood Cancer Study. We also 
examined the maternal genotypes of 752 of these cases. Data from 824 noncancer 
controls recruited were used for comparison. No evidence of an association with 
MTHFR 677 was observed for ALL or AML, either in children or their mothers. 
However, in children an increased risk of ALL (odds ratio [OR] = 1.88; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 1.16-3.07; P = .010) and AML (OR = 2.74; 95% CI, 
1.07-7.01; P = .036) was observed with the MTR 2756 GG genotype; the association 
was most pronounced for cases with the MLL translocation (OR = 4.90; 95% CI, 
1.30-18.45; P = .019). These data suggest that genetic variation in methionine 
synthase could mediate risk of childhood leukemia, either via effects on DNA 
methylation or via effects on fetal growth and development.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-249722
PMCID: PMC2869556
PMID: 20101025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]