1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Jun;34(6):677-84. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.01.014. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

Multiple forms of alpha-2 macroglobulin in shrimp Fenneropenaeus chinesis and 
their transcriptional response to WSSV or Vibrio pathogen infection.

Ma H(1), Wang B, Zhang J, Li F, Xiang J.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China. mahongm@ouc.edu.cn

Alpha-2 macroglobulin (A2M) is a non-specific protease inhibitor involved in 
host defense. By full length cloning and sequencing we identified three distinct 
cDNAs for A2M in Chinese shrimp Fenneropenaeus chinesis, designated FcA2M-1, 
FcA2M-2 and FcA2M-3, respectively. Expression profiles in normal tissues as well 
as tissues after challenge by white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) and Vibrio 
pathogen were conducted for FcA2M-1 and FcA2M-2. The FcA2M-1 and FcA2M-2 cDNAs 
encode proteins with 1501 or 1502 amino acids, respectively, containing the 
typical conserved domain architecture of A2M. Similar to complement component 
C3, FcA2M-2 has a catalytic histidine, which may confer opsonic properties on 
this shrimp A2M. Six variants in the bait region were found in FcA2M-2 
responding differently to Vibrio challenge, thereby widening the spectrum of 
inhibition and the diversity of immune recognition. FcA2M-1 and FcA2M-3, as well 
as most other protostomia invertebrate A2Ms identified so far, have a serine 
residue in the catalytic histidine position instead of the conserved asparagine 
residue found in vertebrate A2Ms. This, as inferred from a carp C3 molecule in 
which the catalytic histidine is substituted by a serine, suggests A2Ms in lower 
invertebrates possibly bear C3-like opsonic activity. These FcA2Ms showed much 
lower similarity to each other than to the A2Ms in other shrimp species, further 
supported by pylogenetic analysis. FcA2M-1 was found to be expressed most highly 
in hemocytes and lymphoid organ, while FcA2M-2 was expressed most highly in the 
heart and lymphoid organ, with the lowest expression in hemocytes. Challenge by 
WSSV or Vibrio pathogen increased the FcA2M-1 mRNA level in both hemocytes and 
lymphoid organ. After challenge, FcA2M-2 showed up-regulation in lymphoid organ 
but not in hemocytes. These expression features indicate that the different 
types of A2M in F. chinesis carry out different functions and that they are not 
simply functionally redundant.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.01.014
PMID: 20105438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]