1. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Feb 24;132(7):2243-53. doi: 10.1021/ja908418r.

Understanding blue-to-red conversion in monomeric fluorescent timers and 
hydrolytic degradation of their chromophores.

Pletnev S(1), Subach FV, Dauter Z, Wlodawer A, Verkhusha VV.

Author information:
(1)Synchrotron Radiation Research Section, Macromolecular Crystallography 
Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA. 
pletnevs@mail.nih.gov

Fast-FT is a fluorescent timer (FT) engineered from DsRed-like fluorescent 
protein mCherry. Crystal structures of Fast-FT (chromophore Met66-Tyr67-Gly68) 
and its precursor with blocked blue-to-red conversion Blue102 (chromophore 
Leu66-Tyr67-Gly68) have been determined at the resolution of 1.15 A and 1.81 A, 
respectively. Structural data suggest that blue-to-red conversion, taking place 
in Fast-FT and in related FTs, is associated with the oxidation of 
Calpha2-Cbeta2 bond of Tyr67. Site directed mutagenesis revealed a crucial role 
of Arg70 and Tyr83 in the delayed oxidation of Calpha2-Cbeta2 bond, introducing 
the timing factor in maturation of the timer. Substitutions Ser217Ala and 
Ser217Cys in Fast-FT substantially slow down formation of an intermediate blue 
chromophore but do not affect much blue-to-red conversion, whereas mutations 
Arg70Lys or Trp83Leu, having little effect on the blue chromophore formation 
rate, markedly accelerates formation of the red chromophore. The chromophore of 
FTs adopts a cis-conformation stabilized by a hydrogen bond between its 
phenolate oxygen and the side chain hydroxyl of Ser146. In Blue102, a bulky side 
chain of Ile146 precludes the chromophore from adopting a "cis-like" 
conformation, blocking its blue-to-red conversion. Both Fast-FT and Blue102 
structures revealed hydrolytic degradation of the chromophores. In Fast-FT, 
chromophore-forming Met66 residue is eliminated from the polypeptide chain, 
whereas Leu66 in Blue102 is cleaved out from the chromophore, decarboxylated and 
remains attached to the preceding Phe65. Hydrolysis of the chromophore competes 
with chromophore maturation and is driven by the same residues that participate 
in chromophore maturation.

DOI: 10.1021/ja908418r
PMCID: PMC2887295
PMID: 20121102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]