1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Feb 12;86(2):126-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.018.
Epub  2010 Feb 4.

A missense mutation in the aggrecan C-type lectin domain disrupts extracellular 
matrix interactions and causes dominant familial osteochondritis dissecans.

Stattin EL(1), Wiklund F, Lindblom K, Onnerfjord P, Jonsson BA, Tegner Y, Sasaki 
T, Struglics A, Lohmander S, Dahl N, Heinegård D, Aspberg A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå 
University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden.

Osteochondritis dissecans is a disorder in which fragments of articular 
cartilage and subchondral bone dislodge from the joint surface. We analyzed a 
five-generation family in which affected members had autosomal-dominant familial 
osteochondritis dissecans. A genome-wide linkage analysis identified aggrecan 
(ACAN) as a prime candidate gene for the disorder. Sequence analysis of ACAN 
revealed heterozygosity for a missense mutation (c.6907G > A) in affected 
individuals, resulting in a p.V2303M amino acid substitution in the aggrecan G3 
domain C-type lectin, which mediates interactions with other proteins in the 
cartilage extracellular matrix. Binding studies with recombinant mutated and 
wild-type G3 proteins showed loss of fibulin-1, fibulin-2, and tenascin-R 
interactions for the V2303M protein. Mass spectrometric analyses of aggrecan 
purified from patient cartilage verified that V2303M aggrecan is produced and 
present in the tissue. Our results provide a molecular mechanism for the 
etiology of familial osteochondritis dissecans and show the importance of the 
aggrecan C-type lectin interactions for cartilage function in vivo.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.018
PMCID: PMC2820178
PMID: 20137779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]