1. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Jun 1;9(4):411-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00571.x.  Epub 2010 Jan 30.

Association between AKT1 but not AKTIP genetic variants and increased risk for 
suicidal behavior in bipolar patients.

Magno LA(1), Miranda DM, Neves FS, Pimenta GJ, Mello MP, De Marco LA, Correa H, 
Romano-Silva MA.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Sa√∫de Mental, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de 
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

We tested the hypothesis that the presence of AKT1 and AKTIP polymorphisms, 
target genes that encode key proteins in the signaling of dopaminergic and 
serotonergic systems, is associated with suicidal behavior in bipolar patients. 
The subjects were 273 patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder I or II (age = 
41.4 +/- 12.9). TaqMan single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping assays (AKT1: 
rs2494731, rs3803304, rs3730358, rs10149779, rs2494746, rs1130214 and rs249878; 
AKTIP: rs9302648 and rs7189819) were used. We found that the AKT1 marker showed 
an association with suicide attempts (rs1130214, P < 0.05) and attempted violent 
attacks (rs2494746, P < 0.05). One out of the seven tested markers of AKT1 
attained significant genotype association with violent attempt (rs2494731; P < 
0.05). A significant association was detected in the AKT1 haplotype test. We did 
not observe an association between suicidal behavior and AKTIP variants and also 
did not find an interaction between AKTIP and AKT1 polymorphisms. In addition, 
we found that demographic and clinical data are associated with lifetime history 
of suicide attempts. Our data suggest that demographic and clinical 
characteristics and AKT1 single markers and haplotypes, but not AKTIP 
polymorphisms or interactions between AKT1 and AKTIP, are associated with 
increased risk for suicidal behavior in bipolar patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00571.x
PMID: 20132317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]