1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10281-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.084939. Epub 
2010 Feb 5.

Nox4 B-loop creates an interface between the transmembrane and dehydrogenase 
domains.

Jackson HM(1), Kawahara T, Nisimoto Y, Smith SM, Lambeth JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

By targeting redox-sensitive amino acids in signaling proteins, the NADPH 
oxidase (Nox) family of enzymes link reactive oxygen species to physiological 
processes. We previously analyzed the sequences of 107 Nox enzymes and 
identified conserved regions that are predicted to have important functions in 
Nox structure or activation. One such region is the cytosolic B-loop, which in 
Nox1-4 contains a conserved polybasic region. Previous studies of Nox2 showed 
that certain basic residues in the B-loop are important for activity and 
translocation of p47(phox)/p67(phox), suggesting this region participates in 
subunit assembly. However, conservation of this region in Nox4, which does not 
require p47(phox)/p67(phox), suggested an additional role for the B-loop in Nox 
function. Here, we show by mutation of Nox4 B-loop residues that this region is 
important for Nox4 activity. Fluorescence polarization detected binding between 
Nox4 B-loop peptide and dehydrogenase domain (K(d) = 58 +/- 12 nm). This 
interaction was weakened with Nox4 R96E B-loop corresponding to a mutation that 
also markedly decreases the activity of holo-Nox4. Truncations of the 
dehydrogenase domain localize the B-loop-binding site to the N-terminal half of 
the NADPH-binding subdomain. Similarly, the Nox2 B-loop bound to the Nox2 
dehydrogenase domain, and both the Nox2 and Nox4 interactions were dependent on 
the polybasic region of the B-loop. These data indicate that the B-loop is 
critical for Nox4 function; we propose that the B-loop, by binding to the 
dehydrogenase domain, provides the interface between the transmembrane and 
dehydrogenase domains of Nox enzymes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.084939
PMCID: PMC2856233
PMID: 20139414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]