1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar 12;86(3):440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.025. Epub
 2010 Feb 11.

A weighted false discovery rate control procedure reveals alleles at FOXA2 that 
influence fasting glucose levels.

Xing C(1), Cohen JC, Boerwinkle E.

Author information:
(1)Donald W. Reynolds Cardiovascular Clinical Research Center, McDermott Center 
for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8591, USA. chao.xing@utsouthwestern.edu

Association signals in GWAS are usually prioritized solely by p values. Here, we 
attempt to improve the power of GWAS by using a weighted false discovery rate 
control procedure to detect associations of low-frequency variants with effect 
sizes similar to or even larger than those of common variants. We used the 
Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 to test for association with fasting 
glucose levels in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC) 
population. In addition to finding several previously identified sequence 
variations, we identified a low-frequency variant (rs1209523; minor allele 
frequency = 0.043) near FOXA2 that was associated with fasting glucose levels in 
European Americans (EAs) (n = 7428, p value = 1.3 x 10(-5)). The association 
between rs1209523 and glucose levels was also significant in African Americans 
(AAs) (n = 2029, p value = 6.7 x 10(-3)) of the ARIC and was confirmed by 
replication in both EAs and AAs of the Dallas Heart Study (n = 963 and 1571, 
respectively; p values = 5.3 x 10(-3) and 5.8 x 10(-4), respectively) and in EAs 
of the Cooper Center Longitudinal Study (n = 2862; p value = 1.6 x 10(-2)). A 
meta-analysis of these five populations yielded an estimated effect size of 
-1.31 mg/dl per minor allele (p value = 2.2 x 10(-11)). This study reveals that 
there is a cache of less-frequent variants in GWAS arrays that can be identified 
via analytical approaches accounting for allele frequencies.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.025
PMCID: PMC2833364
PMID: 20152958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]