1. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):971-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.5.10914. Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Phosphorylation of Ser72 is dispensable for Skp2 assembly into an active SCF 
ubiquitin ligase and its subcellular localization.

Bashir T(1), Pagan JK, Busino L, Pagano M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, Smilow 
Research Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

F-box proteins are the substrate recognition subunits of SCF (Skp1, Cul1, F-box 
protein) ubiquitin ligase complexes. Skp2 is a nuclear F-box protein that 
targets the CDK inhibitor p27 for ubiquitin- and proteasome-dependent 
degradation. In G(0) and during the G(1) phase of the cell cycle, Skp2 is 
degraded via the APC/C(Cdh1) ubiquitin ligase to allow stabilization of p27 and 
inhibition of CDKs, facilitating the maintenance of the G(0)/G(1) state. 
APC/C(Cdh1) binds Skp2 through an N-terminal domain (amino acids 46-94 in human 
Skp2). It has been shown that phosphorylation of Ser64 and Ser72 in this domain 
dissociates Skp2 from APC/C. More recently, it has instead been proposed that 
phosphorylation of Skp2 on Ser72 by Akt/PKB allows Skp2 binding to Skp1, 
promoting the assembly of an active SCF(Skp2) ubiquitin ligase, and Skp2 
relocalization/retention into the cytoplasm, promoting cell migration via an 
unknown mechanism. According to these reports, a Skp2 mutant in which Ser72 is 
substituted with Ala is unable to promote cell proliferation and loses its 
oncogenic potential. Given the contrasting reports, we revisited these results 
and conclude that phosphorylation of Skp2 on Ser72 does not control Skp2 binding 
to Skp1 and Cul1, has no influence on SCF(Skp2) ubiquitin ligase activity, and 
does not affect the subcellular localization of Skp2.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.9.5.10914
PMCID: PMC3827631
PMID: 20160477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]