1. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3025-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901156. Epub
2010  Feb 17.

MyD88 adaptor-like D96N is a naturally occurring loss-of-function variant of 
TIRAP.

George J(1), Kubarenko AV, Rautanen A, Mills TC, Colak E, Kempf T, Hill AV, 
Nieters A, Weber AN.

Author information:
(1)Toll-Like Receptors and Cancer Division, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Signals elicited by TLRs following the detection of microbes are integrated and 
diversified by a group of four cytoplasmic adaptor molecules featuring an 
evolutionarily conserved Toll/IL-1R signaling domain. Single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in TLRs and their adaptor molecules have been shown to 
influence susceptibility to a range of infectious and other diseases. The 
adaptor MyD88 adaptor-like (Mal)/Toll/IL-1R-containing adaptor protein is 
involved in TLR2 and 4 signal transduction by recruiting another adaptor 
molecule, MyD88, to the plasma membrane. In this study, we used naturally 
occurring variants of Mal as tools to study the molecular biology of Mal in more 
detail in cellular model systems and to thereby identify functionally 
interesting variants whose corresponding nonsynonymous SNPs might be of further 
epidemiological interest. Of seven reported variants for Mal, we found Mal D96N 
associated with reduced NF-kappaB signaling and cytokine production after 
overexpression in HEK293 and Huh-7 cells. The D96N mutation prevented Mal from 
recruiting its signaling partner MyD88 to the plasma membrane and altered 
posttranslational modification of Mal. These findings led us to investigate the 
frequency of heterozygosity for the corresponding SNP rs8177400 in a Caucasian 
case-control study on the etiology of lymphoma, a disease in which TLRs have 
been implicated. Although rs8177400 did not modify lymphoma risk in general, its 
frequency of heterozygosity was accurately determined to 0.97%. Our data add 
rs8177400 (D96N) to the list of functionally important variants of Mal and 
warrant further research into its immunological, epidemiological, and diagnostic 
relevance.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901156
PMID: 20164415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]