1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 12;6(2):e1000841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000841.

Genome-wide association study in Asian populations identifies variants in ETS1 
and WDFY4 associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Yang W(1), Shen N, Ye DQ, Liu Q, Zhang Y, Qian XX, Hirankarn N, Ying D, Pan HF, 
Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW, Lee KW, Mok MY, Wong SN, Leung AM, Li XP, Avihingsanon 
Y, Wong CM, Lee TL, Ho MH, Lee PP, Chang YK, Li PH, Li RJ, Zhang L, Wong WH, Ng 
IO, Lau CS, Sham PC, Lau YL; Asian Lupus Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Lau YL, Shen N, Ye DQ, Hirankarn N, Yang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, 
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a complex and potentially fatal autoimmune 
disease, characterized by autoantibody production and multi-organ damage. By a 
genome-wide association study (320 patients and 1,500 controls) and subsequent 
replication altogether involving a total of 3,300 Asian SLE patients from Hong 
Kong, Mainland China, and Thailand, as well as 4,200 ethnically and 
geographically matched controls, genetic variants in ETS1 and WDFY4 were found 
to be associated with SLE (ETS1: rs1128334, P = 2.33x10(-11), OR = 1.29; WDFY4: 
rs7097397, P = 8.15x10(-12), OR = 1.30). ETS1 encodes for a transcription factor 
known to be involved in a wide range of immune functions, including Th17 cell 
development and terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes. SNP rs1128334 is 
located in the 3'-UTR of ETS1, and allelic expression analysis from peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells showed significantly lower expression level from the 
risk allele. WDFY4 is a conserved protein with unknown function, but is 
predominantly expressed in primary and secondary immune tissues, and rs7097397 
in WDFY4 changes an arginine residue to glutamine (R1816Q) in this protein. Our 
study also confirmed association of the HLA locus, STAT4, TNFSF4, BLK, BANK1, 
IRF5, and TNFAIP3 with SLE in Asians. These new genetic findings may help us to 
gain a better understanding of the disease and the functions of the genes 
involved.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000841
PMCID: PMC2820522
PMID: 20169177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.