1. Ind Health. 2010;48(1):96-107. doi: 10.2486/indhealth.48.96.

Role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha in hepatobiliary injury 
induced by ammonium perfluorooctanoate in mouse liver.

Minata M(1), Harada KH, KÃ¤rrman A, Hitomi T, Hirosawa M, Murata M, Gonzalez FJ, 
Koizumi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health and Environmental Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) has been suggested 
to protect against chemically induced hepatobiliary injuries in rodents. This 
function could mask the potential toxicities of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) 
that is an emerging environmental contaminant and a weak ligand of PPARalpha. 
However its function has not been clarified. In this study, PFOA was found to 
elicit hepatocyte and bile duct injuries in Pparalpha-null mice after 4 wk 
treatment with PFOA ammonium salt (0, 12.5, 25, 50 micromol/kg/d, gavage). In 
wild-type mice, PFOA caused major hepatocellular damage dose-dependently and 
minor cholangiopathy observed only at 25 and 50 micromol/kg. In treated 
Pparalpha-null mice, PFOA produced marked fat accumulation, severe 
cholangiopathy, hepatocellular damage and apoptotic cells especially in bile 
ducts. Oxidative stress was also increased 4-fold at 50 micromol/kg and 
TNF-alpha mRNA was upregulated more than 3-fold at 25 micromol/kg in 
Pparalpha-null mice. Biliary bile acid/phospholipid ratios were higher in 
Pparalpha-null mice than in wild-type mice. Results from these studies suggest 
that PPARalpha is protective against PFOA and have a critical role in drug 
induced hepatobiliary injury.

DOI: 10.2486/indhealth.48.96
PMCID: PMC7385711
PMID: 20160413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]