1. Shock. 2010 Aug;34(2):169-75. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181cffe7d.

Hypoxia-induced alteration of mitochondrial genes in cardiomyocytes: role of 
Bnip3 and Pdk1.

Jian B(1), Wang D, Chen D, Voss J, Chaudry I, Raju R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.

The hypoxic conditions induced by reduced blood flow decreases oxygen 
availability in target tissues. Cellular hypoxia leads to mitochondrial 
dysfunction, decreased energy production, and increased production of reactive 
oxygen species. To determine the alteration in expression of mitochondrial genes 
after hypoxia in cardiomyocytes, we developed a rodent mitochondrial gene chip 
(RoMitoChip). The chip had 1088 probe sets including 46 probe sets representing 
37 mouse mitochondrial DNA transcripts and the remaining probe sets representing 
mouse nuclear genes contributing to the mitochondrial structure and function. 
Mouse cardiomyocytes isolated from neonatal C57BL/6 mice that were subjected to 
hypoxia (1% oxygen) for different time intervals demonstrated a dichotomy in the 
expression profile of tRNA and mRNA transcripts. We report a total of 483 
signature genes that were altered by hypoxia in the cardiac myocytes and related 
to mitochondrial structure and function. This includes 23 transcripts on 
mitochondrial DNA. Pathway analysis demonstrated predominant changes in the 
expression of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, glucose and fatty 
acid metabolism, and apoptosis. The most upregulated genes after 24 h of hypoxia 
included hypoxia-inducible factor 1, alpha subunit, inducible genes Bnip3, Pdk1, 
and Aldoc. Whereas Bnip3 is important in the cardiomyocyte death pathway, Pdk1 
enzyme is critical in conserving mitochondrial function by diverting metabolic 
intermediates to glycolysis. This study identifies the participation of two 
important pathways, cell death and glycolytic, and two key proteins, Bnip3 and 
Pdk1, playing critical roles in these pathways in cardiomyocytes after severe 
hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e3181cffe7d
PMCID: PMC3671386
PMID: 20160671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]