1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):3692-708. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq087. Epub
2010  Feb 17.

A cooperative and specific DNA-binding mode of HIV-1 integrase depends on the 
nature of the metallic cofactor and involves the zinc-containing N-terminal 
domain.

Carayon K(1), Leh H, Henry E, Simon F, Mouscadet JF, Deprez E.

Author information:
(1)LBPA, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 61 av. du Président Wilson, 
94235 Cachan, France.

HIV-1 integrase catalyzes the insertion of the viral genome into chromosomal 
DNA. We characterized the structural determinants of the 3'-processing reaction 
specificity--the first reaction of the integration process--at the DNA-binding 
level. We found that the integrase N-terminal domain, containing a pseudo 
zinc-finger motif, plays a key role, at least indirectly, in the formation of 
specific integrase-DNA contacts. This motif mediates a cooperative DNA binding 
of integrase that occurs only with the cognate/viral DNA sequence and the 
physiologically relevant Mg(2+) cofactor. The DNA-binding was essentially 
non-cooperative with Mn(2+) or using non-specific/random sequences, regardless 
of the metallic cofactor. 2,2'-Dithiobisbenzamide-1 induced zinc ejection from 
integrase by covalently targeting the zinc-finger motif, and significantly 
decreased the Hill coefficient of the Mg(2+)-mediated integrase-DNA interaction, 
without affecting the overall affinity. Concomitantly, 2,2'-dithiobisbenzamide-1 
severely impaired 3'-processing (IC(50) = 11-15 nM), suggesting that zinc 
ejection primarily perturbs the nature of the active integrase oligomer. A less 
specific and weaker catalytic effect of 2,2'-dithiobisbenzamide-1 is mediated by 
Cys 56 in the catalytic core and, notably, accounts for the weaker inhibition of 
the non-cooperative Mn(2+)-dependent 3'-processing. Our data show that the 
cooperative DNA-binding mode is strongly related to the sequence-specific 
DNA-binding, and depends on the simultaneous presence of the Mg(2+) cofactor and 
the zinc effector.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq087
PMCID: PMC2887959
PMID: 20164093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]