1. Int J Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;127(11):2530-41. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25254.

Cleavage of galectin-3 by matrix metalloproteases induces angiogenesis in breast 
cancer.

Nangia-Makker P(1), Wang Y, Raz T, Tait L, Balan V, Hogan V, Raz A.

Author information:
(1)Tumor Progression and Metastasis, Department of Pathology, School of 
Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Galectin-3 cleavage is related to progression of human breast and prostate 
cancer and is partly responsible for tumor growth, angiogenesis and apoptosis 
resistance in mouse models. A functional polymorphism in galectin-3 gene, 
determining its susceptibility to cleavage by matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs)-2/-9 is related to racial disparity in breast cancer incidence in Asian 
and Caucasian women. The purpose of our study is to evaluate (i) if cleavage of 
galectin-3 could be related to angiogenesis during the progression of human 
breast cancer, (ii) the role of cleaved galectin-3 in induction of angiogenesis 
and (iii) determination of the galectin-3 domain responsible for induction of 
angiogenic response. Galectin-3 null breast cancer cells BT-459 were transfected 
with either cleavable full-length galectin-3 or its fragmented peptides. 
Chemotaxis, chemoinvasion, heterotypic aggregation, epithelial-endothelial cell 
interactions and angiogenesis were compared to noncleavable galectin-3. 
BT-549-H(64) cells harboring cleavable galectin-3 exhibited increased 
chemotaxis, invasion and interactions with endothelial cells resulting in 
angiogenesis and 3D morphogenesis compared to BT-549-P(64) cells harboring 
noncleavable galectin-3. BT-549-H(64) cells induced increased migration and 
phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase in migrating endothelial cells. 
Endothelial cells cocultured with BT-549 cells transfected with galectin-3 
peptides indicate that amino acids 1-62 and 33-250 stimulate migration and 
morphogenesis of endothelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of blood vessel 
density and galectin-3 cleavage in a breast cancer progression tissue array 
support the in vitro findings. We conclude that the cleavage of the N terminus 
of galectin-3 followed by its release in the tumor microenvironment in part 
leads to breast cancer angiogenesis and progression.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.25254
PMCID: PMC3334857
PMID: 20162566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]