1. Brain. 2010 Mar;133(Pt 3):671-89. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq013. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Attenuated variants of Lesch-Nyhan disease.

Jinnah HA(1), Ceballos-Picot I, Torres RJ, Visser JE, Schretlen DJ, Verdu A, 
Lar√≥vere LE, Chen CJ, Cossu A, Wu CH, Sampat R, Chang SJ, de Kremer RD, Nyhan W, 
Harris JC, Reich SG, Puig JG; Lesch-Nyhan Disease International Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Department of Human Genetics, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. hjinnah@emory.edu

Comment in
    Brain. 2010 Mar;133(Pt 3):649-51. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq027.
    Brain. 2010 Nov;133(11):e153; author reply e154. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq156.

Lesch-Nyhan disease is a neurogenetic disorder caused by deficiency of the 
enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase. The classic form of the 
disease is described by a characteristic syndrome that includes overproduction 
of uric acid, severe generalized dystonia, cognitive disability and 
self-injurious behaviour. In addition to the classic disease, variant forms of 
the disease occur wherein some clinical features are absent or unusually mild. 
The current studies provide the results of a prospective and multi-centre 
international study focusing on neurological manifestations of the largest 
cohort of Lesch-Nyhan disease variants evaluated to date, with 46 patients from 
3 to 65 years of age coming from 34 families. All had evidence for 
overproduction of uric acid. Motor abnormalities were evident in 42 (91%), 
ranging from subtle clumsiness to severely disabling generalized dystonia. 
Cognitive function was affected in 31 (67%) but it was never severe. Though none 
exhibited self-injurious behaviours, many exhibited behaviours that were 
maladaptive. Only three patients had no evidence of neurological dysfunction. 
Our results were compared with a comprehensive review of 78 prior reports 
describing a total of 127 Lesch-Nyhan disease variants. Together these results 
define the spectrum of clinical features associated with hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency. At one end of the spectrum are patients 
with classic Lesch-Nyhan disease and the full clinical phenotype. At the other 
end of the spectrum are patients with overproduction of uric acid but no 
apparent neurological or behavioural deficits. Inbetween are patients with 
varying degrees of motor, cognitive, or behavioural abnormalities. Recognition 
of this spectrum is valuable for understanding the pathogenesis and diagnosis of 
all forms of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq013
PMCID: PMC2842514
PMID: 20176575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]