1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Mar 12;393(3):555-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.095. Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Identification and functional characterization of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 
(IDH1) mutations in thyroid cancer.

Murugan AK(1), Bojdani E, Xing M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Cellular and Molecular Thyroid Research, Division of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Mutations in the genes for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) and isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 2 (IDH2) have been recently identified in glioblastoma. In the 
present study, we investigated IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in follicular thyroid 
cancer (FTC) and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC), with the latter, like 
glioblastoma, having a rapidly aggressive and lethal clinical course. By direct 
genomic DNA sequencing, we analyzed exon 4 of the IDH1 and IDH2 genes that 
harbored the mutation hot spots codon 132 and 172 of the two genes in 
glioblastoma, respectively, in 12 thyroid cancer cell lines, 20 FTC, and 18 ATC 
tumor samples. A novel homozygous G367A IDH1 mutation, resulting in a G123R 
amino acid change in codon 123, was identified in a case of ATC. A previously 
described IDH1 V71I mutation was found in a case of FTC and a case of ATC and no 
mutations were found in the cell lines. The overall prevalence of mutations was 
thus 1/20 (5%) in FTC and 2/18 (11%) in ATC. We did not find mutation in the 
IDH2 gene in these thyroid cancer cell lines and tumor samples. Sequence 
alignment analysis of 16 species revealed that the novel IDH1 G123R mutation was 
located in a highly conserved region, raising the possibility of a serious 
functional consequence as could also be predicted by the occurrence of a 
positively charged amino acid from this mutation. To test this, we created a 
G123R mutant by site-directed mutagenesis and demonstrated a decreased enzymatic 
activity of IDH1, similar to the expected reduction in the enzymatic activity of 
the previously described R132H IDH1 mutant measured as a control. Thus, 
functionally relevant IDH1 mutations can also occur in thyroid cancer, 
particularly ATC, suggesting a potential tumorigenic role of the IDH1 system 
that could represent a new therapeutic target for thyroid cancer.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.095
PMCID: PMC2838977
PMID: 20171178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.