1. J Exp Bot. 2010 Mar;61(5):1455-67. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq023. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

HvALMT1 from barley is involved in the transport of organic anions.

Gruber BD(1), Ryan PR, Richardson AE, Tyerman SD, Ramesh S, Hebb DM, Howitt SM, 
Delhaize E.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, GPO Box 1600, Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia.

Members of the ALMT gene family contribute to the Al(3+) resistance of several 
plant species by facilitating malate efflux from root cells. The first member of 
this family to be cloned and characterized, TaALMT1, is responsible for most of 
the natural variation of Al(3+) resistance in wheat. The current study describes 
the isolation and characterization of HvALMT1, the barley gene with the greatest 
sequence similarity to TaALMT1. HvALMT1 is located on chromosome 2H which has 
not been associated with Al(3+) resistance in barley. The relatively low levels 
of HvALMT1 expression detected in root and shoot tissues were independent of 
external aluminium or phosphorus supply. Transgenic barley plants transformed 
with the HvALMT1 promoter fused to the green fluorescent protein (GFP) indicated 
that expression of HvALMT1 was relatively high in stomatal guard cells and in 
root tissues containing expanding cells. GFP fused to the C-terminus of the full 
HvALMT1 protein localized to the plasma membrane and motile vesicles within the 
cytoplasm. HvALMT1 conferred both inward and outward currents when expressed in 
Xenopus laevis oocytes that were bathed in a range of anions including malate. 
Both malate uptake and efflux were confirmed in oocyte assays using 
[(14)C]malate as a radiotracer. It is suggested that HvALMT1 functions as an 
anion channel to facilitate organic anion transport in stomatal function and 
expanding cells.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erq023
PMCID: PMC2837267
PMID: 20176888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]