1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Apr 16;397(5):1199-208. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.02.026. Epub 
2010 Feb 22.

Structural and biochemical bases for the redox sensitivity of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis RslA.

Thakur KG(1), Praveena T, Gopal B.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560 012, 
India.

An effective transcriptional response to redox stimuli is of particular 
importance for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, as it adapts to the environment of 
host alveoli and macrophages. The M. tuberculosis sigma factor sigma(L) 
regulates the expression of genes involved in cell-wall and polyketide 
syntheses. sigma(L) interacts with the cytosolic anti-sigma domain of a 
membrane-associated protein, RslA. Here we demonstrate that RslA binds Zn(2+) 
and can sequester sigma(L) in a reducing environment. In response to an 
oxidative stimulus, proximal cysteines in the CXXC motif of RslA form a 
disulfide bond, releasing bound Zn(2+). This results in a substantial 
rearrangement of the sigma(L)/RslA complex, leading to an 8-fold decrease in the 
affinity of RslA for sigma(L). The crystal structure of the -35-element 
recognition domain of sigma(L), sigma(4)(L), bound to RslA reveals that RslA 
inactivates sigma(L) by sterically occluding promoter DNA and RNA polymerase 
binding sites. The crystal structure further reveals that the cysteine residues 
that coordinate Zn(2+) in RslA are solvent exposed in the complex, thus 
providing a structural basis for the redox sensitivity of RslA. The biophysical 
parameters of sigma(L)/RslA interactions provide a template for understanding 
how variations in the rate of Zn(2+) release and associated conformational 
changes could regulate the activity of a Zn(2+)-associated anti-sigma factor.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.02.026
PMCID: PMC2877774
PMID: 20184899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]