1. Exp Eye Res. 2010 Jun;90(6):688-98. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.02.007. Epub 2010
 Feb 23.

Aggregation of deamidated human betaB2-crystallin and incomplete rescue by 
alpha-crystallin chaperone.

Michiel M(1), Duprat E, Skouri-Panet F, Lampi JA, Tardieu A, Lampi KJ, Finet S.

Author information:
(1)Prot√©ines, Biochimie Structurale et Fonctionnelle, CNRS-UPMC, case 29, 7 quai 
St Bernard, 75252 Paris Cedex 5, France.

Aging of the lens is accompanied by extensive deamidation of the lens specific 
proteins, the crystallins. Deamidated crystallins are increased in the insoluble 
proteins and may contribute to cataracts. Deamidation has been shown in vitro to 
alter the structure and decrease the stability of human lens betaB1, betaB2 and 
betaA3-crystallin. Of particular interest, betaB2 mutants were constructed to 
mimic the effect of in vivo deamidations at the interacting interface between 
domains, at Q70 in the N terminal domain and at Q162, its C-terminal homologue. 
The double mutant was also constructed. We previously reported that deamidation 
at the critical interface sites decreased stability, while preserving the 
dimeric 3D structure. In the present study, dynamic light scattering, 
differential scanning calorimetry and small angle X-ray scattering were used to 
investigate the effect of deamidation on stability, thermal unfolding and 
aggregation. The bovine betaLb fraction was used for comparative analysis. The 
chaperone requirements of the various samples were determined using bovine 
alpha-crystallins as the chaperone. Deamidation at both interface Gln residues 
or at Q70, but not Q162, significantly lowered the temperature for unfolding and 
aggregation, which was rapidly followed by precipitation. This 
deamidation-induced aggregation and precipitation was not completely prevented 
by alpha-crystallin chaperone. A potential mechanism for cataract formation in 
vivo involving accumulation of deamidated beta-crystallin aggregates is 
discussed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2010.02.007
PMCID: PMC2904749
PMID: 20188088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]