1. Oncogene. 2010 May 6;29(18):2628-37. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.24. Epub 2010 Mar
1.

Mutant p53 initiates a feedback loop that involves Egr-1/EGF receptor/ERK in 
prostate cancer cells.

Sauer L(1), Gitenay D, Vo C, Baron VT.

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Research Institute of San Diego, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

Early growth response-1 (Egr-1) is overexpressed in human prostate tumors and 
contributes to cancer progression. On the other hand, mutation of p53 is 
associated with advanced prostate cancer, as well as with metastasis and hormone 
independence. This study shows that in prostate cell lines in culture, Egr-1 
overexpression correlated with an alteration of p53 activity because of the 
expression of SV40 large T-antigen or because of a mutation in the TP53 gene. In 
cells containing altered p53 activity, Egr-1 expression was abolished by 
pharmacological inhibition or RNAi silencing of p53. Although forced expression 
of wild-type p53 was not sufficient to trigger Egr-1 transcription, four 
different mutants of p53 were shown to induce Egr-1. Direct binding of p53 to 
the EGR1 promoter could not be detected. Instead, Egr-1 transcription was driven 
by the ERK1/2 pathway, as it was abrogated by specific inhibitors of MEK. Egr-1 
increased the transcription of HB-EGF (epidermal growth factor), amphiregulin 
and epiregulin, resulting in autocrine activation of the EGF receptor (EGFR) and 
downstream MEK/ERK cascade. Thus, mutant p53 initiates a feedback loop that 
involves ERK1/2-mediated transactivation of Egr-1, which in turn increases the 
secretion of EGFR ligands and stimulates the EGFR signaling pathway. Finally, 
p53 may further regulate this feedback loop by altering the level of EGFR 
expression.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.24
PMCID: PMC2865566
PMID: 20190820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.