1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Dec;124(3):635-41. doi:
10.1007/s10549-010-0801-7.  Epub 2010 Feb 27.

Increased MUTYH mutation frequency among Dutch families with breast cancer and 
colorectal cancer.

Wasielewski M(1), Out AA, Vermeulen J, Nielsen M, van den Ouweland A, Tops CM, 
Wijnen JT, Vasen HF, Weiss MM, Klijn JG, Devilee P, Hes FJ, Schutte M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus 
University Medical Centre, Be414, Erasmus MC, CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Homozygous and compound heterozygous MUTYH mutations predispose for 
MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP). The clinical phenotype of MAP is characterised 
by the multiple colorectal adenomas and colorectal carcinoma. We previously 
found that female MAP patients may also have an increased risk for breast 
cancer. Yet, the involvement of MUTYH mutations in families with both breast 
cancer and colorectal cancer is unclear. Here, we have genotyped the MUTYH 
p.Tyr179Cys, p.Gly396Asp and p.Pro405Leu founder mutations in 153 Dutch families 
with breast cancer patients and colorectal cancer patients. Families were 
classified as polyposis, revised Amsterdam criteria positive (FCRC-AMS 
positive), revised Amsterdam criteria negative (FCRC-AMS negative), hereditary 
breast and colorectal cancer (HBCC) and non-HBCC breast cancer families. As 
anticipated, biallelic MUTYH mutations were identified among 13% of 15 polyposis 
families, which was significantly increased compared to the absence of biallelic 
MUTYH mutations in the population (P = 0.0001). Importantly, six heterozygous 
MUTYH mutations were identified among non-polyposis families with breast and 
colorectal cancer. These mutations were identified specifically in FCRC-AMS 
negative and in HBCC breast cancer families (11% of 28 families and 4% of 74 
families, respectively; P = 0.02 for both groups combined vs. controls). 
Importantly, the 11% MUTYH frequency among FCRC-AMS negative families was almost 
fivefold higher than the reported frequencies for FCRC-AMS negative families 
unselected for the presence of breast cancer patients (P = 0.03). Together, our 
results indicate that heterozygous MUTYH mutations are associated with families 
that include both breast cancer patients and colorectal cancer patients, 
independent of which tumour type is more prevalent in the family.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-010-0801-7
PMID: 20191381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]