1. Chembiochem. 2010 Mar 22;11(5):604-21. doi: 10.1002/cbic.200900777.

Adenosyl radical: reagent and catalyst in enzyme reactions.

Marsh EN(1), Patterson DP, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1055, 
USA. nmarsh@umich.edu

Adenosine is undoubtedly an ancient biological molecule that is a component of 
many enzyme cofactors: ATP, FADH, NAD(P)H, and coenzyme A, to name but a few, 
and, of course, of RNA. Here we present an overview of the role of adenosine in 
its most reactive form: as an organic radical formed either by homolytic 
cleavage of adenosylcobalamin (coenzyme B(12), AdoCbl) or by single-electron 
reduction of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) complexed to an iron-sulfur cluster. 
Although many of the enzymes we discuss are newly discovered, adenosine's role 
as a radical cofactor most likely arose very early in evolution, before the 
advent of photosynthesis and the production of molecular oxygen, which rapidly 
inactivates many radical enzymes. AdoCbl-dependent enzymes appear to be confined 
to a rather narrow repertoire of rearrangement reactions involving 1,2-hydrogen 
atom migrations; nevertheless, mechanistic insights gained from studying these 
enzymes have proved extremely valuable in understanding how enzymes generate and 
control highly reactive free radical intermediates. In contrast, there has been 
a recent explosion in the number of radical-AdoMet enzymes discovered that 
catalyze a remarkably wide range of chemically challenging reactions; here there 
is much still to learn about their mechanisms. Although all the radical-AdoMet 
enzymes so far characterized come from anaerobically growing microbes and are 
very oxygen sensitive, there is tantalizing evidence that some of these enzymes 
might be active in aerobic organisms including humans.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.200900777
PMCID: PMC3011887
PMID: 20191656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]