1. Mol Neurobiol. 2010 Jun;41(2-3):115-28. doi: 10.1007/s12035-010-8106-8. Epub 
2010 Mar 3.

Microglia activation and anti-inflammatory regulation in Alzheimer's disease.

Lue LF(1), Kuo YM, Beach T, Walker DG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. lihfen.lue@bannerhealth.com

Inflammatory regulators, including endogenous anti-inflammatory systems, can 
down-regulate inflammation thus providing negative feedback. Chronic 
inflammation can result from imbalance between levels of inflammatory mediators 
and regulators during immune responses. As a consequence, there are heightened 
inflammatory responses and irreversible tissue damage associated with many 
age-related chronic diseases. Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain is marked by 
prominent inflammatory features, in which microglial activation is the driving 
force for the elaboration of an inflammatory cascade. How the regulation of 
inflammation loses its effectiveness during AD pathogenesis remains largely 
unclear. In this article, we will first review current knowledge of microglial 
activation and its association with AD pathology. We then discuss four examples 
of anti-inflammatory systems that could play a role in regulating microglial 
activation: CD200/CD200 receptor, vitamin D receptor, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors, and soluble receptor for advanced glycation 
end products. Through this, we hope to illustrate the diverse aspects of 
inflammatory regulatory systems in brain and neurodegenerative diseases such as 
AD. We also propose the importance of neuronal defense systems, because they are 
part of the integral inflammatory and anti-inflammatory systems. Augmenting the 
anti-inflammatory defenses of neurons can be included in the strategy for 
restoration of balanced immune responses during aging and neurodegenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-010-8106-8
PMCID: PMC2892861
PMID: 20195797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]