1. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Jun;46(9):1617-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.02.009. Epub
2010  Mar 6.

GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1, GSTA1 and colorectal cancer risk: a comprehensive 
meta-analysis.

Economopoulos KP(1), Sergentanis TN.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, National University of Athens, Greece. 
economopoulos@sni.gr

Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) catalyse reactions between glutathione and 
lipophilic compounds with electrophilic centres, leading to neutralisation of 
toxic compounds, xenobiotics and products of oxidative stress. Controversy 
exists about whether GST polymorphisms (GSTM1 null/present genotype, GSTT1 
null/present genotype, GSTP1 Ile105Val and GSTA1 *A/*B) represent risk factors 
for colorectal cancer. This meta-analysis aims to examine the associations 
between the above-mentioned polymorphisms and colorectal cancer risk. Forty-four 
studies were eligible for GSTM1 (11,998 colorectal cancer cases, 17,552 
controls), 34 studies for GSTT1 (8596 cases, 13,589 controls), 19 studies for 
GSTP1 (5421 cases, 7671 controls) and four studies for GSTA1 polymorphism (1648 
cases, 2039 controls). Pooled odds ratios (ORs) were appropriately derived from 
fixed-effects or random-effects models. Separate analyses were conducted on 
Caucasian and Chinese populations. Where appropriate, sensitivity analysis 
concerning the deviation of genotype frequencies in controls from the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was performed. GSTM1 null allele carriers exhibited 
increased colorectal cancer risk in Caucasian populations (pooled OR=1.150, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.060-1.248, random effects); no significant 
association was detected for Chinese subjects (pooled OR=1.025, 95% CI: 
0.903-1.163, fixed effects). Similarly, GSTT1 null allele carriers exhibited 
increased colorectal cancer risk in Caucasian populations (pooled OR=1.312, 95% 
CI: 1.119-1.538, random effects); the association in Chinese subjects was not 
significant (pooled OR=1.068, 95% CI: 0.788-1.449, random effects). Concerning 
GSTP1 Ile105Val no significant associations were demonstrated in either race. 
GSTA1 *A/*B polymorphism was not associated with colorectal cancer risk. GSTM1 
and GSTT1 null genotypes confer additional risk for colorectal cancer in 
Caucasian populations.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.02.009
PMID: 20207535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]