1. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2010 Sep 1;13(5):565-73. doi: 10.1089/ars.2009.2833.

Redox regulation of actin by thioredoxin-1 is mediated by the interaction of the 
proteins via cysteine 62.

Wang X(1), Ling S, Zhao D, Sun Q, Li Q, Wu F, Nie J, Qu L, Wang B, Shen X, Bai 
Y, Li Y, Li Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, State Key Laboratory of Space 
Medicine Fundamentals and Application, China Astronaut Research and Training 
Center, Beijing, China.

Actin is a highly conserved protein in eukaryotic cells, and has been identified 
as one of the main redox targets by redox proteomics under oxidative stress. 
However, little is known about the mechanisms of regulation of the redox state 
of actin. In this study, we investigated how thioredoxin-1 (Trx1) affected the 
redox state of actin and its polymerization under oxidative stress in SH-SY5Y 
cells. Trx1 decreased the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the cells, 
and cysteine residues at positions 32, 35, and 69 of the Trx1 protein were 
active sites for redox regulation. Actin could be kept in a reduced state by 
Trx1 under H(2)O(2) stimulation. A physical interaction was found to exist 
between actin and Trx1. Cysteine 62 in Trx1 was the key site that interacted 
with actin, and it was required to maintain cellular viability and 
anti-apoptotic function. Taken together, these results suggested that Trx1 could 
protect cells from apoptosis under oxidative stress not only by increasing the 
total antioxidant capability and decreasing the ROS levels, but also by 
stabilizing the actin cytoskeletal system, which cooperatively contributed to 
the enhancement of cell viability and worked against apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2009.2833
PMID: 20218863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]