1. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2010 Jun;66(6):611-7. doi: 10.1007/s00228-010-0799-0.
Epub  2010 Mar 6.

Pharmacokinetics of gemcitabine in non-small-cell lung cancer patients: impact 
of the 79A>C cytidine deaminase polymorphism.

Maring JG(1), Wachters FM, Slijfer M, Maurer JM, Boezen HM, Uges DR, de Vries 
EG, Groen HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Diaconessen Hospital Meppel & Bethesda Hospital 
Hoogeveen, Hoogeveenseweg 38, 7943 KA, Meppel, The Netherlands. 
maring@noorderboog.nl

Comment in
    Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2010 Sep;66(9):959-60. doi: 10.1007/s00228-010-0859-5.

OBJECTIVE: To study the impact of the 79A>C polymorphism in the cytidine 
deaminase (CDA) gene on the pharmacokinetics of gemcitabine and its metabolite 
2',2'-difluorodeoxyuridine (dFdU) in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients (n = 20) received gemcitabine 1,125 mg/m(2) as a 
30 min i.v. infusion as part of treatment for NSCLC. Plasma samples were 
collected during 0-6 h after gemcitabine administration. Gemcitabine and dFdU 
were quantified by high performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet 
detection. The CDA 79A>C genotype was determined with PCR and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Gemcitabine was rapidly cleared from plasma and undetectable after 3 h. 
The allele frequency of the 79A>C polymorphism was 0.40. Diplotypes were 
distributed as A/A n = 8, A/C n = 8 ,and C/C n = 4. No significant differences 
were found between the different CDA genotypes and gemcitabine or dFdU AUC, 
clearance, or half-life.
CONCLUSION: The 79A>C polymorphism in the CDA gene does not have a major 
consistent and signficant impact on gemcitabine pharmacokinetics.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-010-0799-0
PMCID: PMC2868996
PMID: 20213492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]