1. Biochemistry. 1991 Apr 30;30(17):4151-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00231a007.

Engineering subtilisin and its substrates for efficient ligation of peptide 
bonds in aqueous solution.

Abrahms√©n L(1), Tom J, Burnier J, Butcher KA, Kossiakoff A, Wells JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Engineering, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080.

Protein engineering techniques were used to construct a derivative of the serine 
protease subtilisin that ligates peptides efficiently in water. The subtilisin 
double mutant in which the catalytic Ser221 was converted to Cys (S221C) and 
Pro225 converted to Ala (P225A) has 10-fold higher peptide ligase activity and 
at least 100-fold lower amidase activity than the singly mutated thiolsubtilisin 
(S221C) that was previously shown to have some peptide ligase activity 
[Nakatsuka, T., Sasaki, T., & Kaiser, E.T. (1987) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 109, 
3808-3810]. A 1.5-A X-ray crystal structure of an oxidized derivative of the 
double mutant (S221C/P225A) supports the protein design strategy in showing that 
the P225A mutation partly relieves the steric crowding expected from the S221C 
substitution, thus accounting for its improved catalytic efficiency. Stable and 
synthetically reasonable alkyl ester peptide substrates were prepared that 
rapidly acylate the S221C/P225A enzyme, and aminolysis of the resulting 
thioacyl-enzyme intermediate by various peptides is strongly preferred over 
hydrolysis. The efficiency of aminolysis is relatively insensitive to the 
sequence of the first two residues in the acyl acceptor peptide whose 
alpha-amino group attacks the thioacyl-enzyme. To obtain greater flexibility in 
the choice of coupling sites, a set of three additional peptide ligases were 
engineered by introducing mutations into the parent ligase (S221C/P225A) that 
were previously shown to change the specificity of subtilisin for the residue 
nearest the acyl bond (the P1 residue). The specificity properties of the parent 
ligase and derivatives of it paralleled those of wild type and corresponding 
specificity variants.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00231a007
PMID: 2021606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]