1. Exp Mol Med. 2010 May 31;42(5):376-85. doi: 10.3858/emm.2010.42.5.039.

Genetic association of angiogenesis- and hypoxia-related gene polymorphisms with 
osteonecrosis of the femoral head.

Hong JM(1), Kim TH, Kim HJ, Park EK, Yang EK, Kim SY.

Author information:
(1)Skeletal Diseases Genome Research Center, Kyungpook National University 
Hospital, Daegu 700-412, Korea.

Multiple factors have been implicated in the development of osteonecrosis of the 
femoral head (ONFH). In particular, non-traumatic ONFH is directly or indirectly 
related to injury of the vascular supply to the femoral head. Thus, hypoxia in 
the femoral head caused by impaired blood flow may be an important risk factor 
for ONFH. In this study, we investigated whether genetic variations of 
angiogenesis- and hypoxia-related genes contribute to an increased risk for the 
development of ONFH. Candidate genes were selected based on known hypoxia and 
angiogenesis pathways. An association study was performed using an Affymetrix 
Targeted Genotyping 3K Chip array with 460 ONFH patients and 300 control 
subjects. We showed that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes TF, 
VEGFC, IGFBP3, and ACE were associated with an increased risk of ONFH. On the 
other hand, SNPs in the KDR and NRP1 genes were associated with protection 
against ONFH. The most important finding was that one SNP (rs2453839) in the 
IGFBP3 gene was significantly associated with a higher risk of ONFH (P=0.0061, 
OR 7.74). In subgroup analysis, most candidate gene variations that were 
associated with ONFH occurred in the idiopathic subgroup. Among other SNPs, ACE 
SNPs were associated with steroid-induced ONFH (P=0.0018-0.0037, OR>3). 
Collectively, our findings suggest that genetic variations in angiogenesis- and 
hypoxia-related genes may help to identify susceptibility factors for the 
development of ONFH in the Korean population.

DOI: 10.3858/emm.2010.42.5.039
PMCID: PMC2877256
PMID: 20215856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]