1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Mar 5;6(3):e1000799. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000799.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ORF57 protein binds and protects a 
nuclear noncoding RNA from cellular RNA decay pathways.

Sahin BB(1), Patel D, Conrad NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

The control of RNA stability is a key determinant in cellular gene expression. 
The stability of any transcript is modulated through the activity of cis- or 
trans-acting regulatory factors as well as cellular quality control systems that 
ensure the integrity of a transcript. As a result, invading viral pathogens must 
be able to subvert cellular RNA decay pathways capable of destroying viral 
transcripts. Here we report that the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV) ORF57 protein binds to a unique KSHV polyadenylated nuclear RNA, called 
PAN RNA, and protects it from degradation by cellular factors. ORF57 increases 
PAN RNA levels and its effects are greatest on unstable alleles of PAN RNA. 
Kinetic analysis of transcription pulse assays shows that ORF57 protects PAN RNA 
from a rapid cellular RNA decay process, but ORF57 has little effect on 
transcription or PAN RNA localization based on chromatin immunoprecipitation and 
in situ hybridization experiments, respectively. Using a UV cross-linking 
technique, we further demonstrate that ORF57 binds PAN RNA directly in living 
cells and we show that binding correlates with function. In addition, we define 
an ORF57-responsive element (ORE) that is necessary for ORF57 binding to PAN RNA 
and sufficient to confer ORF57-response to a heterologous intronless beta-globin 
mRNA, but not its spliced counterparts. We conclude that ORF57 binds to viral 
transcripts in the nucleus and protects them from a cellular RNA decay pathway. 
We propose that KSHV ORF57 protein functions to enhance the nuclear stability of 
intronless viral transcripts by protecting them from a cellular RNA quality 
control pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000799
PMCID: PMC2832700
PMID: 20221435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.