1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 1;19(11):2239-50. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq103. Epub 2010
Mar  10.

Trafficking defects and loss of ligand binding are the underlying causes of all 
reported DDR2 missense mutations found in SMED-SL patients.

Ali BR(1), Xu H, Akawi NA, John A, Karuvantevida NS, Langer R, Al-Gazali L, 
Leitinger B.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, 
Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Spondylo-meta-epiphyseal dysplasia (SMED) with short limbs and abnormal 
calcifications (SMED-SL) is a rare, autosomal recessive human growth disorder, 
characterized by disproportionate short stature, short limbs, short broad 
fingers, abnormal metaphyses and epiphyses, platyspondyly and premature 
calcifications. Recently, three missense mutations and one splice-site mutation 
in the DDR2 gene were identified as causative genetic defects for SMED-SL, but 
the underlying cellular and biochemical mechanisms were not explored. Here we 
report a novel DDR2 missense mutation, c.337G>A (p.E113K), that causes SMED-SL 
in two siblings in the United Arab Emirates. Another DDR2 missense mutation, 
c.2254C>T (p.R752C), matching one of the previously reported SMED-SL mutations, 
was found in a second affected family. DDR2 is a plasma membrane receptor 
tyrosine kinase that functions as a collagen receptor. We expressed DDR2 
constructs with the identified point mutations in human cell lines and evaluated 
their localization and functional properties. We found that all SMED-SL missense 
mutants were defective in collagen-induced receptor activation and that the 
three previously reported mutants (p.T713I, p.I726R and p.R752C) were retained 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. The novel mutant (p.E113K), in contrast, 
trafficked normally, like wild-type DDR2, but failed to bind collagen. This 
finding is in agreement with our recent structural data identifying Glu113 as an 
important amino acid in the DDR2 ligand-binding site. Our data thus demonstrate 
that SMED-SL can result from at least two different loss-of-function mechanisms: 
namely defects in DDR2 targeting to the plasma membrane or the loss of its 
ligand-binding activity.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq103
PMCID: PMC2865377
PMID: 20223752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]