1. Intern Med. 2010;49(6):549-55. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.49.2880. Epub
2010  Mar 15.

A family history of diabetes mellitus is associated with poor glycemic control 
and increased metabolic risks among people with diabetes: data from the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999-2004.

Kuo CK(1), Lin LY, Yu YH, Chang CH, Kuo HK.

Author information:
(1)Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung University 
College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. hsukokuo@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Several lines of evidence from studies involving both general and 
non-diabetic populations have shown that a family history of diabetes was 
associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases and metabolic 
alterations. However, little is known about the relationship of a family history 
of diabetes to glycemic control and metabolic risks among people with diabetes.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-section study of 946 diabetic adults from the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey between 1999 and 2004. Familial 
risk of diabetes was classified as average, moderate, or high. Logistic 
regression analyses were conducted to determine the association between familial 
risk of diabetes and poor glycemic control, as defined by A1C > or = 8%. 
According to stratified levels of familial risk of diabetes, adjusted means of 
various metabolic risks, including A1C, BMI, lipid profiles, and C-reactive 
protein, were obtained by using multiple linear regression.
RESULTS: Independent of basic demographics, health-related behaviors, use of 
anti-diabetic medications, diabetes duration, cardiovascular co-morbidities, and 
various metabolic risks, the odds ratio of poor glycemic control comparing 
participants with a high familial risk of diabetes to those with an average risk 
was 1.91 (95% confidence interval 1.02-3.58). In the multivariate analysis, the 
adjusted means of A1C in participants with high, moderate, and averaged familial 
risk of diabetes were 7.75%, 7.45%, and 7.25%, respectively (p for trend 0.036). 
Participants with a high familial risk of diabetes also had higher triglycerides 
and body mass index (p for trend 0.042 and 0.02, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Diabetic adults with a higher familial risk of diabetes have a worse 
glycemic control, higher BMI, and higher triglycerides. Obtaining family history 
of the disease is crucial in identifying and targeting high risk diabetic 
patients who may require more stringent lifestyle changes as well as 
pharmaceutical intervention.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.49.2880
PMID: 20228589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]