1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 14;285(20):15119-15125. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069427.
Epub  2010 Mar 12.

Co-regulation of caveolar and Cdc42-dependent fluid phase endocytosis by 
phosphocaveolin-1.

Cheng ZJ(1), Singh RD(1), Holicky EL(1), Wheatley CL(1), Marks DL(1), Pagano 
RE(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thoracic 
Diseases Research Unit, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thoracic 
Diseases Research Unit, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905. Electronic address: pagano.richard@mayo.edu.

Several clathrin-independent endocytosis mechanisms have been identified that 
can be distinguished by specific requirements for certain proteins, such as 
caveolin-1 (Cav1) and the Rho GTPases, RhoA and Cdc42, as well as by specific 
cargo. Some endocytic pathways may be co-regulated such that disruption of one 
pathway leads to the up-regulation of another; however, the underlying 
mechanisms for this are unclear. Cav1 has been reported to function as a guanine 
nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDI), which inhibits Cdc42 activation. We 
tested the hypothesis that Cav1 can regulate Cdc42-dependent, fluid phase 
endocytosis. We demonstrate that Cav1 overexpression decreases fluid phase 
endocytosis, whereas silencing of Cav1 enhances this pathway. Enhancement of 
Cav1 phosphorylation using a phosphatase inhibitor reduces Cdc42-regulated 
pinocytosis while stimulating caveolar endocytosis. Fluid phase endocytosis was 
inhibited by expression of a putative phosphomimetic mutant, Cav1-Y14E, but not 
by the phospho-deficient mutant, Cav1-Y14F. Overexpression of Cav2, or a Cav1 
mutant in which the GDI region was altered to the corresponding sequence in 
Cav2, did not suppress fluid phase endocytosis. These results suggest that the 
Cav1 expression level and phosphorylation state regulates fluid phase 
endocytosis via the interaction between the Cav1 GDI region and Cdc42. These 
data define a novel molecular mechanism for co-regulation of two distinct 
clathrin-independent endocytic pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069427
PMCID: PMC2865320
PMID: 20228056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]