1. Inorg Chem. 2010 Apr 5;49(7):3201-15. doi: 10.1021/ic9022135.

Vibrational analysis of the model complex (mu-edt)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) and comparison 
to iron-only hydrogenase: the activation scale of hydrogenase model systems.

Galinato MG(1), Whaley CM, Lehnert N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, 
USA.

Research on simple [FeFe] hydrogenase model systems of type 
(mu-S(2)R)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) (R = C(2)H(4) (edt), C(3)H(6) (pdt)) which have been 
shown to function as robust electrocatalysts for proton reduction, provides a 
reference to understand the electronic and vibrational properties of the active 
site of [FeFe] hydrogenases and of more sophisticated model systems. In this 
study, the solution and solid state Raman spectra of (mu-edt)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) and 
of the corresponding (13)CO-labeled complex are presented and analyzed in 
detail, with focus on the nu(C=O) and nu(Fe-CO)/delta(Fe-C=O) vibrational 
regions. These regions are specifically important as vibrations involving CO 
ligands serve as probes for the "electron richness" of low-valent transition 
metal centers and the geometric structures of the complexes. The obtained 
vibrational spectra have been completely assigned in terms of the nu(C=O), 
nu(Fe-CO), and delta(Fe-C=O) modes, and the force constants of the important C=O 
and Fe-CO bonds have been determined using our Quantum Chemistry Centered Normal 
Coordinate Analysis (QCC-NCA). In the 400-650 cm(-1) region, fifteen mixed 
nu(Fe-CO)/delta(Fe-C=O) modes have been identified. The most prominent Raman 
peaks at 454, 456, and 483 cm(-1) correspond to a combination of nu(Fe-CO) 
stretching and delta(Fe-C=O) linear bending modes. The less intense peaks at 416 
cm(-1) and 419 cm(-1) correspond to pure delta(Fe-C=O) linear bends. In the 
nu(C=O) region, the nu(C=O) normal modes at lower energy (1968 and 1964 cm(-1)) 
are almost pure equatorial (eq) nu(C=O)(eq) stretching vibrations, whereas the 
remaining four nu(C=O) normal modes show dominant (C=O)(eq) (2070 and 1961 
cm(-1)) and (C=O)(ax) (2005 and 1979 cm(-1); ax = axial) contributions. 
Importantly, an inverse correlation between the f(C=O)(ax/eq) and 
f(Fe-CO)(ax/eq) force constants is obtained, in agreement with the idea that the 
Fe(I)-CO bond in these types of complexes is dominated by pi-backdonation. 
Compared to the reduced form of [FeFe] hydrogenase (H(red)), the nu(C=O) 
vibrational frequencies of (mu-edt)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) are higher in energy, 
indicating that the dinuclear iron core in (mu-edt)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) is less 
electron rich compared to H(red) in the actual enzyme. Finally, quantum yields 
for the photodecomposition of (mu-edt)[Fe(CO)(3)](2) have been determined.

DOI: 10.1021/ic9022135
PMCID: PMC2860110
PMID: 20225804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]