1. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Sep 6;187(1-3):56-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.03.012. 
Epub 2010 Mar 12.

Folding anomalies of neuroligin3 caused by a mutation in the 
alpha/beta-hydrolase fold domain.

De Jaco A(1), Dubi N, Comoletti D, Taylor P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United 
States. antonella.dejaco@uniroma1.it

Proteins of the alpha/beta-hydrolase fold family share a common structural fold, 
but perform a diverse set of functions. We have been studying natural mutations 
occurring in association with congenital disorders in the alpha/beta-hydrolase 
fold domain of neuroligin (NLGN), butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Starting from the autism-related R451C mutation in 
the alpha/beta-hydrolase fold domain of NLGN3, we had previously shown that the 
Arg to Cys substitution is responsible for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention 
of the mutant protein and that a similar trafficking defect is observed when the 
mutation is inserted at the homologous positions in AChE and BChE. Herein we 
show further characterization of the R451C mutation in NLGN3 when expressed in 
HEK-293, and by protease digestion sensitivity, we reveal that the phenotype 
results from protein misfolding. However, the presence of an extra Cys does not 
interfere with the formation of disulfide bonds as shown by reaction with 
PEG-maleimide and estimation of the molecular mass changes. These findings 
highlight the role of proper protein folding in protein processing and 
localization.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.03.012
PMCID: PMC5582339
PMID: 20227402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]