1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 21;285(21):15805-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.101980. Epub 
2010 Mar 22.

A putative extracellular salt bridge at the subunit interface contributes to the 
ion channel function of the ATP-gated P2X2 receptor.

Jiang R(1), Martz A, Gonin S, Taly A, de Carvalho LP, Grutter T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biophysicochimie des Récepteurs Canaux, UMR 7199 CNRS, 
Conception et Application de Molécules Bioactives, Faculté de Pharmacie, 
Université de Strasbourg, 74 route du Rhin, BP 24, 67401 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The recent crystal structure of the ATP-gated P2X4 receptor revealed a static 
view of its architecture, but the molecular mechanisms underlying the P2X 
channels activation are still unknown. By using a P2X2 model based on the x-ray 
structure, we sought salt bridges formed between charged residues located in a 
region that directly connects putative ATP-binding sites to the ion channel. To 
reveal their significance for ion channel activation, we made systematic charge 
exchanges and measured the effects on ATP sensitivity. We found that charge 
reversals at the interfacial residues Glu(63) and Arg(274) produced 
gain-of-function phenotypes that were cancelled upon paired charge swapping. 
These results suggest that a putative intersubunit salt bridge formed between 
Glu(63) and Arg(274) contributes to the ion channel function. Engineered 
cysteines E63C and R274C formed redox-dependent cross-links in the absence of 
ATP. By contrast, the presence of ATP reduced the rate of disulfide bond 
formation, indicating that ATP binding might trigger relative movement of 
adjacent subunits at the level of Glu(63) and Arg(274), allowing the 
transmembrane helices to open the channel.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.101980
PMCID: PMC2871448
PMID: 20308075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]