1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 14;285(20):15399-15407. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055111.
Epub  2010 Mar 19.

Point mutation of a plastidic invertase inhibits development of the 
photosynthetic apparatus and enhances nitrate assimilation in sugar-treated 
Arabidopsis seedlings.

Tamoi M(1), Tabuchi T(1), Demuratani M(2), Otori K(1), Tanabe N(1), Maruta T(1), 
Shigeoka S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Bioscience, Faculty of Agriculture, Kinki University, 
3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Bioscience, Faculty of Agriculture, Kinki University, 
3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.
(3)Department of Advanced Bioscience, Faculty of Agriculture, Kinki University, 
3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, 
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan. 
Electronic address: shigeoka@nara.kindai.ac.jp.

Because the photosynthetic apparatus contains a massive amount of nitrogen in 
plants, the regulation of its development by sugar signals is important to the 
maintenance of the carbon-nitrogen balance. In this study we isolated an 
Arabidopsis mutant (sicy-192) whose cotyledon greening was inhibited by 
treatments with sugars such as sucrose, glucose, and fructose. In the mutant, 
the gene encoding plastidic alkaline/neutral invertase (INV-E) was point-mutated 
at codon 294, with Tyr substituted for Cys (C294Y). Interestingly, the greening 
of cotyledons in the knock-out INV-E lines was not inhibited by treatment with 
the sugars. In addition, the knock-out INV-E lines expressing an INV-E:C294Y or 
INV-E:C294A gene had the same phenotype as sicy-192 mutants, whereas the lines 
expressing a wild-type INV-E gene had the same phenotype as wild-type plants. A 
recombinant INV-E:C294Y protein had the same enzymatic activity as a recombinant 
INV-E protein, suggesting that the Cys-294 residue of INV-E is important for its 
functions in the chloroplasts. On treatment with sucrose, the expression of 
photosynthesis-related genes was weaker in seedlings of mutant plants than 
wild-type seedlings, whereas the activity of nitrate reductase was stronger in 
the mutant plants than wild-type plants. These findings suggest that Cys-294 of 
INV-E is associated with the development of the photosynthetic apparatus and the 
assimilation of nitrogen in Arabidopsis seedlings to control the ratio of 
sucrose content to hexose content.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055111
PMCID: PMC2865311
PMID: 20304912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]