1. J Biol Chem. 1991 May 25;266(15):9829-34.

Evidence supporting a passive role for the insulin receptor transmembrane domain 
in insulin-dependent signal transduction.

Frattali AL(1), Treadway JL, Pessin JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

We previously have demonstrated that intramolecular interactions between alpha 
beta-alpha beta subunits are necessary for insulin-dependent activation of the 
protein kinase domain within a single alpha 2 beta 2 heterotetrameric 
insulin-receptor complex (Wilden, P. A., Morrison, B. D., and Pessin, J. E. 
(1989) Biochemistry 28, 785-792). To evaluate the role of the beta subunit 
transmembrane domain in the insulin-dependent signalling mechanism, mutant human 
insulin receptors containing a series of nested transmembrane domain deletions 
(amino acids 941-945) were generated and stable Chinese hamster 
ovary-transfected cell lines were obtained. In addition, a substitution of 
Val-938 for Glu (E/V938) similar to the oncogenic mutation found in the neu 
transmembrane domain was also introduced into the insulin receptor. Scatchard 
analysis of insulin binding to the stable Chinese hamster ovary cell lines 
expressing either wild type or mutant insulin receptors indicated equivalent 
receptor number (2-4 x 10(6)/cell) and similar high affinity binding constants 
(Kd 0.1-0.3 nM). 125I-Insulin affinity cross-linking demonstrated that all of 
the expressed insulin receptors were assembled and processed into alpha 2 beta 2 
heterotetrameric complexes. Surprisingly, all the mutant insulin receptors 
retained insulin-stimulated autophosphorylation both in vivo and in vitro. 
Furthermore, endogenous substrate phosphorylation in vivo as well as 
insulin-stimulated thymidine incorporation into DNA were unaffected by the 
transmembrane domain mutations. These data demonstrate that marked structural 
alterations in the insulin receptor transmembrane domain do not interfere with 
insulin-dependent signal transduction.

PMID: 2033070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]