1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2010 May;34(5):915-24. doi: 
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01164.x. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

Adrenocortical and pituitary glucocorticoid feedback in abstinent 
alcohol-dependent women.

Adinoff B(1), Best SE, Ye W, Williams MJ, Iranmenesh A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, USA. bryon.adinoff@utsouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: The long-term ingestion of alcohol diminishes 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis reactivity in alcohol-dependent men, 
potentially altering future relapse risk. Although sex differences in HPA axis 
functioning are apparent in healthy controls, disruptions in this system have 
received little attention in alcohol-dependent women. In this study, we assessed 
the basal secretory profile of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol, 
adrenocortical sensitivity in both the presence and absence of endogenous 
corticotropic pituitary activation, and feedback pituitary glucocorticoid 
sensitivity to dexamethasone.
METHODS: Seven women 4- to 8-week abstinent alcohol-only dependent subjects and 
10 age-matched female healthy controls were studied. All subjects were between 
30 and 50 years old, not taking oral contraceptives, and were studied during the 
early follicular phase of their menstrual cycle. Circulating concentrations of 
ACTH and cortisol were measured in blood samples collected at frequent intervals 
from 2000 to 0800 hour. A submaximal dose of cosyntropin (0.01 microg/kg), a 
synthetic ACTH (1-24), was administered at 0800 hour to assess adrenocortical 
sensitivity. In a separate session, low-dose cosyntropin was also administered 
following high-dose dexamethasone (8 mg intravenous) to assess adrenocortical 
sensitivity in the relative absence of endogenous ACTH. In addition, the ACTH 
response to dexamethasone was measured to determine the pituitary glucocorticoid 
negative feedback. Sessions were 5 days apart, and blood draws were obtained 
every 5 to 10 minutes.
RESULTS: Mean concentrations and pulsatile characteristics of ACTH and cortisol 
over 12 hours were not statistically different between the 2 groups. Healthy 
controls had a somewhat higher (p < 0.08) net peak, but not net integrated, 
cortisol response to cosyntropin relative to the alcohol-dependent women. There 
were no significant group differences in either the ACTH or cortisol response to 
dexamethasone nor in the net cortisol response to cosyntropin following 
dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: Significant differences in pituitary-adrenal function were not 
apparent between alcohol-dependent women and matched controls. Despite the small 
n, it appears that alcohol-dependent women do not show the same disruptions in 
HPA activity as alcohol-dependent men. These findings may have relevance for 
gender-specific treatment effectiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01164.x
PMCID: PMC4038906
PMID: 20331575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]