1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2010 Jan-Feb;28(1):68-72.

Lack of association between macrophage migration inhibitory factor-173 gene 
polymorphism with disease susceptibility and cardiovascular risk in rheumatoid 
arthritis patients from northwestern Spain.

Palomino-Morales R(1), Gonzalez-Juanatey C, Vazquez-Rodriguez TR, Torres O, 
Miranda-Filloy JA, Llorca J, Martin J, Gonzalez-Gay MA.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina, López Neyra, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Cientificas (CSIC), Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: To assess whether the polymorphism of the macrophage migration 
inhibitory factor (MIF) gene at the position -173 is implicated in the disease 
susceptibility, risk of cardiovascular (CV) events and presence of subclinical 
atherosclerosis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A series of 293 unselected patients fulfilling the 1987 
American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for RA seen at the 
rheumatology outpatient clinic of Hospital Xeral-Calde, Lugo, Spain and 526 
matched controls were studied for differences in the MIF-173 G/C gene biallelic 
polymorphism. A total of 182 consecutive patients that had been periodically 
followed between March 1996 and September 1996 until patient's death or January 
1, 2008 were assessed for the presence of CV events. Moreover, between March and 
December 2007, a subgroup of unselected RA patients with no history of CV events 
was studied for the presence of subclinical atherosclerosis by the assessment of 
the endothelial function (n=107) and the carotid artery intima-media thickness 
(IMT) (n=91) by ultrasonography studies. Patients and controls were genotyped 
for the MIF-173 G/C gene polymorphism using a PCR system with pre-developed 
TaqMan allelic discrimination assay.
RESULTS: No significant differences in allele or genotype frequencies for the 
MIF-173 gene polymorphism between RA patients and controls were found. 
Forty-four of the 182 patients followed between 1996 and January 2008 
experienced CV events. Although the frequency of MIF-173 GG homozygous was 
increased in those who had CV events (88.6%) compared to those who did not 
suffer these complication (73.2%), the difference was not statistically 
significant. It was also the case when we analyzed the potential influence of 
MIF-173 genotypes in the presence of endothelial dysfunction or increased 
carotid IMT of patients with RA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not show that MIF-173 gene polymorphism may infer a 
direct risk for disease susceptibility or CV disease in patients with RA.

PMID: 20346241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]