1. Neurogenetics. 2010 Oct;11(4):391-400. doi: 10.1007/s10048-010-0240-y. Epub
2010  Apr 1.

Analysis of NF1 somatic mutations in cutaneous neurofibromas from patients with 
high tumor burden.

Thomas L(1), Kluwe L, Chuzhanova N, Mautner V, Upadhyaya M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Heath 
Park, Cardiff, UK.

Neurofibromatosis type 1, (NF1) is a complex, autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by benign and malignant tumors which result from NF1 gene 
mutations. The molecular mechanisms that underlie NF1 tumorigenesis are still 
poorly understood although inactivation of other modifying loci in conjunction 
with NF1 mutations is postulated to be involved. These modifying loci may 
include deficiencies in mismatch repair genes and elements involved in cell 
cycle regulation (TP53, RB1, and CDKN2A). We have analyzed the somatic mutations 
in 89 cutaneous neurofibromas derived from three unrelated NF1 patients with 
high tumor burden, by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis of the NF1, TP53, 
RB1, and CDKN2A genes, by assessing microsatellite instability (MSI), by direct 
sequencing of the NF1, TP53, and several mismatch repair (MMR) genes and by 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification of the NF1 and TP53 genes. The 
aim was both to assess the possible clonality of these tumors and also to assess 
the involvement of other potential genetic loci in the development of these 
neurofibromas. Somatic NF1 mutations were identified in 57 (64%) of neurofibroma 
samples. Each mutation was distinct demonstrating the independent origin of each 
tumor. While somatic LOH of the TP53 gene was identified in four tumors, no 
specific deletions or sequence variations were identified. LOH of markers 
flanking the RB1 gene was also found in one tumor but no CDKN2A mutations were 
detected. Although evidence of MSI was seen in 21 tumors, no MMR gene 
alterations were identified. The identification of LOH involving TP53 and RB1 
loci is a novel finding in benign cutaneous neurofibromas possibly demonstrating 
an alternative underlying molecular mechanism associated with the development of 
these benign tumors from this cohort of patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-010-0240-y
PMID: 20358387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]