1. J Physiol Biochem. 2009 Dec;65(4):405-13. doi: 10.1007/BF03185936.

Il6 gene promoter polymorphism (-174G/C) influences the association between fat 
mass and cardiovascular risk factors.

Moleres A(1), Rendo-Urteaga T, Azcona C, Martínez JA, Gómez-Martínez S, Ruiz JR, 
Moreno LA, Marcos A, Marti A; AVENA group.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Nutrition and Food Sciences, Physiology and Toxicology, Univ. of 
Navarra, Spain.

During the last decades, the prevalence of obesity has increased rapidly among 
young people. A polymorphism in the promoter region of the IL6 gene (-174G/C), 
has been previously reported to be involved in obesity and metabolic syndrome 
development. Therefore, the aim of the study was to examine whether the 
IL6-174G/C polymorphism influence the association of body fat with low-grade 
inflammatory markers and blood lipids and lipoproteins in Spanish adolescents. 
504 Spanish adolescents participating in the AVENA study were genotyped for 
the-174G/C polymorphism of the IL6 gene. Anthropometric and body composition 
measurements were taken and blood samples were collected for plasma molecules 
determinations. No differences between genotypes were observed in anthropometric 
values, body composition measurements and plasma markers concentration. Physical 
activity level differ between genotypes with subjects carrying the C allele of 
the polymorphism being significantly (p<0.05) more active than GG subjects. The 
association between body fat mass and plasma glucose was influenced by the 
-174G/C polymorphism of the IL6 gene. Subjects carrying the C allele of the 
mutation seem to have higher values of lipoprotein (a) and C-reactive protein as 
their percentage of body fat mass increase. Our results suggest that this 
promoter polymorphism influences the association between adiposity and some 
plasma markers.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03185936
PMID: 20358354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]