1. J Proteome Res. 2010 May 7;9(5):2339-46. doi: 10.1021/pr901083m.

Strategy for degradomic-peptidomic analysis of human blood plasma.

Shen Y(1), Liu T, ToliÄ‡ N, Petritis BO, Zhao R, Moore RJ, Purvine SO, Camp DG, 
Smith RD.

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 
Richland, Washington 99354, USA. Yufeng.shen@pnl.gov

Herein we describe a strategy for degradomic-peptidomic analyses. The human 
blood peptidome was isolated through application of AC/SEC, which enriched its 
components by >300-fold. The isolated peptidome components were separated by 
long column HRLC providing a peak capacity of approximately 300 for species 
having MWs of up to 20 kDa. The separated species were identified by the FT 
MS/MS-UStags sequencing method. We identified >200 peptidome components that 
originated from 29 protein substrates from the blood plasma of a single healthy 
person. The peptidome peptides identified had MWs range of 0.5-14 kDa and 
identifications were achieved with extremely low (near zero) false discovery 
rates through searching the IPI human protein database (approximately 70,000 
entries). Some of the peptidome peptides identified have mutations and 
modifications such as acetylation, acetylhexosamine, amidation, cysteinylation, 
didehydro, oxidation, and pyro-glu. The capabilities described enable the global 
analysis of the peptidome peptides to identify degradome targets such as 
degradome proteases, proteases inhibitors, and other relevant substrates, the 
cleavage specificities for the degradation of individual substrates, as well as 
a potential basis for using the various extents of substrate degradation for 
diagnostic purposes.

DOI: 10.1021/pr901083m
PMCID: PMC2866148
PMID: 20377236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]