1. J Cell Sci. 2010 May 1;123(Pt 9):1480-91. doi: 10.1242/jcs.051474. Epub 2010
Apr  7.

Rab7b controls trafficking from endosomes to the TGN.

Progida C(1), Cogli L, Piro F, De Luca A, Bakke O, Bucci C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies 
(DiSTeBA), University of Salento, Via Provinciale Monteroni, 73100 Lecce, Italy.

Rab7b is a recently identified member of the Rab GTPase protein family and has 
high similarity to Rab7. It has been reported that Rab7b is lysosome associated, 
that it is involved in monocytic differentiation and that it promotes lysosomal 
degradation of TLR4 and TLR9. Here we investigated further the localization and 
function of this GTPase. We found that wild-type Rab7b is lysosome associated 
whereas an activated, GTP-bound form of Rab7b localizes to the Golgi apparatus. 
In contrast to Rab7, Rab7b is not involved in EGF and EGFR degradation. 
Depletion of Rab7b or expression of Rab7b T22N, a Rab7b dominant-negative 
mutant, impairs cathepsin-D maturation and causes increased secretion of 
hexosaminidase. Moreover, expression of Rab7b T22N or depletion of Rab7b alters 
TGN46 distribution, cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) 
trafficking, and causes an increase in the levels of the late endosomal markers 
CI-MPR and cathepsin D. Vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV-G) 
trafficking, by contrast, is normal in Rab7b-depleted or Rab7b-T22N-expressing 
cells. In addition, depletion of Rab7b prevents cholera toxin B-subunit from 
reaching the Golgi. Altogether, these data indicate that Rab7b is required for 
normal lysosome function, and, in particular, that it is an essential factor for 
retrograde transport from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network (TGN).

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.051474
PMID: 20375062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]