1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Jun;76(11):3620-4. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00345-10.
Epub  2010 Apr 9.

Paenibacillus sp. strain E18 bifunctional xylanase-glucanase with a single 
catalytic domain.

Shi P(1), Tian J, Yuan T, Liu X, Huang H, Bai Y, Yang P, Chen X, Wu N, Yao B.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed 
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No. 12 
Zhongguancun South Street, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Xylanases are utilized in a variety of industries for the breakdown of plant 
materials. Most native and engineered bifunctional/multifunctional xylanases 
have separate catalytic domains within the same polypeptide chain. Here we 
report a new bifunctional xylanase (XynBE18) produced by Paenibacillus sp. E18 
with xylanase and beta-1,3-1,4-glucanase activities derived from the same active 
center by substrate competition assays and site-directed mutagenesis of xylanase 
catalytic Glu residues (E129A and E236A). The gene consists of 981 bp, encodes 
327 amino acids, and comprises only one catalytic domain that is highly 
homologous to the glycoside hydrolase family 10 xylanase catalytic domain. 
Recombinant XynBE18 purified from Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) showed specificity 
toward oat spelt xylan and birchwood xylan and beta-1,3-1,4-glucan (barley 
beta-glucan and lichenin). Homology modeling and molecular dynamic simulation 
were used to explore structure differences between XynBE18 and the 
monofunctional xylanase XynE2, which has enzymatic properties similar to those 
of XynBE18 but does not hydrolyze beta-1,3-1,4-glucan. The cleft containing the 
active site of XynBE18 is larger than that of XynE2, suggesting that XynBE18 is 
able to bind larger substrates such as barley beta-glucan and lichenin. Further 
molecular docking studies revealed that XynBE18 can accommodate xylan and 
beta-1,3-1,4-glucan, but XynE2 is only accessible to xylan. These results 
indicate a previously unidentified structure-function relationship for substrate 
specificities among family 10 xylanases.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00345-10
PMCID: PMC2876455
PMID: 20382811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]