1. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 14;30(15):5253-68. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3739-09.2010.

Importin-beta11 regulates synaptic phosphorylated mothers against 
decapentaplegic, and thereby influences synaptic development and function at the 
Drosophila neuromuscular junction.

Higashi-Kovtun ME(1), Mosca TJ, Dickman DK, Meinertzhagen IA, Schwarz TL.

Author information:
(1)FM Kirby Center for Neurobiology, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Importin proteins act both at the nuclear pore to promote substrate entry and in 
the cytosol during signal trafficking. Here, we describe mutations in the 
Drosophila gene importin-beta11, which has not previously been analyzed 
genetically. Mutants of importin-beta11 died as late pupae from neuronal 
defects, and neuronal importin-beta11 was present not only at nuclear pores but 
also in the cytosol and at synapses. Neurons lacking importin-beta11 were viable 
and properly differentiated but exhibited discrete defects. Synaptic 
transmission was defective in adult photoreceptors and at larval neuromuscular 
junctions (NMJs). Mutant photoreceptor axons formed grossly normal projections 
and synaptic terminals in the brain, but synaptic arbors on larval muscles were 
smaller while still containing appropriate synaptic components. Bone morphogenic 
protein (BMP) signaling was the apparent cause of the observed NMJ defects. 
Importin-beta11 interacted genetically with the BMP pathway, and at mutant 
synaptic boutons, a key component of this pathway, phosphorylated mothers 
against decapentaplegic (pMAD), was reduced. Neuronal expression of an 
importin-beta11 transgene rescued this phenotype as well as the other observed 
neuromuscular phenotypes. Despite the loss of synaptic pMAD, pMAD persisted in 
motor neuron nuclei, suggesting a specific impairment in the local function of 
pMAD. Restoring levels of pMAD to mutant terminals via expression of 
constitutively active type I BMP receptors or by reducing retrograde transport 
in motor neurons also restored synaptic strength and morphology. Thus, 
importin-beta11 function interacts with the BMP pathway to regulate a pool of 
pMAD that must be present at the presynapse for its proper development and 
function.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3739-09.2010
PMCID: PMC2881940
PMID: 20392948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]