1. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):120-9.e18. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2010.04.013.  Epub 2010 Apr 24.

Interleukin-28B polymorphism improves viral kinetics and is the strongest 
pretreatment predictor of sustained virologic response in genotype 1 hepatitis C 
virus.

Thompson AJ(1), Muir AJ, Sulkowski MS, Ge D, Fellay J, Shianna KV, Urban T, 
Afdhal NH, Jacobson IM, Esteban R, Poordad F, Lawitz EJ, McCone J, Shiffman ML, 
Galler GW, Lee WM, Reindollar R, King JW, Kwo PY, Ghalib RH, Freilich B, Nyberg 
LM, Zeuzem S, Poynard T, Vock DM, Pieper KS, Patel K, Tillmann HL, Noviello S, 
Koury K, Pedicone LD, Brass CA, Albrecht JK, Goldstein DB, McHutchison JG.

Author information:
(1)Duke Clinical Research Institute, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We recently identified a polymorphism upstream of interleukin 
(IL)-28B to be associated with a 2-fold difference in sustained virologic 
response (SVR) rates to pegylated interferon-alfa and ribavirin therapy in a 
large cohort of treatment-naive, adherent patients with chronic hepatitis C 
virus genotype 1 (HCV-1) infection. We sought to confirm the polymorphism's 
clinical relevance by intention-to-treat analysis evaluating on-treatment 
virologic response and SVR.
METHODS: HCV-1 patients were genotyped as CC, CT, or TT at the polymorphic site, 
rs12979860. Viral kinetics and rates of rapid virologic response (RVR, week 4), 
complete early virologic response (week 12), and SVR were compared by IL-28B 
type in 3 self-reported ethnic groups: Caucasians (n = 1171), African Americans 
(n = 300), and Hispanics (n = 116).
RESULTS: In Caucasians, the CC IL-28B type was associated with improved early 
viral kinetics and greater likelihood of RVR (28% vs 5% and 5%; P < .0001), 
complete early virologic response (87% vs 38% and 28%; P < .0001), and SVR (69% 
vs 33% and 27%; P < .0001) compared with CT and TT. A similar association 
occurred within African Americans and Hispanics. In a multivariable regression 
model, CC IL-28B type was the strongest pretreatment predictor of SVR (odds 
ratio, 5.2; 95% confidence interval, 4.1-6.7). RVR was a strong predictor of SVR 
regardless of IL-28B type. In non-RVR patients, the CC IL-28B type was 
associated with a higher rate of SVR (Caucasians, 66% vs 31% and 24%; P < 
.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: In treatment-naive HCV-1 patients treated with pegylated interferon 
and ribavirin, a polymorphism upstream of IL-28B is associated with increased 
on-treatment and sustained virologic response and effectively predicts treatment 
outcome.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.04.013
PMID: 20399780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]