1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 11;285(24):18709-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106476. Epub 
2010 Apr 15.

Interaction of the human prostacyclin receptor with Rab11: characterization of a 
novel Rab11 binding domain within alpha-helix 8 that is regulated by 
palmitoylation.

Reid HM(1), Mulvaney EP, Turner EC, Kinsella BT.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, Conway Institute of 
Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, 
Dublin 4, Ireland.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2302.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2018 Aug 3;293(31):12287. doi: 10.1074/jbc.W118.004807.

The human prostacyclin receptor (hIP) undergoes agonist-induced internalization 
and subsequent recyclization in slowly recycling endosomes involving its direct 
physical interaction with Rab11a. Moreover, interaction with Rab11a localizes to 
a 22-residue putative Rab11 binding domain (RBD) within the carboxyl-terminal 
tail of the hIP, proximal to the transmembrane 7 (TM7) domain. Because the 
proposed RBD contains Cys(308) and Cys(311), in addition to Cys(309), that are 
known to undergo palmitoylation, we sought to identify the structure/function 
determinants of the RBD, including the influence of palmitoylation, on 
agonist-induced trafficking of the hIP. Through complementary approaches in 
yeast and mammalian cells along with computational structural studies, the RBD 
was localized to a 14-residue domain, between Val(299) and Leu(312), and 
proposed to be organized into an eighth alpha-helical domain (alpha-helix 8), 
comprising Val(299)-Val(307), adjacent to the palmitoylated residues at 
Cys(308)-Cys(311). From mutational and [(3)H]palmitate metabolic labeling 
studies, it is proposed that palmitoylation at Cys(311) in addition to 
agonist-regulated deacylation at Cys(309) > Cys(308) may dynamically position 
alpha-helix 8 in proximity to Rab11a, to regulate agonist-induced intracellular 
trafficking of the hIP. Moreover, Ala-scanning mutagenesis identified several 
hydrophobic residues within alpha-helix 8 as necessary for the interaction with 
Rab11a. Given the diverse membership of the G protein-coupled receptor 
superfamily, of which many members are also predicted to contain an 
alpha-helical 8 domain proximal to TM7 and, often, adjacent to palmitoylable 
cysteine(s), the identification of a functional role for alpha-helix 8, as 
exemplified as an RBD for the hIP, is likely to have broader significance for 
certain members of the superfamily.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106476
PMCID: PMC2881795
PMID: 20395296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]