1. AIDS. 2010 Apr 24;24(7):1043-50. doi: 10.1097/qad.0b013e3283377a06.

First-year lymphocyte T CD4+ response to antiretroviral therapy according to the 
HIV type in the IeDEA West Africa collaboration.

Drylewicz J(1), Eholie S, Maiga M, Zannou DM, Sow PS, Ekouevi DK, Peterson K, 
Bissagnene E, Dabis F, Thiébaut R; International epidemiologic Databases to 
Evaluate AIDS (IeDEA) West Africa Collaboration.

Collaborators: Dabis F, Amani-Bosse C, Ba-Gomis FO, Bissagnene E, Charurat M, 
Delaporte E, Drabo J, Eholie SP, Koulé SO, Maiga M, Messou E, Minga A, Peterson 
K, Sow PS, Traoré H, Zannou MD, Allou G, Anglaret X, Azondékon A, Balestre E, 
Bashi J, Ye-Diarra, Ekouévi DK, Eytard JF, Jaquet A, Kouakoussui A, Leroy V, 
Lewden C, Malateste K, Renner L, Sasco A, Sy HS, Thiébaut R, Timité-Konan M, 
Touré H.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U897, France.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the lymphocyte T CD4+ (CD4) response to combinations of 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) in HIV-1, HIV-2 and dually positive patients in 
West Africa.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Collaboration of 12 prospective cohorts of HIV-infected 
adults followed in Senegal (2), Gambia (1), Mali (2), Benin (1) and Côte 
d'Ivoire (6).
SUBJECTS: Nine thousand, four hundred and eighty-two patients infected by HIV-1 
only, 270 by HIV-2 only and 321 dually positive, who initiated an ART.
OUTCOME MEASURES: CD4 change over a 12-month period.
RESULTS: Observed CD4 cell counts at treatment initiation were similar in the 
three groups [overall median 155, interquartile range (IQR) 68; 249 
cells/microl). In HIV-1 patients, the most common ART regimen was two nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and one non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI; N = 7714) as well as for dually positive 
patients (N = 135). HIV-2 patients were most often treated with a protease 
inhibitor-based regimen (N = 193) but 45 of them were treated with an 
NNRTI-containing ART. In those treated with a NNRTI-containing regimen, the 
estimated mean CD4 change between 3 and 12 months was significantly lower in 
HIV-2 (-41 cells/microl per year) and dually positive patients (+12 cells/microl 
per year) compared to HIV-1 patients (+69 cells/microl per year, overall P value 
0.01). The response in HIV-2 and dually positive patients treated by another 
regimen (triple NRTIs or protease inhibitor-containing ART) was not 
significantly different than the response obtained in HIV-1-only patients (all P 
values >0.30).
CONCLUSION: An optimal CD4 response to ART in West Africa requires determining 
HIV type prior to initiation of antiretroviral drugs. NNRTIs are the mainstay of 
first-line ART in West Africa but are not adapted to the treatment of HIV-2 and 
dually positive patients.

DOI: 10.1097/qad.0b013e3283377a06
PMCID: PMC2880184
PMID: 20397306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]