1. Leuk Res. 2010 Oct;34(10):1275-81. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.02.035. Epub
2010  Apr 14.

DNA repair XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism alone, and in combination with CYP2E1 
polymorphisms significantly contribute to the risk of development of childhood 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Tumer TB(1), Yilmaz D, Tanrikut C, Sahin G, Ulusoy G, Arin√ß E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, 06531 
Ankara, Turkey. tumertb@gmail.com

It is now well established that genetic polymorphisms impairing the DNA repair 
capacity can disrupt the genomic integrity and potentially modulate individual's 
susceptibility to various cancers. In this study, we investigated the possible 
association of X-ray repair cross-complimenting group 1 (XRCC1) Arg399Gln and 
Arg194Trp variants with the risk of incidence of childhood acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL) in Turkish population comprised of 190 healthy controls and 167 
ALL patients. For Arg399Gln polymorphism, the heterozygous (Arg/Gln) and 
homozygous mutant (Gln/Gln) genotypes were significantly more common in the ALL 
patients than the controls (OR: 1.6, p=0.04). Particularly, the Gln399Gln 
genotype significantly increased the risk of disease up to 2.0-fold (OR: 2.0, 
p=0.04). Besides, Gln399Gln genotype has been found to be associated with 
considerably increased risk of ALL among females (OR=2.9, p=0.03). In case of 
codon 194 polymorphism, no significant associations have been found with risk of 
childhood ALL. In addition, none of the combinations of XRCC1 codon 194 and 399 
polymorphisms have been found to be significantly associated with childhood ALL 
risk. In the scope of this study, we have also showed that the co-presence of 
XRCC1 codon 399 and CYP2E1*5B and *6 polymorphisms (data for CYP2E1 
polymorphisms drawn from previously published study conducted in our lab) in the 
same individuals considerably increased the risk for childhood ALL to 3.7-fold 
with borderline significance (p=0.049). The observed combined effect was 
considerably more prominent among females (OR=17.4, p=0.001) and need to further 
investigation. This is the first study showing combined associations of XRCC1 
399Gln, CYP2E1*5B and *6 alleles with the risk of development of childhood ALL.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.02.035
PMID: 20394984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]