1. Pflugers Arch. 2010 Jun;460(1):1-17. doi: 10.1007/s00424-010-0827-z. Epub 2010
 Apr 18.

Regulation of the epithelial Na+ channel and airway surface liquid volume by 
serine proteases.

Gaillard EA(1), Kota P, Gentzsch M, Dokholyan NV, Stutts MJ, Tarran R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, 
PO Box 65, Robert Kilpatrick Clinical Sciences Building, Leicester Royal 
Infirmary, Leicester, LE2 7LX, UK.

Mammalian airways are protected from infection by a thin film of airway surface 
liquid (ASL) which covers airway epithelial surfaces and acts as a lubricant to 
keep mucus from adhering to the epithelial surface. Precise regulation of ASL 
volume is essential for efficient mucus clearance and too great a reduction in 
ASL volume causes mucus dehydration and mucus stasis which contributes to 
chronic airway infection. The epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC) is the 
rate-limiting step that governs Na(+) absorption in the airways. Recent in vitro 
and in vivo data have demonstrated that ENaC is a critical determinant of ASL 
volume and hence mucus clearance. ENaC must be cleaved by either intracellular 
furin-type proteases or extracellular serine proteases to be active and conduct 
Na(+), and this process can be inhibited by protease inhibitors. ENaC can be 
regulated by multiple pathways, and once proteolytically cleaved ENaC may then 
be inhibited by intracellular second messengers such as cAMP and PIP(2). In the 
airways, however, regulation of ENaC by proteases seems to be the predominant 
mode of regulation since knockdown of either endogenous serine proteases such as 
prostasin, or inhibitors of ENaC proteolysis such as SPLUNC1, has large effects 
on ENaC activity in airway epithelia. In this review, we shall discuss how ENaC 
is proteolytically cleaved, how this process can regulate ASL volume, and how 
its failure to operate correctly may contribute to chronic airway disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-010-0827-z
PMCID: PMC2955882
PMID: 20401730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]