1. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 13;5(4):e10153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010153.

Uncovering molecular biomarkers that correlate cognitive decline with the 
changes of hippocampus' gene expression profiles in Alzheimer's disease.

GÃ³mez Ravetti M(1), Rosso OA, Berretta R, Moscato P.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Bioinformatics, Biomarker Discovery and Information-Based 
Medicine, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by a neurodegenerative 
progression that alters cognition. On a phenotypical level, cognition is 
evaluated by means of the MiniMental State Examination (MMSE) and the 
post-mortem examination of Neurofibrillary Tangle count (NFT) helps to confirm 
an AD diagnostic. The MMSE evaluates different aspects of cognition including 
orientation, short-term memory (retention and recall), attention and language. 
As there is a normal cognitive decline with aging, and death is the final state 
on which NFT can be counted, the identification of brain gene expression 
biomarkers from these phenotypical measures has been elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have reanalysed a microarray dataset 
contributed in 2004 by Blalock et al. of 31 samples corresponding to hippocampus 
gene expression from 22 AD subjects of varying degree of severity and 9 
controls. Instead of only relying on correlations of gene expression with the 
associated MMSE and NFT measures, and by using modern bioinformatics methods 
based on information theory and combinatorial optimization, we uncovered a 
1,372-probe gene expression signature that presents a high-consensus with 
established markers of progression in AD. The signature reveals alterations in 
calcium, insulin, phosphatidylinositol and wnt-signalling. Among the most 
correlated gene probes with AD severity we found those linked to synaptic 
function, neurofilament bundle assembly and neuronal plasticity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: A transcription factors analysis of 1,372-probe 
signature reveals significant associations with the EGR/KROX family of proteins, 
MAZ, and E2F1. The gene homologous of EGR1, zif268, Egr-1 or Zenk, together with 
other members of the EGR family, are consolidating a key role in the neuronal 
plasticity in the brain. These results indicate a degree of commonality between 
putative genes involved in AD and prion-induced neurodegenerative processes that 
warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010153
PMCID: PMC2854141
PMID: 20405009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.