1. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Aug;211(2):520-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.03.018. Epub 2010 Mar 25.

Hemochromatosis (HFE) genotype and atherosclerosis: Increased susceptibility to 
iron-induced vascular damage in C282Y carriers?

Engberink MF(1), Povel CM, Durga J, Swinkels DW, de Kort WL, Schouten EG, 
Verhoef P, Geleijnse JM.

Author information:
(1)Wageningen University, Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands. Marielle.Engberink@wur.nl

BACKGROUND: The C282Y mutation of the hemochromatosis (HFE)-gene increases body 
iron status. Among Caucasians, the carrier frequency of this mutation is 8-9%. 
C282Y carriers may be more susceptible to iron-induced atherosclerosis due to 
higher iron levels. It has also been postulated that the C282Y mutation could 
alter aspects of iron metabolism. We examined the relationship between the C282Y 
mutation, iron status, and carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) as a marker of 
atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The present study comprised 764 Dutch men and 
post-menopausal women aged 50-70 years. Mean and maximum carotid IMT were 
assessed by B-mode ultrasonography. Blood was sampled for assessment of the 
C282Y mutation and body iron status. Parameters of iron status (e.g. ferritin 
and non-transferrin bound iron) were significantly higher in C282Y carriers 
(n=80; 10%) compared to non-carriers (P-values <0.001), however, there was no 
difference in the carotid IMT measures. Among non-smokers (n=222), carotid IMT 
was 0.051 mm (95% CI: 0.005; 0.096) lower in carriers compared to non-carriers 
(P=0.03), which remained after adjustment for iron parameters. Within the 
subgroup of carriers, higher carotid IMT values were observed across 
sex-specific quartiles of ferritin (mean IMT: 0.789, 0.787, 0.814, and 0.865 mm; 
P-trend=0.08), whereas this association was absent in non-carriers.
CONCLUSION: Overall, we found no association of HFE genotype with carotid IMT, 
despite higher iron status. Interestingly, C282Y carriers may be hyper 
responsive to vascular damage which needs to be confirmed in prospective cohort 
studies.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.03.018
PMID: 20400082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]