1. RNA Biol. 2010 May-Jun;7(3):361-72. doi: 10.4161/rna.7.3.11564. Epub 2010 May 
16.

Alternative polyadenylation of MeCP2: Influence of cis-acting elements and 
trans-acting factors.

Newnham CM(1), Hall-Pogar T, Liang S, Wu J, Tian B, Hu J, Lutz CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Experimental Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

The human MeCP2 gene encodes a ubiquitously expressed methyl CpG binding 
protein. Mutations in this gene cause a neurodevelopmental disorder called Rett 
Syndrome (RS). Mutations identified in the coding region of MeCP2 account for 
approximately 65% of all RS cases. However, 35% of all patients do not show 
mutations in the coding region of MeCP2, suggesting that mutations in non-coding 
regions likely exist that affect MeCP2 expression rather than protein function. 
The gene is unusual in that is has a >8.5 kb 3' untranslated region (3' UTR), 
and the size of the 3'UTR is differentially regulated in various tissues because 
of distinct polyadenylation signals. We have identified putative cis-acting 
auxiliary regulatory elements that play a role in alternative polyadenylation of 
MeCP2 using an in vivo polyadenylation reporter assay and in a luciferase assay. 
These cis-acting auxiliary elements are found both upstream and downstream of 
the core CPSF binding sites. Mutation of one of these cis-acting auxiliary 
elements, a G-rich element (GRS) significantly reduced MeCP2 polyadenylation 
efficiency in vivo. We further investigated what trans-acting factor(s) might be 
binding to this cis-acting element and found that hnRNP F protein binds 
specifically to the element. We next investigated the MeCP2 3' UTRs by 
performing quantitative real-time PCR; the data suggest that altered RNA 
stability is not a major factor in differential MeCP2 3' UTR usage. In sum, the 
mechanism(s) of regulated alternative 3'UTR usage of MeCP2 are complex, and 
insight into these mechanisms will aid our understanding of the factors that 
influence MeCP2 expression.

DOI: 10.4161/rna.7.3.11564
PMCID: PMC4096559
PMID: 20400852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]