1. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Jun 14;477(1):28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.04.029.
Epub  2010 Apr 21.

Excitatory synaptic transmission in the spinal substantia gelatinosa is under an 
inhibitory tone of endogenous adenosine.

Tian L(1), Ji G, Wang C, Bai X, Lu Y, Xiong L.

Author information:
(1)Pain Clinic, Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xian 710032, China.

Exogenous adenosine produces potent synaptic inhibition in spinal substantia 
gelatinosa (SG), a region involved in nociceptive and thermoreceptive 
mechanisms. To examine the possibility that endogenous adenosine tonically 
modulates excitatory synaptic transmission in spinal SG, whole-cell, 
voltage-clamp recordings were made from SG neurons in adult rat spinal cord 
slices. In all SG neurons sensitive to exogenous adenosine, the adenosine uptake 
inhibitor, NBTI, mimics adenosine's inhibitory actions on dorsal root evoked 
EPSCs (eEPSCs) and miniature spontaneous EPSCs (mEPSCs). These inhibitory 
effects were antagonized by A1 adenosine receptor antagonist, DPCPX. DPCPX also 
potentates eEPSCs in those SG neurons in which adenosine or adenosine A1 
receptor agonists (CHA, CCPA) suppressed eEPSCs. DPCPX often increases mEPSC 
frequency without altering mEPSC amplitude, suggesting presynaptic action on 
adenosine A1 receptors. Selective A2 (DMPX) and A2a (ZM 241385) adenosine 
receptor antagonists had no or minimal effects upon either eEPSCs or mEPSCs. The 
adenosine degrading enzyme, adenosine deaminase, mimicked the effects of DPCPX 
on the mEPSC frequency. We conclude that the excitatory synaptic transmission in 
the spinal SG is under an inhibitory tone of endogenous adenosine through the 
activation of A1 receptors. The present results suggested that the background 
activity of A1 receptors in the spinal SG might be contributed to setting the 
physiological "noceceptive thresholds".

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.04.029
PMID: 20416359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]