1. J Clin Pharmacol. 2011 Mar;51(3):309-20. doi: 10.1177/0091270010368542. Epub 
2010 Apr 23.

Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) activity as a pharmacodynamic 
biomarker of mycophenolic acid effects in pediatric kidney transplant 
recipients.

Fukuda T(1), Goebel J, Thøgersen H, Maseck D, Cox S, Logan B, Sherbotie J, 
Seikaly M, Vinks AA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Pediatric Pharmacology Research Unit, 
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Monitoring inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) activity as a biomarker 
of mycophenolic acid (MPA)-induced immunosuppression may serve as a novel 
approach in pharmacokinetics (PK)/pharmacodynamics (PD)-guided therapy. The 
authors prospectively studied MPA pharmacokinetics and IMPDH inhibition in 28 
pediatric de novo kidney transplant recipients. Pretransplant IMPDH activity and 
full PK/PD profiles were obtained at 3 different occasions: 1 to 3 days, 4 to 9 
days, and approximately 6 months after transplant. Large intra- and interpatient 
variability was noted in MPA pharmacokinetics and exposure and IMPDH inhibition. 
MPA exposure (AUC(0-12 h)) was low early posttransplant and increased over time 
and stabilized at months 3 to 6. Mean pretransplant IMPDH activity (6.4 ± 4.6 
nmol/h/mg protein) was lower than previously reported in adults. In most of the 
patients, IMPDH enzyme activity decreased with increasing MPA plasma 
concentration, with maximum inhibition coinciding with maximum MPA 
concentration. The overall relationship between MPA concentration and IMPDH 
activity was described by a direct inhibitory E(max) model (EC(50) = 0.97 mg/L). 
This study suggests the importance of early PK/PD monitoring to improve drug 
exposure. Because IMPDH inhibition is well correlated to MPA concentration, 
pretransplant IMPDH activity may serve as an early marker to guide the initial 
level of MPA exposure required in a pediatric population.

DOI: 10.1177/0091270010368542
PMCID: PMC3769694
PMID: 20418509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]