1. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 May;152A(5):1161-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33391.

High incidence of progressive postnatal cerebellar enlargement in Costello 
syndrome: brain overgrowth associated with HRAS mutations as the likely cause of 
structural brain and spinal cord abnormalities.

Gripp KW(1), Hopkins E, Doyle D, Dobyns WB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
DE 19899, USA. kgripp@nemours.org

Costello syndrome is a rasopathy caused by germline mutations in the 
proto-oncogene HRAS. Its presentation includes failure-to-thrive with 
macrocephaly, characteristic facial features, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
papillomata, malignant tumors, and cognitive impairment. In a systematic review 
we found absolute or relative macrocephaly (100%), ventriculomegaly (50%), and 
other abnormalities on brain and spinal cord imaging studies in 27/28 
individuals. Posterior fossa crowding with cerebellar tonsillar herniation 
(CBTH) was noted in 27/28 (96%), and in 10/17 (59%) with serial studies 
posterior fossa crowding progressed. Sequelae of posterior fossa crowding and 
CBTH included hydrocephalus requiring shunt or ventriculostomy (25%), Chiari 1 
malformation (32%), and syrinx formation (25%). Our data reveal macrocephaly 
with progressive frontal bossing and CBTH, documenting an ongoing process rather 
than a static congenital anomaly. Comparison of images obtained in young infants 
to subsequent studies demonstrated postnatal development of posterior fossa 
crowding. This process of evolving megalencephaly and cerebellar enlargement is 
in keeping with mouse model data, delineating abnormal genesis of neurons and 
glia, resulting in an increased number of astrocytes and enlarged brain volume. 
In Costello syndrome and macrocephaly-capillary malformation syndrome 
disproportionate brain growth is the main factor resulting in postnatal CBTH and 
Chiari 1 malformation.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33391
PMCID: PMC4910816
PMID: 20425820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]