1. Endocr J. 2010;57(6):541-9. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.k10e-015. Epub 2010 Apr 17.

The relationship between Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor-kappaB Ligand 
(RANKL) gene polymorphism and aortic calcification in Korean women.

Rhee EJ(1), Yun EJ, Oh KW, Park SE, Park CY, Lee WY, Park SW, Kim SW, Baek KH, 
Kang MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between RANKL gene 
polymorphisms and aortic calcification in Korean women. In 237 healthy Korean 
women, aortic calcification in thoracic and abdominal aorta was examined in 
simple radiologic method and lumbar spine and femoral neck BMD were examined by 
dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. Serum OPG levels, bone turnover markers, such 
as ALP levels and urine deoxypyridinoline levels, and urine calcium excretion 
were measured. Genotyping of two RANKL gene polymorphisms, rs2277438 and 
rs9594782, was performed by allelic discrimination using the 5' nuclease 
polymerase chain reaction assay. The subjects with CT/CC genotypes of the 
rs9594782 polymorphism had a 3.9 times higher risk of aortic calcification 
compared with TT genotype. This significance was significant even after 
adjustment for age, BMI, blood pressure, fasting plasma glucose, serum high and 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. Mean levels of urine 
deoxypyridinoline were significantly higher in the subjects with AG/GG genotypes 
of the rs2277438 polymorphism compared with AA genotype, and this significance 
was persistent even after adjustment for age and BMI. There were no associations 
of mean values for age, BMI, serum OPG and ALP levels, urine calcium excretion, 
and BMD with RANKL gene polymorphisms. The RANKL gene rs9594782 polymorphism was 
associated with aortic calcification in Korean women. Rs2277438 polymorphism 
showed significant association with urine deoxypyridinoline levels, a bone 
resorption marker. These results suggest its role on vascular calcification and 
bone metabolism in humans.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.k10e-015
PMID: 20431232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]