1. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Aug;224(2):433-42. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22139.

Constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway impairs 
vitamin D signaling in human prostate epithelial cells.

Zhang Z(1), Kovalenko P, Cui M, Desmet M, Clinton SK, Fleet JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907-2059, USA.

We studied the effect of prolonged activation of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) signaling on 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)(2)D(3)) action in 
the immortalized human prostate epithelial cell line RWPE1 and its Ki-Ras 
transformed clone RWPE2. 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-treatment caused growth arrest and 
induced gene expression in both cell lines but the response was blunted in RWPE2 
cells. Vitamin D receptor (VDR) levels were lower in RWPE2 cells but VDR 
over-expression did not increase vitamin-D-mediated gene transcription in either 
cell line. In contrast, MAPK inhibition restored normal vitamin D 
transcriptional responses in RWPE2 cells and MAPK activation with constitutively 
active MEK1R4F reduced vitamin-D-regulated transcription in RWPE1 cells. 
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-mediated transcription depends upon the VDR and its 
heterodimeric partner the retinoid X receptor (RXR) so we studied whether 
changes in the VDR-RXR transcription complex occur in response to MAPK 
activation. Mutation of putative phosphorylation sites in the activation 
function 1 (AF-1) domain (S32A, T82A) of RXRalpha restored 
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-mediated transactivation in RWPE2 cells. Mammalian two-hybrid 
and co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed a vitamin-D-independent interaction 
between steroid receptor co-activator-1 (SRC-1) and RXRalpha that was reduced by 
MAPK activation and was restored in RWPE2 cells by mutating S32 and T82 in the 
RXRalpha AF-1 domain. Our data show that a common contributor to cancer 
development, prolonged activation of MAPK signaling, impairs 
1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-mediated transcription in prostate epithelial cells. This is due 
in part to the phosphorylation of critical amino acids in the RXRalpha AF-1 
domain and impaired co-activator recruitment.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.22139
PMCID: PMC2916698
PMID: 20432439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]