1. CNS Drugs. 2010 Jul;24(7):539-48. doi: 10.2165/11534920-000000000-00000.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonists in the treatment of 
migraine.

Durham PL(1), Vause CV.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical and Life Sciences, Missouri State University, 524 North 
Boonville Avenue, Springfield, MO 65806, USA. pauldurham@missouristate.edu

Comment in
    CNS Drugs. 2011 Mar;25(3):269-70. doi: 10.2165/11587770-000000000-00000.

Based on preclinical and clinical studies, the neuropeptide calcitonin 
gene-related peptide (CGRP) is proposed to play a central role in the underlying 
pathology of migraine. CGRP and its receptor are widely expressed in both the 
peripheral and central nervous systems by multiple cell types involved in the 
regulation of inflammatory and nociceptive responses. Peripheral release of CGRP 
from trigeminal nerve fibres within the dura and from the cell body of 
trigeminal ganglion neurons is likely to contribute to peripheral sensitization 
of trigeminal nociceptors. Similarly, the release of CGRP within the trigeminal 
nucleus caudalis can facilitate activation of nociceptive second-order neurons 
and glial cells. Thus, CGRP is involved in the development and maintenance of 
persistent pain, central sensitization and allodynia, events characteristic of 
migraine pathology. In contrast, CGRP release within the brain is likely to 
function in an anti-nociceptive capacity. Given the role of CGRP in migraine 
pathology, the potential of CGRP receptor antagonists in the treatment of 
migraine has been investigated. Towards this end, the non-peptide CGRP receptor 
antagonists olcegepant and telcagepant have been shown to be effective in the 
acute treatment of migraine. While telcagepant is being pursued as a frontline 
abortive migraine drug in a phase III clinical trial, an oral formulation of a 
novel CGRP receptor antagonist, BI 44370, is currently in phase II clinical 
trials. Encouragingly, data from clinical studies on these compounds have 
clearly demonstrated the potential therapeutic benefit of this class of drugs 
and support the future development of CGRP receptor antagonists to treat 
migraine and possibly other types of chronic pain.

DOI: 10.2165/11534920-000000000-00000
PMCID: PMC3138175
PMID: 20433208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]