1. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):4081-91. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3335.
Epub  2010 May 4.

In vitro progression of human papillomavirus 16 episome-associated cervical 
neoplasia displays fundamental similarities to integrant-associated 
carcinogenesis.

Gray E(1), Pett MR, Ward D, Winder DM, Stanley MA, Roberts I, Scarpini CG, 
Coleman N.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

An important event in the development of cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 
is deregulated expression of high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) oncogenes, 
most commonly related to viral integration into host DNA. Mechanisms of 
development of the approximately 15% of SCCs that contain extrachromosomal 
(episomal) HR-HPV are poorly understood due to limited longitudinal data. We 
therefore used the W12 model to study mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis 
associated with episomal HPV16. In vitro progression of W12 normally occurs 
through selection of cells containing integrated HPV16. However, in one 
long-term culture, keratinocytes developed a selective growth advantage and 
invasive phenotype while retaining HPV16 episomes at increased copy number in 
the absence of transcriptionally active integrants. Longitudinal investigations 
revealed similarities between the episome- and integrant-associated routes of 
neoplastic progression. Most notable were dynamic changes in viral early gene 
expression in episome-retaining cells, consistent with continually changing 
selective pressures. An early increase in viral transcription preceded elevated 
episome copy number and was followed by a reduction to near baseline after the 
development of invasiveness. Episomal transcriptional deregulation did not 
require selection of a specific sequence variant of the HPV16 upstream 
regulatory region, although increased levels of acetylated histone H4 around the 
late promoter implicated a role for altered chromatin structure. Interestingly, 
invasive episome-retaining cells showed high levels of HPV16 E2/E6 proteins 
(despite decreased transcript levels) and reduced expression of IFN-stimulated 
genes, adaptations that support viral persistence and cell survival. Our 
findings suggest a unified working model for events important in cervical 
neoplastic progression regardless of HR-HPV physical state.

(c)2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3335
PMCID: PMC2872760
PMID: 20442284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]