1. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Jul 1;21(13):2191-201. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e09-10-0874. Epub 
2010 May 5.

Mitochondrial fragmentation leads to intracellular acidification in 
Caenorhabditis elegans and mammalian cells.

Johnson D(1), Nehrke K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medicine, and Pharmacology and Physiology, 
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. 
keith_nehrke@urmc.rochester.edu

Mitochondrial structural dynamics are regulated through the opposing processes 
of membrane fission and fusion, which are conserved from yeast to man. The 
chronic inhibition of mitochondrial fusion as a result of genetic mutation is 
the cause of human autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA) and 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome type 2A (CMT-2A). Here, we demonstrate that genetic 
fragmentation of the mitochondrial network in Caenorhabditis elegans induces 
cellular acidification in a broad range of tissues from the intestine, to body 
wall muscles, and neurons. Genetic epistasis analyses demonstrate that 
fragmentation itself, and not the loss of a particular protein, leads to 
acidosis, and the worm's fitness matches the extent of acidification. We suggest 
that fragmentation may cause acidification through two distinct processes: 
oxidative signaling after the loss of the ability of the mitochondrial inner 
membrane to undergo fusion and lactic acidosis after the loss of outer membrane 
fusion. Finally, experiments in cultured mammalian cells demonstrate a conserved 
link between mitochondrial morphology and cell pH homeostasis. Taken together 
these data reveal a potential role for acidosis in the differing etiology of 
diseases associated with mitochondrial morphology defects such as ADOA and 
CMT-2A.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e09-10-0874
PMCID: PMC2893984
PMID: 20444981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]