1. Biochemistry. 2010 Jun 22;49(24):4998-5006. doi: 10.1021/bi100080p.

Molecular organization of the complex between the muscarinic M3 receptor and the 
regulator of G protein signaling, Gbeta(5)-RGS7.

Sandiford SL(1), Wang Q, Levay K, Buchwald P, Slepak VZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

The complex of the regulator of G protein signaling (RGS), Gbeta(5)-RGS7, can 
inhibit signal transduction via the M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (M3R). 
RGS7 consists of three distinct structural entities: the DEP domain and its 
extension DHEX, the Ggamma-like (GGL) domain, which is permanently bound to 
Gbeta subunit Gbeta(5), and the RGS domain responsible for the interaction with 
Galpha subunits. Inhibition of the M3R by Gbeta(5)-RGS7 is independent of the 
RGS domain but requires binding of the DEP domain to the third intracellular 
loop of the receptor. Recent studies identified the dynamic intramolecular 
interaction between the Gbeta(5) and DEP domains, which suggested that the 
Gbeta(5)-RGS7 dimer could alternate between the "open" and "closed" 
conformations. Here, we identified point mutations that weaken DEP-Gbeta(5) 
binding, presumably stabilizing the open state, and tested their effects on the 
interaction of Gbeta(5)-RGS7 with the M3R. We found that these mutations 
facilitated binding of Gbeta(5)-RGS7 to the recombinant third intracellular loop 
of the M3R but did not enhance its ability to inhibit M3R-mediated Ca(2+) 
mobilization. This led us to the idea that the M3R can effectively induce the 
Gbeta(5)-RGS7 dimer to open; such a mechanism would require a region of the 
receptor distinct from the third loop. Indeed, we found that the C-terminus of 
M3R interacts with Gbeta(5)-RGS7. Truncation of the C-terminus rendered the M3R 
insensitive to inhibition by wild-type Gbeta(5)-RGS7; however, the open mutant 
of Gbeta(5)-RGS7 was able to inhibit signaling by the truncated M3R. The GST 
fusion of the M3R C-tail could not bind to wild-type Gbeta(5)-RGS7 but could 
associate with its open mutant as well as with the separated recombinant DEP 
domain or Gbeta(5). Taken together, our data are consistent with the following 
model: interaction of the M3R with Gbeta(5)-RGS7 causes the DEP domain and 
Gbeta(5) to dissociate from each other and bind to the C-tail, and the DEP 
domain also binds to the third loop, thereby inhibiting M3R-mediated signaling.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100080p
PMCID: PMC2920065
PMID: 20443543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]