1. Ann Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;74(4):369-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00577.x. 
Epub 2010 Apr 25.

Analysis of RET, ZEB2, EDN3 and GDNF genomic rearrangements in central 
congenital hyperventilation syndrome patients by multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification.

Serra A(1), GÃ¶rgens H, Alhadad K, Fitze G, Schackert HK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery (Section Pediatric Surgery), University of Ulm, Ulm, 
Germany. Alexandre.serra@uniklinik-ulm.de

Central congenital hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is an autonomous control 
disease producing hypoventilation, high PaCO(2), and low PaO(2) during quiet 
sleep. The main gene variants detected in CCHS are mutations in the PHOX2b gene 
in up to 97% of isolated cases. However, CCHS is sometimes associated with 
autonomic diseases such as Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). Since genomic 
rearrangements in particularly sensitive areas of the RET protooncogene and/or 
associated genes may account for the CCHS/HSCR phenotype in patients without 
other detectable RET variants, the aim of the present study was to identify 
rearrangements in the coding sequence of RET as well as in three HSCR-associated 
genes (ZEB2, EDN3 and GDNF) in CCHS/HSCR patients by using Multiplex 
Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). We have screened 27 CCHS and 11 
CCHS/HSCR patients for genomic rearrangements in RET, ZEB2, EDN3 and GDNF and 
did not identify any deletion or amplification in these four genes in all 
patients. We conclude that genomic rearrangements in RET are rare and were not 
responsible for the CCHS/HSCR phenotype in individuals without identifiable 
germline RET variants in our group of patients, yet this possibility cannot be 
excluded altogether given the size of the cohort.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2010.00577.x
PMID: 20456320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]