1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 15;19(14):2817-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq182. Epub 2010 
May 12.

TUBA1A mutations cause wide spectrum lissencephaly (smooth brain) and suggest 
that multiple neuronal migration pathways converge on alpha tubulins.

Kumar RA(1), Pilz DT, Babatz TD, Cushion TD, Harvey K, Topf M, Yates L, Robb S, 
Uyanik G, Mancini GM, Rees MI, Harvey RJ, Dobyns WB.

Author information:
(1)Unit√† di Genetica Medica, Policlinico Universitario S. Orsola-Malpighi, 
Bologna, Italy.

We previously showed that mutations in LIS1 and DCX account for approximately 
85% of patients with the classic form of lissencephaly (LIS). Some rare forms of 
LIS are associated with a disproportionately small cerebellum, referred to as 
lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia (LCH). Tubulin alpha1A (TUBA1A), 
encoding a critical structural subunit of microtubules, has recently been 
implicated in LIS. Here, we screen the largest cohort of unexplained LIS 
patients examined to date to determine: (i) the frequency of TUBA1A mutations in 
patients with lissencephaly, (ii) the spectrum of phenotypes associated with 
TUBA1A mutations and (iii) the functional consequences of different TUBA1A 
mutations on microtubule function. We identified novel and recurrent TUBA1A 
mutations in approximately 1% of children with classic LIS and in approximately 
30% of children with LCH, making this the first major gene associated with the 
rare LCH phenotype. We also unexpectedly found a TUBA1A mutation in one child 
with agenesis of the corpus callosum and cerebellar hypoplasia without LIS. 
Thus, our data demonstrate a wider spectrum of phenotypes than previously 
reported and allow us to propose new recommendations for clinical testing. We 
also provide cellular and structural data suggesting that LIS-associated 
mutations of TUBA1A operate via diverse mechanisms that include disruption of 
binding sites for microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs).

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq182
PMCID: PMC2893812
PMID: 20466733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]