1. Ann Pharmacother. 2010 Jun;44(6):1046-53. doi: 10.1345/aph.1P003. Epub 2010
May  11.

Saxagliptin: a new dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor for type 2 diabetes.

Borja-Hart NL(1), Whalen KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, Nova Southeastern 
University, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33328. nborja@nova.edu

OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of 
saxagliptin, a new dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes.
DATA SOURCES: Searches of PubMed (1966-March 2010) and International Pharmacy 
Abstracts (1970-March 2010) were conducted using the key words saxagliptin, 
Onglyza, and BMS-477118. A review of bibliographies of retrieved articles was 
also performed to identify additional references.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All identified studies published in English 
and involving efficacy and safety of saxagliptin in the treatment of type 2 
diabetes were reviewed.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Saxagliptin is a competitive inhibitor of DPP-4 that slows the 
degradation of incretin hormones, thereby stimulating insulin secretion, 
reducing postprandial glucagon, and decreasing glucose levels. Saxagliptin is 
well absorbed after oral administration and demonstrates a pharmacokinetic 
profile that is compatible with once-daily dosing. Clinical trials with 
saxagliptin monotherapy for the treatment of type 2 diabetes showed a reduction 
in hemoglobin A(1c) (A1C) of 0.43-0.9%. Saxagliptin has demonstrated similar 
reductions in A1C when used as add-on therapy with metformin, sulfonylureas, and 
thiazolidinediones. The combination of saxagliptin and metformin for initial 
therapy in treatment-na√Øve patients was associated with greater improvements in 
A1C than either agent alone. In general, saxagliptin therapy is well tolerated. 
The most common adverse effects occurring in clinical trials were headache, 
nasopharyngitis, upper respiratory tract infections, and urinary tract 
infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Saxagliptin is effective as monotherapy or add-on therapy for the 
management of type 2 diabetes. Because saxagliptin has a higher cost and reduces 
A1C and other surrogate markers of glucose control to a lesser extent than other 
well-validated therapies, such as metformin, saxagliptin should be reserved for 
patients who fail or are intolerant of conventional treatments for type 2 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1P003
PMID: 20460554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]