1. Poult Sci. 2010 Jun;89(6):1162-6. doi: 10.3382/ps.2009-00609.

Immunopathological effects of ochratoxin A and T-2 toxin combination on 
broilers.

Xue CY(1), Wang GH, Chen F, Zhang XB, Bi YZ, Cao YC.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510006 PR China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the immunopathological effects of 
combinations of ochratoxin A (OTA) and T-2 toxin on broilers. Four hundred 
eighty 1-d-old broilers were randomly assigned to 4 groups, each group 
consisting of 4 duplicates each with 30 broilers. The 4 groups were fed the 
following diets for 4 wk: group 1=basal diet (control, mycotoxin-free); group 
2=basal diet+2,000 mg/kg of Mycofix Plus; group 3=basal diet+0.25 mg/kg of OTA 
and 0.5 mg/kg of T-2; and group 4=basal diet+0.25 mg/kg of OTA and 0.5 mg/kg of 
T-2+2,000 mg/kg of Mycofix Plus. The feeding of OTA-T-2 toxin diets reduced 
(P<0.05) the level of anti-Newcastle disease virus antibody titers by 10.4%. 
When broilers were administered lipopolysaccharide, the results of real-time PCR 
showed that broilers fed OTA-T-2 toxin reduced the cytokine mRNA expression 
levels of interleukin-2 and interferon-gamma to some extent but not 
significantly (P>0.05). The concentrations of interleukin-2 and interferon-gamma 
in serum were significantly decreased (P<0.05) by OTA-T-2 toxin combination. 
Histopathological studies demonstrated that OTA-T-2 toxin combination caused 
abnormalities in the thymus, bursa of Fabricius, spleen, and liver. Ochratoxin 
A-T-2 toxicity could be counteracted by Mycofix Plus partially but not 
significantly (P>0.05). The concentrations of OTA and T-2 toxin used in this 
study are under the maximum tolerated levels recommended by Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency. Our study clearly put the standard and detoxification method 
for these toxins into question. We suggest that it may be time to reduce the 
maximum allowable limits of OTA and T-2 mycotoxins in feeds to improve animal 
health and the safety of the food chain.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2009-00609
PMID: 20460662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]