1. Anim Genet. 2011 Feb;42(1):83-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02062.x.

Mapping QTL in the porcine MHC region affecting fatness and growth traits in a 
Meishan/Large White composite population.

Wei WH(1), Skinner TM, Anderson JA, Southwood OI, Plastow G, Archibald AL, Haley 
CS.

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Roslin, Midlothian 
EH25 9PS, UK.

A number of studies have mapped QTL regulating porcine fatness and growth traits 
to the region of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on porcine 
chromosome 7 using various experimental crosses. The QTL results from crosses 
using the Chinese Meishan (MS) (slow growing and fat) are particularly 
interesting because the MS alleles have been found to be associated with 
increased growth rate and reduced backfat depth. We investigated these QTL 
further in a composite population derived previously over eight generations by 
intercrossing Meishan and the European Large White breeds. Genotype information 
from 32 markers in a 15cM target region was used in linkage and association 
analyses. A two-step variance component analysis identified QTL for three 
growth-related traits, explaining 19 ∼ 24% of the phenotypic variance with a 
confidence interval of 4 cM in the target region. SNP association analyses found 
that ss181128966 and ss181128924 within the QTL interval were strongly 
associated with the growth traits. Only weak signals for an effect on backfat 
depth were found in the association and linkage analyses, possibly because of 
past directional selection in the composite population.

© 2010 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2010 Stichting International Foundation 
for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02062.x
PMID: 20477798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]