1. J Pediatr. 2010 Aug;157(2):310-315.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.02.040. Epub 
2010 May 15.

Follow-up and quality of life of patients with cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndromes treated with Anakinra.

Lepore L(1), Paloni G, Caorsi R, Alessio M, Rigante D, Ruperto N, Cattalini M, 
Tommasini A, Zulian F, Ventura A, Martini A, Gattorno M.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, the Department of Reproductive and Developmental 
Sciences, University of Trieste, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the quality of life and long-term follow-up of patients 
enrolled in the Italian registry of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes 
(CAPS).
STUDY DESIGN: Since 2004, 20 patients with CAPS were enrolled in a common 
registry from different Italian Centers of Pediatric Rheumatology; 14 patients 
were treated with Anakinra in an open fashion. Both treated and untreated 
patients were routinely followed according to standard of care. The Child Health 
Questionnaire (CHQ-PF 50) was used to assess the health-related quality of life.
RESULTS: The mean duration of follow-up was 37.5 months. In all treated 
patients, a complete and persistent control of the inflammatory manifestations 
was observed with no further progression of the disease. At enrollment in the 
registry, patients showed a poorer health-related quality of life than healthy 
children in both physical and the psychosocial summary scores. Treatment was 
associated with a dramatic and sustained amelioration of a variety of measures 
of poor quality of life, particularly in those concerning the global health 
perception, bodily pain-discomfort, and other physical domains.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term IL-1 blockade produces a significant and persistent 
improvement in the clinical manifestations associated with the disease and on 
the overall quality of life.

Copyright (c) 2010. Published by Mosby, Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.02.040
PMID: 20472245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]