1. PLoS One. 2010 May 7;5(5):e10523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010523.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy reveals neuroprotection by oral 
minocycline in a nonhuman primate model of accelerated NeuroAIDS.

Ratai EM(1), Bombardier JP, Joo CG, Annamalai L, Burdo TH, Campbell J, Fell R, 
Hakimelahi R, He J, Autissier P, Lentz MR, Halpern EF, Masliah E, Williams KC, 
Westmoreland SV, Gonz√°lez RG.

Author information:
(1)AA Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging and Neuroradiology Division, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of 
America. ratai@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Despite the advent of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART), 
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders continue to be a significant problem. In 
efforts to understand and alleviate neurocognitive deficits associated with HIV, 
we used an accelerated simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) macaque model of 
NeuroAIDS to test whether minocycline is neuroprotective against 
lentiviral-induced neuronal injury.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Eleven rhesus macaques were infected with SIV, 
depleted of CD8+ lymphocytes, and studied until eight weeks post inoculation 
(wpi). Seven animals received daily minocycline orally beginning at 4 wpi. 
Neuronal integrity was monitored in vivo by proton magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy and post-mortem by immunohistochemistry for synaptophysin (SYN), 
microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), and neuronal counts. Astrogliosis and 
microglial activation were quantified by measuring glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) and ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (IBA-1), 
respectively. SIV infection followed by CD8+ cell depletion induced a 
progressive decline in neuronal integrity evidenced by declining 
N-acetylaspartate/creatine (NAA/Cr), which was arrested with minocycline 
treatment. The recovery of this ratio was due to increases in NAA, indicating 
neuronal recovery, and decreases in Cr, likely reflecting downregulation of 
glial cell activation. SYN, MAP2, and neuronal counts were found to be higher in 
minocycline-treated animals compared to untreated animals while GFAP and IBA-1 
expression were decreased compared to controls. CSF and plasma viral loads were 
lower in MN-treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, oral minocycline alleviates neuronal 
damage induced by the AIDS virus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010523
PMCID: PMC2866543
PMID: 20479889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.