1. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):6575-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903910. Epub
2010  May 10.

Vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein regulates inside-out signaling of beta2 
integrins in neutrophils.

Deevi RK(1), Koney-Dash M, Kissenpfennig A, Johnston JA, Schuh K, Walter U, Dib 
K.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, 
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

The monomeric GTPase Rap1 controls functional activation of beta2 integrins in 
leukocytes. In this article, we describe a novel mechanism by which the 
chemoattractant fMLP activates Rap1 and inside-out signaling of beta2 integrins. 
We found that fMLP-induced activation of Rap1 in human polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes or neutrophils and differentiated PLB-985 cells was blocked by 
inhibitors of the NO/guanosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate-dependent protein 
kinase (cGKI) pathway [N-(3-(aminomethyl)benzyl)acetamidine, 
1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one, DT-3 peptide, 
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphothioate, Rp-isomer 
triethylammonium salt-guanosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate], indicating that the 
downstream signaling events in Rap1 activation involve the production of NO and 
guanosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate, as well as the activation of cGKI. 
Silencing the expression of vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), a 
substrate of cGKI, in resting PLB-985 cells or mice neutrophils led to 
constitutive activation of Rap1. In parallel, silencing VASP in differentiated 
PLB-985 cells led to recruitment of C3G, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor 
for Rap1, to the plasma membrane. Expression of murine GFP-tagged 
phosphodeficient VASP Ser235Ala mutant (murine serine 235 of VASP corresponds to 
human serine 239) in PLB-985 cells blunted fMLP-induced translocation of C3G to 
the membrane and activation of Rap1. Thus, bacterial fMLP triggers 
cGKI-dependent phosphorylation of human VASP on serine 239 and, thereby, 
controls membrane recruitment of C3G, which is required for activation of Rap1 
and beta2 integrin-dependent antibacterial functions of neutrophils.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903910
PMID: 20483741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]