1. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Sep 6;187(1-3):3-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.05.005. 
Epub 2010 May 20.

From Split to Sibenik: the tortuous pathway in the cholinesterase field.

Taylor P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology 0636, Skaggs School of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 
92093-0650, USA. pwtaylor@ucsd.edu

The interim between the first and tenth International Cholinesterase Meetings 
has seen remarkable advances associated with the applications of structural 
biology and recombinant DNA methodology to our field. The cloning of the 
cholinesterase genes led to the identification of a new super family of 
proteins, termed the alpha,beta-hydrolase fold; members of this family possess a 
four helix bundle capable of linking structural subunits to the functioning 
globular protein. Sequence comparisons and three-dimensional structural studies 
revealed unexpected cousins possessing this fold that, in turn, revealed three 
distinct functions for the alpha,beta-hydrolase proteins. These encompass: (1) a 
capacity for hydrolytic cleavage of a great variety of substrates, (2) a 
heterophilic adhesion function that results in trans-synaptic associations in 
linked neurons, (3) a chaperone function leading to stabilization of nascent 
protein and its trafficking to an extracellular or secretory storage location. 
The analysis and modification of structure may go beyond understanding 
mechanism, since it may be possible to convert the cholinesterases to efficient 
detoxifying agents of organophosphatases assisted by added oximes. Also, the 
study of the relationship between the alpha,beta-hydrolase fold proteins and 
their biosynthesis may yield means by which aberrant trafficking may be 
corrected, enhancing expression of mutant proteins. Those engaged in 
cholinesterase research should take great pride in our accomplishments 
punctuated by the series of ten meetings. The momentum established and initial 
studies with related proteins all hold great promise for the future.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.05.005
PMCID: PMC3000743
PMID: 20493179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]