1. Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 1;70(13):5281-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0704.
Epub  2010 Jun 1.

Periostin, a cell adhesion molecule, facilitates invasion in the tumor 
microenvironment and annotates a novel tumor-invasive signature in esophageal 
cancer.

Michaylira CZ(1), Wong GS, Miller CG, Gutierrez CM, Nakagawa H, Hammond R, 
Klein-Szanto AJ, Lee JS, Kim SB, Herlyn M, Diehl JA, Gimotty P, Rustgi AK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 1;70(15):6398.

Human squamous cell cancers are the most common epithelially derived 
malignancies. One example is esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), which is 
associated with a high mortality rate that is related to a propensity for 
invasion and metastasis. Here, we report that periostin, a highly expressed cell 
adhesion molecule, is a key component of a novel tumor-invasive signature 
obtained from an organotypic culture model of engineered ESCC. This 
tumor-invasive signature classifies with human ESCC microarrays, underscoring 
its utility in human cancer. Genetic modulation of periostin promotes tumor cell 
migration and invasion as revealed in gain-of-loss and loss-of-function 
experiments. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling and 
restoration of wild-type p53 function were each found to attenuate periostin, 
suggesting the interdependence of two common genetic alterations with periostin 
function. Collectively, our studies reveal periostin as an important mediator of 
ESCC tumor invasion and they indicate that organotypic (three-dimensional) 
culture can offer an important tool to discover novel biological effectors in 
cancer.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0704
PMCID: PMC3274349
PMID: 20516120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]