1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Oct;38(19):6418-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq455. Epub 2010
 May 28.

Three prime exonuclease I (TREX1) is Fos/AP-1 regulated by genotoxic stress and 
protects against ultraviolet light and benzo(a)pyrene-induced DNA damage.

Christmann M(1), Tomicic MT, Aasland D, Berdelle N, Kaina B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicology, University Medical Center, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 
67, D-55131 Mainz, Germany. mchristm@uni-mainz.de

Cells respond to genotoxic stress with the induction of DNA damage defence 
functions. Aimed at identifying novel players in this response, we analysed the 
genotoxic stress-induced expression of DNA repair genes in mouse fibroblasts 
proficient and deficient for c-Fos or c-Jun. The experiments revealed a clear 
up-regulation of the three prime exonuclease I (trex1) mRNA following 
ultraviolet (UV) light treatment. This occurred in the wild-type but not c-fos 
and c-jun null cells, indicating the involvement of AP-1 in trex1 induction. 
Trex1 up-regulation was also observed in human cells and was found on promoter, 
RNA and protein level. Apart from UV light, TREX1 is induced by other DNA 
damaging agents such as benzo(a)pyrene and hydrogen peroxide. The mouse and 
human trex1 promoter harbours an AP-1 binding site that is recognized by c-Fos 
and c-Jun, and its mutational inactivation abrogated trex1 induction. Upon 
genotoxic stress, TREX1 is not only up-regulated but also translocated into the 
nucleus. Cells deficient in TREX1 show reduced recovery from the UV and 
benzo(a)pyrene-induced replication inhibition and increased sensitivity towards 
the genotoxins compared to the isogenic control. The data revealed trex1 as a 
novel DNA damage-inducible repair gene that plays a protective role in the 
genotoxic stress response.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq455
PMCID: PMC2965218
PMID: 20511593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]