1. J Intern Med. 2010 Aug;268(2):194-205. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02247.x. 
Epub 2010 May 28.

Low plasma adiponectin concentration is associated with myocardial infarction in 
young individuals.

Persson J(1), Lindberg K, Gustafsson TP, Eriksson P, Paulsson-Berne G, Lundman 
P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Karolinska Institutet, Danderyd University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
jonas.persson@ds.se

Erratum in
    J Intern Med. 2011 Apr;269(4):468.

OBJECTIVE: The importance of adiponectin in coronary heart disease remains to be 
elucidated. Therefore, the associations between plasma adiponectin levels and i) 
myocardial infarction and ii) genetic variation within the adiponectin gene were 
investigated.
METHODS: The study included young survivors (age <60 years) of a first 
myocardial infarction and gender- and age-matched controls (244 pairs). 
Adiponectin concentrations were analysed by radioimmunoassay. Two polymorphisms, 
rs266729 and rs1501299, of the adiponectin gene ADIPOQ were genotyped.
RESULTS: Adiponectin levels were inversely associated with myocardial infarction 
[odds ratio (OR) 9.3, 95% confidence interval (CI) 4.7-18.2, for the lowest 
quartile compared to the highest quartile]. This persisted after adjustment for 
history of hypertension, HDL cholesterol, smoking and body mass index (BMI) (OR 
3.1, 95% CI 1.3-7.6). The rs266729 polymorphism was associated with adiponectin 
levels. Plasma adiponectin concentrations were lower in individuals with the 
rare G/G genotype [median 4.3 mg/L, [corrected] interquartile range (IQR) 
2.8-6.2] compared to the C/G (median 5.8 mg/L), [corrected] IQR 3.9-8.0; P = 
0.035) and C/C genotypes (median 5.5 mg/L, [corrected] IQR 4.0-7.5; P = 0.083).
CONCLUSION: Low plasma adiponectin concentrations are associated with myocardial 
infarction in individuals below the age of 60, and this remains significant 
after adjustment for history of hypertension, HDL cholesterol, smoking and BMI. 
In addition, adiponectin levels differ according to rs266729 genotype.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2010.02247.x
PMID: 20528971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]