1. Korean Diabetes J. 2010 Feb;34(1):47-54. doi: 10.4093/kdj.2010.34.1.47. Epub 
2010 Feb 28.

The Effect of Glucose Fluctuation on Apoptosis and Function of INS-1 Pancreatic 
Beta Cells.

Kim MK(1), Jung HS, Yoon CS, Ko JH, Jun HJ, Kim TK, Kwon MJ, Lee SH, Ko KS, Rhee 
BD, Park JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Maryknoll Medical Center, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Blood glucose level continuously fluctuates within a certain range 
in the human body. In diabetes patients, the extent of such fluctuation is 
large, despite the strict control of blood glucose. Blood glucose fluctuation 
has been shown to mediate more adverse effects on vascular endothelial cells and 
diabetes complications than chronic hyperglycemia, which has been explained as 
due to oxidative stress. As few previous studies have reported the effects of 
chronic and intermittent hyperglycemia on the apoptosis and function of 
pancreatic beta cells, this study reported herein was performed to investigate 
such effects on these cells.
METHODS: For chronic hyperglycemia, INS-1 cells were cultured for 5 days with 
changes of RPMI 1640 medium containing 33 mM glucose every 12 hours. For 
intermittent hyperglycemia, the medium containing 11 mM glucose was exchanged 
with the medium containing 33 mM glucose every 12 hours. Apoptosis was assessed 
by TUNEL assay Hoechst staining and cleaved caspase 3. Insulin secretory 
capacity was assessed, and the expression of Mn-SOD and Bcl-2 was measured by 
Western blotting.
RESULTS: In comparison to the control group, INS-1 cells exposed to chronic 
hyperglycemia and intermittent hyperglycemia showed an increase in apoptosis. 
The apoptosis of INS-1 cells exposed to intermittent hyperglycemia increased 
significantly more than the apoptosis of INS-1 cells exposed to chronic 
hyperglycemia. In comparison to the control group, the insulin secretory 
capacity in the two hyperglycemic states was decreased, and more with 
intermittent hyperglycemia than with chronic hyperglycemia. The expression of 
Mn-SOD and Bcl-2 increased more with chronic hyperglycemia than with 
intermittent hyperglycemia.
CONCLUSION: Intermittent hyperglycemia induced a higher degree of apoptosis and 
decreased the insulin secretory capacity more in pancreatic beta cells than 
chronic hyperglycemia. This activity may be mediated by the anti-oxidative 
enzyme Mn-SOD and the anti-apoptotic signal Bcl-2.

DOI: 10.4093/kdj.2010.34.1.47
PMCID: PMC2879902
PMID: 20532020