1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Aug 15;19(16):3254-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq234. Epub 2010 
Jun 10.

Mutant HSPB8 causes motor neuron-specific neurite degeneration.

Irobi J(1), Almeida-Souza L, Asselbergh B, De Winter V, Goethals S, Dierick I, 
Krishnan J, Timmermans JP, Robberecht W, De Jonghe P, Van Den Bosch L, Janssens 
S, Timmerman V.

Author information:
(1)Peripheral Neuropathy, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Missense mutations (K141N and K141E) in the alpha-crystallin domain of the small 
heat shock protein HSPB8 (HSP22) cause distal hereditary motor neuropathy 
(distal HMN) or Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2L (CMT2L). The mechanism 
through which mutant HSPB8 leads to a specific motor neuron disease phenotype is 
currently unknown. To address this question, we compared the effect of mutant 
HSPB8 in primary neuronal and glial cell cultures. In motor neurons, expression 
of both HSPB8 K141N and K141E mutations clearly resulted in neurite 
degeneration, as manifested by a reduction in number of neurites per cell, as 
well as in a reduction in average length of the neurites. Furthermore, 
expression of the K141E (and to a lesser extent, K141N) mutation also induced 
spheroids in the neurites. We did not detect any signs of apoptosis in motor 
neurons, showing that mutant HSPB8 resulted in neurite degeneration without 
inducing neuronal death. While overt in motor neurons, these phenotypes were 
only very mildly present in sensory neurons and completely absent in cortical 
neurons. Also glial cells did not show an altered phenotype upon expression of 
mutant HSPB8. These findings show that despite the ubiquitous presence of HSPB8, 
only motor neurons appear to be affected by the K141N and K141E mutations which 
explain the predominant motor neuron phenotype in distal HMN and CMT2L.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq234
PMCID: PMC2908473
PMID: 20538880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]