1. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Aug;120(2):169-83. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0707-9. Epub
 2010 Jun 10.

Capillary cerebral amyloid angiopathy identifies a distinct APOE 
epsilon4-associated subtype of sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Thal DR(1), Papassotiropoulos A, Saido TC, Griffin WS, Mrak RE, KÃ¶lsch H, Del 
Tredici K, Attems J, Ghebremedhin E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Ulm, Albert Einstein Allee 11, Ulm, 
Germany. dietmar.thal@uni-ulm.de

The deposition of amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) in the vessel wall, i.e., 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), is associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Two types of CAA can be differentiated by the presence or absence of capillary 
Abeta-deposits. In addition, as in Alzheimer's disease, risk for capillary CAA 
is associated with the apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4-allele. Because these 
morphological and genetic differences between the two types of AD-related CAA 
exist, the question arises as to whether there exist further differences between 
AD cases with and without capillary CAA and, if so, whether capillary CAA can be 
employed to distinguish and define specific subtypes of AD. To address this 
question, we studied AD and control cases both with and without capillary CAA to 
identify the following: (1) distinguishing neuropathological features; (2) 
alterations in perivascular protein expression; and (3) genotype-specific 
associations. More widespread Abeta-plaque pathology was observed in AD cases 
with capillary CAA than in those without. Expression of perivascular excitatory 
amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT-2/GLT-1) was reduced in cortical astrocytes of AD 
cases with capillary CAA in contrast to those lacking capillary Abeta-deposition 
and controls. Genetically, AD cases with capillary CAA were strongly associated 
with the APOE epsilon4 allele compared to those lacking capillary CAA and to 
controls. To further validate the existence of distinct types of AD we analyzed 
polymorphisms in additional apoE- and cholesterol-related candidate genes. Our 
results revealed an association between AD cases without capillary CAA (i.e., AD 
cases with CAA but lacking capillary CAA and AD cases without CAA) and the 
T-allele of the alpha(2)macroglobulin receptor/low-density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1) C766T polymorphism as opposed to AD cases 
with capillary CAA and non-AD controls. Taken together, these results indicate 
that AD cases with capillary CAA differ significantly from other AD cases both 
genetically and morphologically, thereby pointing to a specific capillary 
CAA-related and APOE epsilon4-associated subtype of AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0707-9
PMID: 20535486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]