1. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1311-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902238. Epub
2010  Jun 11.

An IL-2 paradox: blocking CD25 on T cells induces IL-2-driven activation of 
CD56(bright) NK cells.

Martin JF(1), Perry JS, Jakhete NR, Wang X, Bielekova B.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Branch, National Institute for Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Daclizumab (Dac), an Ab against the IL-2R alpha-chain, inhibits brain 
inflammation in patients with multiple sclerosis, while expanding CD56(bright) 
immunoregulatory NK cells in vivo. We hypothesized that this unexpected 
expansion is paradoxically IL-2 driven; caused by the increased availability of 
T cell-derived IL-2 for NK cell signaling. To this end, we performed ex vivo 
functional analyses of CD56(bright) NK cells and T cells from patients in 
clinical trials with Dac. We developed in vitro models to investigate mechanisms 
for ex vivo observations. We observed that Dac treatment caused decreased 
numbers and proliferation of FoxP3(+) T regulatory cells (Tregs), a model T cell 
population known to be dependent on IL-2 for proliferation and survival. As 
anticipated, Dac therapy inhibited IL-2 signaling in all T cells; however, we 
also observed functional adaptation of T cells to low IL-2 signal in vivo, 
characterized by the concomitant enhancement of IL-7 signaling on all T cells 
and parallel increase of CD127 expression by Tregs. In contrast, IL-2 signaling 
on CD56(bright) NK cells was not inhibited by Dac and their in vivo 
proliferation and cytotoxicity actually increased. Mechanistic studies indicated 
that the activation of CD56(bright) NK cells was likely IL-2 driven, as low 
doses of IL-2, but not IL-15, mimicked this activation in vitro. Our study 
provides insight into the role that IL-2 and CD25 play in functional regulation 
of two important immunoregulatory cell populations in humans: FoxP3(+) Tregs and 
CD56(bright) NK cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902238
PMCID: PMC3085179
PMID: 20543101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]