1. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 Mar;12(2):127-32. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5448.2010.00656.x.

The carriage of the type 1 diabetes-associated R262W variant of human LNK 
correlates with increased proliferation of peripheral blood monocytes in 
diabetic patients.

Lavrikova EY(1), Nikitin AG, Kuraeva TL, Peterkova VA, Tsitlidze NM, Chistiakov 
DA, Nosikov VV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, National Research Center GosNIIgenetika, 
Moscow, Russia.

OBJECTIVE: Lymphocyte adaptor protein (LNK) plays a pivotal role as a suppressor 
of T-cell receptor-mediated immune signaling and negative regulator of 
lymphopoiesis and early hematopoiesis. Recently, association between the R262W 
(c.784T>C) variant of the SH2B3 gene (rs3184504) encoding human LNK and type 1 
diabetes (T1D) was found in several populations. In this study, we aimed to 
check whether this marker is associated with T1D in a Russian population.
METHODS: Using a Taqman allele discrimination assay, we genotyped 1062 unrelated 
Russian individuals with diabetes at childhood and adolescence onset and 1020 
healthy controls. T-cell proliferation assay based on the measurement of 
incorporation of bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation into newly synthesized DNA 
was used to evaluate whether carriage of SH2B3 784T>C correlates with T-cell 
proliferation in patients' peripheral mononuclear blood cells (PMBCs) stimulated 
with anti-CD28 and anti-CD3 antibodies.
RESULTS: The allele 784C of SH2B3 was related to a higher risk of T1D (odds 
ratio of 1.52, p = 1.2 × 10(-12)). A correlation between the carriage of the 
predisposing C/C variant of LNK and increased proliferation of T lymphocytes was 
shown in PMBCs of both diabetic [C/C vs. C/T vs.T/T = optical density at 450 nm 
(OD(450)) 6.3 ± 0.8 vs. 4.4 ± 0.7 vs. 2.7 ± 0.5, p = 0.0007] and non-diabetic 
(C/C vs. C/T vs.T/T = OD(450) 2.9 ± 0.6 vs. 2.2 ± 0.4 vs. 1.7 ± 0.4, p = 0.022) 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The SH2B3 784T>C variant could contribute to the pathogenesis of 
T1D through impaired immune response that promotes activation and expansion of 
self-reactive lymphocytes in susceptible individuals.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2010.00656.x
PMID: 20546165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]