1. Arch Microbiol. 2010 Aug;192(8):673-83. doi: 10.1007/s00203-010-0596-2. Epub 
2010 Jun 18.

Influence of the Escherichia coli oxyR gene function on lambda prophage 
maintenance.

Glinkowska M(1), Loś JM, Szambowska A, Czyz A, Całkiewicz J, Herman-Antosiewicz 
A, Wróbel B, Wegrzyn G, Wegrzyn A, Loś M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdańsk, Kładki 24, 80-822 
Gdańsk, Poland.

In Escherichia coli hosts, hydrogen peroxide is one of the factors that may 
cause induction of lambda prophage. Here, we demonstrate that H2O2-mediated 
lambda prophage induction is significantly enhanced in the oxyR mutant host. The 
mRNA levels for cI gene expression were increased in a lambda lysogen in the 
presence of H2O2. On the other hand, stimulation of the p(M) promoter by cI857 
overproduced from a multicopy plasmid was decreased in the DeltaoxyR mutant in 
the presence of H2O2 but not under normal growth conditions. The purified OxyR 
protein did bind specifically to the p(M) promoter region. This binding impaired 
efficiency of interaction of the cI protein with the OR3 site, while stimulating 
such a binding to OR2 and OR1 sites, in the regulatory region of the p(M) 
promoter. We propose that changes in cI gene expression, perhaps in combination 
with moderately induced SOS response, may be responsible for enhanced lambda 
prophage induction by hydrogen peroxide in the oxyR mutant. Therefore, OxyR 
seems to be a factor stimulating lambda prophage maintenance under conditions of 
oxidative stress. This proposal is discussed in the light of efficiency of 
induction of lambdoid prophages bearing genes coding for Shiga toxins.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-010-0596-2
PMCID: PMC2903704
PMID: 20559623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]