1. J Exp Bot. 2010 Aug;61(13):3663-73. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq179. Epub 2010 Jun 17.

Identification and characterization of the maize arogenate dehydrogenase gene 
family.

Holding DR(1), Meeley RB, Hazebroek J, Selinger D, Gruis F, Jung R, Larkins BA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Plant Science Innovation, University of Nebraska, 1901 Vine St., 
Lincoln, NE 68588, USA. dholding2@unl.edu

In plants, the amino acids tyrosine and phenylalanine are synthesized from 
arogenate by arogenate dehydrogenase and arogenate dehydratase, respectively, 
with the relative flux to each being tightly controlled. Here the 
characterization of a maize opaque endosperm mutant (mto140), which also shows 
retarded vegetative growth, is described The opaque phenotype co-segregates with 
a Mutator transposon insertion in an arogenate dehydrogenase gene (zmAroDH-1) 
and this led to the characterization of the four-member family of maize 
arogenate dehydrogenase genes (zmAroDH-1-zmAroDH-4) which share highly similar 
sequences. A Mutator insertion at an equivalent position in AroDH-3, the most 
closely related family member to AroDH-1, is also associated with opaque 
endosperm and stunted vegetative growth phenotypes. Overlapping but differential 
expression patterns as well as subtle mutant effects on the accumulation of 
tyrosine and phenylalanine in endosperm, embryo, and leaf tissues suggest that 
the functional redundancy of this gene family provides metabolic plasticity for 
the synthesis of these important amino acids. mto140/arodh-1 seeds shows a 
general reduction in zein storage protein accumulation and an elevated lysine 
phenotype typical of other opaque endosperm mutants, but it is distinct because 
it does not result from quantitative or qualitative defects in the accumulation 
of specific zeins but rather from a disruption in amino acid biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erq179
PMCID: PMC2921203
PMID: 20558569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]