1. J Immunother. 2010 Jul-Aug;33(6):570-90. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181e032e8.

Immunotherapy for melanoma: current status and perspectives.

Alexandrescu DT(1), Ichim TE, Riordan NH, Marincola FM, Di Nardo A, Kabigting 
FD, Dasanu CA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, USA. mddoru@hotmail.com

Comment in
    J Immunother. 2011 Oct;34(8):606-7; author reply 607-9. doi: 
10.1097/CJI.0b013e31822b9fc7.

Immunotherapy is an important modality in the therapy of patients with malignant 
melanoma. As our knowledge about this disease continues to expand, so does the 
immunotherapeutic armamentarium. Nevertheless, successful preclinical models do 
not always translate into clinically meaningful results. The authors give a 
comprehensive analysis of most recent advances in the immune anti-melanoma 
therapy, including interleukins, interferons, other cytokines, adoptive 
immunotherapy, biochemotherapy, as well as the use of different vaccines. We 
also present the fundamental concepts behind various immune enhancement 
strategies, passive immunotherapy, as well as the use of immune adjuvants. This 
review brings into discussion the results of newer and older clinical trials, as 
well as potential limitations and drawbacks seen with the utilization of various 
immune therapies in malignant melanoma. Development of novel therapeutic 
approaches, along with optimization of existing therapies, continues to hold a 
great promise in the field of melanoma therapy research. Use of anti-CTLA4 and 
anti-PD1 antibodies, realization of the importance of co-stimulatory signals, 
which translated into the use of agonist CD40 monoclonal antibodies, as well as 
activation of innate immunity through enhanced expression of co-stimulatory 
molecules on the surface of dendritic cells by TLR agonists are only a few items 
on the list of recent advances in the treatment of melanoma. The need to 
engineer better immune interactions and to boost positive feedback loops appear 
crucial for the future of melanoma therapy, which ultimately resides in our 
understanding of the complexity of immune responses in this disease.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181e032e8
PMCID: PMC3517185
PMID: 20551839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]