1. Neuroscience. 2010 Sep 1;169(3):1063-70. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.05.044. Epub 2010 May 27.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 regulates inflammatory tolerance in astrocytes.

Beurel E(1), Jope RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-0017, USA.

Inflammatory tolerance is the down-regulation of inflammation upon repeated 
stimuli, which is well-established to occur in peripheral immune cells. However, 
less is known about inflammatory tolerance in the brain although it may provide 
an important protective mechanism from detrimental consequences of prolonged 
inflammation, which appears to occur in many psychiatric and neurodegenerative 
conditions. Array analysis of 308 inflammatory molecules produced by mouse 
primary astrocytes after two sequential stimulations with lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) distinguished three classes, tolerant, sensitized and unaltered groups. 
For many of these inflammatory molecules, inhibition of glycogen synthase 
kinase-3 (GSK3) increased tolerance and reduced sensitization. Focusing on 
LPS-tolerance in interleukin-6 (IL-6) production, we found that microglia 
exhibited a strong tolerance response that matched that of macrophages, whereas 
astrocytes exhibited only partial tolerance. The astrocyte semi-tolerance was 
found to be regulated by GSK3. GSK3 inhibitors or knocking down GSK3 levels 
promoted LPS-tolerance and astrocytes expressing constitutively active GSK3 did 
not develop LPS-tolerance. These findings identify the critical role of GSK3 in 
counteracting IL-6 inflammatory tolerance in cells of the CNS, supporting the 
therapeutic potential of GSK3 inhibitors to reduce neuroinflammation by 
promoting tolerance.

Copyright (c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.05.044
PMCID: PMC2914115
PMID: 20553816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]