1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 15;643(1):13-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.05.063. 
Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Effect of carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine on wild-type and mutant neuronal 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors linked to nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy.

Di Resta C(1), Ambrosi P, Curia G, Becchetti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Piazza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milano, Italy.

Carbamazepine (5H-dibenz[b,f]azepine-5-carboxamide) and oxcarbazepine 
(10,11-dihydro-10-oxo-5H-dibenz[b,f]azepine-5-carboxamide) are widely used for 
the treatment of partial epilepsy. Recent work indicates that these drugs, in 
addition to targeting voltage-gated Na(+) channels, can modulate ligand-gated 
channels. These compounds appear to be particularly effective for treatment of 
nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, which can be caused by mutant neuronal 
nicotinic receptors. We compared the effects of carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine 
on heteromeric nicotinic receptors to better understand the underlying mechanism 
of the effect of these drugs in epileptic patients. Receptors were expressed in 
cell lines and studied by patch-clamp methods at -60 mV. For alpha2beta4 
receptors activated with 100 microM nicotine, IC(50) for carbamazepine was 49 
microM. Receptors in which alpha2 was substituted with alpha2-I279 N, linked to 
autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, had an IC(50) of 21 microM. 
For oxcarbazepine, the IC(50) was larger than 500 microM for wild-type receptors 
and approximately 100 microM for mutant receptors. A similar inhibition was 
observed in the presence of 10 microM nicotine, indicating a non-competitive 
mechanism. The monohydroxy derivative (MHD) of oxcarbazepine, clinically the 
most relevant compound, was tested on both alpha2beta4 and alpha4beta2 
receptors, to obtain a broader view of its possible physiological effects. At 
the typical concentration present in blood (100 microM), MHD produced an 
approximate 40% channel block on alpha4beta2, but no significant effect on 
alpha2beta4 receptors. Oxcarbazepine and MHD retarded the channel deactivation, 
suggesting that these compounds produce open channel block. These results may 
explain the particular efficacy of these drugs in nocturnal frontal lobe 
epilepsy.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.05.063
PMID: 20561518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]