1. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Jun 21;11:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-43.

The methylated N-terminal tail of RCC1 is required for stabilisation of its 
interaction with chromatin by Ran in live cells.

Hitakomate E(1), Hood FE, Sanderson HS, Clarke PR.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Nursing, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical 
School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

BACKGROUND: Regulator of chromosome condensation 1 (RCC1) is the guanine 
nucleotide exchange factor for Ran GTPase. Localised generation of Ran-GTP by 
RCC1 on chromatin is critical for nucleocytoplasmic transport, mitotic spindle 
assembly and nuclear envelope formation. Both the N-terminal tail of RCC1 and 
its association with Ran are important for its interaction with chromatin in 
cells. In vitro, the association of Ran with RCC1 induces a conformational 
change in the N-terminal tail that promotes its interaction with DNA.
RESULTS: We have investigated the mechanism of the dynamic interaction of the 
alpha isoform of human RCC1 (RCC1alpha) with chromatin in live cells using 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) fusions. We show that the N-terminal tail stabilises the interaction of 
RCC1alpha with chromatin and this function can be partially replaced by another 
lysine-rich nuclear localisation signal. Removal of the tail prevents the 
interaction of RCC1alpha with chromatin from being stabilised by RanT24N, a 
mutant that binds stably to RCC1alpha. The interaction of RCC1alpha with 
chromatin is destabilised by mutation of lysine 4 (K4Q), which abolishes 
alpha-N-terminal methylation, and this interaction is no longer stabilised by 
RanT24N. However, alpha-N-terminal methylation of RCC1alpha is not regulated by 
the binding of RanT24N. Conversely, the association of Ran with precipitated 
RCC1alpha does not require the N-terminal tail of RCC1alpha or its methylation. 
The mobility of RCC1alpha on chromatin is increased by mutation of aspartate 182 
(D182A), which inhibits guanine-nucleotide exchange activity, but RCC1alphaD182A 
can still bind nucleotide-free Ran and its interaction with chromatin is 
stabilised by RanT24N.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that the stabilisation of the dynamic 
interaction of RCC1alpha with chromatin by Ran in live cells requires the 
N-terminal tail of RCC1alpha. alpha-N-methylation is not regulated by formation 
of the binary complex with Ran, but it promotes chromatin binding through the 
tail. This work supports a model in which the association of RCC1alpha with 
chromatin is promoted by a conformational change in the alpha-N-terminal 
methylated tail that is induced allosterically in the binary complex with Ran.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-43
PMCID: PMC2898669
PMID: 20565941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]