1. Transfusion. 2011 Jan;51(1):18-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.02751.x.

Geno- and phenotyping and immunogenicity of HNA-3.

Reil A(1), Wesche J, Greinacher A, Bux J.

Author information:
(1)DRK Blood Service West, Hagen, Germany. a.reil@bsdwest.de

Comment in
    Transfusion. 2011 Jan;51(1):2-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.02904.x.

BACKGROUND: Alloantibodies directed against the human neutrophil alloantigen 
(HNA)-3a are frequently implicated in severe and fatal transfusion-related acute 
lung injury (TRALI). The HNA-3a/3b system results from a single-nucleotide 
exchange (461G>A; Arg154Gln) in the choline transporter-like protein 2 gene. 
Genotyping may allow identification of blood donors at risk to develop HNA-3a 
antibodies.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: A polymerase chain reaction using sequence-specific 
primers (PCR-SSP) for genotyping of HNA-3a and -3b alleles was designed. Results 
of genotyping and phenotyping were compared in 40 randomly selected individuals 
and in blood donors and recipients of six TRALI cases associated with HNA-3a 
antibodies. Phenotyping was performed by granulocyte immunofluorescence and 
granulocyte agglutination using typing sera for HNA-3a and two recently found 
HNA-3b-reactive sera. Immunogenicity of HNA-3a was determined by the rate of 
HNA-3a alloantibodies in HNA-3b homozygous parous women.
RESULTS: Genotyping and phenotyping results correlated to 100% and were in 
accordance with alloantibody formation and binding in HNA-3a antibody associated 
TRALI cases. Gene frequencies of HNA-3a and -3b were 0.792 and 0.207 in the 
German population with 64.1% homozygous individuals for the HNA-3a allele, 5.5% 
for the HNA-3b allele, and 30.4% heterozygous individuals, in accordance with 
the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and the gene frequencies of 0.819 and 0.181 
reported in 1964. Immunization rates were estimated to be of 7% for HNA-3a and 
0.5% for HNA-3b.
CONCLUSION: The PCR-SSP method allows reliable determination of the HNA-3a and 
-3b genotypes; approximately 7% of HNA-3b homozygous women develop antibodies 
when exposed to the HNA-3a antigen during pregnancy.

Â© 2010 American Association of Blood Banks.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2010.02751.x
PMID: 20561293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]