1. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1991;19(4):240-5. doi: 10.1002/mpo.2950190406.

Analysis of N-ras gene mutations in medulloblastomas by polymerase chain 
reaction and oligonucleotide probes in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tissues.

Iolascon A(1), Lania A, Badiali M, Pession A, Saglio G, Giangaspero F, Miraglia 
del Giudice E, Perrotta S, Cutillo S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Naples, Italy.

Precise data on the incidence of transforming ras oncogenes in pediatric tumors 
and the correlations with the histopathological properties of the tumors are 
very limited. Additionally the presence of ras activation in medulloblastomas 
has not been investigated so far. Using a combination of techniques including in 
vitro gene amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and detection of 
single base mutations by sequence-specific oligonucleotides we studied N-ras 
activation (mutations at codon 12, 13, and 61) in 32 medulloblastomas. DNA was 
isolated from 20 microns sections of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. 
Mutations were found in 3 out of 32 examined medulloblastomas. In all cases only 
mutations of codon 61 were found: two of three mutations were C to A mutations 
at position 1 of the codon 61 (leading to a substitution of a glutamine residue 
for a lysine) and one was A to T mutation at position 3 in the same codon 
(glutamine-histidine). Our results indicate 10% incidence N-ras mutation in 
medulloblastoma, higher than in other CNS tumors studied so far. The main 
advantages of the procedure described are its greatly improved sensitivity, the 
increased speed with which tumor samples can be analyzed, and the possibility of 
using paraffin-embedded sections to analyze various rare tumors in retrospect.

DOI: 10.1002/mpo.2950190406
PMID: 2056968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]