1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2010 Sep;21(6):954-61. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3038.2010.01073.x. Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Filaggrin gene variants and atopic diseases in early childhood assessed 
longitudinally from birth.

BÃ¸nnelykke K(1), Pipper CB, Tavendale R, Palmer CN, Bisgaard H.

Author information:
(1)Copenhagen Studies on Asthma in Childhood, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Gentofte, Copenhagen, Denmark. kb@copsac.dk

Copenhagen Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood (COPSAC) was one of the 
discovery cohorts of the association between eczema and variants in the 
filaggrin coding gene (FLG). Here, we study the FLG-associated risk of asthma 
symptoms in early life and describe the temporal relationship in the development 
of the different FLG-associated atopic outcomes: asthma, sensitization and 
eczema, assessed longitudinally from birth. A high-risk cohort of 411 children 
was assessed in a prospective clinical study from birth to school-age. Asthma, 
acute severe asthma exacerbations, sensitization and eczema were diagnosed 
prospectively by the investigators. FLG variants R501X and Del4 were determined 
in 382 Caucasians. Filaggrin variants increased risk of developing recurrent 
wheeze, asthma and asthma exacerbations (hazard ratio 1.82 [1.06-3.12], p = 
0.03), which was expressed within the first 1.5 yr of life. Children with 
filaggrin variants had a marked and persistent increase in acute severe asthma 
exacerbations from 1 yr of age (incidence ratio 2.40 [1.19-4.81], p = 0.01) and 
increased risk of asthma by age 5 (odds ratio 2.62 [1.12-6.11], p = 0.03). FLG 
variants increased the risk of eczema, manifesting fully in the first year of 
life (point prevalence ratio for age 0-5 was 1.75 [1.29-2.37]; p-value = 0.0003) 
contrasting the increased risk of specific sensitization by age 4 (odds ratio 
3.52 [1.72-7.25], p = 0.0007) but not age 1.5. This study describes a 
FLG-associated pattern of atopic diseases characterized by the early onset of 
asthma symptoms and eczema and later development of sensitization. The 
association of filaggrin variants with asthma suggests skin barrier dysfunction 
as a novel, and potentially modifiable, mechanism driving early childhood 
asthma.

(c) 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3038.2010.01073.x
PMID: 20573035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]