1. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Oct;130(10):2407-11. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.163. Epub 
2010 Jun 24.

Revertant mosaicism due to a second-site mutation in COL7A1 in a patient with 
recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.

Pasmooij AM(1), Garcia M, Escamez MJ, Nijenhuis AM, Azon A, Cuadrado-Corrales N, 
Jonkman MF, Del Rio M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. a.m.g.pasmooij@derm.umcg.nl

Despite the high incidence of revertant mosaicism (35%) in patients with the 
genetic skin disease epidermolysis bullosa (EB) due to correcting mutations in 
the genes COL17A1 and LAMB3, revertant mosaicism has not been described for 
COL7A1 until recently. Mutations in COL7A1 are responsible for the most 
devastating form of EB in adults, which is characterized by cocooned "mitten" 
deformities of the hands. This report shows in vivo reversion of an inherited 
COL7A1 mutation in a patient with recessive dystrophic EB who was homozygous for 
the frameshift mutation COL7A1:c.6527insC,p.2176FsX337. The patient exhibited a 
patch of clinically healthy revertant skin on her left forearm. The second-site 
mutation c.6528delT, which is present in revertant keratinocytes, resulted in 
correction of the reading frame. As the new CCC codon codes for the same amino 
acid proline as the wild-type codon CCT, the revertant cells expressed wild-type 
type VII collagen polypeptide, leading to restoration of skin function. We 
hypothesize that, on careful examination, revertant mosaicism might be found to 
be more common in patients with type VII collagen-deficient EB. Furthermore, the 
revertant keratinocytes might offer the possibility to explore cell-based 
therapeutic strategies, by culturing in vitro and subsequently grafting as part 
of bioengineered dermo-epidermal substitutes on affected skin.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2010.163
PMID: 20574443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]