1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 May;25 Suppl 1:S31-4. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.06212.x.

Aspirin-induced peptic ulcer and genetic polymorphisms.

Shiotani A(1), Sakakibara T, Nomura M, Yamanaka Y, Nishi R, Imamura H, Tarumi K, 
Kamada T, Hata J, Haruma K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kawasaki Medical School, Matsushima 
Kurashiki City, Okayama, Japan. shiotani@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

There are a few studies of the association between genetic polymorphisms and the 
risks of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin)-induced ulcer or its complications. Two 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), A-842G and 
C50T, exhibited increased sensitivity to aspirin and had lower prostaglandin 
synthesis capacity, lacking statistical significance in the association with 
bleeding peptic ulcer. A recent Japanese study indicated that the number of 
COX-1-1676T alleles was a significant risk factor for peptic ulcer in users of 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). There are some genetic 
polymorphisms for aspirin resistance, such as platelet membrane glycoproteins, 
thromboxane A2 (TXA2) receptor, platelet activating factor acetylhydrolase and 
coagulation factor XIII; however, data on the frequency of gastrointestinal (GI) 
events in these variants are lacking. Carrying the CYP2C9 variants is reported a 
significantly increased risk of non-aspirin NSAID-related GI bleeding. The 
polymorphisms of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha) have been associated with development of peptic ulcer or gastric 
cancer. In a recent investigation, carriage of the IL-1beta-511 T allele was 
significantly associated with peptic ulcer among low-dose aspirin users. 
Hypoacidity in corpus gastritis related to polymorphisms of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines seems to reduce NSAIDs or aspirin-related injury. Data on which 
polymorphisms are significant risk factors for GI events in aspirin users are 
still lacking and further large-scale clinical studies are required.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.06212.x
PMID: 20586862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]