1. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Jan;38(1):365-70. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0117-z. Epub 2010
 Jun 29.

Novel SNPs of the bovine CACNA2D1 gene and their association with carcass and 
meat quality traits.

Yuan ZR(1), Xu SZ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Bovine Breeding, The Key Laboratory for 
Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of Agriculture of 
China, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
No.2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100193, People's 
Republic of China. zhengrong_yuan@yahoo.com.cn

Calcium channel, voltage-dependent, alpha-2/delta subunit 1 (CACNA2D1) gene 
encodes a member of the alpha-2/delta subunit family, proteins are accessory 
molecules associated with voltage-gated calcium channels, and increase the 
density at the plasma membrane of calcium channels activated by high voltage. 
The main objective of the present study was to identify polymorphisms of 
CACNA2D1 gene, and to analyze associations between these polymorphisms and 
carcass and meat quality traits in cattle. In this study, through PCR-SSCP and 
DNA sequencing methods, two new allelic variant corresponding to the C→G and G→T 
mutations at positions 526740 and 537917 in the exon25 and exon35 of bovine 
CACNA2D1 gene, respectively, could be detected. SNP C526740G is a nonsynonymous 
mutation, resulting in a Cysteine (Cys) to Tryptophan (Trp) amino acid 
replacement and SNP G537917T resulting in an Aspartic (Asp) to Tyrosine (Tyr) 
amino acid replacement. The gene-specific SNP markers association analysis was 
investigated. The C526740G was significantly associated with Meat color (MC) 
(P=0.0297) and Backfat thickness (BF) (P<0.001). The G537917A indicated 
significant association with Dressing percentage (DP) (P=0.0485). No significant 
association, however, was detected between any of the marker genotype and other 
traits measured in this study. Results from this study initially suggested that 
CACNA2D1 gene is one of the potential candidate genes influencing carcass and 
meat quality traits and gene-specific SNPs may be a useful marker for MAS 
programs in cattle breeding.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-010-0117-z
PMID: 20585886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]