1. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jun 30;11:105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-105.

Genetic evidence of multiple loci in dystocia--difficult labour.

Algovik M(1), Kivinen K, Peterson H, Westgren M, Kere J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. michael.algovik@ltkalmar.se

BACKGROUND: Dystocia, difficult labour, is a common but also complex problem 
during childbirth. It can be attributed to either weak contractions of the 
uterus, a large infant, reduced capacity of the pelvis or combinations of these. 
Previous studies have indicated that there is a genetic component in the 
susceptibility of experiencing dystocia. The purpose of this study was to 
identify susceptibility genes in dystocia.
METHODS: A total of 104 women in 47 families were included where at least two 
sisters had undergone caesarean section at a gestational length of 286 days or 
more at their first delivery. Study of medical records and a telephone interview 
was performed to identify subjects with dystocia. Whole-genome scanning using 
Affymetrix genotyping-arrays and non-parametric linkage (NPL) analysis was made 
in 39 women exhibiting the phenotype of dystocia from 19 families. In 68 women 
re-sequencing was performed of candidate genes showing suggestive linkage: 
oxytocin (OXT) on chromosome 20 and oxytocin-receptor (OXTR) on chromosome 3.
RESULTS: We found a trend towards linkage with suggestive NPL-score (3.15) on 
chromosome 12p12. Suggestive linkage peaks were observed on chromosomes 3, 4, 6, 
10, 20. Re-sequencing of OXT and OXTR did not reveal any causal variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Dystocia is likely to have a genetic component with variations in 
multiple genes affecting the patient outcome. We found 6 loci that could be 
re-evaluated in larger patient cohorts.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-105
PMCID: PMC2914646
PMID: 20587075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]