1. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jun 17;6(6):e1000992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000992.

The IG-DMR and the MEG3-DMR at human chromosome 14q32.2: hierarchical 
interaction and distinct functional properties as imprinting control centers.

Kagami M(1), O'Sullivan MJ, Green AJ, Watabe Y, Arisaka O, Masawa N, Matsuoka K, 
Fukami M, Matsubara K, Kato F, Ferguson-Smith AC, Ogata T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for 
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Human chromosome 14q32.2 harbors the germline-derived primary DLK1-MEG3 
intergenic differentially methylated region (IG-DMR) and the 
postfertilization-derived secondary MEG3-DMR, together with multiple imprinted 
genes. Although previous studies in cases with microdeletions and epimutations 
affecting both DMRs and paternal/maternal uniparental disomy 14-like phenotypes 
argue for a critical regulatory function of the two DMRs for the 14q32.2 
imprinted region, the precise role of the individual DMR remains to be 
clarified. We studied an infant with upd(14)pat body and placental phenotypes 
and a heterozygous microdeletion involving the IG-DMR alone (patient 1) and a 
neonate with upd(14)pat body, but no placental phenotype and a heterozygous 
microdeletion involving the MEG3-DMR alone (patient 2). The results generated 
from the analysis of these two patients imply that the IG-DMR and the MEG3-DMR 
function as imprinting control centers in the placenta and the body, 
respectively, with a hierarchical interaction for the methylation pattern in the 
body governed by the IG-DMR. To our knowledge, this is the first study 
demonstrating an essential long-range imprinting regulatory function for the 
secondary DMR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000992
PMCID: PMC2887472
PMID: 20585555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.