1. Pediatr Res. 2010 Oct;68(4):292-7. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181ed8609.

Patterns of gene expression in the ductus arteriosus are related to 
environmental and genetic risk factors for persistent ductus patency.

Waleh N(1), Hodnick R, Jhaveri N, McConaghy S, Dagle J, Seidner S, McCurnin D, 
Murray JC, Ohls R, Clyman RI.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, SRI International, Menlo Park, California 
94025, USA.

Three independent risk factors (immature gestation, absence of antenatal 
glucocorticoid exposure, and presence of the rs2817399(A) allele of the gene 
TFAP2B) are associated with patent ductus arteriosus (PDAs) that fail to close 
during prostaglandin inhibition. We hypothesized that these three factors may 
affect a common set of genes that increase the risk of persistent PDA after 
birth. We studied baboon ductus from term, preterm, and glucocorticoid-treated 
preterm fetuses and found that both immature gestation and absence of antenatal 
glucocorticoid exposure decreased RNA expression of calcium- and 
potassium-channel genes involved in oxygen-induced constriction, and 
phosphodiesterase genes (that modulate cAMP/cGMP signaling). Ductus obtained 
from second trimester human pregnancies were genotyped for TFAP2B polymorphisms. 
When present, the rs2817399(A) allele also was associated with decreased 
expression of calcium- and potassium-channel genes. In contrast, alleles of two 
other TFAP2B polymorphisms, rs2817419(G) and rs2635727(T), which are not related 
to the incidence of PDA after birth, had no effect on RNA expression. In 
conclusion, three calcium- and potassium-channel genes (CACNA1G/ alpha1G, CACNB 
2/CaL-beta2, and KCNA2/ Kv1.2) were similarly affected by each of the PDA risk 
factors. We speculate that these channels may play a significant role in closing 
the preterm ductus during prostaglandin inhibition and may be potential targets 
for future pharmacologic manipulations.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3181ed8609
PMCID: PMC2940964
PMID: 20581741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]