1. Circ Res. 2010 Aug 20;107(4):512-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.221481. Epub 
2010 Jul 1.

Purkinje cells from RyR2 mutant mice are highly arrhythmogenic but responsive to 
targeted therapy.

Kang G(1), Giovannone SF, Liu N, Liu FY, Zhang J, Priori SG, Fishman GI.

Author information:
(1)The Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

RATIONALE: The Purkinje fiber network has been proposed as the source of 
arrhythmogenic Ca(2+) release events in catecholaminergic polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia (CPVT), yet evidence supporting this mechanism at the 
cellular level is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the frequency and severity of spontaneous 
Ca(2+) release events and the response to the antiarrhythmic agent flecainide in 
Purkinje cells and ventricular myocytes from RyR2(R4496C/+) CPVT mutant mice and 
littermate controls.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We crossed RyR2(R4496C/+) knock-in mice with the newly 
described Cntn2-EGFP BAC transgenic mice, which express a fluorescent reporter 
gene in cells of the cardiac conduction system, including the distal Purkinje 
fiber network. Isolated ventricular myocytes (EGFP(-)) and Purkinje cells 
(EGFP(+)) from wild-type hearts and mutant hearts were distinguished by 
epifluorescence and intracellular Ca(2+) dynamics recorded by microfluorimetry. 
Both wild-type and RyR2(R4496C/+) mutant Purkinje cells displayed significantly 
slower kinetics of activation and relaxation compared to ventricular myocytes of 
the same genotype, and tau(decay) in the mutant Purkinje cells was significantly 
slower than that observed in wild-type Purkinje cells. Of the 4 groups studied, 
RyR2(R4496C/+) mutant Purkinje cells were also most likely to develop 
spontaneous Ca(2+) release events, and the number of events per cell was also 
significantly greater. Furthermore, with isoproterenol treatment, although all 4 
groups showed increases in the frequency of arrhythmogenic Ca(2+(i)) events, the 
RyR2(R4496C/+) Purkinje cells responded with the most profound abnormalities in 
intracellular Ca(2+) handling, including a significant increase in the frequency 
of unstimulated Ca(2+(i)) events and the development of alternans, as well as 
isolated and sustained runs of triggered beats. Both Purkinje cells and 
ventricular myocytes from wild-type mice showed suppression of spontaneous 
Ca(2+) release events with flecainide, whereas in RyR2(R4496C/+) mice, the 
Purkinje cells were preferentially responsive to drug. In contrast, the RyR2 
blocker tetracaine was equally efficacious in mutant Purkinje cells and 
ventricular myocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Purkinje cells display a greater propensity to develop 
abnormalities in intracellular Ca(2+) handling than ventricular myocytes. This 
proarrhythmic behavior is enhanced by disease-causing mutations in the RyR2 
Ca(2+) release channel and greatly exacerbated by catecholaminergic stimulation, 
with the development of arrhythmogenic triggered beats. These data support the 
concept that Purkinje cells are critical contributors to arrhythmic triggers in 
animal models and humans with CPVT and suggest a broader role for the Purkinje 
fiber network in the genesis of ventricular arrhythmias.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.221481
PMCID: PMC2930621
PMID: 20595652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]