1. J Proteome Res. 2010 Aug 6;9(8):4215-27. doi: 10.1021/pr1005197.

Quantification of beta-catenin signaling components in colon cancer cell lines, 
tissue sections, and microdissected tumor cells using reaction monitoring mass 
spectrometry.

Chen Y(1), Gruidl M, Remily-Wood E, Liu RZ, Eschrich S, Lloyd M, Nasir A, Bui 
MM, Huang E, Shibata D, Yeatman T, Koomen JM.

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute at the University of South 
Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Reaction monitoring mass spectrometry has emerged as a powerful tool for 
targeted detection and quantification of proteins in clinical samples. Here, we 
report the use of gel electrophoresis for protein fractionation and liquid 
chromatography coupled to multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry 
(LC-MRM) screening for quantitative analysis of components from the 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, which contributes to colon tumor formation 
and progression. In silico tools are used to design LC-MRM screens for each 
target protein. Following successful peptide detection, stable isotope labeled 
peptides are synthesized and developed as internal standards. Then, the assays 
are implemented in colon cancer cell lines to achieve detection in minimal 
amounts of cells, compatible with direct translation to clinical specimens. 
Selected assays are compared with qualitative results from immunoblotting 
(Westerns) and translated to individual frozen colon tissue sections and laser 
capture microdissected tumor cells. This LC-MRM platform has been translated 
from in vitro models to clinical specimens, forming the basis for future 
experiments in patient assessment.

DOI: 10.1021/pr1005197
PMCID: PMC2924816
PMID: 20590165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]