1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2010 Aug;43(8):705-11. doi: 
10.1590/s0100-879x2010007500062. Epub 2010 Jul 9.

Promoter region sequence differences in the A and G gamma globin genes of 
Brazilian sickle cell anemia patients.

Barbosa CG(1), Goncalves-Santos NJ, Souza-Ribeiro SB, Moura-Neto JP, Takahashi 
D, Silva DO, Hurtado-Guerrero AF, Reis MG, Goncalves MS.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (CPqGM-FIOCRUZ), 
Salvador, BA, Brasil.

Fetal hemoglobin (HbF), encoded by the HBG2 and HBG1 genes, is the best-known 
genetic modulator of sickle cell anemia, varying dramatically in concentration 
in the blood of these patients. This variation is partially associated with 
polymorphisms located in the promoter region of the HBG2 and HBG1 genes. In 
order to explore known and unknown polymorphisms in these genes, the sequences 
of their promoter regions were screened in sickle cell anemia patients and 
correlated with both their HbF levels and their betaS-globin haplotypes. 
Additionally, the sequences were compared with genes from 2 healthy groups, a 
reference one (N = 104) and an Afro-descendant one (N = 98), to identify 
polymorphisms linked to the ethnic background.The reference group was composed 
by healthy individuals from the general population. Four polymorphisms were 
identified in the promoter region of HBG2 and 8 in the promoter region of HBG1 
among the studied groups. Four novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) 
located at positions -324, -317, -309 and -307 were identified in the reference 
group. A deletion located between -396 and -391 in the HBG2 promoter region and 
the SNP -271 C-->T in the HBG1 promoter region were associated with the Central 
African Republic betaS-globin haplotype. In contrast, the -369 C-->G and 309 
A-->G SNPs in the HBG2 promoter region were correlated to the Benin haplotype. 
The polymorphisms -396_-391 del HBG2, -369 SNP HBG2 and -271 SNP HBG1 correlated 
with HbF levels. Hence, we suggest an important role of HBG2 and HBG1 gene 
polymorphisms on the HbF synthesis.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2010007500062
PMID: 20602015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]