1. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2010 Sep 11;41(1):125-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2010.05.018.
Epub  2010 Jun 18.

In vitro and in vivo pharmacological profile of the 5-benzyl analogue of 
14-methoxymetopon, a novel mu opioid analgesic with reduced propensity to alter 
motor function.

Spetea M(1), Bohotin CR, Asim MF, St√ºbegger K, Schmidhammer H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacy and Center for 
Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, Innrain 52 a, A-6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.

Opioids are the most effective analgesics for pain management, and efficient 
pain control is a therapeutic priority. Herein, we describe the synthesis and 
pharmacological activities of the 5-benzyl analogue of the mu opioid analgesic 
14-methoxymetopon (14-MM). The result of the replacement of the 5-methyl in 
14-MM with a benzyl group on in vitro opioid receptor binding and functional 
profiles, and in vivo behavioural properties, i.e. nociception and motor 
activity, was investigated. In rodent brain membranes, the 5-benzyl derivative 
showed high affinity at the micro opioid receptor and decreased interaction with 
delta and kappa receptors, hence displaying a similar binding profile as 14-MM. 
It displayed potent agonist activity in vitro and in vivo. In in vitro 
guanosine-5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thio)-triphosphate ([(35)S]GTPgammaS) binding assay, it 
activated G-proteins in rat brain membranes through a micro opioid 
receptor-mediated mechanism having significantly enhanced potency compared to 
DAMGO (D-Ala(2),Me-Phe(4),Gly-ol(5)]enkephalin), and to the micro opioid agonist 
morphinans 14-MM, 14-O-methyloxymorphone (14-OMO) and morphine. In vivo, the 
5-benzyl analogue of 14-MM elicited dose-dependent and naloxone-sensitive 
antinociceptive effects in hot-plate and tail-flick tests in mice after 
subcutaneous (s.c.) administration. Its analgesic potency was comparable to 
14-MM, and was 50-fold higher than that of morphine. Contrary to morphine, 14-MM 
and 14-OMO, no motor dysfunction was produced by the new opioid in the mouse 
rotarod test at any of the tested doses. In summary, the 5-benzyl analogue of 
14-MM emerged as a novel potent mu opioid antinociceptive agent with reduced 
propensity to cause unwanted motor impairment.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2010.05.018
PMCID: PMC2954314
PMID: 20600882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]