1. Biochimie. 2010 Sep;92(9):1180-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.06.011. Epub 2010
 Jun 19.

Specificity of calreticulin transacetylase to acetoxy derivatives of 
benzofurans: effect on the activation of platelet nitric oxide synthase.

Gupta A(1), Priya N, Jalal S, Singh P, Chand K, Raj HG, Parmar VS, DePass AL, 
Sharma SK.

Author information:
(1)Bioorganic Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, Delhi 
110 007, India.

Calreticulin Transacetylase (CRTAase) catalyzes the transfer of acetyl group(s) 
from polyphenolic acetates (PAs) to functional proteins, such as Glutathione 
S-transferase (GST), NADPH Cytochrome c reductase and Nitric Oxide Synthase 
(NOS) resulting in the modulation of biological activities. A comparison of the 
specificities of the acetoxy derivatives of coumarins, biscoumarins, chromones, 
flavones, isoflavones and xanthones has been carried out earlier by us with an 
aim to study the effect of nature and position of the acetoxy groups on the 
benzenoid ring and the position of the carbonyl group with respect to 
oxygen/nitrogen heteroatom for the catalytic activity of CRTAase. In this 
communication for the first time, we have studied the influence of differently 
substituted benzofurans on the CRTAase activity to study the effect of the 
replacement of pyran ring of coumarin with furan ring, presence of carbonyl at 
C-3, substitution of C-3 carbonyl group with acetoxy group and presence of 
various substituents (OAc/OH/Cl) on the benzenoid ring. It was observed that 
acetoxy derivatives of benzofurans lead to inhibition of ADP induced platelet 
aggregation by the activation of platelet Nitric Oxide Synthase catalyzed by 
CRTAase. Accordingly, the formation of NO in platelets by 
3-oxo-2,3-dihydrobenzofuran-6,7-diyl diacetate (3a) was found to be comparable 
with that of model polyphenolic acetate (PA), 7,8-diacetoxy-4-methylcoumarin 
(DAMC).

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2010.06.011
PMID: 20600569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]