1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 13;107(28):12640-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1000132107. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Cerebral cavernous malformation protein CCM1 inhibits sprouting angiogenesis by 
activating DELTA-NOTCH signaling.

Wüstehube J(1), Bartol A, Liebler SS, Brütsch R, Zhu Y, Felbor U, Sure U, 
Augustin HG, Fischer A.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology and Tumor Angiogenesis, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg 
University, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany.

Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are frequent vascular abnormalities 
caused by mutations in one of the CCM genes. CCM1 (also known as KRIT1) 
stabilizes endothelial junctions and is essential for vascular morphogenesis in 
mouse embryos. However, cellular functions of CCM1 during the early steps of the 
CCM pathogenesis remain unknown. We show here that CCM1 represents an 
antiangiogenic protein to keep the human endothelium quiescent. CCM1 inhibits 
endothelial proliferation, apoptosis, migration, lumen formation, and sprouting 
angiogenesis in primary human endothelial cells. CCM1 strongly induces 
DLL4-NOTCH signaling, which promotes AKT phosphorylation but reduces 
phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK. Consistently, 
blocking of NOTCH activity alleviates CCM1 effects. ERK phosphorylation is 
increased in human CCM lesions. Transplantation of CCM1-silenced human 
endothelial cells into SCID mice recapitulates hallmarks of the CCM pathology 
and serves as a unique CCM model system. In this setting, the multikinase 
inhibitor Sorafenib can ameliorate loss of CCM1-induced excessive microvascular 
growth, reducing the microvessel density to levels of normal wild-type 
endothelial cells. Collectively, our data suggest that the origin of CCM lesions 
is caused by perturbed Notch signaling-induced excessive capillary sprouting, 
which can be therapeutically targeted.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1000132107
PMCID: PMC2906569
PMID: 20616044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.