1. Metabolism. 2011 Jan;60(1):114-20. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.05.011.

Expression of the selenoprotein S (SELS) gene in subcutaneous adipose tissue and 
SELS genotype are associated with metabolic risk factors.

Olsson M(1), Olsson B, Jacobson P, Thelle DS, Björkegren J, Walley A, Froguel P, 
Carlsson LM, Sjöholm K.

Author information:
(1)Sahlgrenska Center for Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Department of 
Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Institute of Medicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, S-41345 Gothenburg, Sweden.

The selenoprotein S (SELS) is a putative receptor for serum amyloid A, and 
recent studies have suggested that SELS may be a link between type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and inflammation. Genetic studies of SELS polymorphisms have revealed 
associations with circulating levels of inflammatory markers and hard end points 
of cardiovascular disease. In this study, we analyzed SELS expression in 
subcutaneous adipose tissue and SELS genotype in relation to metabolic risk 
factors. DNA microarray expression analysis was used to study the expression of 
SELS in lean and obese siblings from the Swedish Obese Subjects Sib Pair Study. 
TaqMan genotyping was used to analyze 3 polymorphisms, previously found to be 
associated with circulating levels of inflammatory markers, in the INTERGENE 
case-control study of myocardial infarction and unstable angina pectoris. 
Possible associations between SELS genotype and/or expression with anthropometry 
and measures of metabolic status were investigated. Real-time polymerase chain 
reaction was used to analyze the SELS expression in isolated human adipocytes 
incubated with insulin. In lean subjects, we found correlations between SELS 
gene expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue and measures of obesity (waist, P 
= .045; sagittal diameter, P = .031) and blood pressure (diastolic, P = .016; 
systolic P = .015); and in obese subjects, we found correlations with measures 
of obesity (body mass index, P = .03; sagittal diameter, P = .008) and glycemic 
control (homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance, P = .011; insulin, 
P = .009) after adjusting for age and sex. The 5227GG genotype was associated 
with serum levels of insulin (P = .006) and homeostasis model assessment of 
insulin resistance (P = .007). The expression of SELS increased after insulin 
stimulation in isolated human adipocytes (P = .008). In this study, we found an 
association between both SELS gene expression in adipose tissue and SELS 
genotype with measures of glycemic control. In vitro studies demonstrated that 
the SELS gene is regulated by insulin in human subcutaneous adipocytes. This 
study further supports a role for SELS in the development of metabolic disease, 
especially in the context of insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.05.011
PMCID: PMC3004038
PMID: 20619427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]