1. J Mol Diagn. 2010 Sep;12(5):705-11. doi: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100018. Epub 2010
 Jul 8.

The use of COLD-PCR and high-resolution melting analysis improves the limit of 
detection of KRAS and BRAF mutations in colorectal cancer.

Mancini I(1), Santucci C, Sestini R, Simi L, Pratesi N, Cianchi F, Valanzano R, 
Pinzani P, Orlando C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2011 Mar;13(2):243; author reply 244. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmoldx.2010.09.005.

Fast and reliable tests to detect mutations in human cancers are required to 
better define clinical samples and orient targeted therapies. KRAS mutations 
occur in 30-50% of colorectal cancers (CRCs) and represent a marker of clinical 
resistance to cetuximab therapy. In addition, the BRAF V600E is mutated in about 
10% of CRCs, and the development of a specific inhibitor of mutant BRAF kinase 
has prompted a growing interest in BRAF (V600E) detection. Traditional methods, 
such as PCR and direct sequencing, do not detect low-level mutations in cancer, 
resulting in false negative diagnoses. In this study, we designed a protocol to 
detect mutations of KRAS and BRAF(V600E) in 117 sporadic CRCs based on 
coamplification at lower denaturation temperature PCR (COLD-PCR) and 
high-resolution melting (HRM). Using traditional PCR and direct sequencing, we 
found KRAS mutations in 47 (40%) patients and BRAF(V600E) in 10 (8.5%). The use 
of COLD-PCR in apparently wild-type samples allowed us to identify 15 newly 
mutated CRCs (10 for KRAS and 5 for BRAF (V600E)), raising the percentage of 
mutated CRCs to 48.7% for KRAS and to 12.8% for BRAF (V600E). Therefore, 
COLD-PCR combined with HRM permits the correct identification of less 
represented mutations in CRC and better selection of patients eligible for 
targeted therapies, without requiring expensive and time-consuming procedures.

DOI: 10.2353/jmoldx.2010.100018
PMCID: PMC2928436
PMID: 20616366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]