1. Neuro Oncol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1193-9. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq076. Epub 2010 Jul
 13.

EGFR mutation status and survival after diagnosis of brain metastasis in 
nonsmall cell lung cancer.

Eichler AF(1), Kahle KT, Wang DL, Joshi VA, Willers H, Engelman JA, Lynch TJ, 
Sequist LV.

Author information:
(1)Pappas Center for Neuro-Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit 
Street, Yawkey 9E, Boston, MA 02114, USA. aeichler@partners.org

A small subset of patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbors 
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) that predict unique 
sensitivity to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). The characteristics and 
behavior of brain metastases (BMs) in these patients have not been well 
described. The longitudinal records of all NSCLC patients who underwent EGFR 
mutation screening at our center from August 2004 to November 2008 were reviewed 
for eligibility, and 93 patients were identified who developed BM during the 
course of their disease. Survival was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method 
and the log-rank test. Multivariable predictors were assessed via the Cox 
proportional hazards model. Among the 93 patients with BM, 41 (44%) had 
mutations in EGFR, including 13 exon 19 deletions and 12 L858R mutations. 
Eighty-three percent of patients with BM were treated initially with whole brain 
radiation, either alone (53%) or in combination with craniotomy for 
neurosurgical resection (22%) or stereotactic radiosurgery (8%). Median survival 
from the time of BM was 11.7 months and was longer for patients with an EGFR 
mutation (14.5 vs 7.6 months, P = .09). On multivariable analysis, EGFR mutation 
(HR: 0.50, 95% CI: 0.30-0.82), age (HR: 1.03, 95% CI: 1.00-1.05), and active 
extracranial disease (HR: 3.30, 95% CI: 1.70-6.41) were independently associated 
with survival. In NSCLC patients with BM, EGFR mutation status is associated 
with improved survival, independent of age, functional status, extracranial 
disease status, and number of BMs.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noq076
PMCID: PMC3098020
PMID: 20627894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]