1. Clin Lung Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;11(4):228-37. doi: 10.3816/CLC.2010.n.029.

Targeting the immune system in non-small-cell lung cancer: bridging the gap 
between promising concept and therapeutic reality.

Kelly RJ(1), Gulley JL, Giaccone G.

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Developing effective immunotherapy for lung cancer is a daunting but hugely 
attractive challenge. Until recently, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was 
thought of as a nonimmunogenic tumor, but there is now evidence highlighting the 
integral role played by both inflammatory and immunologic responses in lung 
carcinogenesis. Despite recent encouraging preclinical and phase I/II data, 
there are a paucity of phase III trials showing a clear clinical benefit for 
vaccines in lung cancer. There are many difficulties to overcome before the 
development of a successful therapy. Perhaps a measurable immune response may 
not translate into a clinically meaningful or radiologic response. Patient 
selection may also be a problem for ongoing clinical studies. The majority of 
trials for lung cancer vaccines are focused on patients with an advanced stage 
of the disease; however, the ideal candidates may be patients with a lower tumor 
burden and stage I or II disease. Selecting the exact antigens to target is also 
difficult. It will likely require multiple epitopes of a diverse set of genes 
restricted to multiple haplotypes to generate a truly effective vaccine that is 
able to overcome the various immunologic escape mechanisms that tumors use. This 
review discusses the most promising active immunotherapy using protein/peptide 
vaccines, whole cell vaccines, and dendritic cell vaccines and examines current 
phase I and II clinical trial data on some novel nonspecific immunomodulating 
agents.

DOI: 10.3816/CLC.2010.n.029
PMCID: PMC3474196
PMID: 20630824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]