1. Dev Biol. 2010 Sep 15;345(2):191-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.009. Epub 
2010 Jul 14.

Pinin modulates expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, Cdx2, and plays an 
essential role for small intestinal morphogenesis.

Joo JH(1), Taxter TJ, Munguba GC, Kim YH, Dhaduvai K, Dunn NW, Degan WJ, Oh SP, 
Sugrue SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Pinin (Pnn), a nuclear speckle-associated protein, has been shown to function in 
maintenance of epithelial integrity through altering expression of several key 
adhesion molecules. Here we demonstrate that Pnn plays a crucial role in small 
intestinal development by influencing expression of an intestinal homeobox gene, 
Cdx2. Conditional inactivation of Pnn within intestinal epithelia resulted in 
significant downregulation of a caudal type homeobox gene, Cdx2, leading to 
obvious villus dysmorphogenesis and severely disrupted epithelial 
differentiation. Additionally, in Pnn-deficient small intestine, we observed 
upregulated Tcf/Lef reporter activity, as well as misregulated 
expression/distribution of beta-catenin and Tcf4. Since regulation of Cdx gene 
expression has been closely linked to Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activity, we 
explored the possibility of Pnn's interaction with beta-catenin, a major 
effector of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Co-immunoprecipitation assays 
revealed that Pnn, together with its interaction partner CtBP2, a 
transcriptional co-repressor, was in a complex with beta-catenin. Moreover, both 
of these proteins were found to be recruited to the proximal promoter area of 
Cdx2. Taken together, our results suggest that Pnn is essential for tight 
regulation of Wnt signaling and Cdx2 expression during small intestinal 
development.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.009
PMCID: PMC2949054
PMID: 20637749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]