1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 3;285(36):27532-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.159491. Epub
2010  Jul 18.

Loss of function of transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) genetic 
variant is associated with lower risk of active childhood asthma.

Cantero-Recasens G(1), Gonzalez JR, Fandos C, Duran-Tauleria E, Smit LA, 
Kauffmann F, Ant√≥ JM, Valverde MA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Physiology and Channelopathies, Department of 
Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08003, 
Spain.

Transient receptor potential cation channels of the vanilloid subfamily (TRPV) 
participate in the generation of Ca(2+) signals at different locations of the 
respiratory system, thereby controlling its correct functioning. TRPV1 
expression and activity appear to be altered under pathophysiological conditions 
such as chronic cough and airway hypersensitivity, whereas TRPV4 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. However, to date, there is no information about the genetic impact of 
either TRPV1 or TRPV4 on asthma pathophysiology. We now report on the 
association of two functional SNPs, TRPV1-I585V and TRPV4-P19S, with childhood 
asthma. Both SNPs were genotyped in a population of 470 controls without 
respiratory symptoms and 301 asthmatics. Although none of the SNPs modified the 
risk of suffering from asthma, carriers of the TRPV1-I585V genetic variant 
showed a lower risk of current wheezing (odds ratio = 0.51; p = 0.01), a 
characteristic of active asthma, or cough (odds ratio = 0.57; p = 0.02). 
Functional analysis of TRPV1-I585V, using the Ca(2+)-sensitive dye fura-2 to 
measure intracellular [Ca(2+)] concentrations, revealed a decreased channel 
activity in response to two typical TRPV1 stimuli, heat and capsaicin. On the 
other hand, TRPV4-P19S, despite its loss-of-channel function, showed no 
significant association with asthma or the presence of wheezing. Our data 
suggest that genetically determined level of TRPV1 activity is relevant for 
asthma pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C110.159491
PMCID: PMC2934619
PMID: 20639579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]