1. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jul 19;10:377. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-377.

Expression profile and specific network features of the apoptotic machinery 
explain relapse of acute myeloid leukemia after chemotherapy.

Ragusa M(1), Avola G, Angelica R, Barbagallo D, Guglielmino MR, Duro LR, 
Majorana A, Statello L, Salito L, Consoli C, Camuglia MG, Di Pietro C, Milone G, 
Purrello M.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze BioMediche, Unit√† di BioMedicina Molecolare Genomica 
e dei Sistemi Complessi, Genetica, Biologia Computazionale G Sichel, Via Santa 
Sofia 87, 95123 Catania, Italy, EU.

BACKGROUND: According to the different sensitivity of their bone marrow CD34+ 
cells to in vitro treatment with Etoposide or Mafosfamide, Acute Myeloid 
Leukaemia (AML) patients in apparent complete remission (CR) after chemotherapy 
induction may be classified into three groups: (i) normally responsive; (ii) 
chemoresistant; (iii) highly chemosensitive. This inversely correlates with in 
vivo CD34+ mobilization and, interestingly, also with the prognosis of the 
disease: patients showing a good mobilizing activity are resistant to 
chemotherapy and subject to significantly higher rates of Minimal Residual 
Disease (MRD) and relapse than the others. Based on its known role in patients' 
response to chemotherapy, we hypothesized an involvement of the Apoptotic 
Machinery (AM) in these phenotypic features.
METHODS: To investigate the molecular bases of the differential chemosensitivity 
of bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in CR AML patients, and the 
relationship between chemosensitivity, mobilizing activity and relapse rates, we 
analyzed their AM expression profile by performing Real Time RT-PCR of 84 AM 
genes in CD34+ pools from the two extreme classes of patients (i.e., 
chemoresistant and highly chemosensitive), and compared them with normal 
controls.
RESULTS: The AM expression profiles of patients highlighted features that could 
satisfactorily explain their in vitro chemoresponsive phenotype: specifically, 
in chemoresistant patients we detected up regulation of antiapoptotic BIRC genes 
and down regulation of proapoptotic APAF1, FAS, FASL, TNFRSF25. Interestingly, 
our analysis of the AM network showed that the dysregulated genes in these 
patients are characterized by high network centrality (i.e., high values of 
betweenness, closeness, radiality, stress) and high involvement in drug 
response.
CONCLUSIONS: AM genes represent critical nodes for the proper execution of cell 
death following pharmacological induction in patients. We propose that their 
dysregulation (either due to inborn or de novo genomic mutations selected by 
treatment) could cause a relapse in apparent CR AML patients. Based on this, AM 
profiling before chemotherapy and transplantation could identify patients with a 
predisposing genotype to MRD and relapse: accordingly, they should undergo a 
different, specifically tailored, therapeutic regimen and should be carefully 
checked during the post-treatment period.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-377
PMCID: PMC2914706
PMID: 20642818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]