1. Target Oncol. 2010 Jun;5(2):75-84. doi: 10.1007/s11523-010-0144-7. Epub 2010
Jul  20.

Emerging molecular classification in renal cell carcinoma: implications for drug 
development.

Hacker KE(1), Rathmell WK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 450 West Drive, CB 7295, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

In the past decade, progress has been made in the development of targeted 
therapies for advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC). However, as multiple 
therapeutic choices become available to clinicians, we currently lack effective 
indicators that allow physicians to choose the best treatment option for 
specific patients. For approved targeted therapies, potential molecules that 
could indicate drug effectiveness in a specific tumor follow naturally from both 
the therapeutic mechanism and the previously elucidated tumor biology. However, 
in advanced RCC, the use of these molecules as biomarkers for treatment 
selection has shown equivocal results and requires further investigation. In 
addition to looking at specific molecular targets, subclassification of tumors 
based on their molecular characteristics may also allow stratification of 
patients based on therapeutic benefits, providing information for treatment 
selection. Furthermore, the continued development of such tumor classification 
schemes will hopefully uncover other molecular targets that warrant development 
as future RCC therapies. The use of molecular classification of patients' tumors 
for treatment selection will provide the opportunity to increase the 
effectiveness of currently available therapies for advanced RCC and to 
judiciously pursue promising options for future RCC therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/s11523-010-0144-7
PMCID: PMC3392717
PMID: 20645016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]