1. J Mol Signal. 2010 Jul 19;5:10. doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-5-10.

Inhibition of PI3K/AKT and MAPK/ERK pathways causes activation of FOXO 
transcription factor, leading to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in pancreatic 
cancer.

Roy SK(1), Srivastava RK, Shankar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Kansas 
Cancer Center, The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, 
Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. sshankar@kumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian forkhead members of the class O (FOXO) transcription 
factors, including FOXO1, FOXO3a, and FOXO4, are implicated in the regulation of 
several biological processes, including the stress resistance, metabolism, cell 
cycle, apoptosis and DNA repair. The objectives of this study were to examine 
the molecular mechanisms by which FOXO transcription factors induced cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis and enhanced anti-proliferative effects of sulforaphane 
(SFN, an active compound in cruciferous vegetables) in pancreatic cancer cells.
RESULTS: Our data demonstrated that SFN inhibited cell proliferation and colony 
formation, and induced apoptosis through caspase-3 activation in pancreatic 
cancer cells. The inhibition of PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways activated FOXO 
transcription factors. SFN inhibited phosphorylation of AKT and ERK, and 
activated FOXO transcription factors, leading to cell cycle arrest and 
apoptosis. Phosphorylation deficient mutants of FOXO proteins enhanced FOXO 
transcriptional activity, and further enhanced SFN-induced FOXO activity and 
apoptosis. SFN induced the expression of p21/CIP1 and p27/KIP1, and inhibited 
the expression of cyclin D1.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that inhibition of PI3K/AKT and ERK pathways acts 
together to activate FOXO transcription factor and enhances SFN-induced FOXO 
transcriptional activity, leading to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-2187-5-10
PMCID: PMC2915986
PMID: 20642839