1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;44(6):787-93. doi:
10.1165/rcmb.2009-0418OC.  Epub 2010 Jul 23.

Thymic stromal lymphopoietin gene promoter polymorphisms are associated with 
susceptibility to bronchial asthma.

Harada M(1), Hirota T, Jodo AI, Hitomi Y, Sakashita M, Tsunoda T, Miyagawa T, 
Doi S, Kameda M, Fujita K, Miyatake A, Enomoto T, Noguchi E, Masuko H, Sakamoto 
T, Hizawa N, Suzuki Y, Yoshihara S, Adachi M, Ebisawa M, Saito H, Matsumoto K, 
Nakajima T, Mathias RA, Rafaels N, Barnes KC, Himes BE, Duan QL, Tantisira KG, 
Weiss ST, Nakamura Y, Ziegler SF, Tamari M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Respiratory Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, Institute 
of Physical and Chemical Research, Kanagawa, Japan.

Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) triggers dendritic cell--mediated T helper 
(Th) 2 inflammatory responses. A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 
rs3806933, in the promoter region of the TSLP gene creates a binding site for 
the transcription factor activating protein (AP)-1. The variant enhances AP-1 
binding to the regulatory element, and increases the promoter--reporter activity 
of TSLP in response to polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) stimulation 
in normal human bronchial epithelium (NHBE). We investigated whether 
polymorphisms including the SNP rs3806933 could affect the susceptibility to and 
clinical phenotypes of bronchial asthma. We selected three representative (i.e., 
Tag) SNPs and conducted association studies of the TSLP gene, using two 
independent populations (639 patients with childhood atopic asthma and 838 
control subjects, and 641 patients with adult asthma and 376 control subjects, 
respectively). We further examined the effects of corticosteroids and a 
long-acting Î²(2)-agonist (salmeterol) on the expression levels of the TSLP gene 
in response to poly(I:C) in NHBE. We found that the promoter polymorphisms 
rs3806933 and rs2289276 were significantly associated with disease 
susceptibility in both childhood atopic and adult asthma. The functional SNP 
rs3806933 was associated with asthma (meta-analysis, P = 0.000056; odds ratio, 
1.29; 95% confidence interval, 1.14-1.47). A genotype of rs2289278 was 
correlated with pulmonary function. Moreover, the induction of TSLP mRNA and 
protein expression induced by poly(I:C) in NHBE was synergistically impaired by 
a corticosteroid and salmeterol. TSLP variants are significantly associated with 
bronchial asthma and pulmonary function. Thus, TSLP may serve as a therapeutic 
target molecule for combination therapy.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0418OC
PMCID: PMC3159073
PMID: 20656951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]