1. J Neurosci. 2010 Jul 21;30(29):9929-38. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1714-10.2010.

Defective GABAergic neurotransmission and pharmacological rescue of neuronal 
hyperexcitability in the amygdala in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome.

Olmos-Serrano JL(1), Paluszkiewicz SM, Martin BS, Kaufmann WE, Corbin JG, 
Huntsman MM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington DC, 20010, USA.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
variable cognitive impairment and behavioral disturbances such as exaggerated 
fear, anxiety and gaze avoidance. Consistent with this, findings from human 
brain imaging studies suggest dysfunction of the amygdala. Underlying 
alterations in amygdala synaptic function in the Fmr1 knock-out (KO) mouse model 
of FXS, however, remain largely unexplored. Utilizing a combination of 
approaches, we uncover profound alterations in inhibitory neurotransmission in 
the amygdala of Fmr1 KO mice. We demonstrate a dramatic reduction in the 
frequency and amplitude of phasic IPSCs, tonic inhibitory currents, as well as 
in the number of inhibitory synapses in Fmr1 KO mice. Furthermore, we observe 
significant alterations in GABA availability, both intracellularly and at the 
synaptic cleft. Together, these findings identify abnormalities in basal and 
action potential-dependent inhibitory neurotransmission. Additionally, we reveal 
a significant neuronal hyperexcitability in principal neurons of the amygdala in 
Fmr1 KO mice, which is strikingly rescued by pharmacological augmentation of 
tonic inhibitory tone using the GABA agonist gaboxadol (THIP). Thus, our study 
reveals relevant inhibitory synaptic abnormalities in the amygdala in the Fmr1 
KO brain and supports the notion that pharmacological approaches targeting the 
GABAergic system may be a viable therapeutic approach toward correcting 
amygdala-based symptoms in FXS.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1714-10.2010
PMCID: PMC2948869
PMID: 20660275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]