1. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Sep 15;68(6):578-85. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.05.038.  Epub 2010 Jul 31.

Genome-wide association-, replication-, and neuroimaging study implicates HOMER1 
in the etiology of major depression.

Rietschel M(1), Mattheisen M, Frank J, Treutlein J, Degenhardt F, Breuer R, 
Steffens M, Mier D, Esslinger C, Walter H, Kirsch P, Erk S, Schnell K, Herms S, 
Wichmann HE, Schreiber S, Jöckel KH, Strohmaier J, Roeske D, Haenisch B, Gross 
M, Hoefels S, Lucae S, Binder EB, Wienker TF, Schulze TG, Schmäl C, Zimmer A, 
Juraeva D, Brors B, Bettecken T, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Müller-Myhsok B, Maier W, 
Nöthen MM, Cichon S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
marcella.rietschel@zi-mannheim.de

Comment on
    Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;15(6):589-601. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.131.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies are a powerful tool for unravelling 
the genetic background of complex disorders such as major depression.
METHODS: We conducted a genome-wide association study of 604 patients with major 
depression and 1364 population based control subjects. The top hundred findings 
were followed up in a replication sample of 409 patients and 541 control 
subjects.
RESULTS: Two SNPs showed nominally significant association in both the 
genome-wide association study and the replication samples: 1) rs9943849 
(p(combined) = 3.24E-6) located upstream of the carboxypeptidase M (CPM) gene 
and 2) rs7713917 (p(combined) = 1.48E-6), located in a putative regulatory 
region of HOMER1. Further evidence for HOMER1 was obtained through gene-wide 
analysis while conditioning on the genotypes of rs7713917 (p(combined) = 
4.12E-3). Homer1 knockout mice display behavioral traits that are paradigmatic 
of depression, and transcriptional variants of Homer1 result in the 
dysregulation of cortical-limbic circuitry. This is consistent with the findings 
of our subsequent human imaging genetics study, which revealed that variation in 
single nucleotide polymorphism rs7713917 had a significant influence on 
prefrontal activity during executive cognition and anticipation of reward.
CONCLUSION: Our findings, combined with evidence from preclinical and animal 
studies, suggest that HOMER1 plays a role in the etiology of major depression 
and that the genetic variation affects depression via the dysregulation of 
cognitive and motivational processes.

2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.05.038
PMID: 20673876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]