1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1126-33. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22712.

Initial testing (stage 1) of the multi-targeted kinase inhibitor sorafenib by 
the pediatric preclinical testing program.

Keir ST(1), Maris JM, Lock R, Kolb EA, Gorlick R, Carol H, Morton CL, Reynolds 
CP, Kang MH, Watkins A, Houghton PJ, Smith MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The Preston Robert Tisch Brain Tumor Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. keir0001@mc.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Sorafenib is an inhibitor of multiple kinases (e.g., VEGF receptors, 
PDGFR, FLT3, RET, BRAF, KIT) and is approved by FDA for treatment of two adult 
cancers. The activity of sorafenib was evaluated against the PPTP's in vitro and 
in vivo panels.
PROCEDURES: Sorafenib was evaluated against the PPTP in vitro panel using 96-hr 
exposure at concentrations ranging from 1.0 nM to 10.0 µM. It was tested against 
the PPTP in vivo panels at a dose of 60 mg/kg administered by oral gavage daily 
for 5 days per week, repeated for 6 weeks.
RESULTS: In vitro sorafenib demonstrated cytotoxic activity, with a median 
IC(50) value of 4.3 µM. Twenty of 23 cell lines had IC(50) values between 1.0 
and 10.0 µM. A single cell line (Kasumi-1) with an activating KIT mutation had 
an IC(50) value < 1.0 µM (IC(50) = 0.02 µM). In vivo sorafenib induced 
significant differences in event-free survival (EFS) distribution compared to 
control in 27 of 36 (75%) of the evaluable solid tumor xenografts and in 1 of 8 
(12.5%) of the evaluable ALL xenografts. Sorafenib induced tumor growth 
inhibition meeting criteria for intermediate activity (EFS T/C) in 15 of 34 
(44%) evaluable solid tumor xenografts. No xenografts achieved an objective 
response.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary in vitro activity of sorafenib was noted at 
concentrations above 1 µM, with the exception of a more sensitive cell line with 
an activating KIT mutation. The primary in vivo effect for sorafenib was tumor 
growth inhibition, which was observed across multiple histotypes.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.22712
PMCID: PMC3823056
PMID: 20672370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]