1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2010 Sep;76(18):6180-5. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01242-10.
Epub  2010 Jul 30.

Prolyl aminopeptidase from Streptomyces thermoluteus subsp. fuscus strain 
NBRC14270 and synthesis of proline-containing peptides by its S144C variant.

Yamamoto Y(1), Usuki H, Iwabuchi M, Hatanaka T.

Author information:
(1)Okayama Prefectural Technology Center for Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries, Research Institute for Biological Sciences (RIBS), Kaga-gun, Okayama 
716-1241, Japan.

We specifically examined an exopeptidase, prolyl aminopeptidase (PAP), as a 
target for synthesis of proline-containing peptides. A PAP from Streptomyces 
thermoluteus subsp. fuscus NBRC14270 (PAP14270) was obtained using 
sequence-based screening. From PAP14270, 144Ser was replaced by Cys (scPAP14270) 
to give aminolysis activity. In contrast to wild-type PAP14270, scPAP14270 
produced a polymer of proline benzyl ester and cyclo[Pro-Pro]. The product mass 
was confirmed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS). Several 
factors affecting the reaction, such as the pH, concentration of the substrate, 
and reaction time, were measured to determine their effects. Furthermore, a 
correlation was found between substrate specificity in proline peptide synthesis 
and the log D value of acyl acceptors in aminolysis catalyzed by scPAP14270. 
Results showed that dipeptide synthesis proceeded in a weakly acidic environment 
and that cyclization and polymerization occurred under alkaline conditions. 
Furthermore, results suggest that almost all amino acid esters whose log D value 
is greater than 0, except hydroxyproline benzyl ester (Hyp-OBzl), can be 
recognized as acyl acceptors. These findings support the use of PAPs as a tool 
for production of physiologically active proline peptides.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01242-10
PMCID: PMC2937496
PMID: 20675455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]