1. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Jul 29;11:60. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-60.

Multiple domains in the Crumbs Homolog 2a (Crb2a) protein are required for 
regulating rod photoreceptor size.

Hsu YC(1), Jensen AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vertebrate retinal photoreceptors are morphologically complex cells 
that have two apical regions, the inner segment and the outer segment. The outer 
segment is a modified cilium and is continuously regenerated throughout life. 
The molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie vertebrate photoreceptor 
morphogenesis and the maintenance of the outer segment are largely unknown. The 
Crumbs (Crb) complex is a key regulator of apical membrane identity and size in 
epithelia and in Drosophila photoreceptors. Mutations in the human gene CRUMBS 
HOMOLOG 1 (CRB1) are associated with early and severe vision loss. Drosophila 
Crumbs and vertebrate Crb1 and Crumbs homolog 2 (Crb2) proteins are structurally 
similar, all are single pass transmembrane proteins with a large extracellular 
domain containing multiple laminin- and EGF-like repeats and a small 
intracellular domain containing a FERM-binding domain and a PDZ-binding domain. 
In order to begin to understand the role of the Crb family of proteins in 
vertebrate photoreceptors we generated stable transgenic zebrafish in which rod 
photoreceptors overexpress full-length Crb2a protein and several other Crb2a 
constructs engineered to lack specific domains.
RESULTS: We examined the localization of Crb2a constructs and their effects on 
rod morphology. We found that only the full-length Crb2a protein approximated 
the normal localization of Crb2a protein apical to adherens junctions in the 
photoreceptor inner segment. Several Crb2a construct proteins localized 
abnormally to the outer segment and one construct localized abnormally to the 
cell body. Overexpression of full-length Crb2a greatly increased inner segment 
size while expression of several other constructs increased outer segment size.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that particular domains in Crb2a regulate 
its localization and thus may regulate its regionalized function. Our results 
also suggest that the PDZ-binding domain in Crb2a might bring a protein(s) into 
the Crb complex that alters the function of the FERM-binding domain.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-60
PMCID: PMC2927502
PMID: 20670434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]