1. Metabolomics. 2010 Sep;6(3):451-465. doi: 10.1007/s11306-010-0218-7. Epub 2010
 May 27.

Metabolomic and transcriptomic analysis of the rice response to the bacterial 
blight pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae.

Sana TR, Fischer S, Wohlgemuth G, Katrekar A, Jung KH, Ronald PC, Fiehn O.

Bacterial leaf blight (BLB), caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), 
gives rise to devastating crop losses in rice. Disease resistant rice cultivars 
are the most economical way to combat the disease. The TP309 cultivar is 
susceptible to infection by Xoo strain PXO99. A transgenic variety, TP309_Xa21, 
expresses the pattern recognition receptor Xa21, and is resistant. PXO99 big up 
tri, openraxST, a strain lacking the raxST gene, is able to overcome 
Xa21-mediated immunity. We used a single extraction solvent to demonstrate 
comprehensive metabolomics and transcriptomics profiling under sample limited 
conditions, and analyze the molecular responses of two rice lines challenged 
with either PXO99 or PXO99 big up tri, openraxST. LC-TOF raw data file filtering 
resulted in better within group reproducibility of replicate samples for 
statistical analyses. Accurate mass match compound identification with molecular 
formula generation (MFG) ranking of 355 masses was achieved with the METLIN 
database. GC-TOF analysis yielded an additional 441 compounds after BinBase 
database processing, of which 154 were structurally identified by retention 
index/MS library matching. Multivariate statistics revealed that the susceptible 
and resistant genotypes possess distinct profiles. Although few mRNA and 
metabolite differences were detected in PXO99 challenged TP309 compared to mock, 
many differential changes occurred in the Xa21-mediated response to PXO99 and 
PXO99 big up tri, openraxST. Acetophenone, xanthophylls, fatty acids, alkaloids, 
glutathione, carbohydrate and lipid biosynthetic pathways were affected. 
Significant transcriptional induction of several pathogenesis related genes in 
Xa21 challenged strains, as well as differential changes to GAD, PAL, ICL1 and 
Glutathione-S-transferase transcripts indicated limited correlation with 
metabolite changes under single time point global profiling conditions. 
ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: The online version of this article 
(doi:10.1007/s11306-010-0218-7) contains supplementary material, which is 
available to authorized users.

DOI: 10.1007/s11306-010-0218-7
PMCID: PMC2899020
PMID: 20676379

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declare that they have no 
competing interests.