1. Biochemistry. 2010 Aug 24;49(33):6984-91. doi: 10.1021/bi100727y.

Volume exclusion and soft interaction effects on protein stability under crowded 
conditions.

Miklos AC(1), Li C, Sharaf NG, Pielak GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina 27599, USA.

Most proteins function in nature under crowded conditions, and crowding can 
change protein properties. Quantification of crowding effects, however, is 
difficult because solutions containing hundreds of grams of macromolecules per 
liter often interfere with the observation of the protein being studied. Models 
for macromolecular crowding tend to focus on the steric effects of crowders, 
neglecting potential chemical interactions between the crowder and the test 
protein. Here, we report the first systematic, quantitative, residue-level study 
of crowding effects on the equilibrium stability of a globular protein. We used 
a system comprising poly(vinylpyrrolidone)s (PVPs) of varying molecular weights 
as crowding agents and chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 (CI2) as a small globular test 
protein. Stability was quantified with NMR-detected amide (1)H exchange. We 
analyzed the data in terms of hard particle exclusion, confinement, and soft 
interactions. For all crowded conditions, nearly every observed residue 
experiences a stabilizing effect. The exceptions are residues for which 
stabilities are unchanged. At a PVP concentration of 100 g/L, the data are 
consistent with theories of hard particle exclusion. At higher concentrations, 
the data are more consistent with confinement. The data show that the crowder 
also stabilizes the test protein by weakly binding its native state. We conclude 
that the role of native-state binding and other soft interactions needs to be 
seriously considered when applying both theory and experiment to studies of 
macromolecular crowding.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100727y
PMCID: PMC2927838
PMID: 20672856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]