1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Oct;30(10):1976-82. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.212415. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Phosphorylation of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2-interacting protein 1 
tyrosine 392 is required for phospholipase C-gamma activation and podosome 
formation in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Wang J(1), Yin G, Menon P, Pang J, Smolock EM, Yan C, Berk BC.

Author information:
(1)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Medicine, University 
of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. 
bradford_berk@urmc.rochester.edu

OBJECTIVE: Podosomes, which are actin-rich structures, contribute to cell 
motility, matrix remodeling, and tissue remodeling. We have shown that G 
protein-coupled receptor kinase 2-interacting protein 1 (GIT1) colocalizes with 
podosomes and is important in podosome formation in endothelial cells. Src 
stimulates GIT1 tyrosine phosphorylation, which is critical for phospholipase 
C-γ (PLCγ) activation. In this study, we identified specific GIT1 tyrosines 
required for PLCγ activation and podosome formation in vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate (PDBU) to induce podosomes 
in A7r5 VSMC. GIT1 colocalized with podosomes and GIT1 knockdown using short 
interfering RNA significantly reduced podosome formation. PDBU stimulated GIT1 
tyrosine phosphorylation. GIT1 tyrosine phosphorylation was dramatically 
decreased in SYF-/- cells, and it was also reduced by pretreatment with the 
protein kinase C (PKC) and Src inhibitors, suggesting that GIT1 phosphorylation 
was dependent on PKC and Src. By mutation analysis of multiple tyrosines, we 
found that PDBU specifically increased GIT1-Y392 phosphorylation. Overexpression 
of GIT1 (Y392F) but not of GIT1 (Y321F) decreased PDBU-mediated PLCγ activation 
and podosome formation without effect on extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
1/2 activation. Additionally, we provide evidence that GIT1 knockout VSMC have 
markedly fewer podosomes on PDBU treatment compared with wild-type VSMC. These 
data show that GIT1 is a key regulator of podosome formation in VSMC.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our data suggest that GIT1-Y392 phosphorylation is 
critical for PDBU-induced podosome formation by regulating PLCγ activation. We 
propose that specific signaling modules are assembled in a GIT1 
phosphotyrosine-dependent manner as exemplified by PLCγ activation versus 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 activation.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.212415
PMCID: PMC2941990
PMID: 20689073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]