1. Immunogenetics. 2010 Sep;62(9):633-9. doi: 10.1007/s00251-010-0463-y. Epub
2010  Aug 4.

Development of a DNA microarray for detection of expressed equine classical MHC 
class I sequences in a defined population.

Ramsay JD(1), Leib SR, Orfe L, Call DR, Tallmadge RL, Fraser DG, Mealey RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State 
University, Pullman, WA 99164-7040, USA.

Development of an accurate and efficient molecular-based equine MHC class I 
typing method would facilitate the study of T lymphocyte immune responses in 
horses. Here, a DNA microarray was designed to detect expressed classical MHC 
class I genes comprising serologically defined equine leukocyte antigen (ELA)-A 
haplotypes represented in a closed Arabian horse breeding herd. Initially, 
cloning and sequencing of RT-PCR products were used to identify sequences 
associated with the ELA-A1, A4, and W11 haplotypes, and one undefined haplotype, 
in six horses. Subsequently, sequence-specific, conserved (positive control), 
and random nucleotide (negative control) 23- to 27-mer oligonucleotide 
microarray probes were designed and spotted onto an epoxy-coated masked slide 
using a robotic arrayer. Bulk RT-PCR products from each horse were biotinylated 
by nick translation, hybridized to the array, and detected using tyramide signal 
amplification. The microarray consistently detected eight of nine classical MHC 
class I transcripts and allowed ELA haplotypic associations to be made. Cloning 
and sequencing of RT-PCR products were then performed in a group of ELA 
disparate horses and ponies, in which six novel sequences were identified. This 
group was used to determine the specificity of the array. Overall, the 
microarray was more efficient than cloning and sequencing for detecting 
expressed classical MHC class I sequences in this defined population of horses, 
and was significantly more specific than serology. These results confirmed the 
utility of a microarray-based method for high-resolution MHC class I typing in 
the horse. With additional probes the array could be useful in a broader 
population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-010-0463-y
PMCID: PMC3359745
PMID: 20683590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]