1. RNA. 2010 Oct;16(10):1902-14. doi: 10.1261/rna.2066910. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Three distinct peptides from the N domain of translation termination factor eRF1 
surround stop codon in the ribosome.

Bulygin KN(1), Khairulina YS, Kolosov PM, Ven'yaminova AG, Graifer DM, Vorobjev 
YN, Frolova LY, Kisselev LL, Karpova GG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

To study positioning of the polypeptide release factor eRF1 toward a stop signal 
in the ribosomal decoding site, we applied photoactivatable mRNA analogs, 
derivatives of oligoribonucleotides. The human eRF1 peptides cross-linked to 
these short mRNAs were identified. Cross-linkers on the guanines at the second, 
third, and fourth stop signal positions modified fragment 31-33, and to lesser 
extent amino acids within region 121-131 (the "YxCxxxF loop") in the N domain. 
Hence, both regions are involved in the recognition of the purines. A 
cross-linker at the first uridine of the stop codon modifies Val66 near the NIKS 
loop (positions 61-64), and this region is important for recognition of the 
first uridine of stop codons. Since the N domain distinct regions of eRF1 are 
involved in a stop-codon decoding, the eRF1 decoding site is discontinuous and 
is not of "protein anticodon" type. By molecular modeling, the eRF1 molecule can 
be fitted to the A site proximal to the P-site-bound tRNA and to a stop codon in 
mRNA via a large conformational change to one of its three domains. In the 
simulated eRF1 conformation, the YxCxxxF motif and positions 31-33 are very 
close to a stop codon, which becomes also proximal to several parts of the C 
domain. Thus, in the A-site-bound state, the eRF1 conformation significantly 
differs from those in crystals and solution. The model suggested for eRF1 
conformation in the ribosomal A site and cross-linking data are compatible.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.2066910
PMCID: PMC2941099
PMID: 20688868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]