1. Hepatology. 2010 Oct;52(4):1390-400. doi: 10.1002/hep.23795.

CX3CL1-CX3CR1 interaction prevents carbon tetrachloride-induced liver 
inflammation and fibrosis in mice.

Aoyama T(1), Inokuchi S, Brenner DA, Seki E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0702, USA.

Chronic liver disease is associated with hepatocyte injury, inflammation, and 
fibrosis. Chemokines and chemokine receptors are key factors for the migration 
of inflammatory cells such as macrophages and noninflammatory cells such as 
hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). The expression of CX3CR1 and its ligand, CX3CL1, 
is up-regulated in chronic liver diseases such as chronic hepatitis C. However, 
the precise role of CX3CR1 in the liver is still unclear. Here we investigated 
the role of the CX3CL1-CX3CR1 interaction in a carbon tetrachloride 
(CCl(4))-induced liver inflammation and fibrosis model. CX3CR1 was dominantly 
expressed in Kupffer cells in the liver. In contrast, the main source of CX3CL1 
was HSCs. Mice deficient in CX3CR1 showed significant increases in inflammatory 
cell recruitment and cytokine production [including tumor necrosis factor α 
(TNF-α); monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; macrophage inflammatory protein 1β; 
and regulated upon activation, normal T cell expressed, and secreted (RANTES)] 
after CCl(4) treatment versus wild-type (WT) mice. This suggested that CX3CR1 
signaling prevented liver inflammation. Kupffer cells in CX3CR1-deficient mice 
after CCl(4) treatment showed increased expression of TNF-α and transforming 
growth factor β and reduced expression of the anti-inflammatory markers 
interleukin-10 (IL-10) and arginase-1. Coculture experiments showed that HSCs 
experienced significantly greater activation by Kupffer cells from 
CCl(4)-treated CX3CR1-deficient mice versus WT mice. Indeed, augmented fibrosis 
was observed in CX3CR1-deficient mice versus WT mice after CCl(4) treatment. 
Finally, CX3CL1 treatment induced the expression of IL-10 and arginase-1 in WT 
cultured Kupffer cells through CX3CR1, which in turn suppressed HSC activation.
CONCLUSION: The CX3CL1-CX3CR1 interaction inhibits inflammatory properties in 
Kupffer cells/macrophages and results in decreased liver inflammation and 
fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.23795
PMCID: PMC2947579
PMID: 20683935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest exist.