1. Clin Genet. 2011 May;79(5):438-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01493.x.

Novel missense mutations and unexpected multiple changes of RYR1 gene in 75 
malignant hyperthermia families.

Tammaro A(1), Di Martino A, Bracco A, Cozzolino S, Savoia G, Andria B, Cannavo 
A, Spagnuolo M, Piluso G, Aurino S, Nigro V.

Author information:
(1)Centro di Biotecnologie, AORN Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy.

Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an autosomal dominant pharmacogenetic disorder of 
skeletal muscle characterized by disturbance of intracellular calcium 
homeostasis in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Mutations of the ryanodine receptor 1 
(RYR1) gene account for most cases, with some studies claiming up to 86% of 
mutations in this locus. However, RYR1 gene is large and variants are common 
even in the normal population. We examined 54 families with MH susceptibility 
and 21 diagnosed with equivocal MH. Thirty-five were selected for an anesthetic 
reaction, whereas the remainder for hyperCKemia. In these, we studied all 106 
exons of the RYR1 gene. When no mutation was found, we also screened: sodium 
channel voltage-gated, type IV alpha subunit (SCN4A), calcium channel 
voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1S subunit (CACNA1S), and L-type voltage-gated 
calcium channel alpha 2/delta-subunit (CACNL2A). Twenty-nine different RYR1 
mutations were discovered in 40 families. Three other MH genes were tested in 
negative cases. Fourteen RYR1 amino acid changes were novel, of which 12 were 
located outside the mutational 'hot spots'. In two families, the known mutation 
p.R3903Q was also observed in malignant hyperthermia-nonsusceptible (MHN) 
individuals. Unexpectedly, four changes were also found in the same family and 
two in another. Our study confirms that MH is genetically heterogeneous and that 
a consistent number of cases are not due to RYR1 mutations. The discordance 
between in vitro contracture test status and the presence of a proven causative 
RYR1 mutation suggests that the penetrance may vary due to as yet unknown 
factors.

Â© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01493.x
PMID: 20681998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]