1. Prog Neurobiol. 2010 Oct;92(2):184-211. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.05.002. 
Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Heat shock proteins: cellular and molecular mechanisms in the central nervous 
system.

Stetler RA(1), Gan Y, Zhang W, Liou AK, Gao Y, Cao G, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Educational and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs 
Pittsburgh Health Care System, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States. 
stetlerra@upmc.edu

Emerging evidence indicates that heat shock proteins (HSPs) are critical 
regulators in normal neural physiological function as well as in cell stress 
responses. The functions of HSPs represent an enormous and diverse range of 
cellular activities, far beyond the originally identified roles in protein 
folding and chaperoning. HSPs are now understood to be involved in processes 
such as synaptic transmission, autophagy, ER stress response, protein kinase and 
cell death signaling. In addition, manipulation of HSPs has robust effects on 
the fate of cells in neurological injury and disease states. The ongoing 
exploration of multiple HSP superfamilies has underscored the pluripotent nature 
of HSPs in the cellular context, and has demanded the recent revamping of the 
nomenclature referring to these families to reflect a re-organization based on 
structure and function. In keeping with this re-organization, we first discuss 
the HSP superfamilies in terms of protein structure, regulation, expression and 
distribution in the brain. We then explore major cellular functions of HSPs that 
are relevant to neural physiological states, and from there we discuss known and 
proposed HSP impacts on major neurological disease states. This review article 
presents a three-part discussion on the array of HSP families relevant to 
neuronal tissue, their cellular functions, and the exploration of therapeutic 
targets of these proteins in the context of neurological diseases.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.05.002
PMCID: PMC2939168
PMID: 20685377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]