1. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 30;5(7):e11908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011908.

Epstein-Barr virus interferes with the amplification of IFNalpha secretion by 
activating suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 in primary human monocytes.

Michaud F(1), Coulombe F, Gaudreault E, Paquet-Bouchard C, Rola-Pleszczynski M, 
Gosselin J.

Author information:
(1)Innate Immunology Laboratory, CHUQ Research Center (CHUL) and Department of 
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universit√© Laval, Quebec, Quebec, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus is recognized to cause lymphoproliferative 
disorders and is also associated with cancer. Evidence suggests that monocytes 
are likely to be involved in EBV pathogenesis, especially due to a number of 
cellular functions altered in EBV-infected monocytes, a process that may affect 
efficient host defense. Because type I interferons (IFNs) are crucial mediators 
of host defense against viruses, we investigated the effect of EBV infection on 
the IFNalpha pathway in primary human monocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Infection of monocytes with EBV induced IFNalpha 
secretion but inhibited the positive feedback loop for the amplification of 
IFNalpha. We showed that EBV infection induced the expression of suppressor of 
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) and, to a lesser extent, SOCS1, two proteins known 
to interfere with the amplification of IFNalpha secretion mediated by the 
JAK/STAT signal transduction pathway. EBV infection correlated with a blockage 
in the activation of JAK/STAT pathway members and affected the level of 
phosphorylated IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). Depletion of SOCS3, but not 
SOCS1, by small interfering RNA (siRNA) abrogated the inhibitory effect of EBV 
on JAK/STAT pathway activation and significantly restored IFNalpha secretion. 
Finally, transfection of monocytes with the viral protein Zta caused the 
upregulation of SOCS3, an event that could not be recapitulated with mutated 
Zta.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We propose that EBV protein Zta activates SOCS3 
protein as an immune escape mechanism that both suppresses optimal IFNalpha 
secretion by human monocytes and favors a state of type I IFN irresponsiveness 
in these cells. This immunomodulatory effect is important to better understand 
the aspects of the immune response to EBV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011908
PMCID: PMC2912847
PMID: 20689596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.