1. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Jan;26(1):88-99. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.200.

BMD regulation on mouse distal chromosome 1, candidate genes, and response to 
ovariectomy or dietary fat.

Beamer WG(1), Shultz KL, Coombs HF 3rd, DeMambro VE, Reinholdt LG, 
Ackert-Bicknell CL, Canalis E, Rosen CJ, Donahue LR.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. wesley.beamer@jax.org

The distal end of mouse chromosome 1 (Chr 1) harbors quantitative trait loci 
(QTLs) that regulate bone mineral density (BMD) and share conserved synteny with 
human chromosome 1q. The objective of this article was to map this mouse distal 
Chr 1 region and identify gene(s) responsible for BMD regulation in females. We 
used X-ray densitometry [ie, dual-energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA), 
micro-computed tomography (µCT), and peripheral quantitative computed tomography 
(pQCT)] to phenotype a set of nested congenic strains constructed from 
C57BL/6BmJ (B6/Bm) and C3H/HeJ (C3H) mice to map the region associated with the 
BMD QTL. The critical region has been reduced to an interval of 0.152 Mb that 
contributes to increased BMD when C3H alleles are present. Histomorphometry and 
osteoblast cultures indicated that increased osteoblast activity was associated 
with increased BMD in mouse strains with C3H alleles in this critical region. 
This region contains two genes, Aim2, which binds with cytoplasmic dsDNA and 
results in apoptosis, and AC084073.22, a predicted gene of unknown function. 
Ovariectomy induced bone loss in the B6/Bm progenitor and the three congenic 
strains regardless of the alleles present in the critical BMD region. High 
dietary fat treatment (thought to suppress distal Chr 1 QTL for BMD in mice) did 
not induce bone loss in the congenics carrying C3H alleles in the critical 0.152 
Mb carrying the AIM2 and AC084073.22 genes. Gene expression studies in whole 
bone of key congenics showed differential expression of AC084073.22 for strains 
carrying B6/Bm versus C3H alleles but not for Aim2. In conclusion, our data 
suggest that osteoblasts are the cellular target of gene action and that 
AC084073.22 is the best candidate for female BMD regulation in the distal region 
of mouse Chr 1.

© 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.200
PMCID: PMC3179313
PMID: 20687154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]