1. Diabetes. 2010 Oct;59(10):2444-52. doi: 10.2337/db10-0174. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Increased reactive oxygen species production and lower abundance of complex I 
subunits and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1B protein despite normal 
mitochondrial respiration in insulin-resistant human skeletal muscle.

Lefort N(1), Glancy B, Bowen B, Willis WT, Bailowitz Z, De Filippis EA, Brophy 
C, Meyer C, HÃ¸jlund K, Yi Z, Mandarino LJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Metabolic Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The contribution of mitochondrial dysfunction to skeletal muscle 
insulin resistance remains elusive. Comparative proteomics are being applied to 
generate new hypotheses in human biology and were applied here to isolated 
mitochondria to identify novel changes in mitochondrial protein abundance 
present in insulin-resistant muscle.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Mitochondria were isolated from vastus lateralis 
muscle from lean and insulin-sensitive individuals and from obese and 
insulin-resistant individuals who were otherwise healthy. Respiration and 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production rates were measured in vitro. Relative 
abundances of proteins detected by mass spectrometry were determined using a 
normalized spectral abundance factor method.
RESULTS: NADH- and FADH(2)-linked maximal respiration rates were similar between 
lean and obese individuals. Rates of pyruvate and palmitoyl-DL-carnitine (both 
including malate) ROS production were significantly higher in obesity. 
Mitochondria from obese individuals maintained higher (more negative) 
extramitochondrial ATP free energy at low metabolic flux, suggesting that 
stronger mitochondrial thermodynamic driving forces may underlie the higher ROS 
production. Tandem mass spectrometry identified protein abundance differences 
per mitochondrial mass in insulin resistance, including lower abundance of 
complex I subunits and enzymes involved in the oxidation of branched-chain amino 
acids (BCAA) and fatty acids (e.g., carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1B).
CONCLUSIONS: We provide data suggesting normal oxidative capacity of 
mitochondria in insulin-resistant skeletal muscle in parallel with high rates of 
ROS production. Furthermore, we show specific abundance differences in proteins 
involved in fat and BCAA oxidation that might contribute to the accumulation of 
lipid and BCAA frequently associated with the pathogenesis of insulin 
resistance.

DOI: 10.2337/db10-0174
PMCID: PMC3279558
PMID: 20682693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]