1. BMC Cancer. 2010 Aug 9;10:413. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-413.

Mutations in the WTX-gene are found in some high-grade microsatellite instable 
(MSI-H) colorectal cancers.

Scheel SK(1), Porzner M, Pfeiffer S, Ormanns S, Kirchner T, Jung A.

Author information:
(1)Pathologisches Institut der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 
Thalkirchner Strasse 36, 80337 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetically, colorectal cancers (CRCs) can be subdivided into tumors 
with chromosomal instability (CIN) or microsatellite instability (MSI). In both 
types of CRCs genes that are involved in the degradation of beta-CATENIN are 
frequently mutated. Whereas in CIN CRCs APC (Adenomatous Polyposis Coli) is 
affected in most cases, high grade MSI (MSI-H) CRCs frequently display mutations 
in various genes, like the APC-, AXIN2- or CTNNBI (beta-CATENIN) gene itself. 
Recently in Wilms tumors, WTX (Wilms tumor gene on the X-chromosome) was 
discovered as another gene involved in the destruction of beta-CATENIN. As the 
WTX-gene harbors a short T6-microsatellite in its N-terminal coding region, we 
hypothesized that frameshift-mutations might occur in MSI-H CRCs in the WTX 
gene, thus additionally contributing to the stabilization of beta-CATENIN in 
human CRCs.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from 632 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded metastatic 
CRCs (UICCIV) and analyzed for MSI-H by investigating the stability of the 
highly sensitive microsatellite markers BAT25 and BAT26 applying fluorescence 
capillary electrophoresis (FCE). Then, in the MSI-H cases, well described 
mutational hot spot regions from the APC-, AXIN2- and CTNNBI genes were analyzed 
for genomic alterations by didesoxy-sequencing while the WTX T6-microsatellite 
was analyzed by fragment analysis. Additionally, the PCR products of T5-repeats 
were subcloned and mutations were validated using didesoxy-sequencing. 
Furthermore, the KRAS and the BRAF proto-oncogenes were analyzed for the most 
common activating mutations applying pyro-sequencing. mRNA expression of WTX 
from MSI-H and MSS cases and a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines was 
investigated using reverse transcription (RT-) PCR and FCE.
RESULTS: In our cohort of 632 metastatic CRCs (UICCIV) we identified 41 MSI-H 
cases (6.5%). Two of the 41 MSI-H cases (4.8%) displayed a frameshift mutation 
in the T6-repeat resulting in a T5 sequence. Only one case, a male patient, 
expressed the mutated WTX gene while being wild type for all other investigated 
genes.
CONCLUSION: Mutations in the WTX-gene might compromise the function of the 
beta-CATENIN destruction complex in only a small fraction of MSI-H CRCs thus 
contributing to the process of carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-413
PMCID: PMC2928794
PMID: 20696052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]