1. Arch Neurol. 2010 Aug;67(8):970-5. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.177.

Association of alpha-, beta-, and gamma-Synuclein with diffuse lewy body 
disease.

Nishioka K(1), Wider C, Vilariño-Güell C, Soto-Ortolaza AI, Lincoln SJ, 
Kachergus JM, Jasinska-Myga B, Ross OA, Rajput A, Robinson CA, Ferman TJ, 
Wszolek ZK, Dickson DW, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Florida, 4500 San Pablo Rd, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of the genes that encode alpha-, beta-, 
and gamma-synuclein (SNCA, SNCB, and SNCG, respectively) with diffuse Lewy body 
disease (DLBD).
DESIGN: Case-control study. Subjects A total of 172 patients with DLBD 
consistent with a clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease dementia/dementia with 
Lewy bodies and 350 clinically and 97 pathologically normal controls.
INTERVENTIONS: Sequencing of SNCA, SNCB, and SNCG and genotyping of 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms performed on an Applied Biosystems capillary 
sequencer and a Sequenom MassArray pLEX platform, respectively. Associations 
were determined using chi(2) or Fisher exact tests.
RESULTS: Initial sequencing studies of the coding regions of each gene in 89 
patients with DLBD did not detect any pathogenic substitutions. Nevertheless, 
genotyping of known polymorphic variability in sequence-conserved regions 
detected several single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the SNCA and SNCG genes that 
were significantly associated with disease (P = .05 to <.001). Significant 
association was also observed for 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms located in 
SNCB when comparing DLBD cases and pathologically confirmed normal controls (P = 
.03-.01); however, this association was not significant for the clinical 
controls alone or the combined clinical and pathological controls (P > .05). 
After correction for multiple testing, only 1 single-nucleotide polymorphism in 
SNCG (rs3750823) remained significant in all of the analyses (P = .05-.009).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that variants in all 3 members of the 
synuclein gene family, particularly SNCA and SNCG, affect the risk of developing 
DLBD and warrant further investigation in larger, pathologically defined data 
sets as well as clinically diagnosed Parkinson disease/dementia with Lewy bodies 
case-control series.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.177
PMCID: PMC4727539
PMID: 20697047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]