1. Eur Respir J. 2011 Apr;37(4):791-9. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00026410. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

Surfactant protein B polymorphisms, pulmonary function and COPD in 10,231 
individuals.

Bækvad-Hansen M(1), Nordestgaard BG, Dahl M.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. mordah02@heh.regionh.dk

The surfactant protein (SP)-B gene may influence chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) and, thus, personalised medicine. We tested whether functional 
polymorphisms in SP-B (rs1130866 (1580T>C), rs2077079 (-18A>C) and rs3024791 
(-384G>A)) associate with reduced lung function and risk of COPD in the general 
population. We genotyped 10,231 individuals from the general adult Danish 
population, and recorded spirometry and hospital admissions due to COPD. Because 
we previously found an association between the rare SP-B 121ins2 mutation and 
COPD among smokers, we stratified the analyses for smoking status. None of the 
individual SP-B genotypes or genotype combinations were associated with reduced 
forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV₁) % predicted, forced vital capacity (FVC) 
% pred and FEV₁/FVC overall or among smokers (p = 0.25-0.99). The odds ratio for 
spirometrically defined COPD did not differ from 1.0 for any of the SP-B 
genotypes or genotype combinations overall or among smokers (p = 0.17-0.78). 
Similar results were obtained for hospitalisation due to COPD (p = 0.07-0.93); 
we could exclude overall hazard ratios for heterozygotes of 1.18-1.21 and for 
homozygotes of 1.25-1.57 or larger for all three polymorphisms. In conclusion, 
the functional rs1130866, rs2077079 and rs3024791 polymorphisms in the SP-B gene 
are not associated with reduced lung function or risk of COPD, making it 
unlikely that these variants will be useful in personalised medicine.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00026410
PMID: 20693256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]