1. BMC Struct Biol. 2010 Aug 6;10:25. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-10-25.

Molecular basis for defect in Alix-binding by alternatively spliced isoform of 
ALG-2 (ALG-2DeltaGF122) and structural roles of F122 in target recognition.

Inuzuka T(1), Suzuki H, Kawasaki M, Shibata H, Wakatsuki S, Maki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of 
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

BACKGROUND: ALG-2 (a gene product of PDCD6) belongs to the penta-EF-hand (PEF) 
protein family and Ca2+-dependently interacts with various intracellular 
proteins including mammalian Alix, an adaptor protein in the ESCRT system. Our 
previous X-ray crystal structural analyses revealed that binding of Ca2+ to EF3 
enables the side chain of R125 to move enough to make a primary hydrophobic 
pocket (Pocket 1) accessible to a short fragment of Alix. The side chain of 
F122, facing a secondary hydrophobic pocket (Pocket 2), interacts with the Alix 
peptide. An alternatively spliced shorter isoform, designated ALG-2DeltaGF122, 
lacks Gly121Phe122 and does not bind Alix, but the structural basis of the 
incompetence has remained to be elucidated.
RESULTS: We solved the X-ray crystal structure of the PEF domain of 
ALG-2DeltaGF122 in the Ca2+-bound form and compared it with that of ALG-2. 
Deletion of the two residues shortened alpha-helix 5 (alpha5) and changed the 
configuration of the R125 side chain so that it partially blocked Pocket 1. A 
wall created by the main chain of 121-GFG-123 and facing the two pockets was 
destroyed. Surprisingly, however, substitution of F122 with Ala or Gly, but not 
with Trp, increased the Alix-binding capacity in binding assays. The F122 
substitutions exhibited different effects on binding of ALG-2 to other known 
interacting proteins, including TSG101 (Tumor susceptibility gene 101) and 
annexin A11. The X-ray crystal structure of the F122A mutant revealed that 
removal of the bulky F122 side chain not only created an additional open space 
in Pocket 2 but also abolished inter-helix interactions with W95 and V98 
(present in alpha4) and that alpha5 inclined away from alpha4 to expand Pocket 
2, suggesting acquirement of more appropriate positioning of the interacting 
residues to accept Alix.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that the inability of the two-residue shorter ALG-2 
isoform to bind Alix is not due to the absence of bulky side chain of F122 but 
due to deformation of a main-chain wall facing pockets 1 and 2. Moreover, a 
residue at the position of F122 contributes to target specificity and a smaller 
side chain is preferable for Alix binding but not favored to bind annexin A11.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-10-25
PMCID: PMC2927601
PMID: 20691033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]