1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2010 Oct;3(5):542-52. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.110.949768. Epub 2010 Aug 7.

cAMP sensitivity of HCN pacemaker channels determines basal heart rate but is 
not critical for autonomic rate control.

Schweizer PA(1), Duhme N, Thomas D, Becker R, Zehelein J, Draguhn A, Bruehl C, 
Katus HA, Koenen M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: HCN channels activate the pacemaker current I(f), which is thought 
to contribute significantly to generation and regulation of heart rhythm. HCN4 
represents the dominant isotype in the sinoatrial node and binding of cAMP was 
suggested to be necessary for autonomic heart rate regulation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In a candidate gene approach, a heterozygous insertion of 
13 nucleotides in exon 6 of the HCN4 gene leading to a truncated cyclic 
nucleotide-binding domain was identified in a 45-year-old woman with sinus 
bradycardia. Biophysical properties determined by whole-cell patch-clamp 
recording of HEK293 cells demonstrated that mutant subunits (HCN4-695X) were 
insensitive to cAMP. Heteromeric channels composed of wild-type and mutant 
subunits failed to respond to cAMP-like homomeric mutant channels, indicating a 
dominant-negative suppression of cAMP-induced channel activation by mutant 
subunits. Pedigree analysis identified 7 additional living carriers showing 
similar clinical phenotypes, that is, sinus node dysfunction with mean resting 
heart rate of 45.9±4.6 bpm (n=8) compared with 66.5±9.1 bpm of unaffected 
relatives (n=6; P<0.01). Clinical evaluation revealed no ischemic or structural 
heart disease in any family member. Importantly, mutant carriers exhibited 
normal heart rate variance and full ability to accelerate heart rate under 
physical activity or pharmacological stimulation. Moreover, mutant carriers 
displayed distinctive sinus arrhythmias and premature beats linked to adrenergic 
stress.
CONCLUSIONS: In humans, cAMP responsiveness of I(f) determines basal heart rate 
but is not critical for maximum heart rate, heart rate variability, or 
chronotropic competence. Furthermore, cAMP-activated I(f) may stabilize heart 
rhythm during chronotropic response.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.110.949768
PMID: 20693575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]