1. J Med Chem. 2010 Sep 9;53(17):6432-44. doi: 10.1021/jm100498u.

p-Trifluoromethyldiazirinyl-etomidate: a potent photoreactive general anesthetic 
derivative of etomidate that is selective for ligand-gated cationic ion 
channels.

Husain SS(1), Stewart D, Desai R, Hamouda AK, Li SG, Kelly E, Dostalova Z, Zhou 
X, Cotten JF, Raines DE, Olsen RW, Cohen JB, Forman SA, Miller KW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, 32 Fruit Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

We synthesized the R- and S-enantiomers of ethyl 
1-(1-(4-(3-((trifluoromethyl)-3H-diazirin-3-yl)phenyl)ethyl)-1H-imidazole-5-carboxylate 
(trifluoromethyldiazirinyl-etomidate), or TFD-etomidate, a novel photoactivable 
derivative of the stereoselective general anesthetic etomidate (R-(2-ethyl 
1-(phenylethyl)-1H-imidazole-5-carboxylate)). Anesthetic potency was similar to 
etomidate's, but stereoselectivity was reversed and attenuated. Relative to 
etomidate, TFD-etomidate was a more potent inhibitor of the excitatory 
receptors, nAChR (nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) 
((alpha1)(2)beta1delta1gamma1) and 5-HT(3A)R (serotonin type 3A receptor), 
causing significant inhibition at anesthetic concentrations. S- but not 
R-TFD-etomidate enhanced currents elicited from inhibitory alpha1beta2gamma2L 
GABA(A)Rs by low concentrations of GABA, but with a lower efficacy than 
R-etomidate, and site-directed mutagenesis suggests they act at different sites. 
[(3)H]TFD-etomidate photolabeled the alpha-subunit of the nAChR in a manner 
allosterically regulated by agonists and noncompetitive inhibitors. 
TFD-etomidate's novel pharmacology is unlike that of etomidate derivatives with 
photoactivable groups in the ester position, which behave like etomidate, 
suggesting that it will further enhance our understanding of anesthetic 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1021/jm100498u
PMCID: PMC3117435
PMID: 20704351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]