1. Antiviral Res. 2010 Nov;88(2):143-51. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2010.08.006.
Epub  2010 Aug 13.

Semi-solid gels function as physical barriers to human immunodeficiency virus 
transport in vitro.

Lai BE(1), Geonnotti AR, Desoto MG, Montefiori DC, Katz DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Vaginal gels may act as physical barriers to HIV during sexual transmission. 
However, the extent and significance of this effect are not well understood. 
During male-to-female sexual transmission of HIV, semen containing infectious 
HIV is present within the lower female reproductive tract. In cases where a 
topical gel has previously been applied to the vaginal epithelium, virions must 
move through gel layers before reaching vulnerable tissue. This additional 
barrier could affect the functioning of anti-HIV microbicide gels and placebos. 
To better understand HIV transport in gels, we: (1) quantified diffusion 
coefficients of HIV virions within semi-solid delivery vehicles; and (2) tested 
the barrier functioning of thin gel layers in a Transwell system. Two gels used 
as placebos in microbicides clinical trials, hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC) and 
methylcellulose (MC), were found to hinder HIV transport in vitro. The diffusion 
coefficients for HIV virions in undiluted HEC and MC were 4±2 x 10⁻¹² and 7±1 x 
10⁻¹² cm²/s, respectively. These are almost 10,000 times lower than the 
diffusion coefficient for HIV in water. Substantial gel dilution 
(80%:diluent/gel, v/v) was required before diffusion coefficients rose to even 
two orders of magnitude lower than those in water. In the Transwell system, gel 
layers of approximately 150-μm thickness reduced HIV transport. There was a log 
reduction in the amount of HIV that had breached the Transwell membrane after 
0-, 4-, and 8-h incubations. The ability of a gel to function as a physical 
barrier to HIV transport from semen to tissue will also depend on its 
distribution over the epithelium and effects of dilution by vaginal fluids or 
semen. Results here can serve as a baseline for future design of products that 
act as barriers to HIV transmission. The potential barrier function of placebo 
gels should be considered in the design and interpretation of microbicides 
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2010.08.006
PMCID: PMC3072786
PMID: 20709109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]