1. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 5;5(8):e11973. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011973.

Evidence for the existence of secretory granule (dense-core vesicle)-based 
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-dependent Ca2+ signaling system in astrocytes.

Hur YS(1), Kim KD, Paek SH, Yoo SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Inha University School of Medicine, Jung Gu, 
Incheon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The gliotransmitters released from astrocytes are deemed to play key 
roles in the glial cell-neuron communication for normal function of the brain. 
The gliotransmitters, such as glutamate, ATP, D-serine, neuropeptide Y, are 
stored in vesicles of astrocytes and secreted following the inositol 
1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)-induced intracellular Ca2+ releases. Yet studies on 
the identity of the IP3-dependent intracellular Ca2+ stores remain virtually 
unexplored.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have therefore studied the potential existence of the 
IP3-sensitive intracellular Ca2+ stores in the cytoplasm of astrocytes using 
human brain tissue samples in contrast to cultured astrocytes that had primarily 
been used in the past. It was thus found that secretory granule marker proteins 
chromogranins and secretogranin II localize in the large dense core vesicles of 
astrocytes, thereby confirming the large dense core vesicles as bona fide 
secretory granules. Moreover, consistent with the major IP3-dependent 
intracellular Ca2+ store role of secretory granules in secretory cells, 
secretory granules of astrocytes also contained all three (types 1, 2, and 3) 
IP3R isoforms.
SIGNIFICANCE: Given that the secretory granule marker proteins chromogranins and 
secretogranin II are high-capacity, low-affinity Ca2+ storage proteins and 
chromogranins interact with the IP3Rs to activate the IP3R/Ca2+ channels, i.e., 
increase both the mean open time and the open probability of the channels, these 
results imply that secretory granules of astrocytes function as the 
IP3-sensitive intracellular Ca2+ store.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011973
PMCID: PMC2916839
PMID: 20700485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.