1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2010 Aug;14(8):705-19.

Decline in FEV1 related to genetic polymorphisms (+138insA/delA and Lys198Asn) 
of the endothelin-1 gene in COPD. A pilot study.

Kaparianos A(1), Argyropoulou E, Efremidis G, Flordellis C, Spiropoulos K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pneumology, University Hospital 
of Rio, Patras, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent vasoconstrictor and 
bronchoconstrictor but it has been shown to have also proinflammatory 
properties. Its ability to attract inflammatory cells in its site of production, 
upregulates the synthesis of adhesion molecules and stimulates the release of 
cytokines. The fact that cytokines have the ability to induce its synthesis and 
release, creates a dynamic loop for self-preservation and augmentation of the 
airway inflammation in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), even after 
the ceasing of the noxious stimulus, i.e., cigarette smoke. Therefore, 
functional polymorphisms that may lead to increased levels of ET-1 may also 
cause an increased susceptibility to COPD development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed the longitudinal effect on lung function of 
two ET-1 gene polymorphisms in a population of 190 smokers (95 non-COPD and 95 
COPD smokers). The two polymorphisms involved an insertion polymorphism (+138 
adenine insertion 3A/4A, 138bp downstream from the transcription start site, 
exon 1) and a single nucleotide transversion polymorphism on exon 5 (G/T, 
Lys198Asn). A total of 190 subjects were enrolled in the study for each 
polymorphism and were followed for 3 years by annual spirometry sessions.
RESULTS: The adjusted annual decline of forced expiratory volume in 1 second 
(dFEV1) was greater for those having at least one copy of the mutated gene 
ins/delA compared to those with the wild type allele both in the non-COPD 
smokers group (mean difference in dFEV, of 19.4 ml/year, p = 0.004) and COPD 
smokers (mean difference in dFEV1 of 11.15 ml/year, p = 0.003). On the contrary, 
those heterozygous for the Lys198Asn polymorphism were found to have a slower 
decline in FEV1 compared to those homozygous for the wild type allele. The 
non-COPD smokers group had a gain-in-loss of 11,24 ml/year (p < 0.001) while the 
COPD-smokers group had a slower decline of 11.42 ml/year (p = 0.002). Those 
homozygous for the polymorphisms examined show an even greater deviation from 
those with the wild type allele but due to the small number comprising their 
group, the results don't have enough statistical power. Though, they still show 
the trend of the effect the polymorphisms have on annual FEV1 decline.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data shows that ET-1 and its functional polymorphisms 
may be implicated in COPD phenotype and severity.

PMID: 20707291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]