1. BMC Cancer. 2010 Aug 17;10:435. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-435.

Mechanism of endothelial progenitor cell recruitment into neo-vessels in 
adjacent non-tumor tissues in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yu DC(1), Chen J, Sun XT, Zhuang LY, Jiang CP, Ding YT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

BACKGROUND: We investigated the distribution and clinical significance of 
mobilized endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
We found that many more EPCs were recruited to nonmalignant liver tissue 
(especially into adjacent non-tumor tissues (AT)) than to tumor vessels. These 
results suggest that the mechanism underlying the recruitment of EPCs into 
microvessels in AT merits further investigation
METHODS: Angiogenic factors were detected in three tissue microarrays comprising 
normal liver, paired tumor tissue (TT) and AT from 105 patients (who had 
undergone hepatectomy for HCC) using immunohistochemistry. Also, the number of 
EPCs (positive for Sca-1, Flk-1 and c-Kit) in the blood and liver of cirrhotic 
mice were determined by flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry. The 
distribution of these labeled EPCs in tumor and non-tumor tissues was then 
studied.
RESULTS: The results from the tissue microarrays showed that the expression 
levels of VEGF-A, bFGF, TGF-β, MCP-1, TSP-1, MMP-9, TIMP-2, and endostatin were 
significantly higher in AT than in either normal liver or TT (p < 0.05), but no 
significant difference was found in the expression levels of COX-2 and NOS-2 
between AT and TT. The expression of VEGF-A, bFGF, TGF-β, MCP-1, TSP-1, MMP-9, 
TIMP-2, endostatin, COX-2, and NOS-2 in normal liver tissue was weaker than that 
in AT or TT. In cirrhotic mice, the number of circulating endothelial progenitor 
cells gradually increased, before decreasing again. In this mouse model, 
increased numbers of EPCs were recruited and homed specifically to the cirrhotic 
liver.
CONCLUSIONS: Both liver cirrhosis and HCC led to increased expression of 
pro-angiogenic factors, which resulted in the recruitment of EPCs into AT. Also, 
EPCs were mobilized, recruited and homed to cirrhotic liver. The unique 
pathology of HCC coupled with liver cirrhosis may, therefore, be associated with 
the distribution and function of EPCs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-435
PMCID: PMC2936325
PMID: 20716344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]