1. Solid State Electron. 2010 Oct 1;54(10):1185-1191. doi: 
10.1016/j.sse.2010.05.011.

Facile Pyrolytic Synthesis of Silicon Nanowires.

Chan JC(1), Tran H, Pattison JW, Rananavare SB.

Author information:
(1)Advanced Logic Components, Ronler Acres, Intel, Hillsboro, OR 97123.

One-dimensional nanostructures such as silicon nanowires (SiNW) are attractive 
candidates for low power density electronic and optoelectronic devices including 
sensors. A new simple method for SiNW bulk synthesis[1, 2] is demonstrated in 
this work, which is inexpensive and uses low toxicity materials, thereby 
offering a safe, energy efficient and green approach. The method uses low 
flammability liquid phenylsilanes, offering a safer avenue for SiNW growth 
compared with using silane gas. A novel, duo-chamber glass vessel is used to 
create a low-pressure environment where SiNWs are grown through 
vapor-liquid-solid mechanism using gold nanoparticles as a catalyst. The 
catalyst decomposes silicon precursor vapors of diphenylsilane and 
triphenylsilane and precipitates single crystal SiNWs, which appear to grow 
parallel to the substrate surface. This opens up possibilities for synthesizing 
nano-junctions amongst wires which is important for the grid architecture of 
nanoelectronics proposed by Likharev[3]. Even bulk synthesis of SiNW is feasible 
using sacrificial substrates such as CaCO(3) that can be dissolved 
post-synthesis. Furthermore, by dissolving appropriate dopants in liquid 
diphenylsilane, a controlled doping of the nanowires is realized without the use 
of toxic gases and expensive mass flow controllers. Upon boron doping, we 
observe a characteristic red shift in photoluminescence spectra. In summary, an 
inexpensive and versatile method for SiNW is presented that makes these exotic 
materials available to any lab at low cost.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sse.2010.05.011
PMCID: PMC2919782
PMID: 20711489