1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2011 Feb-Mar;90(2-3):143-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.07.006.
 Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Analysis of the signaling pathways regulating Src-dependent remodeling of the 
actin cytoskeleton.

Winograd-Katz SE(1), Brunner MC, Mirlas N, Geiger B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

Cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix is mediated by adhesion receptors, 
mainly integrins, which upon interaction with the extracellular matrix, bind to 
the actin cytoskeleton via their cytoplasmic domains. This association is 
mediated by a variety of scaffold and signaling proteins, which control the 
mechanical and signaling activities of the adhesion site. Upon transformation of 
fibroblasts with active forms of Src (e.g., v-Src), focal adhesions are 
disrupted, and transformed into dot-like contacts known as podosomes, and 
consisting of a central actin core surrounded by an adhesion ring. To clarify 
the mechanism underlying Src-dependent modulation of the adhesive phenotype, and 
its influence on podosome organization, we screened for the effect of 
siRNA-mediated knockdown of tyrosine kinases, MAP kinases and phosphatases on 
the reorganization of the adhesion-cytoskeleton complex, induced by a 
constitutively active Src mutant (SrcY527F). In this screen, we discovered 
several genes that are involved in Src-induced remodeling of the actin 
cytoskeleton. We further showed that knockdown of Src in osteoclasts abolishes 
the formation of the podosome-based rings and impairs cell spreading, without 
inducing stress fiber development. Our work points to several genes that are 
involved in this process, and sheds new light on the molecular plasticity of 
integrin adhesions.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.07.006
PMCID: PMC3005982
PMID: 20719402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]