1. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Oct 1;21(19):3317-29. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-03-0245. Epub 
2010 Aug 18.

Integrin-mediated cell attachment induces a PAK4-dependent feedback loop 
regulating cell adhesion through modified integrin alpha v beta 5 clustering and 
turnover.

Li Z(1), Lock JG, Olofsson H, Kowalewski JM, Teller S, Liu Y, Zhang H, Strömblad 
S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biosciences, Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska 
Institutet, 141 83 Huddinge, Sweden.

Cell-to-extracellular matrix adhesion is regulated by a multitude of pathways 
initiated distally to the core cell-matrix adhesion machinery, such as via 
growth factor signaling. In contrast to these extrinsically sourced pathways, we 
now identify a regulatory pathway that is intrinsic to the core adhesion 
machinery, providing an internal regulatory feedback loop to fine tune adhesion 
levels. This autoinhibitory negative feedback loop is initiated by cell adhesion 
to vitronectin, leading to PAK4 activation, which in turn limits total 
cell-vitronectin adhesion strength. Specifically, we show that PAK4 is activated 
by cell attachment to vitronectin as mediated by PAK4 binding partner integrin 
αvβ5, and that active PAK4 induces accelerated integrin αvβ5 turnover within 
adhesion complexes. Accelerated integrin turnover is associated with additional 
PAK4-mediated effects, including inhibited integrin αvβ5 clustering, reduced 
integrin to F-actin connectivity and perturbed adhesion complex maturation. 
These specific outcomes are ultimately associated with reduced cell adhesion 
strength and increased cell motility. We thus demonstrate a novel mechanism 
deployed by cells to tune cell adhesion levels through the autoinhibitory 
regulation of integrin adhesion.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E10-03-0245
PMCID: PMC2947468
PMID: 20719960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]