1. Int J Psychophysiol. 2011 Jan;79(1):55-63. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2010.08.004.  Epub 2010 Aug 14.

Long-range synchrony of γ oscillations and auditory hallucination symptoms in 
schizophrenia.

Mulert C(1), Kirsch V, Pascual-Marqui R, McCarley RW, Spencer KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, VA Boston Healthcare System and Harvard Medical 
School, Massachusetts, USA.

Phase locking in the gamma-band range has been shown to be diminished in 
patients with schizophrenia. Moreover, there have been reports of positive 
correlations between phase locking in the gamma-band range and positive 
symptoms, especially hallucinations. The aim of the present study was to use a 
new methodological approach in order to investigate gamma-band phase 
synchronization between the left and right auditory cortex in patients with 
schizophrenia and its relationship to auditory hallucinations. Subjects were 18 
patients with chronic schizophrenia (SZ) and 16 healthy control (HC) subjects. 
Auditory hallucination symptom scores were obtained using the Scale for the 
Assessment of Positive Symptoms. Stimuli were 40-Hz binaural click trains. The 
generators of the 40Hz-ASSR were localized using eLORETA and based on the 
computed intracranial signals lagged interhemispheric phase locking between 
primary and secondary auditory cortices was analyzed. Current source density of 
the 40 ASSR response was significantly diminished in SZ in comparison to HC in 
the right superior and middle temporal gyrus (p<0.05). Interhemispheric phase 
locking was reduced in SZ in comparison to HC for the primary auditory cortices 
(p<0.05) but not in the secondary auditory cortices. A significant positive 
correlation was found between auditory hallucination symptom scores and phase 
synchronization between the primary auditory cortices (p<0.05, corrected for 
multiple testing) but not for the secondary auditory cortices. These results 
suggest that long-range synchrony of gamma oscillations is disturbed in 
schizophrenia and that this deficit is related to clinical symptoms such as 
auditory hallucinations.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2010.08.004
PMCID: PMC3017735
PMID: 20713096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]