1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 1;19(21):4304-11. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq349. Epub 2010
Aug  18.

New loci associated with central cornea thickness include COL5A1, AKAP13 and 
AVGR8.

Vitart V(1), Bencić G, Hayward C, Skunca Herman J, Huffman J, Campbell S, Bućan 
K, Navarro P, Gunjaca G, Marin J, Zgaga L, Kolcić I, Polasek O, Kirin M, Hastie 
ND, Wilson JF, Rudan I, Campbell H, Vatavuk Z, Fleck B, Wright A.

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM, Edinburgh, UK. v.vitart@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

Central corneal thickness (CCT) is a highly heritable trait, which has been 
proposed to influence disorders of the anterior segment of the eye. A 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of CCT was performed in 2269 individuals 
from three Croatian and one Scottish population. In the discovery set (1445 
individuals), two genome-wide significant associations were identified for 
single nucleotide polymorphisms rs12447690 (β = 0.23 SD, P = 4.4 × 10(-9)) and 
rs1536482 (β = 0.22 SD, P = 7.1 × 10(-8)) for which the closest candidate genes 
(although ≥90 kb away) were zinc finger 469 (ZNF469) on 16q24.2 and collagen 5 
alpha 1 (COL5A1) on 9q34.2, respectively. Only the ZNF469 association was 
confirmed in our replication set (824 individuals, P = 8.0 × 10(-4)) but COL5A1 
remained a suggestive association in the combined sample (β = 0.16 SD, P = 1.1 × 
10(-6)). Following a larger meta-analysis including recently published CCT GWAS 
summary data, COL5A1 was genome-wide significant (β = 0.13 SD, P = 5.1 × 
10(-8)), together with two additional novel loci. The second new locus (defined 
by rs1034200) was 5 kb from the AVGR8 gene, encoding a putative transcription 
factor with typical ZNF and KRAB domains, in chromosomal region 13q12.11 (β = 
0.14 SD, P = 3.5 × 10(-9)). The third new locus (rs6496932), on 15q25.3 (β = 
0.13, P = 1.4 × 10(-8)), was within a wide linkage disequilibrium block 
extending into the 5' end of the AKAP13 gene, encoding a scaffold protein 
concerned with signal transduction from the cell surface. These associations 
offer mechanistic insights into the regulation of CCT and offer new candidate 
genes for susceptibility to common disorders in which CCT has been implicated, 
including primary open-angle glaucoma and keratoconus.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq349
PMID: 20719862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]