1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Oct 8;402(5):892-904. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.026. Epub
2010  Aug 20.

Molecular insight into the conformational dynamics of the Elongin BC complex and 
its interaction with HIV-1 Vif.

Marcsisin SR(1), Engen JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and the Barnett Institute of 
Chemical and Biological Analysis, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 virion infectivity factor (Vif) inhibits 
the innate viral immunity afforded by the APOBEC3 family of cytidine deaminases. 
Vif targets the APOBEC3 family for poly-ubiquitination and subsequent 
proteasomal degradation by linking the Elongin-BC-dependent ubiquitin ligase 
complex with the APOBEC3 proteins. The interaction between Vif and the 
heterodimeric Elongin BC complex, which is mediated by Vif's viral suppressor of 
cytokine signaling box, is essential for Vif function. The biophysical 
consequences of the full-length Vif:Elongin BC interaction have not been 
extensively reported. In this study, hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry was 
used to dissect the Vif:Elongin BC interaction. Elongin C was found to be highly 
dynamic in the Elongin BC complex while Elongin B was much more stable. 
Recombinant full-length Vif interacted with the Elongin BC complex in vitro with 
a K(d) of 1.9 μM and resulted in observable changes in deuterium uptake in both 
Elongin C and B. Upon binding to Elongin BC, no significant global 
conformational changes were detected in Vif by hydrogen exchange mass 
spectrometry, but a short fragment of Vif that consisted of the viral suppressor 
of cytokine signaling box showed decreased deuterium incorporation upon Elongin 
BC incubation, suggesting that this region folds upon binding.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.08.026
PMCID: PMC2949506
PMID: 20728451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]