1. Aquat Toxicol. 2010 Nov 1;100(3):255-62. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.07.019. 
Epub 2010 Jul 23.

Embryonic exposure to tetrabromobisphenol A and its metabolites, bisphenol A and 
tetrabromobisphenol A dimethyl ether disrupts normal zebrafish (Danio rerio) 
development and matrix metalloproteinase expression.

McCormick JM(1), Paiva MS, Häggblom MM, Cooper KR, White LA.

Author information:
(1)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, School of Environmental and 
Biological Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, New Brunswick, 
NJ 08901, United States.

Tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) is a widely used brominated flame retardant that 
is persistent in the environment and detected in human serum and breast milk. 
TBBPA is microbiologically transformed in anaerobic environments to bisphenol A 
(BPA) and in aerobic environments to TBBPA dimethyl ether (TBBPA DME). Despite 
the detection of TBBPA DME in the environment, the resulting toxicity is not 
known. The relative toxicity of TBBPA, BPA and TBBPA DME was determined using 
embryonic exposure of zebrafish, with BPA and TBBPA DME exhibiting lower potency 
than TBBPA. TBBPA exposure resulted in 100% mortality at 3 (1.6mg/L) and 1.5μM 
(0.8mg/L), whereas BPA and TBBPA DME did not result in significant embryonic 
mortality in comparison to controls. While all three caused edema and 
hemorrhage, only TBBPA specifically caused decreased heart rate, edema of the 
trunk, and tail malformations. Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) expression was 
measured due to the role of these enzymes in the remodeling of the extracellular 
matrix during tissue morphogenesis, wound healing and cell migration. MMP-2, -9 
and -13 expression increased (2-8-fold) after TBBPA exposure followed by an 
increase in the degradation of collagen I and gelatin. TBBPA DME exposure 
resulted in only a slight increase (less than 2-fold) in MMP expression and did 
not significantly increase enzymatic activity. These data suggest that TBBPA is 
more potent than BPA or TBBPA DME and indicate that the trunk and tail 
phenotypes seen after TBBPA exposure could be due in part to alteration of 
proper MMP expression and activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.07.019
PMCID: PMC5839324
PMID: 20728951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]