1. Clin Genet. 2011 Jul;80(1):76-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01515.x. Epub 
2010 Jul 22.

Contribution of VANGL2 mutations to isolated neural tube defects.

Kibar Z(1), Salem S, Bosoi CM, Pauwels E, De Marco P, Merello E, Bassuk AG, 
Capra V, Gros P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, CHU Sainte Justine Research Center 
and University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
zoha.kibar@recherche-stejustine.qc.ca

Vangl2 was identified as the gene defective in the Looptail (Lp) mouse model for 
neural tube defects (NTDs). This gene forms part of the planar cell polarity 
(PCP) pathway, also called the non-canonical Frizzled/Dishevelled pathway, which 
mediates the morphogenetic process of convergent extension essential for proper 
gastrulation and neural tube formation in vertebrates. Genetic defects in PCP 
signaling have strongly been associated with NTDs in mouse models. To assess the 
role of VANGL2 in the complex etiology of NTDs in humans, we resequenced this 
gene in a large multi-ethnic cohort of 673 familial and sporadic NTD patients, 
including 453 open spina bifida and 202 closed spinal NTD cases. Six novel rare 
missense mutations were identified in seven patients, five of which were 
affected with closed spinal NTDs. This suggests that VANGL2 mutations may 
predispose to NTDs in approximately 2.5% of closed spinal NTDs (5 in 202), at a 
frequency that is significantly different from that of 0.4% (2 in 453) detected 
in open spina bifida patients (p = 0.027). Our findings strongly implicate 
VANGL2 in the genetic causation of spinal NTDs in a subset of patients and 
provide additional evidence for a pathogenic role of PCP signaling in these 
malformations.

Â© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01515.x
PMCID: PMC3000889
PMID: 20738329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest All authors declare no 
conflict of interest.