1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep 10;87(3):410-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.002.

Mutations in ABHD12 cause the neurodegenerative disease PHARC: An inborn error 
of endocannabinoid metabolism.

Fiskerstrand T(1), H'mida-Ben Brahim D, Johansson S, M'zahem A, Haukanes BI, 
Drouot N, Zimmermann J, Cole AJ, Vedeler C, Bredrup C, Assoum M, Tazir M, 
Klockgether T, Hamri A, Steen VM, Boman H, Bindoff LA, Koenig M, Knappskog PM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. torunn.fiskerstrand@helse-bergen.no

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Mar;79(3):221-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01611.x.

Polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract (PHARC) 
is a neurodegenerative disease marked by early-onset cataract and hearing loss, 
retinitis pigmentosa, and involvement of both the central and peripheral nervous 
systems, including demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy and cerebellar 
ataxia. Previously, we mapped this Refsum-like disorder to a 16 Mb region on 
chromosome 20. Here we report that mutations in the ABHD12 gene cause PHARC 
disease and we describe the clinical manifestations in a total of 19 patients 
from four different countries. The ABHD12 enzyme was recently shown to hydrolyze 
2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG), the main endocannabinoid lipid transmitter that 
acts on cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2. Our data therefore represent an 
example of an inherited disorder related to endocannabinoid metabolism. The 
endocannabinoid system is involved in a wide range of physiological processes 
including neurotransmission, mood, appetite, pain appreciation, addiction 
behavior, and inflammation, and several potential drugs targeting these pathways 
are in development for clinical applications. Our findings show that ABHD12 
performs essential functions in both the central and peripheral nervous systems 
and the eye. Any future drug-mediated interference with this enzyme should 
consider the potential risk of long-term adverse effects.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.08.002
PMCID: PMC2933347
PMID: 20797687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]