1. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 28;49(38):8276-89. doi: 10.1021/bi101280t.

Characterization of the interaction of β-amyloid with transthyretin monomers and 
tetramers.

Du J(1), Murphy RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
1415 Engineering Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

β-Amyloid (Aβ) is the main protein component of the amyloid plaques associated 
with Alzheimer's disease. Transthyretin (TTR) is a homotetramer that circulates 
in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Wild-type (wt) TTR amyloid deposits are 
linked to senile systemic amyloidosis, a common disease of aging, while several 
TTR mutants are linked to familial amyloid polyneuropathy. Several recent 
studies provide support for the hypothesis that these two amyloidogenic proteins 
interact, and that this interaction is biologically relevant. For example, 
upregulation of TTR expression in Tg2576 mice was linked to protection from the 
toxic effects of Aβ deposition [Stein, T. D., and Johnson, J. A. (2002) J. 
Neurosci. 22, 7380-7388]. We examined the interaction of Aβ with wt TTR as well 
as two mutants: F87M/L110M, engineered to be a stable monomer, and T119M, a 
naturally occurring mutant with a tetrameric stability higher than that of the 
wild type. On the basis of enzyme-linked immunoassays as well as cross-linking 
experiments, we conclude that Aβ monomers bind more to TTR monomers than to TTR 
tetramers. The data further suggest that TTR tetramers interact preferably with 
Aβ aggregates rather than Aβ monomers. Through tandem mass spectrometry analysis 
of cross-linked TTR-Aβ fragments, we identified the A strand, in the inner 
β-sheet of TTR, as well as the EF helix, as regions of TTR that are involved 
with Aβ association. Light scattering and electron microscopy studies 
demonstrate that the outcome of the TTR-Aβ interaction strongly depends on TTR 
quaternary structure. While TTR tetramers may modestly enhance aggregation, TTR 
monomers decidedly arrest Aβ aggregate growth. These data provide important new 
insights into the nature of TTR-Aβ interactions. Such interactions may regulate 
TTR-mediated protection against Aβ toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi101280t
PMCID: PMC2943652
PMID: 20795734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]