1. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 16;5(8):e12183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012183.

Associations of variants in CHRNA5/A3/B4 gene cluster with smoking behaviors in 
a Korean population.

Li MD(1), Yoon D, Lee JY, Han BG, Niu T, Payne TJ, Ma JZ, Park T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of 
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. 
Ming_Li@virginia.edu

Multiple genome-wide and targeted association studies reveal a significant 
association of variants in the CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 (CHRNA5/A3/B4) gene cluster 
on chromosome 15 with nicotine dependence. The subjects examined in most of 
these studies had a European origin. However, considering the distinct linkage 
disequilibrium patterns in European and other ethnic populations, it would be of 
tremendous interest to determine whether such associations could be replicated 
in populations of other ethnicities, such as Asians. In this study, we performed 
comprehensive association and interaction analyses for 32 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CHRNA5/A3/B4 with smoking initiation (SI), smoking 
quantity (SQ), and smoking cessation (SC) in a Korean sample (N = 8,842). We 
found nominally significant associations of 7 SNPs with at least one 
smoking-related phenotype in the total sample (SI: P = 0.015 approximately 
0.023; SQ: P = 0.008 approximately 0.028; SC: P = 0.018 approximately 0.047) and 
the male sample (SI: P = 0.001 approximately 0.023; SQ: P = 0.001 approximately 
0.046; SC: P = 0.01). A spectrum of haplotypes formed by three consecutive SNPs 
located between rs16969948 in CHRNA5 and rs6495316 in the intergenic region 
downstream from the 5' end of CHRNB4 was associated with these three 
smoking-related phenotypes in both the total and the male sample. Notably, 
associations of these variants and haplotypes with SC appear to be much weaker 
than those with SI and SQ. In addition, we performed an interaction analysis of 
SNPs within the cluster using the generalized multifactor dimensionality 
reduction method and found a significant interaction of SNPs rs7163730 in 
LOC123688, rs6495308 in CHRNA3, and rs7166158, rs8043123, and rs11072793 in the 
intergenic region downstream from the 5' end of CHRNB4 to be influencing SI in 
the male sample. Considering that fewer than 5% of the female participants were 
smokers, we did not perform any analysis on female subjects specifically. 
Together, our detected associations of variants in the CHRNA5/A3/B4 cluster with 
SI, SQ, and SC in the Korean smoker samples provide strong evidence for the 
contribution of this cluster to the etiology of SI, ND, and SC in this Asian 
population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012183
PMCID: PMC2922326
PMID: 20808433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.