1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(1):235-47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq763. Epub 2010
Aug  30.

Modular pathways for editing non-cognate amino acids by human cytoplasmic 
leucyl-tRNA synthetase.

Chen X(1), Ma JJ, Tan M, Yao P, Hu QH, Eriani G, Wang ED.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, The Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, 
China.

To prevent potential errors in protein synthesis, some aminoacyl-transfer RNA 
(tRNA) synthetases have evolved editing mechanisms to hydrolyze misactivated 
amino acids (pre-transfer editing) or misacylated tRNAs (post-transfer editing). 
Class Ia leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LeuRS) may misactivate various natural and 
non-protein amino acids and then mischarge tRNA(Leu). It is known that the 
fidelity of prokaryotic LeuRS depends on multiple editing pathways to clear the 
incorrect intermediates and products in the every step of aminoacylation 
reaction. Here, we obtained human cytoplasmic LeuRS (hcLeuRS) and tRNA(Leu) 
(hctRNA(Leu)) with high activity from Escherichia coli overproducing strains to 
study the synthetic and editing properties of the enzyme. We revealed that 
hcLeuRS could adjust its editing strategy against different non-cognate amino 
acids. HcLeuRS edits norvaline predominantly by post-transfer editing; however, 
it uses mainly pre-transfer editing to edit Î±-amino butyrate, although both 
amino acids can be charged to tRNA(Leu). Post-transfer editing as a final 
checkpoint of the reaction was very important to prevent mis-incorporation in 
vitro. These results provide insight into the modular editing pathways created 
to prevent genetic code ambiguity by evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq763
PMCID: PMC3017609
PMID: 20805241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]