1. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 15;347(2):301-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.027. Epub
2010  Sep 21.

Increased expression of FoxM1 transcription factor in respiratory epithelium 
inhibits lung sacculation and causes Clara cell hyperplasia.

Wang IC(1), Zhang Y, Snyder J, Sutherland MJ, Burhans MS, Shannon JM, Park HJ, 
Whitsett JA, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of the Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
USA. I-Ching.Wang@cchmc.org

Foxm1 is a member of the Forkhead Box (Fox) family of transcription factors. 
Foxm1 (previously called Foxm1b, HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2) is expressed in 
multiple cell types and plays important roles in cellular proliferation, 
differentiation and tumorigenesis. Genetic deletion of Foxm1 from mouse 
respiratory epithelium during initial stages of lung development inhibits lung 
maturation and causes respiratory failure after birth. However, the role of 
Foxm1 during postnatal lung morphogenesis remains unknown. In the present study, 
Foxm1 expression was detected in epithelial cells of conducting and peripheral 
airways and changing dynamically with lung maturation. To discern the biological 
role of Foxm1 in the prenatal and postnatal lung, a novel transgenic mouse line 
that expresses a constitutively active form of FoxM1 (FoxM1 N-terminal deletion 
mutant or FoxM1-ΔN) under the control of lung epithelial-specific SPC promoter 
was produced. Expression of the FoxM1-ΔN transgene during embryogenesis caused 
epithelial hyperplasia, inhibited lung sacculation and expression of the type II 
epithelial marker, pro-SPC. Expression of FoxM1-ΔN mutant during the postnatal 
period did not influence alveologenesis but caused focal airway hyperplasia and 
increased proliferation of Clara cells. Likewise, expression of FoxM1-ΔN mutant 
in conducting airways with Scgb1a1 promoter was sufficient to induce Clara cell 
hyperplasia. Furthermore, FoxM1-ΔN cooperated with activated K-Ras to induce 
lung tumor growth in vivo. Increased activity of Foxm1 altered lung sacculation, 
induced proliferation in the respiratory epithelium and accelerated lung tumor 
growth, indicating that precise regulation of Foxm1 is critical for normal lung 
morphogenesis and development of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.027
PMCID: PMC2957513
PMID: 20816795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]