1. Br J Haematol. 2010 Nov;151(3):239-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08364.x. 
Epub 2010 Aug 31.

Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes and risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in a pooled 
analysis of three studies.

Shen M(1), Menashe I, Morton LM, Zhang Y, Armstrong B, Wang SS, Lan Q, Hartge P, 
Purdue MP, Cerhan JR, Grulich A, Cozen W, Yeager M, Holford TR, Vajdic CM, Davis 
S, Leaderer B, Kricker A, Severson RK, Zahm SH, Chatterjee N, Rothman N, Chanock 
SJ, Zheng T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
DHHS, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Genetic variations in DNA repair genes are thought to play an important role in 
the pathogenesis and development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). To further 
explore this hypothesis, we genotyped 319 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in 27 DNA repair gene regions in 1946 cases and 1808 controls pooled from 
three population-based case-control studies of NHL in the US and Australia. 
Relative risks of NHL and NHL subtypes in relation to SNP genotypes were 
assessed using logistic regression. Associations of gene regions and pathways 
with NHL or NHL subtypes were explored using the minP and tail-strength 
statistics, respectively. Overall, genetic polymorphisms within the DNA repair 
pathway were associated with NHL (P = 0·005). Similar associations were seen 
with the double-strand break repair (P = 0·02) and nucleotide excision repair (P 
= 0·04) pathways. Five SNPs (BLM rs441399, RAD50 rs2237060, FAM82A2 rs2304583, 
ERCC3 rs4150506, and XRCC4 rs13178127) were particularly noteworthy because 
their gene regions were significantly associated with NHL or NHL subtypes (minP 
≤ 0·05), or because of high level of statistical significance (P ≤ 0·005) and 
consistent findings across the three studies. These results support the 
hypothesis that common genetic polymorphisms in human DNA repair genes may 
modify the risk of NHL.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08364.x
PMCID: PMC2967772
PMID: 20813000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]