1. J Psychiatr Res. 2011 Mar;45(3):322-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.07.008.

Developmental changes in multivariate neuroanatomical patterns that predict risk 
for psychosis in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome.

Gothelf D(1), Hoeft F, Ueno T, Sugiura L, Lee AD, Thompson P, Reiss AL.

Author information:
(1)The Child Psychiatry Department, The Edmond and Lily Safra Children's 
Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

The primary objective of the current prospective study was to examine 
developmental patterns of voxel-by-voxel gray and white matter volumes (GMV, 
WMV, respectively) that would predict psychosis in adolescents with 22q11.2 
deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS), the most common known genetic risk factor for 
schizophrenia. We performed a longitudinal voxel-based morphometry analysis 
using structural T1 MRI scans from 19 individuals with 22q11.2DS and 18 
typically developing individuals. In 22q11.2DS, univariate analysis showed that 
greater reduction in left dorsal prefrontal cortical (dPFC) GMV over time 
predicted greater psychotic symptoms at Time2. This dPFC region also showed 
significantly reduced volumes in 22q11.2DS compared to typically developing 
individuals at Time1 and 2, greater reduction over time in 22q11.2DS COMT(Met) 
compared to COMT(Val), and greater reduction in those with greater decline in 
verbal IQ over time. Leave-one-out Multivariate pattern analysis results (MVPA) 
on the other hand, showed that patterns of GM and WM morphometric changes over 
time in regions including but not limited to the dPFC predicted risk for 
psychotic symptoms (94.7-100% accuracy) significantly better than using 
univariate analysis (63.1%). Additional predictive brain regions included medial 
PFC and dorsal cingulum. This longitudinal prospective study shows novel 
evidence of morphometric spatial patterns predicting the development of 
psychotic symptoms in 22q11.2DS, and further elucidates the abnormal 
maturational processes in 22q11.2DS. The use of neuroimaging using MVPA may hold 
promise to predict outcome in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.07.008
PMCID: PMC3000448
PMID: 20817203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests I, D. Gothelf, have no 
conflicts of interest. I have no financial ties to any people or organizations 
that could have influenced this research study.