1. Am J Transplant. 2010 Oct;10(10):2331-40. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-6143.2010.03245.x.  Epub 2010 Sep 3.

Skeletal integrity and visceral transplantation.

Resnick J(1), Gupta N, Wagner J, Costa G, Cruz RJ Jr, Martin L, Koritsky DA, 
Perera S, Matarese L, Eid K, Schuster B, Roberts M, Greenspan S, Abu-Elmagd K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Despite continuous improvement in long-term survival, there is no knowledge 
about risk of bone health impairment and management strategies before and after 
intestinal transplantation. Therefore, 147 adults were retrospectively studied 
via chart review; 70 long-term survivors, 53 candidates and 24 recipients with 
longitudinal follow-up. Evaluation process included measurement of bone mineral 
density (BMD) and allied biochemical markers. Both long-term survivors and 
candidates showed low bone mass with lower (p < 0.05) z-scores at hip, femoral 
neck and spine. Vitamin D deficiency and secondary hyperparathyroidism were 
observed in both groups. Prevalence of osteoporosis was 44% among long-term 
survivors and 36% in candidates with age, BMD, duration of parenteral nutrition, 
type of immunosuppression and rejection being significant risk factors. 
Fragility fractures occurred at a higher (p = 0.02) rate among long-term 
survivors (20%) compared to candidates (6%). The longitudinal study documented 
acceleration (p = 0.025) of bone loss after transplantation with a decline of 
13.4% (femoral neck), 12.7% (hip) and 2.1% (spine). Alendronate reduced (p < 
0.05) but did not prevent bone loss. In conclusion, intestinal transplant 
recipients are at risk of osteoporosis secondary to bone loss before and after 
transplantation. Accordingly, current management includes comprehensive 
preventive measures with prompt therapeutic intervention utilizing intravenous 
bisphosphonates or subcutaneous human PTH.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 The American Society of 
Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2010.03245.x
PMCID: PMC4869861
PMID: 20825384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]