1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011 Jan;63(1):102-10. doi: 10.1002/acr.20344.

Hyperuricemia and incident hypertension: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Grayson PC(1), Kim SY, LaValley M, Choi HK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Boston University Medical Center and Boston 
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA. peter.grayson@bmc.org

OBJECTIVE: A novel rodent model and a recent randomized trial of hyperuricemic 
adolescents with hypertension suggest a pathogenetic role of uric acid in 
hypertension, but it remains unknown whether these findings would be applicable 
to adult populations where the larger disease burden exists. We conducted a 
systematic review and meta-analysis to determine if hyperuricemia was associated 
with incident hypertension, particularly in various demographic subgroups.
METHODS: We searched major electronic databases using medical subject headings 
and keywords without language restrictions (through April 2010). We included 
prospective cohort studies with data on incident hypertension related to serum 
uric acid levels. Data abstraction was conducted in duplicate. We analyzed age, 
sex, and race subgroups.
RESULTS: A total of 18 prospective cohort studies representing data from 55,607 
participants were included. Hyperuricemia was associated with an increased risk 
for incident hypertension (adjusted risk ratio [RR] 1.41, 95% confidence 
interval [95% CI] 1.23-1.58). For a 1 mg/dl increase in uric acid level, the 
pooled RR for incident hypertension after adjusting for potential confounding 
was 1.13 (95% CI 1.06-1.20). These effects were significantly larger in younger 
study populations (P = 0.02) and tended to be larger in women (P = 0.059). Two 
studies suggested that the effect may also be larger among African American 
individuals. Furthermore, later publication year and US-based studies were 
significantly associated with a lower effect estimate (P values <0.02).
CONCLUSION: Hyperuricemia is associated with an increased risk for incident 
hypertension, independent of traditional hypertension risk factors. This risk 
appears more pronounced in younger individuals and women.

Copyright Â© 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.20344
PMCID: PMC3016454
PMID: 20824805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]