1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Sep 2;6(9):e1001080. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001080.

Formation of mobile chromatin-associated nuclear foci containing HIV-1 Vpr and 
VPRBP is critical for the induction of G2 cell cycle arrest.

Belzile JP(1), Abrahamyan LG, Gérard FC, Rougeau N, Cohen EA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de 
Montréal (IRCM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Future Microbiol. 2011 Apr;6(4):375-8. doi: 10.2217/fmb.11.17.

HIV-1 Viral protein R (Vpr) induces a cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase by 
activating the ATR DNA damage/stress checkpoint. Recently, we and several other 
groups showed that Vpr performs this activity by recruiting the DDB1-CUL4A 
(VPRBP) E3 ubiquitin ligase. While recruitment of this E3 ubiquitin ligase 
complex has been shown to be required for G2 arrest, the subcellular compartment 
where this complex forms and functionally acts is unknown. Herein, using 
immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, we show that Vpr forms nuclear foci 
in several cell types including HeLa cells and primary CD4+ T-lymphocytes. These 
nuclear foci contain VPRBP and partially overlap with DNA repair foci components 
such as gamma-H2AX, 53BP1 and RPA32. While treatment with the non-specific ATR 
inhibitor caffeine or depletion of VPRBP by siRNA did not inhibit formation of 
Vpr nuclear foci, mutations in the C-terminal domain of Vpr and cytoplasmic 
sequestration of Vpr by overexpression of Gag-Pol resulted in impaired formation 
of these nuclear structures and defective G2 arrest. Consistently, we observed 
that G2 arrest-competent sooty mangabey Vpr could form these foci but not its G2 
arrest-defective paralog Vpx, suggesting that formation of Vpr nuclear foci 
represents a critical early event in the induction of G2 arrest. Indeed, we 
found that Vpr could associate to chromatin via its C-terminal domain and that 
it could form a complex with VPRBP on chromatin. Finally, analysis of Vpr 
nuclear foci by time-lapse microscopy showed that they were highly mobile and 
stable structures. Overall, our results suggest that Vpr recruits the DDB1-CUL4A 
(VPRBP) E3 ligase to these nuclear foci and uses these mobile structures to 
target a chromatin-bound cellular substrate for ubiquitination in order to 
induce DNA damage/replication stress, ultimately leading to ATR activation and 
G2 cell cycle arrest.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001080
PMCID: PMC2932712
PMID: 20824083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.