1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Jan;39(2):440-53. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq796. Epub 2010
Sep  10.

p53 activates the PANK1/miRNA-107 gene leading to downregulation of CDK6 and 
p130 cell cycle proteins.

BÃ¶hlig L(1), Friedrich M, Engeland K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.

The tumor suppressor p53 is a central regulator of cell-cycle arrest and 
apoptosis by acting as a transcription factor to regulate numerous genes. We 
identified all human p53-regulated mRNAs by microarray analyses and searched for 
protein-coding genes which contain intronic miRNAs. Among others, this analysis 
yielded the panthothenate kinase 1 (PANK1) gene and its intronic miRNA-107. We 
showed that miRNA-107 and PANK1 are coregulated by p53 in different cell 
systems. The PANK1 protein, which catalyzes the rate-limiting step of coenzyme A 
biosynthesis, is also upregulated by p53. We observed that p53 directly 
activates PANK1 and miRNA-107 transcription through a binding site in the PANK1 
promoter. Furthermore, p53 is recruited to the PANK1 promoter after DNA damage. 
In order to get more insight into miRNA-107 function we investigated its 
potential target genes. Cell-cycle regulators are significantly enriched among 
predicted miRNA-107 targets. We found miRNA-107-dependent regulation of two 
important regulators of G(1)/S progression, CDK6 and the RB-related 2 gene RBL2 
(p130). CDK6 and p130 proteins are downregulated upon miRNA-107 expression. Our 
results uncover a novel miRNA-dependent signaling pathway which leads to 
downregulation of cell cycle proteins in the absence of transcriptional 
repression.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkq796
PMCID: PMC3025554
PMID: 20833636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]