1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010 Oct;69(10):1057-70. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181f4dcef.

Downregulation of the potassium chloride cotransporter KCC2 in vulnerable 
motoneurons in the SOD1-G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Fuchs A(1), Ringer C, Bilkei-Gorzo A, Weihe E, Roeper J, Schütz B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurophysiology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.

The balance between excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs is critical for 
the physiological control of motoneurons. The maintenance of a low-intracellular 
chloride concentration by the potassium chloride cotransporter 2 (KCC2) is 
essential for the efficacy of fast synaptic inhibition of mature motoneurons in 
response to the activation of ionotropic γ-aminobutyric acid A and glycine 
receptors. Altered synaptic balance and excitotoxicity have been proposed as 
candidate pathophysiological processes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
Therefore, we investigated the expression patterns of KCC2 and its functional 
opponent, the chloride influx-mediating sodium-potassium chloride cotransporter 
1 (NKCC1), in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1-G93A) mouse model of ALS. We 
detected reduced KCC2 messenger RNA levels and less membrane-bound KCC2 
immunoreactivity in ALS-vulnerable motoneurons in lumbar spinal cord and 
hypoglossal nuclei of SOD1-G93A mice but not in degeneration-resistant 
oculomotor nuclei. Downregulation of KCC2 started during late presymptomatic 
stages and accelerated in parallel to hind limb and tongue motor function 
deficits. In contrast, NKCC1 messenger RNA levels were unaltered in postnatal 
lumbar spinal cord motoneurons. Our data indicate that reductions in KCC2 gene 
expression may contribute to selective motor deficits and disease progression in 
vulnerable motoneurons in a mouse model of ALS.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181f4dcef
PMID: 20838240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]