1. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Nov;120(5):641-9. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0741-7. Epub 
2010 Sep 14.

Glucocerebrosidase is present in α-synuclein inclusions in Lewy body disorders.

Goker-Alpan O(1), Stubblefield BK, Giasson BI, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, NHGRI, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3708, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase, known to 
cause Gaucher disease (GD), are a risk factor for the development of Parkinson 
disease (PD) and related disorders. This association is based on the concurrence 
of parkinsonism and GD, the identification of glucocerebrosidase mutations in 
cohorts with PD from centers around the world, and neuropathologic findings. The 
contribution of glucocerebrosidase to the development of parkinsonian pathology 
was explored by studying seven brain samples from subjects carrying 
glucocerebrosidase mutations with pathologic diagnoses of PD and/or Lewy body 
dementia. Three individuals had GD and four were heterozygous for 
glucocerebrosidase mutations. All cases had no known family history of PD and 
the mean age of disease onset was 59 years (range 42-77). Immunofluorescence 
studies on brain tissue samples from patients with parkinsonism associated with 
glucocerebrosidase mutations showed that glucocerebrosidase was present in 
32-90% of Lewy bodies (mean 75%), some ubiquitinated and others 
non-ubiquitinated. In samples from seven subjects without mutations, <10% of 
Lewy bodies were glucocerebrosidase positive (mean 4%). This data demonstrates 
that glucocerebrosidase can be an important component of α-synuclein-positive 
pathological inclusions. Unraveling the role of mutant glucocerebrosidase in the 
development of this pathology will further our understanding of the lysosomal 
pathways that likely contribute to the formation and/or clearance of these 
protein aggregates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0741-7
PMCID: PMC3352317
PMID: 20838799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors of this 
manuscript have no conflicts of interest to disclose.