1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Jan 7;133(1):37-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.08.062.
Epub  2010 Sep 9.

The effect of bamboo extract on hepatic biotransforming enzymes--findings from 
an obese-diabetic mouse model.

Koide CL(1), Collier AC, Berry MJ, Panee J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, 
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Bamboo leaves are used as a component in traditional Chinese 
medicine for the anti-inflammatory function. Our previous studies have 
demonstrated that an ethanol/water extract from Phyllostachys edulis ameliorated 
obesity-associated chronic systemic inflammation in mice, and therefore 
relieving the symptoms of type 2 diabetes. The aim of this project was to 
further investigate the effects of this bamboo extract on hepatic 
biotransformation enzymes in both lean and obese mice, as an initial step in the 
toxicological evaluation of using this traditional medicine in obese/diabetic 
population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male C57BL/6J mice were randomized to 4 groups and fed 
standard (10% kcal from fat) diet with or without bamboo extract supplementation 
at a dose of 10 gram per kilogram diet (n=10 and n=9, respectively), or high fat 
(45% kcal from fat) diet with or without bamboo extract (n=8 and N=7, 
respectively). The dietary treatment lasted for 6 months. Subsequently, the 
activities and expression of the major Phase I and II hepatic biotransformation 
enzymes were assessed in subcellular fractions from murine livers.
RESULTS: Three groups of mice, lean bamboo extract-supplemented, obese/diabetic, 
and bamboo extract-supplemented obese/diabetic, showed greater activities of 
cytochromes P450 1a2 and 3a11 compared to control but no changes in the 
expression level of these proteins. For Phase II enzymes, bamboo extract 
supplementation in lean mice caused decreased glutathione-S-transferase activity 
(-12%) and greater uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase activity (+46%), 
but had no effect on sulfotransferase activity. Conversely, the obese/diabetic 
condition itself increased glutathione-S-transferase and uridine diphosphate 
glucuronosyltransferase activities, but decreased total sulfotransferase 
activity and sulfotransferase 2a1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Bamboo extract and obesity/diabetes show significant independent 
effects on hepatic biotransformation as well as interaction effects in mice. 
These changes may alter the clearance of endo- and xenobiotics, including bamboo 
extract itself, hence this effect should be carefully considered in the 
medicinal application of bamboo extract as it has potential to alter its own 
metabolism and that of other medications concurrently administered to obese 
diabetic patients.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.08.062
PMCID: PMC3471658
PMID: 20832461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.