1. Cancer. 2011 Feb 1;117(3):492-500. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25445. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Evidence for an hMSH3 defect in familial hamartomatous polyps.

Huang SC(1), Lee JK, Smith EJ, Doctolero RT, Tajima A, Beck SE, Weidner N, 
Carethers JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with hamartomatous polyposis syndromes have increased risk 
for colorectal cancer (CRC). Although progression of polyps to carcinoma is 
observed, pathogenic mechanisms remain unknown. The authors examined whether 
familial hamartomatous polyps harbor defects in DNA mismatch repair (MMR), and 
assayed for somatic mutation of PTEN, a gene inactivated in the germline of some 
hamartomatous polyposis syndrome patients.
METHODS: Ten hamartomatous polyposis syndrome patients were genotyped for 
germline mutations. Epithelial and nonepithelial polyp DNA were assayed for 
microsatellite instability (MSI) and PTEN frameshift mutation. DNA MMR and PTEN 
protein expression were assessed in all polyps by immunohistochemistry. In 
addition, 99 MSI-high sporadic CRCs and 50 each of hMLH1(-/-) and hMSH3(-/-) 
cell clones were examined for PTEN frameshifts.
RESULTS: Twenty-five (58%) of 43 hamartomatous polyposis syndrome polyps 
demonstrated dinucleotide or greater MSI in polyp epithelium, consistent with 
hMSH3 deficiency. MSI domains lost hMSH3 expression, and PTEN expression was 
lost in polyps from germline PTEN patients; sporadic hamartomatous polyps did 
not show any of these findings. PTEN analysis revealed wild type exon 7 and 8 
sequences suggestive of nonexistent or rare events for PTEN frameshifts; 
however, MSI-high sporadic CRC showed 11 (11%) of 99 frameshifts within PTEN, 
with 4 tumors having complete loss of PTEN expression. Subcloning hMLH1(-/-) and 
hMSH3(-/-) cells revealed somatic PTEN frameshifts in 4% and 12% of clones, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Nondysplastic epithelium from hamartomatous polyposis syndrome 
polyps harbors hMSH3 defects, which may prime neoplastic transformation. Polyps 
from PTEN(+/-) patients lose PTEN expression, but loss is not a universal early 
feature of all hamartomatous polyposis syndrome. However, PTEN frameshifts can 
occur in hMSH3-deficient cells, suggesting that hMSH3 deficiency could drive 
hamartomatous polyposis syndrome tumorigenesis.

Copyright Â© 2010 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25445
PMCID: PMC3005073
PMID: 20845481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: All authors declare no conflict or 
competing interest for this manuscript.