1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Dec 1;19(23):4654-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq396. Epub 2010
Sep  14.

Discovery of the BMPR1A promoter and germline mutations that cause juvenile 
polyposis.

Calva-Cerqueira D(1), Dahdaleh FS, Woodfield G, Chinnathambi S, Nagy PL, 
Larsen-Haidle J, Weigel RJ, Howe JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa 
Hospitals and Clinics, 200 Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242-1086, USA.

Juvenile polyposis (JP) is an autosomal dominant hamartomatous polyposis 
syndrome where affected individuals are predisposed to colorectal and upper 
gastrointestinal cancer. Forty-five percent of JP patients have mutations or 
deletions involving the coding regions of SMAD4 and BMPR1A, but the genetic 
basis of other cases is unknown. We set out to identify the JP gene in a large 
kindred having 10 affected members without SMAD4 or BMPR1A coding sequence 
mutations or deletions. We found a germline deletion segregating in all affected 
members, mapping 119 kb upstream of the coding region of BMPR1A by multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification and comparative genomic hybridization. To 
further understand the genomic structure of BMPR1A, we performed 5' RACE from 
lymphoblastoid cell lines and normal colon tissue, which revealed four 
non-coding (NC) exons and two putative promoters. Further analysis of this 
deletion showed that it encompassed 12 433 bp, including one promoter and NC 
exon. The activities of each promoter and deletion constructs were evaluated by 
luciferase assays, and the stronger promoter sequence analyzed for changes in JP 
patients without SMAD4 or BMPR1A alterations. A total of 6 of 65 JP probands 
were found to have mutations affecting this promoter. All probands examined had 
diminished BMPR1A protein by ELISA, and all promoter mutations but one led to 
significantly reduced luciferase activity relative to the wild-type promoter 
reporter. We conclude that we have identified the promoter for BMPR1A, in which 
mutations may be responsible for as many as 10% of JP cases with unknown 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq396
PMCID: PMC2972697
PMID: 20843829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]