1. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 1;70(21):8642-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1345.
Epub  2010 Sep 14.

Heat shock protein 90 inhibition depletes LATS1 and LATS2, two regulators of the 
mammalian hippo tumor suppressor pathway.

Huntoon CJ(1), Nye MD, Geng L, Peterson KL, Flatten KS, Haluska P, Kaufmann SH, 
Karnitz LM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), which regulates the functions of multiple 
oncogenic signaling pathways, has emerged as a novel anticancer therapeutic 
target, and multiple small-molecule HSP90 inhibitors are now in clinical trials. 
Although the effects of HSP90 inhibitors on oncogenic signaling pathways have 
been extensively studied, the effects of these agents on tumor suppressor 
signaling pathways are currently unknown. Here, we have examined how HSP90 
inhibitors affect LATS1 and the related protein LATS2, two kinases that relay 
antiproliferative signals in the Hippo tumor suppressor pathway. Both LATS1 and 
LATS2 were depleted from cells treated with the HSP90 inhibitors 
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), radicicol, and PU-H71. 
Moreover, these kinases interacted with HSP90, and LATS1 isolated from 
17-AAG-treated cells had reduced catalytic activity, thus showing that the 
kinase is a bona fide HSP90 client. Importantly, LATS1 signaling was disrupted 
by 17-AAG in tumor cell lines in vitro and clinical ovarian cancers in vivo as 
shown by reduced levels of LATS1 and decreased phosphorylation of the LATS 
substrate YAP, an oncoprotein transcriptional coactivator that regulates genes 
involved in cell and tissue growth, including the CTGF gene. Consistent with the 
reduced YAP phosphorylation, there were increased levels of CTGF, a secreted 
protein that is implicated in tumor proliferation, metastasis, and angiogenesis. 
Taken together, these results identify LATS1 and LATS2 as novel HSP90 clients 
and show that HSP90 inhibitors can disrupt the LATS tumor suppressor pathway in 
human cancer cells.

Â©2010 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1345
PMCID: PMC2970685
PMID: 20841485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]