1. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;30(1):55-9. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1106. Epub 2010 Sep 
17.

Endothelial nitric oxide genotypes and haplotypes are not associated with 
end-stage renal disease.

Marson BP(1), Dickel S, Ishizawa MH, Metzger IF, Izidoro-Toledo T, da Costa BE, 
Poli-de-Figueiredo CE, Tanus-Santos JE.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirao 
Preto, Brazil.

The identification of genetic markers associated with chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) may help to predict its development. Because reduced nitric oxide (NO) 
bioavailability and endothelial dysfunction are involved in CKD, genetic 
polymorphisms in the gene encoding the enzyme involved in NO synthesis 
(endothelial NO synthase [eNos]) may affect the susceptibility to CKD and the 
development of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). We compared genotype and 
haplotype distributions of three relevant eNOS polymorphisms (T(-786)C in the 
promoter region, Glu298Asp in exon 7, and 4b/4a in intron 4) in 110 healthy 
control subjects and 127 ESRD patients. Genotypes for the T(-786)C and Glu298Asp 
polymorphisms were determined by TaqMan(®) Allele Discrimination assay and 
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Genotypes for the intron 4 polymorphism 
were determined by polymerase chain reaction and fragment separation by 
electrophoresis. The software program PHASE 2.1 was used to estimate the 
haplotypes frequencies. We considered significant a probability value of 
p < 0.05/number of haplotypes (p < 0.05/8 = 0.0063). We found no significant 
differences between groups with respect to age, ethnicity, and gender. CKD 
patients had higher blood pressure, total cholesterol, and creatinine levels 
than healthy control subjects (all p < 0.05). Genotype and allele distributions 
for the three eNOS polymorphisms were similar in both groups (p > 0.05). We 
found no significant differences in haplotype distribution between groups 
(p > 0.05). The lack of significant associations between eNOS polymorphisms and 
ESRD suggests that eNOS polymorphisms may not be relevant to the genetic 
component of CKD that leads to ESRD.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2010.1106
PMID: 20849252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]