1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2010 Dec;33(6):795-802. doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9196-1. 
Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Progressive ataxia and myoclonic epilepsy in a patient with a homozygous 
mutation in the FOLR1 gene.

Pérez-Dueñas B(1), Toma C, Ormazábal A, Muchart J, Sanmartí F, Bombau G, Serrano 
M, García-Cazorla A, Cormand B, Artuch R.

Author information:
(1)Departament of Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Passeig Sant Joan de 
Dèu, 2, 08950 Esplugues, Barcelona, Spain. bperez@hsjdbcn.org

Several unrelated disorders can lead to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5MTHF) 
depletion in the cerobrospinal fluid (CSF), including primary genetic disorders 
in folate-related pathways or those causing defective transport across the 
blood-CSF barrier. We report a case of cerebral folate transport deficiency due 
to a novel homozygous mutation in the FOLR1 gene, in an effort to clarify 
phenotype-genotype correlation in this newly identified neurometabolic disorder. 
A previously healthy infant developed an ataxic syndrome in the second year of 
life, followed by choreic movements and progressive myoclonic epilepsy. At the 
age of 26 months, we analyzed CSF 5MTHF by HPLC with fluorescence detection and 
conducted magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and spectroscopy studies. Finally, we 
performed mutational screening in the coding region of the FOLR1 gene. MR showed 
a diffuse abnormal signal of the cerebral white matter, cerebellar atrophy and a 
reduced peak of choline in spectroscopy. A profound deficiency of CSF 5MTHF (2 
nmol/L; NV 48-127) with reduced CSF/plasma folate ratio (0.4; NV 1.5-3.5) was 
highly suggestive of defective brain folate-specific transport across the 
blood-CSF/brain barrier. Mutation screening of FOLR1 revealed a new homozygous 
missense mutation (p.Cys105Arg) that is predicted to abolish a disulfide bond, 
probably necessary for the correct folding of the protein. Both parents were 
heterozygous carriers of the same variant. Mutation screening in the FOLR1 gene 
is advisable in children with profound 5MTHF deficiency and decreased CSF/serum 
folate ratio. Progressive ataxia and myoclonic epilepsy, together with impaired 
brain myelination, are clinical hallmarks of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-010-9196-1
PMID: 20857335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]