1. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 15;5(9):e12761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012761.

In silico identification of carboxylate clamp type tetratricopeptide repeat 
proteins in Arabidopsis and rice as putative co-chaperones of Hsp90/Hsp70.

Prasad BD(1), Goel S, Krishna P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.

The essential eukaryotic molecular chaperone Hsp90 operates with the help of 
different co-chaperones, which regulate its ATPase activity and serve as 
adaptors to recruit client proteins and other molecular chaperones, such as 
Hsp70, to the Hsp90 complex. Several Hsp90 and Hsp70 co-chaperones contain the 
tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain, which interacts with the highly conserved 
EEVD motif at the C-terminal ends of Hsp90 and Hsp70. The acidic side chains in 
EEVD interact with a subset of basic residues in the TPR binding pocket called a 
'carboxylate clamp'. Since the carboxylate clamp residues are conserved in the 
TPR domains of known Hsp90/Hsp70 co-chaperones, we carried out an in silico 
search for TPR proteins in Arabidopsis and rice comprising of at least one 
three-motif TPR domain with conserved amino acid residues required for 
Hsp90/Hsp70 binding. This approach identified in Arabidopsis a total of 36 
carboxylate clamp (CC)-TPR proteins, including 24 novel proteins, with potential 
to interact with Hsp90/Hsp70. The newly identified CC-TPR proteins in 
Arabidopsis and rice contain additional protein domains such as ankyrin, SET, 
octicosapeptide/Phox/Bem1p (Phox/PB1), DnaJ-like, thioredoxin, FBD and F-box, 
and protein kinase and U-box, indicating varied functions for these proteins. To 
provide proof-of-concept of the newly identified CC-TPR proteins for interaction 
with Hsp90, we demonstrated interaction of AtTPR1 and AtTPR2 with AtHsp90 in 
yeast two-hybrid and in vitro pull down assays. These findings indicate that the 
in silico approach used here successfully identified in a genome-wide context 
CC-TPR proteins with potential to interact with Hsp90/Hsp70, and further suggest 
that the Hsp90/Hsp70 system relies on TPR co-chaperones more than it was 
previously realized.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012761
PMCID: PMC2939883
PMID: 20856808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.