1. Hear Res. 2010 Dec 1;270(1-2):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.09.004. Epub 
2010 Sep 17.

Current focusing sharpens local peaks of excitation in cochlear implant 
stimulation.

Srinivasan AG(1), Landsberger DM, Shannon RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Communication and Auditory Neuroscience, House Ear Institute, 
Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA. asrinivasan@hei.org

Cochlear implant (CI) users' spectral resolution is limited by the number of 
implanted electrodes, interactions between the electrodes, and the underlying 
neural population. Current steering has been proposed to increase the number of 
spectral channels beyond the number of physical electrodes, however, electric 
field interactions may limit CI users' access to current-steered virtual 
channels (VCs). Current focusing (e.g tripolar stimulation) has been proposed to 
reduce current spread and thereby reduce interactions. In this study, current 
steering and current focusing were combined in a four-electrode stimulation 
pattern, i.e quadrupolar virtual channels (QPVCs). The spread of excitation was 
measured and compared between QPVC and Monopolar VC (MPVC) stimuli using a 
forward masking task. Results showed a sharper peak in the excitation pattern 
and reduced spread of masking for QPVC stimuli. Results from the forward masking 
study were compared with a previous study measuring VC discrimination ability 
and showed a weak relationship between spread of excitation and VC 
discriminability. The results suggest that CI signal processing strategies that 
utilize both current steering and current focusing might increase CI users' 
functional spectral resolution by transmitting more channels and reducing 
channel interactions.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.09.004
PMCID: PMC2997903
PMID: 20850513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]