1. Arch Med Res. 2010 Jul;41(5):378-82. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2010.07.010.

G1359A polymorphism in the cannabinoid receptor-1 gene is associated with 
metabolic syndrome in the Chinese Han population.

Hu WC(1), Feng P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, General Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 
PR China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Recent studies suggest that endocannabinoids modulate food 
intake and lipogenesis through cannabinoid receptor-1 (CNR1). This study aims to 
determine the association between G1359A polymorphism of CNR1 and metabolic 
syndrome (MetS) in the Chinese Han population.
METHODS: A total of 382 subjects at risk for MetS and 136 healthy subjects from 
Tianjin, China were genotyped for the G1359A polymorphism of CNR1 using TaqMan 
assay. Anthropometric measurements and serum analyses were done for body mass 
index (BMI), waist circumference, blood pressure, serum triglycerides (TG), 
serum total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol, fasting plasma glucose, and plasma insulin levels.
RESULTS: GG genotype of CNR1 has a higher incidence in MetS subjects than in 
control subjects. Logistic regression analysis shows that the GG genotype was 
significantly associated with the increased risk of developing MetS (OR 2.204, 
95% CI 1.277-3.803, p = 0.005). Compared with CNR1 GG genotype in MetS subjects, 
CNR1 GA and AA genotypes in subjects with MetS had relatively lower levels of 
BMI, waist circumference, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR) and TG.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the G1359A polymorphism of the CNR1 gene may 
contribute to MetS susceptibility in the Chinese Han population.

Copyright Â© 2010 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2010.07.010
PMID: 20851297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]