1. Diabetes Care. 2011 Jan;34(1):168-73. doi: 10.2337/dc10-0579. Epub 2010 Sep
20.

Identification of autoantibody-negative autoimmune type 2 diabetic patients.

Brooks-Worrell BM(1), Reichow JL, Goel A, Ismail H, Palmer JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. 
bbrooks@u.washington.edu

OBJECTIVE: Islet autoimmunity has long been recognized in the pathogenesis of 
type 1 diabetes and is becoming increasingly acknowledged as a component in the 
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Islet reactive T cells and autoantibodies have 
been demonstrated in type 1 diabetes, whereas islet autoimmunity in type 2 
diabetes has been limited to islet autoantibodies. In this study, we 
investigated whether islet reactive T cells might also be present in type 2 
diabetic patients and how islet reactive T cells correlate with Î²-cell function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Adult phenotypic type 2 diabetic patients (n = 36) 
were screened for islet reactive T-cell responses using cellular immunoblotting 
and five islet autoantibodies (islet cell antibody, GADA, insulin autoantibody, 
insulinoma-associated protein-2 autoantibody, and zinc transporter 
autoantibody).
RESULTS: We identified four subgroups of adult phenotypic type 2 diabetic 
patients based on their immunological status (Ab(-)T(-), Ab(+)T(-), Ab(-)T(+), 
and Ab(+)T(+)). The Ab(-)T(+) type 2 diabetic patients demonstrated T-cell 
responses similar to those of the Ab(+)T(+) type 2 diabetic patients. Data were 
adjusted for BMI, insulin resistance, and duration of diabetes. Significant 
differences (P < 0.02) were observed among groups for fasting and 
glucagon-stimulated C-peptide responses. T-cell responses to islet proteins were 
also demonstrated to fluctuate less than autoantibody responses.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a group of adult autoimmune phenotypic type 2 
diabetic patients who are Ab(-)T(+) and thus would not be detected using 
autoantibody testing alone. We conclude that islet autoimmunity may be more 
prevalent in adult phenotypic type 2 diabetic patients than previously 
estimated.

DOI: 10.2337/dc10-0579
PMCID: PMC3004952
PMID: 20855551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]