1. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Mar;226(3):809-21. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22406.

Fibroblast growth factor-2 stimulates directed migration of periodontal ligament 
cells via PI3K/AKT signaling and CD44/hyaluronan interaction.

Shimabukuro Y(1), Terashima H, Takedachi M, Maeda K, Nakamura T, Sawada K, 
Kobashi M, Awata T, Oohara H, Kawahara T, Iwayama T, Hashikawa T, Yanagita M, 
Yamada S, Murakami S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Biology and Disease Control, Department of Periodontology, 
Osaka University Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) regulates a variety of functions of the 
periodontal ligament (PDL) cell, which is a key player during tissue 
regeneration following periodontal tissue breakdown by periodontal disease. In 
this study, we investigated the effects of FGF-2 on the cell migration and 
related signaling pathways of MPDL22, a mouse PDL cell clone. FGF-2 activated 
the migration of MPDL22 cells and phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K) and akt. The P13K inhibitors, Wortmannin and LY294002, 
suppressed both cell migration and akt activation in MPDL22, suggesting that the 
PI3K/akt pathway is involved in FGF-2-stimulated migration of MPDL22 cells. 
Moreover, in response to FGF-2, MPDL22 showed increased CD44 expression, avidity 
to hyaluronan (HA) partly via CD44, HA production and mRNA expression of HA 
synthase (Has)-1, 2, and 3. However, the distribution of HA molecular mass 
produced by MPDL22 was not altered by FGF-2 stimulation. Treatment of transwell 
membrane with HA facilitated the migration of MPDL22 cells and an anti-CD44 
neutralizing antibody inhibited it. Interestingly, the expression of CD44 was 
colocalized with HA on the migrating cells when stimulated with FGF-2. 
Furthermore, an anti-CD44 antibody and small interfering RNA for CD44 
significantly decreased the FGF-2-induced migration of MPDL22 cells. Taken 
together, PI3K/akt and CD44/HA signaling pathways are responsible for 
FGF-2-mediated cell motility of PDL cells, suggesting that FGF-2 accelerates 
periodontal regeneration by regulating the cellular functions including 
migration, proliferation and modulation of extracellular matrix production.

Copyright Â© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.22406
PMID: 20857427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]