1. BMC Genomics. 2010 Sep 24;11:512. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-512.

SOLiD sequencing of four Vibrio vulnificus genomes enables comparative genomic 
analysis and identification of candidate clade-specific virulence genes.

Gulig PA(1), de Cr√©cy-Lagard V, Wright AC, Walts B, Telonis-Scott M, McIntyre 
LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA. gulig@ufl.edu

BACKGROUND: Vibrio vulnificus is the leading cause of reported death from 
consumption of seafood in the United States. Despite several decades of research 
on molecular pathogenesis, much remains to be learned about the mechanisms of 
virulence of this opportunistic bacterial pathogen. The two complete and 
annotated genomic DNA sequences of V. vulnificus belong to strains of clade 2, 
which is the predominant clade among clinical strains. Clade 2 strains generally 
possess higher virulence potential in animal models of disease compared with 
clade 1, which predominates among environmental strains. SOLiD sequencing of 
four V. vulnificus strains representing different clades (1 and 2) and biotypes 
(1 and 2) was used for comparative genomic analysis.
RESULTS: Greater than 4,100,000 bases were sequenced of each strain, yielding 
approximately 100-fold coverage for each of the four genomes. Although the read 
lengths of SOLiD genomic sequencing were only 35 nt, we were able to make 
significant conclusions about the unique and shared sequences among the genomes, 
including identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Comparative 
analysis of the newly sequenced genomes to the existing reference genomes 
enabled the identification of 3,459 core V. vulnificus genes shared among all 
six strains and 80 clade 2-specific genes. We identified 523,161 SNPs among the 
six genomes.
CONCLUSIONS: We were able to glean much information about the genomic content of 
each strain using next generation sequencing. Flp pili, GGDEF proteins, and 
genomic island XII were identified as possible virulence factors because of 
their presence in virulent sequenced strains. Genomic comparisons also point 
toward the involvement of sialic acid catabolism in pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-512
PMCID: PMC3091676
PMID: 20863407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]