1. Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1401-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61109-9. Epub
 2010 Sep 29.

Rare chromosomal deletions and duplications in attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder: a genome-wide analysis.

Williams NM(1), Zaharieva I, Martin A, Langley K, Mantripragada K, Fossdal R, 
Stefansson H, Stefansson K, Magnusson P, Gudmundsson OO, Gustafsson O, Holmans 
P, Owen MJ, O'Donovan M, Thapar A.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre in Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics and Department of 
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Cardiff, UK. williamsnm@cf.ac.uk

Comment in
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1367-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61192-0.
    Lancet. 2010 Oct 23;376(9750):1364. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61937-X.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):377-8; author reply 378. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60120-7.
    Lancet. 2011 Jan 29;377(9763):378-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60122-0.

BACKGROUND: Large, rare chromosomal deletions and duplications known as copy 
number variants (CNVs) have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders 
similar to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We aimed to 
establish whether burden of CNVs was increased in ADHD, and to investigate 
whether identified CNVs were enriched for loci previously identified in autism 
and schizophrenia.
METHODS: We undertook a genome-wide analysis of CNVs in 410 children with ADHD 
and 1156 unrelated ethnically matched controls from the 1958 British Birth 
Cohort. Children of white UK origin, aged 5-17 years, who met diagnostic 
criteria for ADHD or hyperkinetic disorder, but not schizophrenia and autism, 
were recruited from community child psychiatry and paediatric outpatient 
clinics. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in the ADHD and 
control groups with two arrays; CNV analysis was limited to SNPs common to both 
arrays and included only samples with high-quality data. CNVs in the ADHD group 
were validated with comparative genomic hybridisation. We assessed the 
genome-wide burden of large (>500 kb), rare (<1% population frequency) CNVs 
according to the average number of CNVs per sample, with significance assessed 
via permutation. Locus-specific tests of association were undertaken for test 
regions defined for all identified CNVs and for 20 loci implicated in autism or 
schizophrenia. Findings were replicated in 825 Icelandic patients with ADHD and 
35,243 Icelandic controls.
FINDINGS: Data for full analyses were available for 366 children with ADHD and 
1047 controls. 57 large, rare CNVs were identified in children with ADHD and 78 
in controls, showing a significantly increased rate of CNVs in ADHD (0·156 vs 
0·075; p=8·9×10(-5)). This increased rate of CNVs was particularly high in those 
with intellectual disability (0·424; p=2·0×10(-6)), although there was also a 
significant excess in cases with no such disability (0·125, p=0·0077). An excess 
of chromosome 16p13.11 duplications was noted in the ADHD group (p=0·0008 after 
correction for multiple testing), a finding that was replicated in the Icelandic 
sample (p=0·031). CNVs identified in our ADHD cohort were significantly enriched 
for loci previously reported in both autism (p=0·0095) and schizophrenia 
(p=0·010).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings provide genetic evidence of an increased rate of 
large CNVs in individuals with ADHD and suggest that ADHD is not purely a social 
construct.
FUNDING: Action Research; Baily Thomas Charitable Trust; Wellcome Trust; UK 
Medical Research Council; European Union.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61109-9
PMCID: PMC2965350
PMID: 20888040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]