1. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Sep 29;2(51):51ra70. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001599.

Interfering with resistance to smoothened antagonists by inhibition of the PI3K 
pathway in medulloblastoma.

Buonamici S(1), Williams J, Morrissey M, Wang A, Guo R, Vattay A, Hsiao K, Yuan 
J, Green J, Ospina B, Yu Q, Ostrom L, Fordjour P, Anderson DL, Monahan JE, 
Kelleher JF, Peukert S, Pan S, Wu X, Maira SM, García-Echeverría C, Briggs KJ, 
Watkins DN, Yao YM, Lengauer C, Warmuth M, Sellers WR, Dorsch M.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The malignant brain cancer medulloblastoma is characterized by mutations in 
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway genes, which lead to constitutive activation of 
the G protein (heterotrimeric guanosine triphosphate-binding protein)-coupled 
receptor Smoothened (Smo). The Smo antagonist NVP-LDE225 inhibits Hh signaling 
and induces tumor regression in animal models of medulloblastoma. However, 
evidence of resistance was observed during the course of treatment. Molecular 
analysis of resistant tumors revealed several resistance mechanisms. We noted 
chromosomal amplification of Gli2, a downstream effector of Hh signaling, and, 
more rarely, point mutations in Smo that led to reactivated Hh signaling and 
restored tumor growth. Analysis of pathway gene expression signatures also, 
unexpectedly, identified up-regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) 
signaling in resistant tumors as another potential mechanism of resistance. 
Probing the relevance of increased PI3K signaling, we demonstrated that addition 
of the PI3K inhibitor NVP-BKM120 or the dual PI3K-mTOR (mammalian target of 
rapamycin) inhibitor NVP-BEZ235 to the initial treatment with the Smo antagonist 
markedly delayed the development of resistance. Our findings may be useful in 
informing treatment strategies for medulloblastoma.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3001599
PMCID: PMC3422576
PMID: 20881279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The majority of the authors 
are employees of Novartis Pharmaceuticals.