1. Hum Mutat. 2010 Dec;31(12):1360-5. doi: 10.1002/humu.21365. Epub 2010 Nov 9.

COLD PCR HRM: a highly sensitive detection method for IDH1 mutations.

Boisselier B(1), Marie Y, Labussière M, Ciccarino P, Desestret V, Wang X, 
Capelle L, Delattre JY, Sanson M.

Author information:
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut 
du Cerveau et de la Moëlle épinière (CRICM) UMR-S975, Paris, France.

The p.Arg132His mutation of isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1(R132H) ) is a 
frequent alteration and a major prognostic marker in gliomas. However, direct 
sequencing of highly contaminated tumor samples may fail to detect this 
mutation. Our objective was to evaluated the sensitivity of a newly described 
amplification method, coamplification at lower temperature-PCR (COLD PCR), 
combined with high-resolution melting (HRM) for the detection of the IDH1(R132H) 
mutation. To this end, we used serial dilutions of mutant DNA with wild-type 
DNA. PCR-HRM assay detects IDH1(R132H) at an abundance of 25%, similar to the 
detection limit of direct Sanger sequencing. Introducing a run of COLD PCR 
allows the detection of 2% mutant DNA. Using two consecutive runs of COLD PCR, 
we detected 0.25% mutant DNA in a background of wild-type DNA, that mimics a 
tumor sample highly contaminated by normal DNA. We then analyzed 10 biopsies of 
tumor edges, considered free of tumor cells by histological analysis, and showed 
that immunohistochemistry of IDH1(R132H) was positive in three cases (30%), 
whereas double COLD PCR HRM was positive in the 10 cases studied (100%). In 
summary, COLD PCR HRM analysis is 100-fold more sensitive than Sanger 
sequencing, rendering this rapid and powerful strategy particularly useful for 
samples highly contaminated with normal tissue.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21365
PMID: 20886613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]