1. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 8;10:103. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-103.

PLCγ-activated signalling is essential for TrkB mediated sensory neuron 
structural plasticity.

Sciarretta C(1), Fritzsch B, Beisel K, Rocha-Sanchez SM, Buniello A, Horn JM, 
Minichiello L.

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Mouse Biology Unit, Via Ramornie 32, 
00015 Monterotondo, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The vestibular system provides the primary input of our sense of 
balance and spatial orientation. Dysfunction of the vestibular system can 
severely affect a person's quality of life. Therefore, understanding the 
molecular basis of vestibular neuron survival, maintenance, and innervation of 
the target sensory epithelia is fundamental.
RESULTS: Here we report that a point mutation at the phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ) 
docking site in the mouse neurotrophin tyrosine kinase receptor TrkB (Ntrk2) 
specifically impairs fiber guidance inside the vestibular sensory epithelia, but 
has limited effects on the survival of vestibular sensory neurons and growth of 
afferent processes toward the sensory epithelia. We also show that expression of 
the TRPC3 cation calcium channel, whose activity is known to be required for 
nerve-growth cone guidance induced by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 
is altered in these animals. In addition, we find that absence of the PLCγ 
mediated TrkB signalling interferes with the transformation of bouton type 
afferent terminals of vestibular dendrites into calyces (the largest synaptic 
contact of dendrites known in the mammalian nervous system) on type I vestibular 
hair cells; the latter are normally distributed in these mutants as revealed by 
an unaltered expression pattern of the potassium channel KCNQ4 in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate a crucial involvement of the 
TrkB/PLCγ-mediated intracellular signalling in structural aspects of sensory 
neuron plasticity.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-103
PMCID: PMC2964534
PMID: 20932311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]