1. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Apr;26(4):777-91. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.267.

Nell-1, a key functional mediator of Runx2, partially rescues calvarial defects 
in Runx2(+/-) mice.

Zhang X(1), Ting K, Bessette CM, Culiat CT, Sung SJ, Lee H, Chen F, Shen J, Wang 
JJ, Kuroda S, Soo C.

Author information:
(1)Dental and Craniofacial Research Institute, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cell commitment to an osteoprogenitor lineage requires the 
activity of Runx2, a molecule implicated in the etiopathology of multiple 
congenital craniofacial anomalies. Through promoter analyses, we have recently 
identified a new direct transcriptional target of Runx2, Nell-1, a 
craniosynostosis (CS)-associated molecule with potent osteogenic properties. 
This study investigated the mechanistic and functional relationship between 
Nell-1 and Runx2 in regulating osteoblast differentiation. The results showed 
that spatiotemporal distribution and expression levels of Nell-1 correlated 
closely with those of endogenous Runx2 during craniofacial development. 
Phenotypically, cross-mating Nell-1 overexpression transgenic (CMV-Nell-1) mice 
with Runx2 haploinsufficient (Runx2(+/-)) mice partially rescued the calvarial 
defects in the cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD)-like phenotype of Runx2(+/-) mice, 
whereas Nell-1 protein induced mineralization and bone formation in Runx2(+/-) 
but not Runx2(-/-) calvarial explants. Runx2-mediated osteoblastic gene 
expression and/or mineralization was severely reduced by Nell-1 siRNA oligos 
transfection into Runx2(+/+) newborn mouse calvarial cells (NMCCs) or in 
N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced Nell-1(-/-) NMCCs. Meanwhile, Nell-1 
overexpression partially rescued osteoblastic gene expression but not 
mineralization in Runx2 null (Runx2(-/-)) NMCCs. Mechanistically, irrespective 
of Runx2 genotype, Nell-1 signaling activates ERK1/2 and JNK1 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in NMCCs and enhances Runx2 phosphorylation and 
activity when Runx2 is present. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Nell-1 
is a critical downstream Runx2 functional mediator insofar as Runx2-regulated 
Nell-1 promotes osteoblastic differentiation through, in part, activation of 
MAPK and enhanced phosphorylation of Runx2, and Runx2 activity is significantly 
reduced when Nell-1 is blocked or absent.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.267
PMCID: PMC3179324
PMID: 20939017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]