1. Behav Genet. 2011 Jan;41(1):50-7. doi: 10.1007/s10519-010-9402-9. Epub 2010
Oct  15.

Genetic variance in a component of the language acquisition device: ROBO1 
polymorphisms associated with phonological buffer deficits.

Bates TC(1), Luciano M, Medland SE, Montgomery GW, Wright MJ, Martin NG.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognitive Aging and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. tim.bates@ed.ac.uk

The region containing ROBO1 (Chromosome 3p12.3) has been implicated as a 
susceptibility gene for reading disorder and language deficit by translocation 
and linkage data. No association studies have yet been reported supporting any 
candidate gene. Here we report the first association of this gene with language 
deficits, specifically with phonological buffer deficits (a phenotype implicated 
in language acquisition, Specific Language Impairment and Speech Sound Disorder) 
and dyslexia (reading and spelling ability traits) in an unselected sample of 
adolescent twins and their siblings. Family-based analyses were performed on 144 
tag SNPs in ROBO1, typed in 538 families with up to five offspring and tested 
for association with a developmental marker of language impairment (phonological 
buffer capacity, assessed using non word repetition). A reading and spelling 
ability measure--based on validated measures of lexical processing (irregular 
word) and grapheme-phoneme decoding (pseudo word)--and measures of short-term 
and working memory were also analysed. Significant association for phonological 
buffer capacity was observed for 21 of 144 SNPs tested, peaking at 8.70 × 
10(-05) and 9.30 × 10(-05) for SNPs rs6803202 and rs4535189 respectively for 
nonword repetition, values that survive correction for multiple testing. 
Twenty-two SNPs showed significant associations for verbal storage (forward 
digit span)--a trait linked to phonological span. By contrast, just 5 SNPs 
reached nominal significance for working-memory, not surviving correction, and, 
importantly, only one SNP in the 144 tested reached nominal significance (0.04) 
for association with reading and spelling ability. These results provide strong 
support for ROBO1 as a gene involved in a core trait underpinning language 
acquisition, with a specific function in supporting a short-term buffer for 
arbitrary phonological strings. These effects of ROBO1 appear to be unrelated to 
brain mechanisms underpinning reading ability, at least by adolescence. While 
replication will be critical, the present results strongly support ROBO1 as the 
first gene discovered to be associated with language deficits affecting normal 
variation in language ability. Its functional role in neuronal migration 
underlying bilateral symmetry and lateralization of neuronal function further 
suggests a role in the evolution of human language ability.

DOI: 10.1007/s10519-010-9402-9
PMID: 20949370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]