1. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Oct 7;6(10):e1001140. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001140.

Gene annotation and drug target discovery in Candida albicans with a tagged 
transposon mutant collection.

Oh J(1), Fung E, Schlecht U, Davis RW, Giaever G, St Onge RP, Deutschbauer A, 
Nislow C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, United 
States of America.

Candida albicans is the most common human fungal pathogen, causing infections 
that can be lethal in immunocompromised patients. Although Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae has been used as a model for C. albicans, it lacks C. albicans' 
diverse morphogenic forms and is primarily non-pathogenic. Comprehensive genetic 
analyses that have been instrumental for determining gene function in S. 
cerevisiae are hampered in C. albicans, due in part to limited resources to 
systematically assay phenotypes of loss-of-function alleles. Here, we 
constructed and screened a library of 3633 tagged heterozygous transposon 
disruption mutants, using them in a competitive growth assay to examine 
nutrient- and drug-dependent haploinsufficiency. We identified 269 genes that 
were haploinsufficient in four growth conditions, the majority of which were 
condition-specific. These screens identified two new genes necessary for 
filamentous growth as well as ten genes that function in essential processes. We 
also screened 57 chemically diverse compounds that more potently inhibited 
growth of C. albicans versus S. cerevisiae. For four of these compounds, we 
examined the genetic basis of this differential inhibition. Notably, Sec7p was 
identified as the target of brefeldin A in C. albicans screens, while S. 
cerevisiae screens with this compound failed to identify this target. We also 
uncovered a new C. albicans-specific target, Tfp1p, for the synthetic compound 
0136-0228. These results highlight the value of haploinsufficiency screens 
directly in this pathogen for gene annotation and drug target identification.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001140
PMCID: PMC2951378
PMID: 20949076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.