1. Mol Immunol. 2010 Nov-Dec;48(1-3):128-36. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.09.002. 
Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Assessing the role of Asp 194 in the transmembrane domains of the α-chain of the 
high-affinity receptor complex for immunoglobulin E in signal transduction.

Rashid A(1), Iodice MW, Carroll KM, Housden JE, Hunter M, Sabban S, Artymiuk PJ, 
Helm BA.

Author information:
(1)Krebs Institute for Biomolecular Research, Department of Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield 
S10 2TN, United Kingdom. dramiramc@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Mol Immunol. 2011 Apr;48(8):979-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.11.022.

The high-affinity receptor complex for IgE plays a pivotal role in allergic 
responses since cross-linking of the high-affinity IgE receptor (FcɛRI) on 
target cells initiates a signaling cascade facilitating release of inflammatory 
mediators causing allergic responses. The transmembrane regions of the ligand 
binding domains of the high-affinity IgE and low-affinity IgG receptors share an 
invariant motif (LFAVDTGL) containing a polar aspartate within a predominantly 
non-polar setting. The functional importance of this aspartate residue (D194) in 
FcɛRI-mediated receptor signaling was assessed by site-directed mutagenesis. Rat 
basophilic leukemia cells (RBL-2H3) transfected with the human IgE binding 
subunit (FcɛRIα) incorporating polar substitutions like asparagine (D194N) or 
threonine (D194T) resulted in the formation of a functional rat/human chimeric 
receptor complex. When activated via huIgE and antigen, cells transfected with 
these variant receptor subunits supported mediator release, intracellular 
calcium mobilisation and tyrosine phosphorylation of γ-chain and Syk kinase 
while a non-polar substitution (D194L) gave rise to cell surface expression of 
the mutated receptor subunit but failed to initiate downstream signaling. No 
cell surface expression of huFcɛRIα gene constructs was observed when D194 was 
replaced with the non-polar Ile (D194I) residue of similar size, the larger 
positively charged Arg (D194R) or lysine (D194K) residues, or the negatively 
charged glutamate (D194E) and smaller polar Ser (D194S) non-polar Ala (D194A) 
and V (D194V). These observations highlight importance of the size and charge of 
amino acid residue at position 194 in determining IgE receptor subunit 
interactions, cell surface localization, and initiation of downstream signaling 
events.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.09.002
PMID: 20947168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]