1. Prostate. 2011 May;71(6):659-70. doi: 10.1002/pros.21282. Epub 2010 Oct 18.

LL-37 as a therapeutic target for late stage prostate cancer.

Hensel JA(1), Chanda D, Kumar S, Sawant A, Grizzle WE, Siegal GP, Ponnazhagan S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35291-000, USA.

BACKGROUND: The antimicrobial peptide, leucine-leucine-37 (LL-37), stimulates 
proliferation, angiogenesis, and cellular migration, inhibits apoptosis and is 
associated with inflammation. Since these functional processes are often 
exaggerated in cancer, the aim of the present study was to investigate the 
expression and role of LL-37 in prostate cancer (PCa) and establish its value as 
a therapeutic target.
METHODS: We evaluated the expression of LL-37 and the murine orthologue, 
cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP) in human and murine prostate 
tumors, respectively. Compared to normal/benign prostate tissue, both LL-37 and 
CRAMP were increasingly over-expressed with advancing grades of primary PCa and 
its metastasis in human tissues and in the transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse 
prostate (TRAMP) model, correspondingly. We subsequently knocked-down CRAMP in 
the highly tumorigenic TRAMP-C1 cell line via a RNA interference strategy to 
examine the importance of CRAMP on cellular proliferation, angiogenesis, 
invasion, apoptosis, activation of signaling pathways and tumor kinetics.
RESULTS: Abrogation of CRAMP expression led to decreased proliferation, 
invasion, type IV collagenase, and the amount of phosphorylated Erk1/2 and Akt 
signaling in vitro. These results were paralleled in vivo. Syngenic implantation 
of TRAMP-C1 cells subjected to CRAMP knock-down resulted in a decreased tumor 
incidence and size, and the down-regulation of pro-tumorigenic mechanisms.
CONCLUSIONS: CRAMP knock-down in a murine PCa model analogously demonstrated the 
tumorigenic contributions of LL-37 in PCa and its potential as a novel 
therapeutic target for the treatment of PCa and potentially, other cancers 
over-expressing the peptide.

Copyright Â© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.21282
PMCID: PMC3025071
PMID: 20957672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]