1. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Mar;17(5-6):765-76. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0196.
Epub  2010 Dec 7.

In vitro biomimetic construction of hydroxyapatite-porcine acellular dermal 
matrix composite scaffold for MC3T3-E1 preosteoblast culture.

Zhao H(1), Wang G, Hu S, Cui J, Ren N, Liu D, Liu H, Cao C, Wang J, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, Center of Bio and Micro/Nano 
Functional Materials, School of Physics and Microelectronics, Shandong 
University, Jinan, PR China.

The application of porous hydroxyapatite-collagen (HAp-Collagen) as a bone 
tissue engineering scaffold is hindered by two main problems: its high cost and 
low initial strength. As a native 3-dimenssional collagen framework, purified 
porcine acellular dermal matrix (PADM) has been successfully used as a skin 
tissue engineering scaffold. Here we report its application as a matrix for the 
preparation of HAp to produce a bone tissue scaffold through a biomimetic 
chemical process. The HAp-PADM scaffold has two-level pore structure, with large 
channels (∼100 μm in diameter) inherited from the purified PADM microstructure 
and small pores (<100 nm in diameter) formed by self-assembled HAp on the 
channel surfaces. The obtained HAp-PADM scaffold (S15D) has a compressive 
elastic modulus as high as 600 kPa. The presence of HAp in sample S15D reduces 
the degradation rate of PADM in collagenase solution at 37°C. After 7 day 
culture of MC3T3-E1 pre-osteroblasts, MTT data show no statistically significant 
difference on pure PADM framework and HAp-PADM scaffold (p > 0.05). Because of 
its high strength and nontoxicity, its simple preparation method, and designable 
and tailorable properties, the HAp-PADM scaffold is expected to have great 
potential applications in medical treatment of bone defects.

DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0196
PMID: 20964580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]