1. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Oct 27;10:233. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-233.

Polyploid genome of Camelina sativa revealed by isolation of fatty acid 
synthesis genes.

Hutcheon C(1), Ditt RF, Beilstein M, Comai L, Schroeder J, Goldstein E, 
Shewmaker CK, Nguyen T, De Rocher J, Kiser J.

Author information:
(1)Targeted Growth, Inc., Suite 300, Seattle, WA 98102, USA. 
jay.derocher@targetedgrowth.com

BACKGROUND: Camelina sativa, an oilseed crop in the Brassicaceae family, has 
inspired renewed interest due to its potential for biofuels applications. Little 
is understood of the nature of the C. sativa genome, however. A study was 
undertaken to characterize two genes in the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, 
fatty acid desaturase (FAD) 2 and fatty acid elongase (FAE) 1, which revealed 
unexpected complexity in the C. sativa genome.
RESULTS: In C. sativa, Southern analysis indicates the presence of three copies 
of both FAD2 and FAE1 as well as LFY, a known single copy gene in other species. 
All three copies of both CsFAD2 and CsFAE1 are expressed in developing seeds, 
and sequence alignments show that previously described conserved sites are 
present, suggesting that all three copies of both genes could be functional. The 
regions downstream of CsFAD2 and upstream of CsFAE1 demonstrate co-linearity 
with the Arabidopsis genome. In addition, three expressed haplotypes were 
observed for six predicted single-copy genes in 454 sequencing analysis and 
results from flow cytometry indicate that the DNA content of C. sativa is 
approximately three-fold that of diploid Camelina relatives. Phylogenetic 
analyses further support a history of duplication and indicate that C. sativa 
and C. microcarpa might share a parental genome.
CONCLUSIONS: There is compelling evidence for triplication of the C. sativa 
genome, including a larger chromosome number and three-fold larger measured 
genome size than other Camelina relatives, three isolated copies of FAD2, FAE1, 
and the KCS17-FAE1 intergenic region, and three expressed haplotypes observed 
for six predicted single-copy genes. Based on these results, we propose that C. 
sativa be considered an allohexaploid. The characterization of fatty acid 
synthesis pathway genes will allow for the future manipulation of oil 
composition of this emerging biofuel crop; however, targeted manipulations of 
oil composition and general development of C. sativa should consider and, when 
possible take advantage of, the implications of polyploidy.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-233
PMCID: PMC3017853
PMID: 20977772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]