1. J Med Genet. 2011 Mar;48(3):152-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.081851. Epub 2010 Oct
 23.

Variants in CFTR untranslated regions are associated with congenital bilateral 
absence of the vas deferens.

Lopez E(1), Viart V, Guittard C, Templin C, René C, Méchin D, Des Georges M, 
Claustres M, Romey-Chatelain MC, Taulan M.

Author information:
(1)Université Montpellier1, UFR de Médecine, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), a frequent 
cause of obstructive azoospermia, is generated by mutations in the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Despite extensive 
testing for point mutations and large rearrangements, a small proportion of 
alleles still remains unidentified in CBAVD patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mutation scanning analysis of microsatellite variability in 
the CFTR gene identified two undescribed 4 bp sequence repeats (TAAA)(6) and 
(TAAA)(8) in intron 9 in two CBAVD patients heterozygote for either the -33G→A 
promoter transition or the classical [TG12T5] CBAVD mutation. This study 
explores the putative impact of this promoter variant by using a combination of 
web based prediction tools, reporter gene assays, and DNA/proteins interaction 
analyses. Results of transiently transfected vas deferens cells with either the 
-33G wild-type or the -33A variant CFTR directed luciferase reporter gene 
confirmed that the -33A variant, which alters the FOXI1 (Forkhead box I1) 
binding, significantly decreases the CFTR promoter activity. It was also 
investigated whether regulatory elements located within the intronic tetrarepeat 
might influence the CFTR expression. There was evidence that both the (TAAA)(6) 
and the (TAAA)(8) alleles modulate the CFTR transcription and the binding 
affinity for FOX transcription factors, involved in the chromatin architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: As the vas deferens seems to be one of the tissues most susceptible 
to a reduction in the normal CFTR transcripts levels, and as two mild mutations 
are sufficient to induce CBAVD phenotype, these findings raise the possibility 
that these uncommon variants may be a novel cause of CBAVD.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2010.081851
PMID: 20972246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]