1. Horm Behav. 2011 Mar;59(3):296-305. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.10.001. Epub
2010  Oct 26.

The role of Bisphenol A in shaping the brain, epigenome and behavior.

Wolstenholme JT(1), Rissman EF, Connelly JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Cardiovascular Medicine, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is a xenoestrogen that was first synthesized in 1891. Its 
estrogenic properties were discovered in 1930, and shortly after that chemists 
identified its usefulness in the production of epoxy resins. Since the 1950s BPA 
has been used as a synthetic monomer in the manufacturing of polycarbonate 
plastic, polystyrene resins, and dental sealants. Roughly 6.5 billion pounds of 
BPA are produced each year and it is the major estrogenic compound that leaches 
into nearby water and food supplies (vom Saal et al., 2007). BPA has been 
detected in 95% of human urine samples, which indicates that environmental 
exposure is widespread (Calafat et al., 2005). Moreover, BPA affects 
reproductive tissues and the brain. Thus many studies have focused on the 
effects of BPA during embryonic development. The most recent FDA update 
(Administration January 2010) points to "some concern about the potential 
effects of Bisphenol A on the brain, behavior, and prostate gland in fetuses, 
infants, and young children." In light of this concern, we present an updated 
review of BPA's action on the brain and behavior. We begin with a discussion of 
BPA's role as both an endocrine active compound and an agent that alters DNA 
methylation. Next, we review publications that have reported effects of BPA on 
brain and behavior. We end with our interpretation of these data and suggestions 
for future research directions.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.10.001
PMCID: PMC3725332
PMID: 21029734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]