1. Scand J Immunol. 2010 Nov;72(5):454-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02457.x.

Clinical characteristics and molecular analysis of 21 Chinese children with 
congenital agammaglobulinemia.

Zhang ZY(1), Zhao XD, Jiang LP, Liu EM, Wang M, Yu J, Liu P, Yang XQ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.

Congenital agammaglobulinemia is a humoral primary immunodeficiency and affected 
patients have extremely low levels of peripheral B cells and profound deficiency 
of all immunoglobulin isotypes. Mutations of the Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) 
gene are responsible for most of the congenital agammaglobulinemia. In this 
study, the phenotypes of congenital agammaglobulinemia were investigated in 21 
male children from 21 unrelated Chinese families. Sixteen different mutations of 
BTK gene were identified in 18 patients, and three patients did not have BTK 
gene mutations. Nine mutations had been reported previously including one gross 
deletion (c.722_2041del), one missense mutation (c.1764G>T), three non-sense 
mutations (c.194C>A, c.895C>T and c.1821G>A) and four invariant splice-site 
mutations (c.971+2T>C, c.1481+2T>A, c.1482-2A>G, c.1699-2A>G). Seven novel 
mutations were identified (c.373_441del, c. 504delG, c.537delC, c.851delA, 
c.1637G>A, c.1879T>C and c. 1482_1882 del). Ten of the eighteen mutations of BTK 
gene were located in the TK domain, four in the PH domain, three in the SH3 
domain and one spanned the TH, SH3, SH2 and TK domain. Candidate genes of 
autosomal-recessive agammaglobulinemia, including IGHM, CD79a, CD79b and IGLL1, 
were screened in three patients without mutations in the BTK gene. A compound 
heterozygosity mutation in the IGHM gene (c.1956G>A, c.175_176insC) was 
identified in one patient. The results of our study further support that 
molecular genetic testing represents an important tool for early confirmed 
diagnosis of congenital agammaglobulinemia and may allow accurate carrier 
detection and prenatal diagnosis.

© 2010 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2010 Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.2010.02457.x
PMID: 21039741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]