1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 27;5(10):e13650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013650.

Dexamethasone treatment induces the reprogramming of pancreatic acinar cells to 
hepatocytes and ductal cells.

Al-Adsani A(1), Burke ZD, Eberhard D, Lawrence KL, Shen CN, Rustgi AK, Sakaue H, 
Farrant JM, Tosh D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Centre for Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Jul 2;14(7):e0219419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219419.

BACKGROUND: The pancreatic exocrine cell line AR42J-B13 can be reprogrammed to 
hepatocytes following treatment with dexamethasone. The question arises whether 
dexamethasone also has the capacity to induce ductal cells as well as 
hepatocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: AR42J-B13 cells were treated with and without 
dexamethasone and analyzed for the expression of pancreatic exocrine, hepatocyte 
and ductal markers. Addition of dexamethasone inhibited pancreatic amylase 
expression, induced expression of the hepatocyte marker transferrin as well as 
markers typical of ductal cells: cytokeratin 7 and 19 and the lectin peanut 
agglutinin. However, the number of ductal cells was low compared to hepatocytes. 
The proportion of ductal cells was enhanced by culture with dexamethasone and 
epidermal growth factor (EGF). We established several features of the mechanism 
underlying the transdifferentiation of pancreatic exocrine cells to ductal 
cells. Using a CK19 promoter reporter, we show that a proportion of the ductal 
cells arise from differentiated pancreatic exocrine-like cells. We also examined 
whether C/EBPβ (a transcription factor important in the conversion of pancreatic 
cells to hepatocytes) could alter the conversion from acinar cells to a ductal 
phenotype. Overexpression of an activated form of C/EBPβ in 
dexamethasone/EGF-treated cells provoked the expression of hepatocyte markers 
and inhibited the expression of ductal markers. Conversely, ectopic expression 
of a dominant-negative form of C/EBPβ, liver inhibitory protein, inhibited 
hepatocyte formation in dexamethasone-treated cultures and enhanced the ductal 
phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that hepatocytes and ductal 
cells may be induced from pancreatic exocrine AR42J-B13 cells following 
treatment with dexamethasone. The conversion from pancreatic to hepatocyte or 
ductal cells is dependent upon the expression of C/EBPβ.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013650
PMCID: PMC2965100
PMID: 21048969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.