1. PLoS Biol. 2010 Oct 26;8(10):e1000518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000518.

Non-canonical NF-κB activation and abnormal B cell accumulation in mice 
expressing ubiquitin protein ligase-inactive c-IAP2.

Conze DB(1), Zhao Y, Ashwell JD.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2016 Jun 23;14(6):e1002502. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002502.

Chromosomal translocations between loci encoding MALT1 and c-IAP2 are common in 
MALT lymphomas. The resulting fusion proteins lack the c-IAP2 RING domain, the 
region responsible for its ubiquitin protein ligase (E3) activity. Ectopic 
expression of the fusion protein activates the canonical NF-κB signaling 
cascade, but how it does so is controversial and how it promotes MALT lymphoma 
is unknown. Considering recent reports implicating c-IAP1 and c-IAP2 E3 activity 
in repression of non-canonical NF-κB signaling, we asked if the c-IAP2/MALT 
fusion protein can initiate non-canonical NF-κB activation. Here we show that in 
addition to canonical activation, the fusion protein stabilizes NIK and 
activates non-canonical NF-κB. Canonical but not non-canonical activation 
depended on MALT1 paracaspase activity, and expression of E3-inactive c-IAP2 
activated non-canonical NF-κB. Mice in which endogenous c-IAP2 was replaced with 
an E3-inactive mutant accumulated abnormal B cells with elevated non-canonical 
NF-κB and had increased numbers of B cells with a marginal zone phenotype, 
gut-associated lymphoid hyperplasia, and other features of MALT lymphoma. Thus, 
the c-IAP2/MALT1 fusion protein activates NF-κB by two distinct mechanisms, and 
loss of c-IAP2 E3 activity in vivo is sufficient to induce abnormalities common 
to MALT lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000518
PMCID: PMC2964333
PMID: 21048983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.