1. Core Evid. 2010 Oct 21;5:61-76. doi: 10.2147/ce.s7035.

Panitumumab: the evidence for its use in the treatment of metastatic colorectal 
cancer.

Berardi R(1), Onofri A, Pistelli M, Maccaroni E, Scartozzi M, Pierantoni C, 
Cascinu S.

Author information:
(1)Clinica di Oncologia Medica, Universit√† Politecnica delle Marche, Ospedali 
Riuniti Umberto I-GM Lancisi-G Salesi di Ancona, Italy;

Panitumumab is the first fully human monoclonal antibody to Epidermal Growth 
Factor Receptor (EGFR) to enter clinical trials for the treatment of solid 
tumors. The anti-tumor activity of panitumumab has been tested in vitro and in 
vivo, and inhibition of tumor growth has been observed in numerous cancer 
models, particularly lung, kidney and colorectal (CRC). Preclinical and clinical 
studies have established a role for panitumumab in metastatic colorectal cancer 
(mCRC) refractory to multiple chemotherapeutic regimens. Based on these 
encouraging findings, panitumumab was approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of patients with epidermal growth factor 
receptor-expressing mCRC refractory to fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin-, and/or 
irinotecan-containing chemotherapeutic regimens. The improvement in progression 
free survival (PFS) and response rate (RR) produced by panitumumab monotherapy 
was significantly greater in patients with non mutated (wild-type) K-RAS than in 
those with mutant K-RAS. Therefore implementing routine K-RAS screening and 
limiting the use of EGFR inhibitors to patients with wild-type K-RAS appears the 
better strategy for select only the patients who could benefit from the therapy 
with panitumumab and also may have the potential for cost savings. The purpose 
of this review was to evaluate the patient-related, disease-related and 
economic-related evidence for the use of panitumumab in the treatment of 
metastatic colorectal cancer in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.2147/ce.s7035
PMCID: PMC2963923
PMID: 21042543