1. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 10;30(10):1252-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.495. Epub 2010 Nov
 8.

A DNA-binding mutant of TAL1 cooperates with LMO2 to cause T cell leukemia in 
mice.

Draheim KM(1), Hermance N, Yang Y, Arous E, Calvo J, Kelliher MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, UMass Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The most common translocation in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(T-ALL) involves the LMO2 locus, resulting in ectopic expression of the LMO2 
gene in human thymocytes. The LMO2 gene was also activated in patients with 
X-linked Severe Combined Immune Deficiency treated with gene therapy because of 
retroviral insertion in the LMO2 locus. The LMO2 insertions predisposed these 
children to T-ALL, yet how LMO2 contributes to T cell transformation remains 
unclear. The LIM (Lin 11, Isl-1, Mec-3) domain containing LMO2 protein regulates 
erythropoiesis as part of a large transcriptional complex consisting of LMO2, 
TAL1, E47, GATA1 and LDB1 that recognizes bipartite E-box-GATA1 sites on target 
genes. Similarly, a TAL1/E47/LMO2/LDB1 complex is observed in human T-ALL and 
Tal1 and Lmo2 expression in mice results in disease acceleration. To address the 
mechanism(s) of Tal1/Lmo2 synergy in leukemia, we generated Lmo2 transgenic mice 
and mated them with mice that express wild-type Tal1 or a DNA-binding mutant of 
TAL1. Tal1/Lmo2 and MutTAL1/Lmo2 bitransgenic mice exhibit perturbations in 
thymocyte development due to reduced E47/HEB transcriptional activity and 
develop leukemia with identical kinetics. These data demonstrate that the 
DNA-binding activity of Tal1 is not required to cooperate with Lmo2 to cause 
leukemia in mice and suggest that Lmo2 may cooperate with Tal1 to interfere with 
E47/HEB function(s).

Â© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.495
PMCID: PMC3691994
PMID: 21057528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.