1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3618-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175810. Epub
2010  Nov 8.

Processing of optineurin in neuronal cells.

Shen X(1), Ying H, Qiu Y, Park JS, Shyam R, Chi ZL, Iwata T, Yue BY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, College of Medicine, 
University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Optineurin is a gene linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Paget disease of 
bone, and glaucoma, a major blinding disease. Mutations such as E50K were 
identified in glaucoma patients. We investigated herein the involvement of 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) and autophagy, two major routes for protein 
clearance, in processing of optineurin in a retinal ganglion cell model line 
RGC5 and neuronal PC12 cells. It was found that the endogenous optineurin level 
in neuronal cells was increased by treatment of proteasomal inhibitor but not by 
autophagic and lysosomal inhibitors. Multiple bands immunoreactive to 
anti-ubiquitin were seen in the optineurin pulldown, indicating that optineurin 
was ubiquitinated. In cells overexpressing wild type and E50K optineurin, the 
level of the proteasome regulatory Î²5 subunit (PSMB5, indicative of proteasome 
activity) was reduced, whereas that for autophagy marker microtubule-associated 
protein 1 light chain 3 was enhanced compared with controls. Autophagosome 
formation was detected by electron microscopy. The foci formed after optineurin 
transfection were increased upon treatment of an autophagic inhibitor but were 
decreased by treatment of an inducer, rapamycin. Moreover, the level of 
optineurin-triggered apoptosis was reduced by rapamycin. This study thus 
provides compelling evidence that in a normal homeostatic situation, the 
turnover of endogenous optineurin involves mainly UPP. When optineurin is 
up-regulated or mutated, the UPP function is compromised, and autophagy comes 
into play. A decreased PSMB5 level and an induced autophagy were also 
demonstrated in vivo in retinal ganglion cells of E50K transgenic mice, 
validating and making relevant the in vitro findings.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175810
PMCID: PMC3030366
PMID: 21059646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]