1. Matrix Biol. 2011 Mar;30(2):145-53. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2010.10.007. Epub
2010  Nov 3.

MMPs are less efficient than ADAMTS5 in cleaving aggrecan core protein.

Durigova M(1), Nagase H, Mort JS, Roughley PJ.

Author information:
(1)Genetics Unit, Shriners Hospital for Children, Montreal, Canada.

Aggrecan degradation in articular cartilage occurs predominantly through 
proteolysis and has been attributed to the action of members of the matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP) and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with 
thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) families. Both families of enzymes cleave 
aggrecan at specific sites within the aggrecan core protein. One cleavage site 
within the interglobular domain (IGD), between Glu(373-374)Ala and five 
additional sites in the chondroitin sulfate-2 (CS-2) region of aggrecan were 
characterized as "aggrecanase" (ADAMTS) cleavage sites, while cleavage between 
Ser(341-342)Phe within the IGD of bovine aggrecan is attributed to MMP action. 
The objective of this study was to assess the cleavage efficiency of MMPs 
relative to ADAMTS and their contribution to aggrecan proteolysis in vitro. The 
analysis of aggrecan IGD degradation in bovine articular cartilage explants 
treated with catabolic cytokines over a 19-day period showed that MMP-mediated 
degradation of aggrecan within the IGD can only be observed following day 12 of 
culture. This delay is associated with the lack of activation of proMMPs during 
the first 12 days of culture. Analysis of MMP1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13 and 
ADAMTS5 efficiencies at cleaving within the aggrecan IGD and CS-2 region in 
vitro was carried out by the digestion of bovine aggrecan with the various 
enzymes and Western blot analysis using aggrecan anti-G1 and anti-G3 antibodies. 
Of these MMPs, MMP12 was the most efficient at cleaving within the aggrecan IGD. 
In addition to cleavage in the IGD, MMP, 3, 7, 8 and 12 were also able to 
degrade the aggrecan CS-2 region. MMP3 and MMP12 were able to degrade aggrecan 
at the very C-terminus of the CS-2 region, cleaving the Glu(2047-2048)Ala bond 
which was previously shown to be cleaved by ADAMTS5. However, in comparison to 
ADAMTS5, MMP3 was about 100 times and 10 times less efficient at cleaving within 
the aggrecan IGD and CS-2 regions, respectively. Collectively, our results 
showed that the delayed activation of proMMPs and the relatively low cleavage 
efficiency of MMPs can explain the minor contribution of these enzymes to 
aggrecan catabolism in vivo. This study also uncovered a potential role for MMPs 
in the C-terminal truncation of aggrecan.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2010.10.007
PMCID: PMC3057330
PMID: 21055468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]