1. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 28;5(10):e13712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013712.

Identification of candidate genes for dyslexia susceptibility on chromosome 18.

Scerri TS(1), Paracchini S, Morris A, MacPhie IL, Talcott J, Stein J, Smith SD, 
Pennington BF, Olson RK, DeFries JC, Monaco AP, Richardson AJ.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2010;5(12). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/2294a38b-878d-42f0-9faf-0822db4a0248. Richardson, Alex J 
[added].

BACKGROUND: Six independent studies have identified linkage to chromosome 18 for 
developmental dyslexia or general reading ability. Until now, no candidate genes 
have been identified to explain this linkage. Here, we set out to identify the 
gene(s) conferring susceptibility by a two stage strategy of linkage and 
association analysis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Linkage analysis: 264 UK families and 155 US 
families each containing at least one child diagnosed with dyslexia were 
genotyped with a dense set of microsatellite markers on chromosome 18. 
Association analysis: Using a discovery sample of 187 UK families, nearly 3000 
SNPs were genotyped across the chromosome 18 dyslexia susceptibility candidate 
region. Following association analysis, the top ranking SNPs were then genotyped 
in the remaining samples. The linkage analysis revealed a broad signal that 
spans approximately 40 Mb from 18p11.2 to 18q12.2. Following the association 
analysis and subsequent replication attempts, we observed consistent association 
with the same SNPs in three genes; melanocortin 5 receptor (MC5R), dymeclin 
(DYM) and neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 4-like 
(NEDD4L).
CONCLUSIONS: Along with already published biological evidence, MC5R, DYM and 
NEDD4L make attractive candidates for dyslexia susceptibility genes. However, 
further replication and functional studies are still required.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013712
PMCID: PMC2965662
PMID: 21060895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.