1. Mol Immunol. 2011 Jan;48(4):516-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.10.007. Epub
2010  Nov 12.

Systematic mutation and thermodynamic analysis of central tyrosine pairs in 
polyspecific NKG2D receptor interactions.

Culpepper DJ(1), Maddox MK, Caldwell AB, McFarland BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 3307 Third Avenue West, Seattle 
Pacific University, Seattle, WA 98119, USA.

The homodimeric, activating natural killer cell receptor NKG2D interacts with 
multiple monomeric ligands polyspecifically, yet without central conformational 
flexibility. Crystal structures of multiple NKG2D-ligand interactions have 
identified the NKG2D tyrosine pair Tyr 152 and Tyr 199 as forming multiple 
specific but diverse interactions with MICA and related proteins. Here we 
systematically altered each tyrosine to tryptophan, phenylalanine, isoleucine, 
leucine, valine, serine, and alanine to measure the effect of mutation on 
affinity and thermodynamics for binding a range of similar ligands: MICA, the 
higher-affinity ligand MICB, and MICdesign, a high-affinity version of MICA that 
shares all NKG2D contact residues with MICA. Affinity and residue size were 
related: tryptophan could often substitute for tyrosine without loss of 
affinity; loss of the tyrosine hydroxyl through mutation to phenylalanine was 
tolerated more at position 152 than 199; and the smallest residues coincide with 
lowest affinities in general. NKG2D mutant van't Hoff binding thermodynamics 
generally show that substitution of other residues for tyrosine causes a 
moderate positive or flat van't Hoff slope consistent with moderate loss of 
binding enthalpy. One set of NKG2D mutations caused MICA to adopt a positive 
van't Hoff slope corresponding to absorption of heat, and another set caused 
MICB to adopt a negative slope of greater heat release than wild-type. MICdesign 
shared one example of the first set with MICA and one of the second set with 
MICB. When the NKG2D mutation affinities were arranged according to change in 
nonpolar surface area and compared to results from specific antibody-antigen and 
protein-peptide interactions, it was found that hydrophobic surface loss in 
NKG2D reduced binding affinity less than reported in the other contexts. The 
hydrophobic effect at the center of the NKG2D binding appears more similar to 
that at the periphery of an antibody-antigen binding site than at its center. 
Therefore the polyspecific NKG2D binding site is more tolerant of structural 
alteration in general than either an antibody-antigen or protein-peptide binding 
site, and this tolerance may adapt NKG2D to a broad range of protein surfaces 
with micromolar affinity.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.10.007
PMCID: PMC3014408
PMID: 21074271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]