1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2011 Nov;143(2):637-58. doi: 10.1007/s12011-010-8896-6. 
Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Advantages of the use of deciduous teeth, hair, and blood analysis for lead and 
cadmium bio-monitoring in children. A study of 6-year-old children from Krakow 
(Poland).

Barton HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Chemistry and Nutrition, Medical College, Jagiellonian 
University, Medyczna 9, PL-30-688, Cracow, Poland. mfbarton@cyf-kr.edu.pl

The population of about 300 6-year-old preschool children was studied for lead 
(Pb) and cadmium (Cd) in deciduous teeth, scalp hair, and capillary blood. Zinc 
(Zn) content in hair was also measured due to its possible interferences with 
the elements studied. The Pb and Cd contents were measured by graphite furnace 
atomic absorption spectrometry with Zeeman background correction, and Zn, by 
flame method. Metal levels found were comparable to those in European countries. 
Positive correlations between Pb and Cd in the same and different tissues were 
widespread (r=0.23-0.68). A positive correlation was found between Pb in teeth 
and blood (r=0.65, p<0.001). Pb blood threshold 100 μg L(-1) referred to 2.6 μg 
g(-1) Pb in teeth. Predictability of this Pb teeth limit was 14% vs. 5% for Pb 
blood. Strong negative correlation was found between hair Pb and Zn (r=-0.68, 
p<0.001). Enhanced Cd and Zn levels in hair were associated with the household 
drinking water hardness. The associations with some other environmental and 
behavioral factors were also presented and discussed. The results proved the 
advantage of analysis of primary teeth for Pb exposure screening of preschool 
children.

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-010-8896-6
PMCID: PMC3187856
PMID: 21086189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]