1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011 Feb;10(2):M110.004317. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.004317.
 Epub 2010 Nov 16.

Nuclear import of histone deacetylase 5 by requisite nuclear localization signal 
phosphorylation.

Greco TM(1), Yu F, Guise AJ, Cristea IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 
08544, USA.

Histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5), a class IIa deacetylase, is a prominent regulator 
of cellular and epigenetic processes that underlie the progression of human 
disease, ranging from cardiac hypertrophy to cancer. Although it is established 
that phosphorylation mediates 14-3-3 protein binding and provides the essential 
link between HDAC5 nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling and transcriptional repression, 
thus far only four phospho-acceptor sites have been functionally characterized. 
Here, using a combinatorial proteomics approach and phosphomutant screening, we 
present the first evidence that HDAC5 has at least 17 in vivo phosphorylation 
sites within functional domains, including Ser278 and Ser279 within the nuclear 
localization signal (NLS), Ser1108 within the nuclear export signal, and Ser755 
in deacetylase domain. Global and targeted MS/MS analyses of NLS peptides 
demonstrated the presence of single (Ser278 and Ser279) and double 
(Ser278/Ser279) phosphorylations. The double S278/279A mutation showed reduced 
association with HDAC3, slightly decreased deacetylation activity, and 
significantly increased cytoplasmic localization compared with wild type HDAC5, 
whereas the S278A and S1108A phosphomutants were not altered. Live cell imaging 
revealed a deficiency in nuclear import of S278/279A HDAC5. Phosphomutant stable 
cell lines confirmed the cellular redistribution of NLS mutants and revealed a 
more pronounced cytoplasmic localization for the single S279A mutant. Proteomic 
analysis of immunoisolated S278/279A, S279A, and S259/498A mutants linked 
altered cellular localization to changes in protein interactions. S278/279A and 
S279A HDAC5 showed reduced association with the NCoR-HDAC3 nuclear corepressor 
complex as well as protein kinase D enzymes, which were potentiated in the 
S259/498A mutant. These results provide the first link between phosphorylation 
outside the known 14-3-3 sites and downstream changes in protein interactions. 
Together these studies identify Ser279 as a critical phosphorylation within the 
NLS involved in the nuclear import of HDAC5, providing a regulatory point in 
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling that may be conserved in other class IIa 
HDACs-HDAC4 and HDAC9.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M110.004317
PMCID: PMC3033682
PMID: 21081666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]