1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 14;107(50):21394-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1015463107. Epub 2010 Nov 22.

Strategies for stabilizing superoxide dismutase (SOD1), the protein destabilized 
in the most common form of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Auclair JR(1), Boggio KJ, Petsko GA, Ringe D, Agar JN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research 
Center, Brandeis University, 415 South Street, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a disorder characterized by the death of 
both upper and lower motor neurons and by 3- to 5-yr median survival 
postdiagnosis. The only US Food and Drug Administration-approved drug for the 
treatment of ALS, Riluzole, has at best, moderate effect on patient survival and 
quality of life; therefore innovative approaches are needed to combat 
neurodegenerative disease. Some familial forms of ALS (fALS) have been linked to 
mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1). The dominant inheritance of 
mutant SOD1 and lack of symptoms in knockout mice suggest a "gain of toxic 
function" as opposed to a loss of function. A prevailing hypothesis for the 
mechanism of the toxicity of fALS-SOD1 variants, or the gain of toxic function, 
involves dimer destabilization and dissociation as an early step in SOD1 
aggregation. Therefore, stabilizing the SOD1 dimer, thus preventing aggregation, 
is a potential therapeutic strategy. Here, we report a strategy in which we 
chemically cross-link the SOD1 dimer using two adjacent cysteine residues on 
each respective monomer (Cys111). Stabilization, measured as an increase in 
melting temperature, of ∼20 °C and ∼45 °C was observed for two mutants, G93A and 
G85R, respectively. This stabilization is the largest for SOD1, and to the best 
of our knowledge, for any disease-related protein. In addition, chemical 
cross-linking conferred activity upon G85R, an otherwise inactive mutant. These 
results demonstrate that targeting these cysteine residues is an important new 
strategy for development of ALS therapies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1015463107
PMCID: PMC3003092
PMID: 21098299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: A patent has 
been filed by the authors relating to the strategy of SOD1 stabilization 
described here.