1. Lipids Health Dis. 2010 Nov 23;9:134. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-9-134.

Effects of Kurozu concentrated liquid on adipocyte size in rats.

Tong LT(1), Katakura Y, Kawamura S, Baba S, Tanaka Y, Udono M, Kondo Y, Nakamura 
K, Imaizumi K, Sato M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Nutrition Chemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu University, 
6-10-1, Hakozaki, Higashi-Ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Kurozu concentrated liquid (KCL) is used as a health-promoting 
supplement for the treatment of disorders such as cancer, hyperlipidemia, and 
hypertension in Japan. We investigated the possible anti-obesity effects of KCL 
in rats.
METHODS: Male Sprague Dawley rats were fed American Institute of Nutrition 76 
formula diet and were orally administrated KCL or acetic acid at a dose of 100 
mg/kg body weight or deionized water for 4 weeks. Adipocyte size, DNA content in 
subcutaneous adipose tissue, lipid levels in the serum and liver, and the rate 
of fatty acid excretion were determined. Effects of KCL on pancreatic lipase 
activity and 3T3-L1 preadipocyte differentiation were investigated in vitro.
RESULTS: In the KCL group, the average adipocyte size in subcutaneous and 
perirenal adipose tissues was significantly reduced. The KCL-administered rats 
displayed greater numbers of small adipocytes in the subcutaneous, perirenal and 
mesenteric adipose tissues than did rats from the other groups. In the KCL 
group, the DNA content in subcutaneous adipose tissue was significantly 
increased. The rate of fatty acid excretion was significantly increased in the 
KCL group. Furthermore, KCL significantly inhibited pancreatic lipase activity 
in vitro, and also significantly inhibited fat accumulation and mRNA expression 
of fatty acid binding protein 2 (aP2) and peroxisome proliferator-activated γ 
(PPARγ) in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte. The levels of serum and liver lipids, the 
concentration of serum glucose, and the levels of adiponectin were similar among 
the 3 groups.
CONCLUSION: Oral administration of KCL decreases the adipocyte size via 
inhibition of dietary fat absorption and reductions of PPARγ and aP2 mRNA 
expression levels in adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-511X-9-134
PMCID: PMC3002919
PMID: 21092258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]