1. J Am Chem Soc. 2010 Dec 29;132(51):18292-300. doi: 10.1021/ja106820e. Epub
2010  Nov 19.

Conformational remodeling of femtomolar inhibitor-acetylcholinesterase complexes 
in the crystalline state.

Bourne Y(1), Radić Z, Taylor P, Marchot P.

Author information:
(1)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques (AFMB, CNRS 
UMR-6098), Universités d'Aix-Marseille, Campus Luminy-Case 932, F-13288 
Marseille cedex 09, France. yves.bourne@afmb.univ-mrs.fr

The active center of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), a target site for competitive 
inhibitors, resides centrosymmetric to the subunit at the base of a deep, narrow 
gorge lined by aromatic residues. At the gorge entry, a peripheral site 
encompasses overlapping binding loci for noncompetitive inhibitors, which alter 
substrate access to the gorge. The click-chemistry inhibitor TZ2PA6 links the 
active center ligand, tacrine, to the peripheral site ligand, propidium, through 
a biorthogonal reaction of an acetylene and an azide that forms either a syn1 or 
an anti1 triazole. Compared with wild-type mouse AChE, a Tyr337Ala mutant 
displays full catalytic activity, albeit with 2-3 orders of magnitude higher 
affinities for the TZ2PA6 syn1 and anti1 regioisomers, reflected in low 
femtomolar K(d) values, diffusion-limited association, and dissociation 
half-times greater than 1 month and 1 week, respectively. Three structures of 
each of the co-crystallized syn1 and anti1 complexes of the Tyr337Ala mutant 
were solved at three distinct times of crystal maturation, consistent with or 
exceeding the half-lives of the complexes in solution, while crystalline 
complexes obtained from soaked Tyr337Ala crystals led to picturing "freshly 
formed" complexes. The structures, at 2.55-2.75 Å resolution, reveal a range of 
unprecedented conformations of the bound regioisomers, not observed in the 
wild-type AChE complexes, associated with concerted positional rearrangements of 
side chains in the enzyme gorge. Moreover, time-dependent conformational 
remodeling of the crystalline complexes appears to correlate with the 
dissociation half-times of the solution complexes. Hence, for the tight-binding 
TZ2PA6 inhibitors, the initial complexes kinetically driven in solution slowly 
form more stable complexes governed by thermodynamic equilibrium and observable 
in mature crystals.

DOI: 10.1021/ja106820e
PMCID: PMC3016896
PMID: 21090615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]