1. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Nov 22;11:90. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-90.

Structural determinants of PINK1 topology and dual subcellular distribution.

Lin W(1), Kang UJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois 60637, USA.

BACKGROUND: PINK1 is a mitochondria-targeted kinase that constitutively 
localizes to both the mitochondria and the cytosol. The mechanism of how PINK1 
achieves cytosolic localization following mitochondrial processing remains 
unknown. Understanding PINK1 subcellular localization will give us insights into 
PINK1 functions and how mutations in PINK1 lead to Parkinson's disease. We asked 
how the mitochondrial localization signal, the transmembrane domain, and the 
kinase domain participate in PINK1 localization.
RESULTS: We confirmed that PINK1 mitochondrial targeting signal is responsible 
for mitochondrial localization. Once inside the mitochondria, we found that both 
PINK1 transmembrane and kinase domain are important for membrane tethering and 
cytosolic-facing topology. We also showed that PINK1 dual subcellular 
distribution requires both Hsp90 interaction with the kinase domain and the 
proteolysis at a cleavage site downstream of the transmembrane domain because 
removal of this cleavage site completely abolished cytosolic PINK1. In addition, 
the disruption of the Hsp90-PINK1 interaction increased mitochondrial PINK1 
level.
CONCLUSION: Together, we believe that once PINK1 enters the mitochondria, PINK1 
adopts a tethered topology because the transmembrane domain and the kinase 
domain prevent PINK1 forward movement into the mitochondria. Subsequent 
proteolysis downstream of the transmembrane domain then releases PINK1 for 
retrograde movement while PINK1 kinase domain interacts with Hsp90 chaperone. 
The significance of this dual localization could mean that PINK1 has 
compartmental-specific functions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-90
PMCID: PMC2995477
PMID: 21092208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]