1. Exp Gerontol. 2011 Apr;46(4):292-302. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2010.11.006. Epub 
2010 Nov 26.

The effect of α-actinin-3 deficiency on muscle aging.

Seto JT(1), Chan S, Turner N, MacArthur DG, Raftery JM, Berman YD, Quinlan KG, 
Cooney GJ, Head S, Yang N, North KN.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research, The Children's Hospital at 
Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia.

Deficiency of the fast-twitch muscle protein α-actinin-3 due to homozygosity for 
a nonsense polymorphism (R577X) in the ACTN3 gene is common in humans. 
α-Actinin-3 deficiency (XX) is associated with reduced muscle strength/power and 
enhanced endurance performance in elite athletes and in the general population. 
The association between R577X and loss in muscle mass and function (sarcopenia) 
has previously been investigated in a number of studies in elderly humans. The 
majority of studies report loss of ACTN3 genotype association with muscle traits 
in the elderly, however, there is some indication that the XX genotype may be 
associated with faster muscle function decline. To further explore these 
potential age-related effects and the underlying mechanisms, we examined the 
effect of α-actinin-3 deficiency in aging male and female Actn3 knockout (KO) 
mice (2, 6, 12, and 18 months). Our findings support previous reports of a 
diminished influence of ACTN3 genotype on muscle performance in the elderly: 
genotype differences in intrinsic exercise performance, fast muscle force 
generation and male muscle mass were lost in aged mice, but were maintained for 
other muscle function traits such as grip strength. The loss of genotype 
difference in exercise performance occurred despite the maintenance of some 
"slower" muscle characteristics in KO muscles, such as increased oxidative 
metabolism and greater force recovery after fatigue. Interestingly, muscle mass 
decline in aged 18 month old male KO mice was greater compared to wild-type 
controls (WT) (-12.2% in KO; -6.5% in WT). These results provide further support 
that α-actinin-3 deficient individuals may experience faster decline in muscle 
function with increasing age.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2010.11.006
PMID: 21112313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]