1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 Jul;36(6):919-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.10.017. Epub 2010 Nov 26.

Genetic variability within the S100B gene influences the personality trait 
self-directedness.

Suchankova P(1), Baghaei F, Rosmond R, Holm G, Anckarsäter H, Ekman A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska Academy, 
Department of Pharmacology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. 
petra.suchankova@pharm.gu.se

Elevated serum levels of S100B have proven useful as an indicator of 
brain-injury but have also been shown in patients diagnosed with psychiatric 
disorders. Recently, associations were found between variations in the S100B 
gene and schizophrenia as well as bipolar affective disorder. The aim of the 
present study was to investigate whether some of these genetic variations 
influence general aspects of human behaviour as portrayed by normal dimensions 
of personality. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms within the S100B gene, 
2757C>G and 5748C>T, were genotyped in two population based cohorts consisting 
of 42-year-old women (n=270) and 51-year-old men (n=247), respectively. The two 
polymorphisms were analysed with respect to personality traits assessed using 
the Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI). In men, the 2757C>G polymorphism 
was found to significantly influence the TCI dimension self-directedness with 
higher scores in 2757G homozygotes. A similar tendency towards association was 
seen in the female cohort; however, this correlation did not remain significant 
after correction for multiple comparisons. Furthermore, the 5748C>T polymorphism 
was highly associated with self-directedness in men. Self-directedness is an 
overall estimate of adaptive strategies to adjust behaviour to conceptual goals 
as well as coping strategies and is strongly correlated to general mental health 
and absence of personality disorder. These preliminary findings suggest that the 
S100B gene may be implicated not only in certain pathological brain conditions 
but also in processes involved in normal behaviour.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.10.017
PMID: 21112154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]