1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;43(3):416-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.014. Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Structural and functional characterization of the N-terminal domain of human 
Rad51D.

Kim YM(1), Choi BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, KAIST, Daejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

Rad51D, one of five Rad51 paralogs, is required for homologous recombination and 
disruption of Holliday junctions with bloom syndrome protein (BLM) in 
vertebrates. The N-terminal domain of Rad51D is highly conserved in eukaryotic 
Rad51D orthologs and is essential for protein-protein interaction with XRCC2, 
but nothing is known about its individual structure or function. In this study, 
we determined the solution structure of the human Rad51D N-terminal domain 
(residues 1-83), which consists of four short helices flanked by long N- and 
C-terminal tails. Interestingly, the position of the N-terminal tail (residues 
1-13) is fixed within the domain structure via several hydrophobic interactions 
between Leu4 and Thr27, Leu4 and Val28, and Val6 and Ile17. We show that the 
domain preferentially binds to ssDNA versus dsDNA and does not bind to a mobile 
Holliday junction by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. NMR titration and 
dynamics studies showed that human Rad51D-N interacts with ssDNA by positively 
charged and hydrophobic residues on its surface. The results suggest that the 
N-terminal domain of Rad51D is required for the ssDNA-specific binding function 
of human Rad51D and that the conserved N-terminal domains of other Rad51 
paralogs may have distinguishable functions from each other in homologous 
recombination.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2010.11.014
PMID: 21111057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]