1. Genetica. 2011 May;139(5):611-5. doi: 10.1007/s10709-010-9531-3. Epub 2010 Dec
 7.

Rampant gene rearrangement and haplotype hypervariation among nematode 
mitochondrial genomes.

Hyman BC(1), Lewis SC, Tang S, Wu Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. 
bhyman@ucr.edu

Rare syntenic conservation, sequence duplication, and the use of both DNA 
strands to encode genes are signature architectural features defining 
mitochondrial genomes of enoplean nematodes. These characteristics stand in 
contrast to the more conserved mitochondrial genome sizes and transcriptional 
organizations of mitochondrial DNAs (mtDNAs) derived from chromadorean 
nematodes. To address the frequency of gene rearrangement within nematode 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), mitochondrial genome variation has been characterized 
within a more confined enoplean taxonomic unit, the family Mermithidae. The 
complete nucleotide sequences of the mosquito parasitic nematodes Romanomermis 
culicivorax, R. nielseni, and R. iyengari mtDNA have been determined. Duplicated 
expanses encompassing different regions of the mitochondrial genomes were found 
in each of these congeners. These mtDNA shared few rRNA and protein gene 
junctions, indicating extensive gene rearrangement within the Romanomermis 
lineage. Rapid structural changes are also observed at the conspecific level 
where no two individual nematodes carry the same haplotype. Rolling circle 
amplification was used to isolate complete mitochondrial genomes from 
individuals in local populations of Thaumamermis cosgrovei, a parasite of 
terrestrial isopods. Mitochondrial DNA length variants ranging from 19 to 34 kb 
are observed, but haplotypes are not shared between any two individuals. The 
complete nucleotide sequences of three haplotypes have been determined, 
revealing a constant region encoding most mitochondrial genes and a 
hypervariable segment that contains intact and pseudogene copies of several 
mitochondrial genes, duplicated to different copy numbers, resulting in mtDNA 
size variation. Constant rearrangement generates new T. cosgrovei mtDNA forms.

DOI: 10.1007/s10709-010-9531-3
PMCID: PMC3089818
PMID: 21136141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]