1. Mol Pain. 2010 Dec 6;6:86. doi: 10.1186/1744-8069-6-86.

PK20, a new opioid-neurotensin hybrid peptide that exhibits central and 
peripheral antinociceptive effects.

Kleczkowska P(1), Kosson P, Ballet S, Van den Eynde I, Tsuda Y, Tourw√© D, 
Lipkowski AW.

Author information:
(1)Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 
Street 5, 02106 Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The clinical treatment of various types of pain relies upon the use 
of opioid analgesics. However most of them produce, in addition to the analgesic 
effect, several side effects such as the development of dependence and addiction 
as well as sedation, dysphoria, and constipation. One solution to these problems 
are chimeric compounds in which the opioid pharmacophore is hybridized with 
another type of compound to incease antinociceptive effects. Neurotensin-induced 
antinociception is not mediated through the opioid system. Therefore, 
hybridizing neurotensin with opioid elements may result in a potent synergistic 
antinociceptor.
RESULTS: Using the known structure-activity relationships of neurotensin we have 
synthesized a new chimeric opioid-neurotensin compound PK20 which is 
characterized by a very strong antinociceptive potency. The observation that the 
opioid antagonist naltrexone did not completely reverse the antinociceptive 
effect, indicates the partial involvement of the nonopioid component in PK20 in 
the produced analgesia.
CONCLUSIONS: The opioid-neurotensin hybrid analogue PK20, in which opioid and 
neurotensin pharmacophores overlap partially, expresses high antinociceptive 
tail-flick effects after central as well as peripheral applications.

DOI: 10.1186/1744-8069-6-86
PMCID: PMC3017538
PMID: 21134256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]