1. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):405-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.004. Epub
2010  Dec 10.

mitfa is required at multiple stages of melanocyte differentiation but not to 
establish the melanocyte stem cell.

Johnson SL(1), Nguyen AN, Lister JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):330.

The mitfa gene encodes a zebrafish ortholog of the microphthalmia-associated 
transcription factor (Mitf) which, like its counterparts in other species, is 
absolutely required for development of neural crest melanocytes. In order to 
evaluate mitfa's role in different stages of melanocyte development, we have 
identified hypomorphic alleles of mitfa, including two alleles that are 
temperature-sensitive for melanocyte development. Molecular analysis revealed 
that the mitf(fh53)ts results from a single base pair change producing an 
asparagine to tyrosine amino acid substitution in the DNA-binding domain, and 
the mitfa(vc7)ts allele is a mutation in a splice donor site that reduces the 
level of correctly-spliced transcripts. Splicing in the mitfa(vc7) allele does 
not itself appear to be temperature-dependent. A third, hypomorphic allele, 
mitfa(z25) results in an isoleucine to phenylalanine substitution in the first 
helix domain of the protein. Temperature upshift experiments with mitfa(fh53)ts 
show that mitfa is required at several stages of melanocyte differentiation, 
including for expression of the early melanoblast marker dct, again for 
progression from dct expression to differentiation, and again for maintenance of 
dendritic form following differentiation. mitfa(fh53)ts mutants recover 
melanocytes within 2-3days when downshifted at all stages of larval development. 
However, when melanocyte stem cells (MSCs) are ablated by early treatment with 
the erbB3 inhibitor AG1478, melanocyte recovery is lost by 48 h. This result 
indicates first that the MSC is established at the restrictive temperature, and 
that melanoblasts die or lose the ability to recover after being held at the 
restrictive temperature for approximately one day.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.004
PMCID: PMC3040983
PMID: 21146516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]