1. Genes Brain Behav. 2011 Apr;10(3):286-98. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00667.x.  Epub 2011 Jan 10.

PKC-1 acts with the ERK MAPK signaling pathway to regulate Caenorhabditis 
elegans mechanosensory response.

Hyde R(1), Corkins ME, Somers GA, Hart AC.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Center for Cancer Research, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.

In most animals, multiple genes encode protein kinase C (PKC) proteins. 
Pharmacological studies have revealed numerous roles for this protein family, 
yet the in vivo roles of specific PKC proteins and the functional targets of PKC 
activation are poorly understood. We find that in Caenorhabditis elegans, two 
PKC genes, pkc-1 and tpa-1, are required for mechanosensory response; the role 
of the nPKCε/η ortholog, pkc-1, was examined in detail. pkc-1 function is 
required for response to nose touch in adult C. elegans and pkc-1 likely acts in 
the interneurons that regulate locomotion which are direct synaptic targets of 
mechanosensory neurons. Previous studies have suggested numerous possible 
targets of pkc-1; our analysis indicates that pkc-1 may act via the 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(ERK/MAPK) pathway. We find that ERK/MAPK pathway function is required for 
mechanosensory response in C. elegans and that at least one component of this 
pathway, lin-45 Raf, acts in interneurons of the mechanosensory circuit. Genetic 
analysis indicates that lin-45 and pkc-1 act together to regulate nose touch 
response. Thus, these results functionally link two conserved signaling pathways 
in adult C. elegans neurons and define distinct roles for PKC genes in vivo.

© 2011 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00667.x
PMCID: PMC3664539
PMID: 21143768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]