1. Cell Death Dis. 2010;1(1):e2. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2009.4.

Differential neuroprotective effects of 14-3-3 proteins in models of Parkinson's 
disease.

Yacoubian TA(1), Slone SR, Harrington AJ, Hamamichi S, Schieltz JM, Caldwell KA, 
Caldwell GA, Standaert DG.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental Therapeutics, Department of 
Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. 
tyacoub@uab.edu

14-3-3 proteins are important negative regulators of cell death pathways. Recent 
studies have revealed alterations in 14-3-3s in Parkinson's disease (PD) and the 
ability of 14-3-3s to interact with alpha-synuclein (α-syn), a protein central 
to PD pathophysiology. In a transgenic α-syn mouse model, we found reduced 
expression of 14-3-3θ, ε, and γ. These same isoforms prevent α-syn inclusion 
formation in an H4 neuroglioma cell model. Using dopaminergic cell lines stably 
overexpressing each 14-3-3 isoform, we found that overexpression of 14-3-3θ, ε, 
or γ led to resistance to both rotenone and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium 
(MPP(+)), while other isoforms were not protective against both toxins. 
Inhibition of a single protective isoform, 14-3-3θ, by shRNA did not increase 
vulnerability to neurotoxic injury, but toxicity was enhanced by broad-based 
inhibition of 14-3-3 action with the peptide inhibitor difopein. Using a 
transgenic C. elegans model of PD, we confirmed the ability of both human 
14-3-3θ and a C. elegans 14-3-3 homolog (ftt-2) to protect dopaminergic neurons 
from α-syn toxicity. Collectively, these data show a strong neuroprotective 
effect of enhanced 14-3-3 expression - particularly of the 14-3-3θ, ε, and γ 
isoforms - in multiple cellular and animal models of PD, and point to the 
potential value of these proteins in the development of neuroprotective 
therapies for human PD.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2009.4
PMCID: PMC2998343
PMID: 21152247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]