1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;19(4):472-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.198. Epub 2010
Dec  8.

Prevalence of CDKN2A mutations in pancreatic cancer patients: implications for 
genetic counseling.

McWilliams RR(1), Wieben ED, Rabe KG, Pedersen KS, Wu Y, Sicotte H, Petersen GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
mcwilliams.robert@mayo.edu

Germline mutations in CDKN2A have been reported in pancreatic cancer families, 
but genetic counseling for pancreatic cancer risk has been limited by lack of 
information on CDKN2A mutation carriers outside of selected pancreatic or 
melanoma kindreds. Lymphocyte DNA from consecutive, unselected white 
non-Hispanic patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma was used to sequence 
CDKN2A. Frequencies of mutations that alter the coding of p16INK4 or p14ARF were 
quantified overall and in subgroups. Penetrance and likelihood of carrying 
mutations by family history were estimated. Among 1537 cases, 9 (0.6%) carried 
germline mutations in CDKN2A, including three previously unreported mutations. 
CDKN2A mutation carriers were more likely to have a family history of pancreatic 
cancer (P=0.003) or melanoma (P=0.03), and a personal history of melanoma 
(P=0.01). Among cases who reported having a first-degree relative with 
pancreatic cancer or melanoma, the carrier proportions were 3.3 and 5.3%, 
respectively. Penetrance for mutation carriers by age 80 was calculated to be 
58% for pancreatic cancer (95% confidence interval (CI) 8-86%), and 39% for 
melanoma (95% CI 0-80). Among cases who ever smoked cigarettes, the risk for 
pancreatic cancer was higher for carriers compared with non-carriers (HR 25.8, 
P=2.1 × 10⁻¹³), but among nonsmokers, this comparison did not reach statistical 
significance. Germline mutations in CDKN2A among unselected pancreatic cancer 
patients are uncommon, although notably penetrant, especially among smokers. 
Carriers of germline mutations of CDKN2A should be counseled to avoid tobacco 
use to decrease risk of pancreatic cancer in addition to taking measures to 
decrease melanoma risk.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.198
PMCID: PMC3060321
PMID: 21150883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]