1. Neurobiol Dis. 2011 Mar;41(3):655-60. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.11.016. Epub
2010  Dec 13.

Neuronal voltage-gated ion channels are genetic modifiers of generalized 
epilepsy with febrile seizures plus.

Hawkins NA(1), Martin MS, Frankel WN, Kearney JA, Escayg A.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Mutations in the neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel genes SCN1A and SCN2A are 
associated with inherited epilepsies, including genetic epilepsy with febrile 
seizures plus (GEFS+) and Dravet syndrome (severe myoclonic epilepsy of 
infancy). The clinical presentation and severity of these epilepsies vary 
widely, even in people with the same mutation, suggesting the action of 
environmental or genetic modifiers. To gain support for the hypothesis that 
genetic modifiers can influence clinical presentation in patients with 
SCN1A-derived GEFS+, we used mouse models to study the effect of combining the 
human GEFS+ mutation SCN1A-R1648H with SCN2A, KCNQ2, and SCN8A mutations. 
Knock-in mice heterozygous for the R1648H mutation (Scn1a(RH/+)) have decreased 
thresholds to induced seizures and infrequent spontaneous seizures, whereas 
homozygotes display spontaneous seizures and premature lethality. Scn2a(Q54) 
transgenic mice have a mutation in Scn2a that results in spontaneous, 
adult-onset partial motor seizures, and mice carrying the Kcnq2-V182M mutation 
exhibit increased susceptibility to induced seizures, and rare spontaneous 
seizures as adults. Combining the Scn1a-R1648H allele with either Scn2a(Q54) or 
Kcnq2(V182M/+) results in early-onset, generalized tonic-clonic seizures and 
juvenile lethality in double heterozygous mice. In contrast, Scn8a mutants 
exhibit increased resistance to induced seizures. Combining the Scn1a-R1648H and 
Scn8a-med-jo alleles restores normal thresholds to flurothyl-induced seizures in 
Scn1a(RH/+) heterozygotes and improved survival of Scn1a(RH/RH) homozygotes. Our 
results demonstrate that variants in Scn2a, Kcnq2, and Scn8a can dramatically 
influence the phenotype of mice carrying the Scn1a-R1648H mutation and suggest 
that ion channel variants may contribute to the clinical variation seen in 
patients with monogenic epilepsy.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.11.016
PMCID: PMC3035952
PMID: 21156207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The mouse model 
of GEFS+ described in this manuscript has been licensed to Allergan. The terms 
of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by Emory University in 
accordance with its conflict of interest policy.