1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 3;5(12):e14225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014225.

Efficient gene targeting by homologous recombination in rat embryonic stem 
cells.

Meek S(1), Buehr M, Sutherland L, Thomson A, Mullins JJ, Smith AJ, Burdon T.

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, 
University of Edinburgh, Roslin, Midlothian, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The rat is the preferred experimental animal in many biological studies. With 
the recent derivation of authentic rat embryonic stem (ES) cells it is now 
feasible to apply state-of-the art genetic engineering in this species using 
homologous recombination. To establish whether rat ES cells are amenable to in 
vivo recombination, we tested targeted disruption of the hypoxanthine 
phosphoribosyltransferase (hprt) locus in ES cells derived from both inbred and 
outbred strains of rats. Targeting vectors that replace exons 7 and 8 of the 
hprt gene with neomycinR/thymidine kinase selection cassettes were 
electroporated into male Fisher F344 and Sprague Dawley rat ES cells. 
Approximately 2% of the G418 resistant colonies also tolerated selection with 
6-thioguanine, indicating inactivation of the hprt gene. PCR and Southern blot 
analysis confirmed correct site-specific targeting of the hprt locus in these 
clones. Embryoid body and monolayer differentiation of targeted cell lines 
established that they retained differentiation potential following targeting and 
selection. This report demonstrates that gene modification via homologous 
recombination in rat ES cells is efficient, and should facilitate implementation 
of targeted, genetic manipulation in the rat.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014225
PMCID: PMC2997056
PMID: 21151976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.