1. J Phys Chem B. 2011 Jan 27;115(3):580-96. doi: 10.1021/jp1092338. Epub 2010
Dec  17.

Development of CHARMM polarizable force field for nucleic acid bases based on 
the classical Drude oscillator model.

Baker CM(1), Anisimov VM, MacKerell AD Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore, 20 Penn Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

A polarizable force field for nucleic acid bases based on the classical Drude 
oscillator model is presented. Parameter optimization was performed to reproduce 
crystallographic geometries, crystal unit cell parameters, heats of sublimation, 
vibrational frequencies and assignments, dipole moments, molecular 
polarizabilities and quantum mechanical base-base and base-water interaction 
energies. The training and validation data included crystals of unsubstituted 
and alkyl-substituted adenine, guanine, cytosine, uracil, and thymine bases, 
hydrated crystals, and hydrogen bonded base pairs. Across all compounds, the 
RMSD in the calculated heats of sublimation is 4.1%. This equates to an 
improvement of more than 2.5 kcal/mol in accuracy compared to the nonpolarizable 
CHARMM27 force field. However, the level of agreement with experimental 
molecular volume decreased from 1.7% to 2.1% upon moving from the nonpolarizable 
to the polarizable model. The representation of dipole moments is significantly 
improved with the Drude polarizable force field. Unlike in additive force 
fields, there is no requirement for the gas-phase dipole moments to be 
overestimated, illustrating the ability of the Drude polarizable force field to 
treat accurately differently dielectric environments and indicating the 
improvements in the electrostatic model. Validation of the model was performed 
on the basis of the calculation of the gas-phase binding enthalpies of base 
pairs obtained via potential of mean force calculations; the additive and 
polarizable models both performed satisfactorily with average differences of 0.2 
and 0.9 kcal/mol, respectively, and rms differences of 1.3 and 1.7 kcal/mol, 
respectively. Overall, considering the number of significant improvements versus 
the additive CHARMM force field, the incorporation of explicit polarizability 
into the force field for nucleic acid bases represents an additional step toward 
accurate computational modeling of biological systems.

DOI: 10.1021/jp1092338
PMCID: PMC3166616
PMID: 21166469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]