1. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Feb 15;22(4):493-502. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-07-0637. Epub 
2010 Dec 17.

Constitutive activated Cdc42-associated kinase (Ack) phosphorylation at arrested 
endocytic clathrin-coated pits of cells that lack dynamin.

Shen H(1), Ferguson SM, Dephoure N, Park R, Yang Y, Volpicelli-Daley L, Gygi S, 
Schlessinger J, De Camilli P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Program in 
Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, and Kavli Institute for 
Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a fundamental cellular process conserved from 
yeast to mammals and is an important endocytic route for the internalization of 
many specific cargos, including activated growth factor receptors. Here we 
examined changes in tyrosine phosphorylation, a representative output of growth 
factor receptor signaling, in cells in which endocytic clathrin-coated pits are 
frozen at a deeply invaginated state, that is, cells that lack dynamin 
(fibroblasts from dynamin 1, dynamin 2 double conditional knockout mice). The 
major change observed in these cells relative to wild-type cells was an increase 
in the phosphorylation state, and thus activation, of activated Cdc42-associated 
kinase (Ack), a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase. Ack is concentrated at 
clathrin-coated pits, and binds clathrin heavy chain via two clathrin boxes. RNA 
interference-based approaches and pharmacological manipulations further 
demonstrated that the phosphorylation of Ack requires both clathrin assembly 
into endocytic clathrin-coated pits and active Cdc42. These findings reveal a 
link between progression of clathrin-coated pits to endocytic vesicles and an 
activation-deactivation cycle of Ack.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E10-07-0637
PMCID: PMC3038647
PMID: 21169560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]