1. Vision Res. 2011 Apr 13;51(7):633-51. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2010.12.002. Epub 
2010 Dec 15.

The genetics of normal and defective color vision.

Neitz J(1), Neitz M.

Author information:
(1)University of Washington, Dept. of Ophthalmology, Seattle, WA 98195, United 
States. jneitz@uw.edu

The contributions of genetics research to the science of normal and defective 
color vision over the previous few decades are reviewed emphasizing the 
developments in the 25years since the last anniversary issue of Vision Research. 
Understanding of the biology underlying color vision has been vaulted forward 
through the application of the tools of molecular genetics. For all their 
complexity, the biological processes responsible for color vision are more 
accessible than for many other neural systems. This is partly because of the 
wealth of genetic variations that affect color perception, both within and 
across species, and because components of the color vision system lend 
themselves to genetic manipulation. Mutations and rearrangements in the genes 
encoding the long, middle, and short wavelength sensitive cone pigments are 
responsible for color vision deficiencies and mutations have been identified 
that affect the number of cone types, the absorption spectra of the pigments, 
the functionality and viability of the cones, and the topography of the cone 
mosaic. The addition of an opsin gene, as occurred in the evolution of primate 
color vision, and has been done in experimental animals can produce expanded 
color vision capacities and this has provided insight into the underlying neural 
circuitry.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.visres.2010.12.002
PMCID: PMC3075382
PMID: 21167193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]