1. Acta Neuropathol. 2011 Apr;121(4):487-98. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0788-5. Epub
 2010 Dec 16.

Modulation of lipid peroxidation and mitochondrial function improves 
neuropathology in Huntington's disease mice.

Lee J(1), Kosaras B, Del Signore SJ, Cormier K, McKee A, Ratan RR, Kowall NW, 
Ryu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder. 
Oxidative damage has been associated with pathological neuronal loss in HD. The 
therapeutic modulation of oxidative stress and mitochondrial function using low 
molecular weight compounds may be an important strategy for delaying the onset 
and slowing the progression of HD. In the present study, we found a marked 
increase of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE) adducts, a lipid peroxidation marker, in 
the caudate and putamen of HD brains and in the striatum of HD mice. Notably, 
4-HNE immunoreactivity was colocalized with mutant huntingtin inclusions in the 
striatal neurons of R6/2 HD mice. Administration of nordihydroguaiaretic acid 
(NDGA), an antioxidant that functions by inhibiting lipid peroxidation, markedly 
reduced 4-HNE adduct formation in the nuclear inclusions of R6/2 striatal 
neurons. NDGA also protected cultured neurons against oxidative stress-induced 
cell death by improving ATP generation and mitochondrial morphology and 
function. In addition, NDGA restored mitochondrial membrane potential, 
mitochondrial structure, and synapse structure in the striatum of R6/2 mice and 
increased their lifespan. The present findings suggest that further therapeutic 
studies using NDGA are warranted in HD and other neurodegenerative diseases 
characterized by increased oxidative stress and altered mitochondrial function.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0788-5
PMCID: PMC3151672
PMID: 21161248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]