1. Mamm Genome. 2011 Apr;22(3-4):156-69. doi: 10.1007/s00335-010-9309-z. Epub
2010  Dec 15.

Molecular characterization of an allelic series of mutations in the mouse Nox3 
gene.

Flaherty JP(1), Fairfield HE, Spruce CA, McCarty CM, Bergstrom DE.

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

The inner ear consists of the cochlea (the organ of hearing) and the vestibular 
system (the organs of balance). Within the vestibular system, linear 
acceleration and gravity are detected by the saccule and utricle. Resting above 
the neurosensory epithelia of these organs are otoconia, minute proteinaceous 
and crystalline (calcite) inertial masses that shift under the physical forces 
imparted by linear movements and gravity. It is the transduction and sensation 
of these movements and their integration with vision and proprioceptive inputs 
that contribute to the sensation of balance. It has been proposed that a 
reactive oxygen species- (ROS-) generating NADPH oxidase comprising the gene 
products of the Nox3, Noxo1, and Cyba genes plays a critical and constructive 
role in the process of inner-ear development, specifically, the deposition of 
otoconia. Inactivation in mouse of any of the NADPH oxidase components encoded 
by the Nox3, Noxo1, or Cyba gene results in the complete congenital absence of 
otoconia and profound vestibular dysfunction. Here we describe our use of PCR, 
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), and rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) 
with traditional and high-throughput (HTP) sequencing technologies to extend and 
complete the molecular characterization of an allelic series of seven mutations 
in the Nox3 gene. Collectively, the mutation spectrum includes an endogenous 
retrovirus insertion, two missense mutations, a splice donor mutation, a splice 
acceptor mutation, premature translational termination, and a small duplication. 
Together, these alleles provide tools to investigate the mechanisms of otoconial 
deposition over development, throughout aging, and in various disease states.

DOI: 10.1007/s00335-010-9309-z
PMCID: PMC3056917
PMID: 21161235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]