1. Int J Biol Markers. 2010 Oct-Dec;25(4):195-9.

Distribution of a single nucleotide polymorphism of insulin-like growth factor-1 
in colorectal cancer patients and its association with mucinous adenocarcinoma.

Lin JK(1), Shen MY, Lin TC, Lan YT, Wang HS, Yang SH, Li AF, Chang SC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: To analyze the difference in the distribution of an insulin growth 
factor-1 (IGF-1) polymorphism (-2995 C/A) between young and old colorectal 
cancer (CRC) patients.
METHODS: Information from 950 CRC patients undergoing surgery at the Taipei 
Veterans General Hospital between 2000 and 2005 was collected. The IGF-1 
polymorphism was analyzed in patients in extreme age ranges at the time of CRC 
onset (i.e., under the 20th and above the 80th percentiles, respectively). 
Associations between clinicopathological variables and the IGF-1 polymorphism 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: Young CRC patients had a higher frequency of advanced disease (58.7%) 
and mucinous adenocarcinoma (20%) than old CRC patients. Among old CRC patients, 
the frequency of the AA genotype of IGF-1 was 12.7% (24/189), which was 
significantly higher than in young patients (4.2%). Other clinicopathological 
factors including tumor location, differentiation, lymphovascular invasion, and 
TNM stage were not associated with the AA genotype of IGF-1. Mucinous 
differentiation (but not the other clinicopathological factors) was 
significantly associated with the CA/AA genotype of IGF-1 (39/195).
CONCLUSIONS: Older patients had a higher frequency of the AA genotype of 
IGF-1(-2995 C/A), while younger patients more often had advanced disease and 
mucinous adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 21161940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]