1. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 22;11:723. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-723.

Whole genome sequencing of Saccharomyces cerevisiae: from genotype to phenotype 
for improved metabolic engineering applications.

Otero JM(1), Vongsangnak W, Asadollahi MA, Olivares-Hernandes R, Maury J, 
Farinelli L, Barlocher L, Oster√•s M, Schalk M, Clark A, Nielsen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of 
Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden. nielsenj@chalmers.se

BACKGROUND: The need for rapid and efficient microbial cell factory design and 
construction are possible through the enabling technology, metabolic 
engineering, which is now being facilitated by systems biology approaches. 
Metabolic engineering is often complimented by directed evolution, where 
selective pressure is applied to a partially genetically engineered strain to 
confer a desirable phenotype. The exact genetic modification or resulting 
genotype that leads to the improved phenotype is often not identified or 
understood to enable further metabolic engineering.
RESULTS: In this work we performed whole genome high-throughput sequencing and 
annotation can be used to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
between Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains S288c and CEN.PK113-7D. The yeast 
strain S288c was the first eukaryote sequenced, serving as the reference genome 
for the Saccharomyces Genome Database, while CEN.PK113-7D is a preferred 
laboratory strain for industrial biotechnology research. A total of 13,787 
high-quality SNPs were detected between both strains (reference strain: S288c). 
Considering only metabolic genes (782 of 5,596 annotated genes), a total of 219 
metabolism specific SNPs are distributed across 158 metabolic genes, with 85 of 
the SNPs being nonsynonymous (e.g., encoding amino acid modifications). Amongst 
metabolic SNPs detected, there was pathway enrichment in the galactose uptake 
pathway (GAL1, GAL10) and ergosterol biosynthetic pathway (ERG8, ERG9). 
Physiological characterization confirmed a strong deficiency in galactose uptake 
and metabolism in S288c compared to CEN.PK113-7D, and similarly, ergosterol 
content in CEN.PK113-7D was significantly higher in both glucose and galactose 
supplemented cultivations compared to S288c. Furthermore, DNA microarray 
profiling of S288c and CEN.PK113-7D in both glucose and galactose batch cultures 
did not provide a clear hypothesis for major phenotypes observed, suggesting 
that genotype to phenotype correlations are manifested post-transcriptionally or 
post-translationally either through protein concentration and/or function.
CONCLUSIONS: With an intensifying need for microbial cell factories that produce 
a wide array of target compounds, whole genome high-throughput sequencing and 
annotation for SNP detection can aid in better reducing and defining the 
metabolic landscape. This work demonstrates direct correlations between genotype 
and phenotype that provides clear and high-probability of success metabolic 
engineering targets. The genome sequence, annotation, and a SNP viewer of 
CEN.PK113-7D are deposited at http://www.sysbio.se/cenpk.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-723
PMCID: PMC3022925
PMID: 21176163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]