1. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Oct;10(10):5314-23. doi: 10.1128/mcb.10.10.5314-5323.1990.

Effect of a dominant inhibitory Ha-ras mutation on mitogenic signal transduction 
in NIH 3T3 cells.

Cai H(1), Szeber√©nyi J, Cooper GM.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115.

We used a dominant inhibitory mutation of c-Ha-ras which changes Ser-17 to 
Asn-17 in the gene product p21 [p21(Asn-17)Ha-ras] to investigate ras function 
in mitogenic signal transduction. An NIH 3T3 cell line [NIH(M17)] was isolated 
that displayed inducible expression of the mutant Ha-ras gene (Ha-ras Asn-17) 
via the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat and was growth inhibited 
by dexamethasone. The effect of dexamethasone induction on response of quiescent 
NIH(M17) cells to mitogens was then analyzed. Stimulation of DNA synthesis by 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) was 
completely blocked by p21(Asn-17) expression, and stimulation by serum, 
fibroblast growth factor, and platelet-derived growth factor was partially 
inhibited. However, the induction of fos, jun, and myc by EGF and TPA was not 
significantly inhibited in this cell line. An effect of p21(Asn-17) on fos 
induction was, however, demonstrated in transient expression assays in which 
quiescent NIH 3T3 cells were cotransfected with a fos-cat receptor plasmid plus 
a Ha-ras Asn-17 expression vector. In this assay, p21(Asn-17) inhibited 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase expression induced by EGF and other growth 
factors. In contrast to its effect on DNA synthesis, however, Ha-ras Asn-17 
expression did not inhibit fos-cat expression induced by TPA. Conversely, 
downregulation of protein kinase C did not inhibit fos-cat induction by 
activated ras or other oncogenes. These results suggest that ras proteins are 
involved in at least two parallel mitogenic signal transduction pathways, one of 
which is independent of protein kinase C. Although either pathway alone appears 
to be sufficient to induce fos, both appear to be necessary to induce the full 
mitogenic response.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.10.10.5314-5323.1990
PMCID: PMC361223
PMID: 2118993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]