1. Vasc Med. 2010 Dec;15(6):451-9. doi: 10.1177/1358863X10391355.

Inferior vena cava agenesis and deep vein thrombosis: 10 patients and review of 
the literature.

Lambert M(1), Marboeuf P, Midulla M, Trillot N, Beregi JP, Mounier-Vehier C, 
Hatron PY, Jude B.

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Université Lille Nord de France, F-59037 Lille, 
France. marc.lambert@chru-lille.fr

Inferior vena cava agenesis (IVCA) is a rare condition, found in almost 5% of 
patients under 30 years old with unprovoked deep venous thrombosis (DVT). We 
describe 10 consecutive patients with IVCA-associated DVT and conducted an 
extensive literature review to investigate the typical spectrum of 
IVCA-associated DVT. Among our patients (eight men and two women; mean age, 25 ± 
4.5 years), DVT followed intense and unusual (major) physical activity for eight 
of them. DVT was bilateral in six patients and unilateral in four. 
Ultrasonography was unable to detect IVCA, which was visualized by 
computed-tomography scans for seven patients, and magnetic resonance imaging and 
angiography for 10. Hereditary thrombophilia screening, to detect factor V 
Leiden or prothrombin gene heterozygosity (G20210A mutation), was positive for 
only two patients. Wearing elastic stockings and taking an indefinite or 
long-term vitamin K antagonist were prescribed for all 10 patients and nine 
complied with the latter. To date, 62 patients with IVCA-associated DVT have 
been reported in the English literature. Analysis of them and our patients 
yielded a typical spectrum of IVCA-associated DVT characteristics: IVCA occurs 
in young adults, particularly males, and is revealed by proximal DVT following 
major physical exertion. All were treated with a prolonged vitamin K antagonist 
and advised to wear elastic stockings. No precise duration of anticoagulation 
has been established.

DOI: 10.1177/1358863X10391355
PMID: 21183652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]