1. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):463-72. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.287. Epub 2010 Dec 24.

Janus kinase 2 regulates Bcr-Abl signaling in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Samanta A(1), Perazzona B, Chakraborty S, Sun X, Modi H, Bhatia R, Priebe W, 
Arlinghaus R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 
77054, USA.

Despite the success of imatinib mesylate (IM) in the early chronic phase of 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), patients are resistant to IM and other kinase 
inhibitors in the later stages of CML. Our findings indicate that inhibition of 
Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) in Bcr-Abl+ cells overcomes IM resistance although the 
precise mechanism of Jak2 action is unknown. Knocking down Jak2 in Bcr-Abl+ 
cells reduced levels of the Bcr-Abl protein and also the phosphorylation of 
Tyr177 of Bcr-Abl, and Jak2 overexpression rescued these knockdown effects. 
Treatment of Bcr-Abl+ cells with Jak2 inhibitors for 4-6â€‰h but not with IM also 
reduced Bcr-Abl protein and pTyr177 levels. In vitro kinase experiments 
performed with recombinant Jak2 showed that Jak2 readily phosphorylated Tyr177 
of Bcr-Abl (a Jak2 consensus site, YvnV) whereas c-Abl did not. Importantly, 
Jak2 inhibition decreased pTyr177 Bcr-Abl in immune complexes but did not reduce 
levels of Bcr-Abl, suggesting that the reduction of Bcr-Abl by Jak2 inhibition 
is a separate event from phosphorylation of Tyr177. Jak2 inhibition by chemical 
inhibitors (TG101209/WP1193) and Jak2 knockdown diminished the activation of 
Ras, PI-3 kinase pathways and reduced levels of pTyrSTAT5. These findings 
suggest that Bcr-Abl stability and oncogenic signaling in CML cells are under 
the control of Jak2.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2010.287
PMCID: PMC3072513
PMID: 21183952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]