1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011 Apr;89(4):377-87. doi: 10.1007/s00109-010-0710-6. Epub 
2010 Dec 30.

Heart failure-associated anemia: bone marrow dysfunction and response to 
erythropoietin.

Ruifrok WP(1), Qian C, Silljé HH, van Goor H, van Veldhuisen DJ, van Gilst WH, 
de Boer RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, 9713 GZ Groningen, The Netherlands.

Heart failure (HF)-associated anemia is common and has a poor outcome. Because 
bone marrow (BM) dysfunction may contribute to HF-associated anemia, we first 
investigated mechanisms of BM dysfunction in an established model of HF, the 
transgenic REN2 rat, which is characterized by severe hypertrophy and 
ventricular dilatation and SD rats as controls. Secondly, we investigated 
whether stimulation of hematopoiesis with erythropoietin (EPO) could restore 
anemia and BM dysfunction. After sacrifice, erythropoietic precursors (BFU-E) 
were isolated from the BM and cultured for 10 days. BFU-E were quantified and 
transcript abundance of genes involved in erythropoiesis were assayed. Number of 
BFU-E were severely decreased in BM of REN2 rats compared to SD rats (50 ± 6.2 
vs. 6.4 ± 1.7, p < 0.01). EPO treatment increased hematocrit in the SD-EPO group 
(after 6 weeks, 49 ± 1 vs. 58 ± 1%, p < 0.01); however, in the mildly anemic 
REN2 rats, there was no effect (43 ± 1 vs. 44 ± 1%). This was paralleled by a 
67% decrease in BFU-E in BM of REN2 rats compared to SD (p < 0.01). EPO 
significantly improved BFU-E in both SD and REN2 but could not restore this to 
control levels in the REN2 rats. Expression of several genes involved in 
differentiation (LMO2), mobilization (SDF-1), and iron incorporation 
(transferrin receptor) of the BM were differentially expressed in REN2 rats 
compared to SD rats, and EPO did not normalize this. Altogether, these results 
suggest that BM dysfunction is an important contributor to HF-associated anemia 
and that EPO is not an effective agent to treat HF-associated anemia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-010-0710-6
PMCID: PMC3056002
PMID: 21191566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]