1. Exp Neurol. 2011 Mar;228(1):118-25. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.12.018. Epub
 2010 Dec 28.

Chronic deprivation of TrkB signaling leads to selective late-onset 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic degeneration.

Baydyuk M(1), Nguyen MT, Xu B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20057, USA.

The pathological hallmark of Parkinson's disease (PD) is a selective and 
progressive loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta (SNc). In the vast majority of cases the appearance of PD is sporadic, 
and its etiology remains unknown. Several postmortem studies demonstrate reduced 
levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the SNc of PD patients. 
Application of BDNF promotes the survival of DA neurons in PD animal models. 
Here we show that BDNF signaling via its TrkB receptor tyrosine kinase is 
important for survival of nigrostriatal DA neurons in aging brains. 
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the TrkB receptor was expressed in DA neurons 
located in the SNc and ventral tegmental area (VTA). However, a significant loss 
of DA neurons occurred at 12-24 months of age only in the SNc but not in the VTA 
of TrkB hypomorphic mice in which the TrkB receptor was expressed at a quarter 
to a third of the normal amount. The neuronal loss was accompanied by a decrease 
in dopaminergic axonal terminals in the striatum and by gliosis in both the SNc 
and striatum. Furthermore, nigrostriatal DA neurons in the TrkB mutant mice were 
hypersensitive to the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP), a mitochondrial complex I inhibitor that selectively kills DA neurons. 
These results suggest that BDNF-to-TrkB signaling plays an important role in the 
long-term maintenance of the nigrostriatal system and that its deficiency may 
contribute to the progression of PD.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.12.018
PMCID: PMC3041148
PMID: 21192928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]