1. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 1;10(1):100-7. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.1.14362. Epub 2011 Jan
1.

Downregulation of uPAR inhibits migration, invasion, proliferation, FAK/PI3K/Akt 
signaling and induces senescence in papillary thyroid carcinoma cells.

Nowicki TS(1), Zhao H, Darzynkiewicz Z, Moscatello A, Shin E, Schantz S, Tiwari 
RK, Geliebter J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 1;10(5):737-8.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common endocrine and thyroid 
malignancy.  The urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) plays an 
important role in cancer pathogenesis, including breakdown of the extracellular 
matrix, invasion, and metastasis.  Additionally, there is increasing evidence 
that uPAR also promotes tumorigenesis via the modulation of multiple signaling 
pathways.  BRAFV600E, the most common initial genetic mutation in PTC, leads to 
ERK1/2 hyperphosphorylation, which has been shown in numerous cancers to induce 
uPAR.  Treatment of the BRAFV600E-positive PTC cell line, BCPAP, with the 
MEK/ERK inhibitor U0126 reduced uPAR RNA levels by 90%.  siRNA-mediated 
down-regulation of uPAR in BCPAP cells resulted in greatly decreased activity in 
the focal adhesion kinase (FAK)/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt 
signaling pathway.  This phenomenon was concurrent with drastically reduced 
proliferation rates and decreased clonigenic survival, as well as demonstrated 
senescence-associated nuclear morphology and induction of b-galactosidase 
activity. uPAR-knockdown BCPAP cells also displayed greatly reduced migration 
and invasion rates, as well as a complete loss of the cells' ability to augment 
their invasiveness following plasminogen supplementation. Taken together, these 
data provide new evidence of a novel role for uPAR induction (as a consequence 
of constitutive ERK1/2 activation) as a central component in PTC pathogenesis, 
and highlight the potential of uPAR as a therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.10.1.14362
PMCID: PMC3048079
PMID: 21191179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]