1. Int J Neurosci. 2011 Apr;121(4):224-7. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2010.542843. Epub
 2011 Jan 4.

Young-onset parkinsonism in a Hong Kong Chinese man with adult-onset 
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome.

Mak CM(1), Sheng B, Lee HH, Lau KK, Chan WT, Lam CW, Chan YW.

Author information:
(1)Kowloon West Cluster Laboratory Genetic Service, Department of Pathology, 
Princess Margaret Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China. makm@ha.org.hk

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group 
of disorders varied in genetic etiologies, clinical presentations, and 
radiological features. NBIA is an iron homeostasis disorder with progressive 
iron accumulation in the central nervous systems and is clinically characterized 
by extrapyramidal movement abnormalities, retinal pigmentary changes, and 
cognitive impairment. Panthothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 
(Hallervorden-Spatz disease) is the commonest disorder of NBIA with a prevalence 
of one-three per million. Clinically, it is classified into early-onset 
childhood, atypical late-onset, and adult-onset type. Adult-onset type is rarer. 
We report the first case of adult-onset panthothenate kinase-associated 
neurodegeneration in Hong Kong in a 28-year-old Chinese man who presented with 
pure young-onset parkinsonism. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain 
showed the presence of eye-of-the-tiger sign. Two compound heterozygous 
mutations PANK2 NM_153638.2: c.445G > T; NP_705902.2: p.E149X and PANK2 
NM_153638.2: c.1133A > G; NP_705902.2: p.D378G were detected. Parkinsonism per 
se is a very heterogeneous phenotypic group. In view of the readily available 
genetic analysis of PANK2, panthothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 
should be considered in adult patients with young-onset parkinsonism with or 
without the eye-of-the-tiger sign. The exact diagnosis offers a different 
management approach and genetic counseling. NBIA is likely under- or 
misdiagnosed in Hong Kong Chinese.

DOI: 10.3109/00207454.2010.542843
PMID: 21198414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]