1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Oct 15;265(29):17883-90.

Isoprenoid modification of G25K (Gp), a low molecular mass GTP-binding protein 
distinct from p21ras.

Maltese WA(1), Sheridan KM.

Author information:
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Clinic, Danville, Pennsylvania 17822.

Cultured murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells synthesize a number of low molecular 
mass GTP-binding proteins that undergo post-translational modification by 
isoprenoids. We used two-dimensional electrophoresis and immunoblotting to show 
that a 23-24-kDa protein labeled by the isoprenoid precursor [3H]mevalonate was 
specifically recognized by an antibody to G25K (Gp), a low molecular mass 
GTP-binding protein originally purified from placental, platelet, and brain 
membranes. Several isoelectric variants of G25K were detected in MEL cells, and 
all were radiolabeled with [3H]mevalonte. The G25K-immunoreactive protein did 
not cross-react with pan-ras antibody. Although mature p21ras is known to be 
localized in the cell membrane, most of the isoprenylated G25K was found in the 
100,000 x g supernatant fraction when cells were lysed in buffer without 
detergent. Blocking isoprenoid synthesis by incubation of MEL cells with 
lovastatin resulted in a decrease in the concentration of G25K in the 
particulate fraction and a corresponding increase in immunodetectable protein in 
the soluble fraction. Lovastatin treatment also produced shifts in the 
electrophoretic mobilities of the G25K isoforms on two-dimensional gels. These 
observations are consistent with the idea that isoprenylation plays a permissive 
role in the association of G25K with the cell membrane or other organelles. 
However, the high proportion of soluble isoprenylated G25K in MEL cells under 
normal culture conditions suggests that the role of the isoprenoid modification 
may be more complex than simply serving as a structural anchor for stable 
insertion of proteins into the lipid bilayer.

PMID: 2120220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]