1. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 29;5(12):e15317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015317.

Analysis of microRNA expression in the prepubertal testis.

Buchold GM(1), Coarfa C, Kim J, Milosavljevic A, Gunaratne PH, Matzuk MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United 
States of America.

Only thirteen microRNAs are conserved between D. melanogaster and the mouse; 
however, conditional loss of miRNA function through mutation of Dicer causes 
defects in proliferation of premeiotic germ cells in both species. This 
highlights the potentially important, but uncharacterized, role of miRNAs during 
early spermatogenesis. The goal of this study was to characterize on postnatal 
day 7, 10, and 14 the content and editing of murine testicular miRNAs, which 
predominantly arise from spermatogonia and spermatocytes, in contrast to prior 
descriptions of miRNAs in the adult mouse testis which largely reflects the 
content of spermatids. Previous studies have shown miRNAs to be abundant in the 
mouse testis by postnatal day 14; however, through Next Generation Sequencing of 
testes from a B6;129 background we found abundant earlier expression of miRNAs 
and describe shifts in the miRNA signature during this period. We detected 
robust expression of miRNAs encoded on the X chromosome in postnatal day 14 
testes, consistent with prior studies showing their resistance to meiotic sex 
chromosome inactivation. Unexpectedly, we also found a similar positional 
enrichment for most miRNAs on chromosome 2 at postnatal day 14 and for those on 
chromosome 12 at postnatal day 7. We quantified in vivo developmental changes in 
three types of miRNA variation including 5' heterogeneity, editing, and 3' 
nucleotide addition. We identified eleven putative novel pubertal testis miRNAs 
whose developmental expression suggests a possible role in early male germ cell 
development. These studies provide a foundation for interpretation of miRNA 
changes associated with testicular pathology and identification of novel 
components of the miRNA editing machinery in the testis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015317
PMCID: PMC3012074
PMID: 21206922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.