1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Nov;1814(11):1467-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.12.015. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

Molecular enzymology of 5-aminolevulinate synthase, the gatekeeper of heme 
biosynthesis.

Hunter GA(1), Ferreira GC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612-4799, USA.

Pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) is an obligatory cofactor for the homodimeric 
mitochondrial enzyme 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS), which controls metabolic 
flux into the porphyrin biosynthetic pathway in animals, fungi, and the 
α-subclass of proteobacteria. Recent work has provided an explanation for how 
this enzyme can utilize PLP to catalyze the mechanistically unusual cleavage of 
not one but two substrate amino acid α-carbon bonds, without violating the 
theory of stereoelectronic control of PLP reaction-type specificity. Ironically, 
the complex chemistry is kinetically insignificant, and it is the movement of an 
active site loop that defines k(cat) and ultimately, the rate of porphyrin 
biosynthesis. The kinetic behavior of the enzyme is consistent with an 
equilibrium ordered induced-fit mechanism wherein glycine must bind first and a 
portion of the intrinsic binding energy with succinyl-Coenzyme A is then 
utilized to perturb the enzyme conformational equilibrium towards a closed state 
wherein catalysis occurs. Return to the open conformation, coincident with ALA 
dissociation, is the slowest step of the reaction cycle. A diverse variety of 
loop mutations have been associated with hyperactivity, suggesting the enzyme 
has evolved to be purposefully slow, perhaps as a means to allow for rapid 
up-regulation of activity in response to an as yet undiscovered allosteric type 
effector. Recently it was discovered that human erythroid ALAS mutations can be 
associated with two very different diseases. Mutations that down-regulate 
activity can lead to X-linked sideroblastic anemia, which is characterized by 
abnormally high iron levels in mitochondria, while mutations that up-regulate 
activity are associated with X-linked dominant protoporphyria, which in contrast 
is phenotypically identified by abnormally high porphyrin levels. This article 
is part of a Special Issue entitled: Pyridoxal Phosphate Enzymology.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2010.12.015
PMCID: PMC3090494
PMID: 21215825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]