1. Biosystems. 2011 Apr;104(1):42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2010.12.009. Epub 
2011 Jan 7.

Synonymous codon usage of the VP2 gene of a very virulent infectious bursal 
disease virus isolate serial passaged in chicken embryos.

Li Y(1), Wang C, Cheng X, Wu T, Zhang C.

Author information:
(1)Animal Science and Technology College, Henan University of Science and 
Technology, Luoyang, People's Republic of China. my86369@163.com

Three very virulent infectious bursal disease virus (vvIBDV) strains were 
isolated from a single farm and shown to be phylogenetically related to the 
vvIBDV isolate UK661. In this study, a comparative analysis of the synonymous 
codon usage in the hypervariable region of theVP2 (vVP2) gene of the vvIBDV 
strains was done on viruses serially passaged in chicken embryos. Sequencing 
demonstrated that codons change during the serial passage in the vVP2 gene of 
the viruses. Nine codon mutations resulted in amino acids changes. The amino 
acid changes were I256V, I296L 6in isolate XA1989, A222P, I242V, Q253H, I256V in 
isolate XA1998, and Q253H, I256V, I296L in isolate XA2004. Three of the nine 
amino acid changes occurred at residue 256. The codons of the amino acids A232, 
N233, I234, T269, T283 and H338 changed to the synonymous codons in XA1989 after 
the 16th passage, in XA1998 after the 24th passage and in XA2004 22nd passage 
viruses. These mutations change the key amino acid residues Q253H and I256V in 
the domains which are essential for its virulence, and the synonymous codons 
were observed compared to classical virulent IBDV. The results indicated that 
the codon changes during the serial passage comprised of synonymous codon usage 
in the vVP2 gene of IBDV, and this synonymous codon bias was correlated with 
pathotypes. The extent of synonymous codon usage bias in the IBDV-vVP2 gene 
maybe influence the gene expression level and secondary structure of protein as 
well as hydrophobicity, therefore the results provide useful perspectives for 
evolution and understanding of the pathogenesis of IBDV.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2010.12.009
PMID: 21216278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]