1. J Med Chem. 2011 Feb 10;54(3):877-89. doi: 10.1021/jm101349u. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Synthesis and biological evaluation of a new series of 
1,2,4-triazolo[1,5-a]-1,3,5-triazines as human A(2A) adenosine receptor 
antagonists with improved water solubility.

Federico S(1), Paoletta S, Cheong SL, Pastorin G, Cacciari B, Stragliotto S, 
Klotz KN, Siegel J, Gao ZG, Jacobson KA, Moro S, Spalluto G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Universit√† di Trieste, Piazzale Europa 
1, I-34127 Trieste, Italy.

The structure-activity relationship (SAR) of 
1,2,4-triazolo[1,5-a]-1,3,5-triazine derivatives related to ZM241385 as 
antagonists of the A(2A) adenosine receptor (AR) was explored through the 
synthesis of analogues substituted at the 5 position. The A(2A) AR X-ray 
structure was used to propose a structural basis for the activity and 
selectivity of the analogues and to direct the synthetic design strategy to 
provide access to solvent-exposed regions. Thus, we have identified a point of 
substitution for the attachment of solubilizing groups to enhance both aqueous 
solubility and physicochemical properties, maintaining potent interactions with 
the A(2A) AR and, in some cases, receptor subtype selectivity. Among the most 
potent and selective novel compounds were a long-chain ether-containing amine 
congener 20 (K(i) 11.5 nM) and its urethane-protected derivative 14 (K(i) 17.8 
nM). Compounds 20 and 31 (K(i) 11.5 and 16.9 nM, respectively) were readily 
water-soluble up to 10 mM. The analogues were docked in the crystallographic 
structure of the hA(2A) AR and in a homology model of the hA(3) AR, and the per 
residue electrostatic and hydrophobic contributions to the binding were assessed 
and stabilizing factors were proposed.

DOI: 10.1021/jm101349u
PMCID: PMC3578427
PMID: 21214204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]