1. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Nov;38(8):5099-105. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0657-2. Epub
2011  Jan 9.

RNASEL -1385G/A polymorphism and cancer risk: a meta-analysis based on 21 
case-control studies.

Zhang LF(1), Mi YY, Qin C, Wang Y, Cao Q, Wei JF, Zhou YJ, Feng NH, Zhang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, People's Republic of China.

Polymorphisms in the endoribonuclease L (RNASEL) gene have been hypothesized to 
increase the incidence of cancer. The common sequence variation in RNASEL, 
-1385G/A (rs486907) has been involved in several types of cancer risk. However, 
results of the related published studies remained conflicting rather than 
conclusive. To clarify the role of RNASEL -1385G/A genotype in global cancer, we 
performed a meta-analysis of all the available published studies involving 8,732 
cancer patients and 8,748 control subjects. The overall results indicated that 
there was no major influence of the variant on cancer risk. However, stratified 
analysis by ethnicity showed that the RNASEL -1385G/A polymorphism has an 
increased cancer risk in African descendents in the homozygote comparison (OR = 
2.59, 95% CI = 1.27-5.27), although no association was found in the analysis 
stratified by cancer type (OR = 1.12, 95% CI = 0.94-1.35). This meta-analysis 
suggested that the RNASEL -1385G/A polymorphism is associated with cancer risk 
in African descendents. To draw more comprehensive conclusions, further 
prospective studies with larger numbers of participants worldwide are still 
required to examine associations between RNASEL -1385G/A polymorphism and cancer 
risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-010-0657-2
PMID: 21221811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]