1. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):729-37. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.030577. Epub 
2011 Jan 12.

Polymorphisms of nuclear factor-κB family genes are associated with development 
of multiple myeloma and treatment outcome in patients receiving bortezomib-based 
regimens.

Du J(1), Huo J, Shi J, Yuan Z, Zhang C, Fu W, Jiang H, Yi Q, Hou J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, The Myeloma & Lymphoma Center, Changzheng Hospital, 
The Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The nuclear factor-κB pathway is an important signaling pathway 
activated in multiple myeloma cells. Bortezomib inhibits nuclear factor-κB 
activation and is an important antimyeloma agent. Nevertheless, patients treated 
with this drug eventually relapse. We hypothesized that the nuclear factor-κB 
pathway may be associated with multiple myeloma and patients' responses to 
bortezomib.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study we analyzed 26 polymorphism sites of nuclear 
factor-κB family member genes, IKBα, NFKB2, and TRAF3, in 527 unrelated Chinese 
Han subjects (252 with multiple myeloma and 275 controls) using a Sequenom 
MassARRAY genotyping assay, and examined the outcome of 83 patients treated with 
a bortezomib-based regimen.
RESULTS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the TRAF3 rs12147254 A allele and a 
specific haplotype 1 of TRAF3 [GAACAG] are associated with a decreased risk of 
multiple myeloma (odds ratio 0.709, P<0.001, and odds ratio 0.543, P<0.0001), 
while TRAF3 haplotype 4 [GGACAG] was associated with an increased risk of 
development of multiple myeloma (odds ratio 2.099, P=0.001). Moreover, the TRAF3 
rs11160707 GA+AA genotype was significantly associated with a better 
progression-free survival (P=0.018). Patients with the NFKB2 rs12769316 GA+AA 
genotype had a superior overall survival (P=0.020), while those with the 
rs1056890 CT+TT genotype had an inferior overall survival (P=0.037). In an 
exploratory analysis, patients with the GA+AA/CC/GG genotype at the rs12769316, 
rs1056890, and rs11160707 sites had a significantly superior overall survival 
compared to patients with a wild-type genotype (P=0.007). In the multivariable 
analysis, TRAF3 rs11160707 was found to be an independent favorable factor for 
progression-free survival (hazard ratio 0.428, P=0.028).
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear factor-κB family member gene polymorphisms play a role in 
the development of multiple myeloma and in the response to bortezomib therapy.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2010.030577
PMCID: PMC3084920
PMID: 21228035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]