1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Apr;31(4):914-20. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.220558. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

The CXCL16 A181V mutation selectively inhibits monocyte adhesion to CXCR6 but is 
not associated with human coronary heart disease.

Petit SJ(1), Wise EL, Chambers JC, Sehmi J, Chayen NE, Kooner JS, Pease JE.

Author information:
(1)Leukocyte Biology Section, Division, Faculty of Medicine, National Heart and 
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Exhibition Rd, SW7 2AZ London, United 
Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: The chemokine CXCL16 serves as a scavenger receptor for oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein and as an adhesion molecule and chemoattractant for 
cells expressing the receptor CXCR6. A commonly occurring CXCL16 allele has been 
described containing 2 nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms in complete 
linkage disequilibrium, although the effects on CXCL16 function are unknown. 
Here, we examined the effect of the single-nucleotide polymorphisms on CXCL16 
function and assessed the association of the mutant allele with coronary heart 
disease (CHD).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Both wild-type and mutant T123V181-CXCL16 were readily 
expressed in vitro and were similarly functional in assays of oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein scavenging and chemotaxis. However, unlike wild-type 
CXCL16, T123V181-CXCL16 was unable to promote adhesion of CXCR6(+) cells. 
Findings were confirmed ex vivo, with monocytes from donors homozygous for the 
T123V181 allele unable to facilitate adhesion of CXCR6 transfectants. In the 
London Life Sciences Prospective Population cohort (n = 2797), we found that the 
T123V181 allele was not associated with protection or susceptibility to CHD 
(adjusted odds ratio, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.95 to 1.10; P = 0.74).
CONCLUSIONS: CXCL16-mediated cell adhesion plays at best a modest role in CHD, 
and the scavenging and chemotactic properties of the chemokine are more likely 
to be more important in disease pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.220558
PMID: 21233446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]