1. Neurology. 2011 Feb 15;76(7):594-600. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820c309b. Epub 
2011 Jan 19.

Genotype-phenotype associations in SCN1A-related epilepsies.

Zuberi SM(1), Brunklaus A, Birch R, Reavey E, Duncan J, Forbes GH.

Author information:
(1)Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Yorkhill, Glasgow G3 8SJ, UK. 
sameer.zuberi@nhs.net

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 Feb 15;76(7):588-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820d8b51.

OBJECTIVE: Most mutations in SCN1A-related epilepsies are novel and when an 
infant presents with febrile seizures (FS) it is uncertain if they will have 
simple FS, FS+, or develop a severe epilepsy such as Dravet syndrome. Our 
objective was to examine whether the nature of a SCN1A mutation affects the 
epilepsy phenotype.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated clinical and genetic data from 273 
individuals with SCN1A mutations identified in our laboratory and reviewed data 
from 546 published cases. We examined whether the mutation class or distribution 
or nature of amino acid substitution correlated with the epilepsy phenotype, 
using the Grantham Score (GS) as a measure of physicochemical difference between 
amino acids.
RESULTS: Compared to missense mutations, truncating mutations were associated 
with earlier mean onset of prolonged seizures (7.4 vs 8.8 months; p = 0.040), 
myoclonic seizures (16.4 vs 19.4 months; p = 0.041), and atypical absence 
seizures (19.1 vs 30.6 months; p = 0.001). The median GS was higher in patients 
with Dravet syndrome compared to polymorphisms (94 vs 58; p = 0.029) and 
orthologs (94 vs 45; p < 0.001). A high GS was correlated with early onset of 
seizures (r(s) = -0.235; p = 0.008). Missense mutations occurred most frequently 
in the voltage and ion-pore regions where changes in amino acid polarity were 
greater in the Dravet group compared to the genetic epilepsy with febrile 
seizures plus group (3.6 vs 2.7; p = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings help define the clinical significance of specific 
SCN1A mutations based on mutation class and amino acid property and location.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31820c309b
PMID: 21248271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]