1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Jan;91(1):44-9. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.20737. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate: CRISPLD genes and the folate gene pathway 
connection.

Chiquet BT(1), Henry R, Burt A, Mulliken JB, Stal S, Blanton SH, Hecht JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP) is a 
common birth defect that has a multifactorial etiology. Despite having 
substantial genetic liability, <15% of the genetic contribution to NSCLP has 
been delineated. In our efforts to dissect the genetics of NSCLP, we found that 
variation in the CRISPLD2 (cysteine-rich secretory protein LCCL domain 
containing 2) gene is associated with NSCLP and that the protein is expressed in 
the developing murine craniofacies. In addition, we found suggestive linkage of 
NSCLP (LOD > 1.0) to the chromosomal region on 8q13.2-21.13 that contains the 
CRISPLD1 gene. The protein products of both CRISPLD1 and CRISPLD2 contain more 
cysteine residues than comparably sized proteins. Interestingly, the folic acid 
pathway produces endogenous cysteines, and variation in genes in this pathway is 
associated with NSCLP. Based on these observations, we hypothesized that 
variation in CRISPLD1 contributes to NSCLP and that both CRISPLD genes interact 
with each other and genes in the folic acid pathway.
METHODS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CRISPLD1 were genotyped in 
our non-Hispanic white and Hispanic multiplex and simplex NSCLP families.
RESULTS: There was little evidence for a role of variation for CRISPLD1 alone in 
NSCLP. However, interactions were detected between CRISPLD1/CRISPLD2 SNPs and 
variation in folate pathway genes. Altered transmission of one CRISPLD1 SNP was 
detected in the NHW simplex families. Importantly, interactions were detected 
between SNPs in CRISPLD1 and CRISPLD2 (15 interactions, 0.0031 ≤p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These novel findings suggest that CRISPLD1 plays a role in NSCLP 
through the interaction with CRISPLD2 and folate pathway genes.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.20737
PMCID: PMC4142894
PMID: 21254358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]