1. Microb Biotechnol. 2010 Jul;3(4):473-86. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7915.2010.00184.x.

Studies with bioengineered Nisin peptides highlight the broad-spectrum potency 
of Nisin V.

Field D(1), Quigley L, O'Connor PM, Rea MC, Daly K, Cotter PD, Hill C, Ross RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Nisin A is the most thoroughly investigated member of the lantibiotic family of 
antimicrobial peptides. In addition to a long history of safe use as a food 
antimicrobial, its activity against multi-drug resistant pathogens has resulted 
in a renewed interest in applying nisin as a chemotherapeutic to treat bacterial 
infections. The wealth of Nisin-related information that has been generated has 
also led to the development of the biotechnological capacity to engineer novel 
Nisin variants with a view to improving the function and physicochemical 
properties of this already potent peptide. However, the identification of 
bioengineered Nisin derivatives with enhanced antimicrobial activity against 
Gram-positive targets is a recent event. In this study, we created stable 
producers of the most promising derivatives of Nisin A generated to date [M21V 
(hereafter Nisin V) and K22T (hereafter Nisin T)] and assessed their potency 
against a range of drug-resistant clinical, veterinary and food pathogens. Nisin 
T exhibited increased activity against all veterinary isolates, including 
streptococci and staphylococci, and against a number of multi-drug resistant 
clinical isolates including MRSA, but not vancomycin-resistant enterococci. In 
contrast, Nisin V displayed increased potency against all targets tested 
including hVISA strains and the hyper-virulent Clostridium difficile ribotype 
027 and against important food pathogens such as Listeria monocytogenes and 
Bacillus cereus. Significantly, this enhanced activity was validated in a model 
food system against L. monocytogenes. We conclude that Nisin V possesses 
significant potential as a novel preservative or chemotherapeutic compound.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2010 Society for Applied Microbiology 
and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2010.00184.x
PMCID: PMC3815813
PMID: 21255345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]