1. Microb Biotechnol. 2010 Mar;3(2):222-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1751-7915.2009.00145.x.  Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Manipulation of charged residues within the two-peptide lantibiotic lacticin 
3147.

Deegan LH(1), Suda S, Lawton EM, Draper LA, Hugenholtz F, Peschel A, Hill C, 
Cotter PD, Ross RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Alimentary Pharmabiotic Centre, University 
College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Lantibiotics are antimicrobial peptides which contain a high percentage of 
post-translationally modified residues. While most attention has been paid to 
the role of these critical structural features, evidence continues to emerge 
that charged amino acids also play a key role in these peptides. Here 16 
'charge' mutants of the two-peptide lantibiotic lacticin 3147 [composed of Ltnα 
(2+, 2-) and Ltnβ (2+)] were constructed which, when supplemented with 
previously generated peptides, results in a total bank of 23 derivatives altered 
in one or more charged residues. When examined individually, in combination with 
a wild-type partner or, in some instances, in combination with one another, 
these mutants reveal the importance of charge at specific locations within Ltnα 
and Ltnβ, confirm the critical role of the negatively charged glutamate residue 
in Ltnα and facilitate an investigation of the contribution of positively 
charged residues to the cationic Ltnβ. From these investigations it is also 
apparent that the relative importance of the overall charge of lacticin 3147 
varies depending on the target bacteria and is most evident when strains with 
more negatively charged cell envelopes are targeted. These studies also result 
in, for the first time, the creation of a derivative of a lacticin 3147 peptide 
(LtnβR27A) which displays enhanced specific activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2009.00145.x
PMCID: PMC3836577
PMID: 21255322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]