1. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Feb;6(2):244-85. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318206a221.

International association for the study of lung cancer/american thoracic 
society/european respiratory society international multidisciplinary 
classification of lung adenocarcinoma.

Travis WD(1), Brambilla E, Noguchi M, Nicholson AG, Geisinger KR, Yatabe Y, Beer 
DG, Powell CA, Riely GJ, Van Schil PE, Garg K, Austin JH, Asamura H, Rusch VW, 
Hirsch FR, Scagliotti G, Mitsudomi T, Huber RM, Ishikawa Y, Jett J, 
Sanchez-Cespedes M, Sculier JP, Takahashi T, Tsuboi M, Vansteenkiste J, Wistuba 
I, Yang PC, Aberle D, Brambilla C, Flieder D, Franklin W, Gazdar A, Gould M, 
Hasleton P, Henderson D, Johnson B, Johnson D, Kerr K, Kuriyama K, Lee JS, 
Miller VA, Petersen I, Roggli V, Rosell R, Saijo N, Thunnissen E, Tsao M, 
Yankelewitz D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA. travisw@mskcc.org

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Feb;6(2):239-40. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31820bf5b8.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Jul;6(7):1298-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31821f9ef8.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Aug;6(8):1451. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318224643b.

INTRODUCTION: Adenocarcinoma is the most common histologic type of lung cancer. 
To address advances in oncology, molecular biology, pathology, radiology, and 
surgery of lung adenocarcinoma, an international multidisciplinary 
classification was sponsored by the International Association for the Study of 
Lung Cancer, American Thoracic Society, and European Respiratory Society. This 
new adenocarcinoma classification is needed to provide uniform terminology and 
diagnostic criteria, especially for bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC), the 
overall approach to small nonresection cancer specimens, and for 
multidisciplinary strategic management of tissue for molecular and 
immunohistochemical studies.
METHODS: An international core panel of experts representing all three societies 
was formed with oncologists/pulmonologists, pathologists, radiologists, 
molecular biologists, and thoracic surgeons. A systematic review was performed 
under the guidance of the American Thoracic Society Documents Development and 
Implementation Committee. The search strategy identified 11,368 citations of 
which 312 articles met specified eligibility criteria and were retrieved for 
full text review. A series of meetings were held to discuss the development of 
the new classification, to develop the recommendations, and to write the current 
document. Recommendations for key questions were graded by strength and quality 
of the evidence according to the Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation approach.
RESULTS: The classification addresses both resection specimens, and small 
biopsies and cytology. The terms BAC and mixed subtype adenocarcinoma are no 
longer used. For resection specimens, new concepts are introduced such as 
adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA) for 
small solitary adenocarcinomas with either pure lepidic growth (AIS) or 
predominant lepidic growth with â‰¤ 5 mm invasion (MIA) to define patients who, if 
they undergo complete resection, will have 100% or near 100% disease-specific 
survival, respectively. AIS and MIA are usually nonmucinous but rarely may be 
mucinous. Invasive adenocarcinomas are classified by predominant pattern after 
using comprehensive histologic subtyping with lepidic (formerly most mixed 
subtype tumors with nonmucinous BAC), acinar, papillary, and solid patterns; 
micropapillary is added as a new histologic subtype. Variants include invasive 
mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC), colloid, fetal, and enteric 
adenocarcinoma. This classification provides guidance for small biopsies and 
cytology specimens, as approximately 70% of lung cancers are diagnosed in such 
samples. Non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs), in patients with 
advanced-stage disease, are to be classified into more specific types such as 
adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma, whenever possible for several 
reasons: (1) adenocarcinoma or NSCLC not otherwise specified should be tested 
for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations as the presence of these 
mutations is predictive of responsiveness to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 
(2) adenocarcinoma histology is a strong predictor for improved outcome with 
pemetrexed therapy compared with squamous cell carcinoma, and (3) potential 
life-threatening hemorrhage may occur in patients with squamous cell carcinoma 
who receive bevacizumab. If the tumor cannot be classified based on light 
microscopy alone, special studies such as immunohistochemistry and/or mucin 
stains should be applied to classify the tumor further. Use of the term NSCLC 
not otherwise specified should be minimized.
CONCLUSIONS: This new classification strategy is based on a multidisciplinary 
approach to diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma that incorporates clinical, 
molecular, radiologic, and surgical issues, but it is primarily based on 
histology. This classification is intended to support clinical practice, and 
research investigation and clinical trials. As EGFR mutation is a validated 
predictive marker for response and progression-free survival with EGFR tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors in advanced lung adenocarcinoma, we recommend that patients 
with advanced adenocarcinomas be tested for EGFR mutation. This has implications 
for strategic management of tissue, particularly for small biopsies and cytology 
samples, to maximize high-quality tissue available for molecular studies. 
Potential impact for tumor, node, and metastasis staging include adjustment of 
the size T factor according to only the invasive component (1) pathologically in 
invasive tumors with lepidic areas or (2) radiologically by measuring the solid 
component of part-solid nodules.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318206a221
PMCID: PMC4513953
PMID: 21252716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The other authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.