1. J Headache Pain. 2011 Apr;12(2):173-6. doi: 10.1007/s10194-010-0289-x. Epub
2011  Jan 22.

Cardiac safety in cluster headache patients using the very high dose of 
verapamil (≥720 mg/day).

Lanteri-Minet M(1), Silhol F, Piano V, Donnet A.

Author information:
(1)Département d'Evaluation et traitement de la Douleur Médecine palliative, 
Pôle Neurosciences Cliniques du CHU de Nice, Hôpital Pasteur Avenue de la Voie 
Romaine, 06002 Nice Cedex, France. lanteri-minet.m@chu-nice.fr

Use of high doses of verapamil in preventive treatment of cluster headache (CH) 
is limited by cardiac toxicity. We systematically assess the cardiac safety of 
the very high dose of verapamil (verapamil VHD) in CH patients. Our work was a 
study performed in two French headache centers (Marseilles-Nice) from 12/2005 to 
12/2008. CH patients treated with verapamil VHD (≥720 mg) were considered with a 
systematic electrocardiogram (EKG) monitoring. Among 200 CH patients, 29 (14.8%) 
used verapamil VHD (877±227 mg/day). Incidence of EKG changes was 38% (11/29). 
Seven (24%) patients presented bradycardia considered as nonserious adverse 
event (NSAE) and four (14%) patients presented arrhythmia (heart block) 
considered as serious adverse event (SAE). Patients with EKG changes (1,003±295 
mg/day) were taking higher doses than those without EKG changes (800±143 
mg/day), but doses were similar in patients with SAE (990±316 mg/day) and those 
with NSAE (1,011±309 mg/day). Around three-quarters (8/11) of patients presented 
a delayed-onset cardiac adverse event (delay ≥2 years). Our work confirms the 
need for systematic EKG monitoring in CH patients treated with verapamil. Such 
cardiac safety assessment must be continued even for patients using VHD without 
any adverse event for a long time.

© The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at 
Springerlink.com

DOI: 10.1007/s10194-010-0289-x
PMCID: PMC3072493
PMID: 21258839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]