1. Proteins. 2011 Apr;79(4):1193-204. doi: 10.1002/prot.22953. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Crystal structure and substrate-binding mode of cellulase 12A from Thermotoga 
maritima.

Cheng YS(1), Ko TP, Wu TH, Ma Y, Huang CH, Lai HL, Wang AH, Liu JR, Guo RT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan.

Cellulases have been used in many applications to treat various 
carbohydrate-containing materials. Thermotoga maritima cellulase 12A (TmCel12A) 
belongs to the GH12 family of glycoside hydrolases. It is a β-1,4-endoglucanase 
that degrades cellulose molecules into smaller fragments, facilitating further 
utilization of the carbohydrate. Because of its hyperthermophilic nature, the 
enzyme is especially suitable for industrial applications. Here the crystal 
structure of TmCel12A was determined by using an active-site mutant E134C and 
its mercury-containing derivatives. It adopts a β-jellyroll protein fold typical 
of the GH12-family enzymes, with two curved β-sheets A and B and a central 
active-site cleft. Structural comparison with other GH12 enzymes shows 
significant differences, as found in two longer and highly twisted β-strands B8 
and B9 and several loops. A unique Loop A3-B3 that contains Arg60 and Tyr61 
stabilizes the substrate by hydrogen bonding and stacking, as observed in the 
complex crystals with cellotetraose and cellobiose. The high-resolution 
structures allow clear elucidation of the network of interactions between the 
enzyme and its substrate. The sugar residues bound to the enzyme appear to be 
more ordered in the -2 and -1 subsites than in the +1, +2 and -3 subsites. In 
the E134C crystals the bound -1 sugar at the cleavage site consistently show the 
α-anomeric configuration, implicating an intermediate-like structure.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.22953
PMID: 21268113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]