1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Apr;1808(4):1161-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.01.010. Epub 2011 Jan 22.

The amyloidogenic SEVI precursor, PAP248-286, is highly unfolded in solution 
despite an underlying helical tendency.

Brender JR(1), Nanga RP, Popovych N, Soong R, Macdonald PM, Ramamoorthy A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1055, 
USA.

Amyloid fibers in human semen known as SEVI (semen-derived enhancer of viral 
infection) dramatically increase the infectivity of HIV and other enveloped 
viruses, which appears to be linked to the promotion of bridging interactions 
and the neutralization of electrostatic repulsion between the host and the viral 
cell membranes. The SEVI precursor PAP(248-286) is mostly disordered when bound 
to detergent micelles, in contrast to the highly α-helical structures found for 
most amyloid proteins. To determine the origin of this difference, the 
structures of PAP(248-286) were solved in aqueous solution and with 30% and 50% 
trifluoroethanol. In solution, pulsed field gradient (PFG)-NMR and (1)H-(1)H 
NOESY experiments indicate that PAP(248-286) is unfolded to an unusual degree 
for an amyloidogenic peptide but adopts significantly helical structures in TFE 
solutions. The clear differences between the structures of PAP(248-286) in TFE 
and SDS indicate electrostatic interactions play a large role in the folding of 
the peptide, consistent with the slight degree of penetration of PAP(248-286) 
into the hydrophobic core of the micelle. This is another noticeable difference 
between PAP(248-286) and other amyloid peptides, which generally show 
penetration into at least the headgroup region of the bilayer, and may explain 
some of the unusual properties of SEVI.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.01.010
PMCID: PMC3062746
PMID: 21262195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]