1. Microb Cell Fact. 2011 Jan 28;10:4. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-4.

Improving yeast strains using recyclable integration cassettes, for the 
production of plant terpenoids.

Ignea C(1), Cvetkovic I, Loupassaki S, Kefalas P, Johnson CB, Kampranis SC, 
Makris AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Products and Biotechnology, Centre International de 
Hautes Etudes Agronomiques Méditerranéennes, Mediterranean Agronomic Institute 
of Chania, PO Box 85, Chania 73100, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Terpenoids constitute a large family of natural products, attracting 
commercial interest for a variety of uses as flavours, fragrances, drugs and 
alternative fuels. Saccharomyces cerevisiae offers a versatile cell factory, as 
the precursors of terpenoid biosynthesis are naturally synthesized by the sterol 
biosynthetic pathway.
RESULTS: S. cerevisiae wild type yeast cells, selected for their capacity to 
produce high sterol levels were targeted for improvement aiming to increase 
production. Recyclable integration cassettes were developed which enable the 
unlimited sequential integration of desirable genetic elements (promoters, 
genes, termination sequence) at any desired locus in the yeast genome. The 
approach was applied on the yeast sterol biosynthetic pathway genes HMG2, ERG20 
and IDI1 resulting in several-fold increase in plant monoterpene and 
sesquiterpene production. The improved strains were robust and could sustain 
high terpenoid production levels for an extended period. Simultaneous 
plasmid-driven co-expression of IDI1 and the HMG2 (K6R) variant, in the improved 
strain background, maximized monoterpene production levels. Expression of two 
terpene synthase enzymes from the sage species Salvia fruticosa and S. pomifera 
(SfCinS1, SpP330) in the modified yeast cells identified a range of terpenoids 
which are also present in the plant essential oils. Co-expression of the 
putative interacting protein HSP90 with cineole synthase 1 (SfCinS1) also 
improved production levels, pointing to an additional means to improve 
production.
CONCLUSIONS: Using the developed molecular tools, new yeast strains were 
generated with increased capacity to produce plant terpenoids. The approach 
taken and the durability of the strains allow successive rounds of improvement 
to maximize yields.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2859-10-4
PMCID: PMC3042375
PMID: 21276210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]