1. Diabetes Care. 2011 Mar;34(3):661-5. doi: 10.2337/dc10-1925. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Insulin degludec in type 1 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial of a 
new-generation ultra-long-acting insulin compared with insulin glargine.

Birkeland KI(1), Home PD, Wendisch U, Ratner RE, Johansen T, Endahl LA, Lyby K, 
Jendle JH, Roberts AP, DeVries JH, Meneghini LF.

Author information:
(1)Oslo University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Oslo, Norway. 
k.i.birkeland@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVE: Insulin degludec (IDeg) is a basal insulin that forms soluble 
multihexamers after subcutaneous injection, resulting in an ultra-long action 
profile. We assessed the efficacy and safety of IDeg formulations administered 
once daily in combination with mealtime insulin aspart in people with type 1 
diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In this 16-week, randomized, open-label trial, 
participants (mean: 45.8 years old, A1C 8.4%, fasting plasma glucose [FPG] 9.9 
mmol/L, BMI 26.9 kg/m(2)) received subcutaneous injections of IDeg(A) (600 
μmol/L; n = 59), IDeg(B) (900 μmol/L; n = 60), or insulin glargine (IGlar; n = 
59), all given once daily in the evening. Insulin aspart was administered at 
mealtimes. RESULTS At 16 weeks, mean A1C was comparable for IDeg(A) (7.8 ± 
0.8%), IDeg(B) (8.0 ± 1.0%), and IGlar (7.6 ± 0.8%), as was FPG (8.3 ± 4.0, 8.3 
± 2.8, and 8.9 ± 3.5 mmol/L, respectively). Estimated mean rates of confirmed 
hypoglycemia were 28% lower for IDeg(A) compared with IGlar (rate ratio [RR]: 
0.72 [95% CI 0.52-1.00]) and 10% lower for IDeg(B) compared with IGlar (RR: 0.90 
[0.65-1.24]); rates of nocturnal hypoglycemia were 58% lower for IDeg(A) (RR: 
0.42 [0.25-0.69]) and 29% lower for IDeg(B) (RR: 0.71 [0.44-1.16]). Mean total 
daily insulin dose was similar to baseline. The frequency and pattern of adverse 
events was similar between insulin treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: In this clinical exploratory phase 2 trial in people with type 1 
diabetes, IDeg is safe and well tolerated and provides comparable glycemic 
control to IGlar at similar doses, with reduced rates of hypoglycemia.

DOI: 10.2337/dc10-1925
PMCID: PMC3041203
PMID: 21270174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]