1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Jul;17(7):447-52. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar008. Epub 2011
Feb  2.

Polymorphisms in the annexin A5 gene promoter in Japanese women with recurrent 
pregnancy loss.

Miyamura H(1), Nishizawa H, Ota S, Suzuki M, Inagaki A, Egusa H, Nishiyama S, 
Kato T, Pryor-Koishi K, Nakanishi I, Fujita T, Imayoshi Y, Markoff A, Yanagihara 
I, Udagawa Y, Kurahashi H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, 
Fujita Health University, 1-98 Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 
470-1192, Japan.

Recent findings have raised the possibility that polymorphisms within the 
annexin A5 gene (ANXA5) promoter contribute to the etiology of recurrent 
pregnancy loss (RPL). In our present study, 243 Japanese women who had suffered 
more than three fetal losses and a group of 119 fertile controls were genotyped 
for four ANXA5 gene promoter single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; SNP1-4: 
g.-467G >A, g.-448A>C, g.-422T>C, g.-373G>A) previously reported to be 
associated with this disorder. An additional two SNPs located within the 
5'-untranslated region of the ANXA5 (SNP5 and 6: g.-302T>G, g.-1C>T) were also 
evaluated. Our case--control study revealed that the minor allele was 
significantly more frequent in the RPL group than controls for all six of these 
SNPs, among which SNP5 showed the highest significance (P= 0.002). As with the 
M2 haplotype for SNP1-4 (A-C-C-A) for a western population in previous reports, 
a haplotype comprising all of the minor alleles for SNP1-6 (A-C-C-A-G-T), the 
third major haplotype in the Japanese population, showed a significantly higher 
frequency in our current RPL subjects than in controls (P= 0.025). In addition, 
the second major haplotype (G-A-T-G-G-C) was found to confer a significant risk 
of RPL (P= 0.036), implicating SNP5 as a major risk determinant for this 
disease. Our present findings support the hypothesis that genomic variations 
within the ANXA5 gene upstream region impact upon the disease susceptibility to 
RPL. Our data indicate that SNP5 is a novel risk factor for this disease in the 
Japanese population.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/gar008
PMID: 21289001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]