1. AIDS. 2011 Feb 20;25(4):479-92. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283428cbe.

First-line antiretroviral therapy after single-dose nevirapine exposure in South 
Africa: a cost-effectiveness analysis of the OCTANE trial.

Ciaranello AL(1), Lockman S, Freedberg KA, Hughes M, Chu J, Currier J, Wood R, 
Holmes CB, Pillay S, Conradie F, McIntyre J, Losina E, Walensky RP; 
CEPAC-International and OCTANE Investigators.

Collaborators: Danel C, N'Dri-Yoman T, Messou E, Moh R, Ouattara E, Seyler C, 
Touré S, Yazdanpanah Y, Anglaret X, Gabillard D, Touré H, Kumarasamy N, Ganesh 
AK, Orrell C, Wood R, Martinson N, Mohapi L, Cotich K, Goldie SJ, Kimmel AD, 
Lipsitch M, McCormick A, Rydzak C, Seage GR 3rd, Weinstein MC, Horsburgh CR, Hsu 
HE, Flanigan T, Mayer K, Paltiel AD, Ahonkhai A, Andrews J, Bassett IV, Becker 
J, Bender MA, Chiosi J, Levison J, Linas BP, Lu Z, Lorenzana S, Morris B, Pho M, 
Rhode E, Scott CA, Sloan C, Stoler A, Uhler L, Wang B, Wong A, Chaisson R, De 
Gruttola V, Eron J, Gangakhedkar RR, Kaplan J, Karim S, N'Dri-Yoman T, Owens D, 
Wong J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
02114, USA. aciaranello@partners.org

BACKGROUND: The OCTANE trial reports superior outcomes of lopinavir/ritonavir 
vs. nevirapine-based antiretroviral therapy (ART) among women previously exposed 
to single-dose nevirapine to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission. However, 
lopinavir/ritonavir is 12 times costlier than nevirapine.
METHODS: We used a computer model, with OCTANE and local data, to simulate 
HIV-infected, single-dose nevirapine-exposed women in South Africa. Outcomes of 
three alternative ART sequences were projected: no ART (for comparison), 
first-line nevirapine, and first-line lopinavir/ritonavir. OCTANE data included 
mean age (31 years) and CD4 cell count (135/μl); median time since single-dose 
nevirapine (17 months); and 24-week viral suppression efficacy for first-line 
ART (nevirapine: 85%, lopinavir/ritonavir: 97%). Outcomes included life 
expectancy, per-person costs (2008 US$), and incremental cost-effectiveness 
ratios.
RESULTS: With no ART, projected life expectancy was 1.6 years and per-person 
cost was $2980. First-line nevirapine increased life expectancy (15.2 years) and 
cost ($13 990; cost-effectiveness ratio: $810/year of life saved versus no ART). 
First-line lopinavir/ritonavir further increased life expectancy to 16.3 years 
and cost to $15 630 (cost-effectiveness ratio: $1520/year of life saved versus 
first-line nevirapine). First-line lopinavir/ritonavir cost-effectiveness was 
sensitive to prevalence of nevirapine-resistant virus at ART initiation, time 
from single-dose nevirapine exposure to ART initiation (6-12, 12-24, or >24 
months), second-line ART efficacies, and outcomes after 24 weeks on ART.
CONCLUSIONS: First-line lopinavir/ritonavir-based ART is very cost-effective in 
single-dose nevirapine-exposed, South African women similar to OCTANE 
participants. Lopinavir/ritonavir should be initiated in women with known 
nevirapine resistance or single-dose nevirapine exposure less than 12 months 
prior, or in whom such information is unknown.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283428cbe
PMCID: PMC3068908
PMID: 21293199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Michael Hughes is a paid 
member of Data and Safety Monitoring Boards for the following manufacturers of 
antiretroviral therapy: Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, Tibotec. James McIntyre 
has received speaker’s honoraria from Abbott Pharmaceuticals, and research 
funding, travel grants and speaker’s honoraria from Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Glaxo SmithKline. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.