1. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2011 Apr;15(2):304-11. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.01.004. 
Epub 2011 Feb 4.

Ferritin protein nanocages use ion channels, catalytic sites, and nucleation 
channels to manage iron/oxygen chemistry.

Theil EC(1).

Author information:
(1)CHORI Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, 5700 Martin Luther 
King, Jr. Way, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. etheil@chori.org

The ferritin superfamily is composed of ancient, nanocage proteins with an 
internal cavity, 60% of total volume, that reversibly synthesize solid minerals 
of hydrated ferric oxide; the minerals are iron concentrates for cell nutrition 
as well as antioxidants due to ferrous and oxygen consumption during 
mineralization. The cages have multiple iron entry/exit channels, oxidoreductase 
enzyme sites, and, in eukaryotes, Fe(III)O nucleation channels with clustered 
exits that extend protein activity to include facilitated mineral growth. 
Ferritin protein cage differences include size, amino acid sequence, and 
location of the active sites, oxidant substrate and crystallinity of the iron 
mineral. Genetic regulation depends on iron and oxygen signals, which in animals 
includes direct ferrous signaling to RNA to release and to ubiquitin-ligases to 
degrade the protein repressors. Ferritin biosynthesis forms, with DNA, mRNA and 
the protein product, a feedback loop where the genetic signals are also protein 
substrates. The ferritin protein nanocages, which are required for normal iron 
homeostasis and are finding current use in the delivery of nanodrugs, novel 
nanomaterials, and nanocatalysts, are likely contributors to survival and 
success during the transition from anaerobic to aerobic life.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.01.004
PMCID: PMC3074017
PMID: 21296609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]