1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 27;6(1):e16416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016416.

Downregulation of cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase in switchgrass by RNA silencing 
results in enhanced glucose release after cellulase treatment.

Saathoff AJ(1), Sarath G, Chow EK, Dien BS, Tobias CM.

Author information:
(1)Grain, Forage, and Bioenergy Research Unit, United States Department of 
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of 
America.

Cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) catalyzes the last step in monolignol 
biosynthesis and genetic evidence indicates CAD deficiency in grasses both 
decreases overall lignin, alters lignin structure and increases enzymatic 
recovery of sugars. To ascertain the effect of CAD downregulation in 
switchgrass, RNA mediated silencing of CAD was induced through Agrobacterium 
mediated transformation of cv. "Alamo" with an inverted repeat construct 
containing a fragment derived from the coding sequence of PviCAD2. The resulting 
primary transformants accumulated less CAD RNA transcript and protein than 
control transformants and were demonstrated to be stably transformed with 
between 1 and 5 copies of the T-DNA. CAD activity against coniferaldehyde, and 
sinapaldehyde in stems of silenced lines was significantly reduced as was 
overall lignin and cutin. Glucose release from ground samples pretreated with 
ammonium hydroxide and digested with cellulases was greater than in control 
transformants. When stained with the lignin and cutin specific stain 
phloroglucinol-HCl the staining intensity of one line indicated greater 
incorporation of hydroxycinnamyl aldehydes in the lignin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016416
PMCID: PMC3029337
PMID: 21298014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.