1. Prog Lipid Res. 2011 Apr;50(2):193-211. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2011.01.001.
Epub  2011 Feb 2.

Is lipid signaling through cannabinoid 2 receptors part of a protective system?

Pacher P(1), Mechoulam R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiologic Studies, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-9413, USA. 
Pacher@mail.nih.gov

The mammalian body has a highly developed immune system which guards against 
continuous invading protein attacks and aims at preventing, attenuating or 
repairing the inflicted damage. It is conceivable that through evolution 
analogous biological protective systems have been evolved against non-protein 
attacks. There is emerging evidence that lipid endocannabinoid signaling through 
cannabinoid 2 (CB₂) receptors may represent an example/part of such a protective 
system/armamentarium. Inflammation/tissue injury triggers rapid elevations in 
local endocannabinoid levels, which in turn regulate signaling responses in 
immune and other cells modulating their critical functions. Changes in 
endocannabinoid levels and/or CB₂ receptor expressions have been reported in 
almost all diseases affecting humans, ranging from cardiovascular, 
gastrointestinal, liver, kidney, neurodegenerative, psychiatric, bone, skin, 
autoimmune, lung disorders to pain and cancer, and modulating CB₂ receptor 
activity holds tremendous therapeutic potential in these pathologies. While CB₂ 
receptor activation in general mediates immunosuppressive effects, which limit 
inflammation and associated tissue injury in large number of pathological 
conditions, in some disease states activation of the CB₂ receptor may enhance or 
even trigger tissue damage, which will also be discussed alongside the 
protective actions of the CB₂ receptor stimulation with endocannabinoids or 
synthetic agonists, and the possible biological mechanisms involved in these 
effects.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plipres.2011.01.001
PMCID: PMC3062638
PMID: 21295074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]