1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2011 Feb 3;11:320-39. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2011.22.

Anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of the A2A adenosine receptor.

Milne GR(1), Palmer TM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Scotland. 
Gillian.Milne@glasgow.ac.uk

The production of adenosine represents a critical endogenous mechanism for 
regulating immune and inflammatory responses during conditions of stress, 
injury, or infection. Adenosine exerts predominantly protective effects through 
activation of four 7-transmembrane receptor subtypes termed A1, A2A, A2B, and 
A3, of which the A2A adenosine receptor (A2AAR) is recognised as a major 
mediator of anti-inflammatory responses. The A2AAR is widely expressed on cells 
of the immune system and numerous in vitro studies have identified its role in 
suppressing key stages of the inflammatory process, including leukocyte 
recruitment, phagocytosis, cytokine production, and immune cell proliferation. 
The majority of actions produced by A2AAR activation appear to be mediated by 
cAMP, but downstream events have not yet been well characterised. In this 
article, we review the current evidence for the anti-inflammatory effects of the 
A2AAR in different cell types and discuss possible molecular mechanisms 
mediating these effects, including the potential for generalised suppression of 
inflammatory gene expression through inhibition of the NF-kB and JAK/STAT 
proinflammatory signalling pathways. We also evaluate findings from in vivo 
studies investigating the role of the A2AAR in different tissues in animal 
models of inflammatory disease and briefly discuss the potential for development 
of selective A2AAR agonists for use in the clinic to treat specific inflammatory 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1100/tsw.2011.22
PMCID: PMC5720067
PMID: 21298223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]