1. Compr Psychiatry. 2011 Mar-Apr;52(2):181-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.05.007. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

Investigating SAPAP3 variants in the etiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder 
and trichotillomania in the South African white population.

Boardman L(1), van der Merwe L, Lochner C, Kinnear CJ, Seedat S, Stein DJ, 
Moolman-Smook JC, Hemmings SM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, 
South Africa. smjh@sun.ac.za

BACKGROUND: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating psychiatric 
disorder characterized by repeated obsessions and compulsions. Trichotillomania 
(TTM), a psychiatric disorder characterized by repetitive hairpulling, is 
presently classified as an impulse control disorder, but has also been viewed as 
an obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorder. Both conditions are complex 
disorders, with evidence from family and twin studies indicating that their 
etiology includes a genetic component. Results from a recent knockout animal 
model suggest that SAP90/PSD95-associated protein 3 (SAPAP3) may be involved in 
the pathophysiology of both disorders.
METHODS: Seven polymorphic variants distributed across the gene encoding SAPAP3 
were genotyped in South African white OCD (n = 172), TTM (n = 45), and control 
(n = 153) subjects. Single-locus and haplotype analyses were conducted to 
determine association between genetic variants and subjects with OCD, TTM, and 
controls.
RESULTS: Although single-locus analysis revealed a significant association 
between rs11583978 in SAPAP3 and TTM, this association was nonsignificant after 
correction for multiple testing. In the OCD group, a significant association was 
observed between earlier age at onset and the A-T-A-T 
(rs11583978-rs7541937-rs6662980-rs4652867) haplotype compared with the C-G-G-G 
haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This study generated preliminary evidence to link SAPAP3 variants 
to the development of earlier onset OCD. Future studies should concentrate on 
locating the susceptibility variant(s) by focusing on functional polymorphisms 
within SAPAP3.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.05.007
PMID: 21295225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]