1. J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;56(4):300-5. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.9. Epub 2011 Feb 10.

Functional analysis of recently identified mutations in eukaryotic translation 
initiation factor 2Bɛ (eIF2Bɛ) identified in Chinese patients with vanishing 
white matter disease.

Leng X(1), Wu Y, Wang X, Pan Y, Wang J, Li J, Du L, Dai L, Wu X, Proud CG, Jiang 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

Vanishing white matter disease (VWM) is the first human hereditary disease known 
to be caused by defects in initiation of protein synthesis. Gene defects in each 
of the five subunits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B α-ɛ) 
are responsible for the disease, although the mechanism of the pathogenesis is 
not well understood. In our previous study, four novel eIF2Bɛ mutations were 
found in Chinese patients: p.Asp62Val, p.Cys335Ser, p.Asn376Asp and 
p.Ser610-Asp613del. Functional analysis was performed on these mutations and the 
recently reported p.Arg269X. Our data showed that all resulted in a decrease in 
the guanine nucleotide exchange (GEF) activity of the eIF2B complex. p.Arg269X 
and p.Ser610-Asp613del mutants displayed the lowest activity, followed by 
p.Cys335Ser, p.Asn376Asp and p.Asp62Val. p.Arg269X and p.Ser610-Asp613del could 
not produce stable eIF2Bɛ, leading to almost complete loss-of-function. No 
evidence was obtained for the three missense mutations in changes in eIF2Bɛ 
protein level or eIF2BɛSer(540) phosphorylation, and disruption of holocomplex 
assembly, or binding to eIF2. All patients in our study had the classical 
phenotype. p.Asp62Val and p.Asn376Asp mutations caused only mildly decreased GEF 
activity, were probably responsible for relatively mild phenotype in cases of 
classical VWM.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2011.9
PMID: 21307862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]