1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):11163-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.212704. Epub
2011  Feb 8.

Lantibiotic transporter requires cooperative functioning of the peptidase domain 
and the ATP binding domain.

Nishie M(1), Sasaki M, Nagao J, Zendo T, Nakayama J, Sonomoto K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Molecular Microbiology and Biomass Chemistry, Department 
of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Graduate School, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Lantibiotics are ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified 
peptide antibiotics that contain unusual amino acids such as dehydro and 
lanthionine residues. Nukacin ISK-1 is a class II lantibiotic, whose precursor 
peptide (NukA) is modified by NukM to form modified NukA. ATP-binding cassette 
(ABC) transporter NukT is predicted to cleave off the N-terminal leader peptide 
of modified NukA and secrete the mature peptide. Multiple sequence alignments 
revealed that NukT has an N-terminal peptidase domain (PEP) and a C-terminal ATP 
binding domain (ABD). Previously, in vitro reconstitution of NukT has revealed 
that NukT peptidase activity depends on ATP hydrolysis. Here, we constructed a 
series of NukT mutants and investigated their transport activity in vivo and 
peptidase activity in vitro. Most of the mutations of the conserved residues of 
PEP or ABD resulted in failure of nukacin ISK-1 production and accumulation of 
modified NukA inside the cells. NukT(N106D) was found to be the only mutant 
capable of producing nukacin ISK-1. Asn(106) is conserved as Asp in other 
related ABC transporters. Additionally, an in vitro peptidase assay of NukT 
mutants demonstrated that PEP is on the cytosolic side and all of the ABD 
mutants as well as PEP (with the exception of NukT(N106D)) did not have 
peptidase activity in vitro. Taken together, these observations suggest that the 
leader peptide is cleaved off inside the cells before peptide secretion; both 
PEP and ABD are important for NukT peptidase activity, and cooperation between 
these two domains inside the cells is indispensable for proper functioning of 
NukT.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.212704
PMCID: PMC3064170
PMID: 21303905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]