1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 31;6(1):e16583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016583.

Structural and functional characterization of Pseudomonas aeruginosa CupB 
chaperones.

Cai X(1), Wang R, Filloux A, Waksman G, Meng G.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, 
Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an important human pathogen, is estimated to be 
responsible for ∼10% of nosocomial infections worldwide. The pathogenesis of P. 
aeruginosa starts from its colonization in the damaged tissue or medical devices 
(e.g. catheters, prothesis and implanted heart valve etc.) facilitated by 
several extracellular adhesive factors including fimbrial pili. Several clusters 
containing fimbrial genes have been previously identified on the P. aeruginosa 
chromosome and named cup[1]. The assembly of the CupB pili is thought to be 
coordinated by two chaperones, CupB2 and CupB4. However, due to the lack of 
structural and biochemical data, their chaperone activities remain speculative. 
In this study, we report the 2.5 Å crystal structure of P. aeruginosa CupB2. 
Based on the structure, we further tested the binding specificity of CupB2 and 
CupB4 towards CupB1 (the presumed major pilus subunit) and CupB6 (the putative 
adhesin) using limited trypsin digestion and strep-tactin pull-down assay. The 
structural and biochemical data suggest that CupB2 and CupB4 might play 
different, but not redundant, roles in CupB secretion. CupB2 is likely to be the 
chaperone of CupB1, and CupB4 could be the chaperone of CupB4:CupB5:CupB6, in 
which the interaction of CupB4 and CupB6 might be mediated via CupB5.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016583
PMCID: PMC3031594
PMID: 21304995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.