1. Nat Med. 2011 Mar;17(3):356-65. doi: 10.1038/nm.2293. Epub 2011 Feb 13.

Regulation of glucose homeostasis through a XBP-1-FoxO1 interaction.

Zhou Y(1), Lee J, Reno CM, Sun C, Park SW, Chung J, Lee J, Fisher SJ, White MF, 
Biddinger SB, Ozcan U.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Mar;17(3):246-8. doi: 10.1038/nm0311-246.

To date, the only known role of the spliced form of X-box-binding protein-1 
(XBP-1s) in metabolic processes has been its ability to act as a transcription 
factor that regulates the expression of genes that increase the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) folding capacity, thereby improving insulin sensitivity. Here we 
show that XBP-1s interacts with the Forkhead box O1 (FoxO1) transcription factor 
and directs it toward proteasome-mediated degradation. Given this new insight, 
we tested modest hepatic overexpression of XBP-1s in vivo in mouse models of 
insulin deficiency or insulin resistance and found it improved serum glucose 
concentrations, even without improving insulin signaling or ER folding capacity. 
The notion that XBP-1s can act independently of its role in the ER stress 
response is further supported by our finding that in the severely insulin 
resistant ob/ob mouse strain a DNA-binding-defective mutant of XBP-1s, which 
does not have the ability to increase ER folding capacity, is still capable of 
reducing serum glucose concentrations and increasing glucose tolerance. Our 
results thus provide the first evidence to our knowledge that XBP-1s, through 
its interaction with FoxO1, can bypass hepatic insulin resistance independent of 
its effects on ER folding capacity, suggesting a new therapeutic approach for 
the treatment of type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2293
PMCID: PMC3897616
PMID: 21317886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors do not have any conflict of interest.