1. J Appl Toxicol. 2011 Nov;31(8):790-800. doi: 10.1002/jat.1637. Epub 2011 Feb
11.

Toxicological effect of emodin in mouse testicular gene expression profile.

Oshida K(1), Hirakata M, Maeda A, Miyoshi T, Miyamoto Y.

Author information:
(1)Toxicology and Pharmacokinetics Laboratories, Pharmaceutical Research 
Laboratories, Toray Industries Inc., 10-1, Tebiro 6-chome, Kamakura, Kanagawa, 
248-8555, Japan.

Emodin (1,3,8-trihydroxy-6-methyl-anthraquinone) is a herbal medicine extracted 
from the rhizomes of Rheum palmatum, and is known as an inhibitor of casein 
kinase II (CK2). The CK2α' knockout mice are known to be male-infertile; 
however, there have been no reports on the toxicity of emodin in male 
reproductive organs/tissues. To evaluate the toxicological effects of emodin on 
differential gene expression profiles of the testis as compared with acrylamide, 
mice were orally administered emodin and acrylamide for 5 days at a dose of 1000 
and 50 mg kg(-1) per day, respectively, and euthanized 24 h after the final 
administration. Both chemicals induced hypospermatogenesis, eosinophilic change 
and apoptosis of germ cell. A DNA microarray analysis showed that the IGF-1 
receptor signaling was most closely related to the above testicular toxicity 
induced by emodin, and the RhoA regulation, TGF/WNT and cytoskeletal remodeling, 
TNFR1 signaling and adenosine A2A receptor signaling were commonly associated 
with the two chemicals. We selected 36 genes associated with CK2, apoptosis and 
spermatogenesis and determined their expression by quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Both chemicals perturbed the 
expression of genes associated with CK2. Genes related to spermatogenesis were 
also affected, as evidenced by hypospermatogenesis, and eosinophilic change and 
apoptosis of germ cell. The results suggest that emodin causes testicular 
toxicity, including apoptosis with related the IGF-1 receptor signaling pathway, 
and the two chemicals commonly affect CK2, spermatogenesis and sperm motility 
via four pathways, such as TNFR1 signaling.

2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jat.1637
PMID: 21319176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]