1. Basic Res Cardiol. 2011 May;106(3):371-83. doi: 10.1007/s00395-011-0157-0.
Epub  2011 Feb 11.

Cardiac-specific overexpression of E3 ligase Nrdp1 increases ischemia and 
reperfusion-induced cardiac injury.

Zhang Y(1), Zeng Y, Wang M, Tian C, Ma X, Chen H, Fang Q, Jia L, Du J, Li H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Cardiomyocyte death is a major event of myocardial infarction. Previously, we 
and others have shown that E3 ligase-mediated protein turnover plays a critical 
role in cardiac injury. In this study, we sought to determine the role of a 
newly identified E3 ligase, neuregulin receptor degradation protein-1 (Nrdp1), 
on cardiac ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. I/R injury markedly upregulated 
Nrdp1 expression in heart tissue. To elucidate the role of Nrdp1 in I/R-induced 
cardiac injury, neonatal cardiomyocytes were infected with adenoviral constructs 
expressing wild-type, dominant-negative Nrdp1 genes. Increased Nrdp1 expression 
enhanced I/R-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis and inflammation as compared with 
the green fluorescent protein (GFP) control; these effects were attenuated by 
overexpression of a dominant-negative Nrdp1 (C34S/H36Q). Furthermore, 
cardiac-specific Nrdp1 overexpression in vivo in mouse significantly increased 
infarct size, the number of TUNEL-positive nuclei and inflammatory cells, as 
well as mortality, as compared with wild-type mice after I/R injury. The 
mechanisms underlying these effects were associated with the downregulation of 
an Nrdp1 substrate, ErbB3, accompanied by suppression of its downstream targets 
AKT, ERK1/2, and activation of p38 and JNK1/2. Together, these results provide 
evidence for an important role for Nrdp1 in regulating I/R-induced cardiac 
injury. Nrdp1 may constitute a new therapeutic target for ameliorating the 
I/R-induced cardiac injury.

DOI: 10.1007/s00395-011-0157-0
PMID: 21312039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]