1. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Feb 10;11:41. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-41.

Genomic organization and splicing evolution of the doublesex gene, a Drosophila 
regulator of sexual differentiation, in the dengue and yellow fever mosquito 
Aedes aegypti.

Salvemini M(1), Mauro U, Lombardo F, Milano A, Zazzaro V, Arc√† B, Polito LC, 
Saccone G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Section of Genetics and Molecular Biology, 
University of Naples Federico II, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In the model system Drosophila melanogaster, doublesex (dsx) is the 
double-switch gene at the bottom of the somatic sex determination cascade that 
determines the differentiation of sexually dimorphic traits. Homologues of dsx 
are functionally conserved in various dipteran species, including the malaria 
vector Anopheles gambiae. They show a striking conservation of sex-specific 
regulation, based on alternative splicing, and of the encoded sex-specific 
proteins, which are transcriptional regulators of downstream terminal genes that 
influence sexual differentiation of cells, tissues and organs.
RESULTS: In this work, we report on the molecular characterization of the dsx 
homologue in the dengue and yellow fever vector Aedes aegypti (Aeadsx). Aeadsx 
produces sex-specific transcripts by alternative splicing, which encode isoforms 
with a high degree of identity to Anopheles gambiae and Drosophila melanogaster 
homologues. Interestingly, Aeadsx produces an additional novel female-specific 
splicing variant. Genomic comparative analyses between the Aedes and Anopheles 
dsx genes revealed a partial conservation of the exon organization and extensive 
divergence in the intron lengths. An expression analysis showed that Aeadsx 
transcripts were present from early stages of development and that sex-specific 
regulation starts at least from late larval stages. The analysis of the 
female-specific untranslated region (UTR) led to the identification of putative 
regulatory cis-elements potentially involved in the sex-specific splicing 
regulation. The Aedes dsx sex-specific splicing regulation seems to be more 
complex with the respect of other dipteran species, suggesting slightly novel 
evolutionary trajectories for its regulation and hence for the recruitment of 
upstream splicing regulators.
CONCLUSIONS: This study led to uncover the molecular evolution of Aedes aegypti 
dsx splicing regulation with the respect of the more closely related Culicidae 
Anopheles gambiae orthologue. In Aedes aegypti, the dsx gene is sex-specifically 
regulated and encodes two female-specific and one male-specific isoforms, all 
sharing a doublesex/mab-3 (DM) domain-containing N-terminus and different 
C-termini. The sex-specific regulation is based on a combination of exon 
skipping, 5' alternative splice site choice and, most likely, alternative 
polyadenylation. Interestingly, when the Aeadsx gene is compared to the 
Anopheles dsx ortholog, there are differences in the in silico predicted default 
and regulated sex-specific splicing events, which suggests that the upstream 
regulators either are different or act in a slightly different manner. 
Furthermore, this study is a premise for the future development of transgenic 
sexing strains in mosquitoes useful for sterile insect technique (SIT) programs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-41
PMCID: PMC3045327
PMID: 21310052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]