1. Brain Dev. 2012 Jan;34(1):72-5. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.01.005. Epub 2011
 Feb 12.

Paradoxical increase in seizure frequency with valproate in nonketotic 
hyperglycinemia.

Tsuyusaki Y(1), Shimbo H, Wada T, Iai M, Tsuji M, Yamashita S, Aida N, Kure S, 
Osaka H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.

Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH), or glycine encephalopathy, is an autosomal 
recessive disorder caused by a defect in the glycine cleavage enzyme system. In 
neonatal-onset NKH, patients manifest lethargy, hypotonia, apnea, and 
intractable epileptic seizures that are not specific to this disease. We 
experienced a 6-year-old girl with spastic quadriplegia, intractable epilepsy, 
and mental retardation, all initially regarded as sequelae of neonatal 
meningitis. The seizure frequency was transiently increased when valproate was 
started. Head MRI revealed progressive brain atrophy and white matter loss with 
high intensity signals on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images, which 
prompted us to conduct further metabolic workups. High glycine levels led us to 
suspect NKH, and we confirmed this diagnosis by the non-invasive, (13)C-glycine 
breath test. DNA sequencing revealed novel Leu885Pro/Trp897Cys mutations in the 
glycine decarboxylase gene that were transmitted from both parents. Sodium 
benzoate and dextromethorphan dramatically decreased her hypertonicity. Our case 
shows that paradoxical increases in seizure frequency following valproate can be 
a clue for a diagnosis of NKH, and that a correct diagnosis of NKH can greatly 
alter the quality of life in such patients.

Copyright Â© 2011 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.01.005
PMID: 21316884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]