1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 May;300(5):G823-32. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00115.2010. Epub 2011 Feb 10.

The functional -374T/A polymorphism of the receptor for advanced glycation end 
products may modulate Crohn's disease.

Däbritz J(1), Friedrichs F, Weinhage T, Hampe J, Kucharzik T, Lügering A, 
Broeckel U, Schreiber S, Spieker T, Stoll M, Foell D.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of General Pediatrics, Univ. Children's Hospital Muenster, Münster, 
Germany. jan.daebritz@ukmuenster.de

The receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) is involved in innate 
immune mechanisms. Polymorphisms of the RAGE gene have been described as a 
factor amplifying inflammation in susceptible patients, but the association with 
Crohn's disease (CD) is not known. The coding RAGE polymorphism G82S (rs2070600) 
and two promoter polymorphisms, -374T/A (rs1800624) and -429T/C (rs1800625), 
were studied in two samples from Germany and the United States consisting of 421 
and 317 CD patients and 549 and 218 controls, respectively. To test the 
functional relevance, additional data on serum soluble RAGE (sRAGE), tissue RNA, 
and protein levels were collected and immunohistochemical stainings of bowel 
tissue of CD patients and healthy controls as well as models of experimental 
(dextran sodium sulfate-induced) colitis in RAGE knockout and wild-type mice 
were performed. The -374T/A RAGE promotor single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
was negatively associated with CD (odds ratio = 0.708, 95% confidence interval = 
0.535-0.938, P = 0.016) and with stenosis (OR = 0.627, P = 0.04) in the German 
sample. Transmission disequilibrium testing confirmed an undertransmission of 
the -374A allele. Serum sRAGE levels were higher in patients in complete 
remission of the -374AA/TA group (1,975 ± 299 pg/ml; -374TT group: 1,310 ± 153 
pg/ml SE, P < 0.05) and showed a trend toward decreased levels in CD patients 
with active disease compared with CD patients in remission. Further in vitro and 
in vivo studies indicated that an increase of sRAGE ameliorates inflammation. 
The -429T/C and the G82S polymorphism were not associated with CD. The -374T/A 
RAGE polymorphism leading to facilitated RAGE gene transcription may to some 
degree protect from developing a stricturing subphenotype of CD, most likely by 
increasing levels of sRAGE, which neutralizes proinflammatory mediators.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00115.2010
PMID: 21311028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]