1. Dis Model Mech. 2011 Mar;4(2):155-64. doi: 10.1242/dmm.000414. Epub 2011 Feb
14.

Mouse models and the interpretation of human GWAS in type 2 diabetes and 
obesity.

Cox RD(1), Church CD.

Author information:
(1)Metabolism and Inflammation, MRC Harwell Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell 
Science and Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, UK. r.cox@har.mrc.ac.uk

Within the last 3 years, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have had 
unprecedented success in identifying loci that are involved in common diseases. 
For example, more than 35 susceptibility loci have been identified for type 2 
diabetes and 32 for obesity thus far. However, the causal gene and variant at a 
specific linkage disequilibrium block is often unclear. Using a combination of 
different mouse alleles, we can greatly facilitate the understanding of which 
candidate gene at a particular disease locus is associated with the disease in 
humans, and also provide functional analysis of variants through an allelic 
series, including analysis of hypomorph and hypermorph point mutations, and 
knockout and overexpression alleles. The phenotyping of these alleles for 
specific traits of interest, in combination with the functional analysis of the 
genetic variants, may reveal the molecular and cellular mechanism of action of 
these disease variants, and ultimately lead to the identification of novel 
therapeutic strategies for common human diseases. In this Commentary, we discuss 
the progress of GWAS in identifying common disease loci for metabolic disease, 
and the use of the mouse as a model to confirm candidate genes and provide 
mechanistic insights.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.000414
PMCID: PMC3046087
PMID: 21324932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]