1. Oncotarget. 2010 Dec;1(8):751-756. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.210.

The BRAFV600E mutation: what is it really orchestrating in thyroid cancer?

Nucera C(1)(2), Lawler J(2), Hodin R(1), Parangi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Thyroid Cancer Research Laboratory, Endocrine Surgery Unit, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Cancer Biology and Angiogenesis, Department of Pathology, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BRAFV600E is a constitutively active onco-kinase and is the most common genetic 
alteration in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), and in anaplastic thyroid 
carcinoma as well, albeit at a lower frequency. The BRAFV600E mutation in some 
studies has been significantly associated with extra-thyroidal extension, 
metastases, recurrence, and mortality in patients with PTC. A recent genome-wide 
expression profiling approach (Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)) and in vitro 
and in vivo functional studies revealed that BRAFV600E affects extracellular 
matrix composition (i.e. increased expression of some collagens and laminins) 
and promotes thyroid cancer migration and invasion. BRAFV600E through the 
phospho-MEK1/2 and phospho-ERK1/2 pathway may control a network of genes crucial 
in integrating and regulating the extracellular and intracellular signaling in 
thyroid cancer cells, which may be fundamental to trigger an abnormal cell 
differentiation/totipotency and shape/polarity, and contribute to tumor 
aggressiveness mechanisms (i.e. cell adhesion, migration, and invasion). 
Increasing our knowledge of BRAFV600E-modulated ECM genes and targeting the 
subset of genes essential for tumor aggressiveness will help establish a novel 
paradigm for treatment of thyroid cancers harboring BRAFV600E. Furthermore, 
identifying downstream events from the BRAFV600E/ERK1/2 pathway will eventually 
identify novel biomarkers that can be used to correlate with disease outcome and 
overall survival.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.210
PMCID: PMC3074562
PMID: 21321384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]