1. Curr Biol. 2011 Mar 8;21(5):345-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.039. Epub 2011 
Feb 17.

Plant stem cell signaling involves ligand-dependent trafficking of the CLAVATA1 
receptor kinase.

Nimchuk ZL(1), Tarr PT, Ohno C, Qu X, Meyerowitz EM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Cell numbers in above-ground meristems of plants are thought to be 
maintained by a feedback loop driven by perception of the glycopeptide ligand 
CLAVATA3 (CLV3) by the CLAVATA1 (CLV1) receptor kinase and the CLV2/CORYNE (CRN) 
receptor-like complex. CLV3 produced in the stem cells at the meristem apex 
limits the expression level of the stem cell-promoting homeodomain protein 
WUSCHEL (WUS) in the cells beneath, where CLV1 and WUS RNA are localized. WUS 
downregulation nonautonomously reduces stem cell proliferation. Overexpression 
of CLV3 eliminates the stem cells, causing meristem termination, and loss of 
CLV3 function allows meristem overproliferation. There are many questions 
regarding the CLV3/CLV1 interaction, including where in the meristem it occurs, 
how it is regulated, and how it is that a large range of CLV3 concentrations 
gives no meristem size phenotype.
RESULTS: Here we use genetics and live imaging to examine the cell biology of 
CLV1 in Arabidopsis meristematic tissue. We demonstrate that plasma 
membrane-localized CLV1 is reduced in concentration by CLV3, which causes 
trafficking of CLV1 to lytic vacuoles. We find that changes in CLV2 activity 
have no detectable effects on CLV1 levels. We also find that CLV3 appears to 
diffuse broadly in meristems, contrary to a recent sequestration model.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a new model for CLV1 function in plant stem 
cell maintenance and suggests that downregulation of plasma membrane-localized 
CLV1 by its CLV3 ligand can account for the buffering of CLV3 signaling in the 
maintenance of stem cell pools in plants.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.039
PMCID: PMC3072602
PMID: 21333538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]