1. Radiother Oncol. 2011 Mar;98(3):387-93. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.01.021.
Epub  2011 Feb 21.

Association between single nucleotide polymorphisms in the gene for XRCC1 and 
radiation-induced late toxicity in prostate cancer patients.

Langsenlehner T(1), Renner W, Gerger A, Hofmann G, Thurner EM, Kapp KS, 
Langsenlehner U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology, Medical University of Graz, 
Auenbruggerplatz 32, Graz, Austria. tanja.langsenlehner@klinikum-graz.at

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Polymorphisms in genes responsible for DNA damage 
signaling and repair might modulate DNA repair capacity and, therefore, affect 
cell and tissue response to radiation and influence individual radiosensitivity. 
The purpose of the present prospective investigation was to evaluate the 
association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in XRCC1 with radiation-induced 
late side effects in prostate cancer patients treated with radiotherapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: To analyze the role of XRCC1 polymorphisms for late 
toxicity 603 participants from the Austrian PROCAGENE study treated with 
three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy were included in the present 
investigation. Three non-synonymous candidate polymorphisms in the X-ray repair 
cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) gene (Arg194Trp; Arg280His; Arg399Gln) were 
selected and determined by 5´-nuclease (TaqMan) assays.
RESULTS: Within a median follow-up time of 35 months, 91 patients (15.7%) 
developed high-grade late toxicities (defined as late bladder and/or rectal 
toxicity RTOG≥2). In a Kaplan-Meier analysis, carriers of the XRCC1 Arg280His 
polymorphism were at decreased risk of high-grade late toxicity (p=0.022), in 
multivariate analysis including clinical and dosimetric parameters as potential 
confounders the XRCC1 Arg280His polymorphism remained a significant predictor 
for high-grade late toxicity (HR=0.221, 95% CI 0.051-0.956; p=0.043). No 
significant associations were found for the remaining polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the XRCC1 Arg280His polymorphism may be protective 
against the development of high-grade late toxicity after radiotherapy in 
prostate cancer patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.01.021
PMID: 21345510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]