1. Blood. 2011 May 12;117(19):5224-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-300152. Epub
2011  Feb 22.

Genetic determinants of plasma von Willebrand factor antigen levels: a target 
gene SNP and haplotype analysis of ARIC cohort.

Campos M(1), Sun W, Yu F, Barbalic M, Tang W, Chambless LE, Wu KK, Ballantyne C, 
Folsom AR, Boerwinkle E, Dong JF.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

von Willebrand factor (VWF) is an essential component of hemostasis and has been 
implicated in thrombosis. Multimer size and the amount of circulating VWF are 
known to impact hemostatic function. We associated 78 VWF single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes constructed from those SNPs with VWF antigen 
level in 7856 subjects of European descent. Among the nongenomic factors, age 
and body mass index contributed 4.8% and 1.6% of VWF variation, respectively. 
The SNP rs514659 (tags O blood type) contributed 15.4% of the variance. Among 
the VWF SNPs, we identified 18 SNPs that are associated with levels of VWF. The 
correlative SNPs are either intronic (89%) or silent exonic (11%). Although SNPs 
examined are distributed throughout the entire VWF gene without apparent 
cluster, all the positive SNPs are located in a 50-kb region. Exons in this 
region encode for VWF D2, D', and D3 domains that are known to regulate VWF 
multimerization and storage. Mutations in the D3 domain are also associated with 
von Willebrand disease. Fifteen of these 18 correlative SNPs are in 2 distinct 
haplotype blocks. In summary, we identified a cluster of intronic VWF SNPs that 
associate with plasma levels of VWF, individually or additively, in a large 
cohort of healthy subjects.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-300152
PMCID: PMC3109544
PMID: 21343614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]