1. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 15;6(2):e17106. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017106.

CCR3 and choroidal neovascularization.

Li Y(1), Huang D, Xia X, Wang Z, Luo L, Wen R.

Author information:
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, Florida, United States of America.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the leading cause of irreversible 
blindness in the elderly in industrialized countries. The "wet" AMD, 
characterized by the development of choroidal neovacularization (CNV), could 
result in rapid and severe loss of central vision. The critical role of vascular 
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) in CNV development has been established and 
VEGF-A neutralization has become the standard care for wet AMD. Recently, CCR3 
was reported to play an important role in CNV development and that CCR3 
targeting was reported to be superior to VEGF-A targeting in CNV suppression. We 
investigated the role of CCR3 in CNV development using the Matrigel induced CNV 
and found that in both rats and mice, CNV was well-developed in the control eyes 
as well as in eyes treated with CCR3 antagonist SB328437 or CCR3 neutralizing 
antibodies. No statistically significant difference in CNV areas was found 
between the control and SB328437 or CCR3-ab treated eyes. Immunostaining showed 
no specific expression of CCR3 in or near CNV. In contrast, both VEGF-A 
neutralizing antibodies and rapamycin significantly suppressed CNV. These 
results indicate that CCR3 plays no significant role in CNV development and 
question the therapeutic approach of CCR3 targeting to suppress CNV. On the 
other hand, our data support the therapeutic strategies of VEGF-A and mTOR 
(mammalian target of rapamycin) targeting for CNV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017106
PMCID: PMC3039674
PMID: 21358803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Rong Wen is named a 
coinventor of United States Patent Application “Methods for Preventing Choroidal 
Neovascularization” (filed by the University of Pennsylvania on September 18, 
2003; US 10/665203), which covers rapamycin treatments for choroidal 
neovascularization. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.