1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2011 Aug;108(8):1954-64. doi: 10.1002/bit.23118. Epub 2011 
Mar 15.

Expression in CHO cells and pharmacokinetics and brain uptake in the Rhesus 
monkey of an IgG-iduronate-2-sulfatase fusion protein.

Lu JZ(1), Boado RJ, Hui EK, Zhou QH, Pardridge WM.

Author information:
(1)ArmaGen Technologies, Inc, Santa Monica, California, USA.

Sulfatases are potential therapeutic biopharmaceuticals, as mutations in 
sulfatase genes leads to inherited disease. Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) Type II 
is caused by mutations in the lysosomal enzyme, iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS). 
MPS-II affects the brain and enzyme replacement therapy is ineffective for the 
brain, because IDS does not cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). To deliver IDS 
across the human BBB, the sulfatase has been re-engineered as an IgG-sulfatase 
fusion protein with a genetically engineered monoclonal antibody (MAb) against 
the human insulin receptor (HIR). The HIRMAb part of the HIRMAb-IDS fusion 
protein acts as a molecular Trojan horse to ferry the fused IDS across the BBB. 
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were stably transfected to produce the 
HIRMAb-IDS fusion protein. The fusion protein was triaged to the lysosomal 
compartment of MPS-II fibroblasts based on confocal microscopy, and 300 ng/mL 
medium concentrations normalized IDS enzyme activity in the cells. The 
HIRMAb-IDS fusion protein was tritiated and injected intravenously into the 
adult Rhesus monkey at a low dose of 0.1 mg/kg. The IDS enzyme activity in 
plasma was elevated 10-fold above the endogenous level, and therapeutic plasma 
concentrations were generated in vivo. The uptake of the HIRMAb-IDS fusion 
protein in the brain was sufficiently high to produce therapeutic concentrations 
of IDS in the brain following IV administration of the fusion protein.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.23118
PMCID: PMC3117053
PMID: 21351076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]