1. J Mol Recognit. 2011 Mar-Apr;24(2):333-40. doi: 10.1002/jmr.1079. Epub 2010
Dec  13.

The C-terminus of the phage λ Orf recombinase is involved in DNA binding.

Curtis FA(1), Reed P, Wilson LA, Bowers LY, Yeo RP, Sanderson JM, Walmsley AR, 
Sharples GJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Durham, Science 
Site, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.

Phage λ Orf substitutes for the activities of the Escherichia coli RecFOR 
proteins in vivo and is therefore implicated as a recombination mediator, 
encouraging the assembly of bacterial RecA onto single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) 
coated with SSB. Orf exists as a dimer in solution, associates with E. coli SSB 
and binds preferentially to ssDNA. To help identify interacting domains we 
analysed Orf and SSB proteins carrying mutations or truncations in the 
C-terminal region. A cluster of acidic residues at the carboxy-terminus of SSB 
is known to attract multiple protein partners to assist in DNA replication and 
repair. In this case an alternative domain must be utilized since Orf 
association with SSB was unaffected by an SSB113 point mutant (P176S) or removal 
of the last ten residues (ΔC10). Structurally the Orf C-terminus consists of a 
helix with a flexible tail that protrudes from each side of the dimer and could 
serve as a binding site for either SSB or DNA. Eliminating the six residue 
flexible tail (ΔC6) or the entire helix (ΔC19) had no significant impact on the 
Orf-SSB interaction. However, the OrfΔC6 protein exhibited reduced DNA binding, 
a feature shared by single amino acid substitutions within (W141F) or adjacent 
(R140A) to this region. The OrfΔC19 mutant bound poorly to DNA and secondary 
structure analysis in solution revealed that this truncation induces protein 
misfolding and aggregation. The results show that the carboxy-terminus of Orf is 
involved in nucleic acid recognition and also plays an unexpected role in 
maintaining structural integrity.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jmr.1079
PMID: 21360615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]