1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Mar;8(3):141-50. doi: 
10.1038/nrgastro.2011.2.

Cystic precursors to invasive pancreatic cancer.

Matthaei H(1), Schulick RD, Hruban RH, Maitra A.

Author information:
(1)The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Department of Pathology, 
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, 
MD 21231, USA.

Improvements in the sensitivity and quality of cross-sectional imaging have led 
to increasing numbers of patients being diagnosed with cystic lesions of the 
pancreas. In parallel, clinical, radiological, pathological and molecular 
studies have improved the systems for classifying these cysts. Patients with 
asymptomatic serous cystic neoplasms can be managed conservatively with regular 
monitoring; however, the clinical management of patients with intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms and mucinous cystic neoplasms is far more 
challenging, as it is difficult to determine whether these lesions will progress 
to malignancy. Fortunately, prospective studies have helped to establish that 
proposed clinical and radiological criteria (the Sendai guidelines) can be used 
to guide the care of patients with cystic lesions of the pancreas. Despite this 
progress in imaging and clinical guidelines, sensitive and specific tests have 
not yet been developed that can reliably predict the histology and biological 
properties of a cystic lesion. Such biomarkers are urgently needed, as 
noninvasive precursors of pancreatic cancer are curable, while the vast majority 
of invasive pancreatic adenocarcinomas are not.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2011.2
PMCID: PMC3236705
PMID: 21383670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors, the journal 
Chief Editor N. Wood and the CME questions author C. P. Vega declare no 
competing interests.