1. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Aug 1;29(22):3085-96. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.2312. Epub 
2011 Mar 7.

Dissecting therapeutic resistance to RAF inhibition in melanoma by tumor genomic 
profiling.

Wagle N(1), Emery C, Berger MF, Davis MJ, Sawyer A, Pochanard P, Kehoe SM, 
Johannessen CM, Macconaill LE, Hahn WC, Meyerson M, Garraway LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St, 
D1542, Boston, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2024 Mar 10;42(8):976. doi: 10.1200/JCO.24.00017.

Expression of concern in
    J Clin Oncol. 2024 Feb 23:JCO2400161. doi: 10.1200/JCO.24.00161.

A detailed understanding of the mechanisms by which tumors acquire resistance to 
targeted anticancer agents should speed the development of treatment strategies 
with lasting clinical efficacy. RAF inhibition in BRAF-mutant melanoma 
exemplifies the promise and challenge of many targeted drugs; although response 
rates are high, resistance invariably develops. Here, we articulate overarching 
principles of resistance to kinase inhibitors, as well as a translational 
approach to characterize resistance in the clinical setting through tumor 
mutation profiling. As a proof of principle, we performed targeted, massively 
parallel sequencing of 138 cancer genes in a tumor obtained from a patient with 
melanoma who developed resistance to PLX4032 after an initial dramatic response. 
The resulting profile identified an activating mutation at codon 121 in the 
downstream kinase MEK1 that was absent in the corresponding pretreatment tumor. 
The MEK1(C121S) mutation was shown to increase kinase activity and confer robust 
resistance to both RAF and MEK inhibition in vitro. Thus, MEK1(C121S) or 
functionally similar mutations are predicted to confer resistance to combined 
MEK/RAF inhibition. These results provide an instructive framework for assessing 
mechanisms of acquired resistance to kinase inhibition and illustrate the use of 
emerging technologies in a manner that may accelerate personalized cancer 
medicine.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2010.33.2312
PMCID: PMC3157968
PMID: 21383288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of 
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.