1. J Virol. 2011 May;85(10):5003-15. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02314-10. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Role of the herpes simplex virus 1 Us3 kinase phosphorylation site and 
endocytosis motifs in the intracellular transport and neurovirulence of envelope 
glycoprotein B.

Imai T(1), Arii J, Minowa A, Kakimoto A, Koyanagi N, Kato A, Kawaguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral Infection, Department of Infectious Disease Control, 
International Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, 
Japan.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) Us3 protein kinase phosphorylates threonine at 
position 887 (Thr-887) in the cytoplasmic tail of envelope glycoprotein B (gB) 
in infected cells. This phosphorylation downregulates cell surface expression of 
gB and plays a role in viral pathogenesis in the mouse herpes stromal keratitis 
model. In the present study, we demonstrated that Us3 phosphorylation of gB 
Thr-887 upregulated the accumulation of endocytosed gB from the surfaces of 
infected cells. We also showed that two motifs in the cytoplasmic tail of gB, 
tyrosine at position 889 (Tyr-889) and dileucines at positions 871 and 872, were 
required for efficient downregulation of gB cell surface expression and 
upregulation of accumulation of endocytosed gB in infected cells. A systematic 
analysis of mutations in these three sequences in gB suggested that the 
expression of gB on the surfaces of infected cells was downregulated in part by 
the increase in the accumulation of endocytosed gB, which was coordinately and 
tightly regulated by the three gB trafficking signals. Tyr-889 appeared to be of 
predominant importance in regulating the intracellular transport of gB and was 
linked to HSV-1 neurovirulence in mice following intracerebral infection. These 
observations support the hypothesis that HSV-1 evolved the three gB sequences 
for proper regulation of gB intracellular transport and that this regulation 
plays a critical role in diverse aspects of HSV-1 pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02314-10
PMCID: PMC3126194
PMID: 21389132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]