1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2011 Dec;16(6):741-5. doi: 10.1007/s10147-011-0208-4. Epub 
2011 Mar 12.

Surgical intervention for imatinib and sunitinib-resistant gastrointestinal 
stromal tumors.

Kikuchi H(1), Setoguchi T, Miyazaki S, Yamamoto M, Ohta M, Kamiya K, Sakaguchi 
T, Konno H.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Surgery, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. kikuchih@hama-med.ac.jp

Imatinib mesylate is an effective treatment for recurrent or metastatic 
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), but secondary resistance has been 
reported. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib malate has shown efficacy in 
imatinib-resistant GISTs, and has been used as second-line therapy for recurrent 
or metastatic GISTs. However, it is often difficult to treat patients with 
imatinib- and sunitinib-resistant GISTs. In this report, we describe a case of 
surgically resected liver and peritoneal recurrences of GISTs that arose 
polyclonally and were resistant to imatinib and sunitinib. A 67-year-old man was 
referred to our hospital with multiple recurrent GISTs after failed imatinib 
treatment. Sunitinib was administered at 50 mg/day for 4 weeks with 2-week 
intervals between treatments. Some of the recurrent GISTs were sensitive, but 
others were resistant, and progressive disease was diagnosed. Extended left 
hepatectomy and peritoneal tumorectomy were performed. Histologically, tumors 
sensitive to sunitinib showed degenerative changes, while the resistant tumors 
consisted of KIT-positive, viable GIST cells. The primary mutation in all the 
tumors consisted of a deletion at nucleotides 555-560 with an E554D point 
mutation at exon 11 of the c-kit gene. The sunitinib-resistant liver and 
peritoneal tumors had different point mutations: T to G and T to A, 
respectively, although both resulted in an N822K amino acid alteration, 
indicating the polyclonal evolution of recurrent GISTs. Thus, if R0 resection is 
expected, surgical intervention under the control of imatinib or sunitinib 
should be considered for the control of metastatic or recurrent GISTs.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-011-0208-4
PMID: 21394667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]