1. Blood Rev. 2011 May;25(3):139-46. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2011.02.001. Epub 2011
Mar  17.

Interpretation of cytogenetic and molecular results in patients treated for CML.

Vigil CE(1), Griffiths EA, Wang ES, Wetzler M.

Author information:
(1)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, United States.

The International Randomized Study of Interferon vs. STI571 (IRIS) trial that 
investigated the use of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) imatinib (versus 
interferon) changed the treatment and outcome of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). 
Long-term follow-up of IRIS patients has defined response parameters and methods 
of tracking residual disease with cytogenetic testing of bone marrow metaphases 
and molecular monitoring of BCR-ABL transcripts using quantitative 
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Cytogenetic and molecular 
responses are now considered useful surrogates for long-term outcome. Early and 
robust response to imatinib predicts positive long-term outcomes. However, 
15-25% of patients fail initial treatment or become intolerant of imatinib and 
need increased doses or alternate treatment. Second-line treatment with the 
second-generation TKIs nilotinib and dasatinib have resulted in favorable rates 
of progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival. Data from the ENESTnd 
(nilotinib) and DASISION (dasatinib) trials in newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML 
patients demonstrated more robust and rapid complete cytogenetic (77-80%) and 
major molecular responses (43-46%) at 12 months compared with imatinib (65-66% 
and 22-28%). The relationship between a complete cytogenetic response at 12 
months and long-term PFS supports a role for second-generation TKIs as 
first-line treatment of newly diagnosed chronic-phase CML.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2011.02.001
PMCID: PMC3071443
PMID: 21419537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Meir Wetzler is 
on the speakers bureaus of Novartis and Bristol-Myers Squibb. The other 
coauthors have no conflict of interests.