1. Nat Commun. 2011;2:252. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1255.

The acetylation of tau inhibits its function and promotes pathological tau 
aggregation.

Cohen TJ(1), Guo JL, Hurtado DE, Kwong LK, Mills IP, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The microtubule associated protein tau promotes neuronal survival through 
binding and stabilization of MTs. Phosphorylation regulates tau-microtubule 
interactions and hyperphosphorylation contributes to the aberrant formation of 
insoluble tau aggregates in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related tauopathies. 
However, other pathogenic post-translational tau modifications have not been 
well characterized. Here we demonstrate that tau acetylation inhibits tau 
function via impaired tau-microtubule interactions and promotes pathological tau 
aggregation. Mass spectrometry analysis identified specific lysine residues, 
including lysine 280 (K280) within the microtubule-binding motif as the major 
sites of tau acetylation. Immunohistochemical and biochemical studies of brains 
from tau transgenic mice and patients with AD and related tauopathies showed 
that acetylated tau pathology is specifically associated with insoluble, 
Thioflavin-positive tau aggregates. Thus, tau K280 acetylation in our studies 
was only detected in diseased tissue, suggesting it may have a role in 
pathological tau transformation. This study suggests that tau K280 acetylation 
is a potential target for drug discovery and biomarker development for AD and 
related tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms1255
PMCID: PMC3120096
PMID: 21427723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.