1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Jun;156B(4):435-47. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.31179. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

P2RX7 gene is associated consistently with mood disorders and predicts clinical 
outcome in three clinical cohorts.

Soronen P(1), Mantere O, Melartin T, Suominen K, Vuorilehto M, Rytsälä H, 
Arvilommi P, Holma I, Holma M, Jylhä P, Valtonen HM, Haukka J, Isometsä E, 
Paunio T.

Author information:
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, Institute for Molecular Medicine FIMM, National 
Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.

We investigated the effect of nine candidate genes on risk for mood disorders, 
hypothesizing that predisposing gene variants not only elevate the risk for mood 
disorders but also result in clinically significant differences in the clinical 
course of mood disorders. We genotyped 178 DSM-IV bipolar I and II and 272 major 
depressive disorder patients from three independent clinical cohorts carefully 
diagnosed with semistructured interviews and prospectively followed up with life 
charts for a median of 60 (range 6-83) months. Healthy control subjects 
(n = 1322) were obtained from the population-based national Health 2000 Study. 
We analyzed 62 genotyped variants within the selected genes (BDNF, NTRK2, 
SLC6A4, TPH2, P2RX7, DAOA, COMT, DISC1, and MAOA) against the presence of mood 
disorder, and in post-hoc analyses, specifically against bipolar disorder or 
major depressive disorder. Estimates for time ill were based on life charts. The 
P2RX7 gene variants rs208294 and rs2230912 significantly elevated the risk for a 
familial mood disorder (OR = 1.35, P = 0.0013, permuted P = 0.06, and OR = 1.44, 
P = 0.0031, permuted P = 0.17, respectively). The results were consistent in all 
three cohorts. The same risk alleles predicted more time ill in all cohorts (OR 
1.3, 95% CI 1.1-1.6, P = 0.0069 and OR 1.7, 95% CI 1.3-2.3, P = 0.0002 with 
rs208294 and rs2230912, respectively), so that homozygous carriers spent 12 and 
24% more time ill. P2RX7 and its risk alleles predisposed to mood disorders 
consistently in three independent clinical cohorts. The same risk alleles 
resulted in clinically significant differences in outcome of patients with major 
depressive and bipolar disorder.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.31179
PMID: 21438144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]