1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Jul;51(1):82-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.03.011.
Epub  2011 Mar 23.

Identification of a NF-κB cardioprotective gene program: NF-κB regulation of 
Hsp70.1 contributes to cardioprotection after permanent coronary occlusion.

Wilhide ME(1), Tranter M, Ren X, Chen J, Sartor MA, Medvedovic M, Jones WK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0575, USA.

The transcription factor Nuclear Factor Kappa B (NF-κB) has been shown to be 
cardioprotective after permanent coronary occlusion (PO) and late ischemic 
preconditioning (IPC), and yet it is cell injurious after ischemia/reperfusion 
(I/R) in the heart. There is limited information regarding NF-κB-dependent 
cardioprotection, and the NF-κB-dependent genes that contribute to the 
cardioprotection after PO are completely unknown. The objective of the study was 
to identify NF-κB-dependent genes that contribute to cardioprotection after PO. 
Microarray analysis was used to delineate genes that potentially contribute to 
the NF-κB-dependent cardioprotection by determining the overlap between the set 
of PO regulated genes and genes regulated by NF-κB, using mice with genetic 
abrogation of NF-κB activation in the heart. This analysis identified 16 genes 
as candidates for NF-κB-dependent effects after PO. This set of genes overlaps 
with, but is significantly different from the set of genes we previously 
identified as regulated by NF-κB after IPC. The genes encoding heat shock 
protein 70.3 (hspa1a) and heat shock protein 70.1 (hspa1b) were the most 
significantly regulated genes after PO and were up-regulated by NF-κB. Results 
using knockout mice show that Hsp70.1 contributes to NF-κB-dependent 
cardioprotection after PO and likely underlies, at least in part, the 
NF-κΒ-dependent cardioprotective effect. Our previous results show that Hsp70.1 
is injurious after I/R injury. This demonstrates that, like NF-κB itself, 
Hsp70.1 has antithetical effects on myocardial survival and suggests that this 
may underlie the similar antithetical effects of NF-κB after different ischemic 
stimuli. The significance of the research is that understanding the gene network 
regulated by NF-κB after ischemic insult may lead to identification of 
therapeutic targets more appropriate for clinical development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.03.011
PMCID: PMC3569977
PMID: 21439970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]