1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1002027. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002027. Epub
2011  Mar 24.

Whole-exome re-sequencing in a family quartet identifies POP1 mutations as the 
cause of a novel skeletal dysplasia.

Glazov EA(1), Zankl A, Donskoi M, Kenna TJ, Thomas GP, Clark GR, Duncan EL, 
Brown MA.

Author information:
(1)University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra Hospital, 
Woolloongabba, Australia. e.glazov@uq.edu.au

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Aug;80(2):134-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01692.x.

Recent advances in DNA sequencing have enabled mapping of genes for monogenic 
traits in families with small pedigrees and even in unrelated cases. We report 
the identification of disease-causing mutations in a rare, severe, skeletal 
dysplasia, studying a family of two healthy unrelated parents and two affected 
children using whole-exome sequencing. The two affected daughters have clinical 
and radiographic features suggestive of anauxetic dysplasia (OMIM 607095), a 
rare form of dwarfism caused by mutations of RMRP. However, mutations of RMRP 
were excluded in this family by direct sequencing. Our studies identified two 
novel compound heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in POP1, which encodes a 
core component of the RNase mitochondrial RNA processing (RNase MRP) complex 
that directly interacts with the RMRP RNA domains that are affected in anauxetic 
dysplasia. We demonstrate that these mutations impair the integrity and activity 
of this complex and that they impair cell proliferation, providing likely 
molecular and cellular mechanisms by which POP1 mutations cause this severe 
skeletal dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002027
PMCID: PMC3063761
PMID: 21455487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.