1. Adv Appl Microbiol. 2011;74:35-75. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387022-3.00006-9.

Recent advances in hantavirus molecular biology and disease.

Hussein IT(1), Haseeb A, Haque A, Mir MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, University of 
Kansas, Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

Hantaviruses are emerging zoonotic pathogens that belong to the Bunyaviridae 
family. They have been classified as category A pathogens by CDC (centers for 
disease control and prevention). Hantaviruses pose a serious threat to human 
health because their infection causes two highly fatal diseases, hemorrhagic 
fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) and hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS). 
These pathogens are transmitted to humans through aerosolized excreta of their 
infected rodent hosts. Hantaviruses have a tripartite-segmented negative-sense 
RNA genome. The three genomic RNA segments, S, M, and L, encode a nucleocapsid 
protein (N), a precursor glycoprotein that is processed into two envelope 
glycoproteins (Gn and Gc) and the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), 
respectively. N protein is the major structural component of the virus, its main 
function is to protect and encapsidate the three genomic RNAs forming three 
viral ribonucleocapsids. Recent studies have proposed that N in conjunction with 
RdRp plays important roles in the transcription and replication of viral genome. 
In addition, N preferentially facilitates the translation of viral mRNA in 
cells. Glycoproteins, Gn and Gc, play major roles in viral attachment and entry 
to the host cells, virulence, and assembly and packaging of new virions in 
infected cells. RdRp functions as RNA replicase and transcriptase to replicate 
and transcribe the viral RNA and is also thought to have endonuclease activity. 
Currently, no antiviral therapy or vaccine is available for the treatment of 
hantavirus-associated diseases. Understanding the molecular details of 
hantavirus life cycle will help in the identification of targets for antiviral 
therapeutics and in the design of potential antiviral drug for the treatment of 
HFRS and HCPS. Due to the alarming fatality of hantavirus diseases, development 
of an effective vaccine against hantaviruses is a necessity.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-387022-3.00006-9
PMCID: PMC7150226
PMID: 21459193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]