1. Clin Genet. 2012 May;81(5):462-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01670.x. Epub 
2011 Apr 25.

Severe α-1 antitrypsin deficiency caused by Q0(Ourém) allele: clinical features, 
haplotype characterization and history.

Vaz Rodrigues L(1), Costa F, Marques P, Mendonça C, Rocha J, Seixas S.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonology Department, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal.

α-1 Antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) caused by null alleles is associated with the 
total lack of protein and generally it translates into more severe clinical 
features of pulmonary disease. This is the case of Q0(Ourém) , a rare variant 
found in several families of Central Portugal caused by the L353fsX376 mutation. 
A total of 41 patients carrying at least one copy of Q0(Ourém) were evaluated 
for SERPINA1 levels, respiratory function values and lung parenchyma status 
(chest X-ray and computerized tomography scan). Q0(Ourém) haplotype background 
was characterized using seven microsatellites flanking SERPINA1 and Q0(Ourém) 
age was estimated by a statistical method relying on the decay of haplotype 
sharing at linked markers (DHSMAP). Homozygous patients showed a compromised 
lung function and extensive emphysema. SQ0(Ourém) , although having serum levels 
below the 11 µM threshold, did not necessarily result in signs of disease. 
MQ0(Ourém) were found to be a heterogeneous group, mainly composed of normal 
individuals. Eight Q0(Ourém) haplotypes were identified and the allele was 
estimated to have arisen 650 years ago. Q0(Ourém) was associated with mild to 
severe AATD and has a single origin, probably linked to the major Ourém 
settlements where the occurrence of severe AATD may not be explained by recent 
consanguinity.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01670.x
PMID: 21457231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]