1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 28;6(3):e17946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017946.

A transient homotypic interaction model for the influenza A virus NS1 protein 
effector domain.

Kerry PS(1), Ayllon J, Taylor MA, Hass C, Lewis A, Garc√≠a-Sastre A, Randall RE, 
Hale BG, Russell RJ.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, 
Fife, United Kingdom.

Influenza A virus NS1 protein is a multifunctional virulence factor consisting 
of an RNA binding domain (RBD), a short linker, an effector domain (ED), and a 
C-terminal 'tail'. Although poorly understood, NS1 multimerization may 
autoregulate its actions. While RBD dimerization seems functionally conserved, 
two possible apo ED dimers have been proposed (helix-helix and strand-strand). 
Here, we analyze all available RBD, ED, and full-length NS1 structures, 
including four novel crystal structures obtained using EDs from divergent human 
and avian viruses, as well as two forms of a monomeric ED mutant. The data 
reveal the helix-helix interface as the only strictly conserved ED homodimeric 
contact. Furthermore, a mutant NS1 unable to form the helix-helix dimer is 
compromised in its ability to bind dsRNA efficiently, implying that ED 
multimerization influences RBD activity. Our bioinformatical work also suggests 
that the helix-helix interface is variable and transient, thereby allowing two 
ED monomers to twist relative to one another and possibly separate. In this 
regard, we found a mAb that recognizes NS1 via a residue completely buried 
within the ED helix-helix interface, and which may help highlight potential 
different conformational populations of NS1 (putatively termed 'helix-closed' 
and 'helix-open') in virus-infected cells. 'Helix-closed' conformations appear 
to enhance dsRNA binding, and 'helix-open' conformations allow otherwise 
inaccessible interactions with host factors. Our data support a new model of NS1 
regulation in which the RBD remains dimeric throughout infection, while the ED 
switches between several quaternary states in order to expand its functional 
space. Such a concept may be applicable to other small multifunctional proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017946
PMCID: PMC3065461
PMID: 21464929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.