1. Biochemistry. 2011 May 10;50(18):3840-8. doi: 10.1021/bi102070w. Epub 2011 Apr
 15.

20-Iodo-14,15-epoxyeicosa-8(Z)-enoyl-3-azidophenylsulfonamide: photoaffinity 
labeling of a 14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid receptor.

Chen Y(1), Falck JR, Manthati VL, Jat JL, Campbell WB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 
Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Endothelium-derived epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) relax vascular smooth 
muscle by activating potassium channels and causing membrane hyperpolarization. 
Recent evidence suggests that EETs act via a membrane binding site or receptor. 
To further characterize this binding site or receptor, we synthesized 
20-iodo-14,15-epoxyeicosa-8(Z)-enoyl-3-azidophenylsulfonamide 
(20-I-14,15-EE8ZE-APSA), an EET analogue with a photoactive azido group. 
20-I-14,15-EE8ZE-APSA and 14,15-EET displaced 
20-(125)I-14,15-epoxyeicosa-5(Z)-enoic acid binding to U937 cell membranes with 
K(i) values of 3.60 and 2.73 nM, respectively. The EET analogue relaxed 
preconstricted bovine coronary arteries with an ED(50) comparable to that of 
14,15-EET. Using electrophoresis, 20-(125)I-14,15-EE8ZE-APSA labeled a single 47 
kDa band in U937 cell membranes, smooth muscle and endothelial cells, and bovine 
coronary arteries. In U937 cell membranes, the 47 kDa radiolabeling was 
inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner by 8,9-EET, 11,12-EET, and 
14,15-EET (IC(50) values of 444, 11.7, and 8.28 nM, respectively). The 
structurally unrelated EET ligands miconazole, MS-PPOH, and ketoconazole also 
inhibited the 47 kDa labeling. In contrast, radiolabeling was not inhibited by 
8,9-dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acid, 5-oxoeicosatetraenoic acid, a biologically 
inactive thiirane analogue of 14,15-EET, the opioid antagonist naloxone, the 
thromboxane mimetic U46619, or the cannabinoid antagonist AM251. Radiolabeling 
was not detected in membranes from HEK293T cells expressing 79 orphan receptors. 
These studies indicate that vascular smooth muscle, endothelial cells, and U937 
cell membranes contain a high-affinity EET binding protein that may represent an 
EET receptor. This EET photoaffinity labeling method with a high signal-to-noise 
ratio may lead to new insights into the expression and regulation of the EET 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1021/bi102070w
PMCID: PMC3100183
PMID: 21469660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]