1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 29;6(3):e17833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017833.

Three-dimensional traction force microscopy: a new tool for quantifying 
cell-matrix interactions.

Franck C(1), Maskarinec SA, Tirrell DA, Ravichandran G.

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, United 
States of America. franck@brown.edu

The interactions between biochemical processes and mechanical signaling play 
important roles during various cellular processes such as wound healing, 
embryogenesis, metastasis, and cell migration. While traditional traction force 
measurements have provided quantitative information about cell matrix 
interactions in two dimensions, recent studies have shown significant 
differences in the behavior and morphology of cells when placed in 
three-dimensional environments. Hence new quantitative experimental techniques 
are needed to accurately determine cell traction forces in three dimensions. 
Recently, two approaches both based on laser scanning confocal microscopy have 
emerged to address this need. This study highlights the details, implementation 
and advantages of such a three-dimensional imaging methodology with the 
capability to compute cellular traction forces dynamically during cell migration 
and locomotion. An application of this newly developed three-dimensional 
traction force microscopy (3D TFM) technique to single cell migration studies of 
3T3 fibroblasts is presented to show that this methodology offers a new 
quantitative vantage point to investigate the three-dimensional nature of 
cell-ECM interactions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017833
PMCID: PMC3066163
PMID: 21468318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.