1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 3;286(22):19340-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152330. Epub 
2011 Apr 8.

Delayed phosphorylation of classical protein kinase C (PKC) substrates requires 
PKC internalization and formation of the pericentrion in a phospholipase D 
(PLD)-dependent manner.

El-Osta MA(1), Idkowiak-Baldys J, Hannun YA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

It was previously demonstrated that sustained activation (30-60 min) of protein 
kinase C (PKC) results in translocation of PKC α and βII to the pericentrion, a 
dynamic subset of the recycling compartment whose formation is dependent on PKC 
and phospholipase D (PLD). Here we investigated whether the formation of the 
pericentrion modulates the ability of PKC to phosphorylate substrates, 
especially if it reduces substrate phosphorylation by sequestering PKC. 
Surprisingly, using an antibody that detects phosphosubstrates of classical 
PKCs, the results showed that the majority of PKC phosphosubstrates are 
phosphorylated with delayed kinetics, correlating with the time frame of PKC 
translocation to the pericentrion. Substrate phosphorylation was blocked by PLD 
inhibitors and was not observed in response to activation of a PKC βII mutant 
(F663D) that is defective in interaction with PLD and in internalization. 
Phosphorylation was also inhibited by blocking clathrin-dependent endocytosis, 
demonstrating a requirement for endocytosis for the PKC-dependent major 
phosphorylation effects. Serotonin receptor activation by serotonin showed a 
similar response to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, implicating a potential 
role of delayed kinetics in G protein-coupled receptor signaling. Evaluation of 
candidate substrates revealed that the phosphorylation of the PKC substrate 
p70S6K kinase behaved in a similar manner. Gradient-based fractionation revealed 
that the majority of these PKC substrates reside within the 
pericentrion-enriched fractions and not in the plasma membrane. Finally, 
proteomic analysis of the pericentrion-enriched fractions revealed several 
proteins as known PKC substrates and/or proteins involved in endocytic 
trafficking. These results reveal an important role for PKC internalization and 
for the pericentrion as key determinants/amplifiers of PKC action.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.152330
PMCID: PMC3103312
PMID: 21478146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]