1. Mol Med Rep. 2008 Sep-Oct;1(5):667-71. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000010.

The allelic distribution of a single nucleotide polymorphism in the PDCD5 gene 
locus of Japanese non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Nanba K(1), Toyooka S, Soh J, Tsukuda K, Yamamoto H, Sakai A, Ouchida M, 
Kobayashi N, Matsuo K, Koide N, Kusaka K, Shimizu K, Date H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8558, 
Japan.

It has been reported that the rs1862214 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in 
the programmed cell death 5 gene (PDCD5) is associated with smoking-related lung 
cancer risk and prognosis in a European population with a history of smoking. 
The aim of this study was to investigate the status and impact of SNPs in the 
PDCD5 locus of a Japanese population. We developed an assay based on real-time 
PCR with melting curve analysis for determining the rs1862214 SNP, and examined 
this SNP in 165 lung cancer patients and 180 healthy volunteers. Of the 165 lung 
cancer patients (107 smokers), 25 (17), 72 (47) and 68 (43) had the CC, CG and 
GG genotypes of rs1862214, respectively. Of the 180 volunteers (117 smokers), 31 
(24), 81 (52) and 68 (41) had the CC, CG and GG genotypes of rs1862214, 
respectively. No significant difference in allelic distribution was found 
between Japanese patients and healthy controls, even among smokers. Based on the 
published data, the distribution of this SNP appears to be significantly 
different in Japanese and European populations. No significant difference in 
prognosis according to the SNP was observed, either in patients with a history 
of smoking or in the total number of patients. This too differs from the results 
from a European population. In conclusion, we developed a convenient real-time 
PCR-based assay for the genotyping of rs1862214 in the PDCD5 locus. The 
distribution of the rs1862214 SNP in our Japanese population differs from its 
distribution in a European population, and is not related to the risk of cancer 
or to poor prognosis in lung cancer. This suggests the presence of an 
ethnicity-related difference in the role of PDCD5 in the pathogenesis of lung 
cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr_00000010
PMID: 21479467