1. Neuropathology. 2012 Feb;32(1):30-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01216.x.
Epub  2011 Apr 11.

IDH1 mutation, a genetic alteration associated with adult gliomatosis cerebri.

Narasimhaiah D(1), Miquel C, Verhamme E, Desclée P, Cosnard G, Godfraind C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Recently, mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 have been reported as an early and common 
genetic alteration in diffuse gliomas, being possibly followed by 1p/19q loss in 
oligodendrogliomas and TP53 mutations in astrocytomas. Lately, IDH1 mutations 
have also been identified in adult gliomatosis cerebri (GC). The aim of our 
study was to test the status of IDH1/2, p53 and of chromosomes 1 and 19 in a 
series of 12 adult and three pediatric GC. For all tumors, clinico-radiologic 
characteristics, histopathologic features, status of IDH1/2, p53 and of 
chromosomes 1 and 19 were evaluated. IDH1 mutations were detected only in GC of 
adult patients (5/12). They all corresponded to R132H. Additional 1p/19q losses 
were observed in two of them with histological features of oligodendroglial 
lineage. Other copy number alterations of chromosomes 1 and 19 were also 
noticed. The median overall survival in adults was 10.5 months in non-mutated GC 
and 43.5 months in mutated GC. IDH1 mutations were present in GC of adult 
patients, but not in those of children. There was a trend toward longer overall 
survival in mutated GC when compared to non-mutated ones. Concomitant 1p/19q 
loss was observed in IDH1-mutated GC with oligodendroglial phenotype. These 
observations contribute toward establishing a stronger link between GC and 
diffuse glioma. In addition, these results also emphasize the importance of 
testing for IDH1/2 mutations and 1p/19q deletions in GC to classify them better 
and to allow the development of targeted therapy.

© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01216.x
PMID: 21481010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]