1. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2011;13(1):109-25. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2011.13.1/ccelano.

Depressogenic effects of medications: a review.

Celano CM(1), Freudenreich O, Fernandez-Robles C, Stern TA, Caro MA, Huffman JC.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. ccelano@partners.org

The literature is filled with reports that link medications with the onset or 
progression of depression. Because depression is so common in patients with 
medical illness, assessing whether a medication has in fact caused depression, 
or whether the relationship is coincidental, can be challenging. In this 
article, we review the literature on the association between medications and 
depression. For most agents, there are case reports or small studies linking the 
medication with the onset of depression, but more rigorous prospective studies 
are either lacking or found no association between the agent and depression. 
However, several medications, (eg, barbiturates, vigabatrin, topiramate, 
flunarizine, corticosteroids, mefloquine, efavirenz, and interferon-alpha) do 
appear to cause depression in some patients and should be used with caution in 
patients at risk for depression.

La literatura está llena de reportes que relacionan los medicamentos con el 
inicio o la progresión de la depresión. Dado que la depresión es tan frecuente 
en pacientes con enfermedad médica, puede ser desafiante el evaluar si un 
medicamento de hecho ha causado la depresión o si la relación es sólo una 
coincidencia. En este artículo se revisa la literatura relacionada con la 
asociación entre medicamentos y depresión. Para la mayoría de los fármacos hay 
reportes de casos o pequeños estudios que vinculan la medicación con el inicio 
de la depresión, pero estudios prospectivos más rigurosos no existen o no 
encuentran asociación entre el fármaco y la depresión. Sin embargo, varios 
medicamentos (por ejemplo, barbitúricos, vigabatrina, topiramato, flunarizina, 
corticoides, mefloquina, efavirenz e interferon-alfa) parecen causar depresión 
en algunos pacientes y deben utilizarse con cautela en pacientes con riesgo de 
depresión.

La littérature regorge de rapports qui relient les médicaments à la survenue ou 
à la progression d'une dépression. La dépression étant très courante chez les 
personnes malades, l'évaluation de l'implication du médicament dans 
l'installation de la dépression, ou de la coïncidence de la relation observée, 
peut s'avérer difficile. Dans cet article, nous effectuons une revue des liens 
entre médicaments et dépression. Pour la plupart des produits, des rapports de 
cas ou de petites études associent le médicament à la survenue de la dépression, 
mais il manque des études prospectives plus rigoureuses ou celles qui existent 
n'ont pas trouvé de lien entre le produit et la dépression. Cependant, plusieurs 
médicaments (barbituriques, vigabatrine, topiramate, flunarazine, corticoïdes, 
méfloquine, éfavirenz et interféron-α) semblent provoquer une dépression chez 
certains patients et doivent être utilisés avec précaution chez les patients 
ayant un risque de dépression.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2011.13.1/ccelano
PMCID: PMC3181967
PMID: 21485751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]