1. Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;71(8):2901-15. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1731.
Epub  2011 Apr 12.

FLT3-mediated p38-MAPK activation participates in the control of 
megakaryopoiesis in primary myelofibrosis.

Desterke C(1), Bilhou-Nabéra C, Guerton B, Martinaud C, Tonetti C, Clay D, 
Guglielmelli P, Vannucchi A, Bordessoule D, Hasselbalch H, Dupriez B, Benzoubir 
N, Bourgeade MF, Pierre-Louis O, Lazar V, Vainchenker W, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, 
Gisslinger H, Giraudier S, Le Bousse-Kerdilès MC; French Intergroup of 
Myeloproliferative Disorders,; French INSERM; European EUMNET Networks on 
Myelofibrosis.

Collaborators: Bilhou-Nabéra C, Bordessoule D, Bourhis JH, de Botton S, Brière 
J, Demory JL, Dupriez B, Fenaux P, Giraudier S, Kiladjian JJ, Le Bousse-Kerdilès 
MC, Pasquet JM, Lippert E, Praloran V, Morel P, Rey J, Roy L, Viallard JF, 
Barosi G, Cervantes F, Gisslinger H, Griesshammer M, Hasselbalch H, Kreipe H, 
Kvasnicka HM, Kusec R, Marchetti M, Merup M, Pahl H, Palmblad J, Reilly JT, 
Skoda R, Vannucchi AM, Thiele J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U972, Paris-11 University, Institut André Lwoff, Villejuif, France.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;71(11):4049-50.

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is characterized by increased number of 
hematopoietic progenitors and a dysmegakaryopoiesis which supports the stromal 
reaction defining this disease. We showed that increased ligand (FL) levels in 
plasma, hematopoietic progenitors, and stromal cells from PMF patients were 
associated with upregulation of the cognate Flt3 receptor on megakaryocytic (MK) 
cells. This connection prompted us to study a functional role for the FL/Flt3 
couple in PMF dysmegakaryopoiesis, as a route to reveal insights into 
pathobiology and therapy in this disease. Analysis of PMF CD34(+) and MK cell 
transcriptomes revealed deregulation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) pathway along with Flt3 expression. In PMF patients, a higher proportion 
of circulating Flt3(+)CD34(+)CD41(+) cells exhibited an increased MAPK effector 
phosphorylation independently of Jak2(V617F) mutation. Activation of FL/Flt3 
axis in PMF MK cell cultures, in response to FL, induced activation of the 
p38-MAPK cascade, which is known to be involved in inflammation, also increasing 
expression of its target genes (NFATC4, p53, AP-1, IL-8). Inhibiting Flt3 or 
MAPK or especially p38 by chemical, antibody, or silencing strategies restored 
megakaryopoiesis and reduced phosphorylation of Flt3 and p38 pathway effectors, 
confirming the involvement of Flt3 in PMF dysmegakaryopoiesis via p38 
activation. In addition, in contrast to healthy donors, MK cells derived from 
PMF CD34(+) cells exhibited an FL-induced migration that could be reversed by 
p38 inhibition. Taken together, our results implicate the FL/Flt3 
ligand-receptor complex in PMF dysmegakaryopoiesis through persistent p38-MAPK 
activation, with implications for therapeutic prospects to correct altered 
megakaryopoiesis in an inflammatory context.

©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1731
PMID: 21487043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]