1. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 31;6(3):e18375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018375.

Fitness ranking of individual mutants drives patterns of epistatic interactions 
in HIV-1.

Mart√≠nez JP(1), Bocharov G, Ignatovich A, Reiter J, Dittmar MT, Wain-Hobson S, 
Meyerhans A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, University of the Saarland, Homburg, Germany.

Fitness interactions between mutations, referred to as epistasis, can strongly 
impact evolution. For RNA viruses and retroviruses with their high mutation 
rates, epistasis may be particularly important to overcome fitness losses due to 
the accumulation of deleterious mutations and thus could influence the frequency 
of mutants in a viral population. As human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
resistance to azidothymidine (AZT) requires selection of sequential mutations, 
it is a good system to study the impact of epistasis. Here we present a thorough 
analysis of a classical AZT-resistance pathway (the 41-215 cluster) of HIV-1 
variants by fitness measurements in single round infection assays covering 
physiological drug concentrations ex vivo. The sign and value of epistasis 
varied and did not predict the epistatic effect on the mutant frequency. This 
complex behavior is explained by the fitness ranking of the variants that 
strongly depends on environmental factors, i.e., the presence and absence of 
drugs and the host cells used. Although some interactions compensate fitness 
losses, the observed small effect on the relative mutant frequencies suggests 
that epistasis might be inefficient as a buffering mechanism for fitness losses 
in vivo. While the use of epistasis-based hypotheses to make general assumptions 
on the evolutionary dynamics of viral populations is appealing, our data caution 
their interpretation without further knowledge on the characteristics of the 
viral mutant spectrum under different environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018375
PMCID: PMC3069090
PMID: 21483787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.