1. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2011 Jan;49(1):8-12. doi: 10.3340/jkns.2011.49.1.8.
Epub  2011 Jan 31.

Association of toll-like receptor 5 gene polymorphism with susceptibility to 
ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine in korean 
population.

Chung WS(1), Nam DH, Jo DJ, Lee JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oriental Rehabilitation Medicine, College of Oriental Medicine, 
Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) has a 
strong genetic component. Specific gene polymorphisms may be associated with 
OPLL in several genes which regulate calcification in chondrocytes, change of 
extracellular collagen matrix and secretions of many growth factors and 
cytokines controlling bone morphogenesis. Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) may play a 
role in the pathogenesis of OPLL by intermediate nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-ÎºB). 
The current study focused on coding single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
TLR5 for a case-control study investigating the relationship between TLR5 and 
OPLL in a Korean population.
METHODS: A total of 166 patients with OPLL and 231 controls were recruited for a 
case-control association study investigating the relationship between SNPs of 
TLR5 gene and OPLL. Four SNPs were genotyped by direct sequencing (rs5744168, 
rs5744169, rs2072493, and rs5744174). SNP data were analyzed using the SNPStats, 
SNPAnalyzer, Haploview, and Helixtree programs. Multiple logistic regression 
analysis with adjustment for age and gender was performed to calculate an odds 
ratio (OR).
RESULTS: None of SNPs were associated with OPLL in three alternative models 
(codominant, dominant, and recessive models; p > 0.05). A strong linkage 
disequilibrium block, including all 4 SNPs, was constructed using the Gabriel 
method. No haplotype was significantly associated with OPLL in three alternative 
models.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Toll-like receptor 5 gene may not be 
associated with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament risk in 
Korean population.

DOI: 10.3340/jkns.2011.49.1.8
PMCID: PMC3070903
PMID: 21494356