1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Apr;58(4):513-8. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23137. Epub 2011 
Apr 14.

A meta-analysis of MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms and risk of acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia in children.

Yan J(1), Yin M, Dreyer ZE, Scheurer ME, Kamdar K, Wei Q, Okcu MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 Apr;58(4):483-4. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23223.

BACKGROUND: Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and A1298C 
polymorphisms have been implicated in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL) risk, but previously published studies were inconsistent and recent 
meta-analyses were not adequate.
PROCEDURES: In a meta-analysis of 21 publications with 4,706 cases and 7,414 
controls, we used more stringent inclusion method and summarized data on 
associations between MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms and childhood ALL 
risk.
RESULTS: We found an overall association between 677T variant genotypes and 
reduced childhood ALL risk. Specifically, in the dominant genetic model, an 
association was found in a fixed-effect (TT + CT vs. CC: OR = 0.92; 95% 
CI = 0.85-0.99) but not random-effect model, whereas such an association was 
observed in both homozygote genetic model (TT vs. CC: OR = 0.80; 95% 
CI = 0.70-0.93 by fixed effects and OR = 0.78; 95% CI = 0.65-0.93 by random 
effects) and recessive genetic model (TT vs. CC + CT: OR = 0.83; 95% 
CI = 0.72-0.95 by fixed effects and OR = 0.84; 95% CI = 0.73-0.97 by random 
effects). These associations were also observed in subgroups by ethnicity: for 
Asians in all models except for the dominant genetic model by random effect and 
for Caucasians in all models except for the recessive genetic model. However, 
the A1298C polymorphism did not appear to have an effect on childhood ALL risk.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the MTHFR C677T, but not A1298C, 
polymorphism is a potential biomarker for childhood ALL risk.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.23137
PMID: 21495160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]