1. Mol Cell Pharmacol. 2010;2(5):179-189.

Over Expression of Nucleophosmin and Nucleolin Contributes to the Suboptimal 
Activation of a G2/M Checkpoint in Ataxia Telangiectasia Fibroblasts.

Nalabothula N(1), Chakravarty D, Pierce A, Carrier F.

Author information:
(1)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland, 
Baltimore, Maryland.

Ataxia Telangiectasia (AT) cells exhibit suboptimal activation of 
radiation-induced cell cycle checkpoints despite having a wild type p53 
genotype. Reducing or eliminating this delay could restore p53 function and 
reinstate normal cellular response to genotoxic stress. Here we show that the 
levels of Nuclephosmin (NPM), NPM phosphorylated at Serine 125, p53, p53 
phosphorylated at Serine 15 and Serine 392 and the levels of Nucleolin (NCL) are 
high in AT fibroblasts compared to normal cells. Transfection of a functional 
ATM into AT fibroblasts reduced p53, phospo-p53, phospho-NPM and NCL levels to 
wild type fibroblasts levels. Our data indicate that ATM regulates phospho-NPM 
and NCL indirectly through the Protein Phosphatase 1 (PP1). Both, NPM and NCL 
interact with p53 and hinder its phosphorylation at Serine 15 in response to 
bleomycin. Moreover, NPM and NCL are phosphorylated by several of the same 
kinases targeting p53 and could potentially compete with p53 for phosphorylation 
in AT cells. In addition, our data indicate that down regulation of NCL and to a 
lesser extent NPM increase the number of AT cells arrested in G2/M in response 
to bleomycin. Together this data indicate that the lack of PP1 activation in AT 
cells result in increased NPM and NCL protein levels which prevents p53 
phosphorylation in response to bleomycin and contributes to a defective G2/M 
checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC3076699
PMID: 21499441

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No potential conflicts of 
interest to disclose.