1. Pflugers Arch. 2011 Aug;462(2):293-302. doi: 10.1007/s00424-011-0957-y. Epub 
2011 Apr 20.

A residue in the TRPM2 channel outer pore is crucial in determining 
species-dependent sensitivity to extracellular acidic pH.

Zou J(1), Yang W, Beech DJ, Jiang LH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Membrane and Systems Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Acidic pH is an important parameter regulating ion channel activity and its 
biological function. This study investigated inhibition of the hTRPM2 channels 
by extracellular acidic pH and compared the sensitivity of human (h) and mouse 
(m) TRPM2 channel to such an inhibition. The initial inhibition of hTRPM2 
channel currents was substantially reversible, but the reversibility 
progressively diminished as the exposure to acidic pH was prolonged and it was 
essentially lost in the steady state, suggesting that extracellular acidic pH 
induces initial reversible inhibition and subsequent irreversible inactivation. 
Like the hTRPM2 channel, the mTRPM2 channel was sensitive to inhibition by 
pH 4.0-5.5, but the kinetics was significantly slower. Moreover, in contrast to 
the complete inhibition of the hTRPM2 channel, the mTRPM2 channel was 
insensitive to pH 6.0. Replacement of residue Gln(992) in the outer pore with 
the equivalent residue His(995) in the hTRPM2 channel resulted in a mutant 
mTRPM2 channel with the pH sensitivity and kinetics of inhibition of the 
wild-type hTRPM2 channel. Conversely, the reciprocal mutation H995Q in the 
hTRPM2 channel dramatically slowed down the kinetics of inhibition. Swapping 
other residues in the pore region failed to produce such opposing effects. Taken 
together, our results suggest a crucial role of residue His(995)/Gln(992) in the 
outer pore of TRPM2 channels in determining species-dependent effects of 
extracellular acidic pH.

DOI: 10.1007/s00424-011-0957-y
PMID: 21505784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]