1. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2012 Jan;112(1):183-92. doi: 10.1007/s00421-011-1967-3.
Epub  2011 Apr 23.

Creatine kinase MM TaqI and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T and A1298C 
gene polymorphisms influence exercise-induced C-reactive protein levels.

Miranda-Vilela AL(1), Akimoto AK, Lordelo GS, Pereira LC, Grisolia CK, 
Klautau-Guimarães Mde N.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética e Morfologia, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, 
Brazil. mirandavilela@unb.br

Physical training induces beneficial adaptations, but exhausting exercise 
increases reactive oxygen species, which can cause muscular injuries with 
consequent inflammatory processes, implying jeopardized performance and possibly 
overtraining. Acute strenuous exercise almost certainly exceeds the benefits of 
physical activity; it can compromise performance and may contribute to increased 
future risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in athletes. Polymorphisms in the 
muscle-type creatine kinase (CK-MM) gene may influence performance and 
adaptation to training, while many potentially significant genetic variants are 
reported as risk factors for CVD. Therefore, we investigated the influence of 
polymorphisms in CK-MM TaqI and NcoI, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 
C677T and A1298C) and C-reactive protein (CRP G1059C) genes on exercise-induced 
damage and inflammation markers. Blood samples were taken immediately after a 
race (of at least 4 km) that took place outdoors on flat tracks, and were 
submitted to genotyping and biochemical evaluation of aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST), CK, CRP and high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP). CK-MM TaqI polymorphism 
significantly influenced results of AST, CK and hs-CRP, and an association 
between MTHFR C677T and A1298C with CRP level was found, although these levels 
did not exceed reference values. Results indicate that these polymorphisms can 
indirectly influence performance, contribute to higher susceptibility to 
exercise-induced inflammation or protection against it, and perhaps affect 
future risks of CVD in athletes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00421-011-1967-3
PMID: 21516340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]