1. Neural Dev. 2011 Apr 27;6:15. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-15.

Steroid-triggered, cell-autonomous death of a Drosophila motoneuron during 
metamorphosis.

Winbush A(1), Weeks JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon 
Eugene, OR, 97403-1254, USA.

BACKGROUND: The metamorphosis of Drosophila melanogaster is accompanied by 
elimination of obsolete neurons via programmed cell death (PCD). Metamorphosis 
is regulated by ecdysteroids, including 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E), but the roles 
and modes of action of hormones in regulating neuronal PCD are incompletely 
understood.
RESULTS: We used targeted expression of GFP to track the fate of a larval 
motoneuron, RP2, in ventral ganglia. RP2s in abdominal neuromeres two through 
seven (A2 to A7) exhibited fragmented DNA by 15 hours after puparium formation 
(h-APF) and were missing by 20 h-APF. RP2 death began shortly after the 
'prepupal pulse' of ecdysteroids, during which time RP2s expressed ecdysteroid 
receptors (EcRs). Genetic manipulations showed that RP2 death required the 
function of EcR-B isoforms, the death-activating gene, reaper (but not hid), and 
the apoptosome component, Dark. PCD was blocked by expression of the caspase 
inhibitor p35 but unaffected by manipulating Diap1. In contrast, aCC motoneurons 
in neuromeres A2 to A7, and RP2s in neuromere A1, expressed EcRs during the 
prepupal pulse but survived into the pupal stage under all conditions tested. To 
test the hypothesis that ecdysteroids trigger RP2's death directly, we placed 
abdominal GFP-expressing neurons in cell culture immediately prior to the 
prepupal pulse, with or without 20E. 20E induced significant PCD in putative 
RP2s, but not in control neurons, as assessed by morphological criteria and 
propidium iodide staining.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the rise of ecdysteroids during the 
prepupal pulse acts directly, via EcR-B isoforms, to activate PCD in RP2 
motoneurons in abdominal neuromeres A2 to A7, while sparing RP2s in A1. Genetic 
manipulations suggest that RP2's death requires Reaper function, apoptosome 
assembly and Diap1-independent caspase activation. RP2s offer a valuable 'single 
cell' approach to the molecular understanding of neuronal death during insect 
metamorphosis and, potentially, of neurodegeneration in other contexts.

DOI: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-15
PMCID: PMC3098771
PMID: 21521537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]