1. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):138-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.020. Epub
2011  Apr 22.

Ephrin-B reverse signaling controls septation events at the embryonic midline 
through separate tyrosine phosphorylation-independent signaling avenues.

Dravis C(1), Henkemeyer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA

We report that the disruption of bidirectional signaling between ephrin-B2 and 
EphB receptors impairs morphogenetic cell-cell septation and closure events 
during development of the embryonic midline. A novel role for reverse signaling 
is identified in tracheoesophageal foregut septation, as animals lacking the 
cytoplasmic domain of ephrin-B2 present with laryngotracheoesophageal cleft 
(LTEC), while both EphB2/EphB3 forward signaling and ephrin-B2 reverse signaling 
are shown to be required for midline fusion of the palate. In a third midline 
event, EphB2/EphB3 are shown to mediate ventral abdominal wall closure by acting 
principally as ligands to stimulate ephrin-B reverse signaling. Analysis of new 
ephrin-B2(6YFΔV) and ephrin-B2(ΔV) mutants that specifically ablate ephrin-B2 
tyrosine phosphorylation- and/or PDZ domain-mediated signaling indicates there 
are at least two distinct phosphorylation-independent components of reverse 
signaling. These involve both PDZ domain interactions and a non-canonical 
SH2/PDZ-independent form of reverse signaling that may utilize associations with 
claudin family tetraspan molecules, as EphB2 and activated ephrin-B2 molecules 
are specifically co-localized with claudins in epithelia at the point of 
septation. Finally, the developmental phenotypes described here mirror common 
human midline birth defects found with the VACTERL association, suggesting a 
molecular link to bidirectional signaling through B-subclass Ephs and ephrins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.020
PMCID: PMC3104126
PMID: 21539827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]