1. Biochemistry. 2011 May 31;50(21):4597-607. doi: 10.1021/bi102054n. Epub 2011
May  3.

A single amino acid limits the substrate specificity of Thermus thermophilus 
uridine-cytidine kinase to cytidine.

Tomoike F(1), Nakagawa N, Kuramitsu S, Masui R.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamadaoka, 
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

The salvage pathways of nucleotide biosynthesis are more diverse and are less 
well understood as compared with de novo pathways. Uridine-cytidine kinase (UCK) 
is the rate-limiting enzyme in the pyrimidine-nucleotide salvage pathway. In 
this study, we have characterized a UCK homologue of Thermus thermophilus HB8 
(ttCK) biochemically and structurally. Unlike other UCKs, ttCK had substrate 
specificity toward only cytidine and showed no inhibition by UTP, suggesting 
uridine does not bind to ttCK as substrate. Structural analysis revealed that 
the histidine residue located near the functional group at position 4 of 
cytidine or uridine in most UCKs is substituted with tyrosine, Tyr93, in ttCK. 
Replacement of Tyr93 by histidine or glutamine endowed ttCK with phosphorylation 
activity toward uridine. These results suggested that a single amino acid 
residue, Tyr93, gives cytidine-limited specificity to ttCK. However, replacement 
of Tyr93 by Phe or Leu did not change the substrate specificity of ttCK. 
Therefore, we conclude that a residue at this position is essential for the 
recognition of uridine by UCK. In addition, thymidine phosphorylase from T. 
thermophilus HB8 was equally active with thymidine and uridine, which indicates 
that this protein is the sole enzyme metabolizing uridine in T. Thermophilus 
HB8. On the basis of these results, we discuss the pyrimidine-salvage pathway in 
T. thermophilus HB8.

DOI: 10.1021/bi102054n
PMID: 21539325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]