1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jun 15;133(23):8934-41. doi: 10.1021/ja200173a. Epub 2011 
May 24.

Catalytic mechanism of RNA backbone cleavage by ribonuclease H from quantum 
mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations.

Rosta E(1), Nowotny M, Yang W, Hummer G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA.

We use quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics simulations to study the cleavage 
of the ribonucleic acid (RNA) backbone catalyzed by ribonuclease H. This protein 
is a prototypical member of a large family of enzymes that use two-metal 
catalysis to process nucleic acids. By combining Hamiltonian replica exchange 
with a finite-temperature string method, we calculate the free energy surface 
underlying the RNA-cleavage reaction and characterize its mechanism. We find 
that the reaction proceeds in two steps. In a first step, catalyzed primarily by 
magnesium ion A and its ligands, a water molecule attacks the scissile 
phosphate. Consistent with thiol-substitution experiments, a water proton is 
transferred to the downstream phosphate group. The transient phosphorane formed 
as a result of this nucleophilic attack decays by breaking the bond between the 
phosphate and the ribose oxygen. In the resulting intermediate, the dissociated 
but unprotonated leaving group forms an alkoxide coordinated to magnesium ion B. 
In a second step, the reaction is completed by protonation of the leaving group, 
with a neutral Asp132 as a likely proton donor. The overall reaction barrier of 
∼15 kcal mol(-1), encountered in the first step, together with the cost of 
protonating Asp132, is consistent with the slow measured rate of ∼1-100/min. The 
two-step mechanism is also consistent with the bell-shaped pH dependence of the 
reaction rate. The nonmonotonic relative motion of the magnesium ions along the 
reaction pathway agrees with X-ray crystal structures. Proton-transfer reactions 
and changes in the metal ion coordination emerge as central factors in the 
RNA-cleavage reaction.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja200173a
PMCID: PMC3110985
PMID: 21539371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]