1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 27;409(1):46-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.103. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

The ECS(SPSB) E3 ubiquitin ligase is the master regulator of the lifetime of 
inducible nitric-oxide synthase.

Matsumoto K(1), Nishiya T, Maekawa S, Horinouchi T, Ogasawara K, Uehara T, Miwa 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Pharmacology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is an important regulatory system for the 
lifetime of inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS), a high-output isoform 
compared to neuronal NOS (nNOS) and endothelial NOS (eNOS), to prevent 
overproduction of NO that could trigger detrimental effects such as 
cytotoxicity. Two E3 ubiquitin ligases, Elongin B/C-Cullin-5-SPRY domain- and 
SOCS box-containing protein [ECS(SPSB)] and the C-terminus of Hsp70-interacting 
protein (CHIP), recently have been reported to target iNOS for proteasomal 
degradation. However, the significance of each E3 ubiquitin ligase for the 
proteasomal degradation of iNOS remains to be determined. Here, we show that 
ECS(SPSB) specifically interacted with iNOS, but not nNOS and eNOS, and induced 
the subcellular redistribution of iNOS from dense regions to diffused expression 
as well as the ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of iNOS, whereas CHIP 
neither interacted with iNOS nor had any effects on the subcellular 
localization, ubiquitination, and proteasomal degradation of iNOS. These results 
differ from previous reports. Furthermore, the lifetime of the iNOS(N27A) 
mutant, a form of iNOS that does not bind to ECS(SPSB), was substantially 
extended in macrophages. These results demonstrate that ECS(SPSB), but not CHIP, 
is the master regulator of the iNOS lifetime.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.103
PMID: 21549100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]