1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):608-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.002.
Epub  2011 May 5.

Chondrodysplasia and abnormal joint development associated with mutations in 
IMPAD1, encoding the Golgi-resident nucleotide phosphatase, gPAPP.

Vissers LE(1), Lausch E, Unger S, Campos-Xavier AB, Gilissen C, Rossi A, Del 
Rosario M, Venselaar H, Knoll U, Nampoothiri S, Nair M, Spranger J, Brunner HG, 
Bonafé L, Veltman JA, Zabel B, Superti-Furga A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences and 
Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

We used whole-exome sequencing to study three individuals with a distinct 
condition characterized by short stature, chondrodysplasia with brachydactyly, 
congenital joint dislocations, cleft palate, and facial dysmorphism. Affected 
individuals carried homozygous missense mutations in IMPAD1, the gene coding for 
gPAPP, a Golgi-resident nucleotide phosphatase that hydrolyzes phosphoadenosine 
phosphate (PAP), the byproduct of sulfotransferase reactions, to AMP. The 
mutations affected residues in or adjacent to the phosphatase active site and 
are predicted to impair enzyme activity. A fourth unrelated patient was 
subsequently found to be homozygous for a premature termination codon in IMPAD1. 
Impad1 inactivation in mice has previously been shown to produce 
chondrodysplasia with abnormal joint formation and impaired proteoglycan 
sulfation. The human chondrodysplasia associated with gPAPP deficiency joins a 
growing number of skeletoarticular conditions associated with defective 
synthesis of sulfated proteoglycans, highlighting the importance of 
proteoglycans in the development of skeletal elements and joints.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.002
PMCID: PMC3146727
PMID: 21549340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]