1. Anesthesiology. 2011 Jun;114(6):1403-16. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31821c3878.

A peripheral adrenoceptor-mediated sympathetic mechanism can transform 
stress-induced analgesia into hyperalgesia.

Donello JE(1), Guan Y, Tian M, Cheevers CV, Alcantara M, Cabrera S, Raja SN, Gil 
DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Allergan, Inc., Irvine, California, USA.

Comment in
    Anesthesiology. 2011 Jun;114(6):1280-1. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31821c112b.

BACKGROUND: Stress has paradoxical effects on pain, causing stress-induced 
analgesia but also exacerbating pain via poorly understood mechanisms. 
Adrenergic neurotransmission is integral in pathways that regulate the response 
to both pain and stress. Hyperalgesia is often associated with enhanced 
adrenergic sensitivity of primary afferents, but sympathetic nervous system 
outflow has not been demonstrated to exacerbate pain perception after stress.
METHODS: Rats or C57/BL6 wild-type mice treated with α-2 receptor antagonists or 
α-2A receptor knockout mice were exposed to ultrasonic noise stress or footshock 
stress and subsequently tested for hotplate paw withdrawal latencies. The 
sensory sensitivity of α-2A knockout mice to electrical and chemical stimuli was 
tested neurophysiologically and behaviorally. The effects of sympatholytic 
treatments were investigated.
RESULTS: Noise and footshock stressors induced thermal hyperalgesia in rats 
pretreated systemically with α-2 antagonists. Wild-type mice pretreated with α-2 
antagonists and α-2A knockout mice also exhibited thermal hyperalgesia induced 
by noise stress. Local spinal or intraplantar injection of an α-2 antagonist 
counteracted stress-induced analgesia without causing hyperalgesia. The α-2A 
knockout mice had decreased thresholds for peripheral sensitization with 
sulprostone and for windup of the dorsal horn neuronal response to repetitive 
electrical stimuli. Stress-induced hyperalgesia was abolished and the 
sensitization was attenuated by sympathectomy or systemic administration of an 
α-1-adrenergic antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: Sympathetic postganglionic nerves can enhance pain sensation via a 
peripheral α-1-adrenoceptor mechanism when sympathetic outflow is disinhibited. 
The net effect of stress on pain sensation reflects a balance between descending 
spinal inhibition and sympathetic outflow that can shift toward pain 
facilitation when central and peripheral α-2-adrenoceptor inhibitory mechanisms 
are attenuated.

DOI: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31821c3878
PMCID: PMC3143476
PMID: 21540738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]