1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 27;409(1):28-33. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.100. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Salt-inducible kinase 1 is present in lung alveolar epithelial cells and 
regulates active sodium transport.

Eneling K(1), Chen J, Welch LC, Takemori H, Sznajder JI, Bertorello AM.

Author information:
(1)Membrane Signaling Networks, Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Department of 
Medicine, CMM, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital-Solna, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Salt-inducible kinase 1 (SIK1) in epithelial cells mediates the increases in 
active sodium transport (Na(+), K(+)-ATPase-mediated) in response to elevations 
in the intracellular concentration of sodium. In lung alveolar epithelial cells 
increases in active sodium transport in response to β-adrenergic stimulation 
increases pulmonary edema clearance. Therefore, we sought to determine whether 
SIK1 is present in lung epithelial cells and to examine whether 
isoproterenol-dependent stimulation of Na(+), K(+)-ATPase is mediated via SIK1 
activity. All three SIK isoforms were present in airway epithelial cells, and in 
alveolar epithelial cells type 1 and type 2 from rat and mouse lungs, as well as 
from human and mouse cell lines representative of lung alveolar epithelium. In 
mouse lung epithelial cells, SIK1 associated with the Na(+), K(+)-ATPase 
α-subunit, and isoproterenol increased SIK1 activity. Isoproterenol increased 
Na(+), K(+)-ATPase activity and the incorporation of Na(+), K(+)-ATPase 
molecules at the plasma membrane. Furthermore, those effects were abolished in 
cells depleted of SIK1 using shRNA, or in cells overexpressing a SIK1 
kinase-deficient mutant. These results provide evidence that SIK1 is present in 
lung epithelial cells and that its function is relevant for the action of 
isoproterenol during regulation of active sodium transport. As such, SIK1 may 
constitute an important target for drug discovery aimed at improving the 
clearance of pulmonary edema.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.100
PMCID: PMC3106424
PMID: 21549091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]