1. PLoS Biol. 2011 Apr;9(4):e1001052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001052. Epub
2011  Apr 26.

A yeast model of FUS/TLS-dependent cytotoxicity.

Ju S(1), Tardiff DF, Han H, Divya K, Zhong Q, Maquat LE, Bosco DA, Hayward LJ, 
Brown RH Jr, Lindquist S, Ringe D, Petsko GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry, Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences 
Research Center, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2011 Apr;9(4):e1001053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001053.

FUS/TLS is a nucleic acid binding protein that, when mutated, can cause a subset 
of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (fALS). Although FUS/TLS is normally 
located predominantly in the nucleus, the pathogenic mutant forms of FUS/TLS 
traffic to, and form inclusions in, the cytoplasm of affected spinal motor 
neurons or glia. Here we report a yeast model of human FUS/TLS expression that 
recapitulates multiple salient features of the pathology of the disease-causing 
mutant proteins, including nuclear to cytoplasmic translocation, inclusion 
formation, and cytotoxicity. Protein domain analysis indicates that the 
carboxyl-terminus of FUS/TLS, where most of the ALS-associated mutations are 
clustered, is required but not sufficient for the toxicity of the protein. A 
genome-wide genetic screen using a yeast over-expression library identified five 
yeast DNA/RNA binding proteins, encoded by the yeast genes ECM32, NAM8, SBP1, 
SKO1, and VHR1, that rescue the toxicity of human FUS/TLS without changing its 
expression level, cytoplasmic translocation, or inclusion formation. 
Furthermore, hUPF1, a human homologue of ECM32, also rescues the toxicity of 
FUS/TLS in this model, validating the yeast model and implicating a possible 
insufficiency in RNA processing or the RNA quality control machinery in the 
mechanism of FUS/TLS mediated toxicity. Examination of the effect of FUS/TLS 
expression on the decay of selected mRNAs in yeast indicates that the 
nonsense-mediated decay pathway is probably not the major determinant of either 
toxicity or suppression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001052
PMCID: PMC3082520
PMID: 21541368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.