1. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Jan;16(1):59-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01336.x.

Proteomic analysis of metabolic, cytoskeletal and stress response proteins in 
human heart failure.

Li W(1), Rong R, Zhao S, Zhu X, Zhang K, Xiong X, Yu X, Cui Q, Li S, Chen L, Cai 
J, Du J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Chaoyang Hospital, The Key Laboratory of 
Remodelling-related Cardiovascular Diseases, Capital Medical University, 
Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.

Human heart failure is a complex syndrome and a primary cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the world. However, the molecular pathways involved in the 
remodelling process are poorly understood. In this study, we performed 
exhaustive global proteomic surveys of cardiac ventricle isolated from failing 
and non-failing human hearts, and determined the regulatory pathway to uncover 
the mechanism underlying heart failure. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis 
(2-DE) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry was used to identify differentially 
expressed proteins in specimens from failing (n = 9) and non-failing (n = 6) 
human hearts. A total of 25 proteins with at least 1.5-fold change in the 
failing heart were identified; 15 proteins were up-regulated and 10 proteins 
were down-regulated. The altered proteins belong to three broad functional 
categories: (i) metabolic [e.g. NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), 
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, and the cytochrome c oxidase subunit]; (ii) 
cytoskeletal (e.g. myosin light chain proteins, troponin I type 3 and 
transthyretin) and (iii) stress response (e.g. αB-crystallin, HSP27 and HSP20). 
The marked differences in the expression of selected proteins, including HSP27 
and HSP20, were further confirmed by Western blot. Thus, we carried out 
full-scale screening of the protein changes in human heart failure and profiled 
proteins that may be critical in cardiac dysfunction for future mapping.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation 
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01336.x
PMCID: PMC3823093
PMID: 21545686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]