1. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;130(8):1733-44. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26164. Epub 2011
Aug  3.

Oncogenic KRAS-induced interleukin-8 overexpression promotes cell growth and 
migration and contributes to aggressive phenotypes of non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Sunaga N(1), Imai H, Shimizu K, Shames DS, Kakegawa S, Girard L, Sato M, Kaira 
K, Ishizuka T, Gazdar AF, Minna JD, Mori M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, Japan. 
nsunaga@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

The CXC chemokine interleukin-8 (IL-8) is an angiogenic growth factor that is 
overexpressed in various cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). 
Previously, IL-8 was shown as a transcriptional target of RAS signaling, raising 
the possibility of its role in oncogenic KRAS-driven NSCLC. Using microarray 
analysis, we identified IL-8 as the most downregulated gene by shRNA-mediated 
KRAS knockdown in NCI-H1792 NSCLC cells where IL-8 is overexpressed. NSCLC cell 
lines harboring KRAS or EGFR mutations overexpressed IL-8, while IL-8 levels 
were more prominent in KRAS mutants compared to EGFR mutants. IL-8 expression 
was downregulated by shRNA-mediated KRAS knockdown in KRAS mutants or by 
treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors and EGFR siRNAs in EGFR mutants. 
In our analysis of the relationship of IL-8 expression with clinical parameters 
and mutation status of KRAS or EGFR in 89 NSCLC surgical specimens, IL-8 
expression was shown to be significantly higher in NSCLCs of males, smokers, and 
elderly patients and those with pleural involvement and KRAS mutated 
adenocarcinomas. In KRAS mutant cells, the MEK inhibitor markedly decreased IL-8 
expression, while the p38 inhibitor increased IL-8 expression. Attenuation of 
IL-8 function by siRNAs or a neutralizing antibody inhibited cell proliferation 
and migration of KRAS mutant/IL-8 overexpressing NSCLC cells. These results 
indicate that activating mutations of KRAS or EGFR upregulate IL-8 expression in 
NSCLC; IL-8 is highly expressed in NSCLCs from males, smokers, elderly patients, 
NSCLCs with pleural involvement, and KRAS-mutated adenocarcinomas; and IL-8 
plays a role in cell growth and migration in oncogenic KRAS-driven NSCLC.

Copyright Â© 2011 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.26164
PMCID: PMC3374723
PMID: 21544811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]