1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Jul 1;51(1):205-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.022. Epub 2011 Apr 22.

Nox4 regulates Nrf2 and glutathione redox in cardiomyocytes in vivo.

Brewer AC(1), Murray TV, Arno M, Zhang M, Anilkumar NP, Mann GE, Shah AM.

Author information:
(1)King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, 
Cardiovascular Division, London, UK. alison.brewer@kcl.ac.uk

NADPH oxidase-4 (Nox4) is an important modulator of redox signaling that is 
inducible at the level of transcriptional expression in multiple cell types. By 
contrast to other Nox enzymes, Nox4 is continuously active without requiring 
stimulation. We reported recently that expression of Nox4 is induced in the 
adult heart as an adaptive stress response to pathophysiological insult. To 
elucidate the potential downstream target(s) regulated by Nox4, we performed a 
microarray screen to assess the transcriptomes of transgenic (tg) mouse hearts 
in which Nox4 was overexpressed. The screen revealed a significant increase in 
the expression of many antioxidant and detoxifying genes regulated by Nrf2 in tg 
compared to wild-type (wt) mouse hearts, and this finding was subsequently 
confirmed by Q-PCR. Expression of glutathione biosynthetic and recycling enzymes 
was increased in tg hearts and associated with higher levels of both GSH and the 
ratio of reduced:oxidised GSH, compared to wt hearts. The increases in 
expression of the antioxidant genes and the changes in glutathione redox 
effected by Nox4 were ablated in an Nrf2-null genetic background. These data 
therefore demonstrate that Nox4 can activate the Nrf2-regulated pathway, and 
suggest a potential role for Nox4 in the regulation of GSH redox in 
cardiomyocytes.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.04.022
PMCID: PMC3112490
PMID: 21554947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]