1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Aug;26(8):1311-5. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-1847-4. Epub 
2011 May 11.

A novel WT1 heterozygous nonsense mutation (p.K248X) causing a mild and slightly 
progressive nephropathy in a 46,XY patient with Denys-Drash syndrome.

da Silva TE(1), Nishi MY, Costa EM, Martin RM, Carvalho FM, Mendonca BB, 
Domenice S.

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratorio de Hormonios e 
Genetica Molecular LIM42, Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade de Sao Paulo, Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar, 155, PAMB, 2º 
andar, Bloco 6, 05403-900 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

WT1 mutations have been described in a variety of syndromes, including 
Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), which is characterized by predisposition to Wilms' 
tumor, genital abnormalities and development of early nephropathy. The most 
frequent WT1 defects in DDS are missense mutations located in exons 8-9. Our aim 
is to report a novel WT1 mutation in a 46,XY patient with a DDS variant, who 
presented a mild nephropathy with a late onset diagnosed during adolescence. He 
had ambiguous genitalia at birth. At 4 months of age he underwent nephrectomy 
(Wilms' tumor) followed by chemotherapy. Ambiguous genitalia were corrected and 
bilateral gonadectomy was performed. Sequencing of WT1 identified a novel 
heterozygous mutation (c.742A>T) in exon 4 that generates a premature stop codon 
(p.K248X). Interestingly, this patient has an unusual DDS nephropathy 
progression, which reinforces that patients carrying WT1 mutations should have 
the renal function carefully monitored due to the possibility of late-onset 
nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-011-1847-4
PMID: 21559934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]