1. World J Urol. 2012 Apr;30(2):225-32. doi: 10.1007/s00345-011-0690-3. Epub 2011
 May 7.

Sequence variants of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and the risk of prostate cancer 
in Korean men.

Kim HJ(1), Bae JS, Chang IH, Kim KD, Lee J, Shin HD, Lee JY, Kim WJ, Kim W, 
Myung SC.

Author information:
(1)Advanced Urogenital Disease Research Center, Chung-Ang University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

PURPOSE: Chronic inflammation has been considered a potential risk factor for 
prostate cancer. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important in the innate immune 
response to pathogens and in cross talk between innate immunity and adaptive 
immunity. In this study, sequence variants in the TLR4 gene were investigated to 
determine whether they were associated with prostate cancer risk in a Korean 
cohort.
METHODS: An association study between 11 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of the TLR4 gene and prostate cancer was performed in 463 Korean male subjects 
including 240 prostate cancer patients and 223 healthy controls. SNPs were 
genotyped using the TaqMan assay, and their association with the risk of 
prostate cancer was evaluated using logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: The statistical analysis revealed that one SNP at the 3'UTR 
(rs11536889) showed significant association with the risk of prostate cancer (P 
(corr) = 0.005, OR = 1.81). One common haplotype (ht2) was also significantly 
associated with the risk of prostate cancer (P (corr) = 0.009, OR = 1.77). 
However, further analysis showed no association between any of the SNPs and 
prostate cancer prognostic factors such as the Gleason score or tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study suggest that polymorphisms of the TLR4 
gene might be associated with the risk of prostate cancer in Korean men.

DOI: 10.1007/s00345-011-0690-3
PMID: 21553150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]