1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Oct;31(7):1027-32. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9700-7.
Epub  2011 May 8.

BIT/SHPS-1 promotes antiapoptotic effect of BDNF on low potassium-induced cell 
death of cultured cerebellar granule neurons.

Koshimizu H(1), Suzuki S, Araki T, Yamada M, Kojima M, Hatanaka H.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Cell Engineering (RICE), National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Ikeda 563-8577, Japan. 
h-koshimizu@umin.ac.jp

Brain immunoglobulin-like molecule with tyrosine-based activation motifs/SHP 
substrate 1 (BIT/SHPS-1) is a neuronal adhesion molecule that is highly 
expressed in cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs); however its function in CGNs 
remains unclear. Our previous studies indicated that BIT/SHPS-1 is able to 
modulate the antiapoptotic effect of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) on 
CNS neurons by cell type-specific mechanisms. In this article, we have studied 
the role of BIT/SHPS-1 in the antiapoptotic function of BDNF on low potassium 
(LK)-induced cell death of cultured CGNs which is an in vitro model system of 
neuronal apoptosis during brain development. Cultured rat CGNs were transduced 
with wild-type rat BIT/SHPS-1 (BIT/SHPS-1(WT)), its 4F-mutant (BIT/SHPS-1(4F), 
in which all cytoplasmic tyrosine residues were substituted with phenylalanine), 
or nuclear localization signal-attached beta-galactosidase (NLS-LacZ, as 
control)-expressing adenoviruses. Expression of BIT/SHPS-1(WT) and 
BIT/SHPS-1(4F) alone did not affect steady-state cell viability. Tyrosine 
phosphorylation of BIT/SHPS-1 was only detected in BIT/SHPS-1(WT)-expressing 
cultures in the presence and the absence of BDNF. When subjected to LK in the 
presence of BDNF, BIT/SHPS-1(WT)- and BIT/SHPS-1(4F)-expressing cultures showed 
a significant resistance to cell death, while the control virus-transfected 
culture did not. In addition, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) inhibitor, 
LY294002, attenuated the antiapoptotic effect of BDNF on BIT/SHPS-1(WT)-, and 
BIT/SHPS-1(4F)-expressing cultures. These results demonstrated that in both 
tyrosine phosphorylation-independent and PI3-K-dependent manners, BIT/SHPS-1 
promotes the antiapoptotic effect of BDNF on the LK-induced cell death of CGNs.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-011-9700-7
PMID: 21553247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]