1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019158.

High extracellular Ca2+ stimulates Ca2+-activated Cl- currents in frog 
parathyroid cells through the mediation of arachidonic acid cascade.

Okada Y(1), Imendra KG, Miyazaki T, Hotokezaka H, Fujiyama R, Toda K.

Author information:
(1)Integrative Sensory Physiology, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Nagasaki, Japan. okada@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Elevation of extracellular Ca(2+) concentration induces intracellular Ca(2+) 
signaling in parathyroid cells. The response is due to stimulation of the 
phospholipase C/Ca(2+) pathways, but the direct mechanism responsible for the 
rise of intracellular Ca(2+) concentration has remained elusive. Here, we 
describe the electrophysiological property associated with intracellular Ca(2+) 
signaling in frog parathyroid cells and show that Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) 
channels are activated by intracellular Ca(2+) increase through an inositol 
1,4,5-trisphophate (IP(3))-independent pathway. High extracellular Ca(2+) 
induced an outwardly-rectifying conductance in a dose-dependent manner (EC(50) 
âˆ¼6 mM). The conductance was composed of an instantaneous time-independent 
component and a slowly activating time-dependent component and displayed a 
deactivating inward tail current. Extracellular Ca(2+)-induced and Ca(2+) 
dialysis-induced currents reversed at the equilibrium potential of Cl(-) and 
were inhibited by niflumic acid (a specific blocker of Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) 
channel). Gramicidin-perforated whole-cell recording displayed the shift of the 
reversal potential in extracellular Ca(2+)-induced current, suggesting the 
change of intracellular Cl(-) concentration in a few minutes. Extracellular 
Ca(2+)-induced currents displayed a moderate dependency on guanosine 
triphosphate (GTP). All blockers for phospholipase C, diacylglycerol (DAG) 
lipase, monoacylglycerol (MAG) lipase and lipoxygenase inhibited extracellular 
Ca(2+)-induced current. IP(3) dialysis failed to induce conductance increase, 
but 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), arachidonic acid and 
12S-hydroperoxy-5Z,8Z,10E,14Z-eicosatetraenoic acid (12(S)-HPETE) dialysis 
increased the conductance identical to extracellular Ca(2+)-induced conductance. 
These results indicate that high extracellular Ca(2+) raises intracellular 
Ca(2+) concentration through the DAG lipase/lipoxygenase pathway, resulting in 
the activation of Cl(-) conductance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019158
PMCID: PMC3084778
PMID: 21559478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.