1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jan;39(1):563-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0771-9. Epub 2011 
May 8.

A meta-analysis of β1-adrenergic receptor gene polymorphisms in idiopathic 
dilated cardiomyopathy.

Jin B(1), Ge-Shang QZ, Li Y, Shen W, Shi HM, Ni HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12 Middle 
Urumqi Road, Shanghai, 200040, China.

Published data on the association between β1-adrenergic receptor gene 
polymorphisms and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM) risk are 
inconclusive. To derive a more precise estimation of the relationship, a 
meta-analysis was performed. A total of 12 case-control studies including 2642 
cases and 3136 controls provided data on the association between β1-adrenergic 
receptor gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to IDCM. Overall, no 
significantly elevated risk was associated with Arg389Gly polymorphisms for all 
genetic models. In the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, no statistically 
increased risk was found for Gly389Gly versus Arg389Arg (OR 0.73; 95% CI 
0.54-0.99; Ph=0.35) and Gly389Gly versus Arg389Arg+Arg389Gly (OR 0.75; 95% CI 
0.55-1.01; Ph=0.52) among Europeans. Meanwhile, significantly increased risk was 
found among Asians based on the relatively small sample size. Further, 
significantly elevated IDCM risk was associated with Ser49Gly polymorphisms for 
all genetic models. When stratified by ethnicity, statistical association was 
found among Asians for Gly49Gly versus Ser49Ser (OR 4.56; 95% CI 1.36-15.23; 
Ph=0.10) and Gly49Gly versus Ser49Ser+Ser49Gly (OR 4.49; 95% CI 1.33-15.15; 
Ph=0.12), but not among Europeans. In summary, this meta-analysis suggests that 
no statistically increased risk was found between β1-adrenergic receptor gene 
polymorphisms and susceptibility to IDCM among Europeans.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-0771-9
PMID: 21553224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]