1. Brain Behav Immun. 2011 Oct;25(7):1434-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.04.014.
Epub  2011 May 5.

The effect of gp120 on morphine's antinociceptive and neurophysiological 
actions.

Chen X(1), Kirby LG, Palma J, Benamar K, Geller EB, Eisenstein TK, Adler MW.

Author information:
(1)Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. chenyang@temple.edu

Recently, we have shown that morphine's analgesic activity can be attenuated by 
chemokines, specifically CCL5 and CXCL12. Because the HIV-1 coat protein, 
glycoprotein 120 (gp120), binds to the same receptors as do CCL5 and CXCL12, 
experiments were designed to investigate the effect of gp120 in the brain on 
antinociception induced by morphine in the cold-water (-3°C) tail-flick (CWT) 
and hot-plate (+54°C) tests. In addition, mu-opioid-receptor-mediated effects in 
brain periaqueductal grey (PAG) slices were examined with whole-cell patch-clamp 
recordings. The results showed that (1) pretreatment with gp120 itself (10, 25, 
50, 100 or 133 ng, PAG) had no nociceptive effect in the CWT; (2) pretreatment 
with gp120 (25 or 100 ng) dose-dependently reduced antinociception induced by 
subcutaneous (sc) injection of morphine (3 or 6 mg/kg) or PAG injection of 
morphine (100 ng) in the CWT; (3) a PAG injection of gp120 (133 ng), given 30 
min before sc injection of morphine (6 mg/kg), similarly reduced morphine 
antinociception in the hot-plate test; (4) the inhibitory effect of gp120 on 
morphine-induced antinociception in the CWT was reversed by AMD3100, an 
antagonist of CXCR4; (5) pretreatment of slices with gp120 (200 pM) prevented 
morphine (10 μM)-induced hyperpolarization and reduction of input resistance in 
PAG neurons. Electrophysiology studies paralleled gp120-induced desensitization 
of a mu-opioid-receptor-mediated response in PAG neurons at the single-cell 
level. These studies are the first to demonstrate that the analgesic activity of 
morphine can be reduced by the presence of gp120 in the PAG and that 
pretreatment with AMD3100 is able to restore the analgesic effects of morphine.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.04.014
PMCID: PMC3998826
PMID: 21569838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]