1. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2011 Apr;11(2):198-203. doi: 
10.1016/j.clml.2011.03.002. Epub 2011 Apr 8.

Managing Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia: role of 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Ravandi F(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 
fravandi@mdanderson.org

Before the introduction of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the prognosis for 
patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia was 
poor. The treatment of choice, stem cell transplantation, is a potentially 
curative option, but it is available only for a minority of patients and is 
associated with significant risk of morbidity and mortality. Although imatinib 
is largely effective, a substantial proportion of patients become resistant or 
intolerant to it. The activity of imatinib may be enhanced by coadministration 
with chemotherapy; such treatment is effective in many patients. Dasatinib is 
established as a second-line treatment in patients with resistance to or 
intolerance of imatinib. Recent data suggest that dasatinib, either alone or in 
combination with chemotherapy, has utility as first-line therapy. Dasatinib is 
more potent than imatinib, is less susceptible to drug-resistance mechanisms, 
and has been shown to penetrate the blood-brain barrier, making it potentially 
effective for treating central nervous system disease. Patients who relapse 
during treatment with dasatinib frequently carry the T315I mutation of BCR-ABL. 
Future regimens combining dasatinib with an agent able to inhibit this mutation 
may further improve outcome.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clml.2011.03.002
PMCID: PMC4104796
PMID: 21575924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]