1. Cytokine. 2011 Aug;55(2):266-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.04.008. Epub 2011
May  12.

CDH1 -160C>A gene polymorphism is an ethnicity-dependent risk factor for gastric 
cancer.

Chen B(1), Zhou Y, Yang P, Liu L, Qin XP, Wu XT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan 
University, Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.

Comment in
    Cytokine. 2012 Jul;59(1):20-1. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.04.028.

The associations between E-cadherin (CDH1) gene polymorphisms and gastric cancer 
(GC) susceptibility are still controversial. Given this uncertainty, we carried 
out a meta-analysis of published case-control studies to derive more precise 
estimations of these relationships. Relevant studies were identified from PubMed 
and EMBASE up to March 2011. Seventeen studies with 3511 GC cases and 4826 
controls were selected. Crude odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) 
were used to investigate the strength of the associations. No associations 
between CDH1 (+54T>C, -160C>A, -347G>GA, -616G>C, -2076C>T and -3159T>C) gene 
polymorphisms and GC risk for all genetic models were found. As for CDH1 -160C>A 
polymorphism, subgroup analyses by country, gender, study design, smoking 
status, Helicobacter pylori infection, and the Lauren classification of GC did 
not change the results. When stratified by ethnicity, we found the A allele 
carriers had a significantly increased risk of GC among Caucasians (AA vs. 
CA+CC: OR=1.50, 95% CI=1.03-2.19, P=0.03), but not among Asians (AA vs. CA+CC: 
OR=0.87, 95% CI=0.56-1.37, P=0.56). No publication bias was found in the present 
study. This meta-analysis suggests that CDH1 -160C>A gene polymorphism may 
contribute to increased risk of GC among Caucasians.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.04.008
PMID: 21570316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]