1. Cytokine. 2011 Aug;55(2):260-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.04.017. Epub 2011 May
 17.

CXCL12 rs1801157 polymorphism and expression in peripheral blood from breast 
cancer patients.

de Oliveira KB(1), Guembarovski RL, Oda JM, Mantovani MS, Carrera CM, Reiche EM, 
Voltarelli JC, da Silva do Amaral Herrera AC, Watanabe MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathological Sciences, Biological Sciences Center, State 
University of Londrina, Londrina, PR, Brazil.

The role of chemokines has been extensively analyzed both in cancer risk and 
tumor progression. Among different cytokines, CXCR4 and its ligand CXCL12 have 
been recently subjected to a closer examination. The single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) rs1801157 (previously known as CXCL12-A/SDF1-3'A) in the 
CXCL12 gene and the relative expression of mRNA CXCL12 in peripheral blood were 
assessed in breast cancer patients, since the chemokine CXCL12 and its receptor 
CXCR4 regulate leukocyte trafficking and many essential biological processes, 
including tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis of different types of 
tumors. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP (polymerase chain reaction followed 
by restriction fragment length polymorphism) using MspI restriction enzyme and 
the expression analyses by quantitative RT-PCR. No difference in GG genotype and 
allele A carrier frequencies were observed between breast cancer patients and 
healthy blood donors and nor when CXCL12 mRNA expression was assessed among 
patients with different tumor stages. However a significant difference was 
observed when CXCL12 mRNA relative expression was analyzed in breast cancer 
patients in accordance to the presence or absence of the CXCL12 rs1801157 allele 
A. Allele A breast cancer patients presented a mRNA CXCL12 expression about 
2.1-fold smaller than GG breast cancer patients. Estrogen positive patients 
presenting CXCL12 allele A presented a significantly lower expression of CXCL12 
in peripheral blood (p=0.039) than GG hormone positive patients. Our findings 
demonstrated that allele A is associated with low expression of CXCL12 in the 
peripheral blood from ER-positive breast cancer patients, which suggests 
implications on breast cancer clinical outcome.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.04.017
PMID: 21592819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]