1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2011 Jul;156B(5):620-31. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.31206. Epub 2011 May 19.

Novel pathogenic mutations and copy number variations in the VPS13A gene in 
patients with chorea-acanthocytosis.

Tomiyasu A(1), Nakamura M, Ichiba M, Ueno S, Saiki S, Morimoto M, Kobal J, 
Kageyama Y, Inui T, Wakabayashi K, Yamada T, Kanemori Y, Jung HH, Tanaka H, 
Orimo S, Afawi Z, Blatt I, Aasly J, Ujike H, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Josephs KA, 
Tohge R, Rodrigues GR, Dupré N, Yamada H, Yokochi F, Kotschet K, Takei T, 
Rudzińska M, Szczudlik A, Penco S, Fujiwara M, Tojo K, Sano A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Kagoshima University, Japan.

Chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by loss of function mutations in the vacuolar protein sorting 13 
homolog A (VPS13A) gene that encodes chorein. It is characterized by adult-onset 
chorea, peripheral acanthocytes, and neuropsychiatric symptoms. In the present 
study, we performed a comprehensive mutation screen, including sequencing and 
copy number variation (CNV) analysis, of the VPS13A gene in ChAc patients. All 
73 exons and flanking regions of VPS13A were sequenced in 35 patients diagnosed 
with ChAc. To detect CNVs, we also performed real-time quantitative PCR and 
long-range PCR analyses for the VPS13A gene on patients in whom only a single 
heterozygous mutation was detected. We identified 36 pathogenic mutations, 20 of 
which were previously unreported, including two novel CNVs. In addition, we 
investigated the expression of chorein in 16 patients by Western blotting of 
erythrocyte ghosts. This demonstrated the complete absence of chorein in 
patients with pathogenic mutations. This comprehensive screen provides an 
accurate and useful method for the molecular diagnosis of ChAc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.31206
PMID: 21598378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]