1. Lipids Health Dis. 2011 May 24;10:87. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-10-87.

A reduction of CETP activity, not an increase, is associated with modestly 
impaired postprandial lipemia and increased HDL-cholesterol in adult 
asymptomatic women.

Parra ES(1), Urban A, Panzoldo NB, Nakamura RT, Oliveira R, de Faria EC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Lipid Laboratory and Center for Medicine 
and Experimental Surgery, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, 
Rua Tessália Vieira de Camargo, Campinas 13084-971, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between CETP and postprandial hyperlipemia is still 
unclear. We verified the effects of varying activities of plasma CETP on 
postprandial lipemia and precocious atherosclerosis in asymptomatic adult women.
METHODS: Twenty-eight women, selected from a healthy population sample (n = 148) 
were classified according to three CETP levels, all statistically different: 
CETP deficiency (CETPd ≤ 4.5%, n = 8), high activity (CETPi ≥ 23.8, n = 6) and 
controls (CTL, CETP ≥ 4.6% and ≤ 23.7%, n = 14). After a 12 h fast they 
underwent an oral fat tolerance test (40 g of fat/m² of body surface area) for 8 
hours. TG, TG-rich-lipoproteins (TRL), cholesterol and TRL-TG measurements (AUC, 
AUIC, AR, RR and late peaks) and comparisons were performed on all time points. 
Lipases and phospholipids transfer protein (PLTP) were determined. Correlation 
between carotid atherosclerosis (c-IMT) and postprandial parameters was 
determined. CETP TaqIB and I405V and ApoE-ε3/ε2/ε4 polymorphisms were examined. 
To elucidate the regulation of increased lipemia in CETPd a multiple linear 
regression analysis was performed.
RESULTS: In the CETPi and CTL groups, CETP activity was respectively 9 and 5.3 
higher compared to the CETPd group. Concentrations of all HDL fractions and 
ApoA-I were higher in the CETPd group and clearance was delayed, as demonstrated 
by modified lipemia parameters (AUC, AUIC, RR, AR and late peaks and meal 
response patterns). LPL or HL deficiencies were not observed. No genetic 
determinants of CETP deficiency or of postprandial lipemia were found. 
Correlations with c-IMT in the CETPd group indicated postprandial 
pro-atherogenic associations. In CETPd the regression multivariate analysis 
(model A) showed that CETP was largely and negatively predicted by VLDL-C 
lipemia (R² = 92%) and much less by TG, LDL-C, ApoAI, phospholipids and 
non-HDL-C. CETP (model B) influenced mainly the increment in ApoB-100 containing 
lipoproteins (R² = 85% negatively) and phospholipids (R² = 13%), at the 6(th)h 
point.
CONCLUSION: The moderate CETP deficiency phenotype included a paradoxically high 
HDL-C and its sub fractions (as earlier described), positive associations with 
c-IMT, a postprandial VLDL-C increment predicting negatively CETP activity and 
CETP activity regulating inversely the increment in ApoB100-containing 
lipoproteins. We hypothesize that the enrichment of TG content in 
triglyceride-rich ApoB-containing lipoproteins and in TG rich remnants increases 
lipoproteins' competition to active lipolysis sites,reducing their catabolism 
and resulting on postprandial lipemia with atherogenic consequences.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-511X-10-87
PMCID: PMC3125351
PMID: 21609439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]