1. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;50(4):280-3.

[The study of gene mutations in unknown refractory viral infection and primary 
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Tong CR(1), Liu HX, Xie JJ, Wang F, Cai P, Wang H, Zhu J, Teng W, Zhang X, Yang 
JF, Zhang YL, Fei XH, Zhao J, Yin YM, Wu T, Wang JB, Sun Y, Liu R, Shi XD, Lu 
DP.

Author information:
(1)Beijing Daopei Hospital, Beijing 100049, China. tongcr.21@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the type and corresponding clinical characteristics of 
primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) associated immune gene 
mutations in the refractory virus infection or HLH of unknown causes.
METHODS: From December 2009 to July 2010, the patients with refractory virus 
infection or HLH of unknown causes were screened for the primary HLH associated 
immune genes mutations by DNA sequence analysis, including PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, 
STXBP2, SH2D1A and XIAP. The clinical characteristics and outcomes were followed 
up.
RESULTS: Totally 25 patients with refractory virus infection or HLH of unknown 
causes were investigated for the 6 genes and 13 cases were found carrying gene 
mutations, composing of 6 of PRF1 mutation, 3 of UNC13D, and each one of STX11, 
XIAP, SH2D1A and STXBP2, respectively. Among the 13 cases with gene mutations, 5 
suffered from Epstein-Barr virus associated HLH (EBV-HLH), 1 human herpes virus 
7 associated HLH (HHV7-HLH), 1 HLH without causes, 4 chronic activated EB virus 
infection (CAEBV) with 1 progressing to Hodgkin's lymphoma carrying abnormal 
chromosome of t(15;17) (q22;q25) and hyperdiploid, 2 EBV associated lymphoma. 
Among the other 12 patients without gene mutation, 4 suffered from EBV-HLH with 
1 progressing to peripheral T lymphoma, 8 suffered from CAEBV.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary HLH associated immune gene mutations are critical causes of 
refractory virus infection of unknown causes, most patients manifest as HLH, 
some cases appear in CAEBV and EBV associated lymphoma. DNA sequence analysis is 
helpful to early diagnosis and correct decision-making for treatment.

PMID: 21600143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]