1. Vaccine. 2011 Jul 18;29(32):5094-106. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.022. Epub
 2011 May 25.

Mouse models to assess the efficacy of non-typhoidal Salmonella vaccines: 
revisiting the role of host innate susceptibility and routes of challenge.

Simon R(1), Tennant SM, Galen JE, Levine MM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Vaccine Development, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. rsimon@medicine.umaryland.edu

Non-typhoidal Salmonella enterica (NTS) serovars Typhimurium and Enteritidis are 
important causes of bacterial gastroenteritis in the USA and worldwide. In 
sub-Saharan Africa these two serovars are emerging as agents associated with 
lethal invasive disease (e.g., bacteremia, meningitis). The development of NTS 
vaccines, based on mucosally administered live attenuated strains and parenteral 
non-living antigens, could diminish the NTS disease burden globally. Mouse 
models of S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis invasive disease can accelerate the 
development of NTS vaccines. Live attenuated NTS vaccines elicit both cellular 
and humoral immunity in mice and their efficacy is well established. In 
contrast, non-living vaccines that primarily elicit humoral immunity have 
demonstrated variable efficacy. An analysis of the reported studies with 
non-living vaccines against S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis reveals that 
efficacy is influenced by two important independent variables: (1) the innate 
susceptibility to NTS infection that differs dramatically between commonly used 
mouse strains and (2) the virulence of the NTS strain used for challenge. 
Protection by non-living vaccines has generally been seen only in host-pathogen 
interactions where a sub-lethal infection results, such as challenging resistant 
mice with either highly virulent or weakly virulent strains or susceptible mice 
with weakly virulent strains. The immunologic basis of this discrepancy and the 
implications for human NTS vaccine development are reviewed herein.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.022
PMCID: PMC3152302
PMID: 21616112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest with regard to this manuscript.