1. BMC Biochem. 2011 May 31;12:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-30.

Engineering Klebsiella sp. 601 multicopper oxidase enhances the catalytic 
efficiency towards phenolic substrates.

Li Y(1), Gong Z, Li X, Li Y, Wang XG.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Hubei Unversity, Wuhan 430062, China.

BACKGROUND: Structural comparison between bacterial CueO and fungal laccases has 
suggested that a charged residue Glu (E106) in CueO replaces the corresponding 
residue Phe in fungal laccases at the gate of the tunnel connecting type II 
copper to the protein surface and an extra α-helix (L351-G378) near the type I 
copper site covers the substrate binding pocket and might compromise the 
electron transfer from substrate to type I copper. To test this hypothesis, 
several mutants were made in Klebsiella sp. 601 multicopper oxidase, which is 
highly homologous to E. coli CueO with a similarity of 90% and an identity of 
78%.
RESULTS: The E106F mutant gave smaller K(m) (2.4-7 fold) and k(cat) (1-4.4 fold) 
values for all three substrates DMP, ABTS and SGZ as compared with those for the 
wild-type enzyme. Its slightly larger k(cat)/K(m) values for three substrates 
mainly come from the decreased K(m). Deleting α-helix (L351-G378) resulted in 
the formation of inactive inclusion body when the mutant (Δ)α351-378 was 
expressed in E. coli. Another mutant α351-380M was then made via substitution of 
seven amino acid residues in the α-helix (L351-G378) region. The α351-380M 
mutant was active, and displayed a far-UV CD spectrum markedly different from 
that for wild-type enzyme. Kinetic studies showed the α351-380M mutant gave very 
low K(m) values for DMP, ABTS and SGZ, 4.5-, 1.9- and 7-fold less than those for 
the wild type. In addition, k(cat)/K(m) values were increased, 9.4-fold for DMP, 
similar for ABTS and 3-fold for SGZ.
CONCLUSION: The Glu residue at position 106 appears not to be the only factor 
affecting the copper binding, and it may also play a role in maintaining enzyme 
conformation. The α-helix (L351-G378) may not only block access to the type I 
copper site but also play a role in substrate specificities of bacterial MCOs. 
The α351-380M mutant catalyzing oxidation of the phenolic substrate DMP 
effectively would be very useful in green chemistry.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-30
PMCID: PMC3123277
PMID: 21624144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]