1. Genet Mol Biol. 2011 Jan;34(1):40-4. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572011000100008.
Epub  2011 Mar 1.

Biochemical and genetic analysis of butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) in a family, 
due to prolonged neuromuscular blockade after the use of succinylcholine.

Garcia DF(1), Oliveira TG, Molfetta GA, Garcia LV, Ferreira CA, Marques AA, 
Silva WA Jr.

Author information:
(1)Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade 
de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.

Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) is a plasma enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
choline esters, including the muscle-relaxant succinylcholine and mivacurium. 
Patients who present sustained neuromuscular blockade after using 
succinylcholine usually carry BChE variants with reduced enzyme activity or an 
acquired BChE deficiency. We report here the molecular basis of the BCHE gene 
underlying the slow catabolism of succinylcholine in a patient who underwent 
endoscopic nasal surgery. We measured the enzyme activity of BChE and extracted 
genomic DNA in order to study the promoter region and all exons of the BCHE gene 
of the patient, her parents and siblings. PCR products were sequenced and 
compared with reference sequences from GenBank. We detected that the patient and 
one of her brothers have two homozygous mutations: nt1615 GCA > ACA (Ala539Thr), 
responsible for the K variant, and nt209 GAT > GGT (Asp70Gly), which produces 
the atypical variant A. Her parents and two of her brothers were found to be 
heterozygous for the AK allele, and another brother is homozygous for the normal 
allele. Sequence analysis of exon 1 including 5'UTR showed that the proband and 
her brother are homozygous for -116GG. The AK/AK genotype is considered the most 
frequent in hereditary hypocholinesterasemia (44%). This work demonstrates the 
importance of defining the phenotype and genotype of the BCHE gene in patients 
who are subjected to neuromuscular block by succinylcholine, because of the risk 
of prolonged neuromuscular paralysis.

DOI: 10.1590/S1415-47572011000100008
PMCID: PMC3085371
PMID: 21637541