1. Nature. 2011 Jun 2;474(7349):49-53. doi: 10.1038/nature10109.

Crystal structure of the FimD usher bound to its cognate FimC-FimH substrate.

Phan G(1), Remaut H, Wang T, Allen WJ, Pirker KF, Lebedev A, Henderson NS, 
Geibel S, Volkan E, Yan J, Kunze MB, Pinkner JS, Ford B, Kay CW, Li H, Hultgren 
SJ, Thanassi DG, Waksman G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London and 
Birkbeck College, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK.

Type 1 pili are the archetypal representative of a widespread class of adhesive 
multisubunit fibres in Gram-negative bacteria. During pilus assembly, subunits 
dock as chaperone-bound complexes to an usher, which catalyses their 
polymerization and mediates pilus translocation across the outer membrane. Here 
we report the crystal structure of the full-length FimD usher bound to the 
FimC-FimH chaperone-adhesin complex and that of the unbound form of the FimD 
translocation domain. The FimD-FimC-FimH structure shows FimH inserted inside 
the FimD 24-stranded β-barrel translocation channel. FimC-FimH is held in place 
through interactions with the two carboxy-terminal periplasmic domains of FimD, 
a binding mode confirmed in solution by electron paramagnetic resonance 
spectroscopy. To accommodate FimH, the usher plug domain is displaced from the 
barrel lumen to the periplasm, concomitant with a marked conformational change 
in the β-barrel. The amino-terminal domain of FimD is observed in an ideal 
position to catalyse incorporation of a newly recruited chaperone-subunit 
complex. The FimD-FimC-FimH structure provides unique insights into the pilus 
subunit incorporation cycle, and captures the first view of a protein 
transporter in the act of secreting its cognate substrate.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10109
PMCID: PMC3162478
PMID: 21637253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]