1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Jul 20;133(28):10974-82. doi: 10.1021/ja203686t. Epub 2011
 Jun 28.

Nonnative interactions in the FF domain folding pathway from an atomic 
resolution structure of a sparsely populated intermediate: an NMR relaxation 
dispersion study.

Korzhnev DM(1), Vernon RM, Religa TL, Hansen AL, Baker D, Fersht AR, Kay LE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario 
M5S 1A8, Canada.

Several all-helical single-domain proteins have been shown to fold rapidly 
(microsecond time scale) to a compact intermediate state and subsequently 
rearrange more slowly to the native conformation. An understanding of this 
process has been hindered by difficulties in experimental studies of 
intermediates in cases where they are both low-populated and only transiently 
formed. One such example is provided by the on-pathway folding intermediate of 
the small four-helix bundle FF domain from HYPA/FBP11 that is populated at 
several percent with a millisecond lifetime at room temperature. Here we have 
studied the L24A mutant that has been shown previously to form nonnative 
interactions in the folding transition state. A suite of 
Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill relaxation dispersion NMR experiments have been used 
to measure backbone chemical shifts and amide bond vector orientations of the 
invisible folding intermediate that form the input restraints in calculations of 
atomic resolution models of its structure. Despite the fact that the 
intermediate structure has many features that are similar to that of the native 
state, a set of nonnative contacts is observed that is even more extensive than 
noted previously for the wild-type (WT) folding intermediate. Such nonnative 
interactions, which must be broken prior to adoption of the native conformation, 
explain why the transition from the intermediate state to the native conformer 
(millisecond time scale) is significantly slower than from the unfolded ensemble 
to the intermediate and why the L24A mutant folds more slowly than the WT.

DOI: 10.1021/ja203686t
PMCID: PMC3705915
PMID: 21639149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]