1. Genet Mol Biol. 2010 Apr;33(2):224-8. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000026.
Epub  2010 Jun 1.

Association of homocysteine and methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 
C677T) gene polymorphism with coronary artery disease (CAD) in the population of 
North India.

Tripathi R(1), Tewari S, Singh PK, Agarwal S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow India.

The implications of the methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene and 
the level of homocysteine in the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease (CAD) 
have been extensively studied in various ethnic groups. Our aim was to discover 
the association of MTHFR (C677T) polymorphism and homocysteine level with CAD in 
north Indian subjects. The study group consisted of 329 angiographically proven 
CAD patients, and 331 age and sex matched healthy individuals as controls. MTHFR 
(C677T) gene polymorphism was detected based on the polymerase chain reaction 
and restriction digestion with HinfI. Total homocysteine plasma concentration 
was measured using immunoassay. T allele frequency was found to be significantly 
higher in patients than in the control group. We found significantly elevated 
levels of mean homocysteine in the patient group when compared to the control 
group (p = 0.00). Traditional risk factors such as diabetes, hypertension, 
smoking habits, a positive family history and lipid profiles (triglyceride, 
total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, VLDL-cholesterol), were 
found significantly associated through univariate analysis. Furthermore, 
multivariable logistics regression analysis revealed that CAD is significantly 
and variably associated with diabetes, hypertension, smoking, triglycerides and 
HDL-cholesterol. Our findings showed that MTHFR C677T polymorphism and 
homocysteine levels were associated with coronary artery disease in the selected 
population.

DOI: 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000026
PMCID: PMC3036870
PMID: 21637473