1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Sep;1808(9):2156-66. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.04.020. Epub 2011 May 24.

Synthesis and characterization of degradable multivalent cationic lipids with 
disulfide-bond spacers for gene delivery.

Shirazi RS(1), Ewert KK, Leal C, Majzoub RN, Bouxsein NF, Safinya CR.

Author information:
(1)Chemistry and Biochemistry Department, University of California, Santa 
Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Gene therapy provides powerful new approaches to curing a large variety of 
diseases, which are being explored in ongoing worldwide clinical trials. To 
overcome the limitations of viral gene delivery systems, synthetic nonviral 
vectors such as cationic liposomes (CLs) are desirable. However, improvements of 
their efficiency at reduced toxicity and a better understanding of their 
mechanism of action are required. We present the efficient synthesis of a series 
of degradable multivalent cationic lipids (CMVLn, n=2 to 5) containing a 
disulfide bond spacer between headgroup and lipophilic tails. This spacer is 
designed to be cleaved in the reducing milieu of the cytoplasm and thus decrease 
lipid toxicity. Small angle X-ray scattering demonstrates that the initially 
formed lamellar phase of CMVLn-DNA complexes completely disappears when reducing 
agents such as DTT or the biologically relevant reducing peptide glutathione are 
added to mimic the intracellular milieu. The CMVLs (n=3 to 5) exhibit reduced 
cytotoxicity and transfect mammalian cells with efficiencies comparable to those 
of highly efficient non-degradable analogs and benchmark commercial reagents 
such as Lipofectamine 2000. Thus, our results demonstrate that degradable 
disulfide spacers may be used to reduce the cytotoxicity of synthetic nonviral 
gene delivery carriers without compromising their transfection efficiency.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2011.04.020
PMCID: PMC3129426
PMID: 21640069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]