1. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2011 Jul-Aug;33(4):473-80. doi:
10.1016/j.ntt.2011.05.006.  Epub 2011 May 27.

Low-level lead exposure triggers neuronal apoptosis in the developing mouse 
brain.

Dribben WH(1), Creeley CE, Farber N.

Author information:
(1)Division of Emergency Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 
S. Euclid Ave., Campus Box 8072, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. dribbenw@wustl.edu

Erratum in
    Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2013 Jan-Feb;35:54.

While the toxic effects of lead have been recognized for millennia, it has 
remained a significant public health concern due to its continued use and 
toxicological potential. Of particular interest is the increased susceptibility 
of young children to the toxic effects of lead. Although the exact mechanism(s) 
for lead toxicity is currently not well understood, research has established 
that it can be a potent NMDA antagonist. Previous research has established that 
exposure to NMDA antagonists during the brain growth spurt period (first 2 weeks 
of life in mice) can produce apoptotic neurodegeneration throughout the brain. 
Based on this information, the ability of lead exposure (two injections of 350 
mg/kg lead 4h apart) to produce apoptosis in the neonatal mouse brain was 
assessed histologically 8-24h after treatment using activated caspase-3 
immunohistochemistry, De Olmos silver technique, Nissl staining, and electron 
microscopy. Lead exposure produced significant neurodegeneration in the 
caudate/putamen, hippocampus, subiculum, and superficial and deep cortical 
layers of the frontal cortical regions. Further ultrastructural examination 
revealed cellular profiles consistent with apoptotic cell death. Statistical 
results showed that lead exposure significantly increased apoptotic 
neurodegeneration above that seen in normal controls in animals treated at 
postnatal day 7, but not on day 14. The results of this study may provide a 
basis for further elucidation of mechanisms through which the immature nervous 
system may be particularly susceptible to lead exposure.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ntt.2011.05.006
PMCID: PMC3661300
PMID: 21640820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]