1. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Jun 10;12:82. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-82.

Melatonin receptor 1 B polymorphisms associated with the risk of gestational 
diabetes mellitus.

Kim JY(1), Cheong HS, Park BL, Baik SH, Park S, Lee SW, Kim MH, Chung JH, Choi 
JS, Kim MY, Yang JH, Cho DH, Shin HD, Kim SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Cheil General Hospital and Womenâ€™s Healthcare Center, 1 Shinsu-dong, 
Mapo-gu, Seoul, 121-742, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUNDS: Two SNPs in melatonin receptor 1B gene, rs10830963 and rs1387153 
showed significant associations with fasting plasma glucose levels and the risk 
of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) in previous studies. Since T2DM and 
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) share similar characteristics, we suspected 
that the two genetic polymorphisms in MTNR1B may be associated with GDM, and 
conducted association studies between the polymorphisms and the disease. 
Furthermore, we also examined genetic effects of the two polymorphisms with 
various diabetes-related phenotypes.
METHODS: A total of 1,918 subjects (928 GDM patients and 990 controls) were used 
for the study. Two MTNR1B polymorphisms were genotyped using TaqMan assay. The 
allele distributions of SNPs were evaluated by x2 models calculating odds ratios 
(ORs), 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and corresponding P values. Multiple 
regressions were used for association analyses of GDM-related traits. Finally, 
conditional analyses were also performed.
RESULTS: We found significant associations between the two genetic variants and 
GDM, rs10830963, with a corrected P value of 0.0001, and rs1387153, with the 
corrected P value of 0.0008. In addition, we also found that the two SNPs were 
associated with various phenotypes such as homeostasis model assessment of 
beta-cell function and fasting glucose levels. Further conditional analyses 
results suggested that rs10830963 might be more likely functional in 
case/control analysis, although not clear in GDM-related phenotype analyses.
CONCLUSION: There have been studies that found associations between genetic 
variants of other genes and GDM, this is the first study that found significant 
associations between SNPs of MTNR1B and GDM. The genetic effects of two SNPs 
identified in this study would be helpful in understanding the insight of GDM 
and other diabetes-related disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-82
PMCID: PMC3129295
PMID: 21658282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]