1. Genes Immun. 2011 Dec;12(8):615-25. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.34. Epub 2011 Jun
9.

Genome-wide association study of severity in multiple sclerosis.

International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Briggs FB, Shao X, Goldstein BA, Oksenberg JR, Barcellos LF, de 
Jager PL.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the central 
nervous system with a strong genetic component. Several lines of evidence 
support a strong role for genetic factors influencing both disease 
susceptibility and clinical outcome in MS. Identification of genetic variants 
that distinguish particular disease subgroups and/or predict a severe clinical 
outcome is critical to further our understanding of disease mechanisms and guide 
development of effective therapeutic approaches. We studied 1470 MS cases and 
performed a genome-wide association study of more than 2.5 million 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms to identify loci influencing disease severity, 
measured using the MS severity score (MSSS), a measure of clinical disability. 
Of note, no single result achieved genome-wide significance. Furthermore, 
variants within previously confirmed MS susceptibility loci do not appear to 
influence severity. Although bioinformatic analyses highlight certain pathways 
that are over-represented in our results, we conclude that the genetic 
architecture of disease severity is likely polygenic and comprised of modest 
effects, similar to what has been described for MS susceptibility, to date. 
However, a role for major effects of rare variants cannot be excluded. 
Importantly, our results also show the MSSS, when considered as a binary or 
continuous phenotype variable is by comparison a stable outcome.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2011.34
PMCID: PMC3640650
PMID: 21654844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]