1. J Immunol. 2011 Jul 15;187(2):1039-46. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001543. Epub
2011  Jun 8.

Increased frequencies of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein/MHC class 
II-binding CD4 cells in patients with multiple sclerosis.

Raddassi K(1), Kent SC, Yang J, Bourcier K, Bradshaw EM, Seyfert-Margolis V, 
Nepom GT, Kwok WW, Hafler DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510-8018, 
USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by infiltration 
of pathogenic immune cells in the CNS resulting in destruction of the myelin 
sheath and surrounding axons. We and others have previously measured the 
frequency of human myelin-reactive T cells in peripheral blood. Using T cell 
cloning techniques, a modest increase in the frequency of myelin-reactive T 
cells in patients as compared with control subjects was observed. In this study, 
we investigated whether myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-specific T 
cells could be detected and their frequency was measured using 
DRB1*0401/MOG(97-109(107E-S)) tetramers in MS subjects and healthy controls 
expressing HLA class II DRB1*0401. We defined the optimal culture conditions for 
expansion of MOG-reactive T cells upon MOG peptide stimulation of PMBCs. 
MOG(97-109)-reactive CD4(+) T cells, isolated with DRB1*0401/MOG(97-109) 
tetramers, and after a short-term culture of PMBCs with MOG(97-109) peptides, 
were detected more frequently from patients with MS as compared with healthy 
controls. T cell clones from single cell cloning of 
DRB1*0401/MOG(97-109(107E-S)) tetramer(+) cells confirmed that these T cell 
clones were responsive to both the native and the substituted MOG peptide. These 
data indicate that autoantigen-specific T cells can be detected and enumerated 
from the blood of subjects using class II tetramers, and the frequency of 
MOG(97-109)-reactive T cells is greater in patients with MS as compared with 
healthy controls.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001543
PMCID: PMC3131477
PMID: 21653833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]