1. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020435. Epub 2011 May
31.

Taming membranes: functional immobilization of biological membranes in 
hydrogels.

Kusters I(1), Mukherjee N, de Jong MR, Tans S, Ko√ßer A, Driessen AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, AG Groningen, The Netherlands.

Single molecule studies on membrane proteins embedded in their native 
environment are hampered by the intrinsic difficulty of immobilizing elastic and 
sensitive biological membranes without interfering with protein activity. Here, 
we present hydrogels composed of nano-scaled fibers as a generally applicable 
tool to immobilize biological membrane vesicles of various size and lipid 
composition. Importantly, membrane proteins immobilized in the hydrogel as well 
as soluble proteins are fully active. The triggered opening of the 
mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) reconstituted in giant 
unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) was followed in time on single GUVs. Thus, kinetic 
studies of vectorial transport processes across biological membranes can be 
assessed on single, hydrogel immobilized, GUVs. Furthermore, protein 
translocation activity by the membrane embedded protein conducting channel of 
bacteria, SecYEG, in association with the soluble motor protein SecA was 
quantitatively assessed in bulk and at the single vesicle level in the hydrogel. 
This technique provides a new way to investigate membrane proteins in their 
native environment at the single molecule level by means of fluorescence 
microscopy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020435
PMCID: PMC3105061
PMID: 21655266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.