1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Sep;36(10):1982-91. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.81.
Epub  2011 Jun 8.

Moderation of adult depression by a polymorphism in the FKBP5 gene and childhood 
physical abuse in the general population.

Appel K(1), Schwahn C, Mahler J, Schulz A, Spitzer C, Fenske K, Stender J, 
Barnow S, John U, Teumer A, Biffar R, Nauck M, VÃ¶lzke H, Freyberger HJ, Grabe 
HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany. katja.appel@uni-greifswald.de

Childhood maltreatment and depressive disorders have both been associated with a 
dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. The FKBP5 gene codes 
for a co-chaperone regulating the glucocorticoid-receptor sensitivity. Previous 
evidence suggests that subjects carrying the TT genotype of the FKBP5 gene 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1360780 have an increased susceptibility 
to adverse effects of experimental stress. We therefore tested the hypothesis of 
an interaction of childhood abuse with rs1360780 in predicting adult depression. 
In all, 2157 Caucasian subjects from the Study of Health in Pomerania (German 
general population) completed the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) and 
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. The DSM-IV diagnosis of major depressive 
disorder (MDD) was assessed by interview. Genotypes of rs1360780 were taken from 
the Affymetrix Human SNP Array 6.0. Significant interaction (p=0.006) of 
physical abuse with the TT genotype of rs1360780 was found increasing the BDI-II 
score to 17.4 (95% confidence interval (CI)=12.0-22.9) compared with 10.0 
(8.2-11.7) in exposed CC/CT carriers. Likewise, the adjusted odds ratio for MDD 
in exposed TT carriers was 8.2 (95% CI=1.9-35.0) compared with 1.3 (0.8-2.3) in 
exposed subjects with CC/CT genotypes. Relative excess risk due to interaction 
(RERI) analyses confirmed a significant additive interaction effect (RERI=6.8; 
95% CI=0.64-33.7; p<0.05). In explorative analyses, the most severe degree of 
sexual and emotional abuse also yielded significant interaction effects 
(p<0.05). This study revealed interactions between physical abuse and rs1360780 
of the FKBP5 gene, confirming its role in the individual susceptibility to 
depression. Given the large effect sizes, rs1360780 could be included into 
prediction models for depression in individuals exposed to childhood abuse.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2011.81
PMCID: PMC3158316
PMID: 21654733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]