1. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1485-92. Epub 2011 Jun 4.

A novel MERTK deletion is a common founder mutation in the Faroe Islands and is 
responsible for a high proportion of retinitis pigmentosa cases.

Ostergaard E(1), Duno M, Batbayli M, Vilhelmsen K, Rosenberg T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics 4062, Copenhagen University Hospital 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. elsebet.ostergaard@dadlnet.dk

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to elucidate the genetic background of 
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in a Faroe Islands population, a genetic isolate in 
the North Atlantic Ocean.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from subjects diagnosed with RP and their 
families. DNA from affected individuals underwent single nucleotide polymorphism 
microarray analysis and homozygosity mapping followed by sequence analysis of 
candidate genes.
RESULTS: We identified 25 cases of nonsyndromic RP corresponding to a prevalence 
of 1 in 1,900. Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis revealed a homozygous 
region on chromosome 2q, common to patients in four families, which harbored the 
RP gene MER tyrosine kinase protooncogene (MERTK). A deletion of 91 kb was 
identified in seven patients, representing 30% of the analyzed Faroese cases of 
nonsyndromic RP. The clinical course of six patients who were homozygous for the 
deletion showed onset in the first decade followed by a rapid deterioration of 
both rod and cone photoreceptor function. Early macular involvement was present, 
in accordance with that of other reported patients with MERTK mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Previous studies have shown a frequency of less than 1% of MERTK 
mutations in RP patients. The 91-kb deletion encompassing exons 1-7 of MERTK is 
a common founder mutation in the Faroe Islands, responsible for around 30% of 
RP, and together with mutations in protocadherin 21 (PCDH21) accounts for more 
than half of the retinal dystrophy cases.

PMCID: PMC3110495
PMID: 21677792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]