1. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 1;17(15):5016-25. doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0050.  Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors are components of autocrine signaling 
networks in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells.

Marshall ME(1), Hinz TK, Kono SA, Singleton KR, Bichon B, Ware KE, Marek L, 
Frederick BA, Raben D, Heasley LE.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Craniofacial Biology and Radiation Oncology, University of 
Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO80045, USA.

PURPOSE: We previously reported that a fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor 
(FGFR) signaling pathway drives growth of lung cancer cell lines of squamous and 
large cell histologies. Herein, we explored FGFR dependency in cell lines 
derived from the tobacco-related malignancy, head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma (HNSCC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: FGF and FGFR mRNA and protein expression was assessed in 
nine HNSCC cell lines. Dependence on secreted FGF2 for cell growth was tested 
with FP-1039, an FGFR1-Fc fusion protein. FGFR and epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) dependence was defined by sensitivity to multiple inhibitors 
selective for FGFRs or EGFR.
RESULTS: FGF2 was expressed in eight of the nine HNSCC cell lines examined. 
Also, FGFR2 and FGFR3 were frequently expressed, whereas only two lines 
expressed FGFR1. FP-1039 inhibited growth of HNSCC cell lines expressing FGF2, 
identifying FGF2 as an autocrine growth factor. FGFR inhibitors selectively 
reduced in vitro growth and extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling in 
three HNSCC cell lines, whereas three distinct lines exhibited responsiveness to 
both EGFR and FGFR inhibitors. Combinations of these drugs yielded additive 
growth inhibition. Finally, three cell lines were highly sensitive to EGFR 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) with no contribution from FGFR pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: FGFR signaling was dominant or codominant with EGFR in six HNSCC 
lines, whereas three lines exhibited little or no role for FGFRs and were highly 
EGFR dependent. Thus, the HNSCC cell lines can be divided into subsets defined 
by sensitivity to EGFR and FGFR-specific TKIs. FGFR inhibitors may represent 
novel therapeutics to deploy alone or in combination with EGFR inhibitors in 
HNSCC.

Â©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0050
PMCID: PMC3149730
PMID: 21673064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]