1. Breast Care (Basel). 2011;6(2):126-129. doi: 10.1159/000327515. Epub 2011 Apr 
29.

Association between the TNF-α-238G>A and TGF-β1 L10P Polymorphisms and Breast 
Cancer Risk: A Meta-Analysis.

Guo J(1), Meng H, Pei J, Zhu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, The School of Basic Medicine, The Fourth Military 
Medical University, Xi'an, Shanxi, P.R. China.

SUMMARY: BACKGROUND: The tumor necrosis factors alpha and beta (TNF-α, TNF-β) 
can regulate a wide range of cellular responses and facilitate tumor growth and 
progression. However, the effects of the polymorphisms TNF-α-238G>A and 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 L10P on breast cancer risk are still unclear 
or inconclusive. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to provide a full estimation of 
the association with breast cancer, a meta-analysis of the most valid literature 
was performed by searching the databases PubMed, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, 
EBSCO, CNKI, and Google Scholar. RESULTS: For TNF-α-238G>A, 3 studies including 
35,578 cases and 38,095 controls were selected. For TGF-β1 L10P, 11 studies 
including 7,903 cases and 8,797 controls were selected. For TNF-α-238G>A, a 
significant association with breast cancer risk was found in the recessive model 
(odds ratio = 0.954, 95% confidence interval 0.912-0.998), but other models did 
not reach significance. For TGF-β1 L10P, no significant correlations were found. 
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that TNF-α-238G>A may be associated with breast 
cancer incidence, although significance is weak. Its role as an indicator for 
cancer diagnosis should be studied more. Moreover, for TGF-β1 L10P, further 
comprehensive meta-analyses are necessary.

HINTERGRUND: Die Tumornekrosefaktoren alpha und beta (TNF-α, TNF-β) können eine 
Vielzahl von zellulären Vorgängen regulieren und unterstützen Tumorwachstum 
und-progression. Die Auswirkungen der Polymorphismen TNF-α-238G>A und TGF 
(transforming growth factor)-β1 L10P auf das Brustkrebsrisiko sind noch immer 
ungeklärt bzw. nicht eindeutig.
MATERIAL UND METHODEN: Um die Assoziation dieser Polymorphismen mit dem 
Brustkrebsrisiko in vollem Umfang einschätzen zu können, wurde eine Metaanalyse 
der relevantesten Literatur durchgeführt. Zu diesem Zweck wurden die Databanken 
PubMed, Web of Science, ScienceDirect, EBSCO, CNKI und Google Scholar 
durchsucht.
ERGEBNISSE: Für TNF-α-238G>A wurden 3 Studien mit insgesamt 35 578 Fällen und 38 
095 Kontrollen selektiert. Für TGF-β1 L10P wurden 11 Studien mit insgesamt 7903 
Fällen und 8797 Kontrollen selektiert. Unsere Ergebnisse zeigen ein 
signifikantes Brustkrebsrisiko in Verbindung mit TNF-α-238G>A im rezessiven 
Modell (Odds-Ratio = 0,954, 95%-Konfidenzintervall 0,912–0,998). In anderen 
Modellen wurde jedoch keine vergleichbare Signifikanz erreicht. Für TGF-β1 L10P 
konnte keine signifikante Korrelation gezeigt werden.
SCHLUSSFOLGERUNGEN: Unsere Studie gibt Hinweise auf einen Zusammenhang zwischen 
TNF-α-238G>A und der Inzidenz des Mammakarzinoms, obgleich nur eine schwache 
Signifikanz besteht. Die Rolle dieses Polymorphismus als ein Indikator in der 
Krebsdiagnose sollte eingehender untersucht werden. Für TGF-β1 L10P sollten 
ebenfalls weiterführende, umfassende Metaanalysen durchgeführt werden.

DOI: 10.1159/000327515
PMCID: PMC3104903
PMID: 21673823