1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Mar;39(3):2553-60. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1007-8. Epub
2011  Jun 17.

Association between methylation in mismatch repair genes, V600E BRAF mutation 
and microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer patients.

Rasuck CG(1), Leite SM, Komatsuzaki F, Ferreira AC, Oliveira VC, Gomes KB.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Molecular Department, Instituto Hermes Pardini, Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) corresponds to the third most prevalent type of cancer. 
Its origins can either be sporadic or inherited, being Lynch syndrome the most 
common form of hereditary CRC. The activation of BRAF oncogene, inactivation of 
mismatch repair genes by methylation of CpG islands, and microsatellite 
instability (MSI) have been reported to be involved in CRC development. The goal 
of the study was to characterize CRC tumors using clinical and molecular 
criteria through association and cluster analysis. Amsterdam II and Bethesda 
guidelines and molecular variables were analyzed in 77 patients from Brazil. The 
replication error (RER) status, based in microsatellite instability, showed 
association with metachronous tumor, MLH1 gene methylation and inverse 
association with left-sided and synchronous tumors. The PMS2 gene was considered 
the best predictor for differentiating levels of methylation and the 
mononucleotide were considered the best markers to evaluate RER status. The 
cluster 1 was characterized of individuals over 60 years of age, female, 
right-sided tumor, high microsatellite instability, and metachronous or 
synchronous tumors. The individuals in cluster 2 were younger than 45 years of 
age, male and showed left sided or rectum tumors, and microsatellite stability. 
Even though it was not observed a significant association, a higher number of 
individuals with family history of cancer and tumors without promoter 
methylation were found in cluster 2. The V600E mutation did not show association 
with clinical or molecular characteristics. Evaluation of MSI and methylation of 
MLH1 and PMS2 genes should be considered in order to assist with clinical 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-1007-8
PMID: 21681432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]