1. Depress Anxiety. 2011 Dec 21;28(12):1048-57. doi: 10.1002/da.20840. Epub 2011 
Jun 16.

Serotonin transporter gene and childhood trauma--a G × E effect on anxiety 
sensitivity.

Klauke B(1), Deckert J, Reif A, Pauli P, Zwanzger P, Baumann C, Arolt V, 
Glöckner-Rist A, Domschke K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Muenster, Muenster, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors and environmental factors are assumed to 
interactively influence the pathogenesis of anxiety disorders. Thus, a 
gene-environment interaction (G × E) study was conducted with respect to anxiety 
sensitivity (AS) as a promising intermediate phenotype of anxiety disorders.
METHOD: Healthy subjects (N = 363) were assessed for AS, childhood maltreatment 
(Childhood Trauma Questionnaire), and genotyped for functional serotonin 
transporter gene variants (5-HTTLPR/5-HTT rs25531). The influence of genetic and 
environmental variables on AS and its subdimensions was determined by a 
step-wise hierarchical regression and a multiple indicator multiple cause 
(MIMIC) model.
RESULTS: A significant G × E effect of the more active 5-HTT genotypes and 
childhood maltreatment on AS was observed. Furthermore, genotype (LL)-childhood 
trauma interaction particularly influenced somatic AS subdimensions, whereas 
cognitive subdimensions were affected by childhood maltreatment only.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicate a G × E effect of the more active 5-HTT genotypes 
and childhood maltreatment on AS, with particular impact on its somatic 
subcomponent.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/da.20840
PMID: 21681867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]