1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020656. Epub 2011 Jun
7.

Temporal analysis of the honey bee microbiome reveals four novel viruses and 
seasonal prevalence of known viruses, Nosema, and Crithidia.

Runckel C(1), Flenniken ML, Engel JC, Ruby JG, Ganem D, Andino R, DeRisi JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United State of America.

Honey bees (Apis mellifera) play a critical role in global food production as 
pollinators of numerous crops. Recently, honey bee populations in the United 
States, Canada, and Europe have suffered an unexplained increase in annual 
losses due to a phenomenon known as Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD). 
Epidemiological analysis of CCD is confounded by a relative dearth of bee 
pathogen field studies. To identify what constitutes an abnormal 
pathophysiological condition in a honey bee colony, it is critical to have 
characterized the spectrum of exogenous infectious agents in healthy hives over 
time. We conducted a prospective study of a large scale migratory bee keeping 
operation using high-frequency sampling paired with comprehensive molecular 
detection methods, including a custom microarray, qPCR, and ultra deep 
sequencing. We established seasonal incidence and abundance of known viruses, 
Nosema sp., Crithidia mellificae, and bacteria. Ultra deep sequence analysis 
further identified four novel RNA viruses, two of which were the most abundant 
observed components of the honey bee microbiome (âˆ¼10(11) viruses per honey bee). 
Our results demonstrate episodic viral incidence and distinct pathogen patterns 
between summer and winter time-points. Peak infection of common honey bee 
viruses and Nosema occurred in the summer, whereas levels of the trypanosomatid 
Crithidia mellificae and Lake Sinai virus 2, a novel virus, peaked in January.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020656
PMCID: PMC3110205
PMID: 21687739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.