1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020850. Epub 2011 Jun
13.

The interplay between protein L-isoaspartyl methyltransferase activity and 
insulin-like signaling to extend lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Khare S(1), Linster CL, Clarke SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California-Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(5). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/d6ad8c55-fd3a-4f6c-a2ba-849e4a6500ca.

The protein L-isoaspartyl-O-methyltransferase functions to initiate the repair 
of isomerized aspartyl and asparaginyl residues that spontaneously accumulate 
with age in a variety of organisms. Caenorhabditis elegans nematodes lacking the 
pcm-1 gene encoding this enzyme display a normal lifespan and phenotype under 
standard laboratory growth conditions. However, significant defects in 
development, egg laying, dauer survival, and autophagy have been observed in 
pcm-1 mutant nematodes when deprived of food and when exposed to oxidative 
stress. Interestingly, overexpression of this repair enzyme in both Drosophila 
and C. elegans extends adult lifespan under thermal stress. In this work, we 
show the involvement of the insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling (IIS) 
pathway in PCM-1-dependent lifespan extension in C. elegans. We demonstrate that 
reducing the levels of the DAF-16 downstream transcriptional effector of the IIS 
pathway by RNA interference reduces the lifespan extension resulting from PCM-1 
overexpression. Using quantitative real-time PCR analysis, we show the 
up-regulation of DAF-16-dependent stress response genes in the PCM-1 
overexpressor animals compared to wild-type and pcm-1 mutant nematodes under 
mild thermal stress conditions. Additionally, similar to other long-lived C. 
elegans mutants in the IIS pathway, including daf-2 and age-1 mutants, PCM-1 
overexpressor adult animals display increased resistance to severe thermal 
stress, whereas pcm-1 mutant animals survive less long under these conditions. 
Although we observe a higher accumulation of damaged proteins in pcm-1 mutant 
nematodes, the basal level of isoaspartyl residues detected in wild-type animals 
was not reduced by PCM-1 overexpression. Our results support a signaling role 
for the protein L-isoaspartyl methyltransferase in lifespan extension that 
involves the IIS pathway, but that may be independent of its function in overall 
protein repair.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020850
PMCID: PMC3113807
PMID: 21695191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.