1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Aug 19;411(3):537-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.011. Epub
2011  Jun 17.

Regulation of fat storage and reproduction by Krüppel-like transcription factor 
KLF3 and fat-associated genes in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Zhang J(1), Bakheet R, Parhar RS, Huang CH, Hussain MM, Pan X, Siddiqui SS, 
Hashmi S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute, 
New York Blood Center, 310 East 67th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Coordinated regulation of fat storage and utilization is essential for energy 
homeostasis, and its disruption is associated with metabolic syndrome and 
atherosclerosis in humans. Across species, Krüppel-like transcription factors 
(KLFs) have been identified as key components of adipogenesis. In humans, KLF14 
acts as a master transregulator of adipose gene expression in type 2 diabetes 
and cis-acting expression quantitative trait locus associated with high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol. Herein we report that, in Caenorhabditis elegans, 
mutants in klf-3 accumulate large fat droplets rich in neutral lipids in the 
intestine; this lipid accumulation is associated with an increase in 
triglyceride levels. The klf-3 mutants show normal pharyngeal pumping; however, 
they are sterile or semisterile. We explored important genetic interactions of 
klf-3 with the genes encoding enzymes involved in fatty acid (FA) β-oxidation in 
mitochondria or peroxisomes and FA synthesis in the cytosol, namely acyl-CoA 
synthetase (acs-1 and acs-2), acyl-CoA oxidase (F08A8.1 and F08A8.2), and 
stearoyl-CoA desaturase (fat-7). We show that mutations or RNA interference in 
these genes increases fat deposits in the intestine of acs-1, acs-2, F08A8.1, 
and F08A8 animals. We further show that acs-1 and F08A8.1 influence larval 
development and fertility, respectively. Thus, KLF3 may regulate FA utilization 
in the intestine and reproductive tissue. We demonstrate that depletion of 
F08A8.1 activity, but not of acs-1, acs-2, F08A8.2, or fat-7 activity, enhances 
the fat phenotype of the klf-3 mutant. Taken together, these results suggest 
that klf-3 regulates lipid metabolism, along with acs-1, acs-2, F08A8.1, and 
F08A8.2, by promoting FA β-oxidation and, in parallel, may contribute to normal 
reproductive behavior and fecundity in C. elegans.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.06.011
PMCID: PMC4371853
PMID: 21704635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]