1. J Virol. 1990 Nov;64(11):5542-52. doi: 10.1128/JVI.64.11.5542-5552.1990.

Cysteine mutants of herpes simplex virus type 1 glycoprotein D exhibit 
temperature-sensitive properties in structure and function.

Long D(1), Cohen GH, Muggeridge MI, Eisenberg RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6003.

We previously constructed seven mutations in the gene for glycoprotein D (gD) of 
herpes simplex virus type 1 in which the codon for one of the cysteine residues 
was replaced by a serine codon. Each of the mutant genes was cloned into a 
eucaryotic expression vector, and the proteins were transiently expressed in 
mammalian cells. We found that alteration of any of the first six cysteine 
residues had profound effects on protein conformation and oligosaccharide 
processing. In this report, we show that five of the mutant proteins exhibit 
temperature-sensitive differences in such properties as aggregation, antigenic 
conformation, oligosaccharide processing, and transport to the cell surface. 
Using a complementation assay, we have now assessed the ability of the mutant 
proteins to function in virus infection. This assay tests the ability of the 
mutant proteins expressed from transfected plasmids to rescue production of 
infectious virions of a gD-minus virus, F-gD beta, in Vero cells. Two mutant 
proteins, Cys-2 (Cys-106 to Ser) and Cys-4 (Cys-127 to Ser), were able to 
complement F-gD beta at 31.5 degrees C but not at 37 degrees C. The rescued 
viruses, designated F-gD beta(Cys-2) and F-gD beta(Cys-4), were neutralized as 
efficiently as wild-type virus by anti-gD monoclonal antibodies, indicating that 
gD was present in the virion envelope in a functional form. Both F-gD 
beta(Cys-2) and F-gD beta(Cys-4) functioned normally in a penetration assay. 
However, the infectivity of these viruses was markedly reduced compared with 
that of the wild type when they were preincubated at temperatures above 37 
degrees C. The results suggest that mutations involving Cys-106 or Cys-127 in 
gD-1 confer a temperature-sensitive phenotype on herpes simplex virus. These and 
other properties of the cysteine-to-serine mutants allowed us to predict a 
disulfide bonding pattern for gD.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.64.11.5542-5552.1990
PMCID: PMC248606
PMID: 2170686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]