1. Hum Genet. 2012 Jan;131(1):67-76. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1035-4. Epub 2011
Jun  25.

Mutations in the NRG1 gene are associated with Hirschsprung disease.

Tang CS(1), Ngan ES, Tang WK, So MT, Cheng G, Miao XP, Leon TY, Leung BM, Hui 
KJ, Lui VH, Chen Y, Chan IH, Chung PH, Liu XL, Wong KK, Sham PC, Cherny SS, Tam 
PK, Garcia-Barcelo MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, congenital colon aganglionosis) is a relatively 
common complex genetic condition caused by abnormal development of the enteric 
nervous system (ENS). Through a recent genome-wide association study conducted 
on Chinese HSCR patients, we identified a new HSCR contributing locus, 
neuregulin 1 (NRG1; 8p12), a gene known to be involved in the development of the 
ENS. As genes in which disease-associated common variants are found are to be 
considered as candidates for the search of deleterious rare variants (RVs) in 
the coding sequences, we sequenced the NRG1 exons of 358 sporadic HSCR patients 
and 333 controls. We identified a total of 13 different heterozygous RVs 
including 8 non-synonymous (A28G, E134K, V266L, H347Y, P356L, V486M, A511T, 
P608A) and 3 synonymous amino acid substitutions (P24P, T169T, L483L), a 
frameshift (E239fsX10), and a c.503-4insT insertion. Functional analysis of the 
most conserved non-synonymous substitutions, H347Y and P356L, showed uneven 
intracellular distribution and aberrant expression of the mutant proteins. 
Except for T169T and V486M, all variants were exclusive to HSCR patients. 
Overall, there was a statistically significant over-representation of NRG1 RVs 
in HSCR patients (p = 0.008). We show here that not only common, but also rare 
variants of the NRG1 gene contribute to HSCR. This strengthens the role of NRG1.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-011-1035-4
PMID: 21706185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]