1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(17):7610-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr524. Epub
2011  Jun 28.

Efficient gene targeting mediated by a lentiviral vector-associated 
meganuclease.

Izmiryan A(1), Basmaciogullari S, Henry A, Paques F, Danos O.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, 75743 Paris, 
France.

Gene targeting can be achieved with lentiviral vectors delivering donor 
sequences along with a nuclease that creates a locus-specific double-strand 
break (DSB). Therapeutic applications of this system would require an 
appropriate control of the amount of endonuclease delivered to the target cells, 
and potentially toxic sustained expression must be avoided. Here, we show that 
the nuclease can be transferred into cells as a protein associated with a 
lentiviral vector particle. I-SceI, a prototypic meganuclease from yeast, was 
incorporated into the virions as a fusion with Vpr, an HIV accessory protein. 
Integration-deficient lentiviral vectors containing the donor sequences and the 
I-SceI fusion protein were tested in reporter cells in which targeting events 
were scored by the repair of a puromycin resistance gene. Molecular analysis of 
the targeted locus indicated a 2-fold higher frequency of the expected 
recombination event when the nuclease was delivered as a protein rather than 
encoded by a separate vector. In both systems, a proportion of clones displayed 
multiple integrated copies of the donor sequences, either as tandems at the 
targeted locus or at unrelated loci. These integration patterns were dependent 
upon the mode of meganuclease delivery, suggesting distinct recombination 
processes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr524
PMCID: PMC3177226
PMID: 21715375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]