1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2011 Oct 15;143(3-4):255-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.06.020. Epub 2011 Jun 12.

The role of BST2/tetherin in feline retrovirus infection.

Dietrich I(1), Hosie MJ, Willett BJ.

Author information:
(1)Retrovirus Research Laboratory, MRC - University of Glasgow Centre for Virus 
Research, Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Bearsden Road, Glasgow 
G611QH, United Kingdom. i.dietrich.1@research.gla.ac.uk

Pathogenic retroviral infections of mammals have induced the evolution of 
cellular anti-viral restriction factors and have shaped their biological 
activities. This intrinsic immunity plays an important role in controlling viral 
replication and imposes a barrier to viral cross-species transmission. 
Well-studied examples of such host restriction factors are TRIM5α, an E3 
ubiquitin ligase that binds incoming retroviral capsids in the cytoplasm via its 
C-terminal PRY/SPRY (B30.2) domain and targets them for proteasomal degradation, 
and APOBEC3 proteins, cytidine deaminases that induce hypermutation and impair 
viral reverse transcription. Tetherin (BST-2, CD317) is an interferon-inducible 
transmembrane protein that potently inhibits the release of nascent retrovirus 
particles in single-cycle replication assays. However, whether the primary 
biological activity of tetherin in vivo is that of a restriction factor remains 
uncertain as recent studies on human tetherin suggest that it is unable to 
prevent spreading infection of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). The 
feline tetherin homologue resembles human tetherin in amino acid sequence, 
protein topology and anti-viral activity. Transiently expressed feline tetherin 
displays potent inhibition of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) and HIV-1 
particle release. However, stable ectopic expression of feline tetherin in a 
range of feline cell lines has no inhibitory effect on the growth of either 
primary or cell culture-adapted strains of FIV. By comparing and contrasting the 
activities of the felid and primate tetherins against their respective 
immunodeficiency-causing lentiviruses we may gain insight into the contribution 
of tetherins to the control of lentiviral replication and the evolution of 
lentiviral virulence.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.06.020
PMCID: PMC4261133
PMID: 21715020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]