1. BMC Public Health. 2011 Jun 30;11:518. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-518.

Cost-effectiveness of intensive inpatient treatments for severely obese children 
and adolescents in the Netherlands; a randomized controlled trial (HELIOS).

Makkes S(1), Halberstadt J, Renders CM, Bosmans JE, van der Baan-Slootweg OH, 
Seidell JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, VU 
University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, Amsterdam, 1081 HV, the Netherlands. 
s.makkes@vu.nl

BACKGROUND: Intensive combined lifestyle interventions are the recommended 
treatment for severely obese children and adolescents, but there is a lack of 
studies and their cost-effectiveness. The objective of this study is to compare 
the cost-effectiveness of two intensive one-year inpatient treatments and usual 
care for severely obese children and adolescents.
METHODS/DESIGN: Participants are 40 children aged 8-13 and 40 adolescents aged 
13-18 with severe obesity (SDS-BMI ≥ 3.0 or SDS-BMI ≥ 2.3 with obesity related 
co-morbidity). They will be randomized into two groups that will receive a 
comprehensive treatment program of 12 months that focuses on nutrition, physical 
activity and behavior change of the participant and their parents. The two 
programs are the same in total duration (12 months), but differ in inpatient 
treatment duration. Group A will participate in a 6 month intensive inpatient 
treatment program during weekdays, followed by six monthly return visits of 2 
days. Group B will participate in a 2 month intensive inpatient treatment 
program during weekdays, followed by biweekly return visits of 2 days during the 
next four months, followed by six monthly return visits of 2 days. Several 
different health care professionals are involved, such as pediatricians, 
dieticians, psychologists, social workers, nurses and physiotherapists. Results 
will also be compared to a control group that receives usual care. The primary 
outcome is SDS-BMI. Secondary outcomes include quality of life using the EQ-5D 
and cardiovascular risk factors. Data will be collected at baseline and after 6, 
12 and 24 months. An economic evaluation will be conducted alongside this study. 
Healthcare consumption will be based on actual resource use, using prospective 
data collection during 2 years through cost diaries. Quality Adjusted Life Years 
(QALYs) will be calculated using the EQ-5D.
DISCUSSION: This study will provide useful information on the effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of inpatient treatment in severely obese children and 
adolescents. Valuable information on long term effects, after 2 years, is also 
included.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Netherlands Trial Register (NTR): NTR1678.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-518
PMCID: PMC3141469
PMID: 21718471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]