1. Gene. 2011 Oct 10;485(2):130-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.06.020. Epub 2011 Jun
 30.

An SRp75/hnRNPG complex interacting with hnRNPE2 regulates the 5' splice site of 
tau exon 10, whose misregulation causes frontotemporal dementia.

Wang Y(1), Wang J, Gao L, Stamm S, Andreadis A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Tau is a neuronal-specific microtubule-associated protein that plays an 
important role in establishing neuronal polarity and maintaining the axonal 
cytoskeleton. Aggregated tau is the major component of neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs), structures present in the brains of people affected by neurodegenerative 
diseases called tauopathies. Tauopathies include Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism (FTDP-17), the early onset dementia 
observed in Down syndrome (DS; trisomy 21) and the dementia component of 
myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1). Splicing misregulation of adult-specific exon 
10, which codes for a microtubule binding domain, results in expression of 
abnormal ratios of tau isoforms, leading to FTDP-17. Positions 3 to 19 of the 
intron downstream of exon 10 define a hotspot of splicing regulation: the region 
diverges between humans and rodents, and point mutations within it result in 
tauopathies. In this study, we investigated three regulators of exon 10 
splicing: serine/arginine-rich protein SRp75 and heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoproteins hnRNPG and hnRNPE2. SRp75 and hnRNPG inhibit splicing of exon 
10 whereas hnRNPE2 activates it. Using co-transfections, co-immunoprecipitations 
and RNAi we discovered that SRp75 binds to the proximal downstream intron of tau 
exon 10 at the FTDP-17 hotspot region; and that hnRNPG and hnRNPE2 interact with 
SRp75. Thus, increased exon 10 inclusion in FTDP mutants may arise from weakened 
SRp75 binding. This work provides insights into the splicing regulation of the 
tau gene and into possible strategies for correcting the imbalance in 
tauopathies caused by changes in the ratio of exon 10.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.06.020
PMCID: PMC3163755
PMID: 21723381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]