1. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):505-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.016. Epub
2011  Jun 30.

Precise cis-regulatory control of spatial and temporal expression of the alx-1 
gene in the skeletogenic lineage of s. purpuratus.

Damle S(1), Davidson EH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 
USA.

Deployment of the gene-regulatory network (GRN) responsible for skeletogenesis 
in the embryo of the sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus is restricted to 
the large micromere lineage by a double negative regulatory gate. The gate 
consists of a GRN subcircuit composed of the pmar1 and hesC genes, which encode 
repressors and are wired in tandem, plus a set of target regulatory genes under 
hesC control. The skeletogenic cell state is specified initially by 
micromere-specific expression of these regulatory genes, viz. alx1, ets1, tbrain 
and tel, plus the gene encoding the Notch ligand Delta. Here we use a recently 
developed high throughput methodology for experimental cis-regulatory analysis 
to elucidate the genomic regulatory system controlling alx1 expression in time 
and embryonic space. The results entirely confirm the double negative gate 
control system at the cis-regulatory level, including definition of the 
functional HesC target sites, and add the crucial new information that the 
drivers of alx1 expression are initially Ets1, and then Alx1 itself plus Ets1. 
Cis-regulatory analysis demonstrates that these inputs quantitatively account 
for the magnitude of alx1 expression. Furthermore, the Alx1 gene product not 
only performs an auto-regulatory role, promoting a fast rise in alx1 expression, 
but also, when at high levels, it behaves as an auto-repressor. A synthetic 
experiment indicates that this behavior is probably due to dimerization. In 
summary, the results we report provide the sequence level basis for control of 
alx1 spatial expression by the double negative gate GRN architecture, and 
explain the rising, then falling temporal expression profile of the alx1 gene in 
terms of its auto-regulatory genetic wiring.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.016
PMCID: PMC3164750
PMID: 21723273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]