1. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2011;111:191-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0693-8_32.

Post-treatment with SR49059 improves outcomes following an intracerebral 
hemorrhagic stroke in mice.

Manaenko A(1), Fathali N, Khatibi NH, Lekic T, Shum KJ, Martin R, Zhang JH, Tang 
J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Loma Linda University, School of 
Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA.

Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) is a devastating stroke subtype characterized by 
severe brain edema formation leading to cerebral blood flow compromise and 
parenchymal damage. Arginine vasopressin (AVP), a non-peptide antidiuretic 
hormone, has recently been implicated as a modulator of brain edema following 
injury. In this study, we investigated the effects of SR49059, a highly specific 
AVP V1a receptor antagonist, on brain injury outcomes following ICH, 
specifically assessing the ability of SR49059 in reducing brain edema and 
improving neurobehavioral deficits. Male CD1 mice (n=35) were randomly assigned 
to the following groups: sham, ICH, ICH with SR49059 at 0.5 mg/kg, and ICH with 
SR49059 at 2 mg/kg. ICH was induced by using the collagenase injection model, 
and treatment was given 1 h after surgery. Post-assessment was conducted at 24 
and 72 h after surgery, and included brain water content and neurobehavioral 
testing. The study found that SR49059 significantly reduced cerebral edema at 24 
and 72 h post-ICH injury and improved neurobehavioral deficits at 72 h. Our 
study suggests that blockage of the AVP V1a receptor is a promising treatment 
target for improving ICH-induced brain injury. Further studies will be needed to 
confirm this relationship and determine future clinical direction.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0693-8_32
PMCID: PMC3563694
PMID: 21725754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement We declare that 
we have no conflict of interest.