1. Biochemistry. 2011 Aug 16;50(32):6909-19. doi: 10.1021/bi2004334. Epub 2011
Jul  18.

Structural and biochemical insights into the mechanism of fosfomycin 
phosphorylation by fosfomycin resistance kinase FomA.

Pakhomova S(1), Bartlett SG, Doerner PA, Newcomer ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana 70803, United States. sveta@lsu.edu

We present here the crystal structures of fosfomycin resistance protein (FomA) 
complexed with MgATP, with ATP and fosfomycin, with MgADP and fosfomycin 
vanadate, with MgADP and the product of the enzymatic reaction, fosfomycin 
monophosphate, and with ADP at 1.87, 1.58, 1.85, 1.57, and 1.85 Å resolution, 
respectively. Structures of these complexes that approximate different reaction 
steps allowed us to distinguish the catalytically active conformation of ATP and 
to reconstruct the model of the MgATP·fosfomycin complex. According to the 
model, the triphosphate tail of the nucleotide is aligned toward the phosphonate 
moiety of fosfomycin, in contest to the previously published MgAMPPNP complex, 
with the attacking fosfomycin oxygen positioned 4 Å from the γ-phosphorus of 
ATP. Site-directed mutagenesis studies and comparison of these structures with 
that of homologous N-acetyl-l-glutamate and isopentenyl phosphate kinases 
allowed us to propose a model of phosphorylation of fosfomycin by FomA enzyme. A 
Mg cation ligates all three phosphate groups of ATP and together with positively 
charged K216, K9, K18, and H58 participates in the dissipation of negative 
charge during phosphoryl transfer, indicating that the transferred phosphate 
group is highly negatively charged, which would be expected for an associative 
mechanism. K216 polarizes the γ-phosphoryl group of ATP. K9, K18, and H58 
participate in stabilization of the transition state. D150 and D208 play 
organizational roles in catalysis. S148, S149, and T210 participate in 
fosfomycin binding, with T210 being crucial for catalysis. Hence, it appears 
that as in the homologous enzymes, FomA-catalyzed phosphoryl transfer takes 
place by an in-line predominantly associative mechanism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi2004334
PMCID: PMC3153955
PMID: 21728358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]