1. J Proteomics. 2011 Oct 19;74(11):2430-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2011.06.015.
Epub  2011 Jun 25.

Proteomic identification of specifically carbonylated brain proteins in 
APP(NLh)/APP(NLh) × PS-1(P264L)/PS-1(P264L) human double mutant knock-in mice 
model of Alzheimer disease as a function of age.

Sultana R(1), Robinson RA, Di Domenico F, Abdul HM, St Clair DK, Markesbery WR, 
Cai J, Pierce WM, Butterfield DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Center of Membrane Sciences, and Sanders-Brown 
Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common type of dementia and is characterized 
pathologically by the presence of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), senile plaques 
(SPs), and loss of synapses. The main component of SP is amyloid-beta peptide 
(Aβ), a 39 to 43 amino acid peptide, generated by the proteolytic cleavage of 
amyloid precursor protein (APP) by the action of beta- and gamma-secretases. The 
presenilins (PS) are components of the γ-secretase, which contains the protease 
active center. Mutations in PS enhance the production of the Aβ42 peptide. To 
date, more than 160 mutations in PS1 have been identified. Many PS mutations 
increase the production of the β-secretase-mediated C-terminal (CT) 99 amino 
acid-long fragment (CT99), which is subsequently cleaved by γ-secretase to yield 
Aβ peptides. Aβ has been proposed to induce oxidative stress and neurotoxicity. 
Previous studies from our laboratory and others showed an age-dependent increase 
in oxidative stress markers, loss of lipid asymmetry, and Aβ production and 
amyloid deposition in the brain of APP/PS1 mice. In the present study, we used 
APP (NLh)/APP(NLh) × PS-1(P246L)/PS-1(P246L) human double mutant knock-in 
APP/PS-1 mice to identify specific targets of brain protein carbonylation in an 
age-dependent manner. We found a number of proteins that are oxidatively 
modified in APP/PS1 mice compared to age-matched controls. The relevance of the 
identified proteins to the progression and pathogenesis of AD is discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2011.06.015
PMCID: PMC3199338
PMID: 21726674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]