1. Nature. 2011 Jul 3;475(7355):240-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10162.

Architecture of the Mediator head module.

Imasaki T(1), Calero G, Cai G, Tsai KL, Yamada K, Cardelli F, Erdjument-Bromage 
H, Tempst P, Berger I, Kornberg GL, Asturias FJ, Kornberg RD, Takagi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Mediator is a key regulator of eukaryotic transcription, connecting activators 
and repressors bound to regulatory DNA elements with RNA polymerase II (Pol II). 
In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mediator comprises 25 subunits with a 
total mass of more than one megadalton (refs 5, 6) and is organized into three 
modules, called head, middle/arm and tail. Our understanding of Mediator 
assembly and its role in regulating transcription has been impeded so far by 
limited structural information. Here we report the crystal structure of the 
essential Mediator head module (seven subunits, with a mass of 223 kilodaltons) 
at a resolution of 4.3 ångströms. Our structure reveals three distinct domains, 
with the integrity of the complex centred on a bundle of ten helices from five 
different head subunits. An intricate pattern of interactions within this 
helical bundle ensures the stable assembly of the head subunits and provides the 
binding sites for general transcription factors and Pol II. Our structural and 
functional data suggest that the head module juxtaposes transcription factor IIH 
and the carboxy-terminal domain of the largest subunit of Pol II, thereby 
facilitating phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain of Pol II. Our 
results reveal architectural principles underlying the role of Mediator in the 
regulation of gene expression.

©2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1038/nature10162
PMCID: PMC4109712
PMID: 21725323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.