1. Eur Respir J. 2012 Mar;39(3):597-603. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00072911. Epub
2011  Jul 7.

Molecular genetics and clinical features of Chinese idiopathic and heritable 
pulmonary arterial hypertension patients.

Liu D(1), Liu QQ, Eyries M, Wu WH, Yuan P, Zhang R, Soubrier F, Jing ZC.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Cardio-Pulmonary Circulation, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Mutations of the bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor (BMPR2) gene 
predispose to pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). 290 idiopathic (I)PAH 
patients and 15 heritable (H)PAH were screened to determine the spectrum and 
rate of BMPR2 mutations in a large Chinese patient group. Gene sequencing and 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPAÂ®) were used to detect 
sequence mutations and large rearrangements (RGTs). Total mutation rate was 
14.5% (n = 42 out of 290) in Chinese IPAH patients, and 53.3% (n = 8 out of 15) 
in HPAH patients. RGT mutation rate was 3.1% (n = 7 out of 229) and represented 
14% (n = 7 out of 50) of all identified mutations. 25 BMPR2 mutations were newly 
identified. Patients in this study were younger than other reported PAH 
subjects. BMPR2 mutation carriers were ~6 yrs younger at diagnosis than 
noncarriers (p = 0.002), but this relationship was significant only in the 
female group, which was larger. The proportion of females carrying a BMPR2 
mutation was half that of males (12.8% versus 25.3%; p = 0.008). Our results 
indicate that the overall genetics of Chinese PAH patients is similar to that of 
other populations, but the clinical picture differs by the precocity of the 
disease in the whole patient group, and the lower proportion of females found to 
carry a BMPR2 mutation.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.00072911
PMID: 21737554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]