1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2011 Jul 12;6:50. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-50.

Classification, diagnosis and potential mechanisms in pontocerebellar 
hypoplasia.

Namavar Y(1), Barth PG, Poll-The BT, Baas F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH) is group of very rare, inherited progressive 
neurodegenerative disorders with prenatal onset. Up to now seven different 
subtypes have been reported (PCH1-7). The incidence of each subtype is unknown. 
All subtypes share common characteristics, including hypoplasia/atrophy of 
cerebellum and pons, progressive microcephaly, and variable cerebral 
involvement. Patients have severe cognitive and motor handicaps and seizures are 
often reported. Treatment is only symptomatic and prognosis is poor, as most 
patients die during infancy or childhood. The genetic basis of different 
subtypes has been elucidated, which makes prenatal testing possible in families 
with mutations. Mutations in three tRNA splicing endonuclease subunit genes were 
found to be responsible for PCH2, PCH4 and PCH5. Mutations in the nuclear 
encoded mitochondrial arginyl- tRNA synthetase gene underlie PCH6. The tRNA 
splicing endonuclease, the mitochondrial arginyl- tRNA synthetase and the 
vaccinia related kinase1 are mutated in the minority of PCH1 cases. These genes 
are involved in essential processes in protein synthesis in general and tRNA 
processing in particular. In this review we describe the neuroradiological, 
neuropathological, clinical and genetic features of the different PCH subtypes 
and we report on in vitro and in vivo studies on the tRNA splicing endonuclease 
and mitochondrial arginyl-tRNA synthetase and discuss their relation to 
pontocerebellar hypoplasia.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-6-50
PMCID: PMC3159098
PMID: 21749694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]