1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Aug;17(8):1698-713. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21553. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

Impact of disrupting adenosine A₃ receptors (A₃⁻/⁻ AR) on colonic motility or 
progression of colitis in the mouse.

Ren T(1), Grants I, Alhaj M, McKiernan M, Jacobson M, Hassanain HH, Frankel W, 
Wunderlich J, Christofi FL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological studies suggest that adenosine A₃AR influences 
motility and colitis. Functional A₃⁻/⁻AR knockout mice were used to prove 
whether A₃AR activation is involved in modulating either motility or colitis.
METHODS: A₃AR was probed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) genotyping, Western 
blot, and immunochemistry. Motility was assessed in vivo by artificial 
bead-expulsion, stool-frequency, and FITC-dextran transit. Colitis was induced 
with dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) in A₃⁻/⁻AR or wildtype (WT) age- and 
sex-matched controls. Progression of colitis was evaluated by histopathology, 
changes in myeloperoxidase (MPO), colon length, CD4(+) -cells, weight-loss, 
diarrhea, and the guaiac test.
RESULTS: Goat anti-hu-A₃ antiserum identified a 66 kDa immunogenic band in 
colon. A₃AR-immunoreactivity is expressed in SYN(+) -nerve varicosities, 
s-100(+) -glia, and crypt cells, but not 5-HT(+) (EC), CD4(+) (T), tryptase(+) 
(MC), or muscle cells. A₃AR immunoreactivity in myenteric ganglia of distal 
colon >> proximal colon by a ratio of 2:1. Intestinal transit and bead expulsion 
were accelerated in A₃⁻/⁻AR mice compared to WT; stool retention was lower by 
40%-60% and stool frequency by 67%. DSS downregulated A₃AR in epithelia. DSS 
histopathology scores indicated less mucosal damage in AA₃⁻/⁻AR mice than WT. 
A₃⁻/⁻AR phenotype protected against DSS-induced weight loss, neutrophil (MPO), 
or CD4(+) -T cell infiltration, colon shortening, change in splenic weight, 
diarrhea, or occult-fecal blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Functional disruption of A₃AR in A₃⁻/⁻AR mice alters intestinal 
motility. We postulate that ongoing release of adenosine and activation of 
presynaptic-inhibitory A₃AR can slow down transit and inhibit the defecation 
reflex. A₃AR may be involved in gliotransmission. In separate studies, A₃⁻/⁻AR 
protects against DSS colitis, consistent with a novel hypothesis that A₃AR 
activation contributes to development of colitis.

Copyright © 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ibd.21553
PMCID: PMC3116114
PMID: 21744424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]