1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Aug;155A(8):1906-16. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34100. Epub
2011  Jul 8.

Deletions and duplications of developmental pathway genes in 5q31 contribute to 
abnormal phenotypes.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Drautz JM, Clericuzio CL, Cushing T, Raskin S, Martin J, Tervo 
RC, Pitarque JA, Nowak DM, Karolak JA, Lamb AN, Schultz RA, Ballif BC, Bejjani 
BA, Gajecka M, Shaffer LG.

Author information:
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, Washington, USA.

Although copy number changes of 5q31 have been rarely reported, deletions have 
been associated with some common characteristics, such as short stature, failure 
to thrive, developmental delay (DD)/intellectual disability (ID), club feet, 
dislocated hips, and dysmorphic features. We report on three individuals with 
deletions and two individuals with duplications at 5q31, ranging from 3.6 Mb to 
8.1 Mb and 830 kb to 3.4 Mb in size, respectively. All five copy number changes 
are apparently de novo and involve several genes that are important in 
developmental pathways, including PITX1, SMAD5, and WNT8A. The individuals with 
deletions have characteristic features including DD, short stature, club feet, 
cleft or high palate, dysmorphic features, and skeletal anomalies. 
Haploinsufficiency of PITX1, a transcription factor important for limb 
development, is likely the cause for the club feet, skeletal anomalies, and 
cleft/high palate, while additional genes, including SMAD5 and WNT8A, may also 
contribute to additional phenotypic features. Two patients with deletions also 
presented with corneal anomalies. To identify a causative gene for the corneal 
anomalies, we sequenced candidate genes in a family with apparent autosomal 
dominant keratoconus with suggestive linkage to 5q31, but no mutations in 
candidate genes were found. The duplications are smaller than the deletions, and 
the patients with duplications have nonspecific features. Although development 
is likely affected by increased dosage of the genes in the region, the 
developmental disruption appears less severe than that seen with deletion.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34100
PMID: 21744490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]