1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Oct 15;82(8):984-95. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.06.026. 
Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Recent advances in understanding nicotinic receptor signaling mechanisms that 
regulate drug self-administration behavior.

Tuesta LM(1), Fowler CD, Kenny PJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Behavioral and Molecular Neuroscience, Department of Molecular 
Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute - Scripps Florida, Jupiter, FL 
33458, USA.

Tobacco smoking is one of the leading causes of disease and premature death in 
the United States. Nicotine is considered the major reinforcing component in 
tobacco smoke responsible for tobacco addiction. Nicotine acts in the brain 
through the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). The predominant 
nAChR subtypes in mammalian brain are those containing α4 and β2 subunits. The 
α4β2 nAChRs, particularly those located in the mesoaccumbens dopamine pathway, 
play a key role in regulating the reinforcing properties of nicotine. 
Considering that twelve mammalian nAChR subunits have been cloned, it is likely 
that nAChRs containing subunits in addition to, or other than, α4 and β2 also 
play a role in the tobacco smoking habit. Consistent with this possibility, 
human genome-wide association studies have shown that genetic variation in the 
CHRNA5-CHRNA3-CHRNB4 gene cluster located in chromosome region 15q25, which 
encode the α5, α3 and β4 nAChR subunits, respectively, increases vulnerability 
to tobacco addiction and smoking-related diseases. Most recently, α5-containing 
nAChRs located in the habenulo-interpeduncular tract were shown to limit 
intravenous nicotine self-administration behavior in rats and mice, suggesting 
that deficits in α5-containing nAChR signaling in the habenulo-interpeduncular 
tract increases vulnerability to the motivational properties of nicotine. 
Finally, evidence suggests that nAChRs may also play a prominent role in 
controlling consumption of addictive drugs other than nicotine, including 
cocaine, alcohol, opiates and cannabinoids. The aim of the present review is to 
discuss recent preclinical findings concerning the identity of the nAChR 
subtypes that regulate self-administration of nicotine and other drugs of abuse.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.06.026
PMCID: PMC3163076
PMID: 21740894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]