1. Indian J Hum Genet. 2011 May;17 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S32-40. doi: 
10.4103/0971-6866.80357.

Pharmacogenomic association study on the role of drug metabolizing, drug 
transporters and drug target gene polymorphisms in drug-resistant epilepsy in a 
north Indian population.

Kumari R(1), Lakhan R, Garg RK, Kalita J, Misra UK, Mittal B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: In epilepsy, in spite of the best possible medications and treatment 
protocols, approximately one-third of the patients do not respond adequately to 
anti-epileptic drugs. Such interindividual variations in drug response are 
believed to result from genetic variations in candidate genes belonging to 
multiple pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present pharmacogenetic analysis, a total of 402 
epilepsy patients were enrolled. Of them, 128 were diagnosed as multiple 
drug-resistant epilepsy and 274 patients were diagnosed as having 
drug-responsive epilepsy. We selected a total of 10 candidate gene polymorphisms 
belonging to three major classes, namely drug transporters, drug metabolizers 
and drug targets. These genetic polymorphism included CYP2C9 c.430C>T (*2 
variant), CYP2C9 c.1075 A>C (*3 variant), ABCB1 c.3435C>T, ABCB1c.1236C>T, 
ABCB1c.2677G>T/A, SCN1A c.3184 A> G, SCN2A c.56G>A (p.R19K), GABRA1c.IVS11 + 15 
A>G and GABRG2 c.588C>T. Genotyping was performed using polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) methods, and each 
genotype was confirmed via direct DNA sequencing. The relationship between 
various genetic polymorphisms and responsiveness was examined using binary 
logistic regression by SPSS statistical analysis software.
RESULTS: CYP2C9 c.1075 A>C polymorphism showed a marginal significant difference 
between drug resistance and drug-responsive patients for the AC genotype (Odds 
ratio [OR] = 0.57, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.32-1.00; P = 0.05). In drug 
transporter, ABCB1c.2677G>T/A polymorphism, allele A was associated with 
drug-resistant phenotype in epilepsy patients (P = 0.03, OR = 0.31, 95% CI = 
0.10-0.93). Similarly, the variant allele frequency of SCN2A c.56 G>A single 
nucleotide polymorphism was significantly higher in drug-resistant patients (P = 
0.03; OR = 1.62, 95% CI = 1.03, 2.56). We also observed a significant difference 
at the genotype as well as allele frequencies of GABRA1c.IVS11 + 15 A > G 
polymorphism in drug-resistant patients for homozygous GG genotype (P = 0.03, OR 
= 1.84, 95% CI = 1.05-3.23) and G allele (P = 0.02, OR = 1.43, 95% CI = 
1.05-1.95).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that pharmacogenetic variants have important 
roles in epilepsy at different levels. It may be noted that multi-factorial 
diseases like epilepsy are also regulated by various other factors that may also 
be considered in the future.

DOI: 10.4103/0971-6866.80357
PMCID: PMC3125053
PMID: 21747585

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.