1. Biochem J. 2011 Nov 1;439(3):381-90. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110284.

Docking interactions of the JNK scaffold protein WDR62.

Cohen-Katsenelson K(1), Wasserman T, Khateb S, Whitmarsh AJ, Aronheim A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Rappaport Family Institute for Research 
in the Medical Sciences, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Bat-Galim, 
Haifa, Israel.

JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase) is part of a MAPK (mitogen-activated protein 
kinase) signalling cascade. Scaffold proteins simultaneously associate with 
various components of the MAPK signalling pathway and play a crucial role in 
signal transmission and MAPK regulation. WDR62 (WD repeat domain 62) is a JNK 
scaffold protein. Recessive mutations within WDR62 result in severe cerebral 
cortical malformation. In the present study we demonstrate the association of 
WDR62 with endogenous and overexpressed proteins of both JNK2 and the 
JNK2-activating kinase MKK7 (MAPK kinase 7). Association of WDR62 with JNK2 and 
MKK7 occurs via direct protein-protein interactions. We mapped the docking 
domain of WDR62 responsible for the association with JNK. WDR62 interacts with 
all JNK isoforms through a D domain motif located at the C-terminus. A WDR62 
mutant lacking the putative JNK-binding domain fails to activate and recruit JNK 
to cellular granules. Furthermore, a synthetic peptide composed of the WDR62 
docking domain inhibits JNK2 activity in vitro. WDR62 association with JNK2 
requires both the JNK CD and ED domains, and the binding requisite is distinct 
from that of the previously described JNK2 association with JIP1 
(JNK-interacting protein 1). Next, we characterized the association between 
WDR62 and MKK7. WDR62 associates directly with the MKK7β1 isoform independently 
of JNK binding, but fails to interact with MKK7α1. Furthermore, MKK7β1 recruits 
a protein phosphatase that dephosphorylates WDR62. Interestingly, a premature 
termination mutation in WDR62 that results in severe brain developmental defects 
does not abrogate WDR62 association with either JNK or MKK7. Therefore such 
mutations represent a loss of WDR62 function independent of JNK signalling.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20110284
PMCID: PMC3462610
PMID: 21749326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]