1. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Sep-Oct;104(1-2):149-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.06.015.  Epub 2011 Jun 24.

β-Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations in two cohorts of Greek patients with 
sporadic Parkinson's disease.

Moraitou M(1), Hadjigeorgiou G, Monopolis I, Dardiotis E, Bozi M, Vassilatis D, 
Vilageliu L, Grinberg D, Xiromerisiou G, Stefanis L, Michelakakis H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Enzymology and Cellular Function, Institute of Child Health, 
Athens, Greece.

An increasing number of clinical, neuropathological and experimental evidence 
linking Gaucher disease and a spectrum of synucleinopathies, including 
Parkinson's disease (PD) has emerged over the last decade. In particular, 
several studies, despite individual differences, have shown that mutations in 
the β-glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are a risk factor for PD. Recently a study 
from Northern Greece has shown a significant overrepresentation of such 
mutations only in patients with early onset PD. In the present study 8 different 
GBA mutations covering 87% of the mutations identified in Gaucher disease 
patients diagnosed in Greece were investigated in two ethnic Greek cohorts of 
patients with sporadic Parkinson's disease. Cohort A included patients residing 
and originating from Thessaly, Central Greece (n=100) and cohort B included 
patients residing and/or originating from the greater area of Athens (n=105). 
Age-gender-ethnicity matched healthy individuals from the same areas were 
included as controls (n=206). In patients of cohort A 11 carriers of GBA 
mutations were identified (5/11:N370S, 2/11:L444P, 2/11: D409H;H255Q, 
1/11:H255Q, 1/11D409H) as opposed to 3 in the controls (n=105) (1/3:N370S, 
1/3:H255Q, 1/3:Y108C) (p=0.021, OR 4.2, 95% CI=1.14-15.54). In patients of 
cohort B 10 carriers of GBA mutations were identified (4/10:L444P, 
4/10:D409H;H255Q, 1/10:N370S, 1/10:IVS10-1G→A) as opposed to 4 in controls 
(n=101) (3/4:N370S, 1/4:L444P). However the difference was not statistically 
significant (p=0.113, OR 2.5, 95% CI=0.77-8.42). In both cohorts, patients with 
PD harboring a GBA mutation had an earlier onset of symptoms than non-carriers 
(p=0.034, p=0.004). The overall difference in the number of carriers identified 
in PD patients and controls was statistically significant (p=0.006; OR 3.24; 95% 
CI=1.35-7.81). The association was reinforced in the early onset PD patients 
(EOPD; n=28, p=0.000, OR 11.37; 95% CI=3.73-34.6). In conclusion GBA mutations 
were identified with increased frequency in both geographical cohorts of 
patients with sporadic PD studied compared to control individuals, with the 
difference being statistically significant only in cohort A. An impressive 
association with EOPD was found and one third of the EOPD patients examined 
harbored a GBA mutation. Qualitative differences regarding the type of mutations 
and/or their relative frequencies were observed between cohorts A and B of PD 
patients. Genetic and/or environmental factors may account for the observed 
differences.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.06.015
PMID: 21745757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]