1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;96(9):E1361-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2453. 
Epub 2011 Jul 13.

FOXO3 is inhibited by oncogenic PI3K/Akt signaling but can be reactivated by the 
NSAID sulindac sulfide.

Weidinger C(1), Krause K, Mueller K, Klagge A, Fuhrer D.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital Essen, 
Hufelandstr 55, D-45147 Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Overactivation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt 
pathway has emerged as a pivotal trigger of thyroid carcinogenesis. Recent 
findings from other tumor entities revealed that PI3K/Akt-driven carcinogenesis 
critically involves the inactivation of the tumor-suppressive transcription 
factor Forkhead box O (FOXO)-3. However, little is known about FOXO3 in the 
thyroid context.
AIMS: We sought to investigate the influence of the thyroid oncogenes BRAFV600E, 
H-RASV12, and p110α (H1074R) on the regulation of the PI3K downstream target 
FOXO3 in vitro. Furthermore, the impact of the expression of phosphatase and 
tensin homolog deleted from chromosome 10 (PTEN) on the transcriptional activity 
of FOXO3 was assessed in a panel of 44 human thyroid tumors. Finally, we tried 
to modulate FOXO3 activity pharmacologically with help of the nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drug sulindac sulfide (SS).
RESULTS: We found that the overexpression of p110α H1074R results in the 
inactivation of FOXO3 via its nuclear exclusion. In vivo, we observed a direct 
correlation between PTEN expression and the transcriptional activation of FOXO3. 
In vitro, we found that stimulation with SS reversed PI3K/Akt-driven 
inactivation of FOXO3, resulting in its nuclear relocation and a combined 
induction of the antiproliferative FOXO target genes Gadd45α and p27(kip1) and 
the proapoptotic FOXO target gene Bim in benign (FRTL-5) and malignant human 
thyrocytes (FTC-133). In agreement with this, SS promoted the cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis in thyroid cells, which could be amplified by the transfection of 
exogenous FOXO3.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that deregulation of proapoptotic FOXO3 represents 
a central step in PI3K/Akt-mediated thyroid carcinogenesis. Thus, SS might 
represent an attractive pharmacological tool for targeting thyroid neoplasia 
with aberrant PI3K/Akt/FOXO3 signaling.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2010-2453
PMID: 21752881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]