1. Antiviral Res. 2011 Oct;92(1):81-9. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.07.004. Epub
 2011 Jul 13.

Oseltamivir-resistant pandemic A(H1N1) 2009 influenza viruses detected through 
enhanced surveillance in the Netherlands, 2009-2010.

Meijer A(1), Jonges M, Abbink F, Ang W, van Beek J, Beersma M, Bloembergen P, 
Boucher C, Claas E, Donker G, van Gageldonk-Lafeber R, Isken L, de Jong A, Kroes 
A, Leenders S, van der Lubben M, Mascini E, Niesters B, Oosterheert JJ, 
Osterhaus A, Riesmeijer R, Riezebos-Brilman A, Schutten M, Sebens F, Stelma F, 
Swaan C, Timen A, van 't Veen A, van der Vries E, te Wierik M, Koopmans M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public Health 
and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. adam.meijer@rivm.nl

Enhanced surveillance of infections due to the pandemic A(H1N1) influenza virus, 
which included monitoring for antiviral resistance, was carried out in the 
Netherlands from late April 2009 through late May 2010. More than 1100 instances 
of infection with the pandemic A(H1N1) influenza virus from 2009 and 2010 
[A(H1N1) 2009] distributed across this period were analyzed. Of these, 19 cases 
of oseltamivir-resistant virus harboring the H275Y mutation in the neuraminidase 
(NA) were detected. The mean 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) levels for 
oseltamivir- and zanamivir-susceptible A(H1N1) 2009 viruses were 1.4-fold and 
2-fold, respectively, lower than for the seasonal A(H1N1) influenza viruses from 
2007/2008; for oseltamivir-resistant A(H1N1) 2009 virus the IC50 was 2.9-fold 
lower. Eighteen of the 19 patients with oseltamivir-resistant virus showed 
prolonged shedding of the virus and developed resistance while on oseltamivir 
therapy. Sixteen of these 18 patients had an immunodeficiency, of whom 11 had a 
hematologic disorder. The two other patients had another underlying disease. Six 
of the patients who had an underlying disease died; of these, five had received 
cytostatic or immunosuppressive therapy. No indications for onward transmission 
of resistant viruses were found. This study showed that the main association for 
the emergence of cases of oseltamivir-resistant A(H1N1) 2009 virus was receiving 
antiviral therapy and having drug-induced immunosuppression or an hematologic 
disorder. Except for a single case of a resistant virus not linked to 
oseltamivir therapy, the absence of detection of resistant variants in community 
specimens and in specimens from contacts of cases with resistant virus suggested 
that the spread of resistant A(H1N1) 2009 virus was limited. Containment may 
have been the cumulative result of impaired NA function, successful isolation of 
the patients, and prophylactic measures to limit exposure.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.07.004
PMID: 21767571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]