1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 9;286(36):31241-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.256024. Epub
2011  Jul 18.

Trafficking of alpha4* nicotinic receptors revealed by superecliptic phluorin: 
effects of a beta4 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated mutation and chronic 
exposure to nicotine.

Richards CI(1), Srinivasan R, Xiao C, Mackey ED, Miwa JM, Lester HA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 
91125, USA.

We employed a pH-sensitive GFP analog, superecliptic phluorin, to observe 
aspects of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) trafficking to the plasma 
membrane (PM) in cultured mouse cortical neurons. The experiments exploit 
differences in the pH among endoplasmic reticulum (ER), trafficking vesicles, 
and the extracellular solution. The data confirm that few α4β4 nAChRs, but many 
α4β2 nAChRs, remain in neutral intracellular compartments, mostly the ER. We 
observed fusion events between nAChR-containing vesicles and PM; these could be 
quantified in the dendritic processes. We also studied the β4R348C polymorphism, 
linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This mutation depressed fusion 
rates of α4β4 receptor-containing vesicles with the PM by ∼2-fold, with only a 
small decrease in the number of nAChRs per vesicle. The mutation also decreased 
the number of ER exit sites, showing that the reduced receptor insertion results 
from a change at an early stage in trafficking. We confirm the previous report 
that the mutation leads to reduced agonist-induced currents; in the cortical 
neurons studied, the reduction amounts to 2-3-fold. Therefore, the reduced 
agonist-induced currents are caused by the reduced number of α4β4-containing 
vesicles reaching the membrane. Chronic nicotine exposure (0.2 μM) did not alter 
the PM insertion frequency or trafficking behavior of α4β4-laden vesicles. In 
contrast, chronic nicotine substantially increased the number of α4β2-containing 
vesicle fusions at the PM; this stage in α4β2 nAChR up-regulation is presumably 
downstream from increased ER exit. Superecliptic phluorin provides a tool to 
monitor trafficking dynamics of nAChRs in disease and addiction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.256024
PMCID: PMC3173132
PMID: 21768117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]