1. Exp Brain Res. 2011 Sep;213(4):415-22. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2791-z. Epub
2011  Jul 17.

Intense training overcomes effects of the Val66Met BDNF polymorphism on 
short-term plasticity.

McHughen SA(1), Pearson-Fuhrhop K, Ngo VK, Cramer SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California-Irvine 
Medical Center, 101 The City Drive South, Orange, CA 92868-4280, USA.

The val(66)met polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene 
impacts activity-dependent secretion of BDNF and modifies short-term cortical 
plasticity. The current study examined whether sustained training overcomes 
polymorphism effects on short-term plasticity and also examined polymorphism 
effects on long-term plasticity. Twenty-four subjects completed a 12-day 
protocol of daily training on a marble navigation task that required intense use 
of the first dorsal interosseus (FDI) muscle. In parallel, transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) mapping was used to assess serial measures of short-term 
cortical motor map plasticity, plus long-term cortical motor map plasticity, of 
the cortical FDI map. On Day 1, subjects with the polymorphism did not show 
significant short-term cortical motor map plasticity over 30 min of FDI 
activity, but subjects without the polymorphism did. After 5 days of intense 
training, a genotype-based difference in short-term cortical motor map 
plasticity was no longer found, as both groups showed short-term plasticity 
across the 30 min of FDI activity. Also, across 12 days of training, map area 
decreased significantly, in a manner that did not vary in relation to genotype. 
Training of sufficient intensity and duration overcomes effects that the 
val(66)met polymorphism has on short-term cortical motor map plasticity. The 
polymorphism-related differences seen with short-term plasticity are not found 
with long-term cortical motor map plasticity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-011-2791-z
PMID: 21769545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]