1. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;75(5):569-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2011.00663.x. 
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Mitochondria-wide association study of common variants in osteoporosis.

Guo Y(1), Yang TL, Liu YZ, Shen H, Lei SF, Yu N, Chen J, Xu T, Cheng Y, Tian Q, 
Yu P, Deng HW.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, Institute of Molecular Genetics, School of Life Science and 
Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, PR China.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants are involved in the pathogenesis of human 
complex diseases, especially for age-related disorders, including osteoporosis. 
However, the role of mtDNA variants in osteoporosis is largely unknown. In this 
study, we performed a mitochondria-wide association study for osteoporosis in a 
large sample of 2286 unrelated Caucasian subjects. A total of 445 mtSNPs were 
genotyped and 72 mtSNPs survived the quality control. We first examined 
association between mtSNPs and bone mineral density (BMD), and identified that 
an mtSNP, mt4823 within the ND2 gene, was strongly associated with hip BMD (P= 
2.05 × 10(-4)), even after Bonferroni correction. The C allele of mt4823 was 
associated with reduced hip BMD and the effect size (β) was ∼0.044. Another SNP 
mt15885 within the MT-CYB gene was associated both with spine (P= 1.66 × 10(-3)) 
and hip BMD (P= 0.023). The T allele of mt15885 had a protective effect on spine 
(β= 0.064) and hip BMD (β= 0.038). Next, we classified subjects into the nine 
common European haplogroups and conducted association analyses. Subjects 
classified as haplogroup X had significantly lower hip BMD values than others 
(P= 0.040). Our results highlighted the importance of mtDNA variants in 
osteoporosis.

© 2011 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2011 Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2011.00663.x
PMCID: PMC3155639
PMID: 21762117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All the authors declare 
that they have no conflicts of interest.