1. Cardiol J. 2011;18(4):352-63.

Novel therapeutic targets for preserving a healthy endothelium: strategies for 
reducing the risk of vascular and cardiovascular disease.

Ramli J(1), CalderonArtero P, Block RC, Mousa SA.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Albany College of Pharmacy and Health 
Sciences, One Discovery Drive, Rensselaer, NY 12144, USA.

The endothelium lies in a strategic anatomical position between the circulating 
blood and the vascular smooth-muscle cells. It is a source of vasodilators such 
as nitric oxide, prostacyclin, and hyperpolarizing factor as well as 
heparin-like substances and other molecules with antiproliferative properties. 
These effects of endothelial cells may explain why platelets and monocytes 
usually do not adhere at the blood vessel wall. However, under pathological 
conditions, endothelial dysfunction occurs and significantly contributes to the 
increase of platelet- -vessel wall interaction, vasoconstriction, 
pro-inflammation, and proliferation. Under these conditions, 
endothelium-dependent vasodilation is reduced, and endothelium-dependent 
constrictor responses are augmented. Upon vessel wall injury, the platelets 
rapidly adhere to the exposed sub-endothelial matrix, which is mediated by 
several cellular receptors present on platelets or endothelial cells and various 
adhesive proteins. Subsequent platelet activation results in the recruitment of 
additional platelets and the generation of platelet aggregates, so forming a 
stable platelet plug. Therapeutic strategies aimed at improving or preserving 
endothelial function therefore may be promising in terms of preventing and 
treating coronary artery disease. Diagnostic modalities for assessing 
endothelial function should allow for the early detection of vascular 
endothelial dysfunction before the manifestation of serious adverse vascular 
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3342824
PMID: 21769815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]