1. J Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;56(9):631-9. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.72. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Autosomal recessive deafness 1A (DFNB1A) in Yakut population isolate in Eastern 
Siberia: extensive accumulation of the splice site mutation IVS1+1G>A in GJB2 
gene as a result of founder effect.

Barashkov NA(1), Dzhemileva LU, Fedorova SA, Teryutin FM, Posukh OL, Fedotova 
EE, Lobov SL, Khusnutdinova EK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical 
Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, 
Russian Federation. barashkov2004@mail.ru

Hereditary forms of hearing impairment (HI) caused by GJB2 (Cx26) mutations are 
the frequent sensory disorders registered among newborns in various human 
populations. In this study, we present data on the molecular, audiological and 
population features of autosomal recessive deafness 1A (DFNB1A) associated with 
the donor splicing site IVS1+1G>A mutation of GJB2 gene in Yakut population 
isolate of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) located in Eastern Siberia (Russian 
Federation). The Yakut population exhibits high frequency of some Mendelian 
disorders, which are rare in other populations worldwide. Mutational analysis of 
GJB2 gene in 86 unrelated Yakut patients with congenital HI without other 
clinical features has been performed. In this study, we registered a large 
cohort of Yakut patients homozygous for the IVS1+1G>A mutation (70 unrelated 
deaf subjects in total). Detailed audiological analysis of 40 deaf subjects with 
genotype IVS1+1G>A/IVS1+1G>A revealed significant association of this genotype 
with mostly symmetrical bilateral severe to profound HI (85% severe-to-profound 
HI versus 15% mild-to-moderate HI, P<0.05). The highest among six investigated 
Eastern Siberian populations carrier frequency of the IVS1+1G>A mutation (11.7%) 
has been found in Yakut population. Reconstruction of 140 haplotypes with 
IVS1+1G>A mutation demonstrates the common origin of all mutant chromosomes 
found in Yakuts. The age of mutation was estimated to be approximately 800 
years. These findings characterize Eastern Siberia as the region with the most 
extensive accumulation of the IVS1+1G>A mutation in the world as a result of 
founder effect.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2011.72
PMID: 21776002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]