1. Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 15;71(18):5965-75. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0445.
Epub  2011 Jul 20.

Using tandem mass spectrometry in targeted mode to identify activators of class 
IA PI3K in cancer.

Yang X(1), Turke AB, Qi J, Song Y, Rexer BN, Miller TW, JÃ¤nne PA, Arteaga CL, 
Cantley LC, Engelman JA, Asara JM.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Division of Signal Transduction, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Phosphatiditylinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) is activated in some cancers by direct 
mutation, but it is activated more commonly in cancer by mutation of upstream 
acting receptor tyrosine kinases (TK). At present, there is no systematic method 
to determine which TK signaling cascades activate PI3K in certain cancers, 
despite the likely utility of such information to help guide selection of 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) drug strategies for personalized therapy. Here, 
we present a quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
approach that identifies upstream activators of PI3K both in vitro and in vivo. 
Using non-small cell lung carcinoma to illustrate this approach, we show a 
correct identification of the mechanism of PI3K activation in several models, 
thereby identifying the most appropriate TKI to downregulate PI3K signaling. 
This approach also determined the molecular mechanisms and adaptors required for 
PI3K activation following inhibition of the mTOR kinase TORC1. We further 
validated the approach in breast cancer cells with mutational activation of 
PIK3CA, where tandem mass spectrometry detected and quantitatively measured the 
abundance of a helical domain mutant (E545K) of PIK3CA connected to PI3K 
activation. Overall, our findings establish a mass spectrometric approach to 
identify functional interactions that govern PI3K regulation in cancer cells. 
Using this technique to define the pathways that activate PI3K signaling in a 
given tumor could help inform clinical decision making by helping guide 
personalized therapeutic strategies for different patients.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0445
PMCID: PMC3209668
PMID: 21775521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]