1. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;34(6):424-8.

[Superoxide dismutase gene polymorphisms and functional activity in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo F(1), Kuang JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang 330006, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the association of genetic polymorphism of superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) and superoxide dismutase activity in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.
METHODS: A total of 114 patients with COPD (the COPD group) and 80 healthy 
volunteers (the control group) were enrolled in this study. Peripheral blood was 
taken and whole blood cell genomic DNA was extracted. The genetic polymorphisms 
of Mn-SOD (G5774A) and EC-SOD G (-4466)T genes were determined by DNA sequencing 
and polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP). Peripheral blood plasma was collected and the functional activity of 
SOD was determined by a SOD kit.
RESULTS: The distribution of the Mn-SOD genotype frequencies (GG, AG, AA) 
between the patients [27.2% (31/114), 53.5% (61/114) and 19.3% (22/114)] and the 
controls [46.3% (37/80), 37.5% (30/80) and 16.2% (13/80)] were significantly 
different (χ(2) = 7.681, P < 0.05). The A allele gene frequencies of the 
patients (46.1%, 105/228) were significant higher than those of the controls 
(35.0%, 56/160), and subjects with the A allele gene of Mn-SOD were more likely 
to have COPD [OR = 1.585, 95%CI (1.045 - 2.404), P < 0.05]. The AA and AG 
genotypes of Mn-SOD were correlated with the most severe COPD (χ(2) = 12.345, P 
< 0.01). The distribution of the EC-SOD genotype frequencies (GG, GT, TT) was 
76.3% (87/114), 22.8% (26/114), 0.9% (1/114) in the patients and 71.3% (57/80), 
28.7% (23/80), 0% (0/80) in the controls. The allele gene frequencies of the 
EC-SOD (G, T) were 87.7% (200/228), 12.3% (28/228) in the patients and 85.6% 
(137/160), 14.4% (23/160) in the controls. There were no significant differences 
in the distribution of the different genotypes or allele gene frequencies 
between the patients and the controls in the EC-SOD genes (χ(2) = 0.631, P > 
0.05; χ(2) = 0.36, P > 0.05). The SOD activity of COPD patients [(84 ± 17) kU/L] 
was significant lower than that of the healthy controls [(109 ± 15) kU/L].
CONCLUSIONS: Mn-SOD (G5774A) genetic polymorphism is related to the development 
of COPD. The Mn-SOD 5774A allele gene may be one of the predisposing genes for 
COPD. The AA and AG genotypes of Mn-SOD were correlated with the most severy 
COPD. The decrease of blood plasma SOD activity in COPD patients indicates a 
dysfunction of the oxidant/antioxidant defense system in the disease.

PMID: 21781513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]