1. Biophys Chem. 2011 Nov;159(1):210-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2011.06.015. Epub 2011
 Jul 3.

Modulation of allosteric behavior through adjustment of the differential 
stability of the two interacting domains in E. coli cAMP receptor protein.

Li J(1), Lee JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas 
Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas 77555–1055, USA.

The communication mechanism(s) responsible for the allosteric behavior of E.coli 
cAMP binding receptor protein, CRP, is still a subject of intense investigation. 
As a tool to explore the communication mechanism, the mutations at various 
positions in the cAMP-binding (K52N, D53H, S62F and T127L) or the DNA- binding 
(H159L) domain or both (K52N/H159L) were generated. The sites and specific 
nature of side chain substitutions were defined by earlier genetic studies, the 
results of which show that these mutants have a similar phenotype i.e. they are 
activated without exogenous cAMP. Presently, no significant changes in the 
structures of WT and mutant CRPs have been observed. Hence, the pressing issue 
is to identify a physical parameter that reflects the effects of mutations. In 
this study, the stability of these various CRP species in the presence of GuHCl 
was monitored by three spectroscopic techniques, namely, CD, tryptophan 
fluorescence and FT-IR which could provide data on the stability of α-helices 
and β-strands separately. Results of this study led to the following 
conclusions: 1. The α-helices can be grouped into two families with different 
stabilities. Mutations exert a differential effect on the stability of helices 
as demonstrated by a biphasic unfolding curve for the helices. 2. Regardless of 
the locations of mutations, the effects can be communicated to the other domain 
resulting in a perturbation of the stability of both domains, although the 
effects are more significantly expressed in the stability of the helices. 3. 
Although in an earlier study [Gekko, et al. Biochemistry 43 (2004) 3844] we 
showed that cooperativity of cAMP binding is generally correlated to the global 
dynamics of the protein and DNA binding affinity, in this study we found that 
generally there is no clear correlation between functional energetics and 
stability of secondary structures. Thus, results of this study imply that 
modulation of allostery in CRP is entropic in nature.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpc.2011.06.015
PMCID: PMC3166978
PMID: 21782316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]