1. J Endocrinol. 2011 Oct;211(1):79-85. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0260. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

The influence of the BRAF V600E mutation in thyroid cancer cell lines on the 
anticancer effects of 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-ribonucleoside.

Choi HJ(1), Kim TY, Chung N, Yim JH, Kim WG, Kim JA, Kim WB, Shong YK.

Author information:
(1)Asan Institute for Life Science, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Asan Medical Center, 86 Asanbyeongwon-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Republic of 
Korea.

5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-ribonucleoside (AICAR) is an activator of 
5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which plays a role in the maintenance of 
cellular energy homeostasis. Activated AMPK inhibits the protein kinase 
mechanistic target of rapamycin, thereby reducing the extent of protein 
translation and suppressing both cell growth and cell cycle entry. Recent 
reports indicate that AMPK-mediated growth inhibition is achieved via an action 
of the RAF-MEK-ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in melanoma cells 
harboring the V600E mutant form of the BRAF oncogene. In this study, we 
investigated the anti-cancer efficacy of AICAR by measuring its effects on 
proliferation, apoptosis, and cell cycle progression of BRAF wild-type and 
V600E-mutant thyroid cancer cell lines. We also explored the mechanism 
underlying these effects. AICAR inhibited the proliferation of BRAF V600E-mutant 
thyroid cancer cell lines more strongly than was the case with wild-type cell 
lines. The suppressive effect of AICAR on cell proliferation was associated with 
increased S-phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Interestingly, AICAR 
suppressed phosphorylation of ERK and p70S6K in BRAF V600E-mutant thyroid cancer 
cells, but rather increased phosphorylation in wild-type cells. Together, the 
results indicate that AICAR-induced AMPK activation in BRAF V600E-mutant thyroid 
cancer cell lines resulted in increases in apoptosis and S-phase arrest via 
downregulation of ERK and p70S6K activity. Thus, regulation of AMPK activity may 
be potentially useful as a therapy for thyroid cancer if the cancer harbors a 
BRAF V600E mutation.

DOI: 10.1530/JOE-11-0260
PMID: 21795305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]