1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;27(1):211-23. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110209.

Coenzyme Q10 decreases amyloid pathology and improves behavior in a transgenic 
mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Dumont M(1), Kipiani K, Yu F, Wille E, Katz M, Calingasan NY, Gouras GK, Lin MT, 
Beal MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.

Increased oxidative stress is implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). A large body of evidence suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction 
and increased reactive oxygen species occur prior to amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition. 
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a component of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, 
is well characterized as a neuroprotective antioxidant in animal models and 
human trials of Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease, and reduces plaque 
burden in AβPP/PS1 mice. We now show that CoQ10 reduces oxidative stress and 
amyloid pathology and improves behavioral performance in the Tg19959 mouse model 
of AD. CoQ10 treatment decreased brain levels of protein carbonyls, a marker of 
oxidative stress. CoQ10 treatment resulted in decreased plaque area and number 
in hippocampus and in overlying cortex immunostained with an Aβ42-specific 
antibody. Brain Aβ42 levels were also decreased by CoQ10 supplementation. Levels 
of amyloid-β protein precursor (AβPP) β-carboxyterminal fragments were 
decreased. Importantly, CoQ10-treated mice showed improved cognitive performance 
during Morris water maze testing. Our results show decreased pathology and 
improved behavior in transgenic AD mice treated with the naturally occurring 
antioxidant compound CoQ10. CoQ10 is well tolerated in humans and may be 
promising for therapeutic trials in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110209
PMCID: PMC3267988
PMID: 21799249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]