1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Dec;130(3):1021-8. doi:
10.1007/s10549-011-1681-1.  Epub 2011 Jul 31.

Mutation analysis of the SLX4/FANCP gene in hereditary breast cancer.

Landwehr R(1), Bogdanova NV, Antonenkova N, Meyer A, Bremer M, Park-Simon TW, 
Hillemanns P, Karstens JH, Schindler D, DÃ¶rk T.

Author information:
(1)Clinics of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg 
Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

SLX4 coordinates three structure-specific endonucleases in the DNA damage 
response. One subtype of Fanconi anaemia, FA-P, has recently been attributed to 
biallelic SLX4 gene mutations. To investigate whether monoallelic SLX4 gene 
defects play some role in the inherited component of breast cancer 
susceptibility, in this study we resequenced the whole SLX4 coding region and 
flanking untranslated sections in genomic DNA samples obtained from a total of 
52 German or Byelorussian patients with familial breast cancer. Selected 
variants were subsequently screened by RFLP or TaqMan-based assays in an 
extended set of 965 German breast cancer cases and 985 healthy female controls. 
The resequencing study uncovered four new SLX4 missense substitutions, each of 
them in a single breast cancer patient. Three missense substitutions (p.V197A, 
p.G700R and p.R1034H) were not found in a subsequent screening of 240 additional 
breast cancer patients, while one missense substitution (p.R237Q) was more 
common and was detected in a total of 12 cases (1.3%) and seven controls (0.7%) 
in the Hannover breast cancer study. The rare missense substitution, p.G700R, 
resides in the conserved BTB domain and was in silico predicted to be 
pathogenic. Seven additional missense polymorphisms were correlated and formed 
one haplotype which was, however, neither associated with breast cancer risk nor 
with survival from breast cancer. In summary, this study did not reveal 
truncating or clearly pathogenic mutations, but unravelled four new unclassified 
missense variants at a low frequency. We conclude that there is no evidence for 
a major role of SLX4 coding variants in the inherited susceptibility towards 
breast cancer in German and Byelorussian patients, although very rare mutations 
such as the p.G700R substitution could make a minor contribution.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-011-1681-1
PMID: 21805310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]