1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Aug;33(8):1493-506. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.06.008. Epub 2011 Jul 30.

Allopregnanolone restores hippocampal-dependent learning and memory and neural 
progenitor survival in aging 3xTgAD and nonTg mice.

Singh C(1), Liu L, Wang JM, Irwin RW, Yao J, Chen S, Henry S, Thompson RF, 
Brinton RD.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 
90089-9121, USA.

We previously demonstrated that allopregnanolone (APα) increased proliferation 
of neural progenitor cells and reversed neurogenic and cognitive deficits prior 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology (Wang, J.M., Johnston, P.B., Ball, B.G., 
Brinton, R.D., 2005. The neurosteroid allopregnanolone promotes proliferation of 
rodent and human neural progenitor cells and regulates cell-cycle gene and 
protein expression. J. Neurosci. 25, 4706-4718; Wang, J.M., Singh, C., Liu, L., 
Irwin, R.W., Chen, S., Chung, E.J., Thompson, R.F., Brinton, R.D., 2010. 
Allopregnanolone reverses neurogenic and cognitive deficits in mouse model of 
Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 6498-6503). Herein, we 
determined efficacy of APα to restore neural progenitor cell survival and 
associative learning and memory subsequent to AD pathology in male 3xTgAD mice 
and their nontransgenic (nonTg) counterparts. APα significantly increased 
survival of bromodeoxyuridine positive (BrdU+) cells and hippocampal-dependent 
associative learning and memory in 3xTgAD mice in the presence of intraneuronal 
amyloid beta (Aβ) whereas APα was ineffective subsequent to development of 
extraneuronal Aβ plaques. Restoration of hippocampal-dependent associative 
learning was maximal by the first day and sustained throughout behavioral 
training. Learning and memory function in APα-treated 3xTgAD mice was 100% 
greater than vehicle-treated and comparable to maximal normal nonTg performance. 
In aged 15-month-old nonTg mice, APα significantly increased survival of 
bromodeoxyuridine-positive cells and hippocampal-dependent associative learning 
and memory. Results provide preclinical evidence that APα promoted survival of 
newly generated cells and restored cognitive performance in the preplaque phase 
of AD pathology and in late-stage normal aging.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.06.008
PMCID: PMC3232295
PMID: 21803451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]