1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 30;286(39):34036-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284216. Epub 
2011 Aug 4.

Disruption of IkappaB kinase (IKK)-mediated RelA serine 536 phosphorylation 
sensitizes human multiple myeloma cells to histone deacetylase (HDAC) 
inhibitors.

Dai Y(1), Chen S, Wang L, Pei XY, Funk VL, Kramer LB, Dent P, Grant S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University/Massey CancerCenter, 
Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

Post-translational modifications of RelA play an important role in regulation of 
NF-κB activation. We previously demonstrated that in malignant hematopoietic 
cells, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) induced RelA hyperacetylation and 
NF-κB activation, attenuating lethality. We now present evidence that IκB kinase 
(IKK) β-mediated RelA Ser-536 phosphorylation plays a significant functional 
role in promoting RelA acetylation, inducing NF-κB activation, and limiting 
HDACI lethality in human multiple myeloma (MM) cells. Immunoblot profiling 
revealed that although basal RelA phosphorylation varied in MM cells, Ser-536 
phosphorylation correlated with IKK activity. Exposure to the pan-HDACIs 
vorinostat or LBH-589 induced phosphorylation of IKKα/β (Ser-180/Ser-181) and 
RelA (Ser-536) in MM cells, including cells expressing an IκBα 
"super-repressor," accompanied by increased RelA nuclear translocation, 
acetylation, DNA binding, and transactivation activity. These events were 
substantially blocked by either pan-IKK or IKKβ-selective inhibitors, resulting 
in marked apoptosis. Consistent with these events, inhibitory peptides targeting 
either the NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO) binding domain for IKK complex 
formation or RelA phosphorylation sites also significantly increased HDACI 
lethality. Moreover, IKKβ knockdown by shRNA prevented Ser-536 phosphorylation 
and significantly enhanced HDACI susceptibility. Finally, introduction of a 
nonphosphorylatable RelA mutant S536A, which failed to undergo acetylation in 
response to HDACIs, impaired NF-κB activation and increased cell death. These 
findings indicate that HDACIs induce Ser-536 phosphorylation of the NF-κB 
subunit RelA through an IKKβ-dependent mechanism, an action that is functionally 
involved in activation of the cytoprotective NF-κB signaling cascade primarily 
through facilitation of RelA acetylation rather than nuclear translocation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284216
PMCID: PMC3190767
PMID: 21816815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]