1. BMJ. 2011 Aug 4;343:d4588. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d4588.

Impact of CYP2C19 variant genotypes on clinical efficacy of antiplatelet 
treatment with clopidogrel: systematic review and meta-analysis.

Bauer T(1), Bouman HJ, van Werkum JW, Ford NF, ten Berg JM, Taubert D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University Hospital of Cologne, D-50931 Cologne, 
Germany.

Comment in
    BMJ. 2011 Aug 04;343:d4953. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d4953.
    Ann Intern Med. 2011 Dec 20;155(12):JC6-13. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-155-12-201112200-02013.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the accumulated information from genetic association 
studies investigating the impact of variants of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 
genotype on the clinical efficacy of clopidogrel.
DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis with a structured search algorithm 
and prespecified eligibility criteria for retrieval of relevant studies; 
dominant genetic model assumptions and quantitative methods for calculating 
summary effect estimates from study level odds ratios; systematic assessment of 
bias within and between studies; and grading of the cumulative evidence by 
consensus criteria.
DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, the Cochrane Library, online databases, contents 
pages and bibliographies of general medical, cardiovascular, pharmacological, 
and genetic journals. Eligibility criteria for selecting studies Original full 
length reports assessing the cumulative incidence of major adverse 
cardiovascular events or stent thrombosis over a follow-up period of at least a 
month in association with carrier status for the loss of function or gain of 
function CYP2C19 allele in adult patients with coronary artery disease and a 
clinical presentation of acute coronary syndrome or stable angina pectoris who 
were taking clopidogrel.
RESULTS: 15 studies met the inclusion criteria. The random effects summary odds 
ratio for stent thrombosis in carriers of at least one CYP2C19 loss of function 
allele versus non-carriers combining nine studies was 1.77 (95% confidence 
interval 1.31 to 2.40; P < 0.001). This nominally significant odds ratio was 
subject to considerable bias across the studies (small study effect bias and 
replication diversity). The adjustment for these quality modifiers tended to 
abolish the association. The corresponding random effects summary odds ratio of 
major adverse cardiovascular events for 12 studies combined was 1.11 (0.89 to 
1.39; P = 0.36). The random effects summary odds ratio of stent thrombosis in 
carriers versus non-carriers of at least one CYP2C19*17 gain of function allele 
for three studies combined was 0.99 (0.60 to 1.62; P = 0.96), and the 
corresponding odds ratio of major adverse cardiovascular events in five studies 
was 0.93 (0.75 to 1.14; P = 0.48). The overall quality of epidemiological 
evidence was graded as low, which excludes reliable clinical assessments.
CONCLUSIONS: Accumulated information from genetic association studies does not 
indicate a substantial or consistent influence of CYP2C19 gene polymorphisms on 
the clinical efficacy of clopidogrel. The current evidence does not support the 
use of individualised antiplatelet regimens guided by CYP2C19 genotype.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.d4588
PMCID: PMC3191560
PMID: 21816733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available 
on request from the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any 
organisation for the submitted work; JWvW has specified relationships with 
Accumetrics, Siemens, and The Medicines Company, and JMtB has specified 
relationships with Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, 
Sanofi-Aventis, and Schering-Plough, that might have an interest in the 
submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or activities 
that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.