1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022296. Epub 2011 Jul
19.

L-Ilf3 and L-NF90 traffic to the nucleolus granular component: 
alternatively-spliced exon 3 encodes a nucleolar localization motif.

Viranaicken W(1), Gasmi L, Chaumet A, Durieux C, Georget V, Denoulet P, Larcher 
JC.

Author information:
(1)UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7622, Laboratoire de Biologie du DÃ©veloppement, 
Paris, France.

Ilf3 and NF90, two proteins containing double-stranded RNA-binding domains, are 
generated by alternative splicing and involved in several functions. Their 
heterogeneity results from posttranscriptional and posttranslational 
modifications. Alternative splicing of exon 3, coding for a 13 aa N-terminal 
motif, generates for each protein a long and short isoforms. Subcellular 
fractionation and localization of recombinant proteins showed that this motif 
acts as a nucleolar localization signal. Deletion and substitution mutants 
identified four arginines, essential for nucleolar targeting, and three 
histidines to stabilize the proteins within the nucleolus. The short isoforms 
are never found in the nucleoli, whereas the long isoforms are present in the 
nucleoplasm and the nucleoli. For Ilf3, only the posttranslationally-unmodified 
long isoform is nucleolar, suggesting that this nucleolar targeting is abrogated 
by posttranslational modifications. Confocal microscopy and FRAP experiments 
have shown that the long Ilf3 isoform localizes to the granular component of the 
nucleolus, and that L-Ilf3 and L-NF90 exchange rapidly between nucleoli. The 
presence of this 13 aminoacid motif, combined with posttranslational 
modifications, is responsible for the differences in Ilf3 and NF90 isoforms 
subcellular localizations. The protein polymorphism of Ilf3/NF90 and the various 
subcellular localizations of their isoforms may partially explain the various 
functions previously reported for these proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022296
PMCID: PMC3139624
PMID: 21811582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.