1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022838. Epub 2011 Jul
28.

MicroRNA-96 directly inhibits γ-globin expression in human erythropoiesis.

Azzouzi I(1), Moest H, Winkler J, Fauchère JC, Gerber AP, Wollscheid B, Stoffel 
M, Schmugge M, Speer O.

Author information:
(1)Division of Haematology, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

Fetal hemoglobin, HbF (α(2)γ(2)), is the main hemoglobin synthesized up to 
birth, but it subsequently declines and adult hemoglobin, HbA (α(2)β(2)), 
becomes predominant. Several studies have indicated that expression of the HbF 
subunit γ-globin might be regulated post-transcriptionally. This could be 
confered by ∼22-nucleotide long microRNAs that associate with argonaute proteins 
to specifically target γ-globin mRNAs and inhibit protein expression. Indeed, 
applying immunopurifications, we found that γ-globin mRNA was associated with 
argonaute 2 isolated from reticulocytes that contain low levels of HbF (<1%), 
whereas association was significantly lower in reticulocytes with high levels of 
HbF (90%). Comparing microRNA expression in reticulocytes from cord blood and 
adult blood, we identified several miRNAs that were preferentially expressed in 
adults, among them miRNA-96. The overexpression of microRNA-96 in human ex vivo 
erythropoiesis decreased γ-globin expression by 50%, whereas the knock-down of 
endogenous microRNA-96 increased γ-globin expression by 20%. Moreover, 
luciferase reporter assays showed that microRNA-96 negatively regulates 
expression of γ-globin in HEK293 cells, which depends on a seedless but highly 
complementary target site located within the coding sequence of γ-globin. Based 
on these results we conclude that microRNA-96 directly suppresses γ-globin 
expression and thus contributes to HbF regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022838
PMCID: PMC3145767
PMID: 21829531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.