1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):203-10. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.127. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

People of the British Isles: preliminary analysis of genotypes and surnames in a 
UK-control population.

Winney B(1), Boumertit A, Day T, Davison D, Echeta C, Evseeva I, Hutnik K, 
Leslie S, Nicodemus K, Royrvik EC, Tonks S, Yang X, Cheshire J, Longley P, 
Mateos P, Groom A, Relton C, Bishop DT, Black K, Northwood E, Parkinson L, 
Frayling TM, Steele A, Sampson JR, King T, Dixon R, Middleton D, Jennings B, 
Bowden R, Donnelly P, Bodmer W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, ORCRB, Headington, Oxford, UK. 
bruce.winney@clinpharm.ox.ac.uk

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):129-30. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.153.

There is a great deal of interest in a fine-scale population structure in the 
UK, both as a signature of historical immigration events and because of the 
effect population structure may have on disease association studies. Although 
population structure appears to have a minor impact on the current generation of 
genome-wide association studies, it is likely to have a significant part in the 
next generation of studies designed to search for rare variants. A powerful way 
of detecting such structure is to control and document carefully the provenance 
of the samples involved. In this study, we describe the collection of a cohort 
of rural UK samples (The People of the British Isles), aimed at providing a 
well-characterised UK-control population that can be used as a resource by the 
research community, as well as providing a fine-scale genetic information on the 
British population. So far, some 4000 samples have been collected, the majority 
of which fit the criteria of coming from a rural area and having all four 
grandparents from approximately the same area. Analysis of the first 3865 
samples that have been geocoded indicates that 75% have a mean distance between 
grandparental places of birth of 37.3 km, and that about 70% of grandparental 
places of birth can be classed as rural. Preliminary genotyping of 1057 samples 
demonstrates the value of these samples for investigating a fine-scale 
population structure within the UK, and shows how this can be enhanced by the 
use of surnames.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.127
PMCID: PMC3260910
PMID: 21829225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]