1. Lancet Neurol. 2011 Sep;10(9):806-18. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70155-7. Epub
 2011 Aug 3.

FGF-21 as a biomarker for muscle-manifesting mitochondrial respiratory chain 
deficiencies: a diagnostic study.

Suomalainen A(1), Elo JM, Pietiläinen KH, Hakonen AH, Sevastianova K, Korpela M, 
Isohanni P, Marjavaara SK, Tyni T, Kiuru-Enari S, Pihko H, Darin N, Õunap K, 
Kluijtmans LA, Paetau A, Buzkova J, Bindoff LA, Annunen-Rasila J, Uusimaa J, 
Rissanen A, Yki-Järvinen H, Hirano M, Tulinius M, Smeitink J, Tyynismaa H.

Author information:
(1)Research Programmes Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland. anu.wartiovaara@helsinki.fi

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2011 Sep;10(9):777-8. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70172-7.

BACKGROUND: Muscle biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosis of mitochondrial 
disorders because of the lack of sensitive biomarkers in serum. Fibroblast 
growth factor 21 (FGF-21) is a growth factor with regulatory roles in lipid 
metabolism and the starvation response, and concentrations are raised in 
skeletal muscle and serum in mice with mitochondrial respiratory chain 
deficiencies. We investigated in a retrospective diagnostic study whether FGF-21 
could be a biomarker for human mitochondrial disorders.
METHODS: We assessed samples from adults and children with mitochondrial 
disorders or non-mitochondrial neurological disorders (disease controls) from 
seven study centres in Europe and the USA, and recruited healthy volunteers 
(healthy controls), matched for age where possible, from the same centres. We 
used ELISA to measure FGF-21 concentrations in serum or plasma samples (abnormal 
values were defined as >200 pg/mL). We compared these concentrations with values 
for lactate, pyruvate, lactate-to-pyruvate ratio, and creatine kinase in serum 
or plasma and calculated sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative 
predictive values for all biomarkers.
FINDINGS: We analysed serum or plasma from 67 patients (41 adults and 26 
children) with mitochondrial disorders, 34 disease controls (22 adults and 12 
children), and 74 healthy controls. Mean FGF-21 concentrations in serum were 820 
(SD 1151) pg/mL in adult and 1983 (1550) pg/mL in child patients with 
respiratory chain deficiencies and 76 (58) pg/mL in healthy controls. FGF-21 
concentrations were high in patients with mitochondrial disorders affecting 
skeletal muscle but not in disease controls, including those with dystrophies. 
In patients with abnormal FGF-21 concentrations in serum, the odds ratio of 
having a muscle-manifesting mitochondrial disease was 132·0 (95% CI 38·7-450·3). 
For the identification of muscle-manifesting mitochondrial disease, the 
sensitivity was 92·3% (95% CI 81·5-97·9%) and specificity was 91·7% 
(84·8-96·1%). The positive and negative predictive values for FGF-21 were 84·2% 
(95% CI 72·1-92·5%) and 96·1 (90·4-98·9%). The accuracy of FGF-21 to correctly 
identify muscle-manifesting respiratory chain disorders was better than that for 
all conventional biomarkers. The area under the 
receiver-operating-characteristic curve for FGF-21 was 0·95; by comparison, the 
values for other biomarkers were 0·83 lactate (p=0·037, 0·83 for pyruvate 
(p=0·015), 0·72 for the lactate-to-pyruvate ratio (p=0·0002), and 0·77 for 
creatine kinase (p=0·013).
INTERPRETATION: Measurement of FGF-21 concentrations in serum identified primary 
muscle-manifesting respiratory chain deficiencies in adults and children and 
might be feasible as a first-line diagnostic test for these disorders to reduce 
the need for muscle biopsy.
FUNDING: Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation, Molecular 
Medicine Institute of Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki University 
Central Hospital, Academy of Finland, Novo Nordisk, Arvo and Lea Ylppö 
Foundation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70155-7
PMCID: PMC7568343
PMID: 21820356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest AS and HT have submitted 
an international patent application for serum diagnostics of mitochondrial 
disease. KHP has been paid to give lectures for Eli Lilly, Abbott, and Novo 
Nordisk. JS is the Chief Executive Officer of Khondrion, a spin-off company of 
the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre. The other authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.