1. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2012 Jan;97(1-2):22-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2011.07.006. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase (HPGDS): a high stability, Val187Ile 
isoenzyme common among African Americans and its relationship to risk for 
colorectal cancer.

Tippin BL(1), Levine AJ, Materi AM, Song WL, Keku TO, Goodman JE, Sansbury LB, 
Das S, Dai A, Kwong AM, Lin AM, Lin JM, Park JM, Patterson RE, Chlebowski RT, 
Garavito RM, Inoue T, Cho W, Lawson JA, Kapoor S, Kolonel LN, Le Marchand L, 
Haile RW, Sandler RS, Lin HJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center and Los Angeles 
Biomedical Research Institute, Torrance, CA, USA.

Intestinal tumors in Apc(Min/+) mice are suppressed by over-production of HPGDS, 
which is a glutathione transferase that forms prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2)). We 
characterized naturally occurring HPGDS isoenzymes, to see if HPGDS variation is 
associated with human colorectal cancer risk. We used DNA heteroduplex analysis 
and sequencing to identify HPGDS variants among healthy individuals. HPGDS 
isoenzymes were produced in bacteria, and their catalytic activities were 
tested. To determine in vivo effects, we conducted pooled case-control analyses 
to assess whether there is an association of the isoenzyme with colorectal 
cancer. Roughly 8% of African Americans and 2% of Caucasians had a highly stable 
Val187lle isoenzyme (with isoleucine instead of valine at position 187). At 
37°C, the wild-type enzyme lost 15% of its activity in 1h, whereas the Val187Ile 
form remained >95% active. At 50°C, the half life of native HPGDS was 9min, 
compared to 42 min for Val187Ile. The odds ratio for colorectal cancer among 
African Americans with Val187Ile was 1.10 (95% CI, 0.75-1.62; 533 cases, 795 
controls). Thus, the Val187Ile HPGDS isoenzyme common among African Americans is 
not associated with colorectal cancer risk. Other approaches will be needed to 
establish a role for HPGDS in occurrence of human intestinal tumors, as 
indicated by a mouse model.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2011.07.006
PMCID: PMC3226866
PMID: 21821144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]