1. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2011 Oct;10(5):313-21. doi: 
10.2174/187152811797200641.

Analogs of the sea anemone potassium channel blocker ShK for the treatment of 
autoimmune diseases.

Beeton C(1), Pennington MW, Norton RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. beeton@bcm.edu

CCR7- effector memory T (TEM) lymphocytes are involved in autoimmune diseases 
such as multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes mellitus and rheumatoid arthritis. 
These cells express Kv1.3 potassium channels that play a major role in their 
activation. Blocking these channels preferentially inhibits the activation of 
CCR7- TEM cells, with little or no effects on CCR7+ na√Øve and central memory T 
cells. Blockers of lymphocyte Kv1.3 channels therefore show considerable 
potential as therapeutics for autoimmune diseases. ShK, a 35-residue polypeptide 
isolated from the Caribbean sea anemone Stichodactyla helianthus, blocks Kv1.3 
channels at picomolar concentrations. Although ShK was effective in treating 
rats with delayed type hypersensitivity and a model of multiple sclerosis, it 
lacks selectivity for Kv1.3 channels over closely-related Kv1 channels. 
Extensive mutagenesis studies combined with elucidation of the structure of ShK 
led to models of ShK docked with the channel. This knowledge was valuable in the 
development of new ShK analogs with improved selectivity and increasing 
stability, which have proven efficacious in preventing and/or treating animal 
models of delayed type hypersensitivity, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and multiple sclerosis without inducing generalized immunosuppression. They are 
currently undergoing further evaluation as potential immunomodulators for the 
treatment of autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/187152811797200641
PMCID: PMC3398462
PMID: 21824083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST All three authors are 
co-founders of Airmid Inc., a company based in California and focused on the 
development of Kv1.3 channel blockers as therapeutics for autoimmune diseases.