1. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 Sep 26;51(9):2266-76. doi: 10.1021/ci2000743. Epub 2011
 Aug 23.

Study of Tamiflu sensitivity to variants of A/H5N1 virus using different force 
fields.

Nguyen TT(1), Mai BK, Li MS.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Computational Science and Technology, Thu Duc District, Ho Chi 
Minh City, Vietnam.

An accurate estimation of binding free energy of a ligand to receptor ΔG(bind) 
is one of the most important problems in drug design. The success of solution of 
this problem is expected to depend on force fields used for modeling a 
ligand-receptor complex. In this paper, we consider the impact of four main 
force fields, AMBER99SB, CHARMM27, GROMOS96 43a1, and OPLS-AA/L, on the binding 
affinity of Oseltamivir carboxylate to the wild-type and Y252H, N294S, and H274Y 
mutants of glycoprotein neuraminidase from the pandemic A/H5N1 virus. Having 
used the molecular mechanic-Poisson-Boltzmann surface area method, we have shown 
that ΔG(bind), obtained by AMBER99SB, OPLS-AA/L, and CHARMM27, shows the high 
correlation with the available experimental data. They correctly capture the 
binding ranking Y252H → WT → N294S → H274Y observed in experiments (Collins, P. 
J. et al. Nature 2008, 453, 1258). In terms of absolute values of binding 
scores, results obtained by AMBER99SB are in the nearest range with experiments, 
while OPLS-AA/L, which is applied to study binding of Oseltamivir to the 
influenza virus for the first time, gives rather big negative values for 
ΔG(bind). GROMOS96 43a1 provides a lower correlation as it supports Oseltamivir 
to be more resistant to N294S than H274Y. Our study suggests that force fields 
have pronounced influence on theoretical estimations of binding free energy of a 
ligand to receptor. The effect of all-atom models on dynamics of the binding 
pocket as well as on the hydrogen-bond network between Oseltamivir and receptors 
is studied in detail. The hydrogen network, obtained by GROMOS, is weakest among 
four studied force fields.

DOI: 10.1021/ci2000743
PMID: 21834591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]