1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Oct 14;413(1):150-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.07.054. Epub
2011  Jul 29.

Improving the resistance of a eukaryotic β-barrel protein to thermal and 
chemical perturbations.

Gessmann D(1), Mager F, Naveed H, Arnold T, Weirich S, Linke D, Liang J, 
Nussberger S.

Author information:
(1)Biophysics Department, Institute of Biology, University of Stuttgart, 
Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany.

β-Barrel membrane proteins have regular structures with extensive hydrogen-bond 
networks between their transmembrane (TM) β-strands, which stabilize their 
protein fold. Nevertheless, weakly stable TM regions, which are important for 
the protein function and interaction with other proteins, exist. Here, we report 
on the apparent stability of human Tom40A, a member of the "mitochondrial porin 
family" and main constituent of the mitochondrial protein-conducting channel TOM 
(translocase of the outer membrane). Using a physical interaction model, TmSIP, 
for β-barrel membrane proteins, we have identified three unfavorable β-strands 
in the TM domain of the protein. Substitution of key residues inside these 
strands with hydrophobic amino acids results in a decreased sensitivity of the 
protein to chemical and/or thermal denaturation. The apparent melting 
temperature observed when denatured at a rate of 1 °C per minute is shifted from 
73 to 84 °C. Moreover, the sensitivity of the protein to denaturant agents is 
significantly lowered. Further, we find a reduced tendency for the mutated 
protein to form dimers. We propose that the identified weakly stable β-strands 
1, 2 and 9 of human Tom40A play an important role in quaternary protein-protein 
interactions within the mammalian TOM machinery. Our results show that the use 
of empirical energy functions to model the apparent stability of β-barrel 
membrane proteins may be a useful tool in the field of nanopore bioengineering.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.07.054
PMCID: PMC3782296
PMID: 21835183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]