1. Microb Drug Resist. 2011 Dec;17(4):507-12. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0040. Epub
2011  Aug 10.

Fecal colonization of Enterobacteriaceae carrying plasmid-mediated quinolone 
resistance determinants in Korea.

Jeong HS(1), Bae IK, Shin JH, Kim SH, Chang CL, Jeong J, Kim S, Lee CH, Ryoo NH, 
Lee JN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Inje University College of Medicine, 
633-165 Gaegeum-dong Busanjin-gu, Busan, Korea.

The aims of the current study were to investigate the prevalence and molecular 
characteristics of plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) genes from 
colonizing fecal organisms and to compare the incidence and subtype of these 
genes according to bacterial species and hospital at five tertiary-care 
hospitals in Korea. A total of 500 nonduplicated clinical isolates of 
Enterobacteriaceae were obtained from fecal specimens at five tertiary-care 
hospitals between March and May 2008. The PMQR genes (qnrA, qnrB, qnrS, 
aac(6')-Ib-cr, and qepA) were amplified by PCR and confirmed by direct 
sequencing of the PCR products. A total of 83 (16.6%) qnr-positive isolates were 
detected. The prevalence rates of qnrA, qnrB, and qnrS were 1.4%, 13.6%, and 
1.6%, respectively. The species distributions of qnrB-positive isolates were 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (37/109; 33.9%), Citrobacter freundii (10/34; 29.4%), 
Citrobacter braakii (8/13; 61.5%), and Escherichia coli (8/275; 2.9%). Sixteen 
subtypes of qnrB were detected, including seven novel variants. The prevalences 
of aac(6')-Ib-cr and qepA were 15.6% (n=78) and 0.6% (n=3), respectively. The 
aac(6')-Ib-cr gene was detected in 39 (47.0%) of 83 qnr-positive isolates and 39 
(9.4%) of 417 qnr-negative isolates There was one qepA variant containing a 
novel mutation (Ala231Val). The prevalence of PMQR genes was high in 
Enterobacteriaceae from stool specimens in Korea, and there was a close relation 
between qnr and aac(6')-Ib-cr.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2011.0040
PMID: 21830908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]