1. J Pediatr. 2012 Jan;160(1):74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.045. Epub 2011 
Aug 15.

Humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to monovalent 2009 influenza A/H1N1 
and seasonal trivalent influenza vaccines in high-risk children.

Long CB(1), Ramos I, Rastogi D, Manwani D, Janow G, Del Rio M, Mayers M, Herold 
BC, Fernandez-Sesma A, Madan RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Humoral and cell-mediated immune responses to monovalent 2009 
pandemic influenza A (H1N1/2009) and seasonal trivalent influenza (TIV) vaccines 
were evaluated in healthy children and children with asthma, sickle cell disease 
(SCD), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and solid organ transplantation 
(SOT).
STUDY DESIGN: Blood was collected from 112 subjects at the time of H1N1/2009 
vaccination and 46 ± 15 days later for hemagglutination inhibition titers and 
γ-interferon ELISPOT responses to H1N1/2009 vaccine and TIV; unvaccinated 
children also received TIV at enrollment.
RESULTS: A significant increase in the percentage of subjects with 
seroprotective hemagglutination inhibition titers to both vaccines was observed 
in all high-risk groups. Children with asthma and SCD were most likely to 
achieve seroprotective titers to H1N1/2009, whereas <50% of subjects with SOT 
and SLE had a seroprotective response. Subjects with SOT and SLE also had lower 
rates of seroprotection after TIV, and subjects with SLE had the lowest ELISPOT 
responses to both vaccines. Overall, 73% of healthy children exhibited 
protective responses to TIV; only 35% achieved seroprotection for H1N1/2009.
CONCLUSIONS: This evaluation of immune responses to H1N1/2009 in high-risk 
children suggests suboptimal responses for SOT and SLE subjects, but not for 
subjects with SCD or asthma. Higher antigen dose, additional dose regimens, or 
both for immunocompromised children warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.06.045
PMCID: PMC3652684
PMID: 21840537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.