1. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10598-604. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05369-11. Epub 2011 Aug
17.

Comparative analysis of avian influenza virus diversity in poultry and humans 
during a highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N7) virus outbreak.

Jonges M(1), Bataille A, Enserink R, Meijer A, Fouchier RA, Stegeman A, Koch G, 
Koopmans M.

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Centre for 
Infectious Disease Control, P.O. Box 1, Bilthoven, Netherlands. 
marcel.jonges@rivm.nl

Although increasing data have become available that link human adaptation with 
specific molecular changes in nonhuman influenza viruses, the molecular changes 
of these viruses during a large highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAI) 
outbreak in poultry along with avian-to-human transmission have never been 
documented. By comprehensive virologic analysis of combined veterinary and human 
samples obtained during a large HPAI A (H7N7) outbreak in the Netherlands in 
2003, we mapped the acquisition of human adaptation markers to identify the 
public health risk associated with an HPAI outbreak in poultry. Full-length 
hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase (NA), and PB2 sequencing of A (H7N7) viruses 
obtained from 45 human cases showed amino acid variations at different codons in 
HA (n=20), NA (n=23), and PB2 (n=23). Identification of the avian sources of 
human virus infections based on 232 farm sequences demonstrated that for each 
gene about 50% of the variation was already present in poultry. Polygenic 
accumulation and farm-to-farm spread of known virulence and human adaptation 
markers in A (H7N7) virus-infected poultry occurred prior to farm-to-human 
transmission. These include the independent emergence of HA A143T mutants, 
accumulation of four NA mutations, and farm-to-farm spread of virus variants 
harboring mammalian host determinants D701N and S714I in PB2. This implies that 
HPAI viruses with pandemic potential can emerge directly from poultry. Since the 
public health risk of an avian influenza virus outbreak in poultry can rapidly 
change, we recommend virologic monitoring for human adaptation markers among 
poultry as well as among humans during the course of an outbreak in poultry.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.05369-11
PMCID: PMC3187520
PMID: 21849451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]