1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002225. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002225. Epub
2011  Aug 11.

Suppression of scant identifies Endos as a substrate of greatwall kinase and a 
negative regulator of protein phosphatase 2A in mitosis.

Rangone H(1), Wegel E, Gatt MK, Yeung E, Flowers A, Debski J, Dadlez M, Janssens 
V, Carpenter AT, Glover DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002213.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) plays a major role in dephosphorylating the 
targets of the major mitotic kinase Cdk1 at mitotic exit, yet how it is 
regulated in mitotic progression is poorly understood. Here we show that 
mutations in either the catalytic or regulatory twins/B55 subunit of PP2A act as 
enhancers of gwl(Scant), a gain-of-function allele of the Greatwall kinase gene 
that leads to embryonic lethality in Drosophila when the maternal dosage of the 
mitotic kinase Polo is reduced. We also show that heterozygous mutant endos 
alleles suppress heterozygous gwl(Scant); many more embryos survive. 
Furthermore, heterozygous PP2A mutations make females heterozygous for the 
strong mutation polo(11) partially sterile, even in the absence of gwl(Scant). 
Heterozygosity for an endos mutation suppresses this PP2A/polo(11) sterility. 
Homozygous mutation or knockdown of endos leads to phenotypes suggestive of 
defects in maintaining the mitotic state. In accord with the genetic 
interactions shown by the gwl(Scant) dominant mutant, the mitotic defects of 
Endos knockdown in cultured cells can be suppressed by knockdown of either the 
catalytic or the Twins/B55 regulatory subunits of PP2A but not by the other 
three regulatory B subunits of Drosophila PP2A. Greatwall phosphorylates Endos 
at a single site, Ser68, and this is essential for Endos function. Together 
these interactions suggest that Greatwall and Endos act to promote the 
inactivation of PP2A-Twins/B55 in Drosophila. We discuss the involvement of Polo 
kinase in such a regulatory loop.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002225
PMCID: PMC3154957
PMID: 21852956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.