1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002186. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002186. Epub 
2011 Aug 11.

Differential contribution of PB1-F2 to the virulence of highly pathogenic H5N1 
influenza A virus in mammalian and avian species.

Schmolke M(1), Manicassamy B, Pena L, Sutton T, Hai R, Varga ZT, Hale BG, Steel 
J, Pérez DR, García-Sastre A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York, United States of America.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza A viruses (HPAIV) of the H5N1 subtype 
occasionally transmit from birds to humans and can cause severe systemic 
infections in both hosts. PB1-F2 is an alternative translation product of the 
viral PB1 segment that was initially characterized as a pro-apoptotic 
mitochondrial viral pathogenicity factor. A full-length PB1-F2 has been present 
in all human influenza pandemic virus isolates of the 20(th) century, but 
appears to be lost evolutionarily over time as the new virus establishes itself 
and circulates in the human host. In contrast, the open reading frame (ORF) for 
PB1-F2 is exceptionally well-conserved in avian influenza virus isolates. Here 
we perform a comparative study to show for the first time that PB1-F2 is a 
pathogenicity determinant for HPAIV (A/Viet Nam/1203/2004, VN1203 (H5N1)) in 
both mammals and birds. In a mammalian host, the rare N66S polymorphism in 
PB1-F2 that was previously described to be associated with high lethality of the 
1918 influenza A virus showed increased replication and virulence of a 
recombinant VN1203 H5N1 virus, while deletion of the entire PB1-F2 ORF had 
negligible effects. Interestingly, the N66S substituted virus efficiently 
invades the CNS and replicates in the brain of Mx+/+ mice. In ducks deletion of 
PB1-F2 clearly resulted in delayed onset of clinical symptoms and systemic 
spreading of virus, while variations at position 66 played only a minor role in 
pathogenesis. These data implicate PB1-F2 as an important pathogenicity factor 
in ducks independent of sequence variations at position 66. Our data could 
explain why PB1-F2 is conserved in avian influenza virus isolates and only 
impacts pathogenicity in mammals when containing certain amino acid motifs such 
as the rare N66S polymorphism.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002186
PMCID: PMC3154844
PMID: 21852950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.