1. Pharmacol Rep. 2011;63(3):815-25. doi: 10.1016/s1734-1140(11)70594-1.

Influence of ABCB1, CYP3A4*18B and CYP3A5*3 polymorphisms on cyclosporine A 
pharmacokinetics in bone marrow transplant recipients.

Qiu F(1), He XJ, Sun YX, Li-Ling J, Zhao LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang 110004, China.

The aim of this study was to retrospectively evaluate the effect of 
polymorphisms in the CYP3A4, CYP3A5 and ABCB1 genes on the dose-adjusted 
concentration and dose requirement of cyclosporine A(CsA) in Chinese recipients 
during the early period after bone marrow or hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation. Ninety-one bone marrow transplant recipients were genotyped by 
the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP) assay or by direct sequencing for the C1236T, G2677T/A and C3435T 
polymorphisms in CYP3A4*18B, CYP3A5*3, and ABCB1, respectively. The 
concentration at zero before administration (C₀) and concentration at 2 h after 
administration (C₂) of whole blood CsA were measured by fluorescence 
polarization immunoassay. Dose-adjusted C₀ and C₂ were determined and compared 
among groups with different genotypes. Compared with CYP3A5*3/*3 individuals, 
CYP3A5*1/*1 subjects have a significantly lower dose-adjusted C₀ and C₂ at days 
1-10 and a higher dose requirement for CsA at days 16-30 (p < 0.05). In 
addition, homozygotes for the ABCB1 3435T mutant have a significantly higher 
dose-adjusted C₀ and C₂ and a lower dose requirement compared with wildtype (p < 
0.05). Similar results were also derived for carriers of the T-G-C haplotype in 
CYP3A5 producers compared with non-carriers (p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, 
respectively). In summary, the ABCB1 3435T SNP, T-G-C haplotype in CYP3A5 
producers, and CYP3A5*3 SNP are all associated with differences in CsA 
pharmacokinetics and dose requirements during the first month after bone marrow 
or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Genetic testing can therefore help 
to determine initial dosage and individualize immunosuppressive therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s1734-1140(11)70594-1
PMID: 21857093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]