1. Biochem J. 2011 Dec 15;440(3):335-44. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111286.

Retinaldehyde is a substrate for human aldo-keto reductases of the 1C subfamily.

Ruiz FX(1), Porté S, Gallego O, Moro A, Ardèvol A, Del Río-Espínola A, Rovira C, 
Farrés J, Parés X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, E-08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

Human AKR (aldo-keto reductase) 1C proteins (AKR1C1-AKR1C4) exhibit relevant 
activity with steroids, regulating hormone signalling at the pre-receptor level. 
In the present study, investigate the activity of the four human AKR1C enzymes 
with retinol and retinaldehyde. All of the enzymes except AKR1C2 showed 
retinaldehyde reductase activity with low Km values (~1 μM). The kcat values 
were also low (0.18-0.6 min-1), except for AKR1C3 reduction of 
9-cis-retinaldehyde whose kcat was remarkably higher (13 min-1). Structural 
modelling of the AKR1C complexes with 9-cis-retinaldehyde indicated a distinct 
conformation of Trp227, caused by changes in residue 226 that may contribute to 
the activity differences observed. This was partially supported by the kinetics 
of the AKR1C3 R226P mutant. Retinol/retinaldehyde conversion, combined with the 
use of the inhibitor flufenamic acid, indicated a relevant role for endogenous 
AKR1Cs in retinaldehyde reduction in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Overexpression 
of AKR1C proteins depleted RA (retinoic acid) transactivation in HeLa cells 
treated with retinol. Thus AKR1Cs may decrease RA levels in vivo. Finally, by 
using lithocholic acid as an AKR1C3 inhibitor and UVI2024 as an RA receptor 
antagonist, we provide evidence that the pro-proliferative action of AKR1C3 in 
HL-60 cells involves the RA signalling pathway and that this is in part due to 
the retinaldehyde reductase activity of AKR1C3.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20111286
PMID: 21851338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]