1. Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;71(20):6338-49. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1291.
Epub  2011 Aug 23.

p38γ promotes breast cancer cell motility and metastasis through regulation of 
RhoC GTPase, cytoskeletal architecture, and a novel leading edge behavior.

Rosenthal DT(1), Iyer H, Escudero S, Bao L, Wu Z, Ventura AC, Kleer CG, Arruda 
EM, Garikipati K, Merajver SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2329-30. doi: 10.4161/cc.25333.

Understanding the molecular alterations that confer cancer cells with motile, 
metastatic properties is needed to improve patient survival. Here, we report 
that p38γ motogen-activated protein kinase regulates breast cancer cell motility 
and metastasis, in part, by controlling expression of the metastasis-associated 
small GTPase RhoC. This p38γ-RhoC regulatory connection was mediated by a novel 
mechanism of modulating RhoC ubiquitination. This relationship persisted across 
multiple cell lines and in clinical breast cancer specimens. Using a 
computational mechanical model based on the finite element method, we showed 
that p38γ-mediated cytoskeletal changes are sufficient to control cell motility. 
This model predicted novel dynamics of leading edge actin protrusions, which 
were experimentally verified and established to be closely related to cell shape 
and cytoskeletal morphology. Clinical relevance was supported by evidence that 
elevated expression of p38γ is associated with lower overall survival of 
patients with breast cancer. Taken together, our results offer a detailed 
characterization of how p38γ contributes to breast cancer progression. Herein we 
present a new mechanics-based analysis of cell motility, and report on the 
discovery of a leading edge behavior in motile cells to accommodate modified 
cytoskeletal architecture. In summary, these findings not only identify a novel 
mechanism for regulating RhoC expression but also advance p38γ as a candidate 
therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1291
PMCID: PMC3193559
PMID: 21862636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]