1. J Chem Inf Model. 2011 Oct 24;51(10):2612-25. doi: 10.1021/ci200212y. Epub
2011  Sep 27.

Critical residue that promotes protein dimerization: a story of partially 
exposed Phe25 in 14-3-3σ.

Liu JY(1), Li Z, Li H, Zhang JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, United States.

Many proteins exist and function as oligomers. While hydrophobic interactions 
have been recognized as the major driving force for oligomerization, detailed 
molecular mechanisms for the assembly are unknown. Here, we used 14-3-3σ as a 
model protein and investigated the role of hydrophobic residues at the dimeric 
interface using MD simulations and coimmunoprecipitations. We found that a 
half-exposed and half-buried residue in the interface, Phe(25), plays a more 
important role in promoting homodimerization than the hydrophobic core residues 
by organizing both favorable hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions. Phe(25) 
is critical in packing and stabilizing hydrophobic core residues. We conclude 
that the structural stability of hydrophobic cores is critical for a stable 
homodimer complex and this stable property can be bestowed by residues outside 
of hydrophobic core. The important organizing activity of Phe(25) for 
homodimerization of 14-3-3σ originates from its unique physical location, 
rigidity, size, and hydrophobicity. Thus, hydrophobic residues that are not 
deeply buried at the oligomeric interface may play important but different roles 
from the buried core residues and they may promote oligomerization by organizing 
co-operativity of core and other residues for favorable hydrophobic and 
electrostatic interactions.

DOI: 10.1021/ci200212y
PMCID: PMC3322420
PMID: 21870863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]