1. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Nov;17(11):1086-92. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.104. Epub 2011
Aug  30.

Dopamine transporter genotype predicts behavioural and neural measures of 
response inhibition.

Cummins TD(1), Hawi Z, Hocking J, Strudwick M, Hester R, Garavan H, Wagner J, 
Chambers CD, Bellgrove MA.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Brain Institute and School of Psychology, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

The ability to inhibit unwanted actions is a heritable executive function that 
may confer risk to disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD). Converging evidence from pharmacology and cognitive neuroscience 
suggests that response inhibition is instantiated within frontostriatal circuits 
of the brain with patterns of activity that are modulated by the catecholamines 
dopamine and noradrenaline. A total of 405 healthy adult participants performed 
the stop-signal task, a paradigmatic measure of response inhibition that yields 
an index of the latency of inhibition, termed the stop-signal reaction time 
(SSRT). Using this phenotype, we tested for genetic association, performing 
high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism mapping across the full range of 
autosomal catecholamine genes. Fifty participants also underwent functional 
magnetic resonance imaging to establish the impact of associated alleles on 
brain and behaviour. Allelic variation in polymorphisms of the dopamine 
transporter gene (SLC6A3: rs37020; rs460000) predicted individual differences in 
SSRT, after corrections for multiple comparisons. Furthermore, activity in 
frontal regions (anterior frontal, superior frontal and superior medial gyri) 
and caudate varied additively with the T-allele of rs37020. The influence of 
genetic variation in SLC6A3 on the development of frontostriatal inhibition 
networks may represent a key risk mechanism for disorders of behavioural 
inhibition.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2011.104
PMID: 21876545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]