1. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Oct 17;504(1):9-12. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.08.021.
Epub  2011 Aug 19.

Expression and genetic analysis of miRNAs involved in CD4+ cell activation in 
patients with multiple sclerosis.

Fenoglio C(1), Cantoni C, De Riz M, Ridolfi E, Cortini F, Serpente M, Villa C, 
Comi C, Monaco F, Mellesi L, Valzelli S, Bresolin N, Galimberti D, Scarpini E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Dino Ferrari Center, University of 
Milan, Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. 
chiara.fenoglio@unimi.it

MicroRNA (miRNA)-mediate RNA interference has been identified as a novel 
mechanism that regulates protein expression. It is recognised that miRNAs play 
essential roles in the immune system and for correct function in the brain. 
Moreover, it is now clear that abnormal miRNA expression is a common feature of 
several diseases involving the immune system including multiple sclerosis (MS). 
Expression analysis for miR-21, miR-146a and -b, miR-150, miR-155 was carried 
out in peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMC) from a cohort of 29 MS patients and 
19 controls. Subsequently, a case control study for miR-146 rs2910164 variant 
was performed in an overall population of 346 MS cases and 339 controls. A 
statistically significant increased expression of miR-21, miR-146a and -b was 
observed in relapsing remitting (RR)MS patients as compared with controls 
(1.44±0.13 vs 0.79±0.06, P=0.036; 1.50±0.12 vs 0.84±0.08, P=0.039; 1.54±0.15 vs 
0.72±0.08, P=0.001 respectively). On the contrary, no differences were found in 
the expression levels of both miR-150 and miR-155 in patients as compared with 
controls (P>0.05). The genetic association study failed to find any differences 
in the frequencies of rs2910164 between patients and controls. miRNA 
dysregulation may contribute to the pathogenesis of MS and highlights the 
possibility to define different disease entities with specific miRNAs profile.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.08.021
PMID: 21875645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]