1. Nature. 2011 Aug 28;477(7366):592-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10394.

Innate immune recognition of bacterial ligands by NAIPs determines inflammasome 
specificity.

Kofoed EM(1), Vance RE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep 09;11(10):644. doi: 10.1038/nri3069.
    Nature. 2011 Sep 28;477(7366):543-4. doi: 10.1038/477543a.

Inflammasomes are a family of cytosolic multiprotein complexes that initiate 
innate immune responses to pathogenic microbes by activating the caspase 1 
protease. Although genetic data support a critical role for inflammasomes in 
immune defence and inflammatory diseases, the molecular basis by which 
individual inflammasomes respond to specific stimuli remains poorly understood. 
The inflammasome that contains the NLRC4 (NLR family, CARD domain containing 4) 
protein was previously shown to be activated in response to two distinct 
bacterial proteins, flagellin and PrgJ, a conserved component of 
pathogen-associated type III secretion systems. However, direct binding between 
NLRC4 and flagellin or PrgJ has never been demonstrated. A homologue of NLRC4, 
NAIP5 (NLR family, apoptosis inhibitory protein 5), has been implicated in 
activation of NLRC4 (refs 7-11), but is widely assumed to have only an auxiliary 
role, as NAIP5 is often dispensable for NLRC4 activation. However, Naip5 is a 
member of a small multigene family, raising the possibility of redundancy and 
functional specialization among Naip genes. Here we show in mice that different 
NAIP paralogues determine the specificity of the NLRC4 inflammasome for distinct 
bacterial ligands. In particular, we found that activation of endogenous NLRC4 
by bacterial PrgJ requires NAIP2, a previously uncharacterized member of the 
NAIP gene family, whereas NAIP5 and NAIP6 activate NLRC4 specifically in 
response to bacterial flagellin. We dissected the biochemical mechanism 
underlying the requirement for NAIP proteins by use of a reconstituted NLRC4 
inflammasome system. We found that NAIP proteins control ligand-dependent 
oligomerization of NLRC4 and that the NAIP2-NLRC4 complex physically associates 
with PrgJ but not flagellin, whereas NAIP5-NLRC4 associates with flagellin but 
not PrgJ. Our results identify NAIPs as immune sensor proteins and provide 
biochemical evidence for a simple receptor-ligand model for activation of the 
NAIP-NLRC4 inflammasomes.

Â© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

DOI: 10.1038/nature10394
PMCID: PMC3184209
PMID: 21874021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.