1. Medchemcomm. 2011 Jan 1;2(8):752-759. doi: 10.1039/C1MD00126D.

Structure-activity relationship of conformationally constrained peptidomimetics 
for antiproliferative activity in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cell lines.

Banappagari S(1), Ronald S, Satyanarayanajois SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University 
of Louisiana at Monroe, Monroe, LA 71201.

Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a member of the human 
epidermal growth factor receptor kinases and is involved in a signaling cascade 
for cell growth and differentiation. It is well established that HER2-mediated 
heterodimerization has important implications in cancer. Deregulation of 
signaling pathways and overexpression of HER2 is known to occur in cancer cells, 
indicating the role of HER2 in tumorigenesis. Therefore, blocking HER2-mediated 
signaling has potential therapeutic value. We have designed several 
peptidomimetics to inhibit HER2-mediated signaling for cell growth. One of the 
compounds (compound 5, Arg-[3-amino-3(1-napthyl)-propionic acid]-Phe) exhibited 
antiproliferative activity with IC(50) values in the nanomolar to micromolar 
range in breast cancer cell lines. To further investigate the structure-activity 
relationship of the compounds, various analogs of compound 5 were designed. 
Conformational constraints were initiated in the peptidomimetic with 
introduction of a Pro residue in the peptidomimetic sequence. Results of 
antiproliferative activity indicated that analogs of compound 5 with C-and 
N-terminal ends capped (compound 16) and compound 9 with Asp at the C-terminal 
exhibited antiproliferative activity in the lower micromolar range against 
breast cancer cell lines. Introduction of conformational constraints such as Pro 
residue in the sequence or cyclization did not enhance the activity of the 
peptidomimetic. Competitive binding studies were carried out to evaluate the 
binding of potent peptidomimetics to HER2-overexpressing cancer cell lines. 
Results indicated that compounds exhibiting antiproliferative activity in breast 
cancer cell lines bind to the cells that overexpress HER2 protein.

DOI: 10.1039/C1MD00126D
PMCID: PMC3163471
PMID: 21887403