1. J Bacteriol. 1990 Jun;172(6):2888-93. doi: 10.1128/jb.172.6.2888-2893.1990.

SecY, a multispanning integral membrane protein, contains a potential leader 
peptidase cleavage site.

Akiyama Y(1), Inada T, Nakamura Y, Ito K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

SecY is an Escherichia coli integral membrane protein required for efficient 
translocation of other proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane; it is embedded 
in this membrane by the 10 transmembrane segments. Among several SecY-alkaline 
phosphatase (PhoA) fusion proteins that we constructed previously, SecY-PhoA 
fusion 3-3, in which PhoA is fused to the third periplasmic region of SecY just 
after the fifth transmembrane segment, was found to be subject to rapid 
proteolytic processing in vivo. Both the SecY and PhoA products of this cleavage 
have been identified immunologically. In contrast, cleavage of SecY-PhoA 3-3 was 
barely observed in a lep mutant with a temperature-sensitive leader peptidase. 
The full-length fusion protein accumulated in this mutant was cleaved in vitro 
by the purified leader peptidase. A sequence Ala-202-Ile-Ala located near the 
proposed interface between transmembrane segment 5 and periplasmic domain 3 of 
SecY was found to be responsible for the recognition and cleavage by the leader 
peptidase, since a mutated fusion protein with Phe-Ile-Phe at this position was 
no longer cleaved even in the wild-type cells. These results indicate that SecY 
contains a potential leader peptidase cleavage site that undergoes cleavage if 
the PhoA sequence is attached carboxy terminally. Thus, transmembrane segment 5 
of SecY can fulfill both of the two important functions of the signal peptide, 
translocation and cleavage, although the latter function is cryptic in the 
normal SecY protein.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.6.2888-2893.1990
PMCID: PMC209085
PMID: 2188944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]