1. Immunobiology. 2012 Feb;217(2):265-71. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.07.020. Epub 
2011 Jul 26.

Complement polymorphisms: geographical distribution and relevance to disease.

Ermini L(1), Wilson IJ, Goodship TH, Sheerin NS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.

The evolution of man has been characterised by recurrent episodes of migration 
and settlement with infectious disease a constant threat. This long history of 
demographic change, together with the action of evolutionary forces such as 
natural selection and genetic drift, has shaped human genetic diversity. In 
particular, the interaction between humans, pathogens and the environment has 
played a crucial role in generating patterns of human genetic variation. The 
complement system plays a crucial role in the early protective immune response 
after exposure to a pathogen. Pathogens, over time, have developed mechanisms to 
circumvent the effects of complement which in turn has led to development of a 
more complex complement system. During the evolution of the complement system 
genes coding complement proteins have evolved polymorphisms, some of which have 
a functional effect, and this may reflect human-pathogen interaction and 
geographical origin. An example is the polymorphism Ile62Val (rs800292 (A>G)) in 
the complement regulator Factor H gene which alters the susceptibility to 
age-related macular degeneration (AMD), with the Ile62 polymorphism protecting 
against AMD. When sub-Saharan African and European populations are compared, the 
frequency of this polymorphism shows a very marked geographical distribution. 
Polymorphisms in other complement genes such as complement factor B show similar 
trends. This paper describes the geographical variation present in complement 
genes and discusses the implications of these observations. The analysis of 
genetic variation in complement genes is a promising tool to unravel mechanisms 
of host-pathogen interaction and can provide new insights into the evolution of 
the human immune system.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.07.020
PMID: 21899915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]