1. Biochemistry. 2011 Nov 1;50(43):9273-82. doi: 10.1021/bi2010027. Epub 2011 Oct
 5.

Hydrogen/deuterium exchange and electron-transfer dissociation mass spectrometry 
determine the interface and dynamics of apolipoprotein E oligomerization.

Huang RY(1), Garai K, Frieden C, Gross ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
Missouri 63130, United States.

Apolipoprotein E, a 34 kDa protein, plays a key role in triglyceride and 
cholesterol metabolism. Of the three common isoforms (ApoE2, -3, and -4), only 
ApoE4 is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. All three isoforms of wild-type 
ApoE self-associate to form oligomers, a process that may have functional 
consequences. Although the C-terminal domain, residues 216-299, of ApoE is 
believed to mediate self-association, the specific residues involved in this 
process are not known. Here we report the use of hydrogen/deuterium exchange 
(H/DX) coupled with enzymatic digestion to identify those regions in the 
sequence of full-length apoE involved in oligomerization. For this 
determination, we compared the results of H/DX of the wild-type proteins and 
those of monomeric forms obtained by modifying four residues in the C-terminal 
domain. The three wild-type and mutant isoforms show similar structures based on 
their similar H/DX kinetics and extents of exchange. Regions of the C-terminus 
(residues 230-270) of the ApoE isoforms show significant differences of 
deuterium uptake between oligomeric and monomeric forms, confirming that 
oligomerization occurs at these regions. To achieve single amino acid 
resolution, we examined the extents of H/DX by using electron transfer 
dissociation (ETD) fragmentation of peptides representing selected regions of 
both the monomeric and the oligomeric forms of ApoE4. From these experiments, we 
could identify the specific residues involved in ApoE oligomerization. In 
addition, our results verify that ApoE4 is composed of a compact structure at 
its N-terminal domain. Regions of C-terminal domain, however, appear to lack 
defined structure.

DOI: 10.1021/bi2010027
PMCID: PMC3202646
PMID: 21899263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]