1. Med Oncol. 2012 Sep;29(3):1928-34. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0057-z. Epub 2011
Sep  9.

Genetic variants of MnSOD and GPX1 and susceptibility to bladder cancer in a 
Turkish population.

Kucukgergin C(1), Sanli O, Amasyalı AS, Tefik T, Seckin S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey.

This study was conducted to investigate the association of genetic polymorphisms 
in the MnSOD and GPX1 genes with the risk and invasiveness of bladder cancer in 
a Turkish population. This prospectively designed study enrolled 157 patients 
with bladder cancer (mean age 63.2 ± 10.86 years) and 224 healthy controls (mean 
age 61.7 ± 8.39 years). Genotyping of the MnSOD Ala-9Val and GPX1 Pro198Leu 
polymorphisms was carried out by PCR-RFLP. No significant difference was found 
in MnSOD genotype distributions between the controls and the bladder cancer 
patients. However, the Leu/Leu genotype of GPX1 was associated with a 
significantly higher risk of bladder cancer than the Pro/Pro genotype. When 
stratified according to tumor stage, the Leu/Leu genotype of GPX1 was more 
frequently observed in bladder cancer patients with high-stage tumors than those 
with low-stage tumors. Additionally, patients carrying both Ala/Ala of MnSOD and 
Leu/Leu of GPX1 had the highest risk of developing bladder cancer. In 
conclusion, the present study indicates that the GPX1 Pro198Leu polymorphism may 
be associated with the risk and development of invasive bladder cancer. In 
addition, the combination of the MnSOD Ala/Ala and GPX1 Leu/Leu genotypes may 
have a synergistic effect on disease risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-011-0057-z
PMID: 21904836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]