1. Eur Heart J. 2012 Feb;33(3):325-34. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr350. Epub 2011
Sep  6.

Genetic variants, plasma lipoprotein(a) levels, and risk of cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality among two prospective cohorts of type 2 diabetes.

Qi Q(1), Workalemahu T, Zhang C, Hu FB, Qi L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington 
Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

AIMS: To examine the relations between genetic loci, plasma lipoprotein(a) 
[Lp(a)] levels, and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk among diabetic patients 
and compare with the observations in the general population.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In two prospective cohorts of patients with type 2 diabetes 
(n= 2308) from the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professional Follow-Up 
Study, we performed (i) genome-wide association (GWA) scans for plasma Lp(a); 
(ii) prospective analysis of plasma Lp(a) for CVD risk and mortality; and (iii) 
genetic association analysis for CVD risk and mortality. Meta-analysis of the 
two GWA scans yielded 71 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on chromosome 6q 
associated with plasma Lp(a) levels at a genome-wide significance level (P< 5 × 
10(-8)). The SNP rs10455872 in LPA was most strongly associated with Lp(a) (P= 
4.60 × 10(-39)). Forward-selection analysis indicated that rs10455872 and other 
five SNPs in a region encompassing LPA, PLG, SLC22A3, and LPAL2 genes were 
independently associated with Lp(a) levels and jointly explained ∼20% of 
variation in diabetic patients. In prospective analysis, we did not find any 
significant association between plasma levels and CVD incidence; the relative 
risk for coronary heart disease (CHD), CVD, and CVD death was 1.05 [95% 
confidence interval (CI): 0.95-1.15], 1.05 (0.96-1.15), and 1.21 (0.99-1.47) per 
1-SD higher log-transformed Lp(a) levels, respectively. Consistently, none of 
the Lp(a) SNPs were associated with CVD risk or mortality (all P> 0.09). For the 
best SNP rs10455872 for plasma Lp(a) levels, the OR for CHD, CVD, and CVD death 
was 0.94 (95% CI: 0.69-1.28), 0.97 (0.72-1.29), and 1.23 (0.79-1.92), 
respectively. The genetic effect on CHD risk showed a significant heterogeneity 
between the diabetic and the general populations (P= 0.006).
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that the effect of Lp(a) on CVD risk among 
diabetic patients might be different from that in the general population. 
Diabetes status may attenuate the relation between Lp(a) and cardiovascular 
risk.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr350
PMCID: PMC3270044
PMID: 21900290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]