1. J Med Virol. 2011 Nov;83(11):1869-75. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22209.

Genotypic tropism of antiretroviral-treated patients with drug resistant HIV-1.

Parczewski M(1), Leszczyszyn-Pynka M, Urbanska A, Bander D, Boron-Kaczmarska A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Szczecin, Poland. mparczewski@yahoo.co.uk

CCR5 inhibitors remain an attractive antiretroviral treatment option for 
HIV-infected patients; however, tropism testing should be utilized prior their 
introduction. This study analyzed genotypic HIV-1 tropisms in patients with 
evidence of genotypic drug resistance to antiretroviral therapies in Northwest 
Poland. V3 loop sequences were analyzed from plasma samples obtained from 
patients presenting with virologic treatment failure while on combined 
antiretroviral treatment and with evidence of genotypic drug resistance. 
Genotypic X4 and R5 tropisms were identified using the geno2pheno algorithm with 
a false positive rate threshold set at 10%. Clinical data for all patients 
examined was collected, in addition to determining the CCR5 Δ32 genotype and 
calculating the genotypic susceptibility score (GSS). Virologic treatment 
failure and the presence of drug resistant mutations were observed in 37/450 
(8.4%) patients on cART (combination antiretroviral therapy) with successful 
tropism analysis carried out on 35 (95%) cases. In 22 (62.9%) and 13 (37.1%) 
cases the R5 and X4 tropisms were predicted, respectively. An association 
between viral X4 tropism and the M41L (P = 0.04) resistance mutation and R5 
tropism and the K103N (P = 0.07) resistance mutation were observed. GSS values 
were lower in the group with NRTI (P = 0.01) and NNRTI resistance (P = 0.048). 
In the majority of the drug resistant patients, R5 tropic viruses were found. As 
genotypic tropism testing is easy to carry out and interpret, its use in 
clinical practice would be highly useful in determining the use of appropriate 
drug therapies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.22209
PMID: 21915859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]