1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Oct 28;413(3):584-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.08.058. Epub
2011  Sep 6.

Actin filament dynamics in the actomyosin VI complex is regulated allosterically 
by calcium-calmodulin light chain.

Prochniewicz E(1), Pierre A, McCullough BR, Chin HF, Cao W, Saunders LP, Thomas 
DD, De La Cruz EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The contractile and enzymatic activities of myosin VI are regulated by calcium 
binding to associated calmodulin (CaM) light chains. We have used transient 
phosphorescence anisotropy to monitor the microsecond rotational dynamics of 
erythrosin-iodoacetamide-labeled actin with strongly bound myosin VI (MVI) and 
to evaluate the effect of MVI-bound CaM light chain on actin filament dynamics. 
MVI binding lowers the amplitude but accelerates actin filament microsecond 
dynamics in a Ca(2+)- and CaM-dependent manner, as indicated from an increase in 
the final anisotropy and a decrease in the correlation time of transient 
phosphorescence anisotropy decays. MVI with bound apo-CaM or Ca(2+)-CaM weakly 
affects actin filament microsecond dynamics, relative to other myosins (e.g., 
muscle myosin II and myosin Va). CaM dissociation from bound MVI damps filament 
rotational dynamics (i.e., increases the torsional rigidity), such that the 
perturbation is comparable to that induced by other characterized myosins. 
Analysis of individual actin filament shape fluctuations imaged by fluorescence 
microscopy reveals a correlated effect on filament bending mechanics. These data 
support a model in which Ca(2+)-dependent CaM binding to the IQ domain of MVI is 
linked to an allosteric reorganization of the actin binding site(s), which 
alters the structural dynamics and the mechanical rigidity of actin filaments. 
Such modulation of filament dynamics may contribute to the Ca(2)(+)- and 
CaM-dependent regulation of myosin VI motility and ATP utilization.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.08.058
PMCID: PMC3633491
PMID: 21910998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]