1. Genet Epidemiol. 2011 Dec;35(8):755-65. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20625. Epub 2011 Sep
 15.

Multilocus association testing with penalized regression.

Basu S(1), Pan W, Shen X, Oetting WS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

In multilocus association analysis, since some markers may not be associated 
with a trait, it seems attractive to use penalized regression with the 
capability of automatic variable selection. On the other hand, in spite of a 
rapidly growing body of literature on penalized regression, most focus on 
variable selection and outcome prediction, for which penalized methods are 
generally more effective than their nonpenalized counterparts. However, for 
statistical inference, i.e. hypothesis testing and interval estimation, it is 
less clear how penalized methods would perform, or even how to best apply them, 
largely due to lack of studies on this topic. In our motivating data for a 
cohort of kidney transplant recipients, it is of primary interest to assess 
whether a group of genetic variants are associated with a binary clinical 
outcome, acute rejection at 6 months. In this article, we study some technical 
issues and alternative implementations of hypothesis testing in Lasso penalized 
logistic regression, and compare their performance with each other and with 
several existing global tests, some of which are specifically designed as 
variance component tests for high-dimensional data. The most interesting, and 
perhaps surprising, conclusion of this study is that, for low to moderately 
high-dimensional data, statistical tests based on Lasso penalized regression are 
not necessarily more powerful than some existing global tests. In addition, in 
penalized regression, rather than building a test based on a single selected 
"best" model, combining multiple tests, each of which is built on a candidate 
model, might be more promising.

Â© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20625
PMCID: PMC3350336
PMID: 21922539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]