1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Mol Cancer. 2011 Sep 19;10:115. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-115.

Differential modulatory effects of GSK-3β and HDM2 on sorafenib-induced AIF 
nuclear translocation (programmed necrosis) in melanoma.

Liu Q(1), Mier JW, Panka DJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Retraction in
    Mol Cancer. 2021 Jun 15;20(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s12943-021-01378-8.

Comment in
    Fed Regist. 2020 Nov 25;85(228):75339-75341.

BACKGROUND: GSK-3β phosphorylates numerous substrates that govern cell survival. 
It phosphorylates p53, for example, and induces its nuclear export, 
HDM2-dependent ubiquitination, and proteasomal degradation. GSK-3β can either 
enhance or inhibit programmed cell death, depending on the nature of the 
pro-apoptotic stimulus. We previously showed that the multikinase inhibitor 
sorafenib activated GSK-3β and that this activation attenuated the cytotoxic 
effects of the drug in various BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines. In this report, 
we describe the results of studies exploring the effects of GSK-3β on the 
cytotoxicity and antitumor activity of sorafenib combined with the HDM2 
antagonist MI-319.
RESULTS: MI-319 alone increased p53 levels and p53-dependent gene expression in 
melanoma cells but did not induce programmed cell death. Its cytotoxicity, 
however, was augmented in some melanoma cell lines by the addition of sorafenib. 
In responsive cell lines, the MI-319/sorafenib combination induced the 
disappearance of p53 from the nucleus, the down modulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, 
the translocation of p53 to the mitochondria and that of AIF to the nuclei. 
These events were all GSK-3β-dependent in that they were blocked with a GSK-3β 
shRNA and facilitated in otherwise unresponsive melanoma cell lines by the 
introduction of a constitutively active form of the kinase (GSK-3β-S9A). These 
modulatory effects of GSK-3β on the activities of the sorafenib/MI-319 
combination were the exact reverse of its effects on the activities of sorafenib 
alone, which induced the down modulation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL and the nuclear 
translocation of AIF only in cells in which GSK-3β activity was either down 
modulated or constitutively low. In A375 xenografts, the antitumor effects of 
sorafenib and MI-319 were additive and associated with the down modulation of 
Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, the nuclear translocation of AIF, and increased suppression of 
tumor angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate a complex partnership between GSK-3β and HDM2 
in the regulation of p53 function in the nucleus and mitochondria. The data 
suggest that the ability of sorafenib to activate GSK-3β and alter the 
intracellular distribution of p53 may be exploitable as an adjunct to agents 
that prevent the HDM2-dependent degradation of p53 in the treatment of melanoma.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-115
PMCID: PMC3189171
PMID: 21929745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]