1. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Aug;14(6):441-51. doi: 
10.3109/15622975.2011.605470. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

The Val66Met polymorphism of the BDNF gene in anorexia nervosa: new data and a 
meta-analysis.

Brandys MK(1), Kas MJ, van Elburg AA, Ophoff R, Slof-Op't Landt MC, Middeldorp 
CM, Boomsma DI, van Furth EF, Slagboom PE, Adan RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of 
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: The Val66Met polymorphism (rs6265) of the BDNF gene is a 
non-synonymous polymorphism, previously associated with anorexia nervosa (AN).
METHODS: We genotyped rs6265 in 235 patients with AN and 643 controls. 
Furthermore, we performed a systematic review of all case-control and 
family-based studies testing this SNP in AN, and combined the results in a 
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: The results of the case-control study were non-significant. For the 
meta-analysis, nine studies were identified (ncases = 2,767; ncontrols = 3,322, 
ntrios = 53) and included. Primarily, the analyses indicated an association with 
OR of 1.11 (P = 0.024) in the allelic contrast, and OR of 1.14 (P = 0.025) for 
the dominant effect of the Met allele. However, additional analyses revealed 
that the first published study (from those included in the meta-analysis) overly 
influenced the pooled effect size (possibly due to a phenomenon known as a 
winner's curse). When this case-control study was replaced by a trio study 
(ntrios = 293) performed on a largely overlapping sample, the effect size became 
smaller and non-significant, both for the allelic contrast (OR = 1.07, P = 
0.156) and the dominant effect (OR = 1.07, P = 0.319). The quality of included 
studies was good and there was no significant heterogeneity across the effect 
sizes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses indicate that the BDNF Val66Met variant is not 
associated with AN at detectable levels.

DOI: 10.3109/15622975.2011.605470
PMID: 21936709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]