1. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;7(1):60-73. doi: 10.1007/s11481-011-9312-5. 
Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cognitive function: are prostaglandins 
at the heart of cognitive impairment in dementia and delirium?

Cunningham C(1), Skelly DT.

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology & Trinity College Institute of 
Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Republic of Ireland. 
colm.cunningham@tcd.ie

Studies of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in rheumatoid 
arthritis imply that inflammation is important in the development of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). However, these drugs have not alleviated the symptoms of AD in 
those who have already developed dementia. This suggests that the primary 
mediator targeted by these drugs, PGE2, is not actively suppressing memory 
function in AD. Amyloid-Î² oligomers appear to be important for the mild 
cognitive changes seen in AD transgenic mice, yet amyloid immunotherapy has also 
proven unsuccessful in clinical trials. Collectively, these findings indicate 
that NSAIDs may target a prodromal process in mice that has already passed in 
those diagnosed with AD, and that synaptic and neuronal loss are key 
determinants of cognitive dysfunction in AD. While the role of inflammation has 
not yet become clear, inflammatory processes definitely have a negative impact 
on cognitive function during episodes of delirium during dementia. Delirium is 
an acute and profound impairment of cognitive function frequently occurring in 
aged and demented patients exposed to systemic inflammatory insults, which is 
now recognised to contribute to long-term cognitive decline. Recent work in 
animal models is beginning to shed light on the interactions between systemic 
inflammation and CNS pathology in these acute exacerbations of dementia. This 
review will assess the role of prostaglandin synthesis in the memory impairments 
observed in dementia and delirium and will examine the relative contribution of 
amyloid, synaptic and neuronal loss. We will also discuss how understanding the 
role of inflammatory mediators in delirious episodes will have major 
implications for ameliorating the rate of decline in the demented population.

DOI: 10.1007/s11481-011-9312-5
PMCID: PMC3280386
PMID: 21932048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]