1. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Nov;22(22):4256-67. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-03-0207. Epub
2011  Sep 21.

Tyrosine phosphorylation within the SH3 domain regulates CAS subcellular 
localization, cell migration, and invasiveness.

Janoštiak R(1), Tolde O, Brůhová Z, Novotný M, Hanks SK, Rösel D, Brábek J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Charles University, 12843 Prague, Czech Republic.

Crk-associated substrate (CAS) is a major tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in 
cells transformed by v-crk and v-src oncogenes and plays an important role in 
invasiveness of Src-transformed cells. A novel phosphorylation site on CAS, 
Tyr-12 (Y12) within the ligand-binding hydrophobic pocket of the CAS SH3 domain, 
was identified and found to be enriched in Src-transformed cells and invasive 
human carcinoma cells. To study the biological significance of CAS Y12 
phosphorylation, phosphomimicking Y12E and nonphosphorylatable Y12F mutants of 
CAS were studied. The phosphomimicking mutation decreased interaction of the CAS 
SH3 domain with focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and PTP-PEST and reduced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of FAK. Live-cell imaging showed that green fluorescent 
protein-tagged CAS Y12E mutant is, in contrast to wild-type or Y12F CAS, 
excluded from focal adhesions but retains its localization to podosome-type 
adhesions. Expression of CAS-Y12F in cas-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted 
in hyperphosphorylation of the CAS substrate domain, and this was associated 
with slower turnover of focal adhesions and decreased cell migration. Moreover, 
expression of CAS Y12F in Src-transformed cells greatly decreased invasiveness 
when compared to wild-type CAS expression. These findings reveal an important 
role of CAS Y12 phosphorylation in the regulation of focal adhesion assembly, 
cell migration, and invasiveness of Src-transformed cells.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E11-03-0207
PMCID: PMC3216652
PMID: 21937722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]