1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):4471-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1236-x. Epub 2011
 Sep 22.

A folate receptor alpha double-mutated haplotype 1816delC-1841A is distributed 
throughout Eurasia and associated with lower erythrocyte folate levels.

Nilsson TK(1), Laanpere M, Altmäe S, Serra-Majem L, Salumets A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Chemistry, Örebro University 
Hospital, and School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro University, 701 85, 
Örebro, Sweden. torbjorn.nilsson@orebroll.se

Folate is crucial for various cellular functions. Several transport mechanisms 
allow folate to enter the intracellular compartment with folate receptor-α being 
the major high-affinity receptor. Rare genetic variations in exons of the FR-α 
gene, FOLR1, were recently shown to cause severe folate deficiency accompanied 
by neurological and other disturbances. So far, similar effects by genetic 
variation in noncoding parts of the FOLR1 gene have not been identified. The aim 
of our study was to determine biochemically the haplotype structure of two 
linked polymorphisms in the FOLR1 gene, 1816delC and 1841G>A, the prevalences of 
the mutated alleles across Eurasia, and their possible effects on physiological 
folate levels in vivo. For this purpose we employed allele-specific PCR and 
Pyrosequencing technology and performed genotyping in 738 subjects from Spain, 
387 from Sweden, 952 from Estonia, and 47 from Korea. We demonstrate the 
presence of an ancient double-mutated haplotype 1816delC-1841A in the FOLR1 
gene, with the prevalence of the mutated allele being highest among Koreans 
(q = 0.074), lower in Estonians (q = 0.017), Spaniards (q = 0.0061), and the 
lowest among Swedes (q = 0.0026). Erythrocyte folate levels were studied in the 
Spanish population sample, where subjects carrying the double-mutated FOLR1 
haplotype had significantly reduced levels by 27% (P = 0.039), adjusted for 
serum vitamin B(12) levels and MTHFR 677C>T genotype, while the mean serum 
folate levels were only 20% lower among the carriers (P = 0.11). Plasma 
homocysteine and cobalamin levels did not differ. Thus, we have demonstrated by 
molecular haplotyping an ancient double-mutated haplotype 1816delC-1841A in the 
FOLR1 gene, spread over the whole Eurasian continent, which may be of functional 
importance for uptake of folate in red blood cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-011-1236-x
PMID: 21938430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]