1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024536. Epub 2011 Sep
8.

Expression of microRNAs in the stem cell niche of the adult mouse incisor.

Jheon AH(1), Li CY, Wen T, Michon F, Klein OD.

Author information:
(1)Program in Craniofacial and Mesenchymal Biology, Department of Orofacial 
Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, United States 
of America.

The mouse incisor is a valuable but under-utilized model organ for studying the 
behavior of adult stem cells. This remarkable tooth grows continuously 
throughout the animal's lifetime and houses two distinct epithelial stem cell 
niches called the labial and lingual cervical loop (laCL and liCL, 
respectively). These stem cells produce progeny that undergo a series of 
well-defined differentiation events en route to becoming enamel-producing 
ameloblasts. During this differentiation process, the progeny move out of the 
stem cell niche and migrate toward the distal tip of the tooth. Although the 
molecular pathways involved in tooth development are well documented, little is 
known about the roles of miRNAs in this process. We used microarray technology 
to compare the expression of miRNAs in three regions of the adult mouse incisor: 
the laCL, liCL, and ameloblasts. We identified 26 and 35 differentially 
expressed miRNAs from laCL/liCL and laCL/ameloblast comparisons, respectively. 
Out of 10 miRNAs selected for validation by qPCR, all transcripts were confirmed 
to be differentially expressed. In situ hybridization and target prediction 
analyses further supported the reliability of our microarray results. These 
studies point to miRNAs that likely play a role in the renewal and 
differentiation of adult stem cells during stem cell-fueled incisor growth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024536
PMCID: PMC3169592
PMID: 21931743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.