1. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 15;187(8):4374-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002488. Epub
2011  Sep 19.

Complement regulation at necrotic cell lesions is impaired by the age-related 
macular degeneration-associated factor-H His402 risk variant.

Lauer N(1), Mihlan M, Hartmann A, Schlötzer-Schrehardt U, Keilhauer C, Scholl 
HP, Charbel Issa P, Holz F, Weber BH, Skerka C, Zipfel PF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology, 07745 Jena, Germany.

Age-related macular degeneration is a leading form of blindness in Western 
countries and is associated with a common SNP (rs 1061170/Y402H) in the Factor H 
gene, which encodes the two complement inhibitors Factor H and FHL1. However, 
the functional consequences of this Tyr(402) His exchange in domain 7 are not 
precisely defined. In this study, we show that the Tyr(402) His sequence 
variation affects Factor H surface recruitment by monomeric C-reactive protein 
(mCRP) to specific patches on the surface of necrotic retinal pigment epithelial 
cells. Enhanced attachment of the protective Tyr(402) variants of both Factor H 
and FHL1 by mCRP results in more efficient complement control and further 
provides an anti-inflammatory environment. In addition, we demonstrate that mCRP 
is generated on the surface of necrotic retinal pigment epithelial cells and 
that this newly formed mCRP colocalizes with the cell damage marker annexin V. 
Bound to the cell surface, Factor H-mCRP complexes allow complement inactivation 
and reduce the release of the proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α. This mCRP-mediated 
complement inhibitory and anti-inflammatory activity at necrotic membrane 
lesions is affected by residue 402 of Factor H and defines a new role for mCRP, 
for Factor H, and also for the mCRP-Factor H complex. The increased protective 
capacity of the Tyr(402) Factor H variant allows better and more efficient 
clearance and removal of cellular debris and reduces inflammation and pathology.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002488
PMID: 21930971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]