1. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024742. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

Environmental levels of the antiviral oseltamivir induce development of 
resistance mutation H274Y in influenza A/H1N1 virus in mallards.

Järhult JD(1), Muradrasoli S, Wahlgren J, Söderström H, Orozovic G, Gunnarsson 
G, Bröjer C, Latorre-Margalef N, Fick J, Grabic R, Lennerstrand J, Waldenström 
J, Lundkvist A, Olsen B.

Author information:
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden. josef.jarhult@medsci.uu.se

Comment in
    Nature. 2019 Sep;573(7774):S53. doi: 10.1038/d41586-019-02752-9.

Oseltamivir (Tamiflu®) is the most widely used drug against influenza infections 
and is extensively stockpiled worldwide as part of pandemic preparedness plans. 
However, resistance is a growing problem and in 2008-2009, seasonal human 
influenza A/H1N1 virus strains in most parts of the world carried the mutation 
H274Y in the neuraminidase gene which causes resistance to the drug. The active 
metabolite of oseltamivir, oseltamivir carboxylate (OC), is poorly degraded in 
sewage treatment plants and surface water and has been detected in aquatic 
environments where the natural influenza reservoir, dabbling ducks, can be 
exposed to the substance. To assess if resistance can develop under these 
circumstances, we infected mallards with influenza A/H1N1 virus and exposed the 
birds to 80 ng/L, 1 µg/L and 80 µg/L of OC through their sole water source. By 
sequencing the neuraminidase gene from fecal samples, we found that H274Y 
occurred at 1 µg/L of OC and rapidly dominated the viral population at 80 µg/L. 
IC₅₀ for OC was increased from 2-4 nM in wild-type viruses to 400-700 nM in 
H274Y mutants as measured by a neuraminidase inhibition assay. This is 
consistent with the decrease in sensitivity to OC that has been noted among 
human clinical isolates carrying H274Y. Environmental OC levels have been 
measured to 58-293 ng/L during seasonal outbreaks and are expected to reach 
µg/L-levels during pandemics. Thus, resistance could be induced in influenza 
viruses circulating among wild ducks. As influenza viruses can cross species 
barriers, oseltamivir resistance could spread to human-adapted strains with 
pandemic potential disabling oseltamivir, a cornerstone in pandemic preparedness 
planning. We propose surveillance in wild birds as a measure to understand the 
resistance situation in nature and to monitor it over time. Strategies to lower 
environmental levels of OC include improved sewage treatment and, more 
importantly, a prudent use of antivirals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024742
PMCID: PMC3171471
PMID: 21931841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: F. Hoffman - La Roche Ltd. 
(www.roche.com) provided deuterium-labeled OC for the experiment. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.