1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002270. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002270. Epub
2011  Sep 8.

A genome-wide metabolic QTL analysis in Europeans implicates two loci shaped by 
recent positive selection.

Nicholson G(1), Rantalainen M, Li JV, Maher AD, Malmodin D, Ahmadi KR, Faber JH, 
Barrett A, Min JL, Rayner NW, Toft H, Krestyaninova M, Viksna J, Neogi SG, Dumas 
ME, Sarkans U; MolPAGE Consortium; Donnelly P, Illig T, Adamski J, Suhre K, 
Allen M, Zondervan KT, Spector TD, Nicholson JK, Lindon JC, Baunsgaard D, Holmes 
E, McCarthy MI, Holmes CC.

Collaborators: Bell J, McCarthy M, Cardon L, Donnelly P, Southern E, Anson J, 
Lathrop M, Gut I, Schuster M, Berlin K, Boel E, Fleckner J, Uhlén M, Bergman T, 
Stich V, Brazma A, Sarkans U, Viksna J, Nicholson J, Bernardinelli L, Hoffmann 
S, Inganas M, Spector T, Langin D, Ponten F, Langen H, Evers S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
nicholso@stats.ox.ac.uk

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Dec;4(6):714-5. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.962175.

We have performed a metabolite quantitative trait locus (mQTL) study of the (1)H 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H NMR) metabolome in humans, 
building on recent targeted knowledge of genetic drivers of metabolic 
regulation. Urine and plasma samples were collected from two cohorts of 
individuals of European descent, with one cohort comprised of female twins 
donating samples longitudinally. Sample metabolite concentrations were 
quantified by (1)H NMR and tested for association with genome-wide 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Four metabolites' concentrations 
exhibited significant, replicable association with SNP variation 
(8.6×10(-11)<p<2.8×10(-23)). Three of these-trimethylamine, 3-amino-isobutyrate, 
and an N-acetylated compound-were measured in urine. The other-dimethylamine-was 
measured in plasma. Trimethylamine and dimethylamine mapped to a single genetic 
region (hence we report a total of three implicated genomic regions). Two of the 
three hit regions lie within haplotype blocks (at 2p13.1 and 10q24.2) that carry 
the genetic signature of strong, recent, positive selection in European 
populations. Genes NAT8 and PYROXD2, both with relatively uncharacterized 
functional roles, are good candidates for mediating the corresponding mQTL 
associations. The study's longitudinal twin design allowed detailed 
variance-components analysis of the sources of population variation in 
metabolite levels. The mQTLs explained 40%-64% of biological population 
variation in the corresponding metabolites' concentrations. These effect sizes 
are stronger than those reported in a recent, targeted mQTL study of metabolites 
in serum using the targeted-metabolomics Biocrates platform. By re-analysing our 
plasma samples using the Biocrates platform, we replicated the mQTL findings of 
the previous study and discovered a previously uncharacterized yet substantial 
familial component of variation in metabolite levels in addition to the 
heritability contribution from the corresponding mQTL effects.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002270
PMCID: PMC3169529
PMID: 21931564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.