1. Andrologia. 2012 May;44 Suppl 1:560-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2011.01227.x. 
Epub 2011 Sep 22.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism in TP53 may be a genetic risk factor for 
Iranian patients with idiopathic male infertility.

Mashayekhi F(1), Hadiyan SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Guilan, Rasht, 
Iran. umistbiology@yahoo.co.uk

Male infertility is a heterogeneous disorder that contributes to the impairment 
of spermatogenesis. The purpose of this study was to assess whether tumour 
suppressor p53 gene (Tp53) polymorphism is associated with idiopathic male 
infertility in the Iranian population. The prevalence of G → C substitution at 
codon 72 in exon 4 was determined in 110 idiopathic infertile azoo-/oligospermic 
patients and 180 fertile healthy control men. PCR-restriction fragment 
polymorphism analysis was employed to determine the genotypes. PCR amplicons 
were subjected to restriction digestion with Bstu1 and separated by gel 
electrophoresis. The Arg/Arg genotype was found more frequently among men with 
idiopathic infertility (32.7%) than among controls (17.7%). No significant 
difference was observed between Pro/Pro genotype and Arg/Arg + Arg/Pro genotypes 
among men with idiopathic infertility and controls (P = 0.11; OR: 0.36; 95% CI: 
0.36-1.10). In contrast, a significant difference was observed in the comparison 
of the Arg/Arg genotype and Arg/Pro + Pro/Pro genotypes among patients and 
controls (P = 0.004; OR: 2.25; 95% CI: 1.29-3.90). Allele frequency evaluation 
suggested a significantly higher incidence of the Arg allele among infertile men 
compared with controls (56% versus 44%; OR: 1.6; 95% CI: 0.92-2.80). In 
conclusion, arginine allele appears to be at greater risk of developing 
idiopathic infertility in Iranian men.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2011.01227.x
PMID: 21943018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]