1. J Cell Biol. 2011 Oct 3;195(1):131-45. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201008013. Epub 2011
Sep  26.

EMILIN1-α4/α9 integrin interaction inhibits dermal fibroblast and keratinocyte 
proliferation.

Danussi C(1), Petrucco A, Wassermann B, Pivetta E, Modica TM, Del Bel Belluz L, 
Colombatti A, Spessotto P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology 2, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, 
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, National Cancer Institute, 
33081 Aviano, Italy.

EMILIN1 promotes α4β1 integrin-dependent cell adhesion and migration and reduces 
pro-transforming growth factor-β processing. A knockout mouse model was used to 
unravel EMILIN1 functions in skin where the protein was abundantly expressed in 
the dermal stroma and where EMILIN1-positive fibrils reached the basal 
keratinocyte layer. Loss of EMILIN1 caused dermal and epidermal 
hyperproliferation and accelerated wound closure. We identified the direct 
engagement of EMILIN1 to α4β1 and α9β1 integrins as the mechanism underlying the 
homeostatic role exerted by EMILIN1. The lack of EMILIN1-α4/α9 integrin 
interaction was accompanied by activation of PI3K/Akt and Erk1/2 pathways as a 
result of the reduction of PTEN. The down-regulation of PTEN empowered Erk1/2 
phosphorylation that in turn inhibited Smad2 signaling by phosphorylation of 
residues Ser245/250/255. These results highlight the important regulatory role 
of an extracellular matrix component in skin proliferation. In addition, EMILIN1 
is identified as a novel ligand for keratinocyte α9β1 integrin, suggesting 
prospective roles for this receptor-ligand pair in skin homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201008013
PMCID: PMC3187715
PMID: 21949412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]