1. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2012 Jul-Sep;26(3):277-81. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e318231a8ac.

NALP1/NLRP1 genetic variants are associated with Alzheimer disease.

Pontillo A(1), Catamo E, Arosio B, Mari D, Crovella S.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, University of 
Trieste, Trieste, Italy. pontillo@burlo.trieste.it

Alzheimer disease (AD) is a complex neurodegenerative disease. Genetic and 
molecular studies have confirmed that in the human brain, amyloid-Î² fibrils can 
induce, through the activation of NALP1 inflammosome, inflammatory and apoptotic 
responses involved in the pathogenesis of AD. Considering that AD pathogenesis 
is multifactorial, we hypothesized that NALP1/NLRP1 could be a susceptibility 
gene involved in the devolvement of the disease. The possible association 
between 9 selected polymorphisms in the NALP1/NLRP1 gene and AD was evaluated by 
comparing their frequency distribution in an Italian cohort of AD patients (AD, 
n = 276) and in a group of Italian sex-matched and age-matched healthy controls 
without dementia (HC, n = 266). Our study, evidences the association of 4 
nonsynonymous polymorphisms in the NLRP1 gene (rs2137722, rs34733791, 
rs11657747, rs11651595) with AD. The major alleles of all 4 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms and the corresponding homozygote genotypes were more frequent in 
AD patients than in healthy controls, suggesting an association of these 
variants in the predisposition versus the development of the disease. These 
findings seem to support the previously reported role of NALP1 in neuronal 
damage, and provide evidence of an association between single nucleotide 
variations in the NLRP1 gene and AD.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318231a8ac
PMID: 21946017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]