1. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2011 Oct;47(9):640-52. doi: 
10.1007/s11626-011-9451-2. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Optimization of gene delivery methods in Xenopus laevis kidney (A6) and Chinese 
hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines for heterologous expression of Xenopus inner ear 
genes.

Ramirez-Gordillo D(1), Trujillo-Provencio C, Knight VB, Serrano EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, P.O. Box 30001, MSC 3AF, 
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA.

The Xenopus inner ear provides a useful model for studies of hearing and balance 
because it shares features with the mammalian inner ear, and because amphibians 
are capable of regenerating damaged mechanosensory hair cells. The structure and 
function of many proteins necessary for inner ear function have yet to be 
elucidated and require methods for analysis. To this end, we seek to 
characterize Xenopus inner ear genes outside of the animal model through 
heterologous expression in cell lines. As part of this effort, we aimed to 
optimize physical (electroporation), chemical (lipid-mediated; Lipofectamine™ 
2000, Metafectene® Pro), and biological (viral-mediated; BacMam virus Cellular 
Lights™ Tubulin-RFP) gene delivery methods in amphibian (Xenopus; A6) cells and 
mammalian (Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)) cells. We successfully introduced the 
commercially available pEGFP-N3, pmCherry-N1, pEYFP-Tubulin, and Cellular 
Lights™ Tubulin-RFP fluorescent constructs to cells and evaluated their 
transfection or transduction efficiencies using the three gene delivery methods. 
In addition, we analyzed the transfection efficiency of a novel construct 
synthesized in our laboratory by cloning the Xenopus inner ear calcium-activated 
potassium channel β1 subunit, then subcloning the subunit into the pmCherry-N1 
vector. Every gene delivery method was significantly more effective in CHO 
cells. Although results for the A6 cell line were not statistically significant, 
both cell lines illustrate a trend towards more efficient gene delivery using 
viral-mediated methods; however the cost of viral transduction is also much 
higher. Our findings demonstrate the need to improve gene delivery methods for 
amphibian cells and underscore the necessity for a greater understanding of 
amphibian cell biology.

DOI: 10.1007/s11626-011-9451-2
PMCID: PMC4038349
PMID: 21959846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]