1. Clin Genet. 2012 Nov;82(5):453-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01794.x. Epub 
2011 Oct 19.

Deficiency of CRTAP in non-lethal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta reduces 
collagen deposition into matrix.

Valli M(1), Barnes AM, Gallanti A, Cabral WA, Viglio S, Weis MA, Makareeva E, 
Eyre D, Leikin S, Antoniazzi F, Marini JC, Mottes M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry A. Castellani, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Deficiency of any component of the ER-resident collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation 
complex causes recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The complex modifies the 
α1(I)Pro986 residue and contains cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), prolyl 
3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1) and cyclophilin B (CyPB). Fibroblasts normally secrete 
about 10% of CRTAP. Most CRTAP mutations cause a null allele and lethal type VII 
OI. We identified a 7-year-old Egyptian boy with non-lethal type VII OI and 
investigated the effects of his null CRTAP mutation on collagen biochemistry, 
the prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex, and collagen in extracellular matrix. The 
proband is homozygous for an insertion/deletion in CRTAP 
(c.118_133del16insTACCC). His dermal fibroblasts synthesize fully overmodified 
type I collagen, and 3-hydroxylate only 5% of α1(I)Pro986. CRTAP transcripts are 
10% of control. CRTAP protein is absent from proband cells, with residual P3H1 
and normal CyPB levels. Dermal collagen fibril diameters are significantly 
increased. By immunofluorescence of long-term cultures, we identified a severe 
deficiency (10-15% of control) of collagen deposited in extracellular matrix, 
with disorganization of the minimal fibrillar network. Quantitative pulse-chase 
experiments corroborate deficiency of matrix deposition, rather than increased 
matrix turnover. We conclude that defects of extracellular matrix, as well as 
intracellular defects in collagen modification, contribute to the pathology of 
type VII OI.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01794.x
PMCID: PMC3748815
PMID: 21955071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest There are no conflicts of 
interest relevant to this article.