1. Hemoglobin. 2011;35(5-6):463-8. doi: 10.3109/03630269.2011.576354. Epub 2011
Sep  27.

α-Hemoglobin stabilizing protein: a modulating factor in thalassemias?

Wajcman H(1), Vasseur C, Pissard S, Baudin-Creuza V.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U955, IMRB, Université Paris Est, 94010 Créteil, France. 
Henri.Wajcman@inserm.fr

α-Hemoglobin stabilizing protein (AHSP) is a small protein of 102 residues 
induced by GATA-1, Oct-1- and EKLF. It is synthesized at a high level in the red 
blood cell precursors and acts as a chaperone protecting the α-hemoglobin (α-Hb) 
chains against precipitation. α-Hemoglobin stabilizing protein forms a 
heterodimer complex with α-Hb, then displaying modified oxygen binding kinetics. 
In the absence of AHSP, α-Hb oxidizes and precipitates within the erythrocyte 
precursors of bone marrow leading to apoptosis and defective erythropoiesis. 
Several α-Hb variants with a structural abnormality, frequently located in the 
contact area between α-Hb and AHSP, exhibit instability and a thalassemia-like 
syndrome when they are associated with another α-thalassemia (α-thal) 
determinant. We suggest that this disorder could result from a disturbed 
interaction between the abnormal α-Hb chains and AHSP. Hb Groene Hart 
(Pro119>Ser) was one of the first examples in which we observed this 
abnormality. We later verified this mechanism in a list of several variants, now 
considered as being nondeletional α-thalassemias. Conversely, it was 
hypothesized from studies on knock-out mice, that a defect affecting AHSP could 
cause a thalassemia-like syndrome. This was supported in man by studies showing 
that a decreased expression of AHSP linked to specific genetic clades could act 
as a modulating factor in some thalassemia phenotypes. It was also supported by 
our observation of a family from Southeast Asia, in which a child homozygous for 
an AHSP mutant (Val56>Gly) displayed, in his first year of life, a moderate 
thalassemia syndrome. This mutant AHSP was expressed in vitro and demonstrated 
by biochemical and biophysical studies to display a clear defective interaction 
with α-Hb, which could support the hypothesis that the reb blood cell (RBC) 
disorders of the child resulted from this abnormality. It therefore appears that 
AHSP is a factor with a key role in the formation of Hb tetramers and that 
structural abnormalities, either on the α-Hb or on the AHSP, may act as a 
thalassemia modulating factor.

DOI: 10.3109/03630269.2011.576354
PMID: 21950764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]