1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2011 Nov;89(5):396-410. doi: 10.1007/s00223-011-9531-z.
Epub  2011 Sep 28.

Abrogation of Cbl-PI3K interaction increases bone formation and osteoblast 
proliferation.

Brennan T(1), Adapala NS, Barbe MF, Yingling V, Sanjay A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Cbl is an adaptor protein and E3 ligase that plays both positive and negative 
roles in several signaling pathways that affect various cellular functions. 
Tyrosine 737 is unique to Cbl and phosphorylated by Src family kinases. 
Phosphorylated CblY737 creates a binding site for the p85 regulatory subunit of 
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) that also plays an important role in the 
regulation of bone homeostasis. To investigate the role of Cbl-PI3K interaction 
in bone homeostasis, we examined knock-in mice in which the PI3K binding site on 
Cbl was ablated due to the substitution of tyrosine 737 to phenylalanine 
(Cbl(YF/YF), YF mice). We previously reported that bone volume in these mice is 
increased due to decreased osteoclast function (Adapala et al., J Biol Chem 
285:36745-36758, 19). Here, we report that YF mice also have increased bone 
formation and osteoblast numbers. In ex vivo cultures bone marrow-derived YF 
osteoblasts showed increased Col1A expression and their proliferation was also 
significantly augmented. Moreover, proliferation of MC3T3-E1 cells was increased 
after treatment with conditioned medium generated by culturing YF bone marrow 
stromal cells. Expression of stromal derived factor-1 (SDF-1) was increased in 
YF bone marrow stromal cells compared to wild type. Increased immunostaining of 
SDF-1 and CXCR4 was observed in YF bone marrow stromal cells compared to wild 
type. Treatment of YF condition medium with neutralizing anti-SDF-1 and 
anti-CXCR4 antibodies attenuated MC3T3-E1 cell proliferation. Cumulatively, 
these results show that abrogation of Cbl-PI3K interaction perturbs bone 
homeostasis, affecting both osteoclast function and osteoblast proliferation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-011-9531-z
PMCID: PMC3191294
PMID: 21952831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]