1. J Cancer Surviv. 2011 Dec;5(4):358-70. doi: 10.1007/s11764-011-0196-4. Epub
2011  Oct 4.

Survivorship care planning after the institute of medicine recommendations: how 
are we faring?

Stricker CT(1), Jacobs LA, Risendal B, Jones A, Panzer S, Ganz PA, Syrjala KL, 
McCabe MS, Baker KS, Miller K, Casillas J, Rosenstein DL, Campbell M, Palmer SC.

Author information:
(1)Abramson Cancer Center at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. carrie.stricker@uphs.upenn.edu

INTRODUCTION: This study evaluates the concordance of treatment summaries (TSs) 
and survivorship care plans (SCPs) delivered to breast cancer survivors within 
the LIVESTRONG™ Network of Survivorship Centers of Excellence with Institute of 
Medicine (IOM) recommendations and describes additional structure/process 
variables.
METHOD: Seven NCI-designated comprehensive cancer centers and six 
community-based centers participated. TS/SCPs for 65 patients were rated against 
IOM recommendations using a study-derived checklist, and surveys were 
administered to better understand the structure and process of delivering 
TSs/SCPs.
RESULTS: On average, fewer than half of IOM content recommendations were met for 
TSs (M = 46%) and less than two thirds for SCPs (M = 59%). No sites achieved 
≥75% overall concordance with IOM recommendations for TSs and only two of 13 met 
this criterion for SCPs. Content domain scores across sites varied widely, as 
did the number of sites addressing domain content with ≥75% concordance. 
Nonetheless, resources required for document preparation and delivery were 
substantial.
DISCUSSION: Gaps in concordance with IOM recommendations exist even in dedicated 
survivorship centers. A substantial time burden was also noted. Further research 
is needed to determine which informational elements are essential, to develop 
and test strategies for improving efficiency and reach, and to determine if 
outcomes of survivorship care planning warrant the resources required in their 
preparation and delivery. IMPLICATIONS FOR SURVIVORS: TSs and SCPs have been 
recommended for all cancer survivors. Essential elements must be determined, 
approaches made more efficient, outcome improvements demonstrated, and 
cost-benefit analyses determined before survivors should expect widespread 
implementation of this recommendation for survivorship care.

DOI: 10.1007/s11764-011-0196-4
PMCID: PMC5865586
PMID: 21968543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]