1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1990 Jul;71(1):223-9. doi: 10.1210/jcem-71-1-223.

H-ras protooncogene mutations in human thyroid neoplasms.

Namba H(1), Gutman RA, Matsuo K, Alvarez A, Fagin JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of California 
School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90048.

Structural alterations of protooncogene sequences may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of human neoplasms. We screened 54 thyroid tumors (36 benign and 18 
malignant) for gene rearrangements of the protooncogenes c-myc, c-myb, c-fos, 
c-erb-B1, c-erb-B2, c-erb-A, N-ras, K-ras, and H-ras. Only mutations of H-ras 
were observed. None of the 15 colloid adenomas examined had detectable H-ras 
rearrangements. Of the remaining tumors, we observed mutations of H-ras in 4 
benign and 4 malignant neoplasms. Gene amplification was found in 5 tumors. An 
aggressive recurrent papillary carcinoma had a marked amplification of one of 
the H-ras alleles. The amplified allele was truncated, in that the 3' variable 
tandem repeat was not a part of the amplification unit, and contained a codon 12 
point mutation leading to a valine for glycine substitution. We also observed 
the association of low copy gene amplification with a codon 12 valine for 
glycine mutation in a follicular adenoma. Two tumors contained H-ras EcoRI 
polymorphisms not present in the DNA of normal thyroid from the same 
individuals, and one follicular carcinoma showed loss of an H-ras allele. Ras 
protooncogenes may become transforming by quantitative mutations, leading to 
increased expression, or qualitative mechanisms, through activating point 
mutations. Both of these appear to coexist in thyroid neoplasms, and it may be 
that a combination of both mechanisms is capable of inducing a more complete 
spectrum of neoplastic phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem-71-1-223
PMID: 2196280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]