1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2011 Nov;17(11):1573-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbmt.2011.09.013. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

National Cancer Institute-National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute/pediatric 
Blood and Marrow Transplant Consortium First International Consensus Conference 
on late effects after pediatric hematopoietic cell transplantation: long-term 
organ damage and dysfunction.

Nieder ML(1), McDonald GB, Kida A, Hingorani S, Armenian SH, Cooke KR, Pulsipher 
MA, Baker KS.

Author information:
(1)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, All Children's Hospital, St Petersburg, 
FL.

Long-term complications after hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) have been 
studied in detail. Although virtually every organ system can be adversely 
affected after HCT, the underlying pathophysiology of these late effects remain 
incompletely understood. This article describes our current understanding of the 
pathophysiology of late effects involving the gastrointestinal, renal, cardiac, 
and pulmonary systems, and discusses post-HCT metabolic syndrome studies. 
Underlying diseases, pretransplantation exposures, transplantation conditioning 
regimens, graft-versus-host disease, and other treatments contribute to these 
problems. Because organ systems are interdependent, long-term complications with 
similar pathophysiologic mechanisms often involve multiple organ systems. 
Current data suggest that post-HCT organ complications result from cellular 
damage that leads to a cascade of complex events. The interplay between 
inflammatory processes and dysregulated cellular repair likely contributes to 
end-organ fibrosis and dysfunction. Although many long-term problems cannot be 
prevented, appropriate monitoring can enable detection and organ-preserving 
medical management at earlier stages. Current management strategies are aimed at 
minimizing symptoms and optimizing function. There remain significant gaps in 
our knowledge of the pathophysiology of therapy-related organ toxicities disease 
after HCT. These gaps can be addressed by closely examining disease biology and 
identifying those patients at greatest risk for adverse outcomes. In addition, 
strategies are needed for targeted disease prevention and health promotion 
efforts for individuals deemed at high risk because of their genetic makeup or 
specific exposure profile.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2011.09.013
PMCID: PMC3215762
PMID: 21963877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]