1. Folia Biol (Praha). 2011;57(4):145-50.

The influence of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) polymorphism on the 
progression of chronic glomerulonephritides.

Safránková H(1), Merta M, Reiterová J, Stekrová J, Maixnerová D, Ryšavá R, 
Skibová J, Tesař V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Charles University in Prague and General University 
Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic. diebo@email.cz

Vascular endothelial growth factor is an important mediator in maintaining 
normal kidney functions. In addition, several lines of evidence show that 
up-regulation of this mediator in glomeruli may be associated with or may 
directly cause renal dysfunction. We tried to assess the influence of the -2578 
C/A and -1154 G/A polymorphisms in the regulatory region of the vascular 
endothelial growth factor gene upon progression of three primary chronic 
glomerulonephritides (minimal change disease/focal and segmental 
glomerulosclerosis, membranous nephropathy, immunoglobulin A nephropathy). We 
studied a cohort of 213 patients compared to 311 unrelated healthy controls. 
Analysis of the C/A polymorphism of vascular endothelial growth factor revealed 
an increased prevalence of CC genotype in the minimal change disease/focal and 
segmental glomerulosclerosis group in comparison with the other groups. A 
balanced distribution of G and A alleles among the respective types of chronic 
glomerulonephritides was shown in the analysis of -1154 G/A polymorphism. 
Finally, we have not proved any significant influence of the polymorphisms at 
positions -2578 C/A and -1154 G/A of the vascular endothelial growth factor gene 
promoter on the progression of chronic glomerulonephritides even though our 
study suggests a negative effect of CC genotype of -2578 C/A polymorphism on the 
clinical course of minimal change disease/focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

PMID: 21978756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]