1. J Mol Biol. 2011 Nov 4;413(4):790-803. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.09.024. Epub
2011  Sep 28.

The NLRP12 pyrin domain: structure, dynamics, and functional insights.

Pinheiro AS(1), Eibl C, Ekman-Vural Z, Schwarzenbacher R, Peti W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology and Biotechnology, Brown 
University, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

The initial line of defense against infection is sustained by the innate immune 
system. Together, membrane-bound Toll-like receptors and cytosolic 
nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich repeat-containing receptors (NLR) 
play key roles in the innate immune response by detecting bacterial and viral 
invaders as well as endogenous stress signals. NLRs are multi-domain proteins 
with varying N-terminal effector domains that are responsible for regulating 
downstream signaling events. Here, we report the structure and dynamics of the 
N-terminal pyrin domain of NLRP12 (NLRP12 PYD) determined using NMR 
spectroscopy. NLRP12 is a non-inflammasome NLR that has been implicated in the 
regulation of Toll-like receptor-dependent nuclear factor-κB activation. NLRP12 
PYD adopts a typical six-helical bundle death domain fold. By direct comparison 
with other PYD structures, we identified hydrophobic residues that are essential 
for the stable fold of the NLRP PYD family. In addition, we report the first in 
vitro confirmed non-homotypic PYD interaction between NLRP12 PYD and the 
pro-apoptotic protein Fas-associated factor 1 (FAF-1), which links the innate 
immune system to apoptotic signaling. Interestingly, all residues that 
participate in this protein:protein interaction are confined to the α2-α3 
surface, a region of NLRP12 PYD that differs most between currently reported 
NLRP PYD structures. Finally, we experimentally highlight a significant role for 
tryptophan 45 in the interaction between NLRP12 PYD and the FAF-1 UBA domain.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.09.024
PMCID: PMC3202057
PMID: 21978668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]