1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41801-41811. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278531.
Epub  2011 Oct 9.

Interactions of cations with the cytoplasmic pores of inward rectifier K(+) 
channels in the closed state.

Inanobe A(1), Nakagawa A(2), Kurachi Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Electronic address: 
inanobe@pharma2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Supramolecular Crystallography, Institute for Protein Research, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Electronic address: 
ykurachi@pharma2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Ion channels gate at membrane-embedded domains by changing their conformation 
along the ion conduction pathway. Inward rectifier K(+) (Kir) channels possess a 
unique extramembrane cytoplasmic domain that extends this pathway. However, the 
relevance and contribution of this domain to ion permeation remain unclear. By 
qualitative x-ray crystallographic analysis, we found that the pore in the 
cytoplasmic domain of Kir3.2 binds cations in a valency-dependent manner and 
does not allow the displacement of Mg(2+) by monovalent cations or spermine. 
Electrophysiological analyses revealed that the cytoplasmic pore of Kir3.2 
selectively binds positively charged molecules and has a higher affinity for 
Mg(2+) when it has a low probability of being open. The selective blocking of 
chemical modification of the side chain of pore-facing residues by Mg(2+) 
indicates that the mode of binding of Mg(2+) is likely to be similar to that 
observed in the crystal structure. These results indicate that the Kir3.2 
crystal structure has a closed conformation with a negative electrostatic field 
potential at the cytoplasmic pore, the potential of which may be controlled by 
conformational changes in the cytoplasmic domain to regulate ion diffusion along 
the pore.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.278531
PMCID: PMC3308888
PMID: 21982822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]