1. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002300. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002300. Epub
2011  Sep 29.

Identification of type 1 diabetes-associated DNA methylation variable positions 
that precede disease diagnosis.

Rakyan VK(1), Beyan H, Down TA, Hawa MI, Maslau S, Aden D, Daunay A, Busato F, 
Mein CA, Manfras B, Dias KR, Bell CG, Tost J, Boehm BO, Beck S, Leslie RD.

Author information:
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United 
Kingdom. v.rakyan@qmul.ac.uk

Monozygotic (MZ) twin pair discordance for childhood-onset Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) 
is ∼50%, implicating roles for genetic and non-genetic factors in the aetiology 
of this complex autoimmune disease. Although significant progress has been made 
in elucidating the genetics of T1D in recent years, the non-genetic component 
has remained poorly defined. We hypothesized that epigenetic variation could 
underlie some of the non-genetic component of T1D aetiology and, thus, performed 
an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) for this disease. We generated 
genome-wide DNA methylation profiles of purified CD14+ monocytes (an immune 
effector cell type relevant to T1D pathogenesis) from 15 T1D-discordant MZ twin 
pairs. This identified 132 different CpG sites at which the direction of the 
intra-MZ pair DNA methylation difference significantly correlated with the 
diabetic state, i.e. T1D-associated methylation variable positions (T1D-MVPs). 
We confirmed these T1D-MVPs display statistically significant intra-MZ pair DNA 
methylation differences in the expected direction in an independent set of 
T1D-discordant MZ pairs (P = 0.035). Then, to establish the temporal origins of 
the T1D-MVPs, we generated two further genome-wide datasets and established 
that, when compared with controls, T1D-MVPs are enriched in singletons both 
before (P = 0.001) and at (P = 0.015) disease diagnosis, and also in singletons 
positive for diabetes-associated autoantibodies but disease-free even after 12 
years follow-up (P = 0.0023). Combined, these results suggest that T1D-MVPs 
arise very early in the etiological process that leads to overt T1D. Our EWAS of 
T1D represents an important contribution toward understanding the etiological 
role of epigenetic variation in type 1 diabetes, and it is also the first 
systematic analysis of the temporal origins of disease-associated epigenetic 
variation for any human complex disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002300
PMCID: PMC3183089
PMID: 21980303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.