1. Methods. 2011 Dec;55(4):337-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2011.09.020. Epub 2011
Sep  29.

Crystallizing membrane proteins using lipidic bicelles.

Ujwal R(1), Bowie JU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and 
Proteomics, Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1570, 
United States.

Crystallization of membrane proteins remains a significant challenge. For 
proteins resistant to the traditional approach of directly crystallizing from 
detergents, lipidic phase crystallization can be a powerful tool. Bicelles are 
an excellent medium for crystallizing membrane proteins in a lipidic 
environment. They can be described as bilayer discs formed by the mixture of a 
long-chain phospholipid and an amphiphile in an aqueous medium. Membrane 
proteins can be readily reconstituted into bicelles, where they are maintained 
in a native-like bilayer environment. Importantly, membrane proteins have been 
shown to be fully functional in bicelles under physiological conditions. 
Protein-bicelle mixtures can be manipulated with almost the same ease as 
detergent-solubilized membrane proteins, making bicelles compatible with 
standard equipment including high-throughput crystallization robots. A number of 
membrane proteins have now been successfully crystallized using the bicelle 
method, including bacteriorhodopsin, β2 adrenergic receptor, voltage-dependent 
anion channel, xanthorhodopsin and rhomboid protease. Because of the success 
with a variety of membrane proteins and the ease of implementation, bicelles 
should be a part of every membrane protein crystallographer's arsenal.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2011.09.020
PMCID: PMC3264687
PMID: 21982781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]