1. J Physiol Biochem. 2012 Mar;68(1):71-6. doi: 10.1007/s13105-011-0120-4. Epub 
2011 Oct 8.

Effect of the melanocortin-3 receptor Thr6Lys and Val81Ile genetic variants on 
body composition and substrate oxidation in Chilean obese children.

Obregón AM(1), Diaz E, Santos JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, Diabetes and Metabolism, School of Medicine, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Avenida Libertador Bernardo O'Higgins 
340, Santiago 8331150, Chile. aniobregon@gmail.com

Mice genetically deficient in the melanocortin-3 receptor gene are characterized 
by normal body weight, increased body fat, mild hypophagia, reduced locomotor 
activity, and increased respiratory quotient compared with wild-type mice. In 
humans, the 6Lys-81Ile haplotype of melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R) gene has been 
associated with childhood obesity, higher body fat percentage, and reduced fat 
oxidation compared to non-carriers. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
association between MC3R 6Lys-81Ile haplotype with body composition and 
substrate oxidation in response to moderate exercise in obese children. Eight 
Chilean obese children (aged 8-12) carriers of MC3R 6Lys-81Ile haplotype were 
compared with eight age-gender-matched obese non-carriers. Children were 
identified through a previous cross-sectional study on genetic determinants of 
childhood obesity (n = 229). Genotypes for MC3R Thr6Lys and Val81Ile were 
determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. Body composition was assessed by the four-compartment model 
(dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, total body water by the deuterium dilution 
technique, and total fat mass by air-displacement plethysmography). Substrate 
oxidation was assessed by indirect calorimetry in response to moderate exercise 
(60% VO(2 max)). Wilcoxon matched-pairs test was used to compare quantitative 
variables. No significant differences among carriers and non-carriers were found 
in anthropometrical and body composition measurements. The Carriers of the 
6Lys-81Ile haplotype showed higher respiratory quotient (p = 0.06) and a 
significantly higher glucose oxidation (p = 0.01) compared with non-carriers 
after standardization for fat-free mass. Our results are consistent with a 
possible participation of MC3R 6Lys-81Ile variants in glucose oxidation in 
response to moderate exercise.

DOI: 10.1007/s13105-011-0120-4
PMID: 21983807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]