1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025775. Epub 2011 Oct
6.

Influence of ROBO1 and RORA on risk of age-related macular degeneration reveals 
genetically distinct phenotypes in disease pathophysiology.

Jun G(1), Nicolaou M, Morrison MA, Buros J, Morgan DJ, Radeke MJ, Yonekawa Y, 
Tsironi EE, Kotoula MG, Zacharaki F, Mollema N, Yuan Y, Miller JW, Haider NB, 
Hageman GS, Kim IK, Schaumberg DA, Farrer LA, DeAngelis MM.

Author information:
(1)Medicine Biomedical Genetics, Boston University Schools of Medicine and 
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

ROBO1 is a strong candidate gene for age-related macular degeneration (AMD) 
based upon its location under a linkage peak on chromosome 3p12, its expression 
pattern, and its purported function in a pathway that includes RORA, a gene 
previously associated with risk for neovascular AMD. Previously, we observed 
that expression of ROBO1 and RORA is down-regulated among wet AMD cases, as 
compared to their unaffected siblings. Thus, we hypothesized that contribution 
of association signals in ROBO1, and interaction between these two genes may be 
important for both wet and dry AMD. We evaluated association of 19 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ROBO1 with wet and dry stages of AMD in a 
sibling cohort and a Greek case-control cohort containing 491 wet AMD cases, 174 
dry AMD cases and 411 controls. Association signals and interaction results were 
replicated in an independent prospective cohort (1070 controls, 164 wet AMD 
cases, 293 dry AMD cases). The most significantly associated ROBO1 SNPs were 
rs1387665 under an additive model (meta P = 0.028) for wet AMD and rs9309833 
under a recessive model (meta P = 6 Ã— 10(-4)) for dry AMD. Further analyses 
revealed interaction between ROBO1 rs9309833 and RORA rs8034864 for both wet and 
dry AMD (interaction P<0.05). These studies were further supported by whole 
transcriptome expression profile studies from 66 human donor eyes and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays from mouse retinas. These findings suggest that 
distinct ROBO1 variants may influence the risk of wet and dry AMD, and the 
effects of ROBO1 on AMD risk may be modulated by RORA variants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025775
PMCID: PMC3188561
PMID: 21998696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.