1. Schizophr Res. 2011 Dec;133(1-3):159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.09.012.
Epub  2011 Oct 12.

Is the conserved mammalian region of ZNF804A locus associated with 
schizophrenia? A population-based genetics analysis.

Zhang R(1), Valenzuela RK, Lu S, Meng L, Guo T, Du X, Kang W, Ma J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Xi'an Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, PR China.

Recently, several genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have reproduced the 
significant association of the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1344706 
(located in intron 2 of the zinc finger protein 804A (ZNF804A) on chromosome 
2q32.1) with schizophrenia. Bioinformatic analysis of the chromosome segment 
around rs1344706 suggests that a short conserved mammalian region exists 
approximately 3kb downstream of rs1344706. In the present work, we studied all 
SNPs in this conserved mammalian region and performed genetic analyses on 
samples from Chinese schizophrenia patients (n = 516) and compared control 
subjects (n = 520). Significant association between an allele of rs13423388 and 
schizophrenia was found (P = 0.0012). Haplotype analysis of the three SNPs 
rs4666998, rs13423388, and rs56280129 showed significant associations with 
schizophrenia (global P = 0.00001). Furthermore, we performed a four-SNP 
haplotype analysis which included the SNPs from the three-SNP haplotype analysis 
and rs1344706 (global P = 0.0005), and found that haplotype GCCG was associated 
with schizophrenia (P = 0.003). In summary, the present study adds new evidence 
for an association between the conserved mammalian region of the ZNF804A gene 
and schizophrenia. Further research is needed to clarify the transcriptional 
regulation of ZNF804A gene and to relate this to the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.09.012
PMID: 21993378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]