1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Oct 13;12:504. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-504.

A genome-wide survey for SNPs altering microRNA seed sites identifies functional 
candidates in GWAS.

Richardson K(1), Lai CQ, Parnell LD, Lee YC, Ordovas JM.

Author information:
(1)Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, Jean Mayer United States Department of 
Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA, USA. Kris.richardson@tufts.edu

BACKGROUND: Gene variants within regulatory regions are thought to be major 
contributors of the variation of complex traits/diseases. Genome wide 
association studies (GWAS), have identified scores of genetic variants that 
appear to contribute to human disease risk. However, most of these variants do 
not appear to be functional. Thus, the significance of the association may be 
brought up by still unknown mechanisms or by linkage disequilibrium (LD) with 
functional polymorphisms. In the present study, focused on functional variants 
related with the binding of microRNAs (miR), we utilized SNP data, including 
newly released 1000 Genomes Project data to perform a genome-wide scan of SNPs 
that abrogate or create miR recognition element (MRE) seed sites (MRESS).
RESULTS: We identified 2723 SNPs disrupting, and 22295 SNPs creating MRESSs. We 
estimated the percent of SNPs falling within both validated (5%) and predicted 
conserved MRESSs (3%). We determined 87 of these MRESS SNPs were listed in GWAS 
association studies, or in strong LD with a GWAS SNP, and may represent the 
functional variants of identified GWAS SNPs. Furthermore, 39 of these have 
evidence of co-expression of target mRNA and the predicted miR. We also gathered 
previously published eQTL data supporting a functional role for four of these 
SNPs shown to associate with disease phenotypes. Comparison of FST statistics (a 
measure of population subdivision) for predicted MRESS SNPs against non MRESS 
SNPs revealed a significantly higher (P = 0.0004) degree of subdivision among 
MRESS SNPs, suggesting a role for these SNPs in environmentally driven 
selection.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated the potential of publicly available resources 
to identify high priority candidate SNPs for functional studies and for disease 
risk prediction.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-504
PMCID: PMC3207998
PMID: 21995669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]