1. Clin Genet. 2012 Sep;82(3):288-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01785.x. Epub
 2011 Oct 14.

'Silent' carriage of two familial Mediterranean fever gene mutations in large 
families with only a single identified patient.

Camus D(1), Shinar Y, Aamar S, Langevitz P, Ben-Zvi I, Livneh A, Lidar M.

Author information:
(1)Heller Institute of Medical Research and Medicine F, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel-Hashomer, affiliated with the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

The presence of two mutations in the familial Mediterranean fever gene, without 
overt familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), designated as phenotype III, 
predisposes to developing 'silent' AA amyloidosis, recognized as phenotype II, 
due to the absence of medical supervision and colchicine prophylaxis. We sought 
to determine the prevalence of phenotype III in large families with only one 
subject affected with FMF, in order to assess the population at risk for 
transformation to phenotype II. A total of seven large families were recruited 
for the study. Siblings were screened for MEFV mutations and underwent a 
clinical interview to assess for unrecognized FMF manifestations. Phenotype III, 
most commonly associated with a V726A/E148Q genotype, was detected in 10% of 
siblings of index cases from informative families, corresponding to a 10-fold 
increase in comparison to the expected rate in the general population (p < 
0.01). Unnoticed 'FMF-like' manifestations were detected among two siblings in 
the five families in which the index case was heterozygous, but in none of the 
siblings of the homozygous index cases. The enrichment for phenotype III and 
detection of occult FMF in large families, in which only a single member is 
afflicted with FMF, mandates routine clinical evaluation and genetic screening 
of siblings.

Â© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01785.x
PMID: 21995303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]