1. Leukemia. 2012 Apr;26(4):720-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.261. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

EXEL-8232, a small-molecule JAK2 inhibitor, effectively treats thrombocytosis 
and extramedullary hematopoiesis in a murine model of myeloproliferative 
neoplasm induced by MPLW515L.

Wernig G(1), Kharas MG, Mullally A, Leeman DS, Okabe R, George T, Clary DO, 
Gilliland DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford 
Hospital and Clinics, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. gwernig@stanford.edu

About 10% of patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) or myelofibrosis (MF) 
that lack mutations in JAK2 harbor an activating mutation in the thrombopoietin 
receptor, MPLW515L. Distinct from the JAK2V617F retroviral transplant model, the 
MPLW515L model recapitulates many features of ET and MF, including severe 
fibrosis and thrombocytosis. We have tested EXEL-8232, an experimental potent 
JAK2 inhibitor, for efficacy in suppression of thrombocytosis in vivo and for 
its ability to attenuate MPLW515L myeloproliferative disease. EXEL-8232 was 
administered for 28 days q12 h by oral gavage at doses of 30 or 100 mg/kg, 
prospectively. Animals treated with EXEL-8232 at 100 mg/kg had normalized high 
platelet counts, eliminated extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen and 
eliminated bone marrow fibrosis, whereas the wild-type controls did not develop 
thrombocytopenia. Consistent with a clinical response in this model, we 
validated surrogate end points for response to treatment, including a reduction 
of endogenous colony growth and signaling inhibition in immature erythroid and 
myeloid primary cells both in vitro and upon treatment in vivo. We conclude that 
EXEL-8232 has efficacy in treatment of thrombocytosis in vivo in a murine model 
of ET and MF, and may be of therapeutic benefit for patients with MPL-mutant 
MPN.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2011.261
PMID: 22005786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]