1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Feb;40(3):1381-94. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr890. Epub 2011 
Oct 18.

Analysis of the interaction with the hepatitis C virus mRNA reveals an 
alternative mode of RNA recognition by the human La protein.

Martino L(1), Pennell S, Kelly G, Bui TT, Kotik-Kogan O, Smerdon SJ, Drake AF, 
Curry S, Conte MR.

Author information:
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, New 
Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Human La protein is an essential factor in the biology of both coding and 
non-coding RNAs. In the nucleus, La binds primarily to 3' oligoU containing 
RNAs, while in the cytoplasm La interacts with an array of different mRNAs 
lacking a 3' UUU(OH) trailer. An example of the latter is the binding of La to 
the IRES domain IV of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA, which is associated with 
viral translation stimulation. By systematic biophysical investigations, we have 
found that La binds to domain IV using an RNA recognition that is quite distinct 
from its mode of binding to RNAs with a 3' UUU(OH) trailer: although the La 
motif and first RNA recognition motif (RRM1) are sufficient for high-affinity 
binding to 3' oligoU, recognition of HCV domain IV requires the La motif and 
RRM1 to work in concert with the atypical RRM2 which has not previously been 
shown to have a significant role in RNA binding. This new mode of binding does 
not appear sequence specific, but recognizes structural features of the RNA, in 
particular a double-stranded stem flanked by single-stranded extensions. These 
findings pave the way for a better understanding of the role of La in viral 
translation initiation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkr890
PMCID: PMC3273827
PMID: 22009680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]