1. Inorg Chem. 2011 Nov 21;50(22):11777-86. doi: 10.1021/ic2018727. Epub 2011 Oct
 18.

Electronic structure of a low-spin heme/Cu peroxide complex: spin-state and 
spin-topology contributions to reactivity.

Kieber-Emmons MT(1), Li Y, Halime Z, Karlin KD, Solomon EI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, 
United States.

This study details the electronic structure of the heme–peroxo–copper adduct 
{[(F8)Fe(DCHIm)]-O2-[Cu(AN)]}+ (LS(AN)) in which O2(2–) bridges the metals in a 
μ-1,2 or “end-on” configuration. LS(AN) is generated by addition of coordinating 
base to the parent complex {[(F8)Fe]-O2-[Cu(AN)]}+ (HS(AN)) in which the O2(2–) 
bridges the metals in an μ-η2:η2 or “side-on” mode. In addition to the 
structural change of the O2(2–) bridging geometry, coordination of the base 
changes the spin state of the heme fragment (from S = 5/2 in HS(AN) to S = 1/2 
in LS(AN)) that results in an antiferromagnetically coupled diamagnetic ground 
state in LS(AN). The strong ligand field of the porphyrin modulates the 
high-spin to low-spin effect on Fe–peroxo bonding relative to nonheme complexes, 
which is important in the O–O bond cleavage process. On the basis of DFT 
calculations, the ground state of LS(AN) is dependent on the Fe–O–O–Cu dihedral 
angle, wherein acute angles (<~150°) yield an antiferromagnetically coupled 
electronic structure while more obtuse angles yield a ferromagnetic ground 
state. LS(AN) is diamagnetic and thus has an antiferromagnetically coupled 
ground state with a calculated Fe–O–O–Cu dihedral angle of 137°. The nature of 
the bonding in LS(AN) and the frontier molecular orbitals which lead to this 
magneto-structural correlation provide insight into possible spin topology 
contributions to O–O bond cleavage by cytochrome c oxidase.

DOI: 10.1021/ic2018727
PMCID: PMC3226806
PMID: 22007669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]