1. Curr Biol. 2011 Oct 25;21(20):1759-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.09.010. Epub
2011  Oct 13.

Blimp1 expression predicts embryonic stem cell development in vitro.

Chu LF(1), Surani MA, Jaenisch R, Zwaka TP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Oct 25;21(20):R850-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.09.024.

Despite recent critical insights into the pluripotent state of embryonic stem 
cells (ESCs), there is little agreement over the inaugural and subsequent steps 
leading to its generation [1-4]. Here we show that inner cell mass 
(ICM)-generated cells expressing Blimp1, a key transcriptional repressor of the 
somatic program during germ cell specification [5, 6], emerge on day 2 of 
blastocyst culture. Single-cell gene expression profiling indicated that many of 
these Blimp1-positive cells coexpress other genes typically associated with 
early germ cell specification. When genetically traced in vitro, these cells 
acquired properties normally associated with primordial germ cells. Importantly, 
fate-mapping experiments revealed that ESCs commonly arise from Blimp1-positive 
precursors; indeed, prospective sorting of such cells from ICM outgrowths 
increased the rate of ESC derivation more than 9-fold. Finally, using genetic 
ablation or distinct small molecules [7, 8], we show that epiblast cells can 
become ESCs without first acquiring Blimp1 positivity. Our findings suggest that 
the germ cell-like state is facultative for the stabilization of pluripotency in 
vitro. Thus, the association of Blimp1 expression with ESC development furthers 
understanding of how the pluripotent state of these cells is established in 
vitro and suggests a means to enhance the generation of new stem cell lines from 
blastocysts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.09.010
PMCID: PMC3203992
PMID: 22000107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]