1. Bioelectromagnetics. 2012 May;33(4):279-87. doi: 10.1002/bem.20704. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

Effect of pulsed electromagnetic field exposure on adenosine receptors in rat 
brain.

Varani K(1), Vincenzi F, Targa M, Corciulo C, Fini M, Setti S, Cadossi R, Borea 
PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy. vrk@unife.it.

Different effects of pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) exposure on brain 
tissue have been described in pre-clinical models and in clinical settings. 
Nevertheless, the mechanism of action and the possible interaction with membrane 
receptors such as adenosine receptors (ARs) has not been investigated. The 
present study focused on the effect of PEMFs on A1 and A2A ARs in the rat 
cerebral cortex and cortical neurons. Affinity and density of ARs were evaluated 
by means of saturation binding experiments while mRNA expression was 
investigated through retro-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
PEMF treatment of the intact rat cerebral cortex or cortical neurons at 1.5 mT 
mediated a transient and significant increase in A2A ARs after 4 h (2.0-fold 
increase) and 6 h (1.4- and 1.8-fold increase, respectively) of exposure. In 
addition, PEMF treatment of the rat cerebral cortex and rat cortical neurons at 
3 mT upregulated A2A ARs after 2 h (2.0- and 2.2-fold increase, respectively) 
and 4 h (1.6- and 1.9-fold increase, respectively). The treatment of rat cortex 
membranes with PEMFs at 1.5 and 3 mT induced an increase in A2A AR density after 
2 h (1.9- and 2.2-fold increase, respectively) and was constant at all 
incubation times investigated. In rat cortical neurons, mRNA levels of A1 and 
A2A ARs were not affected by PEMF exposure for the times and intensities used. 
These results suggest that PEMF treatment has different biological effects in 
whole organs or cells in comparison with isolated membranes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bem.20704
PMID: 22012856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]