1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Aug;87(16):6378-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.87.16.6378.

Peptides on phage: a vast library of peptides for identifying ligands.

Cwirla SE(1), Peters EA, Barrett RW, Dower WJ.

Author information:
(1)Affymax Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

We have constructed a vast library of peptides for finding compounds that bind 
to antibodies and other receptors. Millions of different hexapeptides were 
expressed at the N terminus of the adsorption protein (pIII) of fd phage. The 
vector fAFF1, derived from the tetracycline resistance-transducing vector 
fd-tet, allows cloning of oligonucleotides in a variety of locations in the 5' 
region of gene III. A library of 3 x 10(8) recombinants was generated by cloning 
randomly synthesized oligonucleotides. The library was screened for high-avidity 
binding to a monoclonal antibody (3-E7) that is specific for the N terminus of 
beta-endorphin (Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe). Fifty-one clones selected by three rounds of 
the affinity purification technique called panning were sequenced and found to 
differ from previously known ligands for this antibody. The striking finding is 
that all 51 contained tyrosine as the N-terminal residue and that 48 contained 
glycine as the second residue. The binding affinities of six chemically 
synthesized hexapeptides from this set range from 0.35 microM 
(Tyr-Gly-Phe-Trp-Gly-Met) to 8.3 microM (Tyr-Ala-Gly-Phe-Ala-Gln), compared with 
7.1 nM for a known high-affinity ligand (Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leu). These results 
show that ligands can be identified with no prior information concerning 
antibody specificity. Peptide libraries are also likely to be useful in finding 
ligands that bind to other classes of receptors and in discovering pharmacologic 
agents.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.16.6378
PMCID: PMC54537
PMID: 2201029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]