1. Mob Genet Elements. 2011 May;1(1):66-70. doi: 10.4161/mge.1.1.15455.

B1-SINE retrotransposons: Establishing genomic insulatory networks.

Román AC(1), González-Rico FJ, Fernández-Salguero PM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular; Facultad de Ciencias; 
Universidad de Extremadura; Badajoz, Spain.

More than half the size of most mammalian genomes is composed by repetitive 
sequences. Short Interspersed Nuclear Element (SINE) retrotransposons constitute 
one of the main components of the genomic repetitive fraction. The abundance and 
evolutionary conservation of these sequences support their contribution to 
maintain the stability and proper function of the genome. Several recent studies 
have unveiled some of these intriguing tasks, which include, but are not limited 
to the control of transcriptional regulation and the organization of the 
chromatin. Here, we will comment on our recent report characterizing the 
insulator/boundary activity of a novel B1 SINE retrotransposon (B1-X35S) widely 
present in the mouse genome. A remarkable finding was that B1-X35S-dependent 
insulation required not only the combinatorial binding of transcription factors 
dioxin receptor (AhR) and Snai2/Slug, but also a molecular switch between RNA 
Polymerases (Pol) Pol III and Pol II. Moreover, B1-X35S seemingly forms 
heterochromatic barriers next to gene promoters that bioinformatic analyses 
revealed to dramatically change from embryonic stem (ES) to fibroblasts cells. 
The vast presence of B1-X35S in the mouse genome (over 14,000 instances) opens 
the exciting possibility of a complex network in which retrotransposon-derived 
insulators convert biological input signals into transcriptional responses by 
defining gene expression domains. The importance of such mechanism in different 
cellular and physiological processes will be discussed.

DOI: 10.4161/mge.1.1.15455
PMCID: PMC3190280
PMID: 22016846