1. Mech Ageing Dev. 2012 Apr;133(4):127-32. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.10.002. Epub 
2011 Oct 12.

Base excision repair pathway genes polymorphism in prostate and bladder cancer 
risk in North Indian population.

Mittal RD(1), Mandal RK, Gangwar R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology and Renal Transplantation, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Raebareli Road, Lucknow 226014, Uttar Pradesh, 
India. ramamittal@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Carcinogens causes DNA damage, including oxidative lesions that are 
removed efficiently by the base excision repair (BER) pathway. Variations in BER 
genes may reduce DNA repair capacity, leading to development of urological 
cancers.
METHODS: This study included 195 prostate cancer (PCa) and 212 bladder cancer 
(BC) patients and 250 controls who had been frequency matched by age, sex, and 
ethnicity. We genotyped XRCC1 Exon 6 (C>T), 9 (G>A), 10 (G>A), OGG1 Exon 7 (C>G) 
and APE1 Exon 5 (T>G) genes polymorphism using PCR-RFLP and ARMS.
RESULTS: GA of XRCC1 Exon 9 demonstrated increased risk with PCa as well as in 
BC (p=0.001; p=0.006). Similarly variant containing genotype revealed 
association with PCa (p=0.031). Haplotype of XRCC1 also associated with 
significant risk for PCa and BC. The APE1 GG genotype showed a decreased risk of 
BC (OR=0.25; p=0.017). Variant genotype GG of OGG1 demonstrated significant risk 
with BC (p=0.028).
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggested increased risk for PCa and BC in case of 
GA genotype for XRCC1, and variant GG in case of OGG1. However APE1 GG genotype 
conferred a protective association with BC susceptibility. Larger studies and 
the more SNPs in the same pathway are needed to verify these findings.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2011.10.002
PMID: 22019847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]