1. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):212-21. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.148. Epub 2011 
Oct 21.

Involvement of the PI3K/Akt pathway in myxoid/round cell liposarcoma.

Demicco EG(1), Torres KE, Ghadimi MP, Colombo C, Bolshakov S, Hoffman A, Peng T, 
Bov√©e JV, Wang WL, Lev D, Lazar AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.

The molecular determinants involved in the progression of myxoid liposarcoma to 
increased cellularity/round cell change are poorly understood. We studied the 
PI3K/Akt pathway in myxoid and round cell liposarcomas using a tissue microarray 
composed of 165 tumors from 111 patients, and mutational analysis of PIK3CA in 
44 cases. Activating PIK3CA mutations were found in 6/44 cases, 14%; mutations 
were more frequent in round cell vs myxoid tumors (5/15, 33% vs 1/29, 3%; 
P=0.013). Complete loss of PTEN, an alternative mechanism for PI3K/Akt 
activation, was found in 13/111 (12%) cases and was mutually exclusive with 
PIK3CA mutation. Strong IGF1R expression was demonstrated in 14/39 (36%) of 
round cell and 11/58 (19%) of myxoid tumors (P=0.062). Activation of the PI3K 
pathway was confirmed using immunohistochemical analysis for downstream targets 
phospho-S6 ribosomal protein and phospho-4EBP1. Phospho-4EBP1 was increased in 
round cell tumors compared with myxoid tumors (24/30, 80% vs 25/44, 57%; 
P=0.038) or tumors with treatment effect (10/24, 42%; P=0.02). Phospho-S6 was 
highly expressed in both myxoid and round cell tumors (29/47, 62% and 14/30, 
47%, respectively; P=0.2). In tumors with PIK3CA mutation, any IGF1R expression, 
or loss of PTEN expression, phospho-4EBP1 was more frequently elevated compared 
with tumors without a known activating event in the PI3K pathway (55/72; 76% vs 
3/8, 38%; P=0.033). These findings suggest that activation of the PI3K/Akt 
pathway via activating mutation of PIK3CA, loss of PTEN, or IGF1R expression 
have a role in round cell transformation. The PI3K/Akt pathway may therefore 
provide a therapeutic target in round cell liposarcoma.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.148
PMCID: PMC3266971
PMID: 22020193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/Conflict of interest: None of the 
authors have conflicts of interest.