1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jan;1824(1):68-88. doi:
10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.10.002.  Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Cysteine cathepsins: from structure, function and regulation to new frontiers.

Turk V(1), Stoka V, Vasiljeva O, Renko M, Sun T, Turk B, Turk D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, J. Stefan 
Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia. dusan.turk@ijs.si

It is more than 50 years since the lysosome was discovered. Since then its 
hydrolytic machinery, including proteases and other hydrolases, has been fairly 
well identified and characterized. Among these are the cysteine cathepsins, 
members of the family of papain-like cysteine proteases. They have unique 
reactive-site properties and an uneven tissue-specific expression pattern. In 
living organisms their activity is a delicate balance of expression, targeting, 
zymogen activation, inhibition by protein inhibitors and degradation. The 
specificity of their substrate binding sites, small-molecule inhibitor 
repertoire and crystal structures are providing new tools for research and 
development. Their unique reactive-site properties have made it possible to 
confine the targets simply by the use of appropriate reactive groups. The 
epoxysuccinyls still dominate the field, but now nitriles seem to be the most 
appropriate "warhead". The view of cysteine cathepsins as lysosomal proteases is 
changing as there is now clear evidence of their localization in other cellular 
compartments. Besides being involved in protein turnover, they build an 
important part of the endosomal antigen presentation. Together with the growing 
number of non-endosomal roles of cysteine cathepsins is growing also the 
knowledge of their involvement in diseases such as cancer and rheumatoid 
arthritis, among others. Finally, cysteine cathepsins are important regulators 
and signaling molecules of an unimaginable number of biological processes. The 
current challenge is to identify their endogenous substrates, in order to gain 
an insight into the mechanisms of substrate degradation and processing. In this 
review, some of the remarkable advances that have taken place in the past decade 
are presented. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Proteolysis 50 
years after the discovery of lysosome.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2011.10.002
PMCID: PMC7105208
PMID: 22024571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]