1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002300. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002300. Epub 
2011 Oct 13.

A viral nuclear noncoding RNA binds re-localized poly(A) binding protein and is 
required for late KSHV gene expression.

Borah S(1), Darricarr√®re N, Darnell A, Myoung J, Steitz JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

During the lytic phase of infection, the gamma herpesvirus Kaposi's 
Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus (KSHV) expresses a highly abundant, 1.1 kb 
nuclear noncoding RNA of unknown function. We observe that this polyadenylated 
nuclear (PAN) RNA avidly binds host poly(A)-binding protein C1 (PABPC1), which 
normally functions in the cytoplasm to bind the poly(A) tails of mRNAs, 
regulating mRNA stability and translation efficiency. During the lytic phase of 
KSHV infection, PABPC1 is re-localized to the nucleus as a consequence of 
expression of the viral shutoff exonuclease (SOX) protein; SOX also mediates the 
host shutoff effect in which host mRNAs are downregulated while viral mRNAs are 
selectively expressed. We show that whereas PAN RNA is not required for the host 
shutoff effect or for PABPC1 re-localization, SOX strongly upregulates the 
levels of PAN RNA in transient transfection experiments. This upregulation is 
destroyed by the same SOX mutation that ablates the host shutoff effect and 
PABPC1 nuclear re-localization or by removal of the poly(A) tail of PAN. In 
cells induced into the KSHV lytic phase, depletion of PAN RNA using RNase 
H-targeting antisense oligonucleotides reveals that it is necessary for the 
production of late viral proteins from mRNAs that are themselves polyadenylated. 
Our results add to the repertoire of functions ascribed to long noncoding RNAs 
and suggest a mechanism of action for nuclear noncoding RNAs in gamma 
herpesvirus infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002300
PMCID: PMC3192849
PMID: 22022268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.