1. J Am Chem Soc. 2011 Dec 7;133(48):19536-46. doi: 10.1021/ja208657z. Epub 2011 
Nov 14.

Explaining the structural plasticity of α-synuclein.

Ullman O(1), Fisher CK, Stultz CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02139-4307, USA.

Given that α-synuclein has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several 
neurodegenerative disorders, deciphering the structure of this protein is of 
particular importance. While monomeric α-synuclein is disordered in solution, it 
can form aggregates rich in cross-β structure, relatively long helical segments 
when bound to micelles or lipid vesicles, and a relatively ordered helical 
tetramer within the native cell environment. To understand the physical basis 
underlying this structural plasticity, we generated an ensemble for monomeric 
α-synuclein using a Bayesian formalism that combines data from NMR chemical 
shifts, RDCs, and SAXS with molecular simulations. An analysis of the resulting 
ensemble suggests that a non-negligible fraction of the ensemble (0.08, 95% 
confidence interval 0.03-0.12) places the minimal toxic aggregation-prone 
segment in α-synuclein, NAC(8-18), in a solvent exposed and extended 
conformation that can form cross-β structure. Our data also suggest that a 
sizable fraction of structures in the ensemble (0.14, 95% confidence interval 
0.04-0.23) contains long-range contacts between the N- and C-termini. Moreover, 
a significant fraction of structures that contain these long-range contacts also 
place the NAC(8-18) segment in a solvent exposed orientation, a finding in 
contrast to the theory that such long-range contacts help to prevent 
aggregation. Lastly, our data suggest that α-synuclein samples structures with 
amphipathic helices that can self-associate via hydrophobic contacts to form 
tetrameric structures. Overall, these observations represent a comprehensive 
view of the unfolded ensemble of monomeric α-synuclein and explain how different 
conformations can arise from the monomeric protein.

© 2011 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja208657z
PMCID: PMC3227348
PMID: 22029383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]