1. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26206. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026206. Epub 2011 Oct 
14.

Endoplasmic reticulum quality control is involved in the mechanism of 
endoglin-mediated hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia.

Ali BR(1), Ben-Rebeh I, John A, Akawi NA, Milhem RM, Al-Shehhi NA, Al-Ameri MM, 
Al-Shamisi SA, Al-Gazali L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. bassam.ali@uaeu.ac.ae

Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal dominant genetic 
condition affecting the vascular system and is characterised by epistaxis, 
arteriovenous malformations and mucocutaneous and gastrointestinal 
telangiectases. This disorder affects approximately 1 in 8,000 people worldwide. 
Significant morbidity is associated with this condition in affected individuals, 
and anaemia can be a consequence of repeated haemorrhages from telangiectasia in 
the gut and nose. In the majority of the cases reported, the condition is caused 
by mutations in either ACVRL1 or endoglin genes, which encode components of the 
TGF-beta signalling pathway. Numerous missense mutations in endoglin have been 
reported as causative defects for HHT but the exact underlying cellular 
mechanisms caused by these mutations have not been fully established despite 
data supporting a role for the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control 
machinery. For this reason, we examined the subcellular trafficking of 
twenty-five endoglin disease-causing missense mutations. The mutant proteins 
were expressed in HeLa and HEK293 cell lines, and their subcellular 
localizations were established by confocal fluorescence microscopy alongside the 
analysis of their N-glycosylation profiles. ER quality control was found to be 
responsible in eight (L32R, V49F, C53R, V125D, A160D, P165L, I271N and A308D) 
out of eleven mutants located on the orphan extracellular domain in addition to 
two (C363Y and C382W) out of thirteen mutants in the Zona Pellucida (ZP) domain. 
In addition, a single intracellular domain missense mutant was examined and 
found to traffic predominantly to the plasma membrane. These findings support 
the notion of the involvement of the ER's quality control in the mechanism of a 
significant number, but not all, missense endoglin mutants found in HHT type 1 
patients. Other mechanisms including loss of interactions with signalling 
partners as well as adverse effects on functional residues are likely to be the 
cause of the mutant proteins' loss of function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026206
PMCID: PMC3194820
PMID: 22022569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.