1. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5521-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102202. Epub
2011  Oct 24.

Altered differentiation, diminished pathogenicity, and regulatory activity of 
myelin-specific T cells expressing an enhanced affinity TCR.

Alli R(1), Nguyen P, Geiger TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.

Whereas increased affinity enhances T cell competitiveness after immunization, 
the role of affinity in modulating the pathogenicity of self-reactive T cells is 
less established. To assess this, we generated two myelin-specific, class II 
MHC-restricted TCR that differ only in a buried hydroxymethyl that forms a 
common TCR Î²-chain V region variant. The variation, predicted to increase TCR 
stability, resulted in a ~3log(10) difference in TCR sensitivity with preserved 
fine specificity. The high-affinity TCR markedly diminished T cell 
pathogenicity. T cells were not deleted, did not upregulate Foxp3, and barring 
disease induction were predominantly naive. However, high-affinity CD4(+) T 
cells showed an altered cytokine profile characterized by the production of 
protective cytokines prior to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis induction 
and decreased effector cytokines after. Further, the high-affinity TCR promoted 
the development of CD4(-)CD8(-) and CD8(+) T cells that possessed low intrinsic 
pathogenicity, were protective even in small numbers when transferred into 
wild-type mice and in mixed chimeras, and outcompete CD4(+) T cells during 
disease development. Therefore, TCR affinities exceeding an upper affinity 
threshold may impede the development of autoimmunity through altered development 
and functional maturation of T cells, including diminished intrinsic CD4(+) T 
cell pathogenicity and the development of CD4(-)Foxp3(-) regulatory populations.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102202
PMCID: PMC3221875
PMID: 22025553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]