1. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2011 Dec;31(6):705-11. doi: 
10.1097/JCP.0b013e318234ee84.

Polymorphisms of INSIG2, MC4R, and LEP are associated with obesity- and 
metabolic-related traits in schizophrenic patients.

Kuo PH(1), Kao CF, Chen PY, Chen CH, Tsai YS, Lu ML, Huang MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health & Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive 
Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenic patients have a high prevalence of metabolic 
adversities. Previous studies have suggested some candidate genes for obesity- 
and metabolic-related traits, including the insulin-induced gene (INSIG2), 
melanocortin 4 receptor gene (MC4R), and leptin and leptin receptor genes (LEP 
and LEPR). We aimed to investigate the associations between these genes and 
metabolic disturbances in patients with schizophrenia in Taiwan.
METHODS: Patients with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder 
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition, were recruited from 36 community psychiatric rehabilitation centers or 
hospitals in Taipei. A total of 650 subjects were enrolled, and 577 were 
included in the genetic analyses. The anthropometric (body mass index, waist 
circumference [WC], and blood pressure) and biochemical measurements (fasting 
plasma glucose, insulin, triglyceride, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and 
Homeostasis Model of Assessment - Insulin Resistance index [HOMA-IR]) were 
assessed. Seven loci in the 4 genes were genotyped using standard TaqMan assays. 
Genetic association analyses were conducted for binary and quantitative 
measurements of the previously mentioned traits. Obese patients with 
schizophrenia exhibited more metabolic disturbances than nonobese patients.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that INSIG2 was significantly 
associated with fasting plasma glucose (for rs17587100, P < 0.0001), MC4R was 
associated with WC (for rs2229616, P = 0.005), and LEP was associated with body 
mass index and WC (for rs7799039, P < 0.01). In addition, these loci showed 
suggestive associations with traits including high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol and triglyceride, metabolic syndrome, insulin level, and HOMA-IR 
index (P = 0.05). In addition to the effect from antipsychotic medications and 
an unhealthy lifestyle, genetic factors also contribute to the high prevalence 
of obesity and metabolic disturbances in patients with schizophrenia, especially 
genes involved in metabolic-related pathways.

DOI: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e318234ee84
PMID: 22020349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]