1. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2003 Sep;5(3):207-21. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2003.5.3/dcharney.

The psychobiology of resilience and vulnerability to anxiety disorders: 
implications for prevention and treatment.

Charney DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Chief, Mood and Anxiety Disorders Program, National Institute of Mental 
Health, Bethesda, Md, USA.

Much of the research on the neurobiology of human anxiety disorders has focused 
on psychopaihological abnormalities in patients with anxiety disorders. While 
this line of research is obviously important, more investigation is needed to 
elucidate the psychobiology of resilience to extreme stress. Study of the 
psychobiology of resilience has the potential to identify neurochemical, 
neuropeptide, and hormonal mediators of vulnerability and resilience to severe 
stress. In addition, the relevance of neural mechanisms of reward and 
motivation, fear responsiveness, and social behavior to character traits 
associated with risk and resistance to anxiety disorders may be clarified. These 
areas of investigation should lead to improved methods of diagnosis, novel 
approaches to prevention, and new targets for antianxiety drug discovery.

Gran parte de la investigación de la neurobiología de los trastornos de ansiedad 
en humanos se ha centrado en las anomalias psicopaiotógicas de los pacientes con 
trastornos de ansiedad. Sin desconocer que esta línea de investigación es 
obviamente importante, se requiere de más estudios para clarificar la 
psicobiología de la resiliencia en el estrés extremo. El estudio de la 
psicobiología de la resiliencia tiene la capacidad potencial de identificar 
mediadores neuroquímicos, neuropéptidos y hormonales de vulnerabilidad y 
resiliencia en el estrés severo. Además se puede aclarar la importancia de los 
mecanismos neu-rales de recompensa y motivación, la sensibilidad al miedo y el 
comportamiento social para rasgos de carácter asociados con riesgo y resistencia 
en los trastornos de ansiedad. Estas áreas de investigación deberían conducir a 
mejores métodos diagnósticos, nuevos enfoques en la prevención y nuevos 
objetivos para el descubrimiento de fármacos ansiolíticos.

Une grande partie de la recherche sur la neurobiologie des troubles anxieux 
humains s'est axée sur les anomalies psychopathologiques des patients atteints 
de troubles anxieux. Bien que cette ligne de recherche soit à l'évidence 
importante, il faut plus d'investigations pour élucider la psychobiologie de la 
résilience au stress extrême. Potentiellement, l'étude de la psychobiologie de 
la résilience peut identifier les médiateurs neurochimiques, neuropeptidiques et 
hormonaux de la vulnérabilité et de la résilience au stress sévère. De plus, il 
est possible de clarifier la pertinence des mécanismes nerveux de récompense et 
de motivation, de réactivité à la peur et de comportement social vis-à-vis des 
traits de caractère associés au risque et à la résistance aux troubles anxieux. 
Ces aires d'investigation devraient conduire à l'amélioration des méthodes de 
diagnostic, à de nouvelles approches pour la prévention et à de nouveaux 
objectifs pour la découverte de médicaments dirigés contre l'anxiété.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2003.5.3/dcharney
PMCID: PMC3181630
PMID: 22034473