1. Cell. 2011 Oct 28;147(3):577-89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.044.

Lineage regulators direct BMP and Wnt pathways to cell-specific programs during 
differentiation and regeneration.

Trompouki E(1), Bowman TV, Lawton LN, Fan ZP, Wu DC, DiBiase A, Martin CS, Cech 
JN, Sessa AK, Leblanc JL, Li P, Durand EM, Mosimann C, Heffner GC, Daley GQ, 
Paulson RF, Young RA, Zon LI.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital 
Boston, Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

BMP and Wnt signaling pathways control essential cellular responses through 
activation of the transcription factors SMAD (BMP) and TCF (Wnt). Here, we show 
that regeneration of hematopoietic lineages following acute injury depends on 
the activation of each of these signaling pathways to induce expression of key 
blood genes. Both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 co-occupy sites with master regulators 
adjacent to hematopoietic genes. In addition, both SMAD1 and TCF7L2 follow the 
binding of the predominant lineage regulator during differentiation from 
multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cells to erythroid cells. Furthermore, 
induction of the myeloid lineage regulator C/EBPα in erythroid cells shifts 
binding of SMAD1 to sites newly occupied by C/EBPα, whereas expression of the 
erythroid regulator GATA1 directs SMAD1 loss on nonerythroid targets. We 
conclude that the regenerative response mediated by BMP and Wnt signaling 
pathways is coupled with the lineage master regulators to control the gene 
programs defining cellular identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.044
PMCID: PMC3219441
PMID: 22036566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: L.I.Z. is a founder and 
stock holder of Fate, Inc. and a scientific advisor for Stemgent. G.Q.D. is a 
member of the Scientific Advisory Boards of MPM Capital, Inc., Epizyme, Inc., 
and iPierian, Inc.