1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jan;32(1):92-102. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.238618. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

In vivo functional and transcriptional profiling of bone marrow stem cells after 
transplantation into ischemic myocardium.

Sheikh AY(1), Huber BC, Narsinh KH, Spin JM, van der Bogt K, de Almeida PE, 
Ransohoff KJ, Kraft DL, Fajardo G, Ardigo D, Ransohoff J, Bernstein D, Fischbein 
MP, Robbins RC, Wu JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jan;32(1):1-2. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.239921.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical trials of bone marrow-derived stem cell therapy for the 
heart have yielded variable results. The basic mechanism(s) that underlies their 
potential efficacy remains unknown. In the present study, we evaluated the 
survival kinetics, transcriptional response, and functional outcome of 
intramyocardial bone marrow mononuclear cell (BMMC) transplantation for cardiac 
repair in a murine myocardial infarction model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used bioluminescence imaging and high-throughput 
transcriptional profiling to evaluate the in vivo survival kinetics and gene 
expression changes of transplanted BMMCs after their engraftment into ischemic 
myocardium. Our results demonstrate short-lived survival of cells following 
transplant, with less than 1% of cells surviving by 6 weeks posttransplantation. 
Moreover, transcriptomic analysis of BMMCs revealed nonspecific upregulation of 
various cell regulatory genes, with a marked downregulation of cell 
differentiation and maturation pathways. BMMC therapy caused limited improvement 
of heart function as assessed by echocardiography, invasive hemodynamics, and 
positron emission tomography. Histological evaluation of cell fate further 
confirmed findings of the in vivo cell tracking and transcriptomic analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data suggest that BMMC therapy, in its present 
iteration, may be less efficacious than once thought. Additional refinement of 
existing cell delivery protocols should be considered to induce better 
therapeutic efficacy.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.238618
PMCID: PMC3241895
PMID: 22034515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]