1. J Lipid Res. 2012 Jan;53(1):175-84. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P018952. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Genetic polymorphisms in carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A gene are associated 
with variation in body composition and fasting lipid traits in Yup'ik Eskimos.

Lemas DJ(1), Wiener HW, O'Brien DM, Hopkins S, Stanhope KL, Havel PJ, Allison 
DB, Fernandez JR, Tiwari HK, Boyer BB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK 
99775, USA.

Variants of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A), a key hepatic lipid 
oxidation enzyme, may influence how fatty acid oxidation contributes to obesity 
and metabolic outcomes. CPT1A is regulated by diet, suggesting interactions 
between gene variants and diet may influence outcomes. The objective of this 
study was to test the association of CPT1A variants with body composition and 
lipids, mediated by consumption of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Obesity 
phenotypes and fasting lipids were measured in a cross-sectional sample of 
Yup'ik Eskimo individuals (n = 1141) from the Center of Alaska Native Health 
Research (CANHR) study. Twenty-eight tagging CPT1A SNPs were evaluated with 
outcomes of interest in regression models accounting for family structure. 
Several CPT1A polymorphisms were associated with HDL-cholesterol and obesity 
phenotypes. The P479L (rs80356779) variant was associated with all 
obesity-related traits and fasting HDL-cholesterol. Interestingly, the 
association of P479L with HDL-cholesterol was still significant after correcting 
for body mass index (BMI), percentage body fat (PBF), or waist circumference 
(WC). Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the L479 allele of 
the CPT1A P479L variant confers a selective advantage that is both 
cardioprotective (through increased HDL-cholesterol) and associated with reduced 
adiposity.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.P018952
PMCID: PMC3243474
PMID: 22045927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]