1. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 1;361(1):116-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.018. Epub
2011  Oct 20.

Mesodermal retinoic acid signaling regulates endothelial cell coalescence in 
caudal pharyngeal arch artery vasculogenesis.

Li P(1), Pashmforoush M, Sucov HM.

Author information:
(1)Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of 
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 1425 San Pablo St., Los Angeles, CA 
90033, USA.

Disruption of retinoic acid signaling causes a variety of pharyngeal arch artery 
and great vessel defects, as well as malformations in many other tissues, 
including those derived from the pharyngeal endoderm. Previous studies implied 
that arch artery defects in the context of defective RA signaling occur 
secondary to pharyngeal pouch segmentation defects, although this model has 
never been experimentally verified. In this study, we examined arch artery 
morphogenesis during mouse development, and the role of RA in this process. We 
show in normal embryos that the arch arteries form by vasculogenic 
differentiation of pharyngeal mesoderm. Using various genetic backgrounds and 
tissue-specific mutation approaches, we segregate pharyngeal arch artery and 
pharyngeal pouch defects in RA receptor mutants, and show that RA signal 
transduction only in pharyngeal mesoderm is required for arch artery formation. 
RA does not control pharyngeal mesodermal differentiation to endothelium, but 
instead promotes the aggregation of endothelial cells into nascent vessels. 
Expression of VE-cadherin was substantially reduced in RAR mutants, and this 
deficiency may underlie the arch artery defects. The consequences of disrupted 
mesodermal and endodermal RA signaling were restricted to the 4th and 6th arch 
arteries and to the 4th pharyngeal pouch, respectively, suggesting that 
different regulatory mechanisms control the formation of the more anterior arch 
arteries and pouches.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.018
PMCID: PMC3235035
PMID: 22040871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]