1. Cancer Discov. 2011 Oct;1(5):442-56. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0102. Epub 
2011 Sep 15.

An LXR agonist promotes glioblastoma cell death through inhibition of an 
EGFR/AKT/SREBP-1/LDLR-dependent pathway.

Guo D(1), Reinitz F, Youssef M, Hong C, Nathanson D, Akhavan D, Kuga D, 
Amzajerdi AN, Soto H, Zhu S, Babic I, Tanaka K, Dang J, Iwanami A, Gini B, 
Dejesus J, Lisiero DD, Huang TT, Prins RM, Wen PY, Robins HI, Prados MD, 
Deangelis LM, Mellinghoff IK, Mehta MP, James CD, Chakravarti A, Cloughesy TF, 
Tontonoz P, Mischel PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Arthur G. James Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University Medical School, Columbus, OH, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Feb;2(2):290-1.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant primary brain tumor of adults 
and one of the most lethal of all cancers. Epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) mutations (EGFRvIII) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) hyperactivation 
are common in GBM, promoting tumor growth and survival, including through sterol 
regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP-1)-dependent lipogenesis. The role 
of cholesterol metabolism in GBM pathogenesis, its association with EGFR/PI3K 
signaling, and its potential therapeutic targetability are unknown. In our 
investigation, studies of GBM cell lines, xenograft models, and GBM clinical 
samples, including those from patients treated with the EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor lapatinib, uncovered an EGFRvIII-activated, PI3K/SREBP-1-dependent 
tumor survival pathway through the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR). 
Targeting LDLR with the liver X receptor (LXR) agonist GW3965 caused inducible 
degrader of LDLR (IDOL)-mediated LDLR degradation and increased expression of 
the ABCA1 cholesterol efflux transporter, potently promoting tumor cell death in 
an in vivo GBM model. These results show that EGFRvIII can promote tumor 
survival through PI3K/SREBP-1-dependent upregulation of LDLR and suggest a role 
for LXR agonists in the treatment of GBM patients.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0102
PMCID: PMC3207317
PMID: 22059152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]