1. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):201-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1354. Epub 
2011 Nov 7.

Use of multifunctional sigma-2 receptor ligand conjugates to trigger 
cancer-selective cell death signaling.

Spitzer D(1), Simon PO Jr, Kashiwagi H, Xu J, Zeng C, Vangveravong S, Zhou D, 
Chang K, McDunn JE, Hornick JR, Goedegebuure P, Hotchkiss RS, Mach RH, Hawkins 
WG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Alvin J Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

One major challenge in the development of cancer therapeutics is the selective 
delivery of the drugs to their cellular targets. In the case of pancreatic 
cancer, the σ-2 receptor is a unique target that triggers apoptosis upon 
activation. We have previously developed a series of chemical compounds with 
high affinity for the σ-2 receptor and showed rapid internalization of the 
ligands. One particular specific ligand of the σ-2 receptor, SV119, binds to 
pancreatic cancer cells and induces target cell death in vitro and in vivo. In 
this study, we characterized the ability of SV119 to selectively deliver other 
death-inducing cargos to augment the cytotoxic properties of SV119 itself. When 
conjugated to SV119, small molecules that are known to interfere with 
intracellular prosurvival pathways retained their ability to induce cell death, 
the efficiency of which was enhanced by the combinatorial effect of SV119 
delivered with its small molecule cargo. Our findings define a simple platform 
technology to increase the tumor-selective delivery of small molecule 
therapeutics via σ-2 ligands, permitting chemotherapeutic synergy that can 
optimize efficacy and patient benefit.

©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1354
PMCID: PMC3251632
PMID: 22065721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]