1. Meat Sci. 2008 Nov;80(3):780-7. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.03.022. Epub 2008 
Mar 30.

Investigation of candidate genes for glycolytic potential of porcine skeletal 
muscle: Association with meat quality and production traits in Italian Large 
White pigs.

Fontanesi L(1), Davoli R, Nanni Costa L, Beretti F, Scotti E, Tazzoli M, Tassone 
F, Colombo M, Buttazzoni L, Russo V.

Author information:
(1)DIPROVAL, Sezione di Allevamenti Zootecnici, Faculty of Agriculture, 
University of Bologna, Via F.lli Rosselli 107, 42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy.

The objective of this study was to investigate the association of DNA markers in 
candidate genes for glycolytic potential on meat quality parameters (pH(1), 
pH(u), glycogen and lactate content and glycolytic potential of semimembranosus 
muscle) and estimated breeding values (EBVs) for average daily gain, lean cuts, 
back fat thickness, ham weight, and feed:gain ratio in 272 Italian Large White 
pigs. Three mutations in the PRKAG3 gene (T30N, G52S and I199V) were 
investigated as well as single nucleotide polymorphisms in two other skeletal 
muscle genes (PGAM2 and PKM2) involved in the glycolytic pathway. Association 
analysis with the PRKAG3 markers showed significant results (P<0.05) only for 
pH(1) (I199V, with significant additive effect) and lactate content (T30N), 
confirming, at least in part, the effects of this gene on meat quality traits. 
Significant association (P<0.05) was also observed for PGAM2 and ham weight EBV 
with significant additive and dominance effects. PKM2 was associated with 
average daily gain, lean cuts (P<0.001), back fat thickness and feed:gain ratio 
(P<0.05), with significant additive and/or dominance effects on these traits. 
PKM2 encodes for a key enzyme of the muscle glycolytic pathway and maps on 
porcine chromosome 7 where other studies have reported important QTL for the 
same traits. These data might suggest an important function of this gene in the 
mechanisms that produce the observed effects. The results will be important to 
evaluate the inclusion of some of these DNA polymorphisms in marker assisted 
selection programs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.03.022
PMID: 22063597