1. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan;57(1):46-51. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.127. Epub 2011 Nov
10.

Genetic variations in the CYP17A1 and NT5C2 genes are associated with a 
reduction in visceral and subcutaneous fat areas in Japanese women.

Hotta K(1), Kitamoto A, Kitamoto T, Mizusawa S, Teranishi H, Matsuo T, Nakata Y, 
Hyogo H, Ochi H, Nakamura T, Kamohara S, Miyatake N, Kotani K, Komatsu R, Itoh 
N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda M, Nakajima A, Funahashi T, Miyazaki S, Tokunaga K, 
Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Chayama K, Hamaguchi K, Yamada K, Hanafusa T, Oikawa S, 
Yoshimatsu H, Sakata T, Tanaka K, Matsuzawa Y, Nakao K, Sekine A.

Author information:
(1)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Yoshida-Konoecho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. kikukoh@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Visceral fat accumulation has an important role in increasing the morbidity and 
mortality rates, by increasing the risk of developing several metabolic 
disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia and hypertension. New genetic 
loci that are associated with increased systolic and diastolic blood pressures 
have been identified by genome-wide association studies in Caucasian 
populations. This study investigates whether single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) that confer susceptibility to high blood pressure are also associated 
with visceral fat obesity. We genotyped 1279 Japanese subjects (556 men and 723 
women) who underwent computed tomography for measuring the visceral fat area 
(VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) at the following SNPs: FGF5 rs16998073, 
CACNB2 rs11014166, C10orf107 rs1530440, CYP17A1 rs1004467, NT5C2 rs11191548, 
PLEKHA7 rs381815, ATP2B1 rs2681472 and rs2681492, ARID3B rs6495112, CSK 
rs1378942, PLCD3 rs12946454, and ZNF652 rs16948048. In an additive model, risk 
alleles of the CYP17A1 rs1004467 and NT5C2 rs11191548 were found to be 
significantly associated with reduced SFA (P=0.00011 and 0.0016, respectively). 
When the analysis was performed separately in men and women, significant 
associations of rs1004467 (additive model) and rs11191548 (recessive model) with 
reduced VFA (P=0.0018 and 0.0022, respectively) and SFA (P=0.00039 and 0.00059, 
respectively) were observed in women, but not in men. Our results suggest that 
polymorphisms in the CYP17A1 and NT5C2 genes influence a reduction in both 
visceral and subcutaneous fat mass in Japanese women.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2011.127
PMID: 22071413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]