1. J Physiol Paris. 2012 Jan;106(1-2):12-22. doi:
10.1016/j.jphysparis.2011.10.004.  Epub 2011 Nov 2.

CaV2.1 voltage activated calcium channels and synaptic transmission in familial 
hemiplegic migraine pathogenesis.

Uchitel OD(1), Inchauspe CG, Urbano FJ, Di Guilmi MN.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (CONICET), 
Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de Ciencias 
Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
odu@fbmc.fcen.uba.ar

Studies on the genetic forms of epilepsy, chronic pain, and migraine caused by 
mutations in ion channels have given crucial insights into the molecular 
mechanisms, pathogenesis, and therapeutic approaches to complex neurological 
disorders. In this review we focus on the role of mutated CaV2.1 (i.e., 
P/Q-type) voltage-activated Ca2+ channels, and on the ultimate consequences that 
mutations causing familial hemiplegic migraine type-1 (FHM1) have in 
neurotransmitter release. Transgenic mice harboring the human pathogenic FHM1 
mutation R192Q or S218L (KI) have been used as models to study neurotransmission 
at several central and peripheral synapses. FHM1 KI mice are a powerful tool to 
explore presynaptic regulation associated with expression of CaV2.1 channels. 
Mutated CaV2.1 channels activate at more hyperpolarizing potentials and lead to 
a gain-of-function in synaptic transmission. This gain-of-function might 
underlie alterations in the excitatory/ inhibitory balance of synaptic 
transmission, favoring a persistent state of hyperexcitability in cortical 
neurons that would increase the susceptibility for cortical spreading depression 
(CSD), a mechanism believed to initiate the attacks of migraine with aura.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2011.10.004
PMID: 22074995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]