1. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):133-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1795. Epub 
2011 Nov 11.

Metastasis suppressor NM23-H1 promotes repair of UV-induced DNA damage and 
suppresses UV-induced melanomagenesis.

Jarrett SG(1), Novak M, Dabernat S, Daniel JY, Mellon I, Zhang Q, Harris N, 
Ciesielski MJ, Fenstermaker RA, Kovacic D, Slominski A, Kaetzel DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Biomedical Pharmacology, and Graduate Center for 
Toxicology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine and Markey Cancer Center, 
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Reduced expression of the metastasis suppressor NM23-H1 is associated with 
aggressive forms of multiple cancers. Here, we establish that NM23-H1 (termed H1 
isoform in human, M1 in mouse) and two of its attendant enzymatic activities, 
the 3'-5' exonuclease and nucleoside diphosphate kinase, are novel participants 
in the cellular response to UV radiation (UVR)-induced DNA damage. NM23-H1 
deficiency compromised the kinetics of repair for total DNA polymerase-blocking 
lesions and nucleotide excision repair of (6-4) photoproducts in vitro. Kinase 
activity of NM23-H1 was critical for rapid repair of both polychromatic 
UVB/UVA-induced (290-400 nm) and UVC-induced (254 nm) DNA damage, whereas its 
3'-5' exonuclease activity was dominant in the suppression of UVR-induced 
mutagenesis. Consistent with its role in DNA repair, NM23-H1 rapidly 
translocated to sites of UVR-induced (6-4) photoproduct DNA damage in the 
nucleus. In addition, transgenic mice hemizygous-null for nm23-m1 and nm23-m2 
exhibited UVR-induced melanoma and follicular infundibular cyst formation, and 
tumor-associated melanocytes displayed invasion into adjacent dermis, consistent 
with loss of invasion-suppressing activity of NM23 in vivo. Taken together, our 
data show a critical role for NM23 isoforms in limiting mutagenesis and 
suppressing UVR-induced melanomagenesis.

Â©2011 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1795
PMCID: PMC3251703
PMID: 22080566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]