1. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Mar;132(3 Pt 1):575-82. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.366.
Epub  2011 Nov 17.

Clinical expression and new SPINK5 splicing defects in Netherton syndrome: 
unmasking a frequent founder synonymous mutation and unconventional intronic 
mutations.

Lacroix M(1), Lacaze-Buzy L, Furio L, Tron E, Valari M, Van der Wier G, Bodemer 
C, Bygum A, Bursztejn AC, Gaitanis G, Paradisi M, Stratigos A, Weibel L, 
Deraison C, Hovnanian A.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U563, Toulouse, France.

Netherton syndrome (NS) is a severe skin disease caused by loss-of-function 
mutations in SPINK5 (serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5) encoding the serine 
protease inhibitor LEKTI (lympho-epithelial Kazal type-related inhibitor). Here, 
we disclose new SPINK5 defects in 12 patients, who presented a clinical triad 
suggestive of NS with variations in inter- and intra-familial disease 
expression. We identified a new and frequent synonymous mutation c.891C>T 
(p.Cys297Cys) in exon 11 of the 12 NS patients. This mutation disrupts an exonic 
splicing enhancer sequence and causes out-of-frame skipping of exon 11. 
Haplotype analysis indicates that this mutation is a founder mutation in Greece. 
Two other new deep intronic mutations, c.283-12T>A in intron 4 and c.1820+53G>A 
in intron 19, induced partial intronic sequence retention. A new nonsense 
c.2557C>T (p.Arg853X) mutation was also identified. All mutations led to a 
premature termination codon resulting in no detectable LEKTI on skin sections. 
Two patients with deep intronic mutations showed residual LEKTI fragments in 
cultured keratinocytes. These fragments retained some functional activity, and 
could therefore, together with other determinants, contribute to modulate the 
disease phenotype. This new founder mutation, the most frequent mutation 
described in European populations so far, and these unusual intronic mutations, 
widen the clinical and molecular spectrum of NS and offer new diagnostic 
perspectives for NS patients.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2011.366
PMID: 22089833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]