1. Am J Hematol. 2012 Feb;87(2):136-8. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22215. Epub 2011 Nov 12.

Pruritus in primary myelofibrosis: clinical and laboratory correlates.

Vaa BE(1), Wolanskyj AP, Roeker L, Pardanani A, Lasho TL, Finke CM, Tefferi A.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Medical School, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Recent clinical trials with JAK or mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
inhibitors in primary myelofibrosis (PMF) have identified pruritus as one of the 
most treatment-responsive disease traits. However, little is known about the 
prevalence of pruritus in PMF or its clinical and laboratory correlates. Among 
566 consecutive patients with PMF seen at our institution, the presence or 
absence of pruritus was documented in 90 (16%) and 146 (26%) patients, 
respectively. Patients with pruritus were less likely to express MPLW515 (0% vs. 
10%; P = 0.02) or leukopenia (8% vs. 24%; P = 0.002). The latter association was 
more pronounced in the absence of JAK2 or MPL mutations. Pruritus also clustered 
with marked leukocytosis (23% vs. 11%; P = 0.01) and JAK2V617F (71% vs. 59%; P = 
0.08). Pruritus did not correlate with karyotype (P = 0.33), risk category per 
the Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System (DIPSS)-plus (P = 0.37), 
DIPSS-plus-adjusted survival (P = 0.41), or leukemic transformation (P = 0.13). 
Plasma levels of 20 cytokines, which are known to be abnormally expressed in 
PMF, including IL-1b, IL-2R, IL-6, IL-8, and VEGF, were measured in 63 
informative cases and showed no correlations with history of pruritus. We 
conclude that pruritus is relatively frequent in PMF and is prognostically 
irrelevant. The pathogenesis of PMF-associated pruritus is not necessarily 
linked to proinflammatory cytokines but may instead involve molecules that are 
either granulocyte-derived or influence granulopoiesis. The apparently 
differential effect of MPL vs. JAK2 mutations on pruritus requires further 
investigation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.22215
PMID: 22081434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]