1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027456. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

8-Modified-2'-deoxyadenosine analogues induce delayed polymerization arrest 
during HIV-1 reverse transcription.

Vivet-Boudou V(1), Isel C, Sleiman M, Smyth R, Ben Gaied N, Barhoum P, Laumond 
G, Bec G, Götte M, Mak J, Aubertin AM, Burger A, Marquet R.

Author information:
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et 
Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Strasbourg, France. v.vivet@ibmc-cnrs.unistra.fr

The occurrence of resistant viruses to any of the anti-HIV-1 compounds used in 
the current therapies against AIDS underlies the urge for the development of new 
drug targets and/or new drugs acting through novel mechanisms. While all 
anti-HIV-1 nucleoside analogues in clinical use and in clinical trials rely on 
ribose modifications for activity, we designed nucleosides with a natural 
deoxyribose moiety and modifications of position 8 of the adenine base. Such 
modifications might induce a steric clash with helix αH in the thumb domain of 
the p66 subunit of HIV-1 RT at a distance from the catalytic site, causing 
delayed chain termination. Eleven new 2'-deoxyadenosine analogues modified on 
position 8 of the purine base were synthesized and tested in vitro and in 
cell-based assays. In this paper we demonstrate for the first time that chemical 
modifications on position 8 of 2'-deoxyadenosine induce delayed chain 
termination in vitro, and also inhibit DNA synthesis when incorporated in a DNA 
template strand. Furthermore, one of them had moderate anti-HIV-1 activity in 
cell-culture. Our results constitute a proof of concept indicating that 
modification on the base moiety of nucleosides can induce delayed polymerization 
arrest and inhibit HIV-1 replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027456
PMCID: PMC3210175
PMID: 22087320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.