1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27510. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027510. Epub 2011 Nov 
11.

Atypical scrapie isolates involve a uniform prion species with a complex 
molecular signature.

GÃ¶tte DR(1), Benestad SL, Laude H, Zurbriggen A, Oevermann A, Seuberlich T.

Author information:
(1)NeuroCentre, National and OIE Reference Laboratories for BSE and Scrapie, 
Division of Experimental Clinical Research, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of 
Berne, Berne, Switzerland.

The pathobiology of atypical scrapie, a prion disease affecting sheep and goats, 
is still poorly understood. In a previous study, we demonstrated that atypical 
scrapie affecting small ruminants in Switzerland differs in the neuroanatomical 
distribution of the pathological prion protein (PrP(d)). To investigate whether 
these differences depend on host-related vs. pathogen-related factors, we 
transmitted atypical scrapie to transgenic mice over-expressing the ovine prion 
protein (tg338). The clinical, neuropathological, and molecular phenotype of 
tg338 mice is similar between mice carrying the Swiss atypical scrapie isolates 
and the Nor98, an atypical scrapie isolate from Norway. Together with published 
data, our results suggest that atypical scrapie is caused by a uniform type of 
prion, and that the observed phenotypic differences in small ruminants are 
likely host-dependant. Strikingly, by using a refined SDS-PAGE technique, we 
established that the prominent proteinase K-resistant prion protein fragment in 
atypical scrapie consists of two separate, unglycosylated peptides with 
molecular masses of roughly 5 and 8 kDa. These findings show similarities to 
those for other prion diseases in animals and humans, and lay the groundwork for 
future comparative research.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027510
PMCID: PMC3214077
PMID: 22096587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.