1. Hepatology. 2012 Apr;55(4):1139-45. doi: 10.1002/hep.24781. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Homozygosity mapping identifies a bile acid biosynthetic defect in an adult with 
cirrhosis of unknown etiology.

Molho-Pessach V(1), Rios JJ, Xing C, Setchell KD, Cohen JC, Hobbs HH.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The most common inborn error of bile acid metabolism is 
3β-hydroxy-Δ(5)-C(27)-steroid oxidoreductase (3β-HSD) deficiency, a disorder 
that usually presents in early childhood with hepatic dysfunction. Timely 
diagnosis of this disorder is crucial because it can be effectively treated with 
primary bile acid replacement. Here we describe a 24-year-old woman from Iran 
with cirrhosis of unknown etiology. Her sister and a first cousin died of 
cirrhosis (ages 19 and 6 years) and another 32-year-old first cousin had a 
self-limited liver disorder in childhood that resolved at age 9 years. The 
family history suggested that the affected family members were homozygous for a 
mutant allele inherited identical-by-descent. A genome-wide analysis of 2.4 
million single nucleotide polymorphisms was performed to identify regions of 
homozygosity that were present in the proband and the 32-year-old first cousin, 
but not in a healthy relative. One of these regions contained the gene encoding 
3β-HSD (HSD3B7). Sequence analysis of HSD3B7 revealed that the proband and her 
32-year-old cousin were homozygous for a frameshift mutation (c.45_46del AG, 
p.T15Tfsx27) in exon 1. The diagnosis of 3β-HSD deficiency was confirmed by 
documenting high levels of 3β-hydroxy-Δ(5) bile acids in the serum of the 
proband and the 32-year-old first cousin using mass spectrometry. To our 
knowledge, the 32-year-old relative in this family represents the oldest 
asymptomatic patient with this disorder.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the clinical utility of homozygosity mapping 
in diagnosing autosomal recessive metabolic disorders. This family illustrates 
the wide variation in expressivity that occurs in 3β-HSD deficiency and 
underscores the need to consider a bile acid synthetic defect as a possible 
cause of liver disease in adults.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.24781
PMCID: PMC3771532
PMID: 22095780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]