1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002386. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002386. Epub 
2011 Nov 10.

Towards a structural comprehension of bacterial type VI secretion systems: 
characterization of the TssJ-TssM complex of an Escherichia coli pathovar.

Felisberto-Rodrigues C(1), Durand E, Aschtgen MS, Blangy S, Ortiz-Lombardia M, 
Douzi B, Cambillau C, Cascales E.

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules 
Biologiques, Campus de Luminy, Marseille, France.

Type VI secretion systems (T6SS) are trans-envelope machines dedicated to the 
secretion of virulence factors into eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells, therefore 
required for pathogenesis and/or for competition towards neighboring bacteria. 
The T6SS apparatus resembles the injection device of bacteriophage T4, and is 
anchored to the cell envelope through a membrane complex. This membrane complex 
is composed of the TssL, TssM and TagL inner membrane anchored proteins and of 
the TssJ outer membrane lipoprotein. Here, we report the crystal structure of 
the enteroaggregative Escherichia coli Sci1 TssJ lipoprotein, a two 
four-stranded β-sheets protein that exhibits a transthyretin fold with an 
additional α-helical domain and a protruding loop. We showed that TssJ contacts 
TssM through this loop since a loop depleted mutant failed to interact with TssM 
in vitro or in vivo. Biophysical analysis of TssM and TssJ-TssM interaction 
suggest a structural model of the membrane-anchored outer shell of T6SS. 
Collectively, our results provide an improved understanding of T6SS assembly and 
encourage structure-aided drug design of novel antimicrobials targeting T6SS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002386
PMCID: PMC3213119
PMID: 22102820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.