1. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002372. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002372. Epub 
2011 Nov 10.

Galactosaminogalactan, a new immunosuppressive polysaccharide of Aspergillus 
fumigatus.

Fontaine T(1), Delangle A, Simenel C, Coddeville B, van Vliet SJ, van Kooyk Y, 
Bozza S, Moretti S, Schwarz F, Trichot C, Aebi M, Delepierre M, Elbim C, Romani 
L, Latgé JP.

Author information:
(1)Unité des Aspergillus, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. tfontain@pasteur.fr

A new polysaccharide secreted by the human opportunistic fungal pathogen 
Aspergillus fumigatus has been characterized. Carbohydrate analysis using 
specific chemical degradations, mass spectrometry, ¹H and ¹³C nuclear magnetic 
resonance showed that this polysaccharide is a linear heterogeneous 
galactosaminogalactan composed of α1-4 linked galactose and α1-4 linked 
N-acetylgalactosamine residues where both monosacharides are randomly 
distributed and where the percentage of galactose per chain varied from 15 to 
60%. This polysaccharide is antigenic and is recognized by a majority of the 
human population irrespectively of the occurrence of an Aspergillus infection. 
GalNAc oligosaccharides are an essential epitope of the galactosaminogalactan 
that explains the universal antibody reaction due to cross reactivity with other 
antigenic molecules containing GalNAc stretches such as the N-glycans of 
Campylobacter jejuni. The galactosaminogalactan has no protective effect during 
Aspergillus infections. Most importantly, the polysaccharide promotes fungal 
development in immunocompetent mice due to its immunosuppressive activity 
associated with disminished neutrophil infiltrates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002372
PMCID: PMC3213105
PMID: 22102815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.