1. J Nutr. 2012 Jan;142(1):161S-5S. doi: 10.3945/jn.111.140756. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms upstream from the β-carotene 15,15'-monoxygenase 
gene influence provitamin A conversion efficiency in female volunteers.

Lietz G(1), Oxley A, Leung W, Hesketh J.

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. georg.lietz@ncl.ac.uk

β-Carotene, the most abundant provitamin A carotenoid in the diet, is converted 
to retinal by β-carotene 15,15'-monoxygenase (BCMO1). However, β-carotene 
absorption and conversion into retinal is extremely variable among individuals, 
with proportions of low responders to dietary β-carotene as high as 45%. 
Recently, 2 common nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 
the BCMO1 coding region (R267S; rs12934922 and A379V; rs7501331) revealed 
reduced catalytic activity, confirming that genetic variations contribute to the 
low responder phenotype. Because 4 SNPs 5' upstream from the BCMO1 gene were 
recently shown to affect circulating carotenoid concentrations, the current 
study aimed to investigate the effects of these SNPs on β-carotene conversion 
efficiency. Three of the 4 polymorphisms (rs6420424, rs11645428, and rs6564851) 
reduced the catalytic activity of BCMO1 in female volunteers by 59, 51, and 48%, 
respectively. The TG-rich lipoprotein fraction retinyl palmitate:β-carotene 
ratio was negatively correlated with the G allele of rs11645428 (r = -0.44; P = 
0.018), whereas it was positively correlated with the G allele of rs6420424 (r = 
0.53; P = 0.004) and the T allele of rs6564851 (r = 0.41; P = 0.028). 
Furthermore, large inter-ethnic variations in frequency of affected alleles were 
detected, with frequencies varying from 43 to 84% (rs6420424), 52 to 100% 
(rs11645428), and 19 to 67% (rs6564851). In summary, a range of SNPs can 
influence the effectiveness of using plant-based provitamin A carotenoids to 
increase vitamin A status in at-risk population groups and this effect may vary 
depending on ethnic origin.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.111.140756
PMID: 22113863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]