1. J Dairy Res. 2012 Feb;79(1):110-8. doi: 10.1017/S0022029911000859. Epub 2011
Nov  30.

Effect of polymorphisms in the leptin, leptin receptor and 
acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1) genes and genetic polymorphism 
of milk proteins on bovine milk composition.

Glantz M(1), Lindmark Månsson H, Stålhammar H, Paulsson M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Technology, Engineering and Nutrition, Lund University, 
P.O. Box 124, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden. maria.glantz@food.lth.se

The relations between cow genetics and milk composition have gained a lot of 
attention during the past years, however, generally only a few compositional 
traits have been examined. The aim of this study was to determine if 
polymorphisms in the leptin (LEP), leptin receptor (LEPR) and 
acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1) genes as well as genetic 
polymorphism of β-casein (β-CN), κ-CN and β-lactoglobulin (β-LG) impact several 
bovine milk composition traits. Individual milk samples from the Swedish Red and 
Swedish Holstein breeds were analyzed for components in the protein, lipid, 
carbohydrate and mineral profiles. Cow alleles were determined on the following 
SNP: A1457G, A252T, A59V and C963T on the LEP gene, T945M on the LEPR gene and 
Nt984+8(A-G) on the DGAT1 gene. Additionally, genetic variants of β-CN, κ-CN and 
β-LG were determined. For both the breeds, the same tendency of minor allele 
frequency was found for all SNPs and protein genes, except on LEPA1457G and 
LEPC963T. This study indicated significant (P<0·05) associations between the 
studied SNPs and several compositional parameters. Protein content was 
influenced by LEPA1457G (G>A) and LEPC963T (T>C), whereas total Ca, ionic Ca 
concentration and milk pH were affected by LEPA1457G, LEPA59V, LEPC963T and 
LEPRT945M. However, yields of milk, protein, CN, lactose, total Ca and P were 
mainly affected by β-CN (A2>A1) and κ-CN (A>B>E). β-LG was mainly associated 
with whey protein yield and ionic Ca concentration (A>B). Thus, this study shows 
possibilities of using these polymorphisms as markers within genetic selection 
programs to improve and adjust several compositional parameters.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022029911000859
PMID: 22127264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]