1. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027895. Epub 2011 Nov 
18.

Emergence and transmission pathways of rapidly evolving evolutionary branch C4a 
strains of human enterovirus 71 in the Central Plain of China.

Zhang Y(1), Wang J, Guo W, Wang H, Zhu S, Wang D, Bai R, Li X, Yan D, Wang H, 
Zhang Y, Zhu Z, Tan X, An H, Xu A, Xu W.

Author information:
(1)WHO WPRO Regional Polio Reference Laboratory and State Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, National Institute for Viral Disease 
Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Large-scale outbreaks of hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) 
occurred repeatedly in the Central Plain of China (Shandong, Anhui, and Henan 
provinces) from 2007 until now. These epidemics have increased in size and 
severity each year and are a major public health concern in mainland China.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Phylogenetic analysis was performed and a Bayesian Markov 
chain Monte Carlo tree was constructed based on the complete VP1 sequences of 
HEV71 isolates. These analyses showed that the HFMD epidemic in the Central 
Plain of China was caused by at least 5 chains of HEV71 transmission and that 
the virus continued to circulate and evolve over the winter seasons between 
outbreaks. Between 1998 and 2010, there were 2 stages of HEV71 circulation in 
mainland China, with a shift from evolutionary branch C4b to C4a in 2003-2004. 
The evolution rate of C4a HEV71 was 4.99Ã—10(-3) substitutions per site per year, 
faster than the mean of all HEV71 genotypes. The most recent common ancestor 
estimates for the Chinese clusters dated to October 1994 and November 1993 for 
the C4a and C4b evolutionary branches, respectively. Compared with all C4a HEV71 
strains, a nucleotide substitution in all C4b HEV71 genome (A to C reversion at 
nt2503 in the VP1 coding region, which caused amino acid substitution of VP1-10: 
Gln to His) had reverted.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that C4a HEV71 strains introduced into the Central 
Plain of China are responsible for the recent outbreaks. The relationships among 
HEV71 isolates determined from the combined sequence and epidemiological data 
reveal the underlying seasonal dynamics of HEV71 circulation. At least 5 HEV71 
lineages circulated in the Central Plain of China from 2007 to 2009, and the 
Shandong and Anhui lineages were found to have passed through a genetic 
bottleneck during the low-transmission winter season.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027895
PMCID: PMC3220707
PMID: 22125635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.