1. J Gen Physiol. 2011 Dec;138(6):627-40. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201110693.

The core domain as the force sensor of the yeast mechanosensitive TRP channel.

Su Z(1), Anishkin A, Kung C, Saimi Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.

Stretch-activated conductances are commonly encountered in careful electric 
recordings. Those of known proteins (TRP, MscL, MscS, K(2p), Kv, etc.) all share 
a core, which houses the ion pathway and the gate, but no recognizable 
force-sensing domain. Like animal TRPs, the yeast TRPY1 is polymodal, activated 
by stretch force, Ca(2+), etc. To test whether its S5-S6 core senses the stretch 
force, we tried to uncouple it from the peripheral domains by strategic peptide 
insertions to block the covalent core-periphery interactions. Insertion of long 
unstructured peptides should distort, if not disrupt, protein structures that 
transmit force. Such insertions between S6 and the C-terminal tail largely 
removed Ca(2+) activation, showing their effectiveness. However, such insertions 
as well as those between S5 and the N-terminal region, which includes S1-S4, did 
not significantly alter mechanosensitivity. Even insertions at both locations 
flanking the S5-S6 core did not much alter mechanosensitivity. Tryptophan 
scanning mutations in S5 were also constructed to perturb possible noncovalent 
core-periphery contacts. The testable tryptophan mutations also have little or 
no effects on mechanosensitivity. Boltzmann fits of the wild-type force-response 
curves agree with a structural homology model for a stretch-induced core 
expansion of ~2 nm(2) upon opening. We hypothesize that membrane tension pulls 
on S5-S6, expanding the core and opening the TRPY1 gate. The core being the 
major force sensor offers the simplest, though not the only, explanation of why 
so many channels of disparate designs are mechanically sensitive. Compared with 
the bacterial MscL, TRPY1 is much less sensitive to force, befitting a polymodal 
channel that relies on multiple stimuli.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.201110693
PMCID: PMC3226973
PMID: 22124118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]