1. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 1;318(3):262-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.006. Epub
 2011 Nov 15.

A mutation of the fission yeast EB1 overcomes negative regulation by 
phosphorylation and stabilizes microtubules.

Iimori M(1), Ozaki K, Chikashige Y, Habu T, Hiraoka Y, Maki T, Hayashi I, Obuse 
C, Matsumoto T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake cho, 
Sakyo ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Mal3 is a fission yeast homolog of EB1, a plus-end tracking protein (+TIP). We 
have generated a mutation (89R) replacing glutamine with arginine in the 
calponin homology (CH) domain of Mal3. Analysis of the 89R mutant in vitro has 
revealed that the mutation confers a higher affinity to microtubules and 
enhances the intrinsic activity to promote the microtubule-assembly. The mutant 
Mal3 is no longer a +TIP, but binds strongly the microtubule lattice. Live cell 
imaging has revealed that while the wild type Mal3 proteins dissociate from the 
tip of the growing microtubules before the onset of shrinkage, the mutant Mal3 
proteins persist on microtubules and reduces a rate of shrinkage after a longer 
pausing period. Consequently, the mutant Mal3 proteins cause abnormal elongation 
of microtubules composing the spindle and aster. Mal3 is phosphorylated at a 
cluster of serine/threonine residues in the linker connecting the CH and 
EB1-like C-terminal motif domains. The phosphorylation occurs in a 
microtubule-dependent manner and reduces the affinity of Mal3 to microtubules. 
We propose that because the 89R mutation is resistant to the effect of 
phosphorylation, it can associate persistently with microtubules and confers a 
stronger stability of microtubules likely by reinforcing the cylindrical 
structure.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.11.006
PMID: 22134091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]