1. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Mar 1;71(5):451-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.10.012. 
Epub 2011 Dec 2.

PER2 rs2304672 polymorphism moderates circadian-relevant reward circuitry 
activity in adolescents.

Forbes EE(1), Dahl RE, Almeida JR, Ferrell RE, Nimgaonkar VL, Mansour H, 
Sciarrillo SR, Holm SM, Rodriguez EE, Phillips ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. forbese@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Reward behavior in animals is influenced by circadian genes, 
including clock-pathway genes such as Period2 (PER2). Several forms of 
psychiatric illness are associated with both altered reward function and 
disturbances in circadian function. The PER2 single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) rs2304672 has been associated with psychiatric illnesses involving reward 
dysfunction. Associations among circadian genes, function in neural reward 
circuits, and circadian-influenced behavior have not yet been studied in humans, 
however.
METHODS: 90 healthy adolescents underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging 
during a guessing task with monetary reward, genotyping for two PER2 SNPs 
(rs2304672, rs2304674), and actigraphy to measure sleep in their home 
environments. Weekend sleep midpoint, a behavioral index of circadian function, 
was derived from actigraphy. Puberty was measured by physical exam.
RESULTS: The rs2304672 SNP predicted blood oxygenation level-dependent response 
to monetary reward as constrained by sleep midpoint. Later sleep midpoint was 
associated with reduced activity in a key component of reward circuitry, medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC; Brodmann area 9/10/32), to reward outcome (p(corrected) 
< .05). G allele carriers showed reduced activity in mPFC relative to CC 
homozygotes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings are the first to indicate that circadian genes have a 
significant impact upon circadian-relevant reward circuitry in humans. These 
findings have the potential to elucidate gene-brain-behavior relationships 
underlying reward processing and psychopathology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.10.012
PMCID: PMC3323120
PMID: 22137505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]