1. Vet Pathol. 2012 Jan;49(1):106-15. doi: 10.1177/0300985811429814. Epub 2011
Dec  6.

3-dimensional imaging modalities for phenotyping genetically engineered mice.

Powell KA(1), Wilson D.

Author information:
(1)Small Animal Imaging Shared Resource, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA. kimerly.powell@osumc.edu

A variety of 3-dimensional (3D) digital imaging modalities are available for 
whole-body assessment of genetically engineered mice: magnetic resonance 
microscopy (MRM), X-ray microcomputed tomography (microCT), optical projection 
tomography (OPT), episcopic and cryoimaging, and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM). 
Embryo and adult mouse phenotyping can be accomplished at microscopy or near 
microscopy spatial resolutions using these modalities. MRM and microCT are 
particularly well-suited for evaluating structural information at the organ 
level, whereas episcopic and OPT imaging provide structural and functional 
information from molecular fluorescence imaging at the cellular level. UBM can 
be used to monitor embryonic development longitudinally in utero. Specimens are 
not significantly altered during preparation, and structures can be viewed in 
their native orientations. Technologies for rapid automated data acquisition and 
high-throughput phenotyping have been developed and continually improve as this 
exciting field evolves.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985811429814
PMCID: PMC3857693
PMID: 22146851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Dr. Wilson has a 
financial interest in BioInVision, Inc.