1. Neurotox Res. 2012 May;21(4):379-92. doi: 10.1007/s12640-011-9293-4. Epub 2011
 Dec 6.

Selective mGluR1 antagonist EMQMCM inhibits the kainate-induced excitotoxicity 
in primary neuronal cultures and in the rat hippocampus.

Śmiałowska M(1), Gołembiowska K, Kajta M, Zięba B, Dziubina A, Domin H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smętna 12, 31-343 Kraków, Poland. nfsmialo@cyf-kr.edu.pl

Abundant evidence suggests that indirect inhibitory modulation of glutamatergic 
transmission, via metabotropic glutamatergic receptors (mGluR), may induce 
neuroprotection. The present study was designed to determine whether the 
selective antagonist of mGluR1 
(3-ethyl-2-methyl-quinolin-6-yl)-(4-methoxy-cyclohexyl)-methanone 
methanesulfonate (EMQMCM), showed neuroprotection against the kainate 
(KA)-induced excitotoxicity in vitro and in vivo. In in vitro studies on mouse 
primary cortical and hippocampal neuronal cultures, incubation with KA (150 μM) 
induced strong degeneration [measured as lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) efflux] and 
apoptosis (measured as caspase-3 activity). EMQMCM (0.1-100 μM) added 30 min to 
6 h after KA, significantly attenuated the KA-induced LDH release and prevented 
the increase in caspase-3 activity in the cultures. Those effects were dose- and 
time-dependent. In in vivo studies KA (2.5 nmol/1 μl) was unilaterally injected 
into the rat dorsal CA1 hippocampal region. Degeneration was calculated by 
counting surviving neurons in the CA pyramidal layer using stereological 
methods. It was found that EMQMCM (5-10 nmol/1 μl) injected into the dorsal 
hippocampus 30 min, 1 h, or 3 h (the higher dose only) after KA significantly 
prevented the KA-induced neuronal degeneration. In vivo microdialysis studies in 
rat hippocampus showed that EMQMCM (100 μM) significantly increased 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and decreased glutamate release. When perfused 
simultaneously with KA, EMQMCM substantially increased GABA release and 
prevented the KA-induced glutamate release. The obtained results indicate that 
the mGluR1 antagonist, EMQMCM, may exert neuroprotection against excitotoxicity 
after delayed treatment (30 min to 6 h). The role of enhanced GABAergic 
transmission in the neuroprotection is postulated.

© The Author(s) 2011. This article is published with open access at 
Springerlink.com

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-011-9293-4
PMCID: PMC3296950
PMID: 22144346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]