1. Pancreas. 2012 May;41(4):530-4. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3182374ace.

Serum HSP70: a novel biomarker for early detection of pancreatic cancer.

Dutta SK(1), Girotra M, Singla M, Dutta A, Otis Stephen F, Nair PP, Merchant NB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Sinai Hospital of Baltimore, Baltimore, MD 21215, USA. 
sdutta@lifebridgehealth.org

OBJECTIVES: Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is overexpressed in human pancreatic 
cancer cell lines. To determine if serum HSP70 levels are elevated in patients 
with pancreatic cancer and can function as a biomarker for early detection of 
pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: Study subjects were divided into 3 groups: histologically proven 
pancreatic cancer (PC; n = 23), chronic pancreatitis (CP; n = 12), and matched 
normal control subjects (C; n = 10). Serum HSP70 levels were determined using a 
novel immunoelectrophoresis method developed and validated by the authors. 
Significance of difference between the groups was analyzed with analysis of 
variance (ANOVA). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was 
performed to discriminate patients with pancreatic cancer from normal controls.
RESULTS: The mean ± SE serum HSP70 levels in the PC, CP, and C groups were 1.68 
± 0.083 ng/mL, 0.40 ± 0.057 ng/mL, and 0.04 ng/mL, respectively. Serum HSP70 
levels in the PC group were significantly higher compared with either the CP or 
C groups (P < 0.01). The sensitivity and specificity of elevated serum HSP70 in 
the PC group was 74% and 90%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum HSP70 levels are significantly increased in patients with 
pancreatic cancer and may be useful as an additional biomarker for the detection 
of pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3182374ace
PMCID: PMC4193547
PMID: 22158074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]