1. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:350131. doi: 10.1155/2011/350131. Epub 2011 Nov
 24.

Modeling neurological disorders by human induced pluripotent stem cells.

Kunkanjanawan T(1), Noisa P, Parnpai R.

Author information:
(1)Embryo Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology, 
Suranaree University of Technology, 111 University Avenue, Nakhon Ratchasima 
30000, Thailand.

Studies of human brain development are critical as research on neurological 
disorders have been progressively advanced. However, understanding the process 
of neurogenesis through analysis of the early embryo is complicated and limited 
by a number of factors, including the complexity of the embryos, availability, 
and ethical constrains. The emerging of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) has shed light of a new approach to study 
both early development and disease pathology. The cells behave as precursors of 
all embryonic lineages; thus, they allow tracing the history from the root to 
individual branches of the cell lineage tree. Systems for neural differentiation 
of hESCs and iPSCs have provided an experimental model that can be used to 
augment in vitro studies of in vivo brain development. Interestingly, iPSCs 
derived from patients, containing donor genetic background, have offered a 
breakthrough approach to study human genetics of neurodegenerative diseases. 
This paper summarizes the recent reports of the development of iPSCs from 
patients who suffer from neurological diseases and evaluates the feasibility of 
iPSCs as a disease model. The benefits and obstacles of iPSC technology are 
highlighted in order to raising the cautions of misinterpretation prior to 
further clinical translations.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/350131
PMCID: PMC3227533
PMID: 22162635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]