1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jun;33(6):1121.e13-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.11.003. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Deficits in the mitochondrial enzyme α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase lead to 
Alzheimer's disease-like calcium dysregulation.

Gibson GE(1), Chen HL, Xu H, Qiu L, Xu Z, Denton TT, Shi Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
Burke Medical Research Institute, White Plains, NY 10605, USA. 
ggibson@med.cornell.edu

Understanding the molecular sequence of events that culminate in multiple 
abnormalities in brains from patients that died with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
will help to reveal the mechanisms of the disease and identify upstream events 
as therapeutic targets. The activity of the mitochondrial α-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase complex (KGDHC) in homogenates from autopsy brain declines with 
AD. Experimental reductions in KGDHC in mouse models of AD promote plaque and 
tangle formation, the hallmark pathologies of AD. We hypothesize that deficits 
in KGDHC also lead to the abnormalities in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium 
stores and cytosolic calcium following K(+) depolarization that occurs in cells 
from AD patients and transgenic models of AD. The activity of the mitochondrial 
enzyme KGDHC was diminished acutely (minutes), long-term (days), or chronically 
(weeks). Acute inhibition of KGDHC produced effects on calcium opposite to those 
in AD, while the chronic or long-term inhibition of KGDHC mimicked the 
AD-related changes in calcium. Divergent changes in proteins released from the 
mitochondria that affect endoplasmic reticulum calcium channels may underlie the 
selective cellular consequences of acute versus longer term inhibition of KGDHC. 
The results suggest that the mitochondrial abnormalities in AD can be upstream 
of those in calcium.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.11.003
PMCID: PMC3321099
PMID: 22169199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts. None of the authors have any 
financial conflicts.