1. Int J Immunogenet. 2012 Apr;39(2):144-50. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01072.x.  Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Association between the Interleukin 10-1082G>A polymorphism and coronary heart 
disease risk in a Caucasian population: a meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Zheng J, Liu P, Yu X, Zhou D, Jiang L, You Y, Zhou Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is a cytokine with anti-inflammatory and 
B-cell-stimulating activity. IL-10 is expressed in human atherosclerotic plaques 
and studies have shown the involvement of IL-10 in the atherosclerotic process. 
The IL-10-1082G/A polymorphism is one of the most commonly studied polymorphisms 
in this gene because of its association with coronary heart disease (CHD) risks, 
but previous results have been conflicting. We performed a meta-analysis using 
six eligible case-control studies (including 14 data sets) with a total of 5006 
patients and 3968 controls to summarize the existing data on the association 
between the IL-10-1082G/A polymorphism and CHD risk. Compared with the common 
IL-10-1082G/A GG genotype, the carriers of variant genotypes (IL-10-1082GA/AA) 
had a 1.12-fold elevated risk of CHD (95% CI = 1.01-1.23, P = 0.03) under the 
dominant genetic model, as estimated using a random effect model. The effect of 
the IL-10-1082G/A polymorphism was further evaluated using stratification 
analysis. In the three disease of artery studies, with the variant genotypes had 
a not obvious increased risk of disease of artery (OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 
0.98-1.44, P = 0.08) as estimated using a fixed effect model. Similar results 
were found in the nine myocardial infarction studies (OR = 1.13, 95% CI = 
1.00-1.27, P = 0.05). It was also demonstrated that the increased risk of CHD 
associated with IL-10-1082G/A variant genotypes was more pronounced in 
Caucasians (OR = 1.12, 95% CI = 1.01-1.23, P = 0.03). Our meta-analysis suggests 
that the IL-10-1082G/A polymorphism genotypes (GA+AA) might be associated with 
an increased risk of CHD, especially in Caucasians.

Â© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01072.x
PMID: 22168225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]