1. J Med Chem. 2012 Feb 9;55(3):1082-105. doi: 10.1021/jm2009925. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

Identification of 
1-(3-(6,7-dimethoxyquinazolin-4-yloxy)phenyl)-3-(5-(1,1,1-trifluoro-2-methylpropan-2-yl)isoxazol-3-yl)urea 
hydrochloride (CEP-32496), a highly potent and orally efficacious inhibitor of 
V-RAF murine sarcoma viral oncogene homologue B1 (BRAF) V600E.

Rowbottom MW(1), Faraoni R, Chao Q, Campbell BT, Lai AG, Setti E, Ezawa M, 
Sprankle KG, Abraham S, Tran L, Struss B, Gibney M, Armstrong RC, Gunawardane 
RN, Nepomuceno RR, Valenta I, Hua H, Gardner MF, Cramer MD, Gitnick D, Insko DE, 
Apuy JL, Jones-Bolin S, Ghose AK, Herbertz T, Ator MA, Dorsey BD, Ruggeri B, 
Williams M, Bhagwat S, James J, Holladay MW.

Author information:
(1)Ambit Biosciences, 4215 Sorrento Valley Boulevard, San Diego, California 
92121, United States. mrowbottom@ambitbio.com

The Ras/RAF/MEK/ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway 
plays a central role in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, and 
survival. Expression of mutant BRAF(V600E) results in constitutive activation of 
the MAPK pathway, which can lead to uncontrolled cellular growth. Herein, we 
describe an SAR optimization campaign around a series of quinazoline derived 
BRAF(V600E) inhibitors. In particular, the bioisosteric replacement of a 
metabolically sensitive tert-butyl group with fluorinated alkyl moieties is 
described. This effort led directly to the identification of a clinical 
candidate, compound 40 (CEP-32496). Compound 40 exhibits high potency against 
several BRAF(V600E)-dependent cell lines and selective cytotoxicity for tumor 
cell lines expressing mutant BRAF(V600E) versus those containing wild-type BRAF. 
Compound 40 also exhibits an excellent PK profile across multiple preclinical 
species. In addition, significant oral efficacy was observed in a 14-day 
BRAF(V600E)-dependent human Colo-205 tumor xenograft mouse model, upon dosing at 
30 and 100 mg/kg BID.

DOI: 10.1021/jm2009925
PMID: 22168626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]