1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1823(2):524-33. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.010. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Reduced protein stability of human DJ-1/PARK7 L166P, linked to autosomal 
recessive Parkinson disease, is due to direct endoproteolytic cleavage by the 
proteasome.

Alvarez-Castelao B(1), Muñoz C, Sánchez I, Goethals M, Vandekerckhove J, Castaño 
JG.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto 
Sols, UAM-CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by dopaminergic dysfunction and 
degeneration. DJ-1/PARK7 mutations have been linked with a familial form of 
early onset PD. In this study, we found that human DJ-1 wild type and the 
missense mutants M26I, R98Q, A104T and D149A were stable proteins in cells, only 
the L166P mutant was unstable. In parallel, the former were not degraded and the 
L166P mutant was directly degraded in vitro by proteasome-mediated 
endoproteolytic cleavage. Furthermore, genetic evidence in fission yeast showed 
the direct involvement of proteasome in the degradation of human DJ-1 L166P and 
the corresponding L169P mutant of SPAC22E12.03c, the human orthologue of DJ-1 in 
Schizosaccharomyces Pombe, as their protein levels were increased at restrictive 
temperature in fission yeast (mts4 and pts1-732) harboring temperature sensitive 
mutations in proteasomal subunits. In total, our results provide evidence that 
direct proteasomal endoproteolytic cleavage of DJ-1 L166P is the mechanism of 
degradation contributing to the loss-of-function of the mutant protein, a 
property not shared by other DJ-1 missense mutants associated with PD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.11.010
PMID: 22173095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]