1. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(11):7594-608. doi: 10.3390/ijms12117594. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

Rice protein extracted by different methods affects cholesterol metabolism in 
rats due to its lower digestibility.

Yang L(1), Chen J, Xu T, Qiu W, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Xu F, Liu H.

Author information:
(1)School of Food Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, 73 
Huanghe Road, Harbin 150090, China; E-Mails: lanweizhang@yahoo.com.cn (L.Z.); 
chinacentre@163.com (F.X.).

To elucidate whether the digestibility is responsible for the 
hypocholesterolemic action of rice protein, the effects of rice proteins 
extracted by alkali (RP-A) and Î±-amylase (RP-E) on cholesterol metabolism were 
investigated in 7-week-old male Wistar rats fed cholesterol-free diets for 3 
weeks. The in vitro and in vivo digestibility was significantly reduced by RP-A 
and RP-E as compared to casein (CAS). The digestibility was lower in RP-E than 
that of RP-A. Compared with CAS, the significant cholesterol-lowering effects 
were observed in rats fed by RP-A and RP-E. Fecal excretion of bile acids was 
significantly stimulated by RP-E, but not by RP-A. The apparent cholesterol 
absorption was more effectively inhibited by RP-E than RP-A because more fecal 
neutral sterols were excreted in rats fed RP-E. There was a significant 
correlation between protein digestibility and cholesterol absorption (r = 
0.8662, P < 0.01), resulting in a significant correlation between protein 
digestibility and plasma cholesterol level (r = 0.7357, P < 0.01) in this study. 
The present study demonstrates that the digestibility of rice protein affected 
by extraction method plays a major role in the modulation of cholesterol 
metabolism. Results suggest that the hypocholesterolemic action induced by rice 
protein with lower digestibility primarily contribute to the inhibition of 
cholesterol absorption.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms12117594
PMCID: PMC3233425
PMID: 22174619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]