1. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028847. Epub 2011 Dec 
12.

A common complement C3 variant is associated with protection against wet 
age-related macular degeneration in a Japanese population.

Yanagisawa S(1), Kondo N, Miki A, Matsumiya W, Kusuhara S, Tsukahara Y, Honda S, 
Negi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Ophthalmology, Kobe University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variants in the complement component 3 gene (C3) have been 
shown to be associated with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in Caucasian 
populations of European descent. In particular, a nonsynonymous coding variant, 
rs2230199 (R102G), is presumed to be the most likely causal variant in the C3 
locus based on strong statistical evidence for disease association and 
mechanistic functional evidence. However, the risk allele is absent or rare 
(<1%) in Japanese and Chinese populations, and the association of R102G with AMD 
has not been reported in Asian populations. Genetic heterogeneity of 
disease-associated variants among different ethnicities is common in complex 
diseases. Here, we sought to examine whether other common variants in C3 are 
associated with wet AMD, a common advanced-stage manifestation of AMD, in a 
Japanese population.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genotyped 13 tag single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) that capture the majority of common variations in the C3 
locus and tested for associations between these SNPs and wet AMD in a Japanese 
population comprising 420 case subjects and 197 controls. A noncoding variant in 
C3 (rs2241394) exhibited statistically significant evidence of association 
(allelic P = 8.32 Ã— 10(-4); odds ratio = 0.48 [95% CI = 0.31-0.74] for the 
rs2241394 C allele). Multilocus logistic regression analysis confirmed that the 
effect of rs2241394 was independent of the previously described loci at ARMS2 
and CFH, and that the model including variants in ARMS2 and CFH plus C3 
rs2241394 provided a better fit than the model without rs2241394. We found no 
evidence of epistasis between variants in C3 and CFH, despite the fact that they 
are involved in the same biological pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides evidence that C3 is a common AMD-associated 
locus that transcends racial boundaries and provides an impetus for more 
detailed genetic characterization of the C3 locus in Asian populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028847
PMCID: PMC3236234
PMID: 22174912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.