1. Mov Disord. 2012 Mar;27(3):393-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.24045. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations confer a greater risk of dementia during 
Parkinson's disease course.

Setó-Salvia N(1), Pagonabarraga J, Houlden H, Pascual-Sedano B, Dols-Icardo O, 
Tucci A, Paisán-Ruiz C, Campolongo A, Antón-Aguirre S, Martín I, Muñoz L, Bufill 
E, Vilageliu L, Grinberg D, Cozar M, Blesa R, Lleó A, Hardy J, Kulisevsky J, 
Clarimón J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene are associated with Parkinson's disease 
and Lewy body dementia. However, whether these alterations have any effect on 
the clinical course of Parkinson's disease is not clear. The glucocerebrosidase 
coding region was fully sequenced in 225 Parkinson's disease patients, 17 
pathologically confirmed Lewy body dementia patients, and 186 controls from 
Spain. Twenty-two Parkinson's disease patients (9.8%) and 2 Lewy body dementia 
patients (11.8%) carried mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene, compared with 
only 1 control (0.5%); P = .016 and P = .021 for Parkinson's disease and Lewy 
body dementia, respectively. The N370S and the L444P mutations represented 50% 
of the alterations. Two novel variants, L144V and S488T, and 7 previously 
described alterations were also found. Alterations in glucocerebrosidase were 
associated with a significant risk of dementia during the clinical course of 
Parkinson's disease (age at onset, years of evolution, and sex-adjusted odds 
ratio, 5.8; P = .001). Mutation carriers did not show worse motor symptoms, had 
good response to L-dopa, and tended to present the intermediate parkinsonian 
phenotype. Our findings suggest that mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene 
not only increase the risk of both Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia 
but also strongly influence the course of Parkinson's disease with respect to 
the appearance of dementia.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24045
PMID: 22173904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]