1. Diabetes. 2012 Jan;61(1):85-93. doi: 10.2337/db11-0857.

Hypothalamic leucine metabolism regulates liver glucose production.

Su Y(1), Lam TK, He W, Pocai A, Bryan J, Aguilar-Bryan L, Gutiérrez-Juárez R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Diabetes Research and Training Center, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Amino acids profoundly affect insulin action and glucose metabolism in mammals. 
Here, we investigated the role of the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH), a key 
center involved in nutrient-dependent metabolic regulation. Specifically, we 
tested the novel hypothesis that the metabolism of leucine within the MBH 
couples the central sensing of leucine with the control of glucose production by 
the liver. We performed either central (MBH) or systemic infusions of leucine in 
Sprague-Dawley male rats during basal pancreatic insulin clamps in combination 
with various pharmacological and molecular interventions designed to modulate 
leucine metabolism in the MBH. We also examined the role of hypothalamic 
ATP-sensitive K(+) channels (K(ATP) channels) in the effects of leucine. 
Enhancing the metabolism of leucine acutely in the MBH lowered blood glucose 
through a biochemical network that was insensitive to rapamycin but strictly 
dependent on the hypothalamic metabolism of leucine to α-ketoisocaproic acid 
and, further, insensitive to acetyl- and malonyl-CoA. Functional K(ATP) channels 
were also required. Importantly, molecular attenuation of this central sensing 
mechanism in rats conferred susceptibility to developing hyperglycemia. We 
postulate that the metabolic sensing of leucine in the MBH is a previously 
unrecognized mechanism for the regulation of hepatic glucose production required 
to maintain glucose homeostasis.

DOI: 10.2337/db11-0857
PMCID: PMC3237640
PMID: 22187376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]