1. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2012 Apr;10(2):110-6. doi: 10.1089/met.2011.0071.
Epub  2011 Dec 19.

The Srb1+1050T allele is associated with metabolic syndrome in children but not 
with cholesteryl ester plasma concentrations of high-density lipoprotein 
subclasses.

Juárez-Meavepeña M(1), Carreón-Torres E, López-Osorio C, García-Sánchez C, 
Gamboa R, Torres-Tamayo M, Fragoso JM, Rodríguez-Pérez JM, Vargas-Alarcón G, 
Pérez-Méndez O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio 
Chávez, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Low cholesterol and phospholipid plasma levels of some high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) subclasses have been described in children with metabolic 
syndrome. Scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI) has been proposed to be at 
the origin of such HDL alterations because of its key role on cholesteryl 
esters-HDL metabolism. However, the possible contribution of SR-BI has not been 
specifically explored in this kind of patients.
METHODS: Plasma lipid concentrations of HDL subclasses, i.e., triglycerides 
(TG), phosphatidylcholine (Ph), free cholesterol (FC), and total cholesterol 
(TC), were determined by enzymatic staining on polyacrylamide gradient gels 
(PAGE) in 39 pediatric patients with metabolic syndrome and 65 children as 
controls. Cholesteryl esters were estimated by the difference between TC and FC. 
Proteins of HDL subclasses were also stained for the assessment of the relative 
size distribution of HDL. For statistical analysis, the study population was 
grouped by Srb1 +1050C-->T polymorphism (rs5888) as carriers or noncarriers of 
the T allele, and data were corrected by metabolic syndrome status.
RESULTS: The Srb1 +1050T allele was associated with metabolic syndrome [odds 
ratio (OR)=2.18 (1.12-4.22), P=0.02]. Plasma TG corresponding to HDL3a, as well 
as the relative proportion of this HDL subclass, were slightly higher in 
carriers of the T allele as compared to CC homozygous subjects. Cholesteryl 
esters plasma concentrations of all HDL subclasses were comparable between T 
allele carriers and noncarriers after correction by metabolic syndrome status.
CONCLUSIONS: Srb1 +1050T was associated with metabolic syndrome, but T carrier 
subjects did not show important differences concerning HDL subclasses as 
compared to noncarriers.

DOI: 10.1089/met.2011.0071
PMID: 22182283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]