1. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 15;362(2):282-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.011. Epub
2011  Dec 13.

Ancestral and conserved cis-regulatory architectures in developmental control 
genes.

Rebeiz M(1), Castro B, Liu F, Yue F, Posakony JW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences/CDB, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Among developmental control genes, transcription factor-target gene 
"linkages"--the direct connections between target genes and the factors that 
control their patterns of expression--can show remarkable evolutionary 
stability. However, the specific binding sites that mediate and define these 
regulatory connections are themselves often subject to rapid turnover. Here we 
describe several instances in which particular transcription factor binding 
motif combinations have evidently been conserved upstream of orthologous target 
genes for extraordinarily long evolutionary periods. This occurs against a 
backdrop in which other binding sites for the same factors are coming and going 
rapidly. Our examples include a particular Dpp Silencer Element upstream of 
insect brinker genes, in combination with a novel motif we refer to as the 
Downstream Element; combinations of a Suppressor of Hairless Paired Site (SPS) 
and a specific proneural protein binding site associated with arthropod Notch 
pathway target genes; and a three-motif combination, also including an SPS, 
upstream of deuterostome Hes repressor genes, which are also Notch targets. We 
propose that these stable motif architectures have been conserved intact from a 
deep ancestor, in part because they mediate a special mode of regulation that 
cannot be supplied by the other, unstable motif instances.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.011
PMCID: PMC3265639
PMID: 22185795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]