1. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Sep;1(6):282-289. doi: 10.1159/000331266. Epub 2011 Sep
14.

RASopathies: Clinical Diagnosis in the First Year of Life.

Digilio MC(1), Lepri F, Baban A, Dentici ML, Versacci P, Capolino R, Ferese R, 
De Luca A, Tartaglia M, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, 
IRCCS.

Diagnosis within Noonan syndrome and related disorders (RASopathies) still 
presents a challenge during the first months of life, since most clinical 
features used to differentiate these conditions become manifest later in 
childhood. Here, we retrospectively reviewed the clinical records referred to 
the first year of life of 57 subjects with molecularly confirmed diagnosis of 
RASopathy, to define the early clinical features characterizing these disorders 
and improve our knowledge on natural history. Mildly or markedly expressed 
facial features were invariably present. Congenital heart defects were the 
clinical issue leading to medical attention in patients with Noonan syndrome and 
LEOPARD syndrome. Feeding difficulties and developmental motor delay represented 
the most recurrent features occurring in subjects with cardiofaciocutaneous 
syndrome and Costello syndrome. Thin hair was prevalent among SHOC2 and BRAF 
mutation-positive infants. Café-au-lait spots were found in patients with LS and 
PTPN11 mutations, while keratosis pilaris was more common in individuals with 
SOS1, SHOC2 and BRAF mutations. In conclusion, some characteristics can be used 
as hints for suspecting a RASopathy during the first months of life, and 
individual RASopathies may be suspected by analysis of specific clinical signs. 
In the first year of life, these include congenital heart defects, severity of 
feeding difficulties and delay of developmental milestones, hair and skin 
anomalies, which may help to distinguish different entities, for their 
subsequent molecular confirmation and appropriate clinical management.

DOI: 10.1159/000331266
PMCID: PMC3214957
PMID: 22190897