1. Pathol Int. 2012 Jan;62(1):43-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02745.x.

Primary pure squamous cell carcinoma of the thyroid: report and histogenic 
consideration of a case involving a BRAF mutation.

Ko YS(1), Hwang TS, Han HS, Lim SD, Kim WS, Oh SY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Konkuk University Medical Center, Gwangjin-gu, 
Seoul, Korea.

Primary squamous cell carcinoma of the thyroid (SCC-T) is extremely rare. Its 
clinical presentation is similar to that of anaplastic carcinoma. Metastasis or 
extension from the head and neck area should be ruled out, as patients with 
SCC-T have a poorer prognosis than patients who have a thyroid extension from an 
adjacent tumor. An 87-year-old man presented with a longstanding painless mass 
in the right thyroid and had experienced 2 months of pain upon swallowing. A 
right lobectomy was performed with resection of thyroid cartilage, cricoid 
cartilage, a portion of the first to third tracheal ring and the right neck 
lymph node. A histological examination revealed pure SCC. The tumor cells showed 
diffuse immunoreactivity to CK5/6, CK19 and p63. Immunoreactivity to EMA and p53 
was focally positive. TTF-1, galectin 3 and thyroglobulin immunoreactivity was 
restricted to the non-neoplastic thyroid tissue. Both tumor cells and 
non-neoplastic follicular cells were negative for CD5. The MIB-1 index was 36%. 
DNA extracted from the tumor identified a BRAF V600E mutation in exon 15 and a 
BRAF G468A mutation in exon 11, whereas DNA from non-tumorous cells did not 
contain a mutation. These molecular findings may suggest a direct transformation 
from papillary carcinoma to SCC-T.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02745.x
PMID: 22192803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]