1. Anal Biochem. 2012 Feb 15;421(2):706-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2011.12.013. Epub 
2011 Dec 13.

Vapor conjugation of toluene diisocyanate to specific lysines of human albumin.

Hettick JM(1), Siegel PD, Green BJ, Liu J, Wisnewski AV.

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health, Health Effects Laboratory Division, Morgantown, 
WV 26505, USA. jhettick@cdc.gov

Exposure to toluene diisocyanate (TDI), an industrially important crosslinking 
agent used in the production of polyurethane products, can cause asthma in 
sensitive workers. Albumin has been identified as a major reaction target for 
TDI in vivo, and TDI-albumin reaction products have been proposed to serve as 
exposure biomarkers and to act as asthmagens, yet they remain incompletely 
characterized. In the current study, we used a multiplexed tandem mass 
spectrometry (MS/MS) approach to identify the sites of albumin conjugation by 
TDI vapors, modeling the air/liquid interface of the lung. Vapor phase TDI was 
found to react with human albumin in a dose-dependent manner, with up to 18 
potential sites of conjugation, the most susceptible being Lys351 and the 
dilysine site Lys413-414. Sites of vapor TDI conjugation to albumin were 
quantitatively limited compared with those recently described for liquid phase 
TDI, especially in domains IIA and IIIB of albumin. We hypothesize that the 
orientation of albumin at the air/liquid interface plays an important role in 
vapor TDI conjugation and, thus, could influence biological responses to 
exposure and the development of in vitro assays for exposure and immune 
sensitivity.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2011.12.013
PMCID: PMC3324820
PMID: 22206939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]