1. Curr Biol. 2012 Feb 7;22(3):180-90. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.029. Epub 2011 
Dec 29.

Mad2 and Mad3 cooperate to arrest budding yeast in mitosis.

Lau DT(1), Murray AW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2012 Feb 21;22(4):R128-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.018.

BACKGROUND: The spindle checkpoint ensures accurate chromosome transmission by 
delaying chromosome segregation until all chromosomes are correctly aligned on 
the mitotic spindle. The checkpoint is activated by kinetochores that are not 
attached to microtubules or are attached but not under tension and arrests cells 
at metaphase by inhibiting the anaphase-promoting complex (APC) and its 
coactivator Cdc20. Despite numerous studies, we still do not understand how the 
checkpoint proteins coordinate with each other to inhibit APC(Cdc20) activity.
RESULTS: To ask how the checkpoint components induce metaphase arrest, we 
constructed fusions of checkpoint proteins and expressed them in the budding 
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to mimic possible protein interactions during 
checkpoint activation. We found that expression of a Mad2-Mad3 protein fusion or 
noncovalently linked Mad2 and Mad3, but not the overexpression of the two 
separate proteins, induces metaphase arrest that is independent of functional 
kinetochores or other checkpoint proteins. We further showed that artificially 
tethering Mad2 to Cdc20 also arrests cells in metaphase independently of other 
checkpoint components.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that Mad3 is required for the stable binding of 
Mad2 to Cdc20 in vivo, which is sufficient to inhibit APC activity and is the 
most downstream event in spindle checkpoint activation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.029
PMCID: PMC3277655
PMID: 22209528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]