1. J Oral Biosci. 2011;53(3):248-256. doi: 10.2330/joralbiosci.53.248.

The Amelogenin Proteins and Enamel Development in Humans and Mice.

Gibson CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Dental Medicine, 240 S 40 Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA.

Before a tooth erupts into the oral cavity, the mineralized enamel and dentin 
layers begin to develop. During these early stages of enamel formation, an 
abundant group of proteins known as amelogenins are secreted by ameloblast cells 
within the developing tooth. These proteins are required for the enamel layer to 
reach its normal thickness and attain its intricate structure. Human patients 
with amelogenin gene mutations have a condition referred to as amelogenesis 
imperfecta, and we have analyzed human gene defects so that we can recreate them 
in mice. We have generated mice with a null amelogenin mutation where no 
amelogenin is produced, mice that over-express normal and mutated amelogenins, 
and over-expressors have been mated to null mice for rescue experiments. Because 
there are at least 15 messages that are alternatively spliced from a single 
amelogenin primary RNA transcript, these approaches have begun to reveal the 
functions of individual amelogenin proteins during enamel development. Finally, 
amelogenins are processed by carefully regulated proteolytic digestion leading 
to many additional amelogenin peptides and it is likely that protein function is 
altered during this developmental process. We have also had some surprises, as 
one of our mouse models develops odontogenic tumors, and we know now that some 
of the amelogenins are expressed in other regions of the body outside of the 
oral cavity, and may have a role in signal transduction.

DOI: 10.2330/joralbiosci.53.248
PMCID: PMC3247901
PMID: 22215951