1. Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):505-12. doi: 10.2337/db11-0838. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

FGF21 analogs of sustained action enabled by orthogonal biosynthesis demonstrate 
enhanced antidiabetic pharmacology in rodents.

Mu J(1), Pinkstaff J, Li Z, Skidmore L, Li N, Myler H, Dallas-Yang Q, Putnam AM, 
Yao J, Bussell S, Wu M, Norman TC, Rodriguez CG, Kimmel B, Metzger JM, Manibusan 
A, Lee D, Zaller DM, Zhang BB, DiMarchi RD, Berger JP, Axelrod DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Metabolic Disease-Diabetes, Merck Research Laboratories, 
Rahway, New Jersey, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) mitigates many of the pathogenic features of 
type 2 diabetes, despite a short circulating half-life. PEGylation is a proven 
approach to prolonging the duration of action while enhancing biophysical 
solubility and stability. However, in the absence of a specific protein 
PEGylation site, chemical conjugation is inherently heterogeneous and commonly 
leads to dramatic loss in bioactivity. This work illustrates a novel means of 
specific PEGylation, producing FGF21 analogs with high specific activity and 
salutary biological activities. Using homology modeling and structure-based 
design, specific sites were chosen in human FGF21 for site-specific PEGylation 
to ensure that receptor binding regions were preserved. The in vitro activity of 
the PEGylated FGF21 ana-logs corresponded with the site of PEG placement within 
the binding model. Site-specific PEGylated analogs demonstrated dramatically 
increased circulating half-life and enhanced efficacy in db/db mice. 
Twice-weekly dosing of an optimal FGF21 analog reduced blood glucose, plasma 
lipids, liver triglycerides, and plasma glucagon and enhanced pancreatic insulin 
content, islet number, and glucose-dependent insulin secretion. Restoration of 
insulin sensitivity was demonstrated by the enhanced ability of insulin to 
induce Akt/protein kinase B phosphorylation in liver, muscle, and adipose 
tissues. PEGylation of human FGF21 at a specific and preferred site confers 
superior metabolic pharmacology.

DOI: 10.2337/db11-0838
PMCID: PMC3266413
PMID: 22210323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]