1. Nucl Med Biol. 2012 Apr;39(3):377-87. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2011.10.004.
Epub  2012 Jan 5.

64Cu-NO2A-RGD-Glu-6-Ahx-BBN(7-14)NH2: a heterodimeric targeting vector for 
positron emission tomography imaging of prostate cancer.

Jackson AB(1), Nanda PK, Rold TL, Sieckman GL, Szczodroski AF, Hoffman TJ, Chen 
X, Smith CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, 
MO 65211, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The present study describes the design and development of a new 
heterodimeric RGD-bombesin (BBN) agonist peptide ligand for dual receptor 
targeting of the form (64)Cu-NO2A-RGD-Glu-6-Ahx-BBN(7-14)NH(2) in which Cu-64=a 
positron emitting radiometal; NO2A=1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4-diacetic acid; 
Glu=glutamic acid; 6-Ahx=6-aminohexanoic acid; RGD=the amino acid sequence 
[Arg-Gly-Asp], a nonregulatory peptide that has been used extensively to target 
α(v)β(3) receptors up-regulated on tumor cells and neovasculature; and 
BBN(7-14)NH(2)=Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-Leu-Met-NH(2), an agonist analogue of 
bombesin peptide for specific targeting of the gastrin-releasing peptide 
receptor (GRPr).
METHODS: RGD-Glu-6-Ahx-BBN(7-14)NH(2) was manually coupled with NOTA 
(1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid), and the resulting conjugate was 
labeled with (64)Cu to yield (64)Cu-NO2A-RGD-Glu-6-Ahx-BBN(7-14)NH(2). 
Purification was achieved via reversed-phase high-performance liquid 
chromatography and characterization confirmed by electrospray ionization-mass 
spectrometry.
RESULTS: Competitive displacement binding assays displayed single-digit 
nanomolar IC(50) values showing very high binding affinities toward the GRPr for 
the new heterodimeric peptide analogues. In vivo biodistribution studies showed 
high uptake and retention of tumor-associated radioactivity in PC-3 
tumor-bearing rodent models with little accumulation and retention in nontarget 
tissues. The radiolabeled conjugate also exhibited rapid urinary excretion and 
high tumor-to-background ratios. Micro-positron emission tomography (microPET) 
molecular imaging investigations produced high-quality, high-contrast images in 
PC-3 tumor-bearing mice 15 h postinjection.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on microPET imaging experiments that show high-quality, 
high-contrast images with virtually no residual gastrointestinal radioactivity, 
this new heterodimeric RGD-BBN conjugate can be considered as a promising PET 
tracer candidate for the diagnosis of GRPr-positive tumors in human patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2011.10.004
PMCID: PMC3629973
PMID: 22226021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]