1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2013 Apr;13(2):110-20. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2011.60. Epub 2012
 Jan 10.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of the organic cation transporter 3, SLC22A3.

Chen L(1), Hong C, Chen EC, Yee SW, Xu L, Almof EU, Wen C, Fujii K, Johns SJ, 
Stryke D, Ferrin TE, Simko J, Chen X, Costello JF, Giacomini KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Human organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3 and SLC22A3) mediates the uptake of 
many important endogenous amines and basic drugs in a variety of tissues. OCT3 
is identified as one of the important risk loci for prostate cancer, and is 
markedly underexpressed in aggressive prostate cancers. The goal of this study 
was to identify genetic and epigenetic factors in the promoter region that 
influence the expression level of OCT3. Haplotypes that contained the common 
variants, g.-81G>delGA (rs60515630) (minor allele frequency 11.5% in African 
American) and g.-2G>A (rs555754) (minor allele frequency>30% in all ethnic 
groups) showed significant increases in luciferase reporter activities and 
exhibited stronger transcription factor-binding affinity than the haplotypes 
that contained the major alleles. Consistent with the reporter assays, OCT3 
messenger RNA expression levels were significantly higher in Asian (P<0.001) and 
Caucasian (P<0.05) liver samples from individuals who were homozygous for 
g.-2A/A in comparison with those homozygous for the g.-2G/G allele. Studies 
revealed that the methylation level in the basal promoter region of OCT3 was 
associated with OCT3 expression level and tumorigenesis capability in various 
prostate cancer cell lines. The methylation level of the OCT3 promoter was 
higher in 62% of prostate tumor samples compared with matched normal samples. 
Our studies demonstrate that genetic polymorphisms in the proximal promoter 
region of OCT3 alter the transcription rate of the gene and may be associated 
with altered expression levels of OCT3 in human liver. Aberrant methylation 
contributes to the reduced expression of OCT3 in prostate cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/tpj.2011.60
PMCID: PMC3396779
PMID: 22231567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Authors declare there are 
no competing financial interests in relation to the work.