1. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e28764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028764. Epub 2012 Jan
3.

Quantile-specific penetrance of genes affecting lipoproteins, adiposity and 
height.

Williams PT(1).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, United States of 
America. ptwilliams@lbl.gov

Quantile-dependent penetrance is proposed to occur when the phenotypic 
expression of a SNP depends upon the population percentile of the phenotype. To 
illustrate the phenomenon, quantiles of height, body mass index (BMI), and 
plasma lipids and lipoproteins were compared to genetic risk scores (GRS) 
derived from single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP)s having established 
genome-wide significance: 180 SNPs for height, 32 for BMI, 37 for low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, 47 for high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL)-cholesterol, 52 for total cholesterol, and 31 for triglycerides in 1930 
subjects. Both phenotypes and GRSs were adjusted for sex, age, study, and 
smoking status. Quantile regression showed that the slope of the 
genotype-phenotype relationships increased with the percentile of BMI 
(P = 0.002), LDL-cholesterol (P = 3×10⁻⁸), HDL-cholesterol (P = 5×10⁻⁶), total 
cholesterol (P = 2.5×10⁻⁶), and triglyceride distribution (P = 7.5×10⁻⁶), but 
not height (P = 0.09). Compared to a GRS's phenotypic effect at the 10(th) 
population percentile, its effect at the 90(th) percentile was 4.2-fold greater 
for BMI, 4.9-fold greater for LDL-cholesterol, 1.9-fold greater for 
HDL-cholesterol, 3.1-fold greater for total cholesterol, and 3.3-fold greater 
for triglycerides. Moreover, the effect of the rs1558902 (FTO) risk allele was 
6.7-fold greater at the 90(th) than the 10(th) percentile of the BMI 
distribution, and that of the rs3764261 (CETP) risk allele was 2.4-fold greater 
at the 90(th) than the 10(th) percentile of the HDL-cholesterol distribution. 
Conceptually, it maybe useful to distinguish environmental effects on the 
phenotype that in turn alters a gene's phenotypic expression (quantile-dependent 
penetrance) from environmental effects affecting the gene's phenotypic 
expression directly (gene-environment interaction).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028764
PMCID: PMC3250394
PMID: 22235250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.