1. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Mar;18(3):369-81. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.175. Epub 2012 Jan
 10.

Cerebral folate receptor autoantibodies in autism spectrum disorder.

Frye RE(1), Sequeira JM, Quadros EV, James SJ, Rossignol DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202,USA. 
REFrye@uams.edu

Cerebral folate deficiency (CFD) syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder 
typically caused by folate receptor autoantibodies (FRAs) that interfere with 
folate transport across the blood-brain barrier. Autism spectrum disorders 
(ASDs) and improvements in ASD symptoms with leucovorin (folinic acid) treatment 
have been reported in some children with CFD. In children with ASD, the 
prevalence of FRAs and the response to leucovorin in FRA-positive children has 
not been systematically investigated. In this study, serum FRA concentrations 
were measured in 93 children with ASD and a high prevalence (75.3%) of FRAs was 
found. In 16 children, the concentration of blocking FRA significantly 
correlated with cerebrospinal fluid 5-methyltetrahydrofolate concentrations, 
which were below the normative mean in every case. Children with FRAs were 
treated with oral leucovorin calcium (2 mg kg(-1) per day; maximum 50 mg per 
day). Treatment response was measured and compared with a wait-list control 
group. Compared with controls, significantly higher improvement ratings were 
observed in treated children over a mean period of 4 months in verbal 
communication, receptive and expressive language, attention and stereotypical 
behavior. Approximately one-third of treated children demonstrated moderate to 
much improvement. The incidence of adverse effects was low. This study suggests 
that FRAs may be important in ASD and that FRA-positive children with ASD may 
benefit from leucovorin calcium treatment. Given these results, empirical 
treatment with leucovorin calcium may be a reasonable and non-invasive approach 
in FRA-positive children with ASD. Additional studies of folate receptor 
autoimmunity and leucovorin calcium treatment in children with ASD are 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2011.175
PMCID: PMC3578948
PMID: 22230883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]