1. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1234-42. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.09.012. Epub 
2012 Jan 14.

The diagnostic utility of the GNAS mutation in patients with fibrous dysplasia: 
meta-analysis of 168 sporadic cases.

Lee SE(1), Lee EH, Park H, Sung JY, Lee HW, Kang SY, Seo S, Kim BH, Lee H, Seo 
AN, Ahn G, Choi YL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, 135-710 South Korea.

GNAS mutations have been implicated in the development of fibrous dysplasia and 
multiple endocrinopathies of the Albright-McCune syndrome. To investigate the 
diagnostic utility of GNAS mutations in patients with fibrous dysplasia, we 
performed mutational analyses of histologically confirmed fibrous dysplasia and 
conducted a meta-analysis of the literature. We collected 48 cases of fibrous 
dysplasia from 3 institutions from 2002 to 2011 and performed polymerase chain 
reaction and direct bidirectional sequencing of exons 8 and 9 of GNAS using 
paraffin-embedded tissues. We searched MEDLINE, PubMed, and the KoreaMed 
databases from 1997 to 2011 and included an additional 155 cases of fibrous 
dysplasia from 8 representative studies to conduct a meta-analysis. In our 
sample, 28 (58.3%) of 48 cases showed point mutations of codon 201 at exon 8. 
Twenty-five cases had a substitution of arginine at codon 201 for histidine 
(p.R201H), and 3 cases had a substitution for cysteine (p.R201C). One case had a 
new mutation at codon 224 (p.V224A). The incidence of GNAS mutations was 
significantly greater in cases that involved long bones than in cases that 
involved flat bones (P = .017) and was higher in polyostotic cases than in 
monostotic cases (P = .067). In meta-analysis, 9 studies and 203 patients were 
included. The overall positive rate of GNAS mutation in fibrous dysplasia was 
71.9% (146/203). The major types of mutations were missense mutations such as 
R201H (66.4%) and R201C (30.8%). As a result, the detection of GNAS mutation 
could be a valuable adjunct to conventional histopathologic diagnosis of fibrous 
dysplasia.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.09.012
PMID: 22245114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]