1. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2012;27(4):388-97. doi: 10.2133/dmpk.dmpk-11-rg-135.
 Epub 2012 Jan 13.

The effects of N-glycosylation on the glucuronidation of zidovudine and morphine 
by UGT2B7 expressed in HEK293 cells.

Nagaoka K(1), Hanioka N, Ikushiro S, Yamano S, Narimatsu S.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, Okayama, Japan.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are glycoproteins in endoplasmic reticulum 
membranes. UGT2B7 is an important UGT isoenzyme expressed in human liver and 
glucuronidates various endogenous and exogenous substances. Although this enzyme 
has three potential N-glycosylation sites (asparagine at positions 67, 68 and 
315), no information is available on the actual glycosylated sites and the 
effects of N-glycosylation on its enzymatic functions. We thus constructed 
HEK293 cells expressing wild-type UGT2B7 and five mutants (N67Q, N68Q, N315Q, 
N68Q/N315Q and N67Q/N68Q/N315Q) in which an asparagine at one or more potential 
N-glycosylation sites was substituted with a glutamine. An immunoblot analysis 
of whole cell lysate (S9) fractions with or without treatment with an 
endoglycosidase revealed that UGT2B7 was N-glycosylated at Asn-68 and Asn-315 
but not Asn-67. Kinetic analysis employing the S9 fractions as enzyme sources 
and zidovudine (AZT) and morphine as typical substrates demonstrated that the 
abolition of N-glycosylation decreased the affinity for AZT but increased that 
for morphine without affecting reaction velocities, while it decreased the 
affinity for UDPGA as a cofactor regardless of the substrate used. These results 
suggest that N-glycosylation differentially affects the glucuronidation of AZT 
and morphine by human UGT2B7.

DOI: 10.2133/dmpk.dmpk-11-rg-135
PMID: 22240840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]