1. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002444. Epub
2012  Jan 12.

Adaptive evolution of the lactose utilization network in experimentally evolved 
populations of Escherichia coli.

Quan S(1), Ray JC, Kwota Z, Duong T, Bal√°zsi G, Cooper TF, Monds RD.

Author information:
(1)Bio-X Program, Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

Adaptation to novel environments is often associated with changes in gene 
regulation. Nevertheless, few studies have been able both to identify the 
genetic basis of changes in regulation and to demonstrate why these changes are 
beneficial. To this end, we have focused on understanding both how and why the 
lactose utilization network has evolved in replicate populations of Escherichia 
coli. We found that lac operon regulation became strikingly variable, including 
changes in the mode of environmental response (bimodal, graded, and 
constitutive), sensitivity to inducer concentration, and maximum expression 
level. In addition, some classes of regulatory change were enriched in specific 
selective environments. Sequencing of evolved clones, combined with 
reconstruction of individual mutations in the ancestral background, identified 
mutations within the lac operon that recapitulate many of the evolved regulatory 
changes. These mutations conferred fitness benefits in environments containing 
lactose, indicating that the regulatory changes are adaptive. The same mutations 
conferred different fitness effects when present in an evolved clone, indicating 
that interactions between the lac operon and other evolved mutations also 
contribute to fitness. Similarly, changes in lac regulation not explained by lac 
operon mutations also point to important interactions with other evolved 
mutations. Together these results underline how dynamic regulatory interactions 
can be, in this case evolving through mutations both within and external to the 
canonical lactose utilization network.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002444
PMCID: PMC3257284
PMID: 22253602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.