1. Antiviral Res. 2012 Mar;93(3):322-9. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.12.013.
Epub  2012 Jan 10.

Susceptibility of avian influenza viruses of the N6 subtype to the neuraminidase 
inhibitor oseltamivir.

Stoner TD(1), Krauss S, Turner JC, Seiler P, Negovetich NJ, Stallknecht DE, 
Frase S, Govorkova EA, Webster RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN 38105, United States.

Avian influenza viruses are a source of genetic material that can be transmitted 
to humans through direct introduction or reassortment. Although there is a 
wealth of information concerning global monitoring for antiviral resistance 
among human viruses of the N1 and N2 neuraminidase (NA) subtypes, information 
concerning avian viruses of these and other NA subtypes is limited. We undertook 
a surveillance study to investigate the antiviral susceptibility of avian 
influenza N6 NA viruses, the predominant subtype among wild waterfowl. We 
evaluated 73 viruses from North American ducks and shorebirds for susceptibility 
to the NA inhibitor oseltamivir in a fluorescence-based NA enzyme inhibition 
assay. Most (90%) had mean IC(50) values ranging from <0.01 to 5.0nM; 10% were 
from 5.1 to 50.0nM; and none were >50.0nM. Susceptibility to oseltamivir 
remained stable among all isolates collected over approximately three decades 
(P⩽0.74). Two isolates with I222V NA substitution had moderately reduced 
susceptibility to oseltamivir in vitro (IC(50), 30.0 and 40.0nM). One field 
sample was a mixed population containing an avian paramyxovirus (APMV) and H4N6 
influenza virus, as revealed by electron microscopy and hemagglutination 
inhibition assays with a panel of anti-APMV antisera. This highlights the 
importance of awareness and careful examination of non-influenza pathogens in 
field samples from avian sources. This study showed that oseltamivir-resistant 
N6 NA avian influenza viruses are rare, and must be tested both phenotypically 
and genotypically to confirm resistance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2011.12.013
PMCID: PMC3299860
PMID: 22252168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]