1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2012 Mar;45(3):230-7. doi:
10.1590/s0100-879x2012007500009.  Epub 2012 Jan 26.

A conjugate of an anti-midkine single-chain variable fragment to doxorubicin 
inhibits tumor growth.

Zhao S(1), Zhao G, Xie H, Huang Y, Hou Y.

Author information:
(1)Immunology and Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Medical School & State Key 
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Doxorubicin (DOX) was conjugated to a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) 
against human midkine (MK), and the conjugate (scFv-DOX) was used to target the 
chemotherapeutic agent to a mouse solid tumor model in which the tumor cells 
expressed high levels of human MK. The His-tagged recombinant scFv was expressed 
in bacteria, purified by metal affinity chromatography, and then conjugated to 
DOX using oxidative dextran (Dex) as a linker. The molecular formula of this 
immunoconjugate was scFv(Dex)1.3(DOX)20. In vitro apoptosis assays showed that 
the scFv-DOX conjugate was more cytotoxic against MK-transfected human 
adenocarcinoma cells (BGC823-MK) than untransfected cells (55.3 ± 2.4 vs 22.4 ± 
3.8%) for three independent experiments. Nude mice bearing BGC823-MK solid 
tumors received scFv-DOX or equivalent doses of scFv + DOX for 2 weeks and tumor 
growth was more effectively inhibited by the scFv-DOX conjugate than by scFv + 
DOX (51.83% inhibition vs 40.81%). Histological analysis of the tumor tissues 
revealed that the highest levels of DOX accumulated in tumors from mice treated 
with scFv-DOX and this resulted in more extensive tumor cell death than in 
animals treated with the equivalent dose of scFv + DOX. These results show that 
the scFv-DOX conjugate effectively inhibited tumor growth in vivo and suggest 
that antigen-specific scFv may be competent drug-carriers.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2012007500009
PMCID: PMC3854202
PMID: 22267001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]