1. Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 1;11(3):451-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.3.19057. Epub 2012 Feb
1.

Mouse model for probing tumor suppressor activity of protein phosphatase 2A in 
diverse signaling pathways.

Walter G(1), Ruediger R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA. gwalter@ucsd.edu

Evidence that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a tumor suppressor in humans came 
from the discovery of mutations in the genes encoding the Aα and Aβ subunits of 
the PP2A trimeric holoenzymes, Aα-B-C and Aβ-B-C. One point mutation, Aα-E64D, 
was found in a human lung carcinoma. It renders Aα specifically defective in 
binding regulatory B' subunits. Recently, we reported a knock-in mouse 
expressing Aα-E64D and an Aα knockout mouse. The mutant mice showed a 50-60% 
increase in the incidence of lung cancer induced by benzopyrene. Importantly, 
PP2A's tumor suppressor activity depended on p53. These data provide the first 
direct evidence that PP2A is a tumor suppressor in mice. In addition, they 
suggest that PP2A is a tumor suppressor in humans. Here, we report that PP2A 
functions as a tumor suppressor in mice that develop lung cancer triggered by 
oncogenic K-ras. We discuss whether PP2A may function as a tumor suppressor in 
diverse tissues, with emphasis on endometrial and ovarian carcinomas, in which 
Aα mutations were detected at a high frequency. We propose suitable mouse models 
for examining whether PP2A functions as tumor suppressor in major 
growth-stimulatory signaling pathways, and we discuss the prospect of using the 
PP2A activator FTY720 as a drug against malignancies that are driven by these 
pathways.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.11.3.19057
PMCID: PMC3315090
PMID: 22262169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]