1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(9):3834-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks005. Epub 2012 
Jan 20.

A computational pipeline to discover highly phylogenetically informative genes 
in sequenced genomes: application to Saccharomyces cerevisiae natural strains.

Ramazzotti M(1), Bern√° L, Stefanini I, Cavalieri D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Florence, 
Viale G. Pieraccini 6, 50139 Firenze, Italy.

The quest for genes representing genetic relationships of strains or individuals 
within populations and their evolutionary history is acquiring a novel dimension 
of complexity with the advancement of next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
technologies. In fact, sequencing an entire genome uncovers genetic variation in 
coding and non-coding regions and offers the possibility of studying 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae populations at the strain level. Nevertheless, the 
disadvantageous cost-benefit ratio (the amount of details disclosed by NGS 
against the time-expensive and expertise-demanding data assembly process) still 
precludes the application of these techniques to the routinely assignment of 
yeast strains, making the selection of the most reliable molecular markers 
greatly desirable. In this work we propose an original computational approach to 
discover genes that can be used as a descriptor of the population structure. We 
found 13 genes whose variability can be used to recapitulate the phylogeny 
obtained from genome-wide sequences. The same approach that we prove to be 
successful in yeasts can be generalized to any other population of individuals 
given the availability of high-quality genomic sequences and of a clear 
population structure to be targeted.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks005
PMCID: PMC3351171
PMID: 22266652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]