1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 16;287(12):9336-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.334797. Epub 
2012 Jan 23.

Structural basis for Ca2+-induced activation and dimerization of estrogen 
receptor α by calmodulin.

Zhang Y(1), Li Z, Sacks DB, Ames JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, California 95616, 
USA.

The estrogen receptor α (ER-α) regulates expression of target genes implicated 
in development, metabolism, and breast cancer. Calcium-dependent regulation of 
ER-α is critical for activating gene expression and is controlled by calmodulin 
(CaM). Here, we present the NMR structures for the two lobes of CaM each bound 
to a localized region of ER-α (residues 287-305). A model of the complete 
CaM·ER-α complex was constructed by combining these two structures with 
additional data. The two lobes of CaM both compete for binding at the same site 
on ER-α (residues 292, 296, 299, 302, and 303), which explains why full-length 
CaM binds two molecules of ER-α in a 1:2 complex and stabilizes ER-α 
dimerization. Exposed glutamate residues in CaM (Glu(11), Glu(14), Glu(84), and 
Glu(87)) form salt bridges with key lysine residues in ER-α (Lys(299), Lys(302), 
and Lys(303)), which are likely to prevent ubiquitination at these sites and 
inhibit degradation of ER-α. Mutants of ER-α at the CaM-binding site (W292A and 
K299A) weaken binding to CaM, and I298E/K299D disrupts estrogen-induced 
transcription. CaM facilitates dimerization of ER-α in the absence of estrogen, 
and stimulation of ER-α by either Ca(2+) and/or estrogen may serve to regulate 
transcription in a combinatorial fashion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.334797
PMCID: PMC3308758
PMID: 22275375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]