1. J Neurol Sci. 2012 May 15;316(1-2):116-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.01.010.
Epub  2012 Jan 30.

Association between 12p13 SNPs rs11833579/rs12425791 near NINJ2 gene and 
ischemic stroke in East Asian population: evidence from a meta-analysis.

Li BH(1), Zhang LL, Yin YW, Pi Y, Guo L, Yang QW, Gao CY, Fang CQ, Wang JZ, Li 
JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, 
Third Military Medical University, 10 Changjiang Branch Road, Yuzhong District, 
Chongqing 400042, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Meta-analysis in European population found no association between 
rs12425791/rs11833579 and ischemic stroke. Several studies focused on East 
Asians have evaluated the association between this two SNPs and risk of ischemic 
stroke, but the results have been inconsistent. The aim of this study was to 
perform a meta-analysis to investigate a more authentic association between 
rs12425791 and rs11833579 G>A mutation and ischemic stroke in East Asian 
population, as well as in Chinese Han population.
METHODS: Systematic searches of electronic databases Embase, PubMed, Web of 
Science, and CBM as well as hand searching of the references of identified 
articles and the meeting abstracts were performed. Study selection, data 
abstraction and study quality evaluation were independently conducted in 
duplicate. Statistical analyses were performed using software Stata 11.0. The 
pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) were performed. 
Different effects models were used according to the difference in heterogeneity. 
Publication bias was tested by Begg's funnel plot and Egger's regression test.
RESULTS: A total of 4 publications including 7 studies were involved. For 
rs12425791, significant association was found in allelic model (OR=1.06, 
95%CI=1.00-1.11) and dominant model (OR=1.10, 95%CI=1.03-1.18), whereas no 
evidence of association was found for additive model (OR=1.04, 95%CI=0.93-1.17) 
and for recessive model (OR=0.99, 95%CI=0.88-1.10). For rs11833579, no evidence 
of association was found for all genetic models. In the analysis of Chinese Han 
population, there is lack of evidence for association of ischemic stroke for 
both SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our meta-analysis suggests that rs12425791 is 
significantly associated with ischemic stroke in East Asian population but not 
Chinese Han population, of which A alleles increase the risk of ischemic stroke, 
whereas no evidence of association was found for rs11833579 in East Asian 
population as well as Chinese Han population.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.01.010
PMID: 22297388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]