1. Vaccine. 2012 Mar 23;30(14):2427-39. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.069. Epub 
2012 Feb 3.

Chimeric calicivirus-like particles elicit specific immune responses in pigs.

Crisci E(1), Fraile L, Moreno N, Blanco E, Cabezón R, Costa C, Mussá T, 
Baratelli M, Martinez-Orellana P, Ganges L, Martínez J, Bárcena J, Montoya M.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal, UAB-IRTA, Campus de la Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.

Virus-like particles (VLPs) have received considerable attention due to their 
potential application in veterinary vaccines and, in particular, VLPs from 
rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) have successfully shown to be good 
platforms for inducing immune responses against an inserted foreign epitope in 
mice. The aim of this study was to assess the immunogenicity of chimeric 
RHDV-VLPs as vaccine vectors in pigs. For this purpose, we have generated 
chimeric VLPs containing a well-known T epitope of 3A protein of foot-and-mouth 
disease virus (FMDV). Firstly, RHDV-VLPs were able to activate immature porcine 
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (poBMDCs) in vitro. Secondly, pigs were 
inoculated twice in a two-week interval with chimeric RHDV-VLPs at different 
doses intranasally or intramuscularly. One intramuscularly treated group was 
also inoculated with adjuvant Montanide™ ISA 206 at the same time. Specific IgG 
and IgA antibodies against RHDV-VLPs were induced and such levels were higher in 
the adjuvanted group compared with other groups. Interestingly, anti-RHDV-VLP 
IgA responses were higher in groups inoculated intramuscularly than those that 
received the VLPs intranasally. Two weeks after the last immunisation, specific 
IFN-γ-secreting cells against 3A epitope and against RHDV-VLPs were detected in 
PBMCs by ELISPOT. The adjuvanted group exhibited the highest IFN-γ-secreting 
cell numbers and lymphoproliferative specific T cell responses against 3A 
epitope and RHDV-VLP. This is the first immunological report on the potential 
use of chimeric RHDV-VLPs as antigen carriers in pigs.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.01.069
PMCID: PMC7115503
PMID: 22306796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]