1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1818(10):2465-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.01.018. Epub 2012 Jan 28.

The innate immune response to products of phospholipid peroxidation.

Weismann D(1), Binder CJ.

Author information:
(1)Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria.

Lipid peroxidation occurs in the context of many physiological processes but is 
greatly increased in various pathological situations. A consequence of 
phospholipid peroxidation is the generation of oxidation-specific epitopes, such 
as phosphocholine of oxidized phospholipids and malondialdehyde, which form 
neo-self determinants on dying cells and oxidized low-density lipoproteins. In 
this review we discuss evidence demonstrating that pattern recognition receptors 
of the innate immune system recognize oxidation-specific epitopes as endogenous 
damage-associated molecular patterns, allowing the host to identify dangerous 
biological waste. Oxidation-specific epitopes are important targets of both 
cellular and soluble pattern recognition receptors, including toll-like and 
scavenger receptors, C-reactive protein, complement factor H, and innate natural 
IgM antibodies. This recognition allows the innate immune system to mediate 
important physiological house keeping functions, for example by promoting the 
removal of dying cells and oxidized molecules. Once this system is malfunctional 
or overwhelmed the development of diseases, such as atherosclerosis and 
age-related macular degeneration is favored. Understanding the molecular 
components and mechanisms involved in this process, will help the identification 
of individuals with increased risk of developing chronic inflammation, and 
indicate novel points for therapeutic intervention. This article is part of a 
Special Issue entitled: Oxidized phospholipids-their properties and interactions 
with proteins.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.01.018
PMCID: PMC3790971
PMID: 22305963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]