1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031614. Epub 2012 Feb
3.

Changes in cGMP levels affect the localization of EGL-4 in AWC in Caenorhabditis 
elegans.

O'Halloran DM(1), Hamilton OS, Lee JI, Gallegos M, L'Etoile ND.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience, University of California Davis, Davis, California, 
United States of America. damienoh@gwu.edu

The Protein Kinase G, EGL-4, is required within the C. elegans AWC sensory 
neurons to promote olfactory adaptation. After prolonged stimulation of these 
neurons, EGL-4 translocates from the cytosol to the nuclei of the AWC. This 
nuclear translocation event is both necessary and sufficient for adaptation of 
the AWC neuron to odor. A cGMP binding motif within EGL-4 and the GÎ± protein 
ODR-3 are both required for this translocation event, while loss of the guanylyl 
cyclase ODR-1 was shown to result in constitutively nuclear localization of 
EGL-4. However, the molecular changes that are integrated over time to produce a 
stably adapted response in the AWC are unknown. Here we show that odor-induced 
fluctuations in cGMP levels in the adult cilia may be responsible in part for 
sending EGL-4 into the AWC nucleus to produce long-term adaptation. We found 
that reductions in cGMP that result from mutations in the genes encoding the 
cilia-localized guanylyl cyclases ODR-1 and DAF-11 result in constitutively 
nuclear EGL-4 even in naive animals. Conversely, increases in cGMP levels that 
result from mutations in cGMP phosphodiesterases block EGL-4 nuclear entry even 
after prolonged odor exposure. Expression of a single phosphodiesterase in 
adult, naive animals was sufficient to modestly increase the number of animals 
with nuclear EGL-4. Further, coincident acute treatment of animals with odor and 
the phosphodiesterase inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) decreased the 
number of animals with nuclear EGL-4. These data suggest that reducing cGMP 
levels in AWC is necessary and even partially sufficient for nuclear 
translocation of EGL-4 and adaptation as a result of prolonged odor exposure. 
Our genetic analysis and chemical treatment of C. elegans further indicate that 
cilia morphology, as defined by fluorescent microscopic observation of the 
sensory endings, may allow for odor-induced fluctuations in cGMP levels and this 
fluctuation may be responsible for sending EGL-4 into the AWC nucleus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031614
PMCID: PMC3272044
PMID: 22319638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.