1. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Feb;8(2):e1002507. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002507. Epub 
2012 Feb 2.

Phagosomal rupture by Mycobacterium tuberculosis results in toxicity and host 
cell death.

Simeone R(1), Bobard A, Lippmann J, Bitter W, Majlessi L, Brosch R, Enninga J.

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unit for Integrated Mycobacterial Pathogenomics, Paris, 
France.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Jun 15;10(7):442. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2825.

Survival within macrophages is a central feature of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
pathogenesis. Despite significant advances in identifying new immunological 
parameters associated with mycobacterial disease, some basic questions on the 
intracellular fate of the causative agent of human tuberculosis in 
antigen-presenting cells are still under debate. To get novel insights into this 
matter, we used a single-cell fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET)-based method to investigate the potential cytosolic access of M. 
tuberculosis and the resulting cellular consequences in an unbiased, 
quantitative way. Analysis of thousands of THP-1 macrophages infected with 
selected wild-type or mutant strains of the M. tuberculosis complex 
unambiguously showed that M. tuberculosis induced a change in the FRET signal 
after 3 to 4 days of infection, indicating phagolysosomal rupture and cytosolic 
access. These effects were not seen for the strains M. tuberculosisÎ”RD1 or BCG, 
both lacking the ESX-1 secreted protein ESAT-6, which reportedly shows 
membrane-lysing properties. Complementation of these strains with the ESX-1 
secretion system of M. tuberculosis restored the ability to cause phagolysosomal 
rupture. In addition, control experiments with the fish pathogen Mycobacterium 
marinum showed phagolysosomal translocation only for ESX-1 intact strains, 
further validating our experimental approach. Most importantly, for M. 
tuberculosis as well as for M. marinum we observed that phagolysosomal rupture 
was followed by necrotic cell death of the infected macrophages, whereas ESX-1 
deletion- or truncation-mutants that remained enclosed within phagolysosomal 
compartments did not induce such cytotoxicity. Hence, we provide a novel 
mechanism how ESX-1 competent, virulent M. tuberculosis and M. marinum strains 
induce host cell death and thereby escape innate host defenses and favor their 
spread to new cells. In this respect, our results also open new research 
directions in relation with the extracellular localization of M. tuberculosis 
inside necrotic lesions that can now be tackled from a completely new 
perspective.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002507
PMCID: PMC3271072
PMID: 22319448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.