1. Plant Mol Biol. 2012 May;79(1-2):21-33. doi: 10.1007/s11103-012-9891-4. Epub 
2012 Feb 11.

Unraveling the function of Arabidopsis thaliana OS9 in the endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation of glycoproteins.

Hüttner S(1), Veit C, Schoberer J, Grass J, Strasser R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Genetics and Cell Biology, BOKU-University of Natural 
Resources and Life Sciences, Muthgasse 18, 1190 Vienna, Austria.

In the endoplasmic reticulum, immature polypeptides coincide with terminally 
misfolded proteins. Consequently, cells need a well-balanced quality control 
system, which decides about the fate of individual proteins and maintains 
protein homeostasis. Misfolded and unassembled proteins are sent for destruction 
via the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery to prevent 
the accumulation of potentially toxic protein aggregates. Here, we report the 
identification of Arabidopsis thaliana OS9 as a component of the plant ERAD 
pathway. OS9 is an ER-resident glycoprotein containing a mannose-6-phosphate 
receptor homology domain, which is also found in yeast and mammalian lectins 
involved in ERAD. OS9 fused to the C-terminal domain of YOS9 can complement the 
ERAD defect of the corresponding yeast Δyos9 mutant. An A. thaliana OS9 
loss-of-function line suppresses the severe growth phenotype of the bri1-5 and 
bri1-9 mutant plants, which harbour mutated forms of the brassinosteroid 
receptor BRI1. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that OS9 associates 
with Arabidopsis SEL1L/HRD3, which is part of the plant ERAD complex and with 
the ERAD substrates BRI1-5 and BRI1-9, but only the binding to BRI1-5 occurs in 
a glycan-dependent way. OS9-deficiency results in activation of the unfolded 
protein response and reduces salt tolerance, highlighting the role of OS9 during 
ER stress. We propose that OS9 is a component of the plant ERAD machinery and 
may act specifically in the glycoprotein degradation pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-012-9891-4
PMCID: PMC3332353
PMID: 22328055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]