1. J Neurophysiol. 2012 May;107(10):2703-12. doi: 10.1152/jn.00374.2011. Epub
2012  Feb 15.

β2-Adrenergic receptor supports prolonged theta tetanus-induced LTP.

Qian H(1), Matt L, Zhang M, Nguyen M, Patriarchi T, Koval OM, Anderson ME, He K, 
Lee HK, Hell JW.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

The widespread noradrenergic innervation in the brain promotes arousal and 
learning by molecular mechanisms that remain largely undefined. Recent work 
shows that the β(2)-adrenergic receptor (β(2)AR) is linked to the AMPA-type 
glutamate receptor subunit GluA1 via stargazin and PSD-95 (Joiner ML, Lise MF, 
Yuen EY, Kam AY, Zhang M, Hall DD, Malik ZA, Qian H, Chen Y, Ulrich JD, Burette 
AC, Weinberg RJ, Law PY, El-Husseini A, Yan Z, Hell JW. EMBO J 29: 482-495, 
2010). We now demonstrate that the β(2)AR plays a prominent role in long-term 
potentiation (LTP) induced by a train of 900 stimuli at 5 Hz (prolonged 
theta-tetanus-LTP, or PTT-LTP) in the hippocampal CA1 region in mice, which 
requires simultaneous β-adrenergic stimulation. Although PTT-LTP was impaired in 
hippocampal slices from β(1)AR and β(2)AR knockout (KO) mice, only 
β(2)AR-selective stimulation with salbutamol supported this PTT-LTP in wild-type 
(WT) slices, whereas β(1)AR-selective stimulation with dobutamine (+ prazosin) 
did not. Furthermore, only the β(2)AR-selective antagonist ICI-118551 and not 
the β(1)AR-selective antagonist CGP-20712 inhibited PTT-LTP and phosphorylation 
of GluA1 on its PKA site S845 in WT slices. Our analysis of S845A knockin (KI) 
mice indicates that this phosphorylation is relevant for PTT-LTP. These results 
identify the β(2)AR-S845 signaling pathway as a prominent regulator of synaptic 
plasticity.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00374.2011
PMCID: PMC3362273
PMID: 22338020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]