1. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 May;123(5):695-709. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-0951-2.
Epub  2012 Feb 14.

Joubert syndrome: brain and spinal cord malformations in genotyped cases and 
implications for neurodevelopmental functions of primary cilia.

Juric-Sekhar G(1), Adkins J, Doherty D, Hevner RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
University of Washington, 98101, USA.

Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal recessive ciliopathy characterized by 
hypotonia, ataxia, abnormal eye movements, and intellectual disability. The 
brain is malformed, with severe vermian hypoplasia, fourth ventriculomegaly, and 
"molar tooth" appearance of the cerebral and superior cerebellar peduncles 
visible as consistent features on neuroimaging. Neuropathological studies, 
though few, suggest that several other brain and spinal cord structures, such as 
the dorsal cervicomedullary junction, may also be affected in at least some 
patients. Genetically, JS is heterogeneous, with mutations in 13 genes 
accounting for approximately 50% of patients. Here, we compare neuropathologic 
findings in five subjects with JS, including four with defined mutations in OFD1 
(2 siblings), RPGRIP1L, or TCTN2. Characteristic findings in all JS genotypes 
included vermian hypoplasia, fragmented dentate and spinal trigeminal nuclei, 
hypoplastic pontine and inferior olivary nuclei, and nondecussation of 
corticospinal tracts. Other common findings, seen in multiple genotypes but not 
all subjects, were dorsal cervicomedullary heterotopia, nondecussation of 
superior cerebellar peduncles, enlarged arcuate nuclei, hypoplastic reticular 
formation, hypoplastic medial lemnisci, and dorsal spinal cord disorganization. 
Thus, while JS exhibits significant neuropathologic as well as genetic 
heterogeneity, no genotype-phenotype correlations are apparent as yet. Our 
findings suggest that primary cilia are important for neural patterning, 
progenitor proliferation, cell migration, and axon guidance in the developing 
human brain and spinal cord.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-012-0951-2
PMID: 22331178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]