1. Environ Res. 2012 Feb;113:52-7. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2012.01.003. Epub 2012
Feb  15.

Low-level arsenic exposure, AS3MT gene polymorphism and cardiovascular diseases 
in rural Texas counties.

Gong G(1), O'Bryant SE.

Author information:
(1)F. Marie Hall Institute for Rural and Community Health, Texas Tech University 
Health Science Center, 3601 4th Street, STOP 6232, Lubbock, TX 79430-6232, USA.

Most Americans living in rural areas use groundwater for drinking. Exposure to 
low-level (around the current U.S. standard 10 μg/L) arsenic in drinking water 
is associated with increased mortality of cardiovascular diseases. The current 
study was to determine if coronary heart disease, hypertension, and 
hyperlipidemia were associated with low-level arsenic exposure and AS3MT gene 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) A35991G (rs10748835) in rural Texas. 
Subjects (156 men, 343 women, 40-96 years of age with a mean of 61) were 
residents from rural counties Cochran, Palmer, and Bailey, Texas. Groundwater 
arsenic concentration at each subject's home was estimated with ArcGIS inverse 
distance weighted interpolation based on the residential location's distances to 
surrounding wells with known water arsenic concentrations. The estimated 
groundwater arsenic concentration ranged from 2.2 to 15.3 (mean 6.2) μg/L in 
this cohort. Logistic regression analysis showed that coronary heart disease was 
associated with higher arsenic exposure (p<0.05) and with AS3MT genotype GG vs. 
AA (p<0.05) after adjustments for age, ethnicity, gender, education, smoking 
status, alcoholism, and anti-hyperlipidemia medication. Hypertension was 
associated with higher arsenic exposure, while hyperlipidemia was associated 
with genotype AG vs. AA of the AS3MT gene (p<0.05). Thus, coronary heart disease 
and its main risk factors were associated with low-level arsenic exposure, AS3MT 
polymorphism or both.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2012.01.003
PMID: 22341486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]