1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031139. Epub 2012 Feb
8.

High diversity of Cryptosporidium subgenotypes identified in Malaysian HIV/AIDS 
individuals targeting gp60 gene.

Iqbal A(1), Lim YA, Surin J, Sim BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Currently, there is a lack of vital information in the genetic 
makeup of Cryptosporidium especially in developing countries. The present study 
aimed at determining the genotypes and subgenotypes of Cryptosporidium in 
hospitalized Malaysian human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive patients.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, 346 faecal samples collected from 
Malaysian HIV positive patients were genetically analysed via PCR targeting the 
60 kDa glycoprotein (gp60) gene. Eighteen (5.2% of 346) isolates were determined 
as Cryptosporidium positive with 72.2% (of 18) identified as Cryptosporidium 
parvum whilst 27.7% as Cryptosporidium hominis. Further gp60 analysis revealed 
C. parvum belonging to subgenotypes IIaA13G1R1 (2 isolates), IIaA13G2R1 (2 
isolates), IIaA14G2R1 (3 isolates), IIaA15G2R1 (5 isolates) and IIdA15G1R1 (1 
isolate). C. hominis was represented by subgenotypes IaA14R1 (2 isolates), 
IaA18R1 (1 isolate) and IbA10G2R2 (2 isolates).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings highlighted the presence of high 
diversity of Cryptosporidium subgenotypes among Malaysian HIV infected 
individuals. The predominance of the C. parvum subgenotypes signified the 
possibility of zoonotic as well as anthroponotic transmissions of 
cryptosporidiosis in HIV infected individuals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031139
PMCID: PMC3275556
PMID: 22347442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.