1. PLoS Genet. 2012 Feb;8(2):e1002525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002525. Epub
2012  Feb 9.

Mixed effects modeling of proliferation rates in cell-based models: consequence 
for pharmacogenomics and cancer.

Im HK(1), Gamazon ER, Stark AL, Huang RS, Cox NJ, Dolan ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Studies, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
haky@uchicago.edu

The International HapMap project has made publicly available extensive genotypic 
data on a number of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs). Building on this resource, 
many research groups have generated a large amount of phenotypic data on these 
cell lines to facilitate genetic studies of disease risk or drug response. 
However, one problem that may reduce the usefulness of these resources is the 
biological noise inherent to cellular phenotypes. We developed a novel method, 
termed Mixed Effects Model Averaging (MEM), which pools data from multiple 
sources and generates an intrinsic cellular growth rate phenotype. This 
intrinsic growth rate was estimated for each of over 500 HapMap cell lines. We 
then examined the association of this intrinsic growth rate with gene expression 
levels and found that almost 30% (2,967 out of 10,748) of the genes tested were 
significant with FDR less than 10%. We probed further to demonstrate evidence of 
a genetic effect on intrinsic growth rate by determining a significant 
enrichment in growth-associated genes among genes targeted by top 
growth-associated SNPs (as eQTLs). The estimated intrinsic growth rate as well 
as the strength of the association with genetic variants and gene expression 
traits are made publicly available through a cell-based pharmacogenomics 
database, PACdb. This resource should enable researchers to explore the 
mediating effects of proliferation rate on other phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002525
PMCID: PMC3276560
PMID: 22346769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.