1. Front Microbiol. 2012 Feb 3;3:26. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00026. eCollection 
2012.

Anoxic iron cycling bacteria from an iron sulfide- and nitrate-rich freshwater 
environment.

Haaijer SC(1), Crienen G, Jetten MS, Op den Camp HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Nijmegen, Netherlands.

In this study, both culture-dependent and culture-independent methods were used 
to determine whether the iron sulfide mineral- and nitrate-rich freshwater 
nature reserve Het Zwart Water accommodates anoxic microbial iron cycling. 
Molecular analyses (16S rRNA gene clone library and fluorescence in situ 
hybridization, FISH) showed that sulfur-oxidizing denitrifiers dominated the 
microbial population. In addition, bacteria resembling the iron-oxidizing, 
nitrate-reducing Acidovorax strain BrG1 accounted for a major part of the 
microbial community in the groundwater of this ecosystem. Despite the apparent 
abundance of strain BrG1-like bacteria, iron-oxidizing nitrate reducers could 
not be isolated, likely due to the strictly autotrophic cultivation conditions 
adopted in our study. In contrast an iron-reducing Geobacter sp. was isolated 
from this environment while FISH and 16S rRNA gene clone library analyses did 
not reveal any Geobacter sp.-related sequences in the groundwater. Our findings 
indicate that iron-oxidizing nitrate reducers may be of importance to the redox 
cycling of iron in the groundwater of our study site and illustrate the 
necessity of employing both culture-dependent and independent methods in studies 
on microbial processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00026
PMCID: PMC3271277
PMID: 22347219