1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 May 15;83(10):1427-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.01.032.
 Epub 2012 Feb 10.

The prototypic pharmacogenetic drug debrisoquine is a substrate of the 
genetically polymorphic organic cation transporter OCT1.

Saadatmand AR(1), Tadjerpisheh S, Brockmöller J, Tzvetkov MV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University Medical Center, 
Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany.

Debrisoquine is a probe drug for in vivo phenotyping of human CYP2D6 metabolic 
activity. However, debrisoquine is positively charged under physiological 
conditions and it is unclear how it enters the hepatocytes to undergo CYP2D6 
metabolism. We analysed whether debrisoquine is a substrate of the hepatic 
organic cation transporter OCT1 and whether drug-drug interactions at OCT1, or 
polymorphisms in OCT1 gene, affect debrisoquine uptake. Debrisoquine showed low 
carrier-independent membrane permeability (P(e) of 0.01×10⁻⁶ cm/s in artificial 
PAMPA membranes) and strongly inhibited the uptake of the model OCT1 substrate 
MPP+ (IC₅₀ of 6.2 ± 0.8 μM). Debrisoquine uptake was significantly increased in 
HEK293 cells overexpressing OCT1 compared to control cells. The OCT1-mediated 
uptake of debrisoquine followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics (K(M) of 5.9 ± 1.5 μM 
and V(max) of 41.9 ± 4.5pmol/min/mg protein) and was inhibited by known OCT1 
inhibitors and by commonly used drugs. OCT1-mediated debrisoquine uptake was 
reduced or missing in cells expressing loss-of-function OCT1 isoforms. Deletion 
of Met420 or substitution of Arg61Cys or Gly401Ser reduced V(max) by 48, 63 and 
91%, respectively, but did not affect the K(M). The OCT1 isoforms carrying 
Cys88Arg or Gly465Arg substitutions completely lacked OCT1-mediated debrisoquine 
uptake. In conclusion, debrisoquine is a substrate of OCT1 and has the potential 
to be used as a phenotyping marker for OCT1 activity. Moreover, variations in 
debrisoquine metabolic phenotypes and their associations with diseases may be 
due not only to genetic variations CYP2D6, but also in OCT1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.01.032
PMID: 22342776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]