1. J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):445-54. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111709. Epub 2012 Feb
 20.

Lethal myelofibrosis induced by Bmi1-deficient hematopoietic cells unveils a 
tumor suppressor function of the polycomb group genes.

Oguro H(1), Yuan J, Tanaka S, Miyagi S, Mochizuki-Kashio M, Ichikawa H, Yamazaki 
S, Koseki H, Nakauchi H, Iwama A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins form the multiprotein polycomb repressive 
complexes (PRC) 1 and 2, and function as transcriptional repressors through 
histone modifications. They maintain the proliferative capacity of hematopoietic 
stem and progenitor cells by repressing the transcription of tumor suppressor 
genes, namely Ink4a and Arf, and thus have been characterized as oncogenes. 
However, the identification of inactivating mutations in the PcG gene, EZH2, 
unveiled a tumor suppressor function in myeloid malignancies, including primary 
myelofibrosis (PMF). Here, we show that loss of another PcG gene, Bmi1, causes 
pathological hematopoiesis similar to PMF. In a mouse model, loss of Bmi1 in 
Ink4a-Arf(-/-) hematopoietic cells induced abnormal megakaryocytopoiesis 
accompanied by marked extramedullary hematopoiesis, which eventually resulted in 
lethal myelofibrosis. Absence of Bmi1 caused derepression of a cohort of genes, 
including Hmga2, which is an oncogene overexpressed in PMF. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Bmi1 directly represses the 
transcription of Hmga2. Overexpression of Hmga2 in hematopoietic stem cells 
induced a myeloproliferative state with enhanced megakaryocytopoiesis in mice, 
implicating Hmga2 in the development of pathological hematopoiesis in the 
absence of Bmi1. Our findings provide the first genetic evidence of a tumor 
suppressor function of Bmi1 and uncover the role of PcG proteins in restricting 
growth by silencing oncogenes.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20111709
PMCID: PMC3302226
PMID: 22351929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]