1. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031252. Epub 2012 Feb
16.

The pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthetic pathway modulates production of biofilm 
determinants in Escherichia coli.

Garavaglia M(1), Rossi E, Landini P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology, Universit√† degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Bacteria are often found in multicellular communities known as biofilms, which 
constitute a resistance form against environmental stresses. Extracellular 
adhesion and cell aggregation factors, responsible for bacterial biofilm 
formation and maintenance, are tightly regulated in response to physiological 
and environmental cues. We show that, in Escherichia coli, inactivation of genes 
belonging to the de novo uridine monophosphate (UMP) biosynthetic pathway 
impairs production of curli fibers and cellulose, important components of the 
bacterial biofilm matrix, by inhibiting transcription of the csgDEFG operon, 
thus preventing production of the biofilm master regulator CsgD protein. 
Supplementing growth media with exogenous uracil, which can be converted to UMP 
through the pyrimidine nucleotide salvage pathway, restores csgDEFG 
transcription and curli production. In addition, however, exogenous uracil 
triggers cellulose production, particularly in strains defective in either carB 
or pyrB genes, which encode enzymes catalyzing the first steps of de novo UMP 
biosynthesis. Our results indicate the existence of tight and complex links 
between pyrimidine metabolism and curli/cellulose production: transcription of 
the csgDEFG operon responds to pyrimidine nucleotide availability, while 
cellulose production is triggered by exogenous uracil in the absence of active 
de novo UMP biosynthesis. We speculate that perturbations in the UMP 
biosynthetic pathways allow the bacterial cell to sense signals such as 
starvation, nucleic acids degradation, and availability of exogenous 
pyrimidines, and to adapt the production of the extracellular matrix to the 
changing environmental conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031252
PMCID: PMC3281075
PMID: 22359582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.