1. Neurosci Lett. 2012 May 10;516(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.02.017. Epub
 2012 Feb 15.

A family-based association study of dopamine receptor D4 and mental retardation 
in Qinba region of China.

Zhang K(1), Zhang M, He H, Zhang J, Chi W, Guo Y, Huang S, Zheng Z, Zhang F, Gao 
X.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China 
(Ministry of Education), College of Life Science, Institute of Population and 
Health, Northwest University, Xi'an 710069, China.

Dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) is activated by the neurotransmitter dopamine and 
links to many neurological and psychiatric conditions because of its close 
relationship with prefrontal cortex and other important brain regions. To 
explore the possibility that genetic variants of DRD4 gene predispose to 
children with mental retardation (MR), five target SNPs of DRD4 were selected 
and genotyped in the samples of 163 MR pedigrees from the Qinba region of China. 
Two SNPs (rs752306 and rs3758653) showed weak association with MR (the P values 
were 0.022 and 0.015 for dominant model, and 0.027 and 0.015 for recessive 
model, respectively). Although they did not bear the multiple testing 
corrections, the haplotype which contained rs3758653 exhibited a significant 
association with MR (global P values were 0.018 for dominant model and 0.028 for 
recessive model, respectively). The in silico analysis also indicated that 
rs752306 and rs3758653 would be biologically meaningful SNPs. Therefore, the 
present study suggested that the genetic variants of DRD4 gene may play an 
important role in human MR. Further investigations, such as confirmation with 
other independent samples and functional studies, may elucidate their effect on 
gene expression and MR susceptibility.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.02.017
PMID: 22366260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]