1. Anal Chem. 2012 Apr 3;84(7):3269-77. doi: 10.1021/ac203336u. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Examination of glycan profiles from IgG-depleted human immunoglobulins 
facilitated by microscale affinity chromatography.

Svoboda M(1), Mann BF, Goetz JA, Novotny MV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and National Center for Glycomics and 
Glycoproteomics, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405, USA.

Among the most important proteins involved in disease and healing processes are 
the immunoglobulins (Igs). Although many of the Igs have been studied through 
proteomics, aside from IgG, immunoglobulin carbohydrates have not been 
extensively characterized in different states of health. It seems valuable to 
develop techniques that permit an understanding of changes in the structures and 
abundances of Ig glycans in the context of disease onset and progression. We 
have devised a strategy for characterization of the glycans for the Ig classes 
other than IgG (i.e., A, D, E, and M) that contain kappa light chains that 
requires only a few microliters of biological material. First, we designed a 
microcolumn containing recombinant Protein L that was immobilized on macroporous 
silica particles. A similarly designed Protein G microcolumn was utilized to 
first perform an online depletion of the IgG from the sample, human blood serum, 
and thereby facilitate enrichment of the other Igs. Even though only 3 Î¼L of 
serum was used in these analyses, we were able to recover a significantly 
enriched fraction of non-IgG immunoglobulins. The enrichment properties of the 
Protein L column were characterized using a highly sensitive label-free 
quantitative proteomics LC-MS/MS approach, and the glycomic profiles of enriched 
immunoglobulins were measured by MALDI-TOF MS. As a proof of principle, a 
comparative study was conducted using blood serum from a small group of lung 
cancer patients and a group of age-matched cancer-free individuals to 
demonstrate that the method is suitable for investigation of glycosylation 
changes in disease. The results were in agreement with a glycomic investigation 
of whole blood serum from a much larger lung cancer cohort.

DOI: 10.1021/ac203336u
PMCID: PMC3320794
PMID: 22360417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]