1. Biochemistry. 2012 Mar 27;51(12):2515-25. doi: 10.1021/bi3000353. Epub 2012
Mar  12.

Marburg virus glycoprotein GP2: pH-dependent stability of the ectodomain 
α-helical bundle.

Harrison JS(1), Koellhoffer JF, Chandran K, Lai JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New 
York 10461, United States.

Marburg virus (MARV) and Ebola virus (EBOV) constitute the family Filoviridae of 
enveloped viruses (filoviruses) that cause severe hemorrhagic fever. Infection 
by MARV requires fusion between the host cell and viral membranes, a process 
that is mediated by the two subunits of the envelope glycoprotein, GP1 (surface 
subunit) and GP2 (transmembrane subunit). Upon viral attachment and uptake, it 
is believed that the MARV viral fusion machinery is triggered by host factors 
and environmental conditions found in the endosome. Next, conformational 
rearrangements in the GP2 ectodomain result in the formation of a highly stable 
six-helix bundle; this refolding event provides the energetic driving force for 
membrane fusion. Both GP1 and GP2 from EBOV have been extensively studied, but 
there is little information available for the MARV glycoproteins. Here we have 
expressed two variants of the MARV GP2 ectodomain in Escherichia coli and 
analyzed their biophysical properties. Circular dichroism indicates that the 
MARV GP2 ectodomain adopts an α-helical conformation, and one variant sediments 
as a trimer by equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation. Denaturation studies 
indicate the α-helical structure is highly stable at pH 5.3 (unfolding energy, 
ΔG(unf,H(2)O), of 33.4 ± 2.5 kcal/mol and melting temperature, T(m), of 75.3 ± 
2.1 °C for one variant). Furthermore, we found the α-helical stability to be 
strongly dependent on pH, with higher stability under lower-pH conditions (T(m) 
values ranging from ~92 °C at pH 4.0 to ~38 °C at pH 8.0). Mutational analysis 
suggests two glutamic acid residues (E579 and E580) are partially responsible 
for this pH-dependent behavior. On the basis of these results, we hypothesize 
that the pH-dependent folding stability of the MARV GP2 ectodomain provides a 
mechanism for controlling conformational preferences such that the six-helix 
bundle "postfusion" state is preferred under conditions of appropriately matured 
endosomes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi3000353
PMCID: PMC3314129
PMID: 22369502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]