1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2012 Aug;32(6):1011-9. doi: 10.1007/s10571-012-9817-3.
Epub  2012 Feb 24.

An association study on the polymorphisms of dopaminergic genes with working 
memory in a healthy Chinese Han population.

Gong P(1), Zhang H, Chi W, Ge W, Zhang K, Zheng A, Gao X, Zhang F.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China 
(Ministry of Education), College of Life Science, Institute of Population and 
Health, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.

Working memory (WM) is a highly heritable cognitive trait that is involved in 
many higher-level cognitive functions. In the past few years, much evidence has 
indicated that the reduction of dopamine activity in human brain can impair the 
WM system of the neuropsychiatric disorders. In this study, we hypothesized that 
some genes in the dopamine system were involved in the individual difference of 
the cognitive ability in healthy population. To confirm this hypothesis, a 
population-based study was performed to examine the effects of COMT, DAT (1), 
DRD (1), DRD (2), DRD (3), and DRD (4) on WM spans. Our results indicated there 
were significant associations of TaqIA and TaqIB in DRD (2) with digital WM 
span, respectively (χ(2) = 9.460, p = 0.009; χ(2) = 6.845, p = 0.033). On the 
other hand, we found a significant interaction between Ser9Gly in DRD (3) and 
TaqIA of DRD (2) on digital WM span (F = 3.207, p = 0.013). COMT, DAT (1) , DRD 
(1), and DRD (4), however, had no significant effects on digital and spatial WM 
spans (χ(2)<3.84, p > 0.05). These preliminary results further indicated that 
certain functional variants in dopamine system, such as TaqIA and TaqIB of DRD 
(2), were possibly involved in difference of WM in a healthy population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-012-9817-3
PMID: 22362150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]