1. J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;57(4):265-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.16. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Impact of common type 2 diabetes risk gene variants on future type 2 diabetes in 
the non-diabetic population in Korea.

Park SE(1), Lee WY, Oh KW, Baek KH, Yoon KH, Kang MI, Son HY, Lee WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We prospectively examined the association between type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM) progression and common T2DM-risk gene variants in 870 non-diabetic 
participants in a Chungju Metabolic Disease Cohort Study in Korea. We genotyped 
the following six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs): KCNQ1 (potassium 
voltage-gated channel, KQT-like subfamily member 1) rs2237892, CDKAL1 
(regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1) rs7554840, CDKN2A/B 
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A/B) rs1081161, SCL30A8 (solute carrier 
family 30 member 8 gene) rs13266634, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2) 
rs7903146, and PPARG (peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma) 
rs1801282. Anthropometric data and metabolic parameters were obtained at 
baseline and year 4. Pancreatic β cell function was assessed by the homeostasis 
model assessment index of β cells (HOMA-β). After 4 years, 137 subjects 
developed T2DM (15.7%). A significant association was found in the variant of 
KCNQ1 rs2237892, whereas the SNPs of CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, SCL30A8, TCF7L2 and PPARG 
were not associated. The C-allele carriers of KCNQ1 conferred a significantly 
increased risk for T2DM compared with the T/T genotype, independently of 
clinical risk factors (odds ratio=2.61, 95% confidence intervals=1.02-6.69, 
P=0.04). Although no differences were observed at baseline among the KCNQ1 
variants, HOMA-β levels by year 4 were significantly lower in the C-allele 
carriers after controlling for metabolic parameters. The genetic variations in 
KCNQ1 are associated with future development of T2DM in Koreans, which might be 
mediated by differences in insulin secretory function.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2012.16
PMID: 22377714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]