1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2012 Dec;30(10):635-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.eimc.2012.01.012. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

[Mass spectrometry in the clinical microbiology laboratory].

[Article in Spanish]

Jordana-Lluch E(1), Martró Català E, Ausina Ruiz V.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Microbiología, Fundación Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias 
de la Salud Germans Trias y Pujol, Hospital Universitario Germans Trias y Pujol, 
Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Barcelona, España.

Infectious diseases are still a cause of high mortality and morbidity rates. 
Current microbiological diagnostic methods are based on culture and phenotypic 
identification of isolated microorganisms, which can be obtained in about 24-48 
h. Given that the microbiological identification is of major importance for 
patient management, new diagnostic methods are needed in order to detect and 
identify microorganisms in a timely and accurate manner. Over the last few 
years, several molecular techniques based on the amplification of microbial 
nucleic acids have been developed with the aim of reducing the time needed for 
the identification of the microorganisms involved in different infectious 
processes. On the other hand, mass spectrometry has emerged as a rapid and 
consistent alternative to conventional methods for microorganism identification. 
This review describes the most widely used mass spectrometry technologies 
-matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) and 
electrospray ionization time-of-flight (ESI-TOF)-, both for protein and nucleic 
acid analysis, as well as the commercial platforms available. Related 
publications of most interest in clinical microbiology are also reviewed.

Actualmente, las enfermedades infecciosas siguen causando una elevada mortalidad 
y morbilidad. Los métodos de diagnóstico microbiológico se basan en el cultivo 
seguido de la identificación fenotípica del microorganismo una vez aislado, y el 
tiempo necesario para su obtención puede variar de 24 a 48 h. Dado que la 
identificación microbiológica repercute directamente en el manejo del paciente y 
su pronóstico, son necesarias nuevas herramientas diagnósticas capaces de 
detectar e identificar cualquier microorganismo de manera rápida y fiable. A lo 
largo de los últimos años se han desarrollado diferentes técnicas moleculares 
basadas en la amplificación genética con el objetivo de reducir el tiempo 
necesario para la identificación de los microorganismos implicados en diferentes 
tipos de procesos infecciosos. Por otro lado, la espectrometría de masas ha 
surgido como una alternativa rápida y eficaz a los métodos convencionales para 
la identificación de microorganismos. En esta revisión se describe la tecnología 
en sus dos formas más utilizadas —desorción/ionización por láser asistida por 
matriz (MALDI-TOF) e ionización por electrospray (ESI-TOF)— para el análisis 
tanto de las proteínas como de los ácidos nucleicos microbianos, así como las 
diferentes plataformas comerciales disponibles. Así mismo, se hace una revisión 
de los trabajos de mayor interés en microbiología clínica.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eimc.2012.01.012
PMCID: PMC7103318
PMID: 22381225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]