1. FEBS J. 2012 May;279(10):1777-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08554.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 21.

Comparative active-site mutation study of human and Caenorhabditis elegans 
thymidine kinase 1.

Skovgaard T(1), Uhlin U, Munch-Petersen B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University, Denmark. 
tine.skovgaard@cpr.ku.dk

The first step for the intracellular retention of several anticancer or 
antiviral nucleoside analogues is the addition of a phosphate group catalysed by 
a deoxyribonucleoside kinase such as thymidine kinase 1 (TK1). Recently, human 
TK1 (HuTK1) has been crystallized and characterized using different ligands. To 
improve our understanding of TK1 substrate specificity, we performed a detailed, 
mutation-based comparative structure-function study of the active sites of two 
thymidine kinases: HuTK1 and Caenorhabditis elegans TK1 (CeTK1). Specifically, 
mutations were introduced into the hydrophobic pocket surrounding the substrate 
base. In CeTK1, some of these mutations led to increased activity with 
deoxycytidine and deoxyguanosine, two unusual substrates for TK1-like kinases. 
In HuTK1, mutation of T163 to S resulted in a kinase with a 140-fold lower K(m) 
for the antiviral nucleoside analogue 3'-azido-3'-deoxythymidine (AZT) compared 
with the natural substrate thymidine. The crystal structure of the T163S-mutated 
HuTK1 reveals a less ordered conformation of the ligand thymidine triphosphate 
compared with the wild-type structure but the cause of the changed specificity 
towards AZT is not obvious. Based on its highly increased AZT activity relative 
to thymidine activity this TK1 mutant could be suitable for suicide gene 
therapy.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08554.x
PMID: 22385435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]