1. Ageing Res Rev. 2012 Jul;11(3):347-52. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2012.01.007. Epub
2012  Feb 23.

Evolutionary aspects of human exercise--born to run purposefully.

Mattson MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research 
Program, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. mattsonm@grc.nia.nih.gov

This article is intended to raise awareness of the adaptive value of endurance 
exercise (particularly running) in the evolutionary history of humans, and the 
implications of the genetic disposition to exercise for the aging populations of 
modern technology-driven societies. The genome of Homo sapiens has evolved to 
support the svelte phenotype of an endurance runner, setting him/her apart from 
all other primates. The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the 
competitive advantages conferred by exercise capacity in youth can also provide 
a survival benefit beyond the reproductive period. These mechanisms include 
up-regulation of genes encoding proteins involved in protecting cells against 
oxidative stress, disposing of damaged proteins and organelles, and enhancing 
bioenergetics. Particularly fascinating are the signaling mechanisms by which 
endurance running changes the structure and functional capabilities of the brain 
and, conversely, the mechanisms by which the brain integrates metabolic, 
cardiovascular and behavioral responses to exercise. As an emerging example, I 
highlight the roles of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) as a mediator of 
the effects of exercise on the brain, and BDNF's critical role in regulating 
metabolic and cardiovascular responses to endurance running. A better 
understanding of such 'healthspan-extending' actions of endurance exercise may 
lead to new approaches for improving quality of life as we advance in the coming 
decades and centuries.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2012.01.007
PMCID: PMC3356485
PMID: 22394472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]