1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2013 Jun;13(3):264-71. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2012.6. Epub 2012 
Mar 6.

The influence of metabolic syndrome, physical activity and genotype on 
catechol-O-methyl transferase promoter-region methylation in schizophrenia.

Lott SA(1), Burghardt PR, Burghardt KJ, Bly MJ, Grove TB, Ellingrod VL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Social and Administrative Sciences, University of 
Michigan College of Pharmacy, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) 158Val/Met variant has been suggested 
to play a role in COMT function. Epigenetic regulation of COMT may further 
influence the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in these patient populations. 
This study examined the correlation between COMT promoter methylation and 
metabolic syndrome in schizophrenia patients receiving atypical antipsychotic 
(AAP) therapy. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples of schizophrenia 
subjects screened for metabolic syndrome. Pyrosequencing was used to analyze two 
methylation sites of the soluble COMT (COMT-s) promoter region. Associations 
between AAP use, lifestyle variables, metabolic syndrome and COMT genotype with 
peak methylation values were analyzed. Data are reported in 85 subjects. 
Methylation on CpG site 1 had a mean of 79.08% (±4.71) and it was 12.43% (±1.19) 
on site 2. COMT genotype proved to be an indicator of COMT methylation status on 
site 1 (F(2, 84)=5.78, P=0.0044) and site 2 (F(2, 84),=3.79, P=0.027). A 
significant negative correlation between physical activity and COMT promoter 
region methylation was found in Val/Val homozygous patients (site 1: P=0.013 and 
site 2: P=0.019). Those homozygous for Met/Met showed a positive correlation 
between promoter site methylation and physical activity (site 1: P=0.027, site 
2: P=0.005), and between CpG site methylation and metabolic syndrome (site 1: 
P=0.002; site 2: P=0.001). The results of this study suggest that COMT promoter 
region methylation is largely influenced by COMT genotype and that physical 
activity plays a significant role in epigenetic modulation of COMT.

DOI: 10.1038/tpj.2012.6
PMCID: PMC3663896
PMID: 22391769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No conflicts of interest 
are reported by the authors.