1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(3):e1002412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002412. Epub 
2012 Mar 1.

Degenerate T-cell recognition of peptides on MHC molecules creates large holes 
in the T-cell repertoire.

Calis JJ(1), de Boer RJ, Ke≈ümir C.

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Biology & Bioinformatics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. j.j.a.calis@uu.nl

The cellular immune system screens peptides presented by host cells on MHC 
molecules to assess if the cells are infected. In this study we examined whether 
the presented peptides contain enough information for a proper self/nonself 
assessment by comparing the presented human (self) and bacterial or viral 
(nonself) peptides on a large number of MHC molecules. For all MHC molecules 
tested, only a small fraction of the presented nonself peptides from 174 species 
of bacteria and 1000 viral proteomes ([Formula: see text]0.2%) is shown to be 
identical to a presented self peptide. Next, we use available data on T-cell 
receptor-peptide-MHC interactions to estimate how well T-cells distinguish 
between similar peptides. The recognition of a peptide-MHC by the T-cell 
receptor is flexible, and as a result, about one-third of the presented nonself 
peptides is expected to be indistinguishable (by T-cells) from presented self 
peptides. This suggests that T-cells are expected to remain tolerant for a large 
fraction of the presented nonself peptides, which provides an explanation for 
the "holes in the T-cell repertoire" that are found for a large fraction of 
foreign epitopes. Additionally, this overlap with self increases the need for 
efficient self tolerance, as many self-similar nonself peptides could initiate 
an autoimmune response. Degenerate recognition of peptide-MHC-I complexes by 
T-cells thus creates large and potentially dangerous overlaps between self and 
nonself.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002412
PMCID: PMC3291541
PMID: 22396638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.