1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2012 May;36(3):616-48. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6976.2012.00339.x.

Host-pathogen checkpoints and population bottlenecks in persistent and 
intracellular uropathogenic Escherichia coli bladder infection.

Hannan TJ(1), Totsika M, Mansfield KJ, Moore KH, Schembri MA, Hultgren SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Bladder infections affect millions of people yearly, and recurrent symptomatic 
infections (cystitis) are very common. The rapid increase in infections caused 
by multidrug-resistant uropathogens threatens to make recurrent cystitis an 
increasingly troubling public health concern. Uropathogenic Escherichia coli 
(UPEC) cause the vast majority of bladder infections. Upon entry into the lower 
urinary tract, UPEC face obstacles to colonization that constitute population 
bottlenecks, reducing diversity, and selecting for fit clones. A critical 
mucosal barrier to bladder infection is the epithelium (urothelium). UPEC bypass 
this barrier when they invade urothelial cells and form intracellular bacterial 
communities (IBCs), a process which requires type 1 pili. IBCs are transient in 
nature, occurring primarily during acute infection. Chronic bladder infection is 
common and can be either latent, in the form of the quiescent intracellular 
reservoir (QIR), or active, in the form of asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB/ABU) or 
chronic cystitis. In mice, the fate of bladder infection, QIR, ASB, or chronic 
cystitis, is determined within the first 24 h of infection and constitutes a 
putative host-pathogen mucosal checkpoint that contributes to susceptibility to 
recurrent cystitis. Knowledge of these checkpoints and bottlenecks is critical 
for our understanding of bladder infection and efforts to devise novel 
therapeutic strategies.

Â© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2012.00339.x
PMCID: PMC3675774
PMID: 22404313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]