1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032310. Epub 2012 Mar
5.

Listeriolysin o is strongly immunogenic independently of its cytotoxic activity.

Carrero JA(1), Vivanco-Cid H, Unanue ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, United States of America. jacarrer@wustl.edu

The presentation of microbial protein antigens by Major Histocompatibility 
Complex (MHC) molecules is essential for the development of acquired immunity to 
infections. However, most biochemical studies of antigen processing and 
presentation deal with a few relatively inert non-microbial model antigens. The 
bacterial pore-forming toxin listeriolysin O (LLO) is paradoxical in that it is 
cytotoxic at nanomolar concentrations as well as being the source of dominant 
CD4 and CD8 T cell epitopes following infection with Listeria monocytogenes. 
Here, we examined the relationship of LLO toxicity to its antigenicity and 
immunogenicity. LLO offered to antigen presenting cells (APC) as a soluble 
protein, was presented to CD4 T cells at picomolar to femtomolar concentrations- 
doses 3000-7000-fold lower than free peptide. This presentation required a dose 
of LLO below the cytotoxic level. Mutations of two key tryptophan residues 
reduced LLO toxicity by 10-100-fold but had no effect on its presentation to CD4 
T cells. Thus there was a clear dissociation between the cytotoxic properties of 
LLO and its very high antigenicity. Presentation of LLO to CD8 T cells was not 
as robust as that seen in CD4 T cells, but still occurred in the nanomolar 
range. APC rapidly bound and internalized LLO, then disrupted endosomal 
compartments within 4 hours of treatment, allowing endosomal contents to access 
the cytosol. LLO was also immunogenic after in vivo administration into mice. 
Our results demonstrate the strength of LLO as an immunogen to both CD4 and CD8 
T cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032310
PMCID: PMC3293810
PMID: 22403645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.