1. Anim Genet. 2012 Apr;43(2):115-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2011.02224.x. Epub
 2011 Jul 7.

Genetic polymorphisms in bovine transferrin receptor 2 (TFR2) and solute carrier 
family 40 (iron-regulated transporter), member 1 (SLC40A1) genes and their 
association with beef iron content.

Duan Q(1), Tait RG Jr, Mayes MS, Garrick DJ, Liu Q, Van Eenennaam AL, Mateescu 
RG, Van Overbeke DL, Garmyn AJ, Beitz DC, Reecy JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Beef is considered to be an excellent source of dietary iron. However, little is 
known about the genetic control of beef iron content. We hypothesized that 
genetic polymorphisms in transferrin receptor 2 (TFR2) and solute carrier family 
40 (iron-regulated transporter), member 1 (SLC40A1) could influence skeletal 
muscle iron content. The objective of this study was to use Angus cattle to 
identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the exons and flanking 
regions of the bovine TFR2 and SLC40A1 genes and to evaluate the extent to which 
genetic variation in them was associated with bovine longissimus dorsi muscle 
iron content. Ten novel SNPs were identified in TFR2, of which one SNP tended to 
be associated (P < 0.013) with skeletal muscle iron content. Nine novel SNPs in 
SLC40A1, NC007300: rs133108154, rs137140497, rs135205621, rs136600836, 
rs134388440, rs136347850, rs134186279, rs134621419 and rs137555693, were 
identified, of which SNPs rs134388440, rs136347850 and rs137555693 were 
significantly associated (P < 0.007) with skeletal muscle iron content. High 
linkage disequilibrium was observed among SLC40A1 SNPs rs134388440, rs136347850 
and rs137555693 (R(2)  > 0.99), from which two haplotypes, TGC and CAT, were 
defined. Beef from individuals that were homozygous for the TGC haplotype had 
significantly (P < 0.001) higher iron content than did beef from CAT homozygous 
or heterozygous individuals. The estimated size of effect of the identified 
haplotypes was 0.3% of the phenotypic variance. In conclusion, our study 
provides evidence for genetic control of beef iron concentration. Moreover, SNPs 
identified in SLC40A1, rs134388440, rs136347850 and rs137555693 might be useful 
markers for the selection of Angus cattle for altered iron content.

© 2011 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2011 Stichting International Foundation 
for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2011.02224.x
PMID: 22404347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]