1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1990 Nov 15;283(1):193-9. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(90)90630-h.

Regulation of intestinal calbindin-D28K gene expression: a solution 
hybridization study.

Fullmer CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, New York State College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Cornell University, Ithaca 14853.

A solution hybridization assay employing specific synthetic oligodeoxynucleotide 
probes was developed to study the regulation of intestinal calbindin-D28K mRNA. 
The technique is rapid and quantitative and eliminates the need for sample 
transfer, blotting, autoradiography, and densitometry. Following validation of 
the assay, chick intestinal calbindin-D and calbindin-D mRNA levels were 
compared under conditions known to stimulate intestinal calcium (Ca) transport. 
Both the protein and its mRNA were undetectable in 25-day-old vitamin 
D-deficient chicks. Following acute administration of vitamin D3, calbindin-D 
mRNA levels increased somewhat more rapidly than calbindin-D protein, but 
overall, the correlation was excellent. Chicks fed a nutritionally adequate diet 
for 14 days and then changed to a low Ca (0.1%) diet responded with increased 
calbindin-D and calbindin-D mRNA levels. Again the correlation was excellent 
over the ensuing 14-day experimental period. The combined effects of vitamin D 
repletion and dietary Ca status were also investigated with respect to calbindin 
D and its mRNA. Fourteen-day-old vitamin D-deficient chicks were changed to 
diets containing vitamin D and either adequate (1.2%) or low (0.3%) in Ca. The 
intestinal responses were measured at intervals up to 14 days. In the normal Ca 
situation, there were initial increases in both calbindin mRNA levels, which 
peaked at between 4 and 7 days, and calbindin protein levels, which peaked at 7 
days. Both values subsequently declined during the remaining 7 days of the 
experimental period. In the low Ca situation, there were similar increases in 
calbindin mRNA and protein levels through 4 and 7 days respectively, but these 
levels remained high for the remainder of the 14-day experimental period. The 
present results demonstrate that intestinal tissue levels of calbindin D and its 
mRNA respond similarly to vitamin D repletion and dietary Ca restriction as well 
as the combination of these stimuli. There is no evidence to support significant 
post-transcriptional regulation of calbindin-D by Ca.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(90)90630-h
PMID: 2241170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]