1. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jan-Feb;205(1-2):1-11. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.009.

Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: understanding the complexities of the 
genetic background.

Fishbein L(1), Nathanson KL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Diabetes and Metabolism, 
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.

Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PCC/PGL) are tumors derived from the 
adrenal medulla or extra-adrenal ganglia, respectively. They are rare and often 
benign tumors that are associated with high morbidity and mortality due to mass 
effect and high circulating catecholamines. Although most PCCs and PGLs are 
thought to be sporadic, over one third are associated with 10 known 
susceptibility genes. Mutations in three genes causing well characterized tumor 
syndromes are associated with an increased risk of developing PCCs and PGLs, 
including VHL (von Hippel-Lindau disease), NF1 (Neurofibromatosis Type 1), and 
RET (Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2). Mutations in any of the succinate 
dehydrogenase (SDH) complex subunit genes (SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD) can lead to 
PCCs and PGLs with variable penetrance, as can mutations in the subunit 
cofactor, SDHAF2. Recently, two additional genes have been identified, TMEM127 
and MAX. Although these tumors are rare in the general population, occurring in 
two to eight per million people, they are more commonly associated with an 
inherited mutation than any other cancer type. This review summarizes the known 
germline and somatic mutations leading to the development of PCC and PGL, as 
well as biochemical profiling for PCCs/PGLs and screening of mutation carriers.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.009
PMCID: PMC3311650
PMID: 22429592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]