1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Jul 2;38(1):4-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.02.009. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Cannabinoid receptors: nomenclature and pharmacological principles.

Console-Bram L(1), Marcu J, Abood ME.

Author information:
(1)Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

The CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors are members of the G protein-coupled 
receptor (GPCR) family that are pharmacologically well defined. However, the 
discovery of additional sites of action for endocannabinoids as well as 
synthetic cannabinoid compounds suggests the existence of additional cannabinoid 
receptors. Here we review this evidence, as well as the current nomenclature for 
classifying a target as a cannabinoid receptor. Basic pharmacological 
definitions, principles and experimental conditions are discussed in order to 
place in context the mechanisms underlying cannabinoid receptor activation. 
Constitutive (agonist-independent) activity is observed with the overexpression 
of many GPCRs, including cannabinoid receptors. Allosteric modulators can alter 
the pharmacological responses of cannabinoid receptors. The complex molecular 
architecture of each of the cannabinoid receptors allows for a single receptor 
to recognize multiple classes of compounds and produce an array of distinct 
downstream effects. Natural polymorphisms and alternative splice variants may 
also contribute to their pharmacological diversity. As our knowledge of the 
distinct differences grows, we may be able to target select receptor 
conformations and their corresponding pharmacological responses. Importantly, 
the basic biology of the endocannabinoid system will continue to be revealed by 
ongoing investigations.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.02.009
PMCID: PMC3378782
PMID: 22421596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]