1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 Feb;8(2):260-6. doi: 10.4161/hv.18469. Epub 2012
Feb  1.

Characterization and long-term persistence of immune response following two 
doses of an AS03A-adjuvanted H1N1 influenza vaccine in healthy Japanese adults.

Ikematsu H(1), Nagai H, Kawashima M, Kawakami Y, Tenjinbaru K, Li P, Walravens 
K, Gillard P, Roman F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Trials, Center for Advanced Medical Innovation, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan. hikematsu@camiku.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Background Long-term persistence of immune response and safety of two doses of 
an A/California/07/2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza vaccine adjuvanted with AS03 (an 
α-tocopherol oil-in-water emulsion-based Adjuvant System) administered 21 d 
apart was evaluated in Japanese adults [NCT00989612]. Methods One-hundred 
healthy subjects aged 20-64 y (stratified [1:1] into two age strata 20-40 y and 
41-64 y) received 21 d apart, two doses of AS03-adjuvanted 3.75µg haemagglutinin 
(HA) H1N1 2009 vaccine. Immunogenicity data by haemagglutination inhibition (HI) 
assay six months after the first vaccine dose (Day 182) and microneutralization 
assay following each of the two vaccine doses (Days 21 and 42) and at Day 182 
are reported here. Results Persistence of strong HI immune response was observed 
at Day 182 that met the US and European regulatory thresholds for pandemic 
influenza vaccines (seroprotection rate: 95%; seroconversion rate: 93%; 
geometric mean fold-rise: 20). The neutralizing antibody response against the 
A/Netherlands/602/2009 strain (antigenically similar to vaccine-strain) 
persisted for at least up to Day 182 (vaccine response rate: 76%; geometric mean 
titer: 114.4) and paralleled the HI immune response at all time points. No 
marked difference was observed in HI antibody persistence and neutralising 
antibody response between the two age strata. The vaccine had a 
clinically-acceptable safety profile. Conclusion Two priming doses of H1N1 2009 
pandemic influenza vaccine induced an immune response persisting for at least 
six months after the first vaccine dose. This could be beneficial in evaluating 
the importance and effect of vaccination with this AS03-adjuvanted pandemic 
influenza vaccine.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.18469
PMCID: PMC3367709
PMID: 22426369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]