1. Front Microbiol. 2012 Mar 15;3:97. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00097. eCollection 
2012.

Role of Human TRIM5α in Intrinsic Immunity.

Nakayama EE(1), Shioda T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viral Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has a very narrow host range. HIV type 1 
(HIV-1) does not infect Old World monkeys, such as the rhesus monkey (Rh). Rh 
TRIM5α was identified as a factor that confers resistance, intrinsic immunity, 
to HIV-1 infection. Unfortunately, human TRIM5α is almost powerless to restrict 
HIV-1. However, human TRIM5α potently restricts N-tropic murine leukemia viruses 
(MLV) but not B-tropic MLV, indicating that human TRIM5α represents the 
restriction factor previously designated as Ref1. African green monkey TRIM5α 
represents another restriction factor previously designated as Lv1, which 
restricts both HIV-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus isolated from macaque 
(SIVmac) infection. TRIM5 is a member of the tripartite motif family containing 
RING, B-box2, and coiled-coil domains. The RING domain is frequently found in E3 
ubiquitin ligase, and TRIM5α is thought to degrade viral core via 
ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent and -independent pathways. The alpha isoform of 
TRIM5 has an additional C-terminal PRYSPRY domain, which is a determinant of 
species-specific retrovirus restriction by TRIM5α. On the other hand, the target 
regions of viral capsid protein (CA) are scattered on the surface of core. A 
single amino acid difference in the surface-exposed loop between α-helices 6 and 
7 (L6/7) of HIV type 2 (HIV-2) CA affects viral sensitivity to human TRIM5α and 
was also shown to be associated with viral load in West African HIV-2 patients, 
indicating that human TRIM5α is a critical modulator of HIV-2 replication in 
vivo. Interestingly, L6/7 of CA corresponds to the MLV determinant of 
sensitivity to mouse factor Fv1, which potently restricts N-tropic MLV. In 
addition, human genetic polymorphisms also affect antiviral activity of human 
TRIM5α. Recently, human TRIM5α was shown to activate signaling pathways that 
lead to activation of NF-κB and AP-1 by interacting with TAK1 complex. TRIM5α is 
thus involved in control of viral infection in multiple ways.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00097
PMCID: PMC3304089
PMID: 22435067