1. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 25;44(5):511-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2231.

Meta-analysis identifies nine new loci associated with rheumatoid arthritis in 
the Japanese population.

Okada Y(1), Terao C, Ikari K, Kochi Y, Ohmura K, Suzuki A, Kawaguchi T, Stahl 
EA, Kurreeman FA, Nishida N, Ohmiya H, Myouzen K, Takahashi M, Sawada T, 
Nishioka Y, Yukioka M, Matsubara T, Wakitani S, Teshima R, Tohma S, Takasugi K, 
Shimada K, Murasawa A, Honjo S, Matsuo K, Tanaka H, Tajima K, Suzuki T, Iwamoto 
T, Kawamura Y, Tanii H, Okazaki Y, Sasaki T, Gregersen PK, Padyukov L, 
Worthington J, Siminovitch KA, Lathrop M, Taniguchi A, Takahashi A, Tokunaga K, 
Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Kamatani N, Mimori T, Plenge RM, Yamanaka H, Momohara S, 
Yamada R, Matsuda F, Yamamoto K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Autoimmune Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, 
Yokohama, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis is a common autoimmune disease characterized by chronic 
inflammation. We report a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS) in a Japanese population including 4,074 individuals with rheumatoid 
arthritis (cases) and 16,891 controls, followed by a replication in 5,277 
rheumatoid arthritis cases and 21,684 controls. Our study identified nine loci 
newly associated with rheumatoid arthritis at a threshold of P < 5.0 × 10(-8), 
including B3GNT2, ANXA3, CSF2, CD83, NFKBIE, ARID5B, PDE2A-ARAP1, PLD4 and 
PTPN2. ANXA3 was also associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus 
erythematosus (P = 0.0040), and B3GNT2 and ARID5B were associated with Graves' 
disease (P = 3.5 × 10(-4) and 2.9 × 10(-4), respectively). We conducted a 
multi-ancestry comparative analysis with a previous meta-analysis in individuals 
of European descent (5,539 rheumatoid arthritis cases and 20,169 controls). This 
provided evidence of shared genetic risks of rheumatoid arthritis between the 
populations.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2231
PMID: 22446963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]