1. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16179-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342758. Epub 
2012 Mar 28.

Thioredoxin-1 regulates cellular heme insertion by controlling S-nitrosation of 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Chakravarti R(1), Stuehr DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

NO generated by inducible NOS (iNOS) causes buildup of S-nitrosated GAPDH 
(SNO-GAPDH) in cells, which then inhibits further iNOS maturation by limiting 
the heme insertion step (Chakravarti, R., Aulak, K. S., Fox, P. L., and Stuehr, 
D. J. (2010) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 18004-18009). We investigated 
what regulates this process utilizing a slow-release NO donor (NOC-18) and 
studying changes in cellular SNO-GAPDH levels during and after NO exposure. 
Culturing macrophage-like cells with NOC-18 during cytokine activation caused 
buildup of heme-free (apo) iNOS and SNO-GAPDH. Upon NOC-18 removal, the cells 
quickly recovered their heme insertion capacity in association with rapid 
SNO-GAPDH denitrosation, implying that these processes are linked. We then 
altered cell expression of thioredoxin-1 (Trx1) or S-nitrosoglutathione 
reductase, both of which can function as a protein denitrosylase. Trx1 knockdown 
increased SNO-GAPDH levels in cells, made heme insertion hypersensitive to NO, 
and increased the recovery time, whereas Trx1 overexpression greatly diminished 
SNO-GAPDH buildup and protected heme insertion from NO inhibition. In contrast, 
knockdown of S-nitrosoglutathione reductase expression had little effect on 
these parameters. Experiments utilizing C152S GAPDH confirmed that the NO 
effects are all linked to S-nitrosation of GAPDH at Cys-152. We conclude (i) 
that NO inhibition of heme insertion and its recovery can be rapid and dynamic 
processes and are inversely linked to the S-nitrosation of GAPDH and (ii) that 
the NO sensitivity of heme insertion can vary depending on the Trx1 expression 
level due to Trx1 acting as an SNO-GAPDH denitrosylase. Together, our results 
identify a new way that cells regulate heme protein maturation during 
inflammation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342758
PMCID: PMC3351338
PMID: 22457359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]