1. Vaccine. 2012 May 14;30(23):3405-12. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.03.039. Epub 
2012 Mar 29.

A bivalent vaccine to protect against Streptococcus pneumoniae and Salmonella 
typhi.

Lu YJ(1), Zhang F, Sayeed S, Thompson CM, Szu S, Anderson PW, Malley R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital Boston, and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, United States.

Pneumococcal and Salmonella typhi infections are two major diseases for children 
in developing countries. For typhoid fever, licensed Vi polysaccharide vaccines 
are ineffective in children <2-year old. While investigational Vi conjugate 
vaccines have been shown effective in clinical trials, they are currently only 
available to restricted areas. Pneumococcal capsular polysaccharide conjugate 
vaccines are highly effective in children, but suffer from some limitations 
including cost and limited serotype coverage. We have previously shown that a 
fusion conjugate vaccine, consisting of pneumococcal fusion protein PsaA and 
pneumolysoid (PdT) conjugated to a polysaccharide, results in enhanced antibody 
and CD4+ Th17 cell responses as well as protection against pneumococcal 
colonization and disease in mice. Here we applied this approach to develop a 
bivalent vaccine against pneumococcus and S. typhi. Two species-conserved 
pneumococcal antigens (SP1572 or SP2070) were fused to the nonhemolytic 
pneumolysoid PdT. SP1572-PdT was then conjugated to Vi polysaccharide and 
SP2070-PdT was conjugated to the pneumococcal cell wall polysaccharide (CWPS; 
also conserved). Mice immunized with this bivalent conjugate were protected 
against pneumococcal colonization and sepsis challenges, and made anti-Vi 
antibody concentrations higher by 40-fold compared to mice that received 
equimolar mixtures of the antigens. An enhanced killing of Vi-bearing 
Salmonellae in vitro was demonstrated from plasma of mice that received the 
fusion conjugate but not the mixture of antigens. Our results support further 
evaluation of this bivalent immunogen for the prevention of pneumococcal 
colonization and disease, and of typhoid fever.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.03.039
PMCID: PMC3334478
PMID: 22465750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]