1. Pharmacogenomics. 2012 Apr;13(5):555-70. doi: 10.2217/pgs.11.160.

Worldwide variation in human drug-metabolism enzyme genes CYP2B6 and UGT2B7: 
implications for HIV/AIDS treatment.

Li J(1), Menard V, Benish RL, Jurevic RJ, Guillemette C, Stoneking M, Zimmerman 
PA, Mehlotra RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

AIM: Hepatic enzymes, CYP2B6 and UGT2B7 play a major role in the metabolism of 
the widely used antiretroviral drugs efavirenz, nevirapine and zidovudine. In 
the present study, we provide a view of UGT2B7 haplotype structure, and quantify 
the genetic diversity and differentiation at both CYP2B6 and UGT2B7 genes on a 
worldwide scale.
MATERIALS & METHODS: We genotyped one intronic and three promoter SNPs, and 
together with three nonsynonymous SNPs, inferred UGT2B7 alleles in north 
American (n = 326), west African (n = 133) and Papua New Guinean (n = 142) 
populations. We also included genotype data for five CYP2B6 and six UGT2B7 SNPs 
from an additional 12 worldwide populations (n = 629) analyzed in the 1000 
Genomes Project.
RESULTS: We observed significant differences in certain SNP and allele 
frequencies of CYP2B6 and UGT2B7 among worldwide populations. Diversity values 
were higher for UGT2B7 than for CYP2B6, although there was more diversity 
between populations for CYP2B6. For both genes, most of the genetic variation 
was observed among individuals within populations, with the Papua New Guinean 
population showing the highest pairwise differentiation values for CYP2B6, and 
the Asian and European populations showing higher pairwise differentiation 
values for UGT2B7.
CONCLUSION: These new genetic distinctions provide additional insights for 
investigating differences in antiretroviral pharmacokinetics and therapy 
outcomes among ethnically and geographically diverse populations.

DOI: 10.2217/pgs.11.160
PMCID: PMC3390746
PMID: 22462748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]