1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Sep;47(3):324-31. doi:
10.1165/rcmb.2012-0003OC.  Epub 2012 Mar 29.

4-Phenylbutyric acid treatment rescues trafficking and processing of a mutant 
surfactant protein-C.

Stewart GA(1), Ridsdale R, Martin EP, Na CL, Xu Y, Mandapaka K, Weaver TE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Ave., MLC7029, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Mutations in the SFTPC gene, encoding surfactant protein-C (SP-C), are 
associated with interstitial lung disease (ILD). Knowledge of the intracellular 
fate of mutant SP-C is essential in the design of therapies to correct 
trafficking/processing of the proprotein, and to prevent the formation of 
cytotoxic aggregates. We assessed the potential of a chemical chaperone to 
correct the trafficking and processing of three disease-associated mutant SP-C 
proteins. HEK293 cells were stably transfected with wild-type (SP-C(WT)) or 
mutant (SP-C(L188Q), SP-C(Δexon4), or SP-C(I73T)) SP-C, and cell lines with a 
similar expression of SP-C mRNA were identified. The effects of the chemical 
chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA) and lysosomotropic drugs on intracellular 
trafficking to the endolysosomal pathway and the subsequent conversion of SP-C 
proprotein to mature peptide were assessed. Despite comparable SP-C mRNA 
expression, proprotein concentrations varied greatly: SP-C(I73T) was more 
abundant than SP-C(WT) and was localized to the cell surface, whereas 
SP-C(Δexon4) was barely detectable. In contrast, SP-C(L188Q) and SP-C(WT) 
proprotein concentrations were comparable, and a small amount of SP-C(L188Q) was 
localized to the endolysosomal pathway. PBA treatment restored the trafficking 
and processing of SP-C(L188Q) to SP-C(WT) concentrations, but did not correct 
the mistrafficking of SP-C(I73T) or rescue SP-C(Δexon4). PBA treatment also 
promoted the aggregation of SP-C proproteins, including SP-C(L188Q). This study 
provides proof of the principle that a chemical chaperone can correct the 
mistrafficking and processing of a disease-associated mutant SP-C proprotein.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0003OC
PMCID: PMC3488688
PMID: 22461427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]