1. Front Genet. 2012 Mar 19;3:33. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00033. eCollection
2012.

Regular Multivitamin Supplement Use, Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in ATIC, 
SHMT2, and SLC46A1, and Risk of Ovarian Carcinoma.

Kelemen LE(1), Wang Q, Dinu I, Vierkant RA, Tsai YY, Cunningham JM, Phelan CM, 
Fridley BL, Amankwah EK, Iversen ES, Berchuck A, Schildkraut JM, Goode EL, 
Sellers TA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Research, Alberta Health Services-Cancer Care 
Calgary, AB, Canada.

ATIC, SHMT2, and SLC46A1 have essential roles in one-carbon (1-C) transfer. The 
authors examined whether associations between ovarian carcinoma and 15 variants 
in these genes are modified by regular multivitamin use, a source of 1-C donors, 
among Caucasian participants from two US case-control studies. Using a phased 
study design, variant-by-multivitamin interactions were tested, and associations 
between variants and ovarian carcinoma were reported stratified by multivitamin 
supplement use. Per-allele risk associations were modified by multivitamin use 
at six variants among 655 cases and 920 controls (Phase 1). In a larger sample 
of 968 cases and 1,265 controls (Phases 1 and 2), interactions were significant 
(P ≤ 0.03) for two variants, particularly among regular multivitamin users: ATIC 
rs7586969 [odds ratio (OR) = 0.7, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.6-0.9] and 
ATIC rs16853834 (OR = 1.5, 95% CI = 1.1-2.0). The two ATIC single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) did not share the same haplotype; however, the haplotypes 
they comprised mirrored their SNP risk associations among regular multivitamin 
supplement users. A multi-variant analysis was also performed by comparing the 
observed likelihood ratio test statistic from adjusted models with and without 
the two ATIC variant-by-multivitamin interaction terms with a null distribution 
of test statistics generated by permuting case status 10,000 times. The 
corresponding observed P value of 0.001 was more extreme than the 
permutation-derived P value of 0.009, suggesting rejection of the null 
hypothesis of no association. In summary, there is little statistical evidence 
that the 15 variants are independently associated with risk of ovarian 
carcinoma. However, the statistical interaction of ATIC variants with regular 
multivitamin intake, when evaluated at both the SNP and gene level, may support 
these findings as relevant to ovarian health and disease processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00033
PMCID: PMC3306919
PMID: 22461784