1. Mol Diagn Ther. 2012 Apr 1;16(2):109-14. doi: 10.1007/BF03256435.

Detection of KCNJ11 gene mutations in a family with neonatal diabetes mellitus: 
implications for therapeutic management of family members with long-standing 
disease.

Abbasi F(1), Saba S, Ebrahim-Habibi A, Sayahpour FA, Amiri P, Larijani B, Amoli 
MM.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations of potassium inwardly-rectifying channel, 
subfamily J, member 11 (KCNJ11), which encodes Kir6.2 (beta-cell adenosine 
triphosphate-sensitive potassium [K(ATP)] channel subunit), have been associated 
with neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) in different studies. Treatment with oral 
sulfonylureas in place of exogenous insulin injections results in improved 
glycemic control in most patients carrying these mutations. Exploration of 
genetic causes of NDM occurring before the age of 6 months has been proposed as 
an important issue in identification of monogenic forms of diabetes, which might 
be critical in their therapeutic management, as a consequence.
METHODS: Mutation screening of the KCNJ11 gene was carried out using PCR 
amplification followed by direct sequencing in three family members: the 
proband, ND1, diagnosed at 40 days of age (current age 7 years); his sibling, 
ND2, diagnosed at 2 years of age (current age 14 years); and their father, ND3, 
diagnosed at 15 years of age (current age 35 years), who had been exclusively 
treated with insulin. The effect of the E227K mutation was also examined in a 
homology model of Kir6.2.
RESULTS: Our results revealed the presence of the heterozygous missense mutation 
c. 679 G/A (E227K) in all three patients, who were all able to successfully 
transfer from insulin injections to an oral sulfonylurea, with improved glycemic 
control.
CONCLUSION: We found that three members of a family with highly variable age of 
onset of insulin-treated diabetes, diagnosed at 40 days, 2 years, and 15 years 
of age, all carried the E227K mutation in KCNJ11 and could switch to an oral 
sulfonylurea. This mutation has been previously reported in patients with 
permanent and transient NDM, as well as later-onset diabetes; this report adds 
to the variability in phenotypic presentation and further supports genetic 
testing in all diabetic members of any family affected by NDM.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03256435
PMID: 22471336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]