1. Biochemistry. 2012 May 1;51(17):3651-61. doi: 10.1021/bi300327z. Epub 2012 Apr
 16.

Structure and dynamics of calmodulin (CaM) bound to nitric oxide synthase 
peptides: effects of a phosphomimetic CaM mutation.

Piazza M(1), Futrega K, Spratt DE, Dieckmann T, Guillemette JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, 
Canada.

Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) plays a major role in a number of key physiological 
and pathological processes. Knowledge of how this is regulated is important. The 
small acidic calcium binding protein, calmodulin (CaM), is required to fully 
activate the enzyme. The exact mechanism of how CaM activates NOS is not fully 
understood. Studies have shown CaM to act like a switch that causes a 
conformational change in NOS to allow for the transfer of an electron between 
the reductase and oxygenase domains through a process that is thought to be 
highly dynamic. To investigate the dynamic properties of CaM-NOS interactions, 
we determined the solution structure of CaM bound to the inducible NOS (iNOS) 
and endothelial NOS (eNOS) CaM binding region peptides. In addition, we 
investigated the effect of CaM phosphorylation. Tyrosine 99 (Y99) of CaM is 
reported to be phosphorylated in vivo. We have produced a phosphomimetic Y99E 
CaM to investigate the structural and functional effects that the 
phosphorylation of this residue may have on nitric oxide production. All three 
mammalian NOS isoforms were included in the investigation. Our results show that 
a phosphomimetic Y99E CaM significantly reduces the maximal synthase activity of 
eNOS by 40% while having little effect on nNOS or iNOS activity. A comparative 
nuclear magnetic resonance study between phosphomimetic Y99E CaM and wild-type 
CaM bound to the eNOS CaM binding region peptide was performed. This 
investigation provides important insights into how the increased 
electronegativity of a phosphorylated CaM protein affects the binding, dynamics, 
and activation of the NOS enzymes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300327z
PMID: 22486744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]