1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034496. Epub 2012 Apr
2.

Computed tomography imaging of primary lung cancer in mice using a 
liposomal-iodinated contrast agent.

Badea CT(1), Athreya KK, Espinosa G, Clark D, Ghafoori AP, Li Y, Kirsch DG, 
Johnson GA, Annapragada A, Ghaghada KB.

Author information:
(1)Center for In Vivo Microscopy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, United States of America. cristian.badea@duke.edu

PURPOSE: To investigate the utility of a liposomal-iodinated nanoparticle 
contrast agent and computed tomography (CT) imaging for characterization of 
primary nodules in genetically engineered mouse models of non-small cell lung 
cancer.
METHODS: Primary lung cancers with mutations in K-ras alone (Kras(LA1)) or in 
combination with p53 (LSL-Kras(G12D);p53(FL/FL)) were generated. A 
liposomal-iodine contrast agent containing 120 mg Iodine/mL was administered 
systemically at a dose of 16 Âµl/gm body weight. Longitudinal micro-CT imaging 
with cardio-respiratory gating was performed pre-contrast and at 0 hr, day 3, 
and day 7 post-contrast administration. CT-derived nodule sizes were used to 
assess tumor growth. Signal attenuation was measured in individual nodules to 
study dynamic enhancement of lung nodules.
RESULTS: A good correlation was seen between volume and diameter-based 
assessment of nodules (R(2)>0.8) for both lung cancer models. The 
LSL-Kras(G12D);p53(FL/FL) model showed rapid growth as demonstrated by 
systemically higher volume changes compared to the lung nodules in Kras(LA1) 
mice (p<0.05). Early phase imaging using the nanoparticle contrast agent enabled 
visualization of nodule blood supply. Delayed-phase imaging demonstrated 
significant differential signal enhancement in the lung nodules of 
LSL-Kras(G12D);p53(FL/FL) mice compared to nodules in Kras(LA1) mice (p<0.05) 
indicating higher uptake and accumulation of the nanoparticle contrast agent in 
rapidly growing nodules.
CONCLUSIONS: The nanoparticle iodinated contrast agent enabled visualization of 
blood supply to the nodules during the early-phase imaging. Delayed-phase 
imaging enabled characterization of slow growing and rapidly growing nodules 
based on signal enhancement. The use of this agent could facilitate early 
detection and diagnosis of pulmonary lesions as well as have implications on 
treatment response and monitoring.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034496
PMCID: PMC3317632
PMID: 22485175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: AA is a co-founder and 
shareholder in Marval. CTB is a consultant for Marval and holds stock options. 
There is nothing to declare regarding employment, consultancy, patents, products 
in development or marketed products. This does not alter the authors' adherence 
to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.