1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2012 Oct;77(4):564-74. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2012.04410.x.

Contribution of human growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor (GHRHR) gene 
sequence variation to isolated severe growth hormone deficiency (ISGHD) and 
normal adult height.

Camats N(1), Fernández-Cancio M, Carrascosa A, Andaluz P, Albisu MÁ, Clemente M, 
Gussinyé M, Yeste D, Audí L.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Paediatrics and Paediatric Endocrinology Research Unit, Vall 
d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona, CIBERER (Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare 
Diseases), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Molecular causes of isolated severe growth hormone deficiency (ISGHD) 
in several genes have been established. The aim of this study was to analyse the 
contribution of growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor (GHRHR) gene sequence 
variation to GH deficiency in a series of prepubertal ISGHD patients and to 
normal adult height.
DESIGN, SUBJECTS AND MEASUREMENTS: A systematic GHRHR gene sequence analysis was 
performed in 69 ISGHD patients and 60 normal adult height controls (NAHC). Four 
GHRHR single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 248 additional 
NAHC. An analysis was performed on individual SNPs and combined genotype 
associations with diagnosis in ISGHD patients and with height-SDS in NAHC.
RESULTS: Twenty-one SNPs were found. P3, P13, P15 and P20 had not been 
previously described. Patients and controls shared 12 SNPs (P1, P2, P4-P11, P16 
and P21). Significantly different frequencies of the heterozygous genotype and 
alternate allele were detected in P9 (exon 4, rs4988498) and P12 (intron 6, 
rs35609199); P9 heterozygous genotype frequencies were similar in patients and 
the shortest control group (heights between -2 and -1 SDS) and significantly 
different in controls (heights between -1 and +2 SDS). GHRHR P9 together with 4 
GH1 SNP genotypes contributed to 6·2% of height-SDS variation in the entire 308 
NAHC.
CONCLUSIONS: This study established the GHRHR gene sequence variation map in 
ISGHD patients and NAHC. No evidence of GHRHR mutation contribution to ISGHD was 
found in this population, although P9 and P12 SNP frequencies were significantly 
different between ISGHD and NAHC. Thus, the gene sequence may contribute to 
normal adult height, as demonstrated in NAHC.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2265.2012.04410.x
PMID: 22489751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]