1. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Aug;64(8):2746-52. doi: 10.1002/art.34490.

Brief report: candidate gene study in systemic sclerosis identifies a rare and 
functional variant of the TNFAIP3 locus as a risk factor for polyautoimmunity.

Koumakis E(1), Giraud M, Dieudé P, Cohignac V, Cuomo G, Airò P, Hachulla E, 
Matucci-Cerinic M, Diot E, Caramaschi P, Mouthon L, Riccieri V, Cracowski JL, 
Tiev KP, Francès C, Amoura Z, Sibilia J, Cosnes A, Carpentier P, Valentini G, 
Manetti M, Guiducci S, Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Chiocchia G, Allanore Y.

Author information:
(1)Paris Descartes University, INSERM U1016, Institut Cochin, and Cochin 
Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic sclerosis (SSc) share 
some pathophysiologic bases as evidenced by individual and familial 
polyautoimmunity and common susceptibility genetic factors. With regard to the 
latter, there has been a recent shift from the "common variant" to the "rare 
variant" paradigm, since rare variants of TNFAIP3 and TREX1 with large effect 
sizes have recently been discovered in SLE. The present study was undertaken to 
investigate whether rare variants of TNFAIP3 and TREX1 are also associated with 
SSc.
METHODS: TREX1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs3135946, rs7626978, 
rs3135943, and rs11797 and TNFAIP3 SNPs rs9494883, rs72063345, rs5029939, 
rs2230926, rs117480515, and rs7749323 were genotyped in a discovery set (985 SSc 
patients and 1,011 controls), and replication analysis of the most relevant 
results was performed in a second set (622 SSc patients and 493 controls).
RESULTS: No association between TREX1 variants and SSc was observed. For 
TNFAIP3, we first demonstrated that a low-frequency variant, rs117480515, tagged 
the recently identified TT>A SLE dinucleotide. In the discovery sample, we 
observed that all tested TNFAIP3 variants were in linkage disequilibrium and 
were associated with SSc and various SSc subsets, including the polyautoimmune 
phenotype. We subsequently genotyped rs117480515 in the replication sample and 
found it to be associated solely with the SSc polyautoimmune subset (odds ratio 
3.51 [95% confidence interval 2.28-5.41], P = 8.58 × 10(-9) ) in the combined 
populations. Genotype-messenger RNA (mRNA) expression correlation analysis 
revealed that the TNFAIP3 rs117480515 risk allele was associated with decreased 
mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: The present findings establish the TNFAIP3 locus as a susceptibility 
factor for the subset of SSc with a polyautoimmune phenotype. Our results 
support the implication of rare/low-frequency functional variants and the 
critical role of A20 in autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.34490
PMID: 22488580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]