1. Brain. 2012 May;135(Pt 5):1387-94. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws070. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement and high lactate 
'LTBL' caused by EARS2 mutations.

Steenweg ME(1), Ghezzi D, Haack T, Abbink TE, Martinelli D, van Berkel CG, Bley 
A, Diogo L, Grillo E, Te Water Naud√© J, Strom TM, Bertini E, Prokisch H, van der 
Knaap MS, Zeviani M.

Author information:
(1)VU University Medical Centre, De Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
ms.vanderknaap@vumc.nl

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):e228. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws197.

In the large group of genetically undetermined infantile-onset mitochondrial 
encephalopathies, multiple defects of mitochondrial DNA-related 
respiratory-chain complexes constitute a frequent biochemical signature. In 
order to identify responsible genes, we used exome-next-generation sequencing in 
a selected cohort of patients with this biochemical signature. In an isolated 
patient, we found two mutant alleles for EARS2, the gene encoding mitochondrial 
glutamyl-tRNA synthetase. The brain magnetic resonance imaging of this patient 
was hallmarked by extensive symmetrical cerebral white matter abnormalities 
sparing the periventricular rim and symmetrical signal abnormalities of the 
thalami, midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata and cerebellar white matter. Proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed increased lactate. We matched this 
magnetic resonance imaging pattern with that of a cohort of 11 previously 
selected unrelated cases. We found mutations in the EARS2 gene in all. 
Subsequent detailed clinical and magnetic resonance imaging based phenotyping 
revealed two distinct groups: mild and severe. All 12 patients shared an 
infantile onset and rapidly progressive disease with severe magnetic resonance 
imaging abnormalities and increased lactate in body fluids and proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy. Patients in the 'mild' group partially recovered and 
regained milestones in the following years with striking magnetic resonance 
imaging improvement and declining lactate levels, whereas those of the 'severe' 
group were characterized by clinical stagnation, brain atrophy on magnetic 
resonance imaging and persistent lactate increases. This new neurological 
disease, early-onset leukoencephalopathy with thalamus and brainstem involvement 
and high lactate, is hallmarked by unique magnetic resonance imaging features, 
defined by a peculiar biphasic clinical course and caused by mutations in a 
single gene, EARS2, expanding the list of medically relevant defects of 
mitochondrial DNA translation.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws070
PMID: 22492562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]