1. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034304. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

Late stage infection in sleeping sickness.

Wolburg H(1), Mogk S, Acker S, Frey C, Meinert M, Schönfeld C, Lazarus M, Urade 
Y, Kubata BK, Duszenko M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.

At the turn of the 19(th) century, trypanosomes were identified as the causative 
agent of sleeping sickness and their presence within the cerebrospinal fluid of 
late stage sleeping sickness patients was described. However, no definitive 
proof of how the parasites reach the brain has been presented so far. Analyzing 
electron micrographs prepared from rodent brains more than 20 days after 
infection, we present here conclusive evidence that the parasites first enter 
the brain via the choroid plexus from where they penetrate the epithelial cell 
layer to reach the ventricular system. Adversely, no trypanosomes were observed 
within the parenchyma outside blood vessels. We also show that brain infection 
depends on the formation of long slender trypanosomes and that the cerebrospinal 
fluid as well as the stroma of the choroid plexus is a hostile environment for 
the survival of trypanosomes, which enter the pial space including the 
Virchow-Robin space via the subarachnoid space to escape degradation. Our data 
suggest that trypanosomes do not intend to colonize the brain but reside near or 
within the glia limitans, from where they can re-populate blood vessels and 
disrupt the sleep wake cycles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034304
PMCID: PMC3320268
PMID: 22496723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.