1. J Lipid Res. 2012 Jul;53(7):1376-83. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P026005. Epub 2012 Apr
13.

Testosterone replacement in hypogonadal men alters the HDL proteome but not HDL 
cholesterol efflux capacity.

Rubinow KB(1), Vaisar T, Tang C, Matsumoto AM, Heinecke JW, Page ST.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research in Reproduction and Contraception, Department of 
Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. 
rubinow@uw.edu

The effects of androgens on cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk in men remain 
unclear. To better characterize the relationship between androgens and HDL, we 
investigated the effects of testosterone replacement on HDL protein composition 
and serum HDL-mediated cholesterol efflux in hypogonadal men. Twenty-three older 
hypogonadal men (ages 51-83, baseline testosterone < 280 ng/dl) were 
administered replacement testosterone therapy (1% transdermal gel) with or 
without the 5α-reductase inhibitor dutasteride. At baseline and after three 
months of treatment, we determined fasting lipid concentrations, HDL protein 
composition, and the cholesterol efflux capacity of serum HDL. Testosterone 
replacement did not affect HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) concentrations but conferred 
significant increases in HDL-associated paraoxonase 1 (PON1) and fibrinogen α 
chain (FGA) (P = 0.022 and P = 0.023, respectively) and a decrease in 
apolipoprotein A-IV (apoA-IV) (P = 0.016). Exogenous testosterone did not affect 
the cholesterol efflux capacity of serum HDL. No differences were observed 
between men who received testosterone alone and those who also received 
dutasteride. Testosterone replacement in older hypogonadal men alters the 
protein composition of HDL but does not significantly change serum HDL-mediated 
cholesterol efflux. These effects appear independent of testosterone conversion 
to dihydrotestosterone. Further research is needed to determine how changes in 
HDL protein content affect CVD risk in men.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.P026005
PMCID: PMC3371249
PMID: 22504910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]