1. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jul;47(1):135-43. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.03.031. Epub
2012  Apr 3.

Mutations affecting synaptic levels of neurexin-1β in autism and mental 
retardation.

Camacho-Garcia RJ(1), Planelles MI, Margalef M, Pecero ML, Martínez-Leal R, 
Aguilera F, Vilella E, Martinez-Mir A, Scholl FG.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Avda. Manuel Siurot s/n, Sevilla 41013, 
Spain.

The identification of mutations in genes encoding proteins of the synaptic 
neurexin-neuroligin pathway in different neurodevelopmental disorders, including 
autism and mental retardation, has suggested the presence of a shared underlying 
mechanism. A few mutations have been described so far and for most of them the 
biological consequences are unknown. To further explore the role of the NRXN1β 
gene in neurodevelopmental disorders, we have sequenced the coding exons of the 
gene in 86 cases with autism and mental retardation and 200 controls and 
performed expression analysis of DNA variants identified in patients. We report 
the identification of four novel independent mutations that affect nearby 
positions in two regions of the gene/protein: i) sequences important for protein 
translation initiation, c.-3G>T within the Kozak sequence, and c.3G>T (p.Met1), 
at the initiation codon; and ii) the juxtamembrane region of the extracellular 
domain, p.Arg375Gln and p.Gly378Ser. These mutations cosegregate with different 
psychiatric disorders other than autism and mental retardation, such as 
psychosis and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. We provide experimental 
evidence for the use of an alternative translation initiation codon for c.-3G>T 
and p.Met1 mutations and reduced synaptic levels of neurexin-1β protein 
resulting from p.Met1 and p.Arg375Gln. The data reported here support a role for 
synaptic defects of neurexin-1β in neurodevelopmental disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.03.031
PMID: 22504536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]