1. Mol Vis. 2012;18:816-29. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Genetic associations in polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis.

Chen H(1), Liu K, Chen LJ, Hou P, Chen W, Pang CP.

Author information:
(1)Joint Shantou International Eye Center, Shantou University & the Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Shantou, China. drchenhaoyu@gmail.com

PURPOSE: To investigate the genetic associations of polypoidal choroidal 
vasculopathy (PCV), the genetic difference between PCV and age-related macular 
degeneration (AMD), and the genotype-phenotype correlation of PCV.
METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis were performed. Published 
articles about genetic associations of PCV identified from a literature search 
were reviewed. The following data from individual studies were extracted and 
analyzed: 1) comparison of genetic polymorphisms between PCV and controls; 2) 
comparison of genetic polymorphisms between PCV and AMD; and 3) comparison of 
phenotypes between different genotype groups.
RESULTS: A total of 33 articles fulfilled the inclusion criteria. With 
meta-analyses, variants in four genes were found to be significantly associated 
with PCV: LOC387715 rs10490924 (n=9, allelic odds ratio [OR]=2.27, p<0.00001), 
HTRA1 rs11200638 (n=4, OR=2.72, p<0.00001), CFH rs1061170 (n=4, OR=1.72, 
p<0.00001), CFH rs800292 (n=5, OR=2.10, p<0.00001), and C2 rs547154 (n=3, 
OR=0.56, p=0.01). LOC387715 rs10490924 was the only variant showing a 
significant difference between PCV and wet AMD (n=5, OR=0.66, p<0.00001). The 
risk genotypes of rs10490924 were associated with larger lesion size, greater 
chance of vitreous hemorrhage, and worse therapeutic response in PCV.
CONCLUSIONS: LOC387715 rs10490924 was associated with PCV and its clinical 
manifestations, and showed a discrepant distribution between PCV and AMD. 
Variants in HTRA1, CFH, and C2 were also associated with PCV.

PMCID: PMC3324368
PMID: 22509112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]