1. Biochem J. 2012 Jun 15;444(3):529-35. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120499.

Definition of the binding mode of a new class of phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
α-selective inhibitors using in vitro mutagenesis of non-conserved amino acids 
and kinetic analysis.

Zheng Z(1), Amran SI, Zhu J, Schmidt-Kittler O, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, 
Shepherd PR, Thompson PE, Jennings IG.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Parkville, 
Victoria 3052, Australia.

The binding mechanism of a new class of lipid-competitive, ATP non-competitive, 
p110α isoform-selective PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) inhibitors has been 
elucidated. Using the novel technique of isoform reciprocal mutagenesis of 
non-conserved amino acids in the p110α and p110β isoforms, we have identified 
three unique binding mechanisms for the p110α-selective inhibitors PIK-75, A-66S 
and J-32. Each of the inhibitor's p110α-isoform-selective binding was found to 
be due to interactions with different amino acids within p110. The PIK-75 
interaction bound the non-conserved region 2 amino acid p110α Ser(773), A-66S 
bound the region 1 non-conserved amino acid p110α Gln(859), and J-32 binding had 
an indirect interaction with Lys(776) and Ile(771). The isoform reciprocal 
mutagenesis technique is shown to be an important analytical tool for the 
rational design of isoform-selective inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20120499
PMCID: PMC3474370
PMID: 22502592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Under agreements between the Johns Hopkins 
University, Exact Sciences, Inostics and Qiagen, K.W.K. and B.V. are entitled to 
a share of the royalties received by the University on sales of products related 
to PIK3CA mutations. K.W.K. and B.V. are members of the Scientific Advisory 
Board of Inostics and own stock in Inostics. The terms of these arrangements are 
being managed by the University in accordance with their conflict of interest 
policies.