1. J Clin Neurosci. 2012 May;19(5):745-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2011.08.036.

The association between two single nucleotide polymorphisms within the 
insulin-degrading enzyme gene and Alzheimer's disease in a Chinese Han 
population.

Cui PJ(1), Cao L, Wang Y, Deng YL, Xu W, Wang G, Zhang Y, Zheng L, Fei QZ, Zhang 
T, Chen SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital 
affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 2nd Rui Jin 
Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

Several previous studies on the relationship between the insulin-degrading 
enzyme (IDE) gene and Alzheimer's disease (AD) have connected certain genetic 
variants to late-onset AD, in the absence of the apolipoprotein E (APOE)ε4 
allele. However, the conclusions of these studies remain controversial. We 
investigated the association between two polymorphisms of IDE with AD in the 
Chinese population and found that the T/A genotype of rs4646958 had an important 
role in AD (adjusted p=0.007, odds ratio [OR]=2.796, 95% confidence interval 
[CI]=1.330-5.878), under the co-dominant genetic model. The T/C genotype of 
rs1887922 was also significantly associated with AD compared to the T/T genotype 
(adjusted p=0.003, OR=2.644, 95% CI=1.407-4.970). The C allele of rs1887922 
conferred a higher risk of AD under the dominant genetics model (adjusted 
p=0.001, OR=2.719, 95% CI=1.472-5.022). Compared with the two other variant 
genotypes, the T/T genotype showed a protective effect in both polymorphisms 
(adjusted p=0.007, OR=0. 358, 95% CI=0.170-0.752 for rs4646958; adjusted 
p=0.001, OR=0. 368, 95% CI=0.199-0.679 in rs1887922). In the context of 
APOEε4-negative status, both variants were significantly associated with AD in 
some genetic models.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2011.08.036
PMID: 22502914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]