1. Transpl Int. 2012 Jun;25(6):680-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-2277.2012.01475.x. Epub
 2012 Apr 16.

Comparative pharmacokinetic study of two mycophenolate mofetil formulations in 
stable kidney transplant recipients.

Sunder-Plassmann G(1), Reinke P, Rath T, Wiecek A, Nowicki M, Moore R, Lutz J, 
Gaggl M, Ferkl M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Department of Medicine III, Medical 
University Vienna, Austria. gere.sunder-plassmann@meduniwien.ac.at

We compared steady-state pharmacokinetics of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) - 
Myfenax(®) (Teva) and CellCept(®) (Roche) - in stable kidney transplant 
recipients (KTRs). This was an international, multi-centre, randomized, 
open-label, two-treatment, two-sequence crossover study with a 3-month 
follow-up. We included KTRs at least 12 months post-transplantation with stable 
renal graft function for at least 3 months. The maintenance treatment consisted 
of MMF in combination with tacrolimus with or without steroids. At the end of 
the two treatment periods, 6-h or 12-h PK studies of mycophenolic acid (MPA) 
were performed. A total of 43 patients (mean age: 50.7 ± 13.5 years; 19 females, 
24 males) were randomized. Estimates of test to reference ratios (90% CIs) were 
0.959 (0.899; 1.023) h*μg/ml for AUC((0-tau)) and 0.873 (0.787; 0.968) μg/ml for 
C(max). Estimates for AUC((0-6h)) were 0.923 (0.865; 0.984) h*μg/ml and 0.985 
(0.877; 1.106) μg/ml for C(min). Thus, AUC((0-tau)), AUC((0-6h)), and C(min) of 
MPA were within the predefined margins. C(max) was somewhat outside of these 
margins in this set of patients. The numbers and types of adverse events were 
not different between the two treatments. The steady-state pharmacokinetics of 
MPA as well as adverse events are comparable for Myfenax(®) and CellCept(®) in 
tacrolimus-treated stable KTRs.

© 2012 The Authors. Transplant International © 2012 European Society for Organ 
Transplantation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-2277.2012.01475.x
PMCID: PMC3528070
PMID: 22500920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]