1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035353. Epub 2012 Apr
13.

Multistep ion channel remodeling and lethal arrhythmia precede heart failure in 
a mouse model of inherited dilated cardiomyopathy.

Suzuki T(1), Shioya T, Murayama T, Sugihara M, Odagiri F, Nakazato Y, Nishizawa 
H, Chugun A, Sakurai T, Daida H, Morimoto S, Kurebayashi N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Patients with inherited dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) frequently die 
with severe heart failure (HF) or die suddenly with arrhythmias, although these 
symptoms are not always observed at birth. It remains unclear how and when HF 
and arrhythmogenic changes develop in these DCM mutation carriers. In order to 
address this issue, properties of the myocardium and underlying gene expressions 
were studied using a knock-in mouse model of human inherited DCM caused by a 
deletion mutation Î”K210 in cardiac troponinT.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By 1 month, DCM mice had already enlarged 
hearts, but showed no symptoms of HF and a much lower mortality than at 2 months 
or later. At around 2 months, some would die suddenly with no clear symptoms of 
HF, whereas at 3 months, many of the survivors showed evident symptoms of HF. In 
isolated left ventricular myocardium (LV) from 2 month-mice, spontaneous 
activity frequently occurred and action potential duration (APD) was prolonged. 
Transient outward (I(to)) and ultrarapid delayed rectifier K(+) (I(Kur)) 
currents were significantly reduced in DCM myocytes. Correspondingly, 
down-regulation of Kv4.2, Kv1.5 and KChIP2 was evident in mRNA and protein 
levels. In LVs at 3-months, more frequent spontaneous activity, greater 
prolongation of APD and further down-regulation in above K(+) channels were 
observed. At 1 month, in contrast, infrequent spontaneous activity and 
down-regulation of Kv4.2, but not Kv1.5 or KChIP2, were observed.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggest that at least three steps of 
electrical remodeling occur in the hearts of DCM model mice, and that the 
combined down-regulation of Kv4.2, Kv1.5 and KChIP2 prior to the onset of HF may 
play an important role in the premature sudden death in this DCM model. DCM mice 
at 1 month or before, on the contrary, are associated with low risk of death in 
spite of inborn disorder and enlarged heart.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035353
PMCID: PMC3325934
PMID: 22514734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.