1. Mov Disord. 2012 Jul;27(8):1004-11. doi: 10.1002/mds.25005. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 and alternative splicing in Parkinson's disease.

Elliott DA(1), Kim WS, Gorissen S, Halliday GM, Kwok JB.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Barker St., Randwick, Sydney, NSW 2031, 
Australia.

Mutations of the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common 
genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD) and are associated with pleiomorphic 
neuropathology. We hypothesize that LRRK2 mediates its pathogenic effect through 
alternative splicing of neurodegeneration genes. Methods used in this study 
included western blotting analysis of subcellular protein fractions, exon-array 
analysis of RNA from cultured neuroblastoma cells transfected with LRRK2 
expression vectors, and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
of RNA from cultured cells and postmortem tissue. Overexpression of the LRRK2 
G2019S mutant resulted in a significant (2.6-fold; P = 0.020) decrease in 
nuclear transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 levels. Exon-array analyses 
revealed that wild-type LRRK2 had a significant effect on the expression of 
genes with nuclear (P < 10(-22) ) and cell-cycle functions (P < 10(-15) ). We 
replicated changes in gene expression in 30% of selected genes by quantitative 
RT-PCR. Overexpression of LRRK2 resulted in the altered splicing of two genes 
associated with PD, with an increased inclusion of exon 10 of 
microtubule-associated protein tau (1.7-fold; P = 0.001) and exon 5 of the 
alpha-synuclein (SNCA) gene (1.6-fold; P =0.005). Moreover, overexpression of 
LRRK2 (G2019S) and two mutant genes associated with neurodegeneration, TARDBP 
(M337V) and FUS (R521H), were associated with decreased inclusion out of the 
dystonin (DST) 1e precursor exons in SK-N-MC cells. Altered splicing of SNCA 
(1.9-fold; P < 0.001) and DST genes (log(2) 2.3-fold; P = 0.005) was observed in 
a cohort of PD, compared with neurologically healthy, brains. This suggests that 
aberrant RNA metabolism is an important contributor to idiopathic PD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25005
PMID: 22528366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]