1. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jul;33(7):1384-90. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs151. Epub 2012 
Apr 20.

Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study data highlights pancreatic 
development genes as susceptibility factors for pancreatic cancer.

Li D(1), Duell EJ, Yu K, Risch HA, Olson SH, Kooperberg C, Wolpin BM, Jiao L, 
Dong X, Wheeler B, Arslan AA, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Fuchs CS, Gallinger S, Gross 
M, Hartge P, Hoover RN, Holly EA, Jacobs EJ, Klein AP, LaCroix A, Mandelson MT, 
Petersen G, Zheng W, Agalliu I, Albanes D, Boutron-Ruault MC, Bracci PM, Buring 
JE, Canzian F, Chang K, Chanock SJ, Cotterchio M, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci EL, 
Goggins M, Hallmans G, Hankinson SE, Hoffman Bolton JA, Hunter DJ, Hutchinson A, 
Jacobs KB, Jenab M, Khaw KT, Kraft P, Krogh V, Kurtz RC, McWilliams RR, 
Mendelsohn JB, Patel AV, Rabe KG, Riboli E, Shu XO, Tjønneland A, Tobias GS, 
Trichopoulos D, Virtamo J, Visvanathan K, Watters J, Yu H, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte 
A, Amundadottir L, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. 
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Four loci have been associated with pancreatic cancer through genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS). Pathway-based analysis of GWAS data is a 
complementary approach to identify groups of genes or biological pathways 
enriched with disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) whose 
individual effect sizes may be too small to be detected by standard single-locus 
methods. We used the adaptive rank truncated product method in a pathway-based 
analysis of GWAS data from 3851 pancreatic cancer cases and 3934 control 
participants pooled from 12 cohort studies and 8 case-control studies (PanScan). 
We compiled 23 biological pathways hypothesized to be relevant to pancreatic 
cancer and observed a nominal association between pancreatic cancer and five 
pathways (P < 0.05), i.e. pancreatic development, Helicobacter pylori 
lacto/neolacto, hedgehog, Th1/Th2 immune response and apoptosis (P = 2.0 × 
10(-6), 1.6 × 10(-5), 0.0019, 0.019 and 0.023, respectively). After excluding 
previously identified genes from the original GWAS in three pathways (NR5A2, ABO 
and SHH), the pancreatic development pathway remained significant (P = 8.3 × 
10(-5)), whereas the others did not. The most significant genes (P < 0.01) in 
the five pathways were NR5A2, HNF1A, HNF4G and PDX1 for pancreatic development; 
ABO for H.pylori lacto/neolacto; SHH for hedgehog; TGFBR2 and CCL18 for Th1/Th2 
immune response and MAPK8 and BCL2L11 for apoptosis. Our results provide a link 
between inherited variation in genes important for pancreatic development and 
cancer and show that pathway-based approaches to analysis of GWAS data can yield 
important insights into the collective role of genetic risk variants in cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgs151
PMCID: PMC3405651
PMID: 22523087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]