1. Plant Mol Biol. 2012 Jun;79(3):243-58. doi: 10.1007/s11103-012-9909-y. Epub
2012  Apr 17.

Deep EST profiling of developing fenugreek endosperm to investigate 
galactomannan biosynthesis and its regulation.

Wang Y(1), Alonso AP, Wilkerson CG, Keegstra K.

Author information:
(1)DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Galactomannans are hemicellulosic polysaccharides composed of a (1 → 4)-linked 
β-D-mannan backbone substituted with single-unit (1 → 6)-α-linked D-galactosyl 
residues. Developing fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) seeds are known to 
accumulate large quantities of galactomannans in the endosperm, and were thus 
used here as a model system to better understand galactomannan biosynthesis and 
its regulation. We first verified the specific deposition of galactomannans in 
developing endosperms and determined that active accumulation occurred from 25 
to 38 days post anthesis (DPA) under our growth conditions. We then examined the 
expression levels during seed development of ManS and GMGT, two genes encoding 
backbone and side chain synthetic enzymes. Based on transcript accumulation 
dynamics for ManS and GMGT, cDNA libraries were constructed using RNA isolated 
from endosperms at four ages corresponding to before, at the beginning of, and 
during active galactomannan deposition. DNA from these libraries was sequenced 
using the 454 sequencing technology to yield a total of 1.5 million expressed 
sequence tags (ESTs). Through analysis of the EST profiling data, we identified 
genes known to be involved in galactomannan biosynthesis, as well as new genes 
that may be involved in this process, and proposed a model for the flow of 
carbon from sucrose to galactomannans. Measurement of in vitro ManS and GMGT 
activities and analysis of sugar phosphate and nucleotide sugar levels in the 
endosperms of developing fenugreek seeds provided data consistent with this 
model. In vitro enzymatic assays also revealed that the ManS enzyme from 
fenugreek endosperm preferentially used GDP-mannose as the substrate for the 
backbone synthesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-012-9909-y
PMCID: PMC3349874
PMID: 22527750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]