1. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Jun;23(12):2264-74. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-12-1013. Epub
2012  Apr 25.

Plk1 regulates the kinesin-13 protein Kif2b to promote faithful chromosome 
segregation.

Hood EA(1), Kettenbach AN, Gerber SA, Compton DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, 
NH 03755, USA.

Solid tumors are frequently aneuploid, and many display high rates of ongoing 
chromosome missegregation in a phenomenon called chromosomal instability (CIN). 
The most common cause of CIN is the persistence of aberrant 
kinetochore-microtubule (k-MT) attachments, which manifest as lagging 
chromosomes in anaphase. k-MT attachment errors form during prometaphase due to 
stochastic interactions between kinetochores and microtubules. The kinesin-13 
protein Kif2b promotes the correction of k-MT attachment errors in prometaphase, 
but the mechanism restricting this activity to prometaphase remains unknown. 
Using mass spectrometry, we identified multiple phosphorylation sites on Kif2b, 
some of which are acutely sensitive to inhibition of Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1). 
We show that Plk1 directly phosphorylates Kif2b at threonine 125 (T125) and 
serine 204 (S204), and that these two sites differentially regulate Kif2b 
function. Phosphorylation of S204 is required for the kinetochore localization 
and activity of Kif2b in prometaphase, and phosphorylation of T125 is required 
for Kif2b activity in the correction of k-MT attachment errors. These data 
demonstrate that Plk1 regulates both the localization and activity of Kif2b 
during mitosis to promote the correction of k-MT attachment errors to ensure 
mitotic fidelity.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E11-12-1013
PMCID: PMC3374746
PMID: 22535524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]