1. J Pharm Sci. 2012 Sep;101(9):3275-91. doi: 10.1002/jps.23164. Epub 2012 Apr
26.

Methotrexate (MTX)-cIBR conjugate for targeting MTX to leukocytes: conjugate 
stability and in vivo efficacy in suppressing rheumatoid arthritis.

Majumdar S(1), Anderson ME, Xu CR, Yakovleva TV, Gu LC, Malefyt TR, Siahaan TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, The University of Kansas, Simons 
Research Laboratories, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, USA.

Methotrexate (MTX) has been used to treat rheumatoid arthritis at low doses and 
leukemia at high doses; however, this drug can produce severe side effects. Our 
hypothesis is that MTX side effects can be attenuated by directing the drug to 
the target cells (i.e., leukocytes) using (cyclo(1,12)PenPRGGSVLVTGC) peptide 
(cIBR). To test this hypothesis, MTX was conjugated to the N-terminus of cIBR 
peptide to give MTX-cIBR conjugate. MTX-cIBR (5.0 mg/kg) suppressed joint 
arthritis in adjuvant arthritis rats and prevented periarticular inflammation 
and bone resorption of the limb joints. In vitro, the toxicity of MTX-cIBR 
peptide against Molt-3 T cells was inhibited by anti-lymphocyte 
function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) antibody and cIBR peptide in a 
concentration-dependent manner, suggesting that the uptake of MTX-cIBR was 
partially mediated by LFA-1. Chemical stability studies indicated that MTX-cIBR 
was most stable at pH 6.0. The MTX portion of MTX-cIBR was unstable under acidic 
conditions, whereas the cIBR portion was unstable under basic conditions. In 
biological media, MTX-cIBR had short half lives in rat plasma (44 min) and 
homogenized rat heart tissue (38 min). This low plasma stability may contribute 
to the low in vivo efficacy of MTX-cIBR; therefore, there is a need to design a 
more stable conjugate to improve the in vivo efficacy.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.23164
PMCID: PMC4474090
PMID: 22539217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]