1. Nature. 2012 May 10;485(7397):207-12. doi: 10.1038/nature11010.

Molecular mechanism of ATP binding and ion channel activation in P2X receptors.

Hattori M(1), Gouaux E.

Author information:
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson 
Park Road, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

P2X receptors are trimeric ATP-activated ion channels permeable to Na+, K+ and 
Ca2+. The seven P2X receptor subtypes are implicated in physiological processes 
that include modulation of synaptic transmission, contraction of smooth muscle, 
secretion of chemical transmitters and regulation of immune responses. Despite 
the importance of P2X receptors in cellular physiology, the three-dimensional 
composition of the ATP-binding site, the structural mechanism of ATP-dependent 
ion channel gating and the architecture of the open ion channel pore are 
unknown. Here we report the crystal structure of the zebrafish P2X4 receptor in 
complex with ATP and a new structure of the apo receptor. The agonist-bound 
structure reveals a previously unseen ATP-binding motif and an open ion channel 
pore. ATP binding induces cleft closure of the nucleotide-binding pocket, 
flexing of the lower body Î²-sheet and a radial expansion of the extracellular 
vestibule. The structural widening of the extracellular vestibule is directly 
coupled to the opening of the ion channel pore by way of an iris-like expansion 
of the transmembrane helices. The structural delineation of the ATP-binding site 
and the ion channel pore, together with the conformational changes associated 
with ion channel gating, will stimulate development of new pharmacological 
agents.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11010
PMCID: PMC3391165
PMID: 22535247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests