1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jul;97(7):E1284-93. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1184. 
Epub 2012 Apr 26.

SNP array profiling of childhood adrenocortical tumors reveals distinct pathways 
of tumorigenesis and highlights candidate driver genes.

Letouzé E(1), Rosati R, Komechen H, Doghman M, Marisa L, Flück C, de Krijger RR, 
van Noesel MM, Mas JC, Pianovski MA, Zambetti GP, Figueiredo BC, Lalli E.

Author information:
(1)Program Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs, Ligue Nationale Contre Le Cancer, 14 
rue Corvisart, 75013 Paris, France. LetouzeE@ligue-cancer.net

CONTEXT: Childhood adrenocortical tumors (ACT) are rare malignancies, except in 
southern Brazil, where a higher incidence rate is associated to a high frequency 
of the founder R337H TP53 mutation. To date, copy number alterations in these 
tumors have only been analyzed by low-resolution comparative genomic 
hybridization.
OBJECTIVE: We analyzed an international series of 25 childhood ACT using 
high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism arrays to: 1) detect focal copy 
number alterations highlighting candidate driver genes; and 2) compare genetic 
alterations between Brazilian patients carrying the R337H TP53 mutation and 
non-Brazilian patients.
RESULTS: We identified 16 significantly recurrent chromosomal alterations 
(q-value < 0.05), the most frequent being -4q34, +9q33-q34, +19p, loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 17 and 11p15. Focal amplifications and 
homozygous deletions comprising well-known oncogenes (MYC, MDM2, PDGFRA, KIT, 
MCL1, BCL2L1) and tumor suppressors (TP53, RB1, RPH3AL) were identified. In 
addition, eight focal deletions were detected at 4q34, defining a sharp peak 
region around the noncoding RNA LINC00290 gene. Although non-Brazilian tumors 
with a mutated TP53 were similar to Brazilian tumors, those with a wild-type 
TP53 displayed distinct genomic profiles, with significantly fewer 
rearrangements (P = 0.019). In particular, three alterations (LOH of chromosome 
17, +9q33-q34, and -4q34) were significantly more frequent in TP53-mutated 
samples. Finally, two of four TP53 wild-type tumors displayed as sole 
rearrangement a copy-neutral LOH of the imprinted region at 11p15, supporting a 
major role for this region in ACT development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight potential driver genes and cellular pathways 
implicated in childhood ACT and demonstrate the existence of different oncogenic 
routes in this pathology.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2012-1184
PMID: 22539591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]