1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35631. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035631. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

Evidence that prefibrotic myelofibrosis is aligned along a clinical and 
biological continuum featuring primary myelofibrosis.

Barosi G(1), Rosti V, Bonetti E, Campanelli R, Carolei A, Catarsi P, Isgr√≤ AM, 
Lupo L, Massa M, Poletto V, Viarengo G, Villani L, Magrini U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Epidemiology and Centre for the Study of 
Myelofibrosis, IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy. 
barosig@smatteo.pv.it

PURPOSE: In the WHO diagnostic classification, prefibrotic myelofibrosis 
(pre-MF) is included in the category of primary myelofibrosis (PMF). However, 
strong evidence for this position is lacking.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated whether pre-MF may be aligned along a 
clinical and biological continuum in 683 consecutive patients who received a WHO 
diagnosis of PMF.
RESULTS: As compared with PMF-fibrotic type, pre-MF (132 cases) showed female 
dominance, younger age, higher hemoglobin, higher platelet count, lower white 
blood cell count, smaller spleen index and higher incidence of splanchnic vein 
thrombosis. Female to male ratio and hemoglobin steadily decreased, while age 
increased from pre-MF to PMF- fibrotic type with early and to advanced bone 
marrow (BM) fibrosis. Likely, circulating CD34+ cells, LDH levels, and frequency 
of chromosomal abnormalities increased, while CXCR4 expression on CD34+ cells 
and serum cholesterol decreased along the continuum of BM fibrosis. Median 
survival of the entire cohort of PMF cases was 21 years. Ninety-eight, 
eighty-one and fifty-six percent of patients with pre-MF, PMF-fibrotic type with 
early and with advanced BM fibrosis, respectively, were alive at 10 years from 
diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Pre-MF is a presentation mode of PMF with a very indolent phenotype. 
The major consequences of this contention is a new clinical vision of PMF, and 
the need to improve prognosis prediction of the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035631
PMCID: PMC3334973
PMID: 22536419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.