1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035390. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

A single nucleotide polymorphism of the neuropeptide B/W receptor-1 gene 
influences the evaluation of facial expressions.

Watanabe N(1), Wada M, Irukayama-Tomobe Y, Ogata Y, Tsujino N, Suzuki M, 
Furutani N, Sakurai T, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Neuropeptide B/W receptor-1 (NPBWR1) is expressed in discrete brain regions in 
rodents and humans, with particularly strong expression in the limbic system, 
including the central nucleus of the amygdala. Recently, Nagata-Kuroiwa et al. 
reported that Npbwr1(-/-) mice showed changes in social behavior, suggesting 
that NPBWR1 plays important roles in the emotional responses of social 
interactions.The human NPBWR1 gene has a single nucleotide polymorphism at 
nucleotide 404 (404A>T; SNP rs33977775). This polymorphism results in an amino 
acid change, Y135F. The results of an in vitro experiment demonstrated that this 
change alters receptor function. We investigated the effect of this variation on 
emotional responses to stimuli of showing human faces with four categories of 
emotional expressions (anger, fear, happiness, and neutral). Subjects' emotional 
levels on seeing these faces were rated on scales of hedonic valence, emotional 
arousal, and dominance (V-A-D). A significant genotype difference was observed 
in valence evaluation; the 404AT group perceived facial expressions more 
pleasantly than did the 404AA group, regardless of the category of facial 
expression. Statistical analysis of each combination of [V-A-D and facial 
expression] also showed that the 404AT group tended to feel less submissive to 
an angry face than did the 404AA group. Thus, a single nucleotide polymorphism 
of NPBWR1 seems to affect human behavior in a social context.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035390
PMCID: PMC3335863
PMID: 22545105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.