1. J Cell Biol. 2012 Apr 30;197(3):439-55. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201201124.

Nonpolarized signaling reveals two distinct modes of 3D cell migration.

Petrie RJ(1), Gavara N, Chadwick RS, Yamada KM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Dental 
and Craniofacial Research, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
petrier@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May 23;13(6):338. doi: 10.1038/nrm3365.

We search in this paper for context-specific modes of three-dimensional (3D) 
cell migration using imaging for phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate 
(PIP3) and active Rac1 and Cdc42 in primary fibroblasts migrating within 
different 3D environments. In 3D collagen, PIP3 and active Rac1 and Cdc42 were 
targeted to the leading edge, consistent with lamellipodia-based migration. In 
contrast, elongated cells migrating inside dermal explants and the cell-derived 
matrix (CDM) formed blunt, cylindrical protrusions, termed lobopodia, and Rac1, 
Cdc42, and PIP3 signaling was nonpolarized. Reducing RhoA, Rho-associated 
protein kinase (ROCK), or myosin II activity switched the cells to 
lamellipodia-based 3D migration. These modes of 3D migration were regulated by 
matrix physical properties. Specifically, experimentally modifying the 
elasticity of the CDM or collagen gels established that nonlinear elasticity 
supported lamellipodia-based migration, whereas linear elasticity switched cells 
to lobopodia-based migration. Thus, the relative polarization of intracellular 
signaling identifies two distinct modes of 3D cell migration governed 
intrinsically by RhoA, ROCK, and myosin II and extrinsically by the elastic 
behavior of the 3D extracellular matrix.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201201124
PMCID: PMC3341168
PMID: 22547408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]