1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5348-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103319. Epub
2012  Apr 27.

IRF5 risk polymorphisms contribute to interindividual variance in pattern 
recognition receptor-mediated cytokine secretion in human monocyte-derived 
cells.

Hedl M(1), Abraham C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Monocyte-derived cells display highly variable cytokine secretion upon pattern 
recognition receptor (PRR) stimulation across individuals; such variability 
likely affects interindividual inflammatory/autoimmune disease susceptibility. 
To define mechanisms for this heterogeneity, we examined PRR-induced 
monocyte-derived cell cytokine secretion from a large cohort of healthy 
individuals. Although cytokine secretion ranged widely among individuals, the 
magnitude of cytokine induction after individual nucleotide-binding 
oligomerization domain 2 (Nod2) and TLR2 stimulation (a cohort of 86 
individuals) or stimulation of multiple TLRs (a cohort of 77 individuals), 
either alone or in combination with Nod2, was consistent intraindividually 
across these stimuli. Nod2 and TLRs signal through IFN regulatory factor 5 
(IRF5), and common IRF5 polymorphisms confer risk for autoimmunity. We find that 
cells from rs2004640 IRF5 risk-associated allele carriers secrete increased 
cytokines upon individual or synergistic PRR stimulation in a gene dose- and 
ligand dose-dependent manner in both monocyte-derived dendritic cells and 
monocyte-derived macrophages. IRF5 expression knockdown in IRF5 risk allele 
carrier cells significantly decreases PRR-induced cytokines. Moreover, we find 
that IRF5 knockdown profoundly decreases Nod2-mediated MAPK and NF-ÎºB pathway 
activation, whereas the PI3K and mammalian target of rapamycin pathways are not 
impaired. Finally, the IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphism is a major determinant of the 
variance (r(2) = 0.53) in Nod2-induced cytokine secretion by monocyte-derived 
cells from different individuals. We therefore show a profound contribution of a 
single gene to the variance in interindividual PRR-induced cytokines. The 
hyperresponsiveness of IRF5 disease-associated polymorphisms to a wide spectrum 
of microbial triggers has broad implications on global immunological responses, 
host defenses against pathogens, and inflammatory/autoimmune disease 
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103319
PMCID: PMC3409850
PMID: 22544929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]