1. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Oct 15;72(8):655-62. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.002.  Epub 2012 May 2.

Tumor necrosis factor gene variation predicts hippocampus volume in healthy 
individuals.

Baune BT(1), Konrad C, Grotegerd D, Suslow T, Ohrmann P, Bauer J, Arolt V, 
Heindel W, Domschke K, Schöning S, Rauch AV, Sehlmeyer C, Kugel H, Dannlowski U.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, North 
Terrace, Adelaide, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α have been implicated 
in neurodegeneration relevant to various neuropsychiatric disorders. Little is 
known about the genetic predisposition to neurodegenerative properties of 
cytokine genes on brain function and on hippocampus (HC) function in particular. 
In this study we investigate the neurodegenerative role of TNF polymorphisms on 
brain morphology in healthy individuals.
METHODS: Voxel-based morphometry was used in a large sample of healthy 
individuals (n = 303) to analyze the associations between genetic variants of 
TNF (rs1800629; rs361525) and brain morphology (gray matter concentration).
RESULTS: In a region of interest analysis of the HC, for rs1800629, we observed 
a strong genotype effect on bilateral HC gray matter concentration. Carriers of 
one or two A-alleles had significantly smaller volumes compared with 
GG-homozygotes. For rs361525, a similar effect was observed at almost the same 
location, with the A-allele resulting in smaller HC volumes compared with GG 
homozygotes.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest a neurodegenerative role of the A-alleles of 
the TNF single nucleotide polymorphisms rs1800629 (-308G/A) and rs361525 
(-238G/A) on hippocampal volumes in healthy individuals. Future imaging studies 
on the role of these single nucleotide polymorphisms in psychiatric populations 
of diseases with neurodegenerative components are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.002
PMID: 22554453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]