1. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):427-33. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.46. Epub 2012 May
10.

Detection of a large heterozygous deletion and a splicing defect in the CFTR 
transcripts from nasal swab of a Japanese case of cystic fibrosis.

Nakakuki M(1), Fujiki K, Yamamoto A, Ko SB, Yi L, Ishiguro M, Yamaguchi M, Kondo 
S, Maruyama S, Yanagimoto K, Naruse S, Ishiguro H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Nutrition, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Research Center of Health, Physical Fitness and Sports, Nagoya University, 
Nagoya, Japan.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in 
CFTR (CF transmembrane conductance regulator). Although CF is the most common 
hereditary disease in Caucasians, it is rare in Asian populations. Common 
disease-causing mutations of CFTR in Caucasians are rarely identified in 
Japanese patients with CF. In the present study, CFTR transcripts from nasal 
swab were analyzed in a Japanese boy, in addition to conventional PCR and direct 
sequence of all exons, their boundaries and promoter region of the CFTR gene. 
The boy was diagnosed with CF by chronic respiratory infection and the elevated 
sweat chloride level. None of the disease-causing mutations of CFTR was detected 
by the conventional analysis. Cloning and sequence of the CFTR transcripts 
revealed a heterozygous deletion spanning exons 16, 17a and 17b. The deletion 
was confirmed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and the direct 
sequence of the junction fragment obtained from the genomic DNA by primer 
walking, which revealed the mutation c.2908+1085_3367+260del7201. We also 
identified a splicing defect: deletion/skipping of exon 1 in the CFTR transcript 
from the other allele. The analysis of CFTR transcripts from nasal swab is 
recommended in the genetic analysis of CF in Japanese.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2012.46
PMID: 22572733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]