1. Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):450-7. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0287. Epub
2012  Mar 31.

Kinetics of inhibitor cycling underlie therapeutic disparities between 
EGFR-driven lung and brain cancers.

Barkovich KJ(1), Hariono S, Garske AL, Zhang J, Blair JA, Fan QW, Shokat KM, 
Nicolaides T, Weiss WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Tumor Research Center, San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):398-400. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0144.

Although mutational activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
features prominently in glioma and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 
inhibitors of EGFR improve survival only in patients with NCSLC. To understand 
how mutations in EGFR influence response to therapy, we generated glioma cells 
expressing either glioma- or NSCLC-derived alleles and quantified kinase-site 
occupancy by clinical inhibitors with the use of a novel affinity probe and 
kinetic methodology. At equivalent doses, erlotinib achieved lower kinase-site 
occupancy in glioma-derived EGFRvIII compared with NSCLC-derived EGFR mutants. 
Kinase-site occupancy correlated directly with cell-cycle arrest. EGFRvIII 
released erlotinib rapidly compared with wild-type EGFR, whereas NSCLC-derived 
mutants released erlotinib slowly.
SIGNIFICANCE: These data suggest that kinase-site occupancy is a biomarker for 
efficacy of EGFR inhibitors, that rapid binding and release of erlotinib in 
glioma-derived EGFRvIII opposes the blockade of downstream signaling, and that 
slower cycling of erlotinib within the active site of NSCLC-derived mutants 
underlies their improved clinical response.

Â© 2012 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0287
PMCID: PMC3354705
PMID: 22588882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST We 
have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.