1. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jan;2(1):41-6. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0194. Epub
2011  Dec 29.

ATM mutations in patients with hereditary pancreatic cancer.

Roberts NJ(1), Jiao Y, Yu J, Kopelovich L, Petersen GM, Bondy ML, Gallinger S, 
Schwartz AG, Syngal S, Cote ML, Axilbund J, Schulick R, Ali SZ, Eshleman JR, 
Velculescu VE, Goggins M, Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Hruban RH, Kinzler KW, 
Klein AP.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institutions, 
Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Jan;2(1):14-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0318.

Pancreatic cancers are the fourth most-common cause of cancer-related deaths in 
the Western world, with >200,000 cases reported in 2010. Although up to 10% of 
these cases occur in familial patterns, the hereditary basis for predisposition 
in the vast majority of affected families is unknown. We used next-generation 
sequencing, including whole-genome and whole-exome analyses, and identified 
heterozygous, constitutional, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene mutations 
in 2 kindreds with familial pancreatic cancer. Mutations segregated with disease 
in both kindreds and tumor analysis demonstrated LOH of the wild-type allele. By 
using sequence analysis of an additional 166 familial pancreatic cancer 
probands, we identified 4 additional patients with deleterious mutations in the 
ATM gene, whereas we identified no deleterious mutations in 190 spouse controls 
(P = 0.046). When we considered only the mostly severely affected families with 
3 or more pancreatic cancer cases, 4 deleterious mutations were found in 87 
families (P = 0.009). Our results indicate that inherited ATM mutations play an 
important role in familial pancreatic cancer predisposition.
SIGNIFICANCE: The genes responsible for the majority of cases of familial 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma are unknown. We here identify ATM as a 
predisposition gene for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Our results have 
important implications for the management of patients in affected families and 
illustrate the power of genome-wide sequencing to identify the basis of familial 
cancer syndromes.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0194
PMCID: PMC3676748
PMID: 22585167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
Under agreements between the Johns Hopkins University, Inostics, PGDx and 
Qiagen, N.P., B.V., K.W.K. and V.E.V are entitled to a share of the royalties 
received by the University on sales of products related to genes and 
technologies described in this manuscript. N.P., B.V., K.W.K. and V.E.V are a 
co-founders of Inostics and Personal Genome Diagnostics are members of their 
Scientific Advisory Boards, and own stock in Inostics and PGDx, which is subject 
to certain restrictions under Johns Hopkins University policy. The terms of 
these arrangements are managed by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance 
with its conflict-of-interest policies.