1. Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):414-24. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0022. Epub 
2012 Apr 1.

Preexisting MEK1 exon 3 mutations in V600E/KBRAF melanomas do not confer 
resistance to BRAF inhibitors.

Shi H(1), Moriceau G, Kong X, Koya RC, Nazarian R, Pupo GM, Bacchiocchi A, 
Dahlman KB, Chmielowski B, Sosman JA, Halaban R, Kefford RF, Long GV, Ribas A, 
Lo RS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-1750, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 May;2(5):390-2. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0128.

BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) induce antitumor responses in nearly 60% of patients 
with advanced V600E/KBRAF melanomas. Somatic activating MEK1 mutations are 
thought to be rare in melanomas, but their potential concurrence with 
V600E/KBRAF may be selected for by BRAFi. We sequenced MEK1/2 exon 3 in 
melanomas at baseline and upon disease progression. Of 31 baseline V600E/KBRAF 
melanomas, 5 (16%) carried concurrent somatic BRAF/MEK1 activating mutations. 
Three of 5 patients with BRAF/MEK1 double-mutant baseline melanomas showed 
objective tumor responses, consistent with the overall 60% frequency. No MEK1 
mutation was found in disease progression melanomas, except when it was already 
identified at baseline. MEK1-mutant expression in V600E/KBRAF melanoma cell 
lines resulted in no significant alterations in p-ERK1/2 levels or 
growth-inhibitory sensitivities to BRAFi, MEK1/2 inhibitor (MEKi), or their 
combination. Thus, activating MEK1 exon 3 mutations identified herein and 
concurrent with V600E/KBRAF do not cause BRAFi resistance in melanoma.
SIGNIFICANCE: As BRAF inhibitors gain widespread use for treatment of advanced 
melanoma, biomarkers for drug sensitivity or resistance are urgently needed. We 
identify here concurrent activating mutations in BRAF and MEK1 in melanomas and 
show that the presence of a downstream mutation in MEK1 does not necessarily 
make BRAF–mutant melanomas resistant to BRAF inhibitors.

© 2012 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0022
PMCID: PMC3594852
PMID: 22588879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest A. 
Ribas and R.S. Lo declare patent application under PCT application serial no. 
PCT/US11/061552 (Compositions and Methods for Detection and Treatment of BRAF 
Inhibitor-Resistant Melanomas). K.B. Dahlman, B. Chmielowski, J.A. Sosman, R.F. 
Kefford, G.V. Long, and A. Ribas have received honoraria from or served as 
consultants to pharmaceutical firms (Roche-Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Illumina). No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed by the other 
authors.