1. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Aug;26(6):830-48. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.05.004. Epub
 2012 May 14.

A systematic review of the association between immunogenomic markers and 
cancer-related fatigue.

Saligan LN(1), Kim HS.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Nursing Research, National Institutes of Health, 9000 
Rockville Pike, Building 10, Room 2-1339, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
saliganl@mail.nih.gov

Fatigue, which is one of the most commonly reported symptoms in cancer, can 
negatively impact the functional status and the health-related quality of life 
of individuals. This paper systematically reviews 34 studies to determine 
patterns of associations between immunogenomic markers and levels of 
cancer-related fatigue (CRF). Findings from the longitudinal studies revealed 
that elevated fatigue symptoms especially of women with early stages of breast 
cancer were associated with high levels of neutrophil/monocyte, IL-1ra, and IL-6 
during radiation therapy; high levels of CD4+, IL-1β, and IL-6 with stressing 
stimuli; high levels of IL-1β during chemotherapy; low NK cell levels after 
chemotherapy; and presence of homozygous IL-6 and TNF alleles. In the 
cross-sectional studies, associations between levels of fatigue and 
immune/inflammatory markers were not consistently found, especially when 
covariates such as BMI, ethnicity, menopausal status, and educational level were 
controlled in the statistical analyses. However, a number of genomic markers 
were observed to be elevated mostly in fatigued breast cancer survivors in the 
cross-sectional studies. Gaps in knowledge and recommendations for future 
research are discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.05.004
PMCID: PMC3398196
PMID: 22595751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.