1. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 15;188(12):6071-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102066. Epub
2012  May 16.

Stromal endothelial cells establish a bidirectional crosstalk with chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia cells through the TNF-related factors BAFF, APRIL, and 
CD40L.

Cols M(1), Barra CM, He B, Puga I, Xu W, Chiu A, Tam W, Knowles DM, Dillon SR, 
Leonard JP, Furman RR, Chen K, Cerutti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a clonal B cell disorder of unknown 
origin. Accessory signals from the microenvironment are critical for the 
survival, expansion, and progression of malignant B cells. We found that the CLL 
stroma included microvascular endothelial cells (MVECs) expressing BAFF and 
APRIL, two TNF family members related to the T cell-associated B 
cell-stimulating molecule CD40L. Constitutive release of soluble BAFF and APRIL 
increased upon engagement of CD40 on MVECs by CD40L aberrantly expressed on CLL 
cells. In addition to enhancing MVEC expression of CD40, leukemic CD40L induced 
cleavases that elicited intracellular processing of pro-BAFF and pro-APRIL 
proteins in MVECs. The resulting soluble BAFF and APRIL proteins delivered 
survival, activation, Ig gene remodeling, and differentiation signals by 
stimulating CLL cells through TACI, BAFF-R, and BCMA receptors. BAFF and APRIL 
further amplified CLL cell survival by upregulating the expression of leukemic 
CD40L. Inhibition of TACI, BCMA, and BAFF-R expression on CLL cells; abrogation 
of CD40 expression in MVECs; or suppression of BAFF and APRIL cleavases in MVECs 
reduced the survival and diversification of malignant B cells. These data 
indicate that BAFF, APRIL, and CD40L form a CLL-enhancing bidirectional 
signaling network linking neoplastic B cells with the microvascular stroma.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102066
PMCID: PMC3370079
PMID: 22593611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]