1. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):7818-28. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00457-12. Epub 2012 May 16.

Structural analysis of hepatitis C virus core-E1 signal peptide and requirements 
for cleavage of the genotype 3a signal sequence by signal peptide peptidase.

Oehler V(1), Filipe A, Montserret R, da Costa D, Brown G, Penin F, McLauchlan J.

Author information:
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

The maturation of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein requires proteolytic 
processing by two host proteases: signal peptidase (SP) and the 
intramembrane-cleaving protease signal peptide peptidase (SPP). Previous work on 
HCV genotype 1a (GT1a) and GT2a has identified crucial residues required for 
efficient signal peptide processing by SPP, which in turn has an effect on the 
production of infectious virus particles. Here we demonstrate that the JFH1 GT2a 
core-E1 signal peptide can be adapted to the GT3a sequence without affecting the 
production of infectious HCV. Through mutagenesis studies, we identified crucial 
residues required for core-E1 signal peptide processing, including a GT3a 
sequence-specific histidine (His) at position 187. In addition, the stable 
knockdown of intracellular SPP levels in HuH-7 cells significantly affects HCV 
virus titers, further demonstrating the requirement for SPP for the maturation 
of core and the production of infectious HCV particles. Finally, our nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) structural analysis of a synthetic HCV JFH1 GT2a 
core-E1 signal peptide provides an essential structural template for a further 
understanding of core processing as well as the first model for an SPP substrate 
within its membrane environment. Our findings give deeper insights into the 
mechanisms of intramembrane-cleaving proteases and the impact on viral 
infections.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00457-12
PMCID: PMC3421639
PMID: 22593157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]