1. Biochemistry. 2012 Jun 12;51(23):4685-92. doi: 10.1021/bi300055n. Epub 2012
May  30.

Conantokins derived from the Asprella clade impart conRl-B, an N-methyl 
d-aspartate receptor antagonist with a unique selectivity profile for NR2B 
subunits.

Gowd KH(1), Han TS, Twede V, Gajewiak J, Smith MD, Watkins M, Platt RJ, Toledo 
G, White HS, Olivera BM, Bulaj G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah , Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Using molecular phylogeny has accelerated the discovery of peptidic ligands 
targeted to ion channels and receptors. One clade of venomous cone snails, 
Asprella, appears to be significantly enriched in conantokins, antagonists of 
N-methyl d-aspartate receptors (NMDARs). Here, we describe the characterization 
of two novel conantokins from Conus rolani, including conantokin conRl-B that 
has shown an unprecedented selectivity for blocking NMDARs that contain NR2B 
subunits. ConRl-B shares only some sequence similarity with the most studied 
NR2B selective conantokin, conG. The divergence between conRl-B and conG in the 
second inter-Gla loop was used to design analogues for structure-activity 
studies; the presence of Pro10 was found to be key to the high potency of 
conRl-B for NR2B, whereas the Îµ-amino group of Lys8 contributed to 
discrimination in blocking NR2B- and NR2A-containing NMDARs. In contrast to 
previous findings for Tyr5 substitutions in other conantokins, conRl-B[L5Y] 
showed potencies on the four NR2 NMDA receptor subtypes that were similar to 
those of the native conRl-B. When delivered into the brain, conRl-B was active 
in suppressing seizures in the model of epilepsy in mice, consistent with 
NR2B-containing NMDA receptors being potential targets for antiepileptic drugs. 
Circular dichroism experiments confirmed that the helical conformation of 
conRl-B is stabilized by divalent metal ions. Given the clinical applications of 
NMDA antagonists, conRl-B provides a potentially important pharmacological tool 
for understanding the differential roles of NMDA receptor subtypes in the 
nervous system. This work shows the effectiveness of coupling molecular 
phylogeny, chemical synthesis, and pharmacology for discovering new bioactive 
natural products.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300055n
PMCID: PMC4153739
PMID: 22594498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest disclosure: GB and HSW are 
scientific cofounders of NeuroAdjuvants, Inc.