1. Ann Hum Genet. 2012 Sep;76(5):352-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00716.x. 
Epub 2012 May 21.

Molecular and population analysis of natural selection on the human haptoglobin 
duplication.

Rodriguez S(1), Williams DM, Guthrie PA, McArdle WL, Smith GD, Evans DM, Gaunt 
TR, Day IN.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology (CAiTE) Bristol 
Genetic Epidemiology Laboratories (BGEL), School of Social and Community 
Medicine, University of Bristol, Oakfield House, Oakfield Grove, Bristol BS8 
2BN, United Kingdom. santi.rodriguez@bristol.ac.uk

Haptoglobin binds free haemoglobin that prevents oxidative damage produced by 
haemolysis. There is a copy number variant (CNV) in the haptoglobin gene (HP) 
consisting of two alleles, Hp1 (no duplication), and Hp2 (1.7kb duplication 
involving two exons). The spread of the Hp2 allele is believed to have taken 
place under selective pressures conferred by malaria resistance. However, 
molecular evidence is lacking and Hp did not emerge in genomewide SNPs surveys 
for evidence of selection. In Europe, there is geographical constancy of Hp2 
frequency, indicative of absence of clinal pressures and that modern day 
European alleles represent a "snapshot" of their out-of-Africa migrations. In 
this work we test for signatures of natural selection acting on the Hp CNV in a 
sample from the UK population (Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, 
ALSPAC). We present here heterozygosity decay, pairwise F(ST) values observed 
between ALSPAC and 301 populations from all five populated continents, extended 
haplotype homozygosity analyses involving the CNV and 80 SNPs surrounding the 
CNV ~500kb in each direction, and linkage disequilibrium and pairwise haplotypic 
analyses involving 160 SNPs on chromosome 16q22.1. Taken together, our results 
represent the first molecular analysis of natural selection in the Hp CNV 
genetic region.

© 2012 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2012 Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00716.x
PMCID: PMC3963445
PMID: 22607059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]