1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(4):4321-4339. doi: 10.3390/ijms13044321. Epub 2012 Apr
2.

Toward the understanding of the metabolism of levodopa I. DFT investigation of 
the equilibrium geometries, acid-base properties and levodopa-water complexes.

Elroby SAK(1)(2), Makki MSI(1), Sobahi TR(1), Hilal RH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 
B.O.208203, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Benisuief University, Benisuief 
6251, Egypt.
(3)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Science, Cairo University, Cairo 12613, 
Egypt.

Levodopa (LD) is used to increase dopamine level for treating Parkinson's 
disease. The major metabolism of LD to produce dopamine is decarboxylation. In 
order to understand the metabolism of LD; the electronic structure of levodopa 
was investigated at the Density Functional DFT/B3LYP level of theory using the 
6-311+G** basis set, in the gas phase and in solution. LD is not planar, with 
the amino acid side chain acting as a free rotator around several single bonds. 
The potential energy surface is broad and flat. Full geometry optimization 
enabled locating and identifying the global minimum on this Potential energy 
surface (PES). All possible protonation/deprotonation forms of LD were examined 
and analyzed. Protonation/deprotonation is local in nature, i.e., is not 
transmitted through the molecular framework. The isogyric 
protonation/deprotonation reactions seem to involve two subsequent steps: First, 
deprotonation, then rearrangement to form H-bonded structures, which is the 
origin of the extra stability of the deprotonated forms. Natural bond orbital 
(NBO) analysis of LD and its deprotonated forms reveals detailed information of 
bonding characteristics and interactions across the molecular framework. The 
effect of deprotonation on the donor-acceptor interaction across the molecular 
framework and within the two subsystems has also been examined. Attempts to 
mimic the complex formation of LD with water have been performed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms13044321
PMCID: PMC3344216
PMID: 22605980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]