1. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2012 Aug;100(8):2106-18. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.34050. Epub 
2012 May 21.

In situ crosslinkable heparin-containing poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels for 
sustained anticoagulant release.

Baldwin AD(1), Robinson KG, Militar JL, Derby CD, Kiick KL, Akins RE Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, 201 DuPont Hall, University 
of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, USA.

Low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is widely used in anticoagulation therapies 
and for the prevention of thrombosis. LMWH is administered by subcutaneous 
injection usually once or twice per day. This frequent and invasive delivery 
modality leads to compliance issues for individuals on prolonged therapeutic 
courses, particularly pediatric patients. Here, we report a long-term delivery 
method for LMWH via subcutaneous injection of long-lasting hydrogels. LMWH is 
modified with reactive maleimide groups so that it can be crosslinked into 
continuous networks with four-arm thiolated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-SH). 
Maleimide-modified LMWH (Mal-LMWH) retains bioactivity as indicated by prolonged 
coagulation time. Hydrogels comprising PEG-SH and Mal-LMWH degrade via 
hydrolysis, releasing bioactive LMWH by first-order kinetics with little initial 
burst release. Separately dissolved Mal-LMWH and PEG-SH solutions were 
co-injected subcutaneously in New Zealand White rabbits. The injected solutions 
successfully formed hydrogels in situ and released LMWH as measured via 
chromogenic assays on plasma samples, with accumulation of LMWH occurring at day 
2 and rising to near-therapeutic dose equivalency by day 5. These results 
demonstrate the feasibility of using LMWH-containing, crosslinked hydrogels for 
sustained and controlled release of anticoagulants.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.34050
PMCID: PMC4096162
PMID: 22615105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]