1. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Oct;52(10):791-9. doi: 10.1002/mc.21923. Epub 2012 May 18.

A functional trinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 5'-untranslated region of 
the glutathione biosynthetic gene GCLC is associated with increased risk for 
lung and aerodigestive tract cancers.

Nichenametla SN(1), Muscat JE, Liao JG, Lazarus P, Richie JP Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, 
Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania.

Glutathione (GSH), the major intracellular antioxidant, protects against cancer 
development by detoxifying carcinogens and free radicals and strengthening the 
immune system. Recently, a GAG-trinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 
5'-untranslated region of the gene for the rate-limiting enzyme for GSH 
biosynthesis, γ-glutamine cysteine ligase (GCL), was shown to be associated with 
lowered GCL activity and GSH levels in vitro and in vivo. We tested the 
hypothesis that this functional polymorphism in GCL is associated with the risk 
for lung and aerodigestive tract cancers. To this end, we conducted a 
case-control study that included 375 lung cancer cases, 200 aerodigestive tract 
cancer cases, and 537 controls. GAG repeat genotype (4, 7, 8, 9, and 10 repeat 
alleles) was determined by capillary electrophoresis of PCR products from the 
repeat region of the GCL catalytic subunit (GCLC). Odds ratios (OR) were 
calculated by logistic regression and adjusted for risk factors, including age, 
sex, body mass index, and smoking history. The GAG-7/7 genotype was associated 
with a 1.9-fold increased risk of lung cancer and 2.6-fold increased risk of 
aerodigestive tract cancer compared to the wild-type GAG-9/9 (P < 0.05). 
Similarly, the GAG-7 allele was associated with an increased risk of lung cancer 
(OR = 1.5, P = 0.01) and aerodigestive tract cancer (OR = 2.3, P < 0.001) 
compared to subjects without GAG-7 allele. These findings suggest that GSH 
synthesis affects the risk of lung and aerodigestive tract cancers, and further 
implicates a role for oxidative stress in the development of these cancers.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.21923
PMCID: PMC3595361
PMID: 22610501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]