1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037057. Epub 2012 May
18.

Inactivation of CDK/pRb pathway normalizes survival pattern of lymphoblasts 
expressing the FTLD-progranulin mutation c.709-1G>A.

Alquezar C(1), Esteras N, Alzualde A, Moreno F, Ayuso MS, López de Munain A, 
Martín-Requero Á.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the progranulin (PGRN) gene, leading to 
haploinsufficiency, cause familial frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP), 
although the pathogenic mechanism of PGRN deficit is largely unknown. Allelic 
loss of PGRN was previously shown to increase the activity of cyclin-dependent 
kinase (CDK) CDK6/pRb pathway in lymphoblasts expressing the c.709-1G>A PGRN 
mutation. Since members of the CDK family appear to play a role in 
neurodegenerative disorders and in apoptotic death of neurons subjected to 
various insults, we investigated the role of CDK6/pRb in cell survival/death 
mechanisms following serum deprivation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed a comparative study of cell 
viability after serum withdrawal of established lymphoblastoid cell lines from 
control and carriers of c.709-1G>A PGRN mutation, asymptomatic and FTLD-TDP 
diagnosed individuals. Our results suggest that the CDK6/pRb pathway is enhanced 
in the c.709-1G>A bearing lymphoblasts. Apparently, this feature allows 
PGRN-deficient cells to escape from serum withdrawal-induced apoptosis by 
decreasing the activity of executive caspases and lowering the dissipation of 
mitochondrial membrane potential and the release of cytochrome c from the 
mitochondria. Inhibitors of CDK6 expression levels like sodium butyrate or the 
CDK6 activity such as PD332991 were able to restore the vulnerability of 
lymphoblasts from FTLD-TDP patients to trophic factor withdrawal.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The use of PGRN-deficient lymphoblasts from FTLD-TDP 
patients may be a useful model to investigate cell biochemical aspects of this 
disease. It is suggested that CDK6 could be potentially a therapeutic target for 
the treatment of the FTLD-TDP.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037057
PMCID: PMC3356399
PMID: 22623979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.