1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037699. Epub 2012 May
21.

Mitochondrial structure, function and dynamics are temporally controlled by 
c-Myc.

Graves JA(1), Wang Y, Sims-Lucas S, Cherok E, Rothermund K, Branca MF, Elster J, 
Beer-Stolz D, Van Houten B, Vockley J, Prochownik EV.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of 
America. gravja@chp.edu

Although the c-Myc (Myc) oncoprotein controls mitochondrial biogenesis and 
multiple enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the 
coordination of these events and the mechanistic underpinnings of their 
regulation remain largely unexplored. We show here that re-expression of Myc in 
myc-/- fibroblasts is accompanied by a gradual accumulation of mitochondrial 
biomass and by increases in membrane polarization and mitochondrial fusion. A 
correction of OXPHOS deficiency is also seen, although structural abnormalities 
in electron transport chain complexes (ETC) are not entirely normalized. 
Conversely, the down-regulation of Myc leads to a gradual decrease in 
mitochondrial mass and a more rapid loss of fusion and membrane potential. 
Increases in the levels of proteins specifically involved in mitochondrial 
fission and fusion support the idea that Myc affects mitochondrial mass by 
influencing both of these processes, albeit favoring the latter. The ETC defects 
that persist following Myc restoration may represent metabolic adaptations, as 
mitochondrial function is re-directed away from producing ATP to providing a 
source of metabolic precursors demanded by the transformed cell.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037699
PMCID: PMC3357432
PMID: 22629444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.