1. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Oct;167(4):929-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11075.x. 
Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Verrucous carcinoma in epidermolysis bullosa simplex is possibly associated with 
a novel mutation in the keratin 5 gene.

Schumann H(1), Roth W, Has C, Volz A, Erfurt-Berge C, Magin TM, 
Bruckner-Tuderman L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. 
hauke.schumann@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is mainly caused by mutations in the KRT5 
and KRT14 genes. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) represents the second most 
frequent skin neoplasia with complex aetiology. The molecular events disrupting 
the orchestrated interplay between the cytoskeleton, cell adhesion molecules and 
signalling proteins are ill understood in SCC. We describe the molecular 
background and the unusual course of the disease in a patient with EBS 
Dowling-Meara, severe keratoderma and a massive verrucous carcinoma. Skin and 
tumour samples from the patient were analysed using light microscopy, 
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence mapping. Mutation analysis of the 
KRT5 and KRT14 genes identified the novel KRT5 mutation p.E477D. Invasive tumour 
areas were characterized by downregulation of keratins 5 and 14, reduced and 
irregular desmocollin-2 expression and increased expression of keratins 6, 16 
and 17. Levels of Ki-67 were increased and levels of E-cadherin strongly reduced 
in the tumour tissue. In this case a novel KRT5 mutation led to increased 
fragility of keratinocytes. Desmosome and adherens junctions were destabilized, 
which may trigger keratinocyte-mediated inflammation, possibly via 
p120-catenin-dependent signalling, suggesting a link between a keratin mutation 
and SCC, which adds weight to the hypothesis that disturbance of the 
cytoskeleton represents a major cause in the appearance of the malignant 
phenotype. Some individuals with EBS may be at risk of developing secondary SCC.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11075.x
PMID: 22639907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]