1. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(27):4215-22. doi: 10.2174/138161212802430413.

Preclinical safety and pharmacokinetic profile of 3K3A-APC, a novel, modified 
activated protein C for ischemic stroke.

Williams PD(1), Zlokovic BV, Griffin JH, Pryor KE, Davis TP.

Author information:
(1)IND Directions, LLC, Catharpin, VA 20143, USA.

Activated protein C (APC), a protease with anticoagulant and cytoprotective 
activities, protects neurons and cerebrovascular endothelium from ischemic 
injury. A recombinant APC, drotrecogin alfa (activated) (DrotAA) (XigrisÂ®), was 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of sepsis; 
however, serious bleeding was a dose-limiting side effect. A modified APC, 
containing 405 amino acid residues, 3K3A-APC, was designed to possess 
significantly reduced anticoagulant activity ( < 10 %) while maintaining full 
cytoprotective properties. The preclinical safety assessment of 3K3A-APC was 
conducted to support initiation of ischemic stroke clinical trials.The safety 
and toxicokinetics of 3K3A-APC were studied in CD-1 mice and cynomolgus monkeys. 
Multiple-dose (14-day), intravenous GLP toxicology assessed toxicity, 
histopathology, immunogenicity, and toxicokinetics.Dose-related increases in 
plasma total 3K3A-APC were observed in mice and monkeys with no evidence of 
accumulation over 14 days. The elimination T(1/2) in monkeys was 1 hour. 
3K3A-APC was well tolerated in mice and monkeys, and no signs of 3K3A-APC 
toxicity were identified in mice or monkeys at any time. Additionally,wild-type 
APC (DrotAA) was studied to obtain comparative anticoagulant data using clotting 
assays. Anticoagulant activity of 3K3A-APC was observed in monkeys at doses of 1 
and 5 mg/kg/day .In contrast, DrotAA showed prolongation of clotting assays in 
monkeys at doses 1/10(th) of those showing effects with 3K3A-APC. Based upon the 
anticoagulant profiles, the risk for APC-induced bleeding in clinical trials of 
3K3A-APC is greatly reduced relative to wild type APC which makes this new drug 
a feasible therapy for ischemic stroke patients.

DOI: 10.2174/138161212802430413
PMCID: PMC3472038
PMID: 22632606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]