1. Front Oncol. 2012 Feb 20;2:16. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00016. eCollection 2012.

Xenobiotic metabolizing gene variants and renal cell cancer: a multicenter 
study.

Heck JE(1), Moore LE, Lee YC, McKay JD, Hung RJ, Karami S, Gaborieau V, 
Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Zaridze DG, Mukeriya A, Mates D, Foretova L, Janout V, 
Kollárová H, Bencko V, Rothman N, Brennan P, Chow WH, Boffetta P.

Author information:
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer Lyon, France.

BACKGROUND: The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have among the highest 
worldwide rates of renal cell cancer (RCC). Few studies have examined whether 
genetic variation in xenobiotic metabolic pathway genes may modify risk for this 
cancer.
METHODS: The Central and Eastern Europe Renal Cell Cancer study was a 
hospital-based case-control study conducted between 1998 and 2003 across seven 
centers in Central and Eastern Europe. Detailed data were collected from 874 
cases and 2053 controls on demographics, work history, and occupational exposure 
to chemical agents. Genes [cytochrome P-450 family, N-acetyltransferases,
NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase I (NQO1), microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH), 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 
(UGT)] were selected for the present analysis based on their putative role in 
xenobiotic metabolism. Haplotypes were calculated using fastPhase. Odds ratios 
and 95% confidence intervals were estimated by unconditional logistic regression 
adjusted for country of residence, age, sex, smoking, alcohol intake, obesity, 
and hypertension.
RESULTS: We observed an increased risk of RCC with one SNP. After adjustment for 
multiple comparisons it did not remain significant. Neither NAT1 nor NAT2 slow 
acetylation was associated with disease.
CONCLUSION: We observed no association between this pathway and renal cell 
cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00016
PMCID: PMC3355831
PMID: 22645715