1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 May 29;14(3):211. doi: 10.1186/ar3844.

The genetics of lupus: a functional perspective.

Guerra SG(1), Vyse TJ, Cunninghame Graham DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Division of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, King's College London, Great Maze Pond, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with a strong 
genetic component and is characterized by chronic inflammation and the 
production of anti-nuclear auto-antibodies. In the era of genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs), elucidating the genetic factors present in SLE has 
been a very successful endeavor; 28 confirmed disease susceptibility loci have 
been mapped. In this review, we summarize the current understanding of the 
genetics of lupus and focus on the strongest associated risk loci found to date 
(P <1.0 Ã— 10-8). Although these loci account for less than 10% of the genetic 
heritability and therefore do not account for the bulk of the disease 
heritability, they do implicate important pathways, which contribute to SLE 
pathogenesis. Consequently, the main focus of the review is to outline the 
genetic variants in the known associated loci and then to explore the potential 
functional consequences of the associated variants. We also highlight the 
genetic overlap of these loci with other autoimmune diseases, which indicates 
common pathogenic mechanisms. The importance of developing functional assays 
will be discussed and each of them will be instrumental in furthering our 
understanding of these associated variants and loci. Finally, we indicate that 
performing a larger SLE GWAS and applying a more targeted set of methods, such 
as the ImmunoChip and next generation sequencing methodology, are important for 
identifying additional loci and enhancing our understanding of the pathogenesis 
of SLE.

DOI: 10.1186/ar3844
PMCID: PMC3446495
PMID: 22640752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]