1. Front Oncol. 2012 Feb 28;2:18. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00018. eCollection 2012.

Glycogen Synthesis is Induced in Hypoxia by the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor and 
Promotes Cancer Cell Survival.

Pelletier J(1), Bellot G, Gounon P, Lacas-Gervais S, Pouyss√©gur J, Mazure NM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, CNRS-UMR 6543, Centre 
Antoine Lacassagne, University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis Nice, France.

The hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), in addition to genetic and epigenetic 
changes, is largely responsible for alterations in cell metabolism in hypoxic 
tumor cells. This transcription factor not only favors cell proliferation 
through the metabolic shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis and 
lactic acid production but also stimulates nutrient supply by mediating adaptive 
survival mechanisms. In this study we showed that glycogen synthesis is enhanced 
in non-cancer and cancer cells when exposed to hypoxia, resulting in a large 
increase in glycogen stores. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the mRNA and 
protein levels of the first enzyme of glycogenesis, phosphoglucomutase1 (PGM1), 
were increased in hypoxia. We showed that induction of glycogen storage as well 
as PGM1 expression were dependent on HIF-1 and HIF-2. We established that 
hypoxia-induced glycogen stores are rapidly mobilized in cells that are starved 
of glucose. Glycogenolysis allows these "hypoxia-preconditioned" cells to 
confront and survive glucose deprivation. In contrast normoxic control cells 
exhibit a high rate of cell death following glucose removal. These findings 
point to the important role of hypoxia and HIF in inducing mechanisms of rapid 
adaptation and survival in response to a decrease in oxygen tension. We propose 
that a decrease in pO(2) acts as an "alarm" that prepares the cells to face 
subsequent nutrient depletion and to survive.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00018
PMCID: PMC3355943
PMID: 22649778