1. Mol Microbiol. 2012 Aug;85(3):445-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08120.x. 
Epub 2012 Jun 12.

Phage shock proteins B and C prevent lethal cytoplasmic membrane permeability in 
Yersinia enterocolitica.

Horstman NK(1), Darwin AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

The bacterial phage shock protein (Psp) stress response system is activated by 
events affecting the cytoplasmic membrane. In response, Psp protein levels 
increase, including PspA, which has been implicated as the master effector of 
stress tolerance. Yersinia enterocolitica and related bacteria with a defective 
Psp system are highly sensitive to the mislocalization of pore-forming secretin 
proteins. However, why secretins are toxic to psp null strains, whereas some 
other Psp inducers are not, has not been explained. Furthermore, previous work 
has led to the confounding and disputable suggestion that PspA is not involved 
in mitigating secretin toxicity. Here we have established a correlation between 
the amount of secretin toxicity in a psp null strain and the extent of 
cytoplasmic membrane permeability to large molecules. This leads to a 
morphological change resembling cells undergoing plasmolysis. Furthermore, using 
novel strains with dis-regulated Psp proteins has allowed us to obtain 
unequivocal evidence that PspA is not required for secretin-stress tolerance. 
Together, our data suggest that the mechanism by which secretin multimers kill 
psp null cells is by causing a profound defect in the cytoplasmic membrane 
permeability barrier. This allows lethal molecular exchange with the 
environment, which the PspB and PspC proteins can prevent.

Â© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2012.08120.x
PMCID: PMC3402641
PMID: 22646656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]