1. J Neurochem. 2012 Aug;122(3):568-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07811.x.
Epub  2012 Jun 22.

Subcellular localization of regulator of G protein signaling RGS7 complex in 
neurons and transfected cells.

Liapis E(1), Sandiford S, Wang Q, Gaidosh G, Motti D, Levay K, Slepak VZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

The R7 family of regulators of G protein signaling (RGS) is involved in many 
functions of the nervous system. This family includes RGS6, RGS7, RGS9, and 
RGS11 gene products and is defined by the presence of the characteristic first 
found in Disheveled, Egl-10, Pleckstrin (DEP), DEP helical extension (DHEX), 
Gγ-like, and RGS domains. Herein, we examined the subcellular localization of 
RGS7, the most broadly expressed R7 member. Our immunofluorescence studies of 
retinal and dorsal root ganglion neurons showed that RGS7 concentrated at the 
plasma membrane of cell bodies, in structures resembling lamellipodia or 
filopodia along the processes, and at the dendritic tips. At the plasma membrane 
of dorsal root ganglia neurons, RGS7 co-localized with its known binding 
partners R7 RGS binding protein (R7BP), Gαo, and Gαq. More than 50% of total 
RGS7-specific immunofluorescence was present in the cytoplasm, primarily within 
numerous small puncta that did not co-localize with R7BP. No specific RGS7 or 
R7BP immunoreactivity was detected in the nuclei. In transfected cell lines, 
ectopic RGS7 had both diffuse cytosolic and punctate localization patterns. RGS7 
also localized in centrosomes. Structure-function analysis showed that the 
punctate localization was mediated by the DEP/DHEX domains, and centrosomal 
localization was dependent on the DHEX domain.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for 
Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07811.x
PMCID: PMC3393828
PMID: 22640015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]