1. Biochemistry. 2012 Jun 26;51(25):5091-104. doi: 10.1021/bi300186g. Epub 2012
Jun  15.

Identification of methylated proteins in the yeast small ribosomal subunit: a 
role for SPOUT methyltransferases in protein arginine methylation.

Young BD(1), Weiss DI, Zurita-Lopez CI, Webb KJ, Clarke SG, McBride AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Molecular Biology Institute, 
UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

We have characterized the posttranslational methylation of Rps2, Rps3, and 
Rps27a, three small ribosomal subunit proteins in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, using mass spectrometry and amino acid analysis. We found that Rps2 
is substoichiometrically modified at arginine-10 by the Rmt1 methyltransferase. 
We demonstrated that Rps3 is stoichiometrically modified by ω-monomethylation at 
arginine-146 by mass spectrometric and site-directed mutagenic analyses. 
Substitution of alanine for arginine at position 146 is associated with slow 
cell growth, suggesting that the amino acid identity at this site may influence 
ribosomal function and/or biogenesis. Analysis of the three-dimensional 
structure of Rps3 in S. cerevisiae shows that arginine-146 makes contacts with 
the small subunit rRNA. Screening of deletion mutants encoding potential yeast 
methyltransferases revealed that the loss of the YOR021C gene results in the 
absence of methylation of Rps3. We demonstrated that recombinant Yor021c 
catalyzes ω-monomethylarginine formation when incubated with 
S-adenosylmethionine and hypomethylated ribosomes prepared from a YOR021C 
deletion strain. Interestingly, Yor021c belongs to the family of SPOUT 
methyltransferases that, to date, have only been shown to modify RNA substrates. 
Our findings suggest a wider role for SPOUT methyltransferases in nature. 
Finally, we have demonstrated the presence of a stoichiometrically methylated 
cysteine residue at position 39 of Rps27a in a zinc-cysteine cluster. The 
discovery of these three novel sites of protein modification within the small 
ribosomal subunit will now allow for an analysis of their functional roles in 
translation and possibly other cellular processes.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300186g
PMCID: PMC3383884
PMID: 22650761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]