1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 21;109(34):E2276-83. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1115240109. Epub 2012 May 31.

Imatinib resistance and microcytic erythrocytosis in a KitV558Δ;T669I/+ 
gatekeeper-mutant mouse model of gastrointestinal stromal tumor.

Bosbach B(1), Deshpande S, Rossi F, Shieh JH, Sommer G, de Stanchina E, Veach 
DR, Scandura JM, Manova-Todorova K, Moore MA, Antonescu CR, Besmer P.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Most gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) harbor a gain-of-function mutation 
in the Kit receptor. GIST patients treated with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor 
imatinib frequently develop imatinib resistance as a result of second-site Kit 
mutations. To investigate the consequences of second-site Kit mutations on GIST 
development and imatinib sensitivity, we engineered a mouse model carrying in 
the endogenous Kit locus both the Kit(V558Δ) mutation found in a familial case 
of GIST and the Kit(T669I) (human KIT(T670I)) "gatekeeper" mutation found in 
imatinib-resistant GIST patients. Similar to Kit(V558/+) mice, Kit(V558;T669I/+) 
mice developed gastric and colonic interstitial cell of Cajal hyperplasia as 
well as cecal GIST. In contrast to the single-mutant Kit(V558/+) control mice, 
treatment of the Kit(V558;T669I/+) mice with either imatinib or dasatinib failed 
to inhibit oncogenic Kit signaling and GIST growth. However, this resistance 
could be overcome by treatment of Kit(V558;T669I/+) mice with sunitinib or 
sorafenib. Although tumor lesions were smaller in Kit(V558;T669I/+) mice than in 
single-mutant mice, both interstitial cell of Cajal hyperplasia and mast cell 
hyperplasia were exacerbated in Kit(V558;T669I/+) mice. Strikingly, the 
Kit(V558;T669I/+) mice developed a pronounced polycythemia vera-like 
erythrocytosis in conjunction with microcytosis. This mouse model should be 
useful for preclinical studies of drug candidates designed to overcome imatinib 
resistance in GIST and to investigate the consequences of oncogenic KIT 
signaling in hematopoietic as well as other cell lineages.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1115240109
PMCID: PMC3427109
PMID: 22652566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: P.B. received 
funding from Novartis for research on GIST.