1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013 Feb 1;85(2):393-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.02.061. Epub 2012 Jun 2.

Acute radiation-induced nocturia in prostate cancer patients is associated with 
pretreatment symptoms, radical prostatectomy, and genetic markers in the TGFβ1 
gene.

De Langhe S(1), De Ruyck K, Ost P, Fonteyne V, Werbrouck J, De Meerleer G, De 
Neve W, Thierens H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium. 
Sofie.DeLanghe@UGent.be

PURPOSE: After radiation therapy for prostate cancer, approximately 50% of the 
patients experience acute genitourinary symptoms, mostly nocturia. This may be 
highly bothersome with a major impact on the patient's quality of life. In the 
past, nocturia is seldom reported as a single, physiologically distinct 
endpoint, and little is known about its etiology. It is assumed that in addition 
to dose-volume parameters and patient- and therapy-related factors, a genetic 
component contributes to the development of radiation-induced damage. In this 
study, we investigated the association among dosimetric, clinical, and TGFβ1 
polymorphisms and the development of acute radiation-induced nocturia in 
prostate cancer patients.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Data were available for 322 prostate cancer patients 
treated with primary or postoperative intensity modulated radiation therapy 
(IMRT). Five genetic markers in the TGFβ1 gene (-800 G>A, -509 C>T, codon 10 
T>C, codon 25 G>C, g.10780 T>G), and a high number of clinical and dosimetric 
parameters were considered. Toxicity was scored using an symptom scale developed 
in-house.
RESULTS: Radical prostatectomy (P<.001) and the presence of pretreatment 
nocturia (P<.001) are significantly associated with the occurrence of 
radiation-induced acute toxicity. The -509 CT/TT (P=.010) and codon 10 TC/CC 
(P=.005) genotypes are significantly associated with an increased risk for 
radiation-induced acute nocturia.
CONCLUSIONS: Radical prostatectomy, the presence of pretreatment nocturia 
symptoms, and the variant alleles of TGFβ1 -509 C>T and codon 10 T>C are 
identified as factors involved in the development of acute radiation-induced 
nocturia. These findings may contribute to the research on prediction of late 
nocturia after IMRT for prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.02.061
PMID: 22658438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]