1. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;82(3):448-63. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.079137. Epub 2012
Jun  5.

Computational and experimental analysis of the transmembrane domain 4/5 
dimerization interface of the serotonin 5-HT(1A) receptor.

Gorinski N(1), Kowalsman N, Renner U, Wirth A, Reinartz MT, Seifert R, Zeug A, 
Ponimaskin E, Niv MY.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Neurophysiology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.

Experimental evidence suggests that most members of class A G-protein coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) can form homomers and heteromers in addition to functioning as 
single monomers. In particular, serotonin (5-HT) receptors were shown to 
homodimerize and heterodimerize with other GPCRs, although the details and the 
physiological role of the oligomerization has not yet been fully elucidated. 
Here we used computational modeling of the 5-HT(1A) receptor monomer and dimer 
to predict residues important for dimerization. Based on these results, we 
carried out rationally designed site-directed mutagenesis. The ability of the 
mutants to dimerize was evaluated using different FRET-based approaches. The 
reduced levels of acceptor photobleaching-FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) and the lower number of monomers participating in oligomers, as assessed 
by lux-FRET, confirmed the decreased ability of the mutants to dimerize and the 
involvement of the predicted contacts (Trp175(4.64), Tyr198(5.41), Arg151(4.40), 
and Arg152(4.41)) at the interface. This information was reintroduced as 
constraints for computational protein-protein docking to obtain a high-quality 
dimer model. Analysis of the refined model as well as molecular dynamics 
simulations of wild-type (WT) and mutant dimers revealed compensating 
interactions in dimers composed of WT and W175A mutant. This provides an 
explanation for the requirement of mutations of Trp175(4.64) in both homomers 
for disrupting dimerization. Our iterative computational-experimental study 
demonstrates that transmembrane domains TM4/TM5 can form an interaction 
interface in 5-HT(1A) receptor dimers and indicates that specific amino acid 
interactions maintain this interface. The mutants and the optimized model of the 
dimer structure may be used in functional studies of serotonin dimers.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.112.079137
PMID: 22669805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]