1. Biosci Rep. 2012 Aug;32(4):413-22. doi: 10.1042/BSR20120050.

Impact of oncogenic driver mutations on feedback between the PI3K and MEK 
pathways in cancer cells.

Yuen HF(1), Abramczyk O, Montgomery G, Chan KK, Huang YH, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa 
S, Gopesh S, Chan KW, Fennell D, Janne P, El-Tanani M, Murray JT.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology (CCRCB), Queenâ€™s University 
Belfast, Belfast, U.K.

Inhibition of the PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/Akt/mTORC1 (mammalian target 
of rapamycin complex 1) and Ras/MEK [MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase)/ERK 
(extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) kinase]/ERK pathways for cancer therapy 
has been pursued for over a decade with limited success. Emerging data have 
indicated that only discrete subsets of cancer patients have favourable 
responses to these inhibitors. This is due to genetic mutations that confer drug 
insensitivity and compensatory mechanisms. Therefore understanding of the 
feedback mechanisms that occur with respect to specific genetic mutations may 
aid identification of novel biomarkers that predict patient response. In the 
present paper, we show that feedback between the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 and Ras/MEK/ERK 
pathways is cell-line-specific and highly dependent on the activating mutation 
of K-Ras or overexpression c-Met. We found that cell lines exhibited 
differential signalling and apoptotic responses to PD184352, a specific MEK 
inhibitor, and PI103, a second-generation class I PI3K inhibitor. We reveal that 
feedback from the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 to the Ras/MEK/ERK pathway is present in 
cancer cells harbouring either K-Ras activating mutations or amplification of 
c-Met but not the wild-type counterparts. Moreover, we demonstrate that 
inhibition of protein phosphatase activity by OA (okadaic acid) restored 
PI103-mediated feedback in wild-type cells. Together, our results demonstrate a 
novel mechanism for feedback between the PI3K/Akt/mTORC1 and the Ras/MEK/ERK 
pathways that only occurs in K-Ras mutant and c-Met amplified cells but not the 
isogenic wild-type cells through a mechanism that may involve inhibition of a 
specific endogenous phosphatase(s) activity. We conclude that monitoring K-Ras 
and c-Met status are important biomarkers for determining the efficacy of PI103 
and other PI3K/Akt inhibitors in cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20120050
PMCID: PMC3392104
PMID: 22668349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]