1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37526. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037526. Epub 2012 May
25.

Activation of β-catenin by oncogenic PIK3CA and EGFR promotes resistance to 
glucose deprivation by inducing a strong antioxidant response.

Cardone L(1), Bardelli A, Avvedimento VE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Cellular and Molecular Pathology, School of 
Medicine, University Federico II of Naples, Naples, Italy. lcardone@tigem.it

Glucose is an essential fuel for cell survival and its availability limits 
aberrant cellular proliferation. We have hypothesized that specific cancer 
mutations regulate metabolic response(s) to glucose deprivation (GD). By means 
of somatic knock-in cellular models, we have analyzed the response to glucose 
deprivation in cells carrying the frequent (delE746-A750)EGFR, (G13D)KRAS or 
(E545K)PIK3CA cancer alleles. We demonstrate that, in mammary epithelial cells, 
glucose has an essential antioxidant function and that these cells are very 
sensitive to GD. Conversely, isogenic cells carrying the (delE746-A750)EGFR or 
the (E545K)PIK3CA, but not the (G13D)KRAS allele, display high tolerance to GD 
by stimulating the expression of anti-oxidant genes (MnSOD and catalase). This 
adaptive transcriptional response is mediated by the activation of WNT/β-catenin 
and FOXO4 signalling. Our data highlights a new functional synergism between 
oncogenic EGFR and PIK3CA with WNT/β-catenin conferring high tolerance to 
oxidative stress generated by nutrient deprivation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037526
PMCID: PMC3360841
PMID: 22662165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: LC and VEA declare no 
conflict of interest related to this work. AB is a member of the scientific 
advisory board at Horizon Discovery (Cambridge, United Kingdom). This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.