1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(Web Server issue):W435-9. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gks495. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

PSC: protein surface classification.

Tseng YY(1), Li WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago 1101 East 57th 
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. ytseng3@uchicago.edu

We recently proposed to classify proteins by their functional surfaces. Using 
the structural attributes of functional surfaces, we inferred the pairwise 
relationships of proteins and constructed an expandable database of protein 
surface classification (PSC). As the functional surface(s) of a protein is the 
local region where the protein performs its function, our classification may 
reflect the functional relationships among proteins. Currently, PSC contains a 
library of 1974 surface types that include 25,857 functional surfaces identified 
from 24,170 bound structures. The search tool in PSC empowers users to explore 
related surfaces that share similar local structures and core functions. Each 
functional surface is characterized by structural attributes, which are 
geometric, physicochemical or evolutionary features. The attributes have been 
normalized as descriptors and integrated to produce a profile for each 
functional surface in PSC. In addition, binding ligands are recorded for 
comparisons among homologs. PSC allows users to exploit related binding surfaces 
to reveal the changes in functionally important residues on homologs that have 
led to functional divergence during evolution. The substitutions at the key 
residues of a spatial pattern may determine the functional evolution of a 
protein. In PSC (http://pocket.uchicago.edu/psc/), a pool of changes in residues 
on similar functional surfaces is provided.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks495
PMCID: PMC3394246
PMID: 22669905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]