1. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:509420. doi: 10.1155/2012/509420. Epub 2012 May
 23.

Associations of polymorphisms in the apolipoprotein APOA1-C3-A5 gene cluster 
with acute coronary syndrome.

Ding Y(1), Zhu MA, Wang ZX, Zhu J, Feng JB, Li DS.

Author information:
(1)Hubei Provincial Key Laboratory of Embryonic Stem Cell Research, Tai He 
Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, 32 S. Renmin Road, Shiyan, Hubei 442000, 
China. dyywzx@163.com

BACKGROUND: Acute coronary syndromes (ACSs) are clinically cardiovascular events 
associated with dyslipidemia in common. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
and haplotypes in the APOA1/C3/A5 gene cluster are associated with diabetes and 
familial combined hyperlipidaemia (FCH). Little is known about whether the 
polymorphisms in these genes affect lipid homeostasis in patients with ACSs. The 
present paper aimed to examine these associations with 4 SNPs in the APOA1 -75G 
> A, the APOC3 -455T > C, and APOA5 -1131T > C, c.553G > T variant to ACSs in 
Chinese Han.
METHODS: Chinese Han of 229 patients with ACSs and 254 unrelated controls were 
analyzed. Four SNPs in APOA1/C3/A5 cluster were genotyped and lipid was 
determined.
RESULTS: Our data show that minor allelic frequencies of APOC3 -455T > C, APOA5 
-1131T > C, and c.553G > T polymorphisms in patients with ACSs were 
significantly higher than control group (P < 0.05). Furthermore, the 3 
polymorphic sites were strongly of linkage disequilibrium, and minor alleles of 
3 SNP sites had higher TG level than wild alleles (P < 0.05), APOC3 -455C and 
APOA5 c.553T allele carriers also had lower level of HDL-C.
CONCLUSIONS: The minor alleles of APOC3 -455T > C, APOA5 -1131T > C, and c.553G 
> T polymorphisms are closely associated with ACSs.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/509420
PMCID: PMC3366243
PMID: 22675253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]