1. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038175. Epub 2012 May
31.

Colorectal cancer linkage on chromosomes 4q21, 8q13, 12q24, and 15q22.

Cicek MS(1), Cunningham JM, Fridley BL, Serie DJ, Bamlet WR, Diergaarde B, Haile 
RW, Le Marchand L, Krontiris TG, Younghusband HB, Gallinger S, Newcomb PA, 
Hopper JL, Jenkins MA, Casey G, Schumacher F, Chen Z, DeRycke MS, Templeton AS, 
Winship I, Green RC, Green JS, Macrae FA, Parry S, Young GP, Young JP, Buchanan 
D, Thomas DC, Bishop DT, Lindor NM, Thibodeau SN, Potter JD, Goode EL; Colon 
CFR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(11). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/1ba2f5e3-8aef-4a12-909b-23f95a889325.

A substantial proportion of familial colorectal cancer (CRC) is not a 
consequence of known susceptibility loci, such as mismatch repair (MMR) genes, 
supporting the existence of additional loci. To identify novel CRC loci, we 
conducted a genome-wide linkage scan in 356 white families with no evidence of 
defective MMR (i.e., no loss of tumor expression of MMR proteins, no 
microsatellite instability (MSI)-high tumors, or no evidence of linkage to MMR 
genes). Families were ascertained via the Colon Cancer Family Registry 
multi-site NCI-supported consortium (Colon CFR), the City of Hope Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, and Memorial University of Newfoundland. A total of 1,612 
individuals (average 5.0 per family including 2.2 affected) were genotyped using 
genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism linkage arrays; parametric and 
non-parametric linkage analysis used MERLIN in a priori-defined family groups. 
Five lod scores greater than 3.0 were observed assuming heterogeneity. The 
greatest were among families with mean age of diagnosis less than 50 years at 
4q21.1 (dominant HLOD = 4.51, α = 0.84, 145.40 cM, rs10518142) and among all 
families at 12q24.32 (dominant HLOD = 3.60, α = 0.48, 285.15 cM, rs952093). 
Among families with four or more affected individuals and among clinic-based 
families, a common peak was observed at 15q22.31 (101.40 cM, rs1477798; dominant 
HLOD = 3.07, α = 0.29; dominant HLOD = 3.03, α = 0.32, respectively). Analysis 
of families with only two affected individuals yielded a peak at 8q13.2 
(recessive HLOD = 3.02, α = 0.51, 132.52 cM, rs1319036). These previously 
unreported linkage peaks demonstrate the continued utility of family-based data 
in complex traits and suggest that new CRC risk alleles remain to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038175
PMCID: PMC3364975
PMID: 22675446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.