1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38793. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038793. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

Specific evolution of F1-like ATPases in mycoplasmas.

Béven L(1), Charenton C, Dautant A, Bouyssou G, Labroussaa F, Sköllermo A, 
Persson A, Blanchard A, Sirand-Pugnet P.

Author information:
(1)University Bordeaux, UMR 1332 de Biologie du Fruit et Pathologie, Villenave 
d'Ornon, France.

F(1)F(0) ATPases have been identified in most bacteria, including mycoplasmas 
which have very small genomes associated with a host-dependent lifestyle. In 
addition to the typical operon of eight genes encoding genuine F(1)F(0) ATPase 
(Type 1), we identified related clusters of seven genes in many mycoplasma 
species. Four of the encoded proteins have predicted structures similar to the 
α, β, γ and ε subunits of F(1) ATPases and could form an F(1)-like ATPase. The 
other three proteins display no similarity to any other known proteins. Two of 
these proteins are probably located in the membrane, as they have three and 
twelve predicted transmembrane helices. Phylogenomic studies identified two 
types of F(1)-like ATPase clusters, Type 2 and Type 3, characterized by a rapid 
evolution of sequences with the conservation of structural features. Clusters 
encoding Type 2 and Type 3 ATPases were assumed to originate from the Hominis 
group of mycoplasmas. We suggest that Type 3 ATPase clusters may spread to other 
phylogenetic groups by horizontal gene transfer between mycoplasmas in the same 
host, based on phylogeny and genomic context. Functional analyses in the 
ruminant pathogen Mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides showed that the Type 3 
cluster genes were organized into an operon. Proteomic analyses demonstrated 
that the seven encoded proteins were produced during growth in axenic media. 
Mutagenesis and complementation studies demonstrated an association of the Type 
3 cluster with a major ATPase activity of membrane fractions. Thus, despite 
their tendency toward genome reduction, mycoplasmas have evolved and exchanged 
specific F(1)-like ATPases with no known equivalent in other bacteria. We 
propose a model, in which the F(1)-like structure is associated with a 
hypothetical X(0) sector located in the membrane of mycoplasma cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038793
PMCID: PMC3369863
PMID: 22685606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.