1. Diabetes. 2012 Aug;61(8):1949-58. doi: 10.2337/db11-1502. Epub 2012 Jun 14.

Hepatocyte-specific Ptpn6 deletion protects from obesity-linked hepatic insulin 
resistance.

Xu E(1), Charbonneau A, Rolland Y, Bellmann K, Pao L, Siminovitch KA, Neel BG, 
Beauchemin N, Marette A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Cardiology Axis of the Institut 
Universitaire de Cardiologie et de Pneumologie de Québec (Hôpital Laval), 
Québec, Québec, Canada.

The protein-tyrosine phosphatase Shp1 negatively regulates insulin action on 
glucose homeostasis in liver and muscle, but its potential role in 
obesity-linked insulin resistance has not been examined. To investigate the role 
of Shp1 in hepatic insulin resistance, we generated hepatocyte-specific Shp1 
knockout mice (Ptpn6(H-KO)), which were subjected to extensive metabolic 
monitoring throughout an 8-week standard chow diet (SD) or high-fat diet (HFD) 
feeding. We report for the first time that Shp1 expression is upregulated in 
metabolic tissues of HFD-fed obese mice. When compared with their 
Shp1-expressing Ptpn6(f/f) littermates, Ptpn6(H-KO) mice exhibited significantly 
lowered fasting glycemia and heightened hepatic insulin sensitivity. After HFD 
feeding, Ptpn6(H-KO) mice developed comparable levels of obesity as Ptpn6(f/f) 
mice, but they were remarkably protected from liver insulin resistance, as 
revealed by euglycemic clamps and hepatic insulin signaling determinations. 
Although Ptpn6(H-KO) mice still acquired diet-induced peripheral insulin 
resistance, they were less hyperinsulinemic during a glucose tolerance test 
because of reduced insulin secretion. Ptpn6(H-KO) mice also exhibited increased 
insulin clearance in line with enhanced CC1 tyrosine phosphorylation in liver. 
These results show that hepatocyte Shp1 plays a critical role in the development 
of hepatic insulin resistance and represents a novel therapeutic target for 
obesity-linked diabetes.

DOI: 10.2337/db11-1502
PMCID: PMC3402325
PMID: 22698917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]