1. J Infect Dis. 2012 Aug 15;206(4):495-503. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis378. Epub
2012  Jun 12.

A functional variation in CD55 increases the severity of 2009 pandemic H1N1 
influenza A virus infection.

Zhou J(1), To KK, Dong H, Cheng ZS, Lau CC, Poon VK, Fan YH, Song YQ, Tse H, 
Chan KH, Zheng BJ, Zhao GP, Yuen KY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, 
Pokfulam Rd, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

Infection due to 2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza A virus (A[H1N1]pdm09) is commonly 
manifested as mild infection but occasionally as severe pneumonia. We 
hypothesized that host genetic variations may contribute to disease severity. An 
initially small-scale genome-wide association study guided the selection of CD55 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 425 Chinese patients with severe (n = 177) or 
mild (n = 248) disease. Carriers of rs2564978 genotype T/T were significantly 
associated with severe infection (odds ratio, 1.75; P = .011) under a recessive 
model, after adjustment for clinical confounders. An allele-specific effect on 
CD55 expression was revealed and ascribed to a promoter indel variation, which 
was in complete linkage disequilibrium with rs2564978. The promoter variant with 
deletion exhibited significantly lower transcriptional activity. We further 
demonstrated that CD55 can protect respiratory epithelial cells from complement 
attack. Additionally, A(H1N1)pdm09 infection promoted CD55 expression. In 
conclusion, CD55 polymorphisms are associated with severe A(H1N1)pdm09 
infection. CD55 may exert a substantial impact on the disease severity of 
A(H1N1)pdm09 infection.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis378
PMID: 22693232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]