1. J Clin Immunol. 2012 Dec;32(6):1165-79. doi: 10.1007/s10875-012-9717-9. Epub 
2012 Jun 15.

Three different classifications, B lymphocyte subpopulations, TNFRSF13B (TACI), 
TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), TNFSF13 (APRIL) gene mutations, CTLA-4 and ICOS gene 
polymorphisms in Turkish patients with common variable immunodeficiency.

Kutukculer N(1), Gulez N, Karaca NE, Aksu G, Berdeli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, 
35100, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey. necil.kutukculer@ege.edu.tr

B lymphocyte subpopulations, previously defined classification schemes 
(Freiburg, Paris, EuroClass), TNFRSF13B (TACI), TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R), TNFSF13 
(APRIL) gene mutations, CTLA-4 and ICOS gene polymorphisms were analyzed in 25 
common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients and 25 healthy controls. 
Patients were also divided into two subgroups due to some disease severity 
criteria. SG (severe disease group) (n:11) included patients who have 
splenomegaly and/or granulomatous diseases and/or bronchiectasis and/or lower 
baseline IgG values (<270 mg/dl). MG (moderate disease group) (n:14) patients 
diagnosed as having ESID/PAGID criteria but does not fulfill SG inclusion 
criteria. The onset of infectious symptoms and age at diagnosis were 50.0 ± 45.7 
and 78.5 ± 54.5 months, respectively. Parental consanguinity rate was 54.5% in 
SG and 7.1% in MG. Switched-memory B cells (CD19 + 27 + IgD-IgM-) showed 
significant decrease in CVID patients and these cells were also significantly 
lower in SG compared to MG. CVID patients had significantly higher percentages 
of CD19 + κ + B cells and CD19 + λ + B cells than healthy controls. Freiburg 
classification: 87.5% of patients (n:21) were in group I and 12.5% were in Group 
II. Eighteen (75%) CVID patients with a low percentage of CD21(low) B cells were 
in Group Ib while three patients classified as Group Ia. The significantly lower 
levels of IgG and IgA in Group Ia is a novel finding. The percentages of 
patients for Paris Classification groups MB0, MB1, MB2 were 88%, 4% and 8%, 
respectively. There was a significant increase of splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy 
and autoimmune cytopenia in Group MB0. EuroClass: 45.8% of patients were smB+ 
and 54.2% were smB-. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy were significantly higher 
in smB- group. TACI: One patient carried heterozygous C104R mutation which was 
known as disease causing. APRIL: G67R and N96S SNPs were detected in most of the 
patients and healthy controls. BAFF-R: P21R/H159Y compound heterozygous mutation 
(n:1) and P21R heterozygous mutations (n:3) were detected. +49 A > G changes in 
exon 1 of CTLA-4 gene: GG and AG genotypes increase the risk of CVID development 
1.32 and 2.18 fold, respectively. 1564 T > C polymorphisms on 3'UTR region in 
exon 2 of ICOS gene was not found to be significantly different in CVID 
patients. CVID classifications were not helpful in determining the genetic 
etiology of CVID.

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-012-9717-9
PMID: 22699762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]