1. Cancer Biomark. 2011;10(5):233-9. doi: 10.3233/CBM-2012-0251.

OPN gene polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility and 
clinicopatholigical characteristics of cervical cancer in a Chinese cohort.

Xu Q(1), Yuan B, Xue F, Zhang L, Li J, Guo H, Yue T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tianjin Medical University General 
Hospital, Tianjin, China. drqianxu@sina.com

AIM: To explore the possible association between Osteopontin (OPN) genetic 
polymorphisms and cervical cancer risk, which remains undocumented yet.
METHOD: We enrolled 300 patients with histologically confirmed cervical squamous 
cell carcinoma and 774 age-matched healthy, unrelated, cancer-free female 
healthy subjects as control subjects. Three OPN gene polymorphisms were 
determined. Reulsts: The genotype distributions and allele frequencies of -156 
GG/G and -443 T/C polymorphisms were significantly differed between cervical 
cancer patients and controls. The cervical cancer cases had markedly higher 
percentage of -156 GG carriage and significantly lower TT and TC of -443 
genotypes than controls. The Logistic regression analysis showed that the -156 
GG carriage was associated with significantly elevated OR of 2.492 for cervical 
cancer while the TT and TC of -443 represented lower risks. This trend was not 
seen in subjects without human papillomavirus infections. In addition, the -156 
GG carriages was significantly associated with poorer clinical conditions, 
including higher clinical stage, poorer tumor differentiation, higher positive 
lymph node status and higher chance of parametrical invasion. The -443 T/C and 
-66 T/G polymorphisms did not show any association with the clinicopathological 
feature.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the -156 GG/G and -443T/C polymorphisms 
might be used as a genetic marker for cervical cancer susceptibility.

DOI: 10.3233/CBM-2012-0251
PMID: 22699784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]