1. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jun 27;134(25):10436-50. doi: 10.1021/ja3006463. Epub 2012
 Jun 14.

Fundamental reaction pathway and free energy profile for inhibition of 
proteasome by Epoxomicin.

Wei D(1), Lei B, Tang M, Zhan CG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Daxue Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 
450052, China.

First-principles quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical free energy 
calculations have been performed to provide the first detailed computational 
study on the possible mechanisms for reaction of proteasome with a 
representative peptide inhibitor, Epoxomicin (EPX). The calculated results 
reveal that the most favorable reaction pathway consists of five steps. The 
first is a proton transfer process, activating Thr1-O(γ) directly by Thr1-N(z) 
to form a zwitterionic intermediate. The next step is nucleophilic attack on the 
carbonyl carbon of EPX by the negatively charged Thr1-O(γ) atom, followed by a 
proton transfer from Thr1-N(z) to the carbonyl oxygen of EPX (third step). Then, 
Thr1-N(z) attacks on the carbon of the epoxide group of EPX, accompanied by the 
epoxide ring-opening (S(N)2 nucleophilic substitution) such that a zwitterionic 
morpholino ring is formed between residue Thr1 and EPX. Finally, the product of 
morpholino ring is generated via another proton transfer. Noteworthy, Thr1-O(γ) 
can be activated directly by Thr1-N(z) to form the zwitterionic intermediate 
(with a free energy barrier of only 9.9 kcal/mol), and water cannot assist the 
rate-determining step, which is remarkably different from the previous 
perception that a water molecule should mediate the activation process. The 
fourth reaction step has the highest free energy barrier (23.6 kcal/mol) which 
is reasonably close to the activation free energy (∼21-22 kcal/mol) derived from 
experimental kinetic data. The obtained novel mechanistic insights should be 
valuable for not only future rational design of more efficient proteasome 
inhibitors but also understanding the general reaction mechanism of proteasome 
with a peptide or protein.

DOI: 10.1021/ja3006463
PMCID: PMC3399118
PMID: 22697787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]