1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038585. Epub 2012 Jun
6.

The spread of Mycoplasma pneumoniae is polyclonal in both an endemic setting in 
France and in an epidemic setting in Israel.

Pereyre S(1), Charron A, Hidalgo-Grass C, Touati A, Moses AE, Nir-Paz R, Bébéar 
C.

Author information:
(1)Université Bordeaux, USC Infections Humaines à Mycoplasmes et Chlamydiae, 
Bordeaux, France. sabine.pereyre@u-bordeaux2.fr

Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections occur both endemically and epidemically, and 
macrolide resistance has been spreading for 10 years worldwide. A substantial 
increased incidence of M. pneumoniae infections has been reported in several 
countries since 2010. Whether this increased incidence is attributed to 
different or to the same M. pneumoniae genotype is unknown. We have developed a 
multilocus variable-number tandem-repeat (VNTR) analysis (MLVA) for the 
molecular typing of M. pneumoniae isolates. In this study, the MLVA typing 
method was modified and validated to be applicable directly to respiratory tract 
specimens without culture. This method was applied to 34 M. pneumoniae-positive 
specimens received at the Bordeaux Hospital, France, between 2007 and 2010 in an 
endemic setting, and to 63 M. pneumoniae-positive specimens collected during an 
epidemic surge of M. pneumoniae infections in 2010 in Jerusalem, Israel. The M. 
pneumoniae endemic spread was shown to be polyclonal in France, with 15 MLVA 
types identified. Strikingly, the Israeli epidemic surge was also a multi-clonal 
phenomenon, with 18 circulating MLVA types. The macrolide resistance-associated 
substitution, A2058G, was found in 22% of the Israeli patients. 
Macrolide-resistant M. pneumoniae belonged to four MLVA types, the MLVA type Z 
being the most frequent one. An association between the MLVA type Z and 
macrolide resistance might exist since macrolide resistance was present or 
generated during the course of illness in all patients infected with this MLVA 
type. In conclusion, the discriminatory power of the MLVA showed that the spread 
of M. pneumoniae strains in France in an endemic setting was polyclonal as well 
as the surge of M. pneumoniae infections in Israel in 2010.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038585
PMCID: PMC3368914
PMID: 22701675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.