1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Aug;39(8):8457-63. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1699-4. Epub
2012  Jun 20.

IL6 gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis 
and review.

Yu Y(1), Wang W, Zhai S, Dang S, Sun M.

Author information:
(1)Center of Educational Technology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 169 
Changlexi Road, Xi'an 710032, Shannxi, People's Republic of China.

A number of case-control studies were conducted to investigate the association 
of IL6 gene polymorphisms with colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the results 
were not always consistent. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis 
to examine the association between the IL6 gene polymorphisms and CRC. Data were 
collected from the following electronic databases: PubMed, EMBASE, Web of 
Science, BIOSIS Previews, HuGENet, and Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, 
with the last report up to July 2011. A total of 17 studies involving 4 SNPs 
were included (16 for rs1800795, 2 for rs1800796, 2 for rs1800797, and 1 for 
rs13306435). Overall, no significant association of these polymorphisms with CRC 
was found in heterozygote comparisons as well as homozygote comparison, dominant 
genetic model and recessive model. In subgroup analysis, among studies using 
population-based controls, fulfilling Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, or using 
Taqman genotyping method, we did not find any significant association. However, 
the rs1800795 C allele was significantly associated with reduced risk for CRC 
among persons who regularly or currently took NSAIDs (four studies, OR = 0.750; 
95 % CI, 0.64-0.88; P = 0.474 for heterogeneity test), and with increased risk 
for CRC among persons who drank (one study, OR = 1.97; 95 % CI, 1.32-2.94). 
Individuals with the rs1800795 C allele in the IL6 gene have a significantly 
lower risk of CRC, but in the setting of NSAIDs use. Further studies are merited 
to assess the association between the IL6 gene polymorphisms and CRC risk among 
persons who take NSAIDs, drink or smoke, etc.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-012-1699-4
PMID: 22714907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]