1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2012 Oct;45(10):913-20. doi: 
10.1590/s0100-879x2012007500101. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Secretory TAT-peptide-mediated protein transduction of LIF receptor α-chain 
distal cytoplasmic motifs into human myeloid HL-60 cells.

Sun Q(1), Xiong J, Lu J, Xu S, Li Y, Zhong XP, Gao GK, Liu HQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hyperbaric Medicine, No 401 Hospital of PLA, Qingdao, China.

The distal cytoplasmic motifs of leukemia inhibitory factor receptor α-chain 
(LIFRα-CT3) can independently induce intracellular myeloid differentiation in 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells by gene transfection; however, there are 
significant limitations in the potential clinical use of these motifs due to 
liposome-derived genetic modifications. To produce a potentially therapeutic 
LIFRα-CT3 with cell-permeable activity, we constructed a eukaryotic expression 
pcDNA3.0-TAT-CT3-cMyc plasmid with a signal peptide (ss) inserted into the 
N-terminal that codes for an ss-TAT-CT3-cMyc fusion protein. The stable 
transfection of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells via this vector and subsequent 
selection by Geneticin resulted in cell lines that express and secrete 
TAT-CT3-cMyc. The spent medium of pcDNA3.0-TAT-CT3-cMyc-transfected CHO cells 
could be purified using a cMyc-epitope-tag agarose affinity chromatography 
column and could be detected via SDS-PAGE, with antibodies against cMyc-tag. The 
direct administration of TAT-CT3-cMyc to HL-60 cell culture media caused the 
enrichment of CT3-cMyc in the cytoplasm and nucleus within 30 min and led to a 
significant reduction of viable cells (P < 0.05) 8 h after exposure. The 
advantages of using this mammalian expression system include the ease of 
generating TAT fusion proteins that are adequately transcripted and the 
potential for a sustained production of such proteins in vitro for future AML 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1590/s0100-879x2012007500101
PMCID: PMC3854185
PMID: 22714809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]