1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Oct 1;53(7):1489-99. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.06.016. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Nox4 involvement in TGF-beta and SMAD3-driven induction of the 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and migration of breast epithelial cells.

Boudreau HE(1), Casterline BW, Rada B, Korzeniowska A, Leto TL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 12441 Parklawn Drive, Rockville, MD, 
USA.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is the development of increased 
cell plasticity that occurs normally during wound healing and embryonic 
development and can be coopted for cancer invasion and metastasis. TGF-beta 
induces EMT but the mechanism is unclear. Our studies suggest that Nox4, a 
member of the NADPH oxidase (Nox) family, is a source of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) affecting cell migration and fibronectin expression, an EMT marker, in 
normal and metastatic breast epithelial cells. We found that TGF-beta induces 
Nox4 expression (mRNA and protein) and ROS generation in normal (MCF10A) and 
metastatic (MDA-MB-231) human breast epithelial cells. Conversely, cells 
expressing a dominant-negative form of Nox4 or Nox4-targeted shRNA showed 
significantly lower ROS production on TGF-beta treatment. Expression of a 
constitutively active TGF-beta receptor type I significantly increased Nox4 
promoter activity, mRNA and protein expression, and ROS generation. Nox4 
transcriptional regulation by TGF-beta was SMAD3 dependent based on the effect 
of constitutively active SMAD3 increasing Nox4 promoter activity, whereas 
dominant-negative SMAD3 or SIS3, a SMAD3-specific inhibitor, had the opposite 
effect. Furthermore, Nox4 knockdown, dominant-negative Nox4 or SMAD3, or SIS3 
blunted TGF-beta induced wound healing and cell migration, whereas cell 
proliferation was not affected. Our experiments further indicate that Nox4 plays 
a role in TGF-beta regulation of fibronectin mRNA expression, based on the 
effects of dominant-negative Nox4 in reducing fibronectin mRNA in 
TGF-beta-treated MDA-MB-231and MCF10A cells. Collectively, these data indicate 
that Nox4 contributes to NADPH oxidase-dependent ROS production that may be 
critical for the progression of the EMT in breast epithelial cells, and thereby 
has therapeutic implications.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.06.016
PMCID: PMC3448829
PMID: 22728268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declared no conflict of 
interest.