1. Eur Biophys J. 2012 Jul;41(7):615-27. doi: 10.1007/s00249-012-0829-1. Epub
2012  Jun 22.

Resolution of the effects induced by W → F substitutions on the conformation and 
dynamics of the amyloid-forming apomyoglobin mutant W7FW14F.

Infusini G(1), Iannuzzi C, Vilasi S, Birolo L, Pagnozzi D, Pucci P, Irace G, 
Sirangelo I.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica Organica e Biochimica, Università di Napoli Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.

Myoglobin is an alpha-helical globular protein containing two highly conserved 
tryptophanyl residues at positions 7 and 14 in the N-terminal region. The 
simultaneous substitution of the two residues increases the susceptibility of 
the polypeptide chain to misfold, causing amyloid aggregation under 
physiological condition, i.e., neutral pH and room temperature. The role played 
by tryptophanyl residues in driving the folding process has been investigated by 
examining three mutated apomyoglobins, i.e., W7F, W14F, and the amyloid-forming 
mutant W7FW14F, by an integrated approach based on far-ultraviolet (UV) circular 
dichroism (CD) analysis, fluorescence spectroscopy, and complementary 
proteolysis. Particular attention has been devoted to examine the conformational 
and dynamic properties of the equilibrium intermediate formed at pH 4.0, since 
it represents the early organized structure from which the native fold 
originates. The results show that the W → F substitutions at position 7 and 14 
differently affect the structural organization of the AGH subdomain of 
apomyoglobin. The combined effect of the two substitutions in the double mutant 
impairs the formation of native-like contacts and favors interchain 
interactions, leading to protein aggregation and amyloid formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00249-012-0829-1
PMID: 22722892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]