1. Microcirculation. 2012 Nov;19(8):676-95. doi:
10.1111/j.1549-8719.2012.00207.x.

Microvascular repair: post-angiogenesis vascular dynamics.

LeBlanc AJ(1), Krishnan L, Sullivan CJ, Williams SK, Hoying JB.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Innovation Institute, Jewish Hospital and St. Mary's 
Healthcare and University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Vascular compromise and the accompanying perfusion deficits cause or complicate 
a large array of disease conditions and treatment failures. This has prompted 
the exploration of therapeutic strategies to repair or regenerate vasculatures, 
thereby establishing more competent microcirculatory beds. Growing evidence 
indicates that an increase in vessel numbers within a tissue does not 
necessarily promote an increase in tissue perfusion. Effective regeneration of a 
microcirculation entails the integration of new stable microvessel segments into 
the network via neovascularization. Beginning with angiogenesis, 
neovascularization entails an integrated series of vascular activities leading 
to the formation of a new mature microcirculation, and includes vascular 
guidance and inosculation, vessel maturation, pruning, AV specification, network 
patterning, structural adaptation, intussusception, and microvascular 
stabilization. While the generation of new vessel segments is necessary to 
expand a network, without the concomitant neovessel remodeling and adaptation 
processes intrinsic to microvascular network formation, these additional vessel 
segments give rise to a dysfunctional microcirculation. While many of the 
mechanisms regulating angiogenesis have been detailed, a thorough understanding 
of the mechanisms driving post-angiogenesis activities specific to 
neovascularization has yet to be fully realized, but is necessary to develop 
effective therapeutic strategies for repairing compromised microcirculations as 
a means to treat disease.

Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1549-8719.2012.00207.x
PMCID: PMC3842172
PMID: 22734666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]