1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8698-710. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks582. Epub 
2012 Jun 22.

The low-resolution solution structure of Vibrio cholerae Hfq in complex with 
Qrr1 sRNA.

Vincent HA(1), Henderson CA, Stone CM, Cary PD, Gowers DM, Sobott F, Taylor JEN, 
Callaghan AJ.

Author information:
(1)Biophysics Laboratories, School of Biological Sciences, Institute of 
Biomedical and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, PO1 
2DT, UK.

In Vibrio cholerae, the RNA binding protein and chaperone Hfq (VcHfq) 
facilitates the pairing of the quorum regulatory RNA (Qrr) small regulatory RNAs 
(sRNAs) to the 5' untranslated regions of the mRNAs for a number of global 
regulators that modulate the expression of virulence genes. This Qrr-mediated 
sRNA circuit is an attractive antimicrobial target, but characterization at the 
molecular level is required for this to be realized. Here, we investigate the 
interactions between VcHfq and the Qrr sRNAs using a variety of biochemical and 
biophysical techniques. We show that the ring-shaped VcHfq hexamer binds the 
Qrrs with 1:1 stoichiometry through its proximal face, and the molecular 
envelope of the VcHfq-Qrr complex is experimentally determined from small angle 
scattering data to present the first structural glimpse of a Hfq-sRNA complex. 
This structure reveals that the VcHfq protein does not change shape on complex 
formation but the RNA does, suggesting that a chaperone role for VcHfq is a 
critical part of the VcHfq-Qrr interaction. Overall, these studies enhance our 
understanding of VcHfq-Qrr interactions.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks582
PMCID: PMC3458539
PMID: 22730296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]