1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Oct;51(10):933-48. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21977. Epub
 2012 Jun 26.

Exclusion of the 750-kb genetically unstable region at Xq27 as a candidate locus 
for prostate malignancy in HPCX1-linked families.

Kouprina N(1), Lee NC, Pavlicek A, Samoshkin A, Kim JH, Lee HS, Varma S, 
Reinhold WC, Otstot J, Solomon G, Davis S, Meltzer PS, Schleutker J, Larionov V.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
kouprinn@mail.nih.gov

Several linkage studies provided evidence for the presence of the hereditary 
prostate cancer locus, HPCX1, at Xq27-q28. The strongest linkage peak of 
prostate cancer overlies a variable region of ~750 kb at Xq27 enriched by 
segmental duplications (SDs), suggesting that the predisposition to prostate 
cancer may be a genomic disorder caused by recombinational interaction between 
SDs. The large size of SDs and their sequence similarity make it difficult to 
examine this region for possible rearrangements using standard methods. To 
overcome this problem, direct isolation of a set of genomic segments by in vivo 
recombination in yeast (a TAR cloning technique) was used to perform a 
mutational analysis of the 750 kb region in X-linked families. We did not detect 
disease-specific rearrangements within this region. In addition, transcriptome 
and computational analyses were performed to search for nonannotated genes 
within the Xq27 region, which may be associated with genetic predisposition to 
prostate cancer. Two candidate genes were identified, one of which is a novel 
gene termed SPANXL that represents a highly diverged member of the SPANX gene 
family, and the previously described CDR1 gene that is expressed at a high level 
in both normal and malignant prostate cells, and mapped 210 kb of upstream the 
SPANX gene cluster. No disease-specific alterations were identified in these 
genes. Our results exclude the 750-kb genetically unstable region at Xq27 as a 
candidate locus for prostate malignancy. Adjacent regions appear to be the most 
likely candidates to identify the elusive HPCX1 locus.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.21977
PMCID: PMC3412920
PMID: 22733720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]