1. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Oct;42(10):2727-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242396. Epub 2012 
Aug 20.

Respiratory syncytial virus infection augments NOD2 signaling in an 
IFN-β-dependent manner in human primary cells.

Vissers M(1), Remijn T, Oosting M, de Jong DJ, Diavatopoulos DA, Hermans PW, 
Ferwerda G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
Netherlands.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major cause of lower respiratory tract 
infections in infants, with remarkable variability in disease severity. An 
exaggerated proinflammatory response and influx of leukocytes is part of the 
pathogenesis of severe RSV disease. Here, we show an increase in proinflammatory 
cytokine production by human immune cells after stimulation with RSV and muramyl 
dipeptide (MDP), which is recognized by nucleotide-binding oligomerization 
domain containing 2 (NOD2). PBMCs from Crohn's disease patients homozygous for 
the 3020insC mutation in the NOD2 gene did not show a synergistic response to 
stimulation with RSV and MDP, suggesting that NOD2 is essential for the observed 
synergy. Further experiments aimed at identifying the viral ligand indicated 
that viral RNA plays an essential role in the recognition of RSV. Stimulation 
with RSV or Poly(I:C) induced IFN-β expression, which resulted in an increased 
expression of the viral receptors TLR3 and RIG-I, as well as an increased NOD2 
expression. Our data indicate that IFN-β induction by viral RNA is an essential 
first step in the increased proinflammatory response to MDP. We hypothesize that 
the enhanced proinflammatory response to MDP following RSV infection may be an 
important factor in determining the outcome of the severity of disease.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201242396
PMID: 22730064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]