1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Oct 1;21(19):4201-13. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds244. Epub 2012
Jun  26.

G2019S leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 causes uncoupling protein-mediated 
mitochondrial depolarization.

Papkovskaia TD(1), Chau KY, Inesta-Vaquera F, Papkovsky DB, Healy DG, Nishio K, 
Staddon J, Duchen MR, Hardy J, Schapira AH, Cooper JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London NW3 2PF, UK.

The G2019S leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common 
genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD), clinically and pathologically 
indistinguishable from idiopathic PD. Mitochondrial abnormalities are a common 
feature in PD pathogenesis and we have investigated the impact of G2019S mutant 
LRRK2 expression on mitochondrial bioenergetics. LRRK2 protein expression was 
detected in fibroblasts and lymphoblasts at levels higher than those observed in 
the mouse brain. The presence of G2019S LRRK2 mutation did not influence LRRK2 
expression in fibroblasts. However, the expression of the G2019S LRRK2 mutation 
in both fibroblast and neuroblastoma cells was associated with mitochondrial 
uncoupling. This was characterized by decreased mitochondrial membrane potential 
and increased oxygen utilization under basal and oligomycin-inhibited 
conditions. This resulted in a decrease in cellular ATP levels consistent with 
compromised cellular function. This uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation was associated with a cell-specific increase in uncoupling 
protein (UCP) 2 and 4 expression. Restoration of mitochondrial membrane 
potential by the UCP inhibitor genipin confirmed the role of UCPs in this 
mechanism. The G2019S LRRK2-induced mitochondrial uncoupling and UCP4 mRNA 
up-regulation were LRRK2 kinase-dependent, whereas endogenous LRRK2 levels were 
required for constitutive UCP expression. We propose that normal mitochondrial 
function was deregulated by the expression of G2019S LRRK2 in a kinase-dependent 
mechanism that is a modification of the normal LRRK2 function, and this leads to 
the vulnerability of selected neuronal populations in PD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds244
PMCID: PMC3441120
PMID: 22736029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]