1. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2012 Aug;5(4):491-508. doi:
10.1007/s12265-012-9382-7.  Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Perspectives on systems biology applications in diabetic kidney disease.

Komorowsky CV(1), Brosius FC 3rd, Pennathur S, Kretzler M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0676, USA.

Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a microvascular complication of type 1 and 2 
diabetes with a devastating impact on individuals with the disease, their 
families, and society as a whole. DKD is the single most frequent cause of 
incident chronic kidney disease cases and accounts for over 40% of the 
population with end-stage renal disease. Contributing factors for the high 
prevalence are the increase in obesity and subsequent diabetes combined with an 
improved long-term survival with diabetes. Environment and genetic variations 
contribute to DKD susceptibility and progressive loss of kidney function. How 
the molecular mechanisms of genetic and environmental exposures interact during 
DKD initiation and progression is the focus of ongoing research efforts. The 
development of standardized, unbiased high-throughput profiling technologies of 
human DKD samples opens new avenues in capturing the multiple layers of DKD 
pathobiology. These techniques routinely interrogate analytes on a genome-wide 
scale generating comprehensive DKD-associated fingerprints. Linking the 
molecular fingerprints to deep clinical phenotypes may ultimately elucidate the 
intricate molecular interplay in a disease stage and subtype-specific manner. 
This insight will form the basis for accurate prognosis and facilitate targeted 
therapeutic interventions. In this review, we present ongoing efforts from 
large-scale data integration translating "-omics" research efforts into improved 
and individualized health care in DKD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12265-012-9382-7
PMCID: PMC3422674
PMID: 22733404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing financial interest.