1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 27;424(2):308-14. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.112. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Phosphorylation of elongation factor-2 kinase differentially regulates the 
enzyme's stability under stress conditions.

Huber-Keener KJ(1), Evans BR, Ren X, Cheng Y, Zhang Y, Hait WN, Yang JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and The Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, The 
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine and Milton S. Hershey Medical 
Center, 500 University Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase (eEF-2K) is a Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent 
enzyme that negatively regulates protein synthesis. eEF-2K has been shown to be 
up-regulated in cancer, and to play an important role in cell survival through 
inhibition of protein synthesis. Post-translational modification of protein 
synthesis machinery is important for its regulation and could be critical for 
survival of cancer cells encountering stress. The purpose of our study was to 
examine the regulation of eEF-2K during stress with a focus on the roles of 
phosphorylation in determining the stability of eEF-2K. We found that stress 
conditions (nutrient deprivation and hypoxia) increase eEF-2K protein. mRNA 
levels are only transiently increased and shortly return to normal, while eEF-2K 
protein levels continue to increase after further exposure to stress. A 
seemingly paradoxical decrease in eEF-2K stability was found when glioma cells 
were subjected to stress despite increased protein expression. We further 
demonstrated that phosphorylation of eEF-2K differentially affects the enzyme's 
turnover under both normal and stress conditions, as evidenced by the different 
half-lives of phosphorylation-defective mutants of eEF-2K. We further found that 
the eEF-2K site (Ser398) phosphorylated by AMPK is pivotal to the protein's 
stability, as the half-life of S398A mutant increases to greater than 24h under 
both normal and stress conditions. These data indicate that eEF-2K is regulated 
at multiple levels with phosphorylation playing a critical role in the enzyme's 
turnover under stressful conditions. The complexity of eEF-2K phosphorylation 
highlights the intricacies of protein synthesis control during cellular stress.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.112
PMCID: PMC3614095
PMID: 22749997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]