1. Cardiovasc Hematol Disord Drug Targets. 2012 Sep;12(1):6-20. doi: 
10.2174/187152912801823174.

Current and emerging therapies in primary myelofibrosis.

Ayyappan S(1), Janakiram M, Raghupathy R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospitals Seidman Cancer 
Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Primary myelofibrosis is a clonal hematopoietic disorder characterized by 
ineffective hematopoiesis and progressive bone marrow fibrosis. Patients with 
high risk myelofibrosis as determined by their advanced age, degree of anemia, 
leukocytosis, constitutional symptoms and high percentage of circulating blasts 
have a very short median survival of 2 years. In addition quality of life is 
significantly compromised due to cytokine induced constitutional symptoms, 
frequent transfusion for cytopenias and bulky splenomegaly. Progression to 
myelogenous leukemia occurs in about 20% of patients within 10 years of 
diagnosis and is often fatal. Allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation is the 
only curative therapy but is limited by patient eligibility, transplant related 
mortality and graft versus host disease. Androgens, erythropoietin analogues, 
hydroxyurea, alkylators and spleen directed therapies have all been used with 
limited efficacy and no curative potential. The discovery of mutations in the 
hematopoietic progenitors of patients with myelofibrosis, including the JAK2 
V617F mutation and others has greatly improved our understanding of the disease 
and facilitated development of newer targeted therapies. Our article will review 
new discoveries in the pathogenesis of myelofibrosis and focus on emerging 
targeted treatments. These novel therapies including oral JAK2 inhibitors, 
immunomodulators, as well as inhibitors of HDAC and mTOR, in isolation and in 
combination are likely to improve outcomes in management of this disease.

DOI: 10.2174/187152912801823174
PMID: 22746348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]