1. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Sep;39(9):9223-32. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1795-5. Epub
2012  Jun 29.

Genetic variations of ANGPTL6 gene and their associations with growth traits and 
slaughter traits in Qinchuan cattle.

Li AM(1), Lan XY, Sun XM, Gao Y, Ma W, Ma Y, Chen H.

Author information:
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, College of 
Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, No. 22 Xinong Road, 
Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China. liamvip@sina.com

Angiopoietin-like protein 6 (ANGPTL6), which plays an important role in 
angiogenesis and energy metabolism as a circulating orphan peptide secreted by 
liver, could produce a potential effect on growth and development of animals. 
The objective of this study was to detect genetic variations of ANGPTL6 gene in 
732 Qinchuan cattle, as well as to analyze their associations with growth traits 
and carcass weight. Herein, three novel mutations (T2359C, C2403A and G3258T) 
were identified in cattle for the first time. Chi-square test showed T2359C and 
C2403A loci were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium except G3258T locus. Haplotype 
with TCG (wild type) was dominant with frequency of 40.0 % among eight different 
haplotypes. Statistical analysis showed body height (BH) and hucklebone width 
(HW) of individuals with genotype CC were significant higher than other 
genotypes in T2359C locus (P < 0.05). In the C2403A locus, chest girth (CG), 
chest depth (CD), and chest breadth (CB) of individuals with genotype CA were 
all extremely significant higher (P < 0.01) while BH was significant higher (P < 
0.05) than genotype CC. The association analysis of combined sites showed BH, 
CG, CB and HW of individuals with combined genotype TC-CA were significant 
higher than other combined genotypes (P < 0.05) in ScaI-VspI site. BH, CG and CB 
of individuals with genotype CA-GG were significant higher (P < 0.05) as well as 
CD was extremely significant higher (P < 0.01) than other genotypes in VspI-RsaI 
site. For ScaI-VspI-RsaI site, CD and HW of individuals with genotype TC-CA-GG 
were significant higher (P < 0.05) than those of other combined genotypes. 
Slaughter test also revealed that the effect of the combined genotypes was 
extremely significant on the carcass weight. Carcass weight of individuals with 
genotype TT-CA and TT-CA-GT were extremely significant heavier than other 
combined genotypes (P < 0.01) in the ScaI-VspI and ScaI-VspI-RsaI sites. And 
those with genotype TT-GT of ScaI-RsaI were significantly heavy (P < 0.05) as 
well as the individuals with genotype CA-GT of VspI-RsaI. In conclusion, the 
present results provided evidence that polymorphisms of ANGPTL6 gene were 
associated with growth and slaughter traits, and may apply to Qinchuan cattle 
breeding program as a possible candidate for marker-assisted selection (MAS).

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-012-1795-5
PMID: 22744424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]