1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8519-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks630. Epub
2012  Jun 29.

RORγ directly regulates the circadian expression of clock genes and downstream 
targets in vivo.

Takeda Y(1), Jothi R, Birault V, Jetten AM.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Section, Systems Biology Group, Biostatistics Branch, Division 
of Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

In this study, we demonstrate that the lack of retinoic acid-related orphan 
receptor (ROR) γ or α expression in mice significantly reduced the peak 
expression level of Cry1, Bmal1, E4bp4, Rev-Erbα and Per2 in an ROR isotype- and 
tissue-selective manner without affecting the phase of their rhythmic 
expression. Analysis of RORγ/RORα double knockout mice indicated that in certain 
tissues RORγ and RORα exhibited a certain degree of redundancy in regulating 
clock gene expression. Reporter gene analysis showed that RORγ was able to 
induce reporter gene activity through the RORE-containing regulatory regions of 
Cry1, Bmal1, Rev-Erbα and E4bp4. Co-expression of Rev-Erbα or addition of a 
novel ROR antagonist repressed this activation. ChIP-Seq and ChIP-Quantitative 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) analysis demonstrated that in vivo 
RORγ regulate these genes directly and in a Zeitgeber time (ZT)-dependent manner 
through these ROREs. This transcriptional activation by RORs was associated with 
changes in histone acetylation and chromatin accessibility. The rhythmic 
expression of RORγ1 by clock proteins may lead to the rhythmic expression of 
RORγ1 target genes. The presence of RORγ binding sites and its down-regulation 
in RORγ-/- liver suggest that the rhythmic expression of Avpr1a depends on RORγ 
consistent with the concept that RORγ1 provides a link between the clock 
machinery and its regulation of metabolic genes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks630
PMCID: PMC3458568
PMID: 22753030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]