1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jun 18;13 Suppl 4(Suppl 4):S6. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2164-13-S4-S6.

Evaluating our ability to predict the structural disruption of RNA by SNPs.

Ritz J(1), Martin JS, Laederach A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

The structure of RiboNucleic Acid (RNA) has the potential to be altered by a 
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP). Disease-associated SNPs mapping to 
non-coding regions of the genome that are transcribed into RiboNucleic Acid 
(RNA) can potentially affect cellular regulation (and cause disease) by altering 
the structure of the transcript. We performed a large-scale meta-analysis of 
Selective 2'-Hydroxyl Acylation analyzed by Primer Extension (SHAPE) data, which 
probes the structure of RNA. We found that several single point mutations exist 
that significantly disrupt RNA secondary structure in the five transcripts we 
analyzed. Thus, every RNA that is transcribed has the potential to be a 
"RiboSNitch;" where a SNP causes a large conformational change that alters 
regulatory function. Predicting the SNPs that will have the largest effect on 
RNA structure remains a contemporary computational challenge. We therefore 
benchmarked the most popular RNA structure prediction algorithms for their 
ability to identify mutations that maximally affect structure. We also evaluated 
metrics for rank ordering the extent of the structural change. Although no 
single algorithm/metric combination dramatically outperformed the others, small 
differences in AUC (Area Under the Curve) values reveal that certain approaches 
do provide better agreement with experiment. The experimental data we analyzed 
nonetheless show that multiple single point mutations exist in all RNA 
transcripts that significantly disrupt structure in agreement with the 
predictions.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S4-S6
PMCID: PMC3303743
PMID: 22759654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]