1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Oct 1;21(19):4253-69. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds248. Epub 2012
Jun  29.

Transcription initiation arising from E-cadherin/CDH1 intron2: a novel protein 
isoform that increases gastric cancer cell invasion and angiogenesis.

Pinheiro H(1), Carvalho J, Oliveira P, Ferreira D, Pinto MT, Osório H, Licastro 
D, Bordeira-Carriço R, Jordan P, Lazarevic D, Sanges R, Stupka E, Huntsman D, 
Seruca R, Oliveira C.

Author information:
(1)IPATIMUP-Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of 
Porto, Porto 4200-465, Portugal.

Disruption of E-cadherin (CDH1 gene) expression, subcellular localization or 
function arises during initiation and progression of almost 90% of all 
epithelial carcinomas. Nevertheless, the mechanisms through which this occurs 
are largely unknown. Previous studies showed the importance of CDH1 intron 2 
sequences for proper gene and protein expression, supporting these as E-cadherin 
cis-modulators. Through RACE and RT-PCR, we searched for transcription events 
arising from CDH1 intron 2 and discovered several new transcripts. One, named 
CDH1a, with high expression in spleen and absent from normal stomach, was 
demonstrated to be translated into a novel isoform, differing from canonical 
E-cadherin in its N-terminal, as determined by mass spectrometry. Quantitative 
and functional assays showed that when overexpressed in an E-cadherin negative 
context, CDH1a replaced canonical protein interactions and functions. However, 
when co-expressed with canonical E-cadherin, CDH1a increased cell invasion and 
angiogenesis. Further, interferon-induced gene IFITM1 and IFI27 levels were 
increased upon CDH1a overexpression. Effects on invasion and IFITM1 and IFI27 
expression were reverted upon CDH1a-specific knockdown. Importantly, CDH1a was 
de novo expressed in gastric cancer cell lines. This study presents a new 
mechanism by which E-cadherin functions are impaired by cis-regulatory 
mechanisms possibly with the involvement of inflammatory machinery. If confirmed 
in other cancer models, our data enclose potential for designing targeted 
therapies to rescue E-cadherin function.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds248
PMID: 22752307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]