1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038862. Epub 2012 Jun
21.

Evolutionary responses to a constructed niche: ancient Mesoamericans as a model 
of gene-culture coevolution.

Hünemeier T(1), Amorim CE, Azevedo S, Contini V, Acuña-Alonzo V, Rothhammer F, 
Dugoujon JM, Mazières S, Barrantes R, Villarreal-Molina MT, Paixão-Côrtes VR, 
Salzano FM, Canizales-Quinteros S, Ruiz-Linares A, Bortolini MC.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(7): 
doi/10.1371/annotation/c648ffaa-47da-45e4-9cde-ef2f4c95ce29.

Culture and genetics rely on two distinct but not isolated transmission systems. 
Cultural processes may change the human selective environment and thereby affect 
which individuals survive and reproduce. Here, we evaluated whether the modes of 
subsistence in Native American populations and the frequencies of the 
ABCA1*Arg230Cys polymorphism were correlated. Further, we examined whether the 
evolutionary consequences of the agriculturally constructed niche in Mesoamerica 
could be considered as a gene-culture coevolution model. For this purpose, we 
genotyped 229 individuals affiliated with 19 Native American populations and 
added data for 41 other Native American groups (n = 1905) to the analysis. In 
combination with the SNP cluster of a neutral region, this dataset was then used 
to unravel the scenario involved in 230Cys evolutionary history. The estimated 
age of 230Cys is compatible with its origin occurring in the American continent. 
The correlation of its frequencies with the archeological data on Zea pollen in 
Mesoamerica/Central America, the neutral coalescent simulations, and the 
F(ST)-based natural selection analysis suggest that maize domestication was the 
driving force in the increase in the frequencies of 230Cys in this region. These 
results may represent the first example of a gene-culture coevolution involving 
an autochthonous American allele.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038862
PMCID: PMC3380856
PMID: 22768049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.