1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jul 10;13:306. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-306.

Let-7b regulates the expression of the growth hormone receptor gene in 
deletion-type dwarf chickens.

Lin S(1), Li H, Mu H, Luo W, Li Y, Jia X, Wang S, Jia X, Nie Q, Li Y, Zhang X.

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular 
Breeding, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: A deletion mutation in the growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene 
results in the inhibition of skeletal muscle growth and fat deposition in dwarf 
chickens. We used microarray techniques to determine microRNA (miRNA) and mRNA 
expression profiles of GHR in the skeletal muscles of 14-day-old embryos as well 
as 7-week-old deletion-type dwarf and normal-type chickens. Our aim was to 
elucidate the miRNA regulation of GHR expression with respect to growth 
inhibition and fat deposition.
RESULTS: At the same developmental stages, different expression profiles in 
skeletal muscles of dwarf and normal chickens occurred for four miRNAs 
(miR-1623, miR-181b, let-7b, and miR-128). At different developmental stages, 
there was a significant difference in the expression profiles of a greater 
number of miRNAs. Eleven miRNAs were up-regulated and 18 down-regulated in the 
7-week-old dwarf chickens when compared with profiles in 14-day-old embryos. In 
7-week-old normal chickens, seven miRNAs were up-regulated and nine 
down-regulated compared with those in 14-day-old embryos. In skeletal muscles, 
22 genes were up-regulated and 33 down-regulated in 14-day-old embryos compared 
with 7-week-old dwarf chickens. Sixty-five mRNAs were up-regulated and 108 
down-regulated in 14-day-old embryos as compared with 7-week-old normal 
chickens. Thirty-four differentially expressed miRNAs were grouped into 18 
categories based on overlapping seed and target sequences. Only let-7b was found 
to be complementary to its target in the 3' untranslated region of GHR, and was 
able to inhibit its expression. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway 
analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reactions indicated there were three 
main signaling pathways regulating skeletal muscle growth and fat deposition of 
chickens. These were influenced by let-7b-regulated GHR. Suppression of the 
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) gene was found to be involved in the signaling 
pathway of adipocytokines.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a critical miRNA, let-7b, involved in the regulation of 
GHR. SOCS3 plays a critical role in regulating skeletal muscle growth and fat 
deposition via let-7b-mediated GHR expression.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-306
PMCID: PMC3428657
PMID: 22781587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]