1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;83(10):970-4. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-302770. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Olfactory impairment in familial ataxias.

Moscovich M(1), Munhoz RP, Teive HA, Raskin S, Carvalho Mde J, Barbosa ER, 
Ranvaud R, Liu J, McFarland K, Ashizawa T, Lees AJ, Silveira-Moriyama L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, 
Curitiba-PR, Brazil.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;83(10):952-3. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-303136.

The main clinical manifestations of the spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) result 
from the involvement of the cerebellum and its connections. Cerebellar activity 
has been consistently observed in functional imaging studies of olfaction, but 
the anatomical pathways responsible for this connection have not yet been 
elucidated. Previous studies have demonstrated olfactory deficit in SCA2, 
Friedreich's ataxia and in small groups of ataxia of diverse aetiology. The 
authors used a validated version of the 16-item smell identification test from 
Sniffin' Sticks (SS-16) was used to evaluate 37 patients with genetically 
determined autosomal dominant ataxia, and 31 with familial ataxia of unknown 
genetic basis. This data was also compared with results in 106 Parkinson's 
disease patients and 218 healthy controls. The SS-16 score was significantly 
lower in ataxia than in the control group (p<0.001, 95% CI for β=0.55 to 1.90) 
and significantly higher in ataxia than in Parkinson's disease (p<0.001, 95% CI 
for β=-4.58 to -3.00) when adjusted for age (p=0.001, 95% CI for β=-0.05 to 
-0.01), gender (p=0.19) and history of tobacco use (p=0.41). When adjusted for 
general cognitive function, no significant difference was found between the 
ataxia and control groups. This study confirms previous findings of mild 
hyposmia in ataxia, and further suggests this may be due to general cognitive 
deficits rather than specific olfactory problems.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-302770
PMCID: PMC3521149
PMID: 22791905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]