1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(7):e1002821. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002821. Epub 2012
Jul  12.

Functional evolution of mammalian odorant receptors.

Adipietro KA(1), Mainland JD, Matsunami H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

The mammalian odorant receptor (OR) repertoire is an attractive model to study 
evolution, because ORs have been subjected to rapid evolution between species, 
presumably caused by changes of the olfactory system to adapt to the 
environment. However, functional assessment of ORs in related species remains 
largely untested. Here we investigated the functional properties of primate and 
rodent ORs to determine how well evolutionary distance predicts functional 
characteristics. Using human and mouse ORs with previously identified ligands, 
we cloned 18 OR orthologs from chimpanzee and rhesus macaque and 17 mouse-rat 
orthologous pairs that are broadly representative of the OR repertoire. We 
functionally characterized the in vitro responses of ORs to a wide panel of 
odors and found similar ligand selectivity but dramatic differences in response 
magnitude. 87% of human-primate orthologs and 94% of mouse-rat orthologs showed 
differences in receptor potency (EC50) and/or efficacy (dynamic range) to an 
individual ligand. Notably dN/dS ratio, an indication of selective pressure 
during evolution, does not predict functional similarities between orthologs. 
Additionally, we found that orthologs responded to a common ligand 82% of the 
time, while human OR paralogs of the same subfamily responded to the common 
ligand only 33% of the time. Our results suggest that, while OR orthologs tend 
to show conserved ligand selectivity, their potency and/or efficacy dynamically 
change during evolution, even in closely related species. These functional 
changes in orthologs provide a platform for examining how the evolution of ORs 
can meet species-specific demands.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002821
PMCID: PMC3395614
PMID: 22807691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.