1. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Sep 5;134(35):14580-94. doi: 10.1021/ja3058474. Epub 2012 
Aug 21.

Proton transfer from C-6 of uridine 5'-monophosphate catalyzed by orotidine 
5'-monophosphate decarboxylase: formation and stability of a vinyl carbanion 
intermediate and the effect of a 5-fluoro substituent.

Tsang WY(1), Wood BM, Wong FM, Wu W, Gerlt JA, Amyes TL, Richard JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA.

The exchange for deuterium of the C-6 protons of uridine 5'-monophosphate (UMP) 
and 5-fluorouridine 5'-monophosphate (F-UMP) catalyzed by yeast orotidine 
5'-monophosphate decarboxylase (ScOMPDC) at pD 6.5-9.3 and 25 °C was monitored 
by (1)H NMR spectroscopy. Deuterium exchange proceeds by proton transfer from 
C-6 of the bound nucleotide to the deprotonated side chain of Lys-93 to give the 
enzyme-bound vinyl carbanion. The pD-rate profiles for k(cat) give turnover 
numbers for deuterium exchange into enzyme-bound UMP and F-UMP of 1.2 × 10(-5) 
and 0.041 s(-1), respectively, so that the 5-fluoro substituent results in a 
3400-fold increase in the first-order rate constant for deuterium exchange. The 
binding of UMP and F-UMP to ScOMPDC results in 0.5 and 1.4 unit decreases, 
respectively, in the pK(a) of the side chain of the catalytic base Lys-93, 
showing that these nucleotides bind preferentially to the deprotonated enzyme. 
We also report the first carbon acid pK(a) values for proton transfer from C-6 
of uridine (pK(CH) = 28.8) and 5-fluorouridine (pK(CH) = 25.1) in aqueous 
solution. The stabilizing effects of the 5-fluoro substituent on C-6 carbanion 
formation in solution (5 kcal/mol) and at ScOMPDC (6 kcal/mol) are similar. The 
binding of UMP and F-UMP to ScOMPDC results in a greater than 5 × 10(9)-fold 
increase in the equilibrium constant for proton transfer from C-6, so that 
ScOMPDC stabilizes the bound vinyl carbanions, relative to the bound 
nucleotides, by at least 13 kcal/mol. The pD-rate profile for k(cat)/K(m) for 
deuterium exchange into F-UMP gives the intrinsic second-order rate constant for 
exchange catalyzed by the deprotonated enzyme as 2300 M(-1) s(-1). This was used 
to calculate a total rate acceleration for ScOMPDC-catalyzed deuterium exchange 
of 3 × 10(10) M(-1), which corresponds to a transition-state stabilization for 
deuterium exchange of 14 kcal/mol. We conclude that a large portion of the total 
transition-state stabilization for the decarboxylation of orotidine 
5'-monophosphate can be accounted for by stabilization of the enzyme-bound vinyl 
carbanion intermediate of the stepwise reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/ja3058474
PMCID: PMC3434256
PMID: 22812629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]