1. Magn Reson Imaging. 2012 Nov;30(9):1203-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2012.05.008.
Epub  2012 Jul 21.

Quantitative assessment of dynamic PET imaging data in cancer imaging.

Muzi M(1), O'Sullivan F, Mankoff DA, Doot RK, Pierce LA, Kurland BF, Linden HM, 
Kinahan PE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-6004, 
USA. muzi@u.washington.edu

Clinical imaging in positron emission tomography (PET) is often performed using 
single-time-point estimates of tracer uptake or static imaging that provides a 
spatial map of regional tracer concentration. However, dynamic tracer imaging 
can provide considerably more information about in vivo biology by delineating 
both the temporal and spatial pattern of tracer uptake. In addition, several 
potential sources of error that occur in static imaging can be mitigated. This 
review focuses on the application of dynamic PET imaging to measuring regional 
cancer biologic features and especially in using dynamic PET imaging for 
quantitative therapeutic response monitoring for cancer clinical trials. Dynamic 
PET imaging output parameters, particularly transport (flow) and overall 
metabolic rate, have provided imaging end points for clinical trials at 
single-center institutions for years. However, dynamic imaging poses many 
challenges for multicenter clinical trial implementations from cross-center 
calibration to the inadequacy of a common informatics infrastructure. Underlying 
principles and methodology of PET dynamic imaging are first reviewed, followed 
by an examination of current approaches to dynamic PET image analysis with a 
specific case example of dynamic fluorothymidine imaging to illustrate the 
approach.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mri.2012.05.008
PMCID: PMC3466344
PMID: 22819579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]