1. Biochemistry. 2012 Aug 28;51(34):6767-75. doi: 10.1021/bi300596a. Epub 2012
Aug  17.

N-terminal region of CusB is sufficient for metal binding and metal transfer 
with the metallochaperone CusF.

Mealman TD(1), Zhou M, Affandi T, Chac√≥n KN, Aranguren ME, Blackburn NJ, Wysocki 
VH, McEvoy MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 
85721, USA.

Gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, utilize efflux resistance 
systems in order to expel toxins from their cells. Heavy-metal resistance is 
mediated by resistance nodulation cell division (RND)-based efflux pumps 
composed of a tripartite complex that includes an RND-transporter, an 
outer-membrane factor (OMF), and a membrane fusion protein (MFP) that spans the 
periplasmic space. MFPs are necessary for complex assembly and have been 
hypothesized to play an active role in substrate efflux. Crystal structures of 
MFPs are available, however incomplete, as large portions of the apparently 
disordered N- and C-termini are unresolved. Such is the case for CusB, the MFP 
of the E. coli Cu(I)/Ag(I) efflux pump CusCFBA. In this work, we have 
investigated the structure and function of the N-terminal region of CusB, which 
includes the metal-binding site and is missing from previously determined 
crystal structures. Results from mass spectrometry and X-ray absorption 
spectroscopy show that the isolated N-terminal 61 residues (CusB-NT) bind metal 
in a 1:1 stoichiometry with a coordination site composed of M21, M36, and M38, 
consistent with full-length CusB. NMR spectra show that CusB-NT is mostly 
disordered in the apo state; however, some slight structure is adopted upon 
metal binding. Much of the intact protein's function is maintained in this 
fragment as CusB-NT binds metal in vivo and in vitro, and metal is transferred 
between the metallochaperone CusF and CusB-NT in vitro. Functional analysis in 
vivo shows that full-length CusB is necessary in an intact polypeptide for full 
metal resistance, though CusB-NT alone can contribute partial metal resistance. 
These findings reinforce the theory that the role of CusB is not only to bind 
metal but also to play an active role in efflux.

DOI: 10.1021/bi300596a
PMCID: PMC3448809
PMID: 22812620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]