1. J Gen Virol. 2012 Oct;93(Pt 10):2204-2214. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.045005-0. Epub 
2012 Jul 18.

Strain-dependent effects of PB1-F2 of triple-reassortant H3N2 influenza viruses 
in swine.

Pena L(1)(2), Vincent AL(3), Loving CL(3), Henningson JN(3), Lager KM(3), Li 
W(1)(2), Perez DR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, College Park, MD, 
USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 
USA.
(3)Virus and Prion Diseases of Livestock Research Unit, National Animal Disease 
Center, USDA-ARS, Ames, IA, USA.

The PB1-F2 protein of the influenza A viruses (IAVs) can act as a virulence 
factor in mice. Its contribution to the virulence of IAV in swine, however, 
remains largely unexplored. In this study, we chose two genetically related H3N2 
triple-reassortant IAVs to assess the impact of PB1-F2 in virus replication and 
virulence in pigs. Using reverse genetics, we disrupted the PB1-F2 ORF of 
A/swine/Wisconsin/14094/99 (H3N2) (Sw/99) and A/turkey/Ohio/313053/04 (H3N2) 
(Ty/04). Removing the PB1-F2 ORF led to increased expression of PB1-N40 in a 
strain-dependent manner. Ablation of the PB1-F2 ORF (or incorporation of the 
N66S mutation in the PB1-F2 ORF, Sw/99 N66S) affected the replication in porcine 
alveolar macrophages of only the Sw/99 KO (PB1-F2 knockout) and Sw/99 N66S 
variants. The Ty/04 KO strain showed decreased virus replication in swine 
respiratory explants, whereas no such effect was observed in Sw/99 KO, compared 
with the wild-type (WT) counterparts. In pigs, PB1-F2 did not affect virus 
shedding or viral load in the lungs for any of these strains. Upon necropsy, 
PB1-F2 had no effect on the lung pathology caused by Sw/99 variants. 
Interestingly, the Ty/04 KO-infected pigs showed significantly increased lung 
pathology at 3 days post-infection compared with pigs infected with the Ty/04 WT 
strain. In addition, the pulmonary levels of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and gamma 
interferon were regulated differentially by the expression of PB1-F2. Taken 
together, these results indicate that PB1-F2 modulates virus replication, 
virulence and innate immune responses in pigs in a strain-dependent fashion.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.045005-0
PMCID: PMC3541787
PMID: 22815274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]