1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040540. Epub 2012 Jul
17.

Protein surface matching by combining local and global geometric information.

Ellingson L(1), Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 
Texas, United States of America.

Comparison of the binding sites of proteins is an effective means for predicting 
protein functions based on their structure information. Despite the importance 
of this problem and much research in the past, it is still very challenging to 
predict the binding ligands from the atomic structures of protein binding sites. 
Here, we designed a new algorithm, TIPSA (Triangulation-based 
Iterative-closest-point for Protein Surface Alignment), based on the iterative 
closest point (ICP) algorithm. TIPSA aims to find the maximum number of atoms 
that can be superposed between two protein binding sites, where any pair of 
superposed atoms has a distance smaller than a given threshold. The search 
starts from similar tetrahedra between two binding sites obtained from 3D 
Delaunay triangulation and uses the Hungarian algorithm to find additional 
matched atoms. We found that, due to the plasticity of protein binding sites, 
matching the rigid body of point clouds of protein binding sites is not adequate 
for satisfactory binding ligand prediction. We further incorporated global 
geometric information, the radius of gyration of binding site atoms, and used 
nearest neighbor classification for binding site prediction. Tested on benchmark 
data, our method achieved a performance comparable to the best methods in the 
literature, while simultaneously providing the common atom set and atom 
correspondences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040540
PMCID: PMC3398928
PMID: 22815760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.