1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3903-12. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00251-12. Epub 2012
Jul  23.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase ITCH negatively regulates canonical Wnt signaling by 
targeting dishevelled protein.

Wei W(1), Li M, Wang J, Nie F, Li L.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Dishevelled (Dvl) is a key component in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway and 
becomes hyperphosphorylated upon Wnt stimulation. Dvl is required for LRP6 
phosphorylation, which is essential for subsequent steps of signal transduction, 
such as Axin recruitment and cytosolic Î²-catenin stabilization. Here, we 
identify the HECT-containing Nedd4-like ubiquitin E3 ligase ITCH as a new 
Dvl-binding protein. ITCH ubiquitinates the phosphorylated form of Dvl and 
promotes its degradation via the proteasome pathway, thereby inhibiting 
canonical Wnt signaling. Knockdown of ITCH by RNA interference increased the 
stability of phosphorylated Dvl and upregulated Wnt reporter gene activity as 
well as endogenous Wnt target gene expression induced by Wnt stimulation. In 
addition, we found that both the PPXY motif and the DEP domain of Dvl are 
critical for its interaction with ITCH, as mutation in the PPXY motif 
(Dvl2-Y568F) or deletion of the DEP domain led to reduced affinity for ITCH. 
Consistently, overexpression of ITCH inhibited wild-type Dvl2-induced, but not 
Dvl2-Y568F mutant-induced, Wnt reporter activity. Moreover, the Y568F mutant, 
but not wild-type Dvl2, can reverse the ITCH-mediated inhibition of Wnt-induced 
reporter activity. Collectively, these results indicate that ITCH plays a 
negative regulatory role in modulating canonical Wnt signaling by targeting the 
phosphorylated form of Dvl.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00251-12
PMCID: PMC3457526
PMID: 22826439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]