1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2012 Jun;9(6):2045-56. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph9062045. Epub 2012 May 29.

Molecular detection and drug resistance of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex 
from cattle at a dairy farm in the Nkonkobe region of South Africa: a pilot 
study.

Silaigwana B(1), Green E, Ndip RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Fort Hare, P.O. 
Box X1314, Alice 5700, South Africa. silaigwana@yahoo.com

Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) causes tuberculosis (TB) in humans and 
animals. We investigated the presence of MTBC in cattle milk and its drug 
resistance using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Two hundred samples (100 mL 
each) were obtained from a dairy farm in the Nkonkobe region of South Africa. 
The samples were processed using the modified Petroff method. DNA was isolated 
using a Zymo Bacterial DNA kit and amplified using Seeplex(速) MTB Nested ACE 
assay. The Genotype(速) Mycobacterium tuberculosis-multidrug resistantplus 
(MTBDRplus) assay was used to perform drug susceptibility and detection of 
mutations conferring resistance to isoniazid (INH) and rifampicin (RIF). Eleven 
samples tested positive for MTBC DNA using the Seeplex(速) MTB Nested ACE assay. 
The Genotype(速) MTBDRplus assay showed that 10/11 samples were resistant to both 
INH and RIF i.e., multi-drug resistant (MDR). The most and least frequent rpoB 
mutations detected in RIF resistant samples were H526Y (9/10) and D516V (2/10) 
respectively. None of the INH resistant samples harbored mutations in the katG 
gene. However, all of them harbored the T8A mutation in the inhA gene. These 
results have clinical and epidemiological significance and calls for further 
studies and necessary actions to delineate the situation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph9062045
PMCID: PMC3397363
PMID: 22829789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]