1. J Cell Sci. 2012 Oct 15;125(Pt 20):4812-21. doi: 10.1242/jcs.107045. Epub 2012
 Jul 23.

The N-terminal TOG domain of Arabidopsis MOR1 modulates affinity for microtubule 
polymers.

Lechner B(1), Rashbrooke MC, Collings DA, Eng RC, Kawamura E, Whittington AT, 
Wasteneys GO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Microtubule-associated proteins of the highly conserved XMAP215/Dis1 family 
promote both microtubule growth and shrinkage, and move with the dynamic 
microtubule ends. The plant homologue, MOR1, is predicted to form a long linear 
molecule with five N-terminal TOG domains. Within the first (TOG1) domain, the 
mor1-1 leucine to phenylalanine (L174F) substitution causes 
temperature-dependent disorganization of microtubule arrays and reduces 
microtubule growth and shrinkage rates. By expressing the two N-terminal TOG 
domains (TOG12) of MOR1, both in planta for analysis in living cells and in 
bacteria for in vitro microtubule-binding and polymerization assays, we 
determined that the N-terminal domain of MOR1 is crucial for microtubule polymer 
binding. Tagging TOG12 at the N-terminus interfered with its ability to bind 
microtubules when stably expressed in Arabidopsis or when transiently 
overexpressed in leek epidermal cells, and impeded polymerase activity in vitro. 
In contrast, TOG12 tagged at the C-terminus interacted with microtubules in 
vivo, rescued the temperature-sensitive mor1-1 phenotype, and promoted 
microtubule polymerization in vitro. TOG12 constructs containing the L174F 
mor1-1 point mutation caused microtubule disruption when transiently 
overexpressed in leek epidermis and increased the affinity of TOG12 for 
microtubules in vitro. This suggests that the mor1-1 mutant protein makes 
microtubules less dynamic by binding the microtubule lattice too strongly to 
support rapid plus-end tracking. We conclude from our results that a balanced 
microtubule affinity in the N-terminal TOG domain is crucial for the polymerase 
activity of MOR1.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.107045
PMID: 22825869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]