1. Mar Drugs. 2012 Jun;10(6):1225-1243. doi: 10.3390/md10061225. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Microbial regulation in gorgonian corals.

Hunt LR(1)(2), Smith SM(1), Downum KR(1), Mydlarz LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at Arlington, 235 Life Science, 
Arlington, TX 76019, USA.
(2)United States Environmental Protection Agency Region 6, 1445 Ross Avenue, 
Dallas, TX 75202, USA.

Gorgonian corals possess many novel natural products that could potentially 
mediate coral-bacterial interactions. Since many bacteria use quorum sensing 
(QS) signals to facilitate colonization of host organisms, regulation of 
prokaryotic cell-to-cell communication may represent an important bacterial 
control mechanism. In the present study, we examined extracts of twelve species 
of Caribbean gorgonian corals, for mechanisms that regulate microbial 
colonization, such as antibacterial activity and QS regulatory activity. Ethanol 
extracts of gorgonians collected from Puerto Rico and the Florida Keys showed a 
range of both antibacterial and QS activities using a specific Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa QS reporter, sensitive to long chain AHLs and a short chain 
N-acylhomoserine lactones (AHL) biosensor, Chromobacterium violaceium. Overall, 
the gorgonian corals had higher antimicrobial activity against non-marine 
strains when compared to marine strains. Pseudopterogorgia americana, 
Pseusopterogorgia acerosa, and Pseudoplexuara flexuosa had the highest QS 
inhibitory effect. Interestingly, Pseudoplexuara porosa extracts stimulated QS 
activity with a striking 17-fold increase in signal. The stimulation of QS by P. 
porosa or other elements of the holobiont may encourage colonization or 
recruitment of specific microbial species. Overall, these results suggest the 
presence of novel stimulatory QS, inhibitory QS and bactericidal compounds in 
gorgonian corals. A better understanding of these compounds may reveal insight 
into coral-microbial ecology and whether a therapeutic potential exists.

DOI: 10.3390/md10061225
PMCID: PMC3397436
PMID: 22822369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]