1. Oncogene. 2013 Jun 20;32(25):3091-100. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.315. Epub 2012
Jul  23.

Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 occur frequently in intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas and share hypermethylation targets with glioblastomas.

Wang P(1), Dong Q, Zhang C, Kuan PF, Liu Y, Jeck WR, Andersen JB, Jiang W, 
Savich GL, Tan TX, Auman JT, Hoskins JM, Misher AD, Moser CD, Yourstone SM, Kim 
JW, Cibulskis K, Getz G, Hunt HV, Thorgeirsson SS, Roberts LR, Ye D, Guan KL, 
Xiong Y, Qin LX, Chiang DY.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Mutations in the genes encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase, IDH1 and IDH2, have 
been reported in gliomas, myeloid leukemias, chondrosarcomas and thyroid cancer. 
We discovered IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in 34 of 326 (10%) intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinomas. Tumor with mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 had lower 
5-hydroxymethylcytosine and higher 5-methylcytosine levels, as well as increased 
dimethylation of histone H3 lysine 79 (H3K79). Mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 were 
associated with longer overall survival (P=0.028) and were independently 
associated with a longer time to tumor recurrence after intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma resection in multivariate analysis (P=0.021). IDH1 and IDH2 
mutations were significantly associated with increased levels of p53 in 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, but no mutations in the p53 gene were found, 
suggesting that mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 may cause a stress that leads to p53 
activation. We identified 2309 genes that were significantly hypermethylated in 
19 cholangiocarcinomas with mutations in IDH1 or IDH2, compared with 
cholangiocarcinomas without these mutations. Hypermethylated CpG sites were 
significantly enriched in CpG shores and upstream of transcription start sites, 
suggesting a global regulation of transcriptional potential. Half of the 
hypermethylated genes overlapped with DNA hypermethylation in IDH1-mutant 
gliobastomas, suggesting the existence of a common set of genes whose expression 
may be affected by mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 in different types of tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.315
PMCID: PMC3500578
PMID: 22824796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST D.Y.C. is a 
consultant for Aveo Pharmaceuticals and Entremed, and held minor stock ownership 
in Illumina, which did not have any role in the study design, data collection 
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.