1. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040644. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

ADP ribosylation by PARP-1 suppresses HOXB7 transcriptional activity.

Wu X(1), Ellmann S, Rubin E, Gil M, Jin K, Han L, Chen H, Kwon EM, Guo J, Ha HC, 
Sukumar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. xinyan@jhmi.edu

Interactions with cofactors regulate transcriptional activity and also help HOX 
proteins to achieve the specificity required for transcriptional regulation of 
target genes. In this study, we describe a novel protein/protein interaction of 
HOXB7 with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) that involves the homeodomain 
of HOXB7 and the first zinc finger domain of PARP-1. Upon binding to PARP-1, 
HOXB7 undergoes poly(ADP-ribosyl)altion resulting in a reduction of its 
transcriptional activity. Since aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues are 
acceptors of the ADP ribose moiety transferred by PARP-1, deletion of the 
evolutionarily conserved C-terminal Glu-rich tail of HOXB7 dramatically 
attenuates ADP-ribosylation of HOXB7 by PARP-1. Further, a mutant of HOXB7 
without the Glu-rich tail loses the ability to be negatively regulated by PARP-1 
and becomes transcriptionally more active in luciferase reporter assays. Since 
the homeodomain is highly conserved among HOX proteins, five other HOX proteins 
were tested. All six showed interaction with, and were poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated by 
PARP-1. However, among them, this modification altered the DNA binding activity 
of only HOXA7 and HOXB7. In summary, this study identifies a new interacting 
partner of HOX proteins. More importantly, this study reveals a novel mechanism 
whereby polyADP-ribosylation regulates transcriptional activities of HOX 
proteins such as HOXB7 and HOXA7.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040644
PMCID: PMC3402478
PMID: 22844406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.