1. Biomaterials. 2012 Oct;33(30):7478-88. doi:
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.06.097.  Epub 2012 Jul 28.

Iterative design of peptide-based hydrogels and the effect of network 
electrostatics on primary chondrocyte behavior.

Sinthuvanich C(1), Haines-Butterick LA, Nagy KJ, Schneider JP.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick National 
Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Iterative peptide design was used to generate two peptide-based hydrogels to 
study the effect of network electrostatics on primary chondrocyte behavior. MAX8 
and HLT2 peptides have formal charge states of +7 and +5 per monomer, 
respectively. These peptides undergo triggered folding and self-assembly to 
afford hydrogel networks having similar rheological behavior and local network 
morphologies, yet different electrostatic character. Each gel can be used to 
directly encapsulate and syringe-deliver cells. The influence of network 
electrostatics on cell viability after encapsulation and delivery, extracellular 
matrix deposition, gene expression, and the bulk mechanical properties of the 
gel-cell constructs as a function of culture time was assessed. The less 
electropositive HLT2 gel provides a microenvironment more conducive to 
chondrocyte encapsulation, delivery, and phenotype maintenance. Cell viability 
was higher for this gel and although a moderate number of cells dedifferentiated 
to a fibroblast-like phenotype, many retained their chondrocytic behavior. As a 
result, gel-cell constructs prepared with HLT2, cultured under static in vitro 
conditions, contained more GAG and type II collagen resulting in mechanically 
superior constructs. Chondrocytes delivered in the more electropositive MAX8 gel 
experienced a greater degree of cell death during encapsulation and delivery and 
the remaining viable cells were less prone to maintain their phenotype. As a 
result, MAX8 gel-cell constructs had fewer cells, of which a limited number were 
capable of laying down cartilage-specific ECM.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.06.097
PMCID: PMC3600380
PMID: 22841922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]