1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Oct;79(10):666-79. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22076. Epub 2012 Sep 
11.

Regulation of the ovarian reserve by members of the transforming growth factor 
beta family.

Pangas SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA. spangas@bcm.edu

Genetic or environmental factors that affect the endowment of oocytes, their 
assembly into primordial follicles, or their subsequent entry into the growing 
follicle pool can disrupt reproductive function and may underlie disorders such 
as primary ovarian insufficiency. Mouse models have been instrumental in 
identifying genes important in ovarian development, and a number of genes now 
associated with ovarian dysfunction in women were first identified as causing 
reproductive defects in knockout mice. The transforming growth factor beta 
(TGFB) family consists of developmentally important growth factors that include 
the TGFBs, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), activins, bone morphogenetic proteins 
(BMPs), and growth and differentiation factor 9 (GDF9). The ovarian primordial 
follicle pool is the source of oocytes in adults. Development of this pool can 
be grossly divided into three key processes: (1) establishment of oocytes during 
embryogenesis followed by (2) assembly and (3) activation of the primordial 
follicle. Disruptions in any of these processes may cause reproductive 
dysfunction. Most members of the TGFB family show pivotal roles in each of these 
areas. Understanding the phenotypes of various mouse models for this protein 
family will be directly relevant to understanding how disruptions in TGFB family 
signaling result in reproductive diseases in women and will present new areas 
for development of tailored diagnostics and interventions for infertility.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.22076
PMCID: PMC3473177
PMID: 22847922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]