1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):32136-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385096. Epub 
2012 Jul 26.

Relative movements of transmembrane regions at the outer mouth of the cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator channel pore during channel gating.

Wang W(1), Linsdell P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada.

Multiple transmembrane (TM) segments line the pore of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator Cl(-) channel; however, the relative 
alignment of these TMs and their relative movements during channel gating are 
unknown. To gain three-dimensional structural information on the outer pore, we 
have used patch clamp recording to study the proximity of pairs of cysteine side 
chains introduced into TMs 6 and 11, using both disulfide cross-linking and 
Cd(2+) coordination. Following channel activation, disulfide bonds could 
apparently be formed between three cysteine pairs (of 15 studied): R334C/T1122C, 
R334C/G1127C, and T338C/S1118C. To examine the state dependence of 
cross-linking, we combined these cysteine mutations with a nucleotide-binding 
domain mutation (E1371Q) that stabilizes the channel open state. Investigation 
of the effects of the E1371Q mutation on disulfide bond formation and Cd(2+) 
coordination suggests that although R334C/T1122C and T338C/S1118C are closer 
together in the channel open state, R334C/G1127C are close together and can form 
disulfide bonds only when the channel is closed. These results provide important 
new information on the three-dimensional structure of the outer mouth of the 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator channel pore: TMs 6 and 11 
are close enough together to form disulfide bonds in both open and closed 
channels. Moreover, the altered relative locations of residues in open and in 
closed channels that we infer allow us to propose that channel opening and 
closing may be associated with a relative translational movement of TMs 6 and 
11, with TM6 moving "down" (toward the cytoplasm) during channel opening.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385096
PMCID: PMC3442544
PMID: 22843683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]