1. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Sep;107(1-2):3-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.005. Epub
 2012 Jul 16.

Nutritional treatment for inborn errors of metabolism: indications, regulations, 
and availability of medical foods and dietary supplements using phenylketonuria 
as an example.

Camp KM(1), Lloyd-Puryear MA, Huntington KL.

Author information:
(1)Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. campkm@od.nih.gov

Medical foods and dietary supplements are used to treat rare inborn errors of 
metabolism (IEM) identified through state-based universal newborn screening. 
These products are regulated under Food and Drug Administration (FDA) food and 
dietary supplement statutes. The lack of harmony in terminology used to refer to 
medical foods and dietary supplements and the misuse of words that imply that 
FDA regulates these products as drugs have led to confusion. These products are 
expensive and, although they are used for medical treatment of IEM, third-party 
payer coverage of these products is inconsistent across the United States. 
Clinicians and families report termination of coverage in late adolescence, 
failure to cover treatment during pregnancy, coverage for select conditions 
only, or no coverage. We describe the indications for specific nutritional 
treatment products for IEM and their regulation, availability, and 
categorization. We conclude with a discussion of the problems that have 
contributed to the paradox of identifying individuals with IEM through newborn 
screening but not guaranteeing that they receive optimal treatment. Throughout 
the paper, we use the nutritional treatment of phenylketonuria as an example of 
IEM treatment.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.07.005
PMCID: PMC3444638
PMID: 22854513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]