1. Reproduction. 2012 Oct;144(4):433-45. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0158. Epub 2012 Aug
6.

Spermatid development in XO male mice with varying Y chromosome short-arm gene 
content: evidence for a Y gene controlling the initiation of sperm 
morphogenesis.

Vernet N(1), Mahadevaiah SK, Ellis PJ, de Rooij DG, Burgoyne PS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Genetics, MRC National 
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. 
vernet.nadege@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Reproduction. 2020 Apr 01;159(4):X1. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0158e.

We recently used three XO male mouse models with varying Y short-arm (Yp) gene 
complements, analysed at 30 days post partum, to demonstrate a Yp gene 
requirement for the apoptotic elimination of spermatocytes with a univalent X 
chromosome at the first meiotic metaphase. The three mouse models were i) 
XSxr(a)O in which the Yp-derived Tp(Y)1Ct(Sxr-a) sex reversal factor provides an 
almost complete Yp gene complement, ii) XSxr(b)O,Eif2s3y males in which 
Tp(Y)1Ct(Sxr-b) has a deletion completely or partially removing eight Yp genes - 
the Yp gene Eif2s3y has been added as a transgene to support spermatogonial 
proliferation, and iii) XOSry,Eif2s3y males in which the Sry transgene directs 
gonad development along the male pathway. In this study, we have used the same 
mouse models analysed at 6 weeks of age to investigate potential Yp gene 
involvement in spermiogenesis. We found that all three mouse models produce 
haploid and diploid spermatids and that the diploid spermatids showed frequent 
duplication of the developing acrosomal cap during the early stages. However, 
only in XSxr(a)O males did spermiogenesis continue to completion. Most 
strikingly, in XOSry,Eif2s3y males, spermatid development arrested at round 
spermatid step 7 so that no sperm head restructuring or tail development was 
observed. In contrast, in XSxr(b)O,Eif2s3y males, spermatids with substantial 
sperm head and tail morphogenesis could be easily found, although this was 
delayed compared with XSxr(a)O. We conclude that Sxr(a) (and therefore Yp) 
includes genetic information essential for sperm morphogenesis and that this is 
partially retained in Sxr(b).

DOI: 10.1530/REP-12-0158
PMCID: PMC3464043
PMID: 22869781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]