1. Oncol Lett. 2011 Mar;2(2):389-393. doi: 10.3892/ol.2011.248. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Genetic testing and first presymptomatic diagnosis in Moroccan families at high 
risk for breast/ovarian cancer.

Laarabi FZ(1), Jaouad IC, Ouldim K, Aboussair N, Jalil A, Gueddari BE, Benjaafar 
N, Sefiani A.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Génomique Humaine, Université Mohamed V Souissi, Rabat, Morocco.

Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes highly predispose to breast and 
ovarian cancers and are responsible for a substantial proportion of familial 
breast and ovarian cancers. No female individuals from families from Morocco 
affected by breast cancer with mutations of these genes have previously been 
reported, and clinicians in Morocco are unaccustomed to dealing with healthy 
female individuals carrying mutations in the BRCA genes. This study aimed to 
report the initial experience of a group of Moroccan investigators carrying out 
predictive genetic testing to detect a known familial mutation in healthy 
Moroccan females with a high risk of developing breast cancer and to introduce 
supervision of these asymptomatic female carriers as a new approach in the 
prevention and early diagnosis of breast and ovarian cancers in Morocco. 
Presymptomatic diagnosis was carried out using DNA genetic testing in 5 healthy 
Moroccan female individuals from three families with an elevated risk of 
developing breast cancer. These are the first Moroccan families reported to be 
affected by breast cancers associated with BRCA mutations. Presymptomatic 
diagnosis was carried out for breast cancer in 5 female individuals from three 
Moroccan families with BRCA mutations. Two of the families are the first 
reported incidence of the founder mutation Ashkenazi BRCA1-185_186delAG in 
Moroccan patients. The third family carried the known BRCA2 mutation 
c.5073dupA/p.trp1692metfsX3. We tested the presence of these mutations in 5 
asymptomatic healthy females from the three families. Two sisters from family 1 
carried the BRCA1-185_186delAG mutation, whereas the third female individual 
from family 2 carried the c.5073dupA/p.trp1692metfsX3 mutation. However, one 
healthy female individual and her mother from family 3 did not carry the 
familial mutation of the BRCA1 gene. This study found BRCA mutations in three 
asymptomatic subjects, suggesting that this is the first step towards the 
development of persistent medical monitoring of females from families with a 
history of breast and ovarian cancers. Consequently, it is crucial for 
oncologists in Morocco to initiate the supervision of healthy female individuals 
with genetic defects which may lead to hereditary cancers.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2011.248
PMCID: PMC3410606
PMID: 22866093