1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e41971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041971. Epub 2012 Aug
6.

Vagaries of fluorochrome reporter gene expression in Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.

Schallenberg S(1), Petzold C, Tsai PY, Sparwasser T, Kretschmer K.

Author information:
(1)Immunotolerance in Regeneration, CRTD/DFG-Center for Regenerative Therapies 
Dresden, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T (Treg) cell lineage commitment and expression of the 
transcription factor Foxp3 can be induced at the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive 
(DP) and CD4(+)CD8(?) single-positive stages of thymic development, as well as 
in postthymic CD4(+) T cells in peripheral lymphoid tissues. The availability of 
transgenic mice with Foxp3-dependent fluorochrome reporter gene expression has 
greatly facilitated studies on the intra- and extrathymic generation of murine 
Foxp3(+) Treg cells. Here, we performed a comparative analysis of thymic Treg 
cell development and peripheral compartments of mature Treg cells in various 
transgenic strains with gene targeted and bacterial artificial chromosome 
(BAC)-driven Foxp3-fluorochrome expression. These studies revealed a relative 
deficiency of Foxp3(+) DP thymocytes selectively in mice with targeted insertion 
of the fluorochrome reporter gene coding sequence into the endogenous Foxp3 
gene. While Foxp3 BAC-driven fluorochrome expression in ex vivo CD4(+) T cells 
was found to faithfully reflect Foxp3 protein expression, we provide evidence 
that Foxp3 BAC transgenesis can result in sizable populations of Foxp3(+) Treg 
cells that lack fluorochrome reporter expression. This could be attributed to 
both timely delayed up-regulation of BAC expression in developing Treg cells and 
the accumulation of peripheral Foxp3(+) Treg cells with continuous 
transcriptional inactivity of the Foxp3 BAC transgene.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041971
PMCID: PMC3412838
PMID: 22879902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.