1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042445. Epub 2012 Aug
2.

Genetic variants in ER cofactor genes and endometrial cancer risk.

Li Y(1), Low HQ, Foo JN, Darabi H, EinarsdÏŒttir K, Humphreys K, Spurdle A; ANECS 
Group; Easton DF, Thompson DJ, Dunning AM, Pharoah PD, Czene K, Chia KS, Hall P, 
Liu J.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Given that the transcriptional regulatory activity of estrogen receptor (ER) is 
modulated by its biochemical cofactors, genetic variation within the ER cofactor 
genes may alter cellular response to estrogen exposure and consequently modify 
the risk for endometrial cancer. We genotyped 685 tagging SNPs within 60 ER 
cofactor genes in 564 endometrial cancer cases and 1,510 controls from Sweden, 
and tested their associations with the risk of endometrial cancer. We 
investigated the associations of individual SNPs by using a trend test as well 
as multiple SNPs within a gene or gene complex by using multi-variant 
association analysis. No significant association was observed for any individual 
SNPs or genes, but a marginal association of the cumulative genetic variation of 
the NCOA2 complex as a whole (NCOA2, CARM1, CREBBP, PRMT1 and EP300) with 
endometrial cancer risk was observed (P(adjusted) = 0.033). However, the 
association failed to be replicated in an independent European dataset of 1265 
cases and 5190 controls (P = 0.71). The results indicate that common genetic 
variants within ER cofactor genes are unlikely to play a significant role in 
endometrial cancer risk in European population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042445
PMCID: PMC3411617
PMID: 22876322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.