1. Crit Ultrasound J. 2012 Jul 2;4(1):15. doi: 10.1186/2036-7902-4-15.

The sonographic digital portfolio: a longitudinal ultrasound image tracking 
program.

Hughes DR(1), Kube E, Gable BD, Madore FE, Bahner DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, The Ohio State University Medical Center, 
760 Prior Health Sciences Library, 376 W 10th Ave, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA. 
david.bahner@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Ultrasonography (US) at the medical student level is developing. As 
clinical skills and simulation centers expand, US equipment miniaturizes, and 
more students are exposed to ultrasound; a digital portfolio comprised of US 
images and videos may be useful in demonstrating experience and possibly 
competency.
METHODS: Medical students participated in US curricula consisting of didactics 
and hands-on training. From 1 July 2006 to 30 June 2008, student images and 
videos were saved. Total images and videos were evaluated and catalogued.
RESULTS: A total of 10,074 images and 1,227 videos were saved during the 2-year 
period. For the academic year 2006 to 2007, 159 medical students obtained 3,641 
of the images (84.9%) and 270 of the videos (86.0%). First year students 
obtained 778 images and 20 videos; second year students, 1,174 images and 64 
videos; third year students, 211 images and 20 videos; and fourth year students, 
1,478 images and 166 videos.For the academic year 2007 to 2008, 222 medical 
students obtained 4,340 images (75%) and 619 videos (67.8%). First year students 
obtained 624 images and 109 videos; second year students, 555 images and 81 
videos; third year students, 132 images and 14 videos; and fourth year students, 
3,029 images and 415 videos.
CONCLUSIONS: The ultrasound digital portfolio allows medical students to collate 
and document their ultrasound experience. Currently, there is no requirement for 
ultrasound training, documentation of competency, or minimum numbers of US exams 
for medical education. The ultrasound digital portfolio may be a useful tool in 
documenting ultrasound proficiency.

DOI: 10.1186/2036-7902-4-15
PMCID: PMC3439353
PMID: 22871130