1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042401. Epub 2012 Aug
3.

Systematic testing of literature reported genetic variation associated with 
coronary restenosis: results of the GENDER Study.

Verschuren JJ(1), Trompet S, Postmus I, Sampietro ML, Heijmans BT, 
Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Slagboom PE, Jukema JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Coronary restenosis after percutaneous coronary intervention still 
remains a significant problem, despite all medical advances. Unraveling the 
mechanisms leading to restenosis development remains challenging. Many studies 
have identified genetic markers associated with restenosis, but consistent 
replication of the reported markers is scarce. The aim of the current study was 
to analyze the joined effect of previously in literature reported candidate 
genes for restenosis in the GENetic DEterminants of Restenosis (GENDER) 
databank.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Candidate genes were selected using a MEDLINE 
search including the terms 'genetic polymorphism' and 'coronary restenosis'. The 
final set included 36 genes. Subsequently, all single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in the genomic region of these genes were analyzed in GENDER using 
set-based analysis in PLINK. The GENDER databank contains genotypic data of 
2,571,586 SNPs of 295 cases with restenosis and 571 matched controls. The set, 
including all 36 literature reported genes, was, indeed, significantly 
associated with restenosis, p = 0.024 in the GENDER study. Subsequent analyses 
of the individual genes demonstrated that the observed association of the 
complete set was determined by 6 of the 36 genes.
CONCLUSION: Despite overt inconsistencies in literature, with regard to 
individual candidate gene studies, this is the first study demonstrating that 
the joint effect of all these genes together, indeed, is associated with 
restenosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042401
PMCID: PMC3411750
PMID: 22879966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.