1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2012 Nov 1;527(1):23-30. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.012.
 Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Characterization of rabbit aldose reductase-like protein with 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase activity.

Endo S(1), Matsunaga T, Kumada S, Fujimoto A, Ohno S, El-Kabbani O, Hu D, 
Toyooka N, Mano J, Tajima K, Hara A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu 501-1196, 
Japan. sendo@gifu-pu.ac.jp

In this study, we isolated the cDNA for a rabbit aldose reductase-like protein 
that shared an 86% sequence identity to human aldo-keto reductase (AKR)(1) 1B10 
and has been assigned as AKR1B19 in the AKR superfamily. The purified 
recombinant AKR1B19 was similar to AKR1B10 and rabbit aldose reductase (AKR1B2) 
in the substrate specificity for various aldehydes and α-dicarbonyl compounds. 
In contrast to AKR1B10 and AKR1B2, AKR1B19 efficiently reduced 
3-keto-5α/β-dihydro-C19/C21/C24-steroids into the corresponding 
3β-hydroxysteroids, showing K(m) of 1.3-9.1 μM and k(cat) of 1.1-7.6 min(-1). 
The stereospecific reduction was also observed in the metabolism of 5α- and 
5β-dihydrotestosterones in AKR1B19-overexpressing cells. The mRNA for AKR1B19 
was ubiquitously expressed in rabbit tissues, and the enzyme was co-purified 
with 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity from the lung. Thus, AKR1B19 may 
function as a 3-ketoreductase, as well as a defense system against cytotoxic 
carbonyl compounds in rabbit tissues. The molecular determinants for the unique 
3-ketoreductase activity were investigated by replacement of Phe303 and Met304 
in AKR1B19 with Gln and Ser, respectively, in AKR1B10. Single and double 
mutations (F303Q, M304S and F303Q/M304S) significantly impaired this activity, 
suggesting the two residues play critical roles in recognition of the steroidal 
substrate.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2012.07.012
PMID: 22874434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]