1. ISRN Hematol. 2012;2012:212586. doi: 10.5402/2012/212586. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Cotransduction with MGMT and Ubiquitous or Erythroid-Specific GFP Lentiviruses 
Allows Enrichment of Dual-Positive Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells In Vivo.

Roth JC(1), Ismail M, Reese JS, Lingas KT, Ferrari G, Gerson SL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, The University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The P140K point mutant of MGMT allows robust hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) 
enrichment in vivo. Thus, dual-gene vectors that couple MGMT and therapeutic 
gene expression have allowed enrichment of gene-corrected HSCs in animal models. 
However, expression levels from dual-gene vectors are often reduced for one or 
both genes. Further, it may be desirable to express selection and therapeutic 
genes at distinct stages of cell differentiation. In this regard, we evaluated 
whether hematopoietic cells could be efficiently cotransduced using low MOIs of 
two separate single-gene lentiviruses, including MGMT for dual-positive cell 
enrichment. Cotransduction efficiencies were evaluated using a range of 
MGMT : GFP virus ratios, MOIs, and selection stringencies in vitro. 
Cotransduction was optimal when equal proportions of each virus were used, but 
low MGMT : GFP virus ratios resulted in the highest proportion of dual-positive 
cells after selection. This strategy was then evaluated in murine models for in 
vivo selection of HSCs cotransduced with a ubiquitous MGMT expression vector and 
an erythroid-specific GFP vector. Although the MGMT and GFP expression 
percentages were variable among engrafted recipients, drug selection enriched 
MGMT-positive leukocyte and GFP-positive erythroid cell populations. These data 
demonstrate cotransduction as a mean to rapidly enrich and evaluate therapeutic 
lentivectors in vivo.

DOI: 10.5402/2012/212586
PMCID: PMC3408655
PMID: 22888445