1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42538. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042538. Epub 2012 Aug
3.

Prevalence and associated factors of diabetes and impaired fasting glucose in 
Chinese hypertensive adults aged 45 to 75 years.

Qin X(1), Li J, Zhang Y, Ma W, Fan F, Wang B, Xing H, Tang G, Wang X, Xu X, Xu 
X, Huo Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedicine, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study examined the prevalence of impaired fasting glucose (IFG) 
and diabetes and their associated factors in 17,184 Chinese hypertensive adults 
aged 45-75 years.
METHODS: A cross-sectional investigation was carried out in a rural area of 
Lianyungang, China. Previously undiagnosed diabetes [fasting plasma glucose 
(FPG) ≥ 7.0 mmol/l] and IFG (6.1-6.9 mmol/l) were defined based on FPG 
concentration. Previously diagnosed diabetes was determined on the basis of 
self-report. Total diabetes included both previously diagnosed diabetes and 
previously undiagnosed diabetes.
RESULTS: The prevalence of previously diagnosed diabetes, undiagnosed diabetes, 
and IFG were 3.4%, 9.8%, and 14.1%, respectively. About 74.2% of the 
participants with diabetes had not previously been diagnosed. In the 
multivariable logistic-regression model, older age, men, antihypertensive 
treatment, obesity (BMI ≥ 25 kg/m(2)), abdominal obesity (waist circumference ≥ 
90 cm for men and ≥ 80 cm for women), non-current smoking, a family history of 
diabetes, higher heart rate, lower physical activity levels, and inland 
residence (versus coastal) were significantly associated with both total 
diabetes and previously undiagnosed diabetes. Furthermore, methylene- 
tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677 TT genotype was an independent associated 
factor for total diabetes, and current alcohol drinking was an independent 
associated factor for previously undiagnosed diabetes. At the same time, older 
age, men, abdominal obesity, non-current smoking, current alcohol drinking, a 
family history of diabetes, higher heart rate, and inland residence (versus 
coastal) were important independent associated factors for IFG.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, we found a high prevalence of diabetes in Chinese 
hypertensive adults. Furthermore, about three out of every four diabetic adults 
were undiagnosed. Our results suggest that population-level measures aimed at 
the prevention, identification (even if only based on the FPG evaluation), and 
treatment of diabetes should be urgently taken to overcome the diabetes epidemic 
in Chinese hypertensive adults.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042538
PMCID: PMC3411819
PMID: 22880024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.