1. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 18;32(29):3420-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.355. Epub 2012 Aug
 13.

Mer or Axl receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition promotes apoptosis, blocks growth 
and enhances chemosensitivity of human non-small cell lung cancer.

Linger RM(1), Cohen RA, Cummings CT, Sather S, Migdall-Wilson J, Middleton DH, 
Lu X, Bar√≥n AE, Franklin WA, Merrick DT, Jedlicka P, DeRyckere D, Heasley LE, 
Graham DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow 
Transplantation, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a prevalent and devastating disease that 
claims more lives than breast, prostate, colon and pancreatic cancers combined. 
Current research suggests that standard chemotherapy regimens have been 
optimized to maximal efficiency. Promising new treatment strategies involve 
novel agents targeting molecular aberrations present in subsets of NSCLC. We 
evaluated 88 human NSCLC tumors of diverse histology and identified Mer and Axl 
as receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) overexpressed in 69% and 93%, respectively, 
of tumors relative to surrounding normal lung tissue. Mer and Axl were also 
frequently overexpressed and activated in NSCLC cell lines. Ligand-dependent Mer 
or Axl activation stimulated MAPK, AKT and FAK signaling pathways indicating 
roles for these RTKs in multiple oncogenic processes. In addition, we identified 
a novel pro-survival pathway-involving AKT, CREB, Bcl-xL, survivin, and 
Bcl-2-downstream of Mer, which is differentially modulated by Axl signaling. We 
demonstrated that short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown of Mer or Axl 
significantly reduced NSCLC colony formation and growth of subcutaneous 
xenografts in nude mice. Mer or Axl knockdown also improved in vitro NSCLC 
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents by promoting apoptosis. When comparing 
the effects of Mer and Axl knockdown, Mer inhibition exhibited more complete 
blockade of tumor growth while Axl knockdown more robustly improved 
chemosensitivity. These results indicate that Mer and Axl have complementary and 
overlapping roles in NSCLC and suggest that treatment strategies targeting both 
RTKs may be more effective than singly-targeted agents. Our findings validate 
Mer and Axl as potential therapeutic targets in NSCLC and provide justification 
for development of novel therapeutic compounds that selectively inhibit Mer 
and/or Axl.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.355
PMCID: PMC3502700
PMID: 22890323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.