1. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2931-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200556. Epub
2012  Aug 15.

Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Cdkn2c deficiency promotes B1a cell expansion 
and autoimmunity in a mouse model of lupus.

Potula HH(1), Xu Z, Zeumer L, Sang A, Croker BP, Morel L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The lupus-prone NZM2410 mice present an expanded B1a cell population that we 
have mapped to the Sle2c1 lupus susceptibility locus. The expression of Cdkn2c, 
a gene encoding for cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p18(Ink4c) and located 
within Sle2c1, is significantly lower in B6.Sle2c1 B cells than in B6 B cells. 
To test the hypothesis that the B1a cell expansion in B6.Sle2c1 mice was due to 
a defective p18 expression, we analyzed the B1a cell phenotypes of p18-deficient 
C57BL/6 mice. We found a dose-dependent negative correlation between the number 
of B1a cells and p18 expression in B cells, with p18-deficient mice showing an 
early expansion of the peritoneal B1a cell pool. p18 deficiency enhanced the 
homeostatic expansion of B1a cells but not of splenic conventional B cells, and 
the elevated number of B6.Sle2c1 B1a cells was normalized by cyclin D2 
deficiency. These data demonstrated that p18 is a key regulator of the size of 
the B1a cell pool. B6.p18(-/-) mice produced significant amounts of anti-DNA IgM 
and IgG, indicating that p18 deficiency contributes to humoral autoimmunity. 
Finally, we have shown that Sle2c1 increases lpr-associated lymphadenopathy and 
T cell-mediated pathology. B6.p18(-/-).lpr mice showed a greater lymphadenopathy 
than B6.Sle2c1.lpr mice, but their renal pathology was intermediate between that 
of B6.lpr and B6.Sle2c1.lpr mice. This indicated that p18-deficiency synergizes, 
at least partially, with lpr-mediated pathology. These results show that Cdkn2c 
contributes to lupus susceptibility by regulating the size of the B1a cell 
compartment and hence their contribution to autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200556
PMCID: PMC3436953
PMID: 22896639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]