1. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 5;31(21):4106-23. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.202. Epub 2012 Aug 
14.

Upregulated function of mitochondria-associated ER membranes in Alzheimer 
disease.

Area-Gomez E(1), Del Carmen Lara Castillo M, Tambini MD, Guardia-Laguarta C, de 
Groof AJ, Madra M, Ikenouchi J, Umeda M, Bird TD, Sturley SL, Schon EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2012 Nov 5;31(21):4095-7. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.279.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is associated with aberrant processing of the amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) by γ-secretase, via an unknown mechanism. We recently 
showed that presenilin-1 and -2, the catalytic components of γ-secretase, and 
γ-secretase activity itself, are highly enriched in a subcompartment of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that is physically and biochemically connected to 
mitochondria, called mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs). We now show 
that MAM function and ER-mitochondrial communication-as measured by cholesteryl 
ester and phospholipid synthesis, respectively-are increased significantly in 
presenilin-mutant cells and in fibroblasts from patients with both the familial 
and sporadic forms of AD. We also show that MAM is an intracellular 
detergent-resistant lipid raft (LR)-like domain, consistent with the known 
presence of presenilins and γ-secretase activity in rafts. These findings may 
help explain not only the aberrant APP processing but also a number of other 
biochemical features of AD, including altered lipid metabolism and calcium 
homeostasis. We propose that upregulated MAM function at the ER-mitochondrial 
interface, and increased cross-talk between these two organelles, may play a 
hitherto unrecognized role in the pathogenesis of AD.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.202
PMCID: PMC3492725
PMID: 22892566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.