1. Primates. 2013 Jan;54(1):89-98. doi: 10.1007/s10329-012-0320-8. Epub 2012 Aug 
14.

Epidemiological study of zoonoses derived from humans in captive chimpanzees.

Kooriyama T(1), Okamoto M, Yoshida T, Nishida T, Tsubota T, Saito A, Tomonaga M, 
Matsuzawa T, Akari H, Nishimura H, Miyabe-Nishiwaki T.

Author information:
(1)Rakuno Gakuen University, Ebetsu, Hokkaido, Japan. kooriyam@rakuno.ac.jp

Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) in wildlife are major threats both to human 
health and to biodiversity conservation. An estimated 71.8Â % of zoonotic EID 
events are caused by pathogens in wildlife and the incidence of such diseases is 
increasing significantly in humans. In addition, human diseases are starting to 
infect wildlife, especially non-human primates. The chimpanzee is an endangered 
species that is threatened by human activity such as deforestation, poaching, 
and human disease transmission. Recently, several respiratory disease outbreaks 
that are suspected of having been transmitted by humans have been reported in 
wild chimpanzees. Therefore, we need to study zoonotic pathogens that can 
threaten captive chimpanzees in primate research institutes. Serological 
surveillance is one of several methods used to reveal infection history. We 
examined serum from 14 captive chimpanzees in Japanese primate research 
institutes for antibodies against 62 human pathogens and 1 chimpanzee-borne 
infectious disease. Antibodies tested positive against 29 pathogens at high or 
low prevalence in the chimpanzees. These results suggest that the proportions of 
human-borne infections may reflect the chimpanzee's history, management system 
in the institute, or regional epidemics. Furthermore, captive chimpanzees are 
highly susceptible to human pathogens, and their induced antibodies reveal not 
only their history of infection, but also the possibility of protection against 
human pathogens.

DOI: 10.1007/s10329-012-0320-8
PMCID: PMC7087813
PMID: 22890486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]