1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):527-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.006. Epub
 2012 Aug 16.

A nonsense mutation in PDE6H causes autosomal-recessive incomplete 
achromatopsia.

Kohl S(1), Coppieters F, Meire F, Schaich S, Roosing S, Brennenstuhl C, Bolz S, 
van Genderen MM, Riemslag FC; European Retinal Disease Consortium; Lukowski R, 
den Hollander AI, Cremers FP, De Baere E, Hoyng CB, Wissinger B.

Collaborators: Ayuso C, Banfi S, Banin E, Sharon D, Ben-Yosef T, Collin RW, 
Hamel C, Inglehearn C, Toomes C, Koenekoop RK, Lopez I, Leroy BP.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for 
Ophthalmology, University of Tuebingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany. 
susanne.kohl@uni-tuebingen.de

Achromatopsia (ACHM) is an autosomal-recessive retinal dystrophy characterized 
by color blindness, photophobia, nystagmus, and severely reduced visual acuity. 
Its prevalence has been estimated to about 1 in 30,000 individuals. Four genes, 
GNAT2, PDE6C, CNGA3, and CNGB3, have been implicated in ACHM, and all encode 
functional components of the phototransduction cascade in cone photoreceptors. 
Applying a functional-candidate-gene approach that focused on screening 
additional genes involved in this process in a cohort of 611 index cases with 
ACHM or other cone photoreceptor disorders, we detected a homozygous single base 
change (c.35C>G) resulting in a nonsense mutation (p.Ser12(∗)) in PDE6H, 
encoding the inhibitory γ subunit of the cone photoreceptor cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate phosphodiesterase. The c.35C>G mutation was present in three 
individuals from two independent families with a clinical diagnosis of 
incomplete ACHM and preserved short-wavelength-sensitive cone function. 
Moreover, we show through immunohistochemical colocalization studies in mouse 
retina that Pde6h is evenly present in all retinal cone photoreceptors, a fact 
that had been under debate in the past. These findings add PDE6H to the set of 
genes involved in autosomal-recessive cone disorders and demonstrate the 
importance of the inhibitory γ subunit in cone phototransduction.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.006
PMCID: PMC3511981
PMID: 22901948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]