1. Biochemistry. 2012 Sep 11;51(36):7173-88. doi: 10.1021/bi3010945. Epub 2012
Aug  31.

Mechanistic studies of the spore photoproduct lyase via a single cysteine 
mutation.

Yang L(1), Lin G, Nelson RS, Jian Y, Telser J, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Indiana University-Purdue 
University Indianapolis, 402 North Blackford Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202, 
USA.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry. 2012 Dec 11;51(49):9940. doi: 10.1021/bi301546f.

5-Thyminyl-5,6-dihydrothymine (also called spore photoproduct or SP) is the 
exclusive DNA photodamage product in bacterial endospores. It is repaired by a 
radical SAM (S-adenosylmethionine) enzyme, the spore photoproduct lyase (SPL), 
at the bacterial early germination phase. Our previous studies proved that SPL 
utilizes the 5'-dA• generated by the SAM cleavage reaction to abstract the 
H(6proR) atom to initiate the SP repair process. The resulting thymine allylic 
radical was suggested to take an H atom from an unknown protein source, most 
likely cysteine 141. Here we show that C141 can be readily alkylated in the 
native SPL by an iodoacetamide treatment, suggesting that it is accessible to 
the TpT radical. SP repair by the SPL C141A mutant yields TpTSO(2)(-) and TpT 
simultaneously from the very beginning of the reaction; no lag phase is observed 
for TpTSO(2)(-) formation. Should any other protein residue serve as the H 
donor, its presence would result in TpT being the major product at least for the 
first enzyme turnover. These observations provide strong evidence to support 
C141 as the direct H atom donor. Moreover, because of the lack of this intrinsic 
H donor, the C141A mutant produces TpT via an unprecedented thymine cation 
radical reduction (proton-coupled electron transfer) process, contrasting to the 
H atom transfer mechanism in the wild-type (WT) SPL reaction. The C141A mutant 
repairs SP at a rate that is ~3-fold slower than that of the WT enzyme. 
Formation of TpTSO(2)(-) and TpT exhibits a V(max) deuterium kinetic isotope 
effect (KIE) of 1.7 ± 0.2, which is smaller than the (D)V(max) KIE of 2.8 ± 0.3 
determined for the WT SPL reaction. These findings suggest that removing the 
intrinsic H atom donor disturbs the rate-limiting process during enzyme 
catalysis. As expected, the prereduced C141A mutant supports only ~0.4 turnover, 
which is in sharp contrast to the >5 turnovers exhibited by the WT SPL reaction, 
suggesting that the enzyme catalytic cycle (SAM regeneration) is disrupted by 
this single mutation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi3010945
PMCID: PMC3448869
PMID: 22906093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]