1. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Sep 15;176(6):461-72. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws126. Epub 2012 
Aug 19.

Hemochromatosis gene (HFE) polymorphisms and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 
meta-analysis.

Rong Y(1), Bao W, Rong S, Fang M, Wang D, Yao P, Hu FB, Liu L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's 
Republic of China.

Comment in
    Am J Epidemiol. 2013 Feb 15;177(4):372-3. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws480.
    Am J Epidemiol. 2013 Feb 15;177(4):373-4. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws481.

The hemochromatosis gene (HFE) has been involved in the etiology of type 2 
diabetes mellitus and investigated in numerous epidemiologic studies. The 
current meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate the gene-disease association in 
relevant studies. Electronic literature search was performed on June 18, 2011, 
from databases of PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and HuGE Navigator. Articles were 
inspected by 2 authors independently, and data were extracted by identical 
extraction form. A total of 5,528 type 2 diabetes cases and 6,920 controls in 
relation to HFE polymorphisms (a cysteine to tyrosine substitution at amino acid 
position 282 (C282Y) and a histidine to aspartate substitution at amino acid 
position 63 (H63D)) were included in the meta-analysis (1997-2011). A fixed- or 
random-effect model was used to calculate the pooled odds ratios based on the 
results from the heterogeneity tests. An increased odds ratio for type 2 
diabetes mellitus was observed in persons carrying a D allele at the H63D 
polymorphism compared with those with an H allele (odds ratio (OR) = 1.21, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 1.03, 1.41; P = 0.02). Moreover, carriers of a D 
allele had a modestly increased risk compared with persons with the wild 
genotype (OR = 1.12, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.25; P = 0.04). The C282Y variant was not 
significantly associated with diabetes risk. In summary, persons with a D allele 
may have a moderately increased risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kws126
PMID: 22908207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]