1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):37057-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.401208. Epub 
2012 Aug 23.

Specific function of the Met-Tyr-Trp adduct radical and residues Arg-418 and 
Asp-137 in the atypical catalase reaction of catalase-peroxidase KatG.

Zhao X(1), Khajo A, Jarrett S, Suarez J, Levitsky Y, Burger RM, Jarzecki AA, 
Magliozzo RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York 11210, USA.

Catalase activity of the dual-function heme enzyme catalase-peroxidase (KatG) 
depends on several structural elements, including a unique adduct formed from 
covalently linked side chains of three conserved amino acids (Met-255, Tyr-229, 
and Trp-107, Mycobacterium tuberculosis KatG numbering) (MYW). Mutagenesis, 
electron paramagnetic resonance, and optical stopped-flow experiments, along 
with calculations using density functional theory (DFT) methods revealed the 
basis of the requirement for a radical on the MYW-adduct, for oxyferrous heme, 
and for conserved residues Arg-418 and Asp-137 in the rapid catalase reaction. 
The participation of an oxyferrous heme intermediate (dioxyheme) throughout the 
pH range of catalase activity is suggested from our finding that carbon monoxide 
inhibits the activity at both acidic and alkaline pH. In the presence of 
H(2)O(2), the MYW-adduct radical is formed normally in KatG[D137S] but this 
mutant is defective in forming dioxyheme and lacks catalase activity. 
KatG[R418L] is also catalase deficient but exhibits normal formation of the 
adduct radical and dioxyheme. Both mutants exhibit a coincidence between 
MYW-adduct radical persistence and H(2)O(2) consumption as a function of time, 
and enhanced subunit oligomerization during turnover, suggesting that the two 
mutations disrupting catalase turnover allow increased migration of the 
MYW-adduct radical to protein surface residues. DFT calculations showed that an 
interaction between the side chain of residue Arg-418 and Tyr-229 in the 
MYW-adduct radical favors reaction of the radical with the adjacent dioxyheme 
intermediate present throughout turnover in WT KatG. Release of molecular oxygen 
and regeneration of resting enzyme are thereby catalyzed in the last step of a 
proposed catalase reaction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.401208
PMCID: PMC3481306
PMID: 22918833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]