1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043390. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

Effects of rs7903146 variation in the Tcf7l2 gene in the lipid metabolism of 
three different populations.

Perez-Martinez P(1), Perez-Caballero AI, Garcia-Rios A, Yubero-Serrano EM, 
Camargo A, Gomez-Luna MJ, Marin C, Gomez-Luna P, Dembinska-Kiec A, 
Rodriguez-Cantalejo F, Tinahones FJ, Roche HM, Perez-Jimenez F, Lopez-Miranda J, 
Delgado-Lista J.

Author information:
(1)Lipids and Atherosclerosis Unit, IMIBIC/Hospital Universitario Reina 
Sofía/Universidad de Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.

BACKGROUND: TCF7L2 rs7903146 is an important genetic factor predicting type 2 
diabetes (T2DM) which has also been linked to higher cardiovascular risk. To 
date, there is little information about the additional impact of this single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) beyond glucose metabolism.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied whether rs7903146 influenced 
postprandial lipid metabolism in three different populations (healthy young men, 
metabolic syndrome (MetS) patients and elderly persons). Eighty-eight healthy 
males were submitted to a single saturated fatty acid-rich test meal. 
Additionally, 110 middle-aged MetS patients and 20 healthy elderly persons (≥ 65 
years) were submitted to three different dietary models followed by test meals. 
Minor allele homozygotes for rs7903146 showed a worse postprandial lipemia 
profile in young males, as seen by a lower HDL-cholesterol and Apo A1 
concentration during the postprandial lipemia and a trend towards higher 
triglycerides (TG), than the other genotypes. In healthy elderly persons, 
carriers of the minor allele showed higher total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, 
Apo B and TG in the fasting state, and a higher postprandial area under the 
curve for total cholesterol, Apo B, small-triglyceride rich lipoprotein (TRL) 
cholesterol and small-(TRL) triglycerides. These results were accompanied by 
differential changes in adipokines. We did not observe any influence of 
rs7903146 on the postprandium of MetS patients.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Healthy young males and elderly persons who are 
carriers of the mutant allele for rs7903146 have an impaired postprandial lipid 
metabolism that may be mediated by an alteration in adipokine regulation, and 
may be related to the higher cardiovascular risk observed in these persons.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00429195.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043390
PMCID: PMC3423356
PMID: 22916254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.