1. Neuroscience. 2012 Nov 8;224:160-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.08.023. 
Epub 2012 Aug 20.

The ubiquitin ligase F-box/G-domain protein 1 promotes the degradation of the 
disease-linked protein torsinA through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and 
macroautophagy.

Gordon KL(1), Glenn KA, Bode N, Wen HM, Paulson HL, Gonzalez-Alegre P.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program of Neuroscience, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA. kara-gordon@uiowa.edu

DYT1 dystonia is a dominantly inherited, disabling neurological disorder with 
low penetrance that is caused by the deletion of a glutamic acid (ΔE) in the 
protein torsinA. We previously showed that torsinA(wt) is degraded through 
macroautophagy while torsinA(ΔE) is targeted to the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway 
(UPP). The different catabolism of torsinA(wt) and (ΔE) potentially modulates 
torsinA(wt):torsinA(ΔE) stoichiometry. Therefore, gaining a mechanistic 
understanding on how the protein quality control machinery clears torsinA(ΔE) in 
neurons may uncover important regulatory steps in disease pathogenesis. Here, we 
asked whether F-box/G-domain protein 1 (FBG1), a ubiquitin ligase known to 
degrade neuronal glycoproteins, is implicated in the degradation of torsinA(ΔE) 
by the UPP. In a first set of studies completed in cultured cells, we show that 
FBG1 interacts with and influences the steady-state levels of torsinA(wt) and 
(ΔE). Interestingly, FBG1 achieves this effect promoting the degradation of 
torsinA not only through the UPP, but also by macroautophagy. To determine the 
potential clinical significance of these findings, we asked if eliminating 
expression of Fbg1 triggers a motor phenotype in torsinA(ΔE) knock in (KI) mice, 
a model of non-manifesting DYT1 mutation carriers. We detected differences in 
spontaneous locomotion between aged torsinA(ΔE) KI-Fbg1 knock out and control 
mice. Furthermore, neuronal levels of torsinA were unaltered in Fbg1 null mice, 
indicating that redundant systems likely compensate in vivo for the absence of 
this ubiquitin ligase. In summary, our studies support a non-essential role for 
FBG1 on the degradation of torsinA and uncover a novel link of FBG1 to the 
autophagy pathway.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.08.023
PMCID: PMC3475648
PMID: 22917612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.