1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Oct 15;21(R1):R66-71. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds345. Epub 2012
Aug  21.

Cystic fibrosis in an era of genomically guided therapy.

Barrett PM(1), Alagely A, Topol EJ.

Author information:
(1)Scripps Translational Science Institute, 3344 N Torrey Pines Road, Suite 300, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 1;22(9):1911.

Although affecting only 4-5% of those with cystic fibrosis (CF), the G551D-CFTR 
mutation is the target of the recently approved 'orphan drug', ivacaftor. The 
promise of such genomically guided therapies heralds a new era in the management 
of CF. A phase 3 trial demonstrated significant improvements in forced 
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV(1)) from baseline, average weight gain, 
concentration in sweat chloride and reductions in pulmonary exacerbations 
[Ramsey, B.W., et al. A CFTR potentiator in patients with CF and the G551D 
mutation. N. Engl. J. Med., 2011. 365: 1663-1672.)]. Ivacaftor is among a group 
of recently approved, novel, mutation guided 'orphan drug' therapies that have 
established clinical benefits within their respective disease categories. They 
do not, however, offer a cure. Pharmaceutical and biotech companies have 
leveraged the incentivized benefits of the Orphan Drug Act to develop more of 
these drugs for orphan disorders affecting populations of <200 000 patients. 
With marked clinical efficacy via DNA sequence guidance, these drugs have also 
set a precedent in terms of the substantial annual costs and if this trend 
continues, such expenditures may become unsustainable. This paper explores the 
genomic pathophysiology of CF and how therapies such as ivacaftor provide 
benefit to those with the disease but at a considerably elevated price point.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds345
PMID: 22914736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]