1. Indian Pacing Electrophysiol J. 2012 Jul;12(4):138-51. doi: 
10.1016/s0972-6292(16)30521-6. Epub 2012 Jul 28.

The design and use of an optical mapping system for the study of intracardiac 
electrical signaling.

Shrivastav M(1), Ghai MB, Singal A, Iaizzo PA.

Author information:
(1)University of Minnesota, Dept of Biomedical Engineering & Surgery.

Fluorescent optical mapping of electrically active cardiac tissues provides a 
unique method to examine the excitation wave dynamics of underlying action 
potentials. Such mapping can be viewed as a bridge between cellular level and 
organ systems physiology, e.g., by facilitating the development of advanced 
theoretical concepts of arrhythmia. We present the design and use of a 
high-speed, high-resolution optical mapping system composed entirely of "off the 
shelf" components. The electrical design integrates a 256 element photodiode 
array with a 16 bit data acquisition system. Proper grounding and shielding at 
various stages of the design reduce electromagnetic interference. Our mechanical 
design provides flexibility in terms of mounting positions and applications (use 
for whole heart or tissue preparations), while maintaining precise alignment 
between all optical components. The system software incorporates a user friendly 
graphical user interface, e.g., spatially recorded action potentials can be 
represented as intensity graphs or in strip chart format. Thus, this system is 
capable of displaying cardiac action potentials with high spatiotemporal 
resolution. Results from cardiac action potential mapping with intact mouse 
hearts are provided. It should be noted that this system could be readily 
configured to study isolated myocardial biopsies (e.g., isolated ventricular 
trabeculae). We describe the details of a versatile, user-friendly system that 
could be employed for a magnitude of study protocols.

DOI: 10.1016/s0972-6292(16)30521-6
PMCID: PMC3407407
PMID: 22912535