1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043277. Epub 2012 Aug
16.

Eco-geographical diversification of bitter taste receptor genes (TAS2Rs) among 
subspecies of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).

Hayakawa T(1), Sugawara T, Go Y, Udono T, Hirai H, Imai H.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan.

Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have region-specific difference in dietary 
repertoires from East to West across tropical Africa. Such differences may 
result from different genetic backgrounds in addition to cultural variations. We 
analyzed the sequences of all bitter taste receptor genes (cTAS2Rs) in a total 
of 59 chimpanzees, including 4 putative subspecies. We identified genetic 
variations including single-nucleotide variations (SNVs), insertions and 
deletions (indels), gene-conversion variations, and copy-number variations 
(CNVs) in cTAS2Rs. Approximately two-thirds of all cTAS2R haplotypes in the 
amino acid sequence were unique to each subspecies. We analyzed the evolutionary 
backgrounds of natural selection behind such diversification. Our previous study 
concluded that diversification of cTAS2Rs in western chimpanzees (P. t. verus) 
may have resulted from balancing selection. In contrast, the present study found 
that purifying selection dominates as the evolutionary form of diversification 
of the so-called human cluster of cTAS2Rs in eastern chimpanzees (P. t. 
schweinfurthii) and that the other cTAS2Rs were under no obvious selection as a 
whole. Such marked diversification of cTAS2Rs with different evolutionary 
backgrounds among subspecies of chimpanzees probably reflects their 
subspecies-specific dietary repertoires.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043277
PMCID: PMC3420883
PMID: 22916235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.