1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Nov 2;423(4):528-39. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.08.008. Epub
2012  Aug 23.

Quantifying interactions of β-synuclein and γ-synuclein with model membranes.

Ducas VC(1), Rhoades E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8114, USA.

The synucleins are a family of proteins involved in numerous neurodegenerative 
pathologies [α-synuclein and β-synuclein (βS)], as well as in various types of 
cancers [γ-synuclein (γS)]. While the connection between α-synuclein and 
Parkinson's disease is well established, recent evidence links point mutants of 
βS to dementia with Lewy bodies. Overexpression of γS has been associated with 
enhanced metastasis and cancer drug resistance. Despite their prevalence in such 
a variety of diseases, the native functions of the synucleins remain unclear. 
They have a lipid-binding motif in their N-terminal region, which suggests 
interactions with biological membranes in vivo. In this study, we used 
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to monitor the binding properties of βS 
and γS to model membranes and to determine the free energy of the interactions. 
Our results show that the interactions are most strongly affected by the 
presence of both anionic lipids and bilayer curvature, while membrane fluidity 
plays a very minor role. Quantifying the lipid-binding properties of βS and γS 
provides additional insights into the underlying factors governing the 
protein-membrane interactions. Such insights not only are relevant to the native 
functions of these proteins but also highlight their contributions to 
pathological conditions that are either mediated or characterized by 
perturbations of these interactions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.08.008
PMCID: PMC3582368
PMID: 22922472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]