1. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(3):347-65. doi: 10.2174/138161213804143725.

The therapeutic target Hsp90 and cancer hallmarks.

Miyata Y(1), Nakamoto H, Neckers L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies, 
Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. 
ymiyata@lif.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Hsp90 is a major molecular chaperone that is expressed abundantly and plays a 
pivotal role in assisting correct folding and functionality of its client 
proteins in cells. The Hsp90 client proteins include a wide variety of signal 
transducing molecules such as protein kinases and steroid hormone receptors. 
Cancer is a complex disease, but most types of human cancer share common 
hallmarks, including self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to 
growth-inhibitory mechanism, evasion of programmed cell death, limitless 
replicative potential, sustained angiogenesis, and tissue invasion and 
metastasis. A surprisingly large number of Hsp90-client proteins play crucial 
roles in establishing cancer cell hallmarks. We start the review by describing 
the structure and function of Hsp90 since conformational changes during the 
ATPase cycle of Hsp90 are closely related to its function. Many co-chaperones, 
including Hop, p23, Cdc37, Aha1, and PP5, work together with Hsp90 by modulating 
the chaperone machinery. Post-translational modifications of Hsp90 and its 
cochaperones are vital for their function. Many tumor-related Hsp90-client 
proteins, including signaling kinases, steroid hormone receptors, p53, and 
telomerase, are described. Hsp90 and its co-chaperones are required for the 
function of these tumor-promoting client proteins; therefore, inhibition of 
Hsp90 by specific inhibitors such as geldanamycin and its derivatives attenuates 
the tumor progression. Hsp90 inhibitors can be potential and effective cancer 
chemotherapeutic drugs with a unique profile and have been examined in clinical 
trials. We describe possible mechanisms why Hsp90 inhibitors show selectivity to 
cancer cells even though Hsp90 is essential also for normal cells. Finally, we 
discuss the "Hsp90-addiction" of cancer cells, and suggest a role for Hsp90 in 
tumor evolution.

DOI: 10.2174/138161213804143725
PMCID: PMC7553218
PMID: 22920906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors confirm that 
this article content has no conflicts of interest.