1. Clin Psychol Rev. 2012 Nov;32(7):650-63. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2012.07.003. Epub 
2012 Aug 7.

Overlapping prefrontal systems involved in cognitive and emotional processing in 
euthymic bipolar disorder and following sleep deprivation: a review of 
functional neuroimaging studies.

McKenna BS(1), Eyler LT.

Author information:
(1)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs San 
Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA 92161, USA. bmckenna@ucsd.edu

Prefrontal cortex (PFC) mediated cognitive and emotional processing deficits in 
bipolar disorder lead to functional limitations even during periods of mood 
stability. Alterations of sleep and circadian functioning are well-documented in 
bipolar disorder, but there is little research directly examining the 
mechanistic role of sleep and/or circadian rhythms in the observed cognitive and 
emotional processing deficits. We systematically review the cognitive and 
emotional processing deficits reliant upon PFC functioning of euthymic patients 
with bipolar disorder and in healthy individuals deprived of sleep. The evidence 
from two parallel lines of investigation suggests that sleep and circadian 
rhythms may be involved in the cognitive and emotional processing deficits seen 
in bipolar disorder through overlapping neurobiological systems. We discuss 
current models of bipolar highlighting the PFC-limbic connections and discuss 
inclusion of sleep-related mechanisms. Sleep and circadian dysfunction is a core 
feature of bipolar disorder and models of neurobiological abnormalities should 
incorporate chronobiological measures. Further research into the role of sleep 
and circadian rhythms in cognition and emotional processing in bipolar disorder 
is warranted.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2012.07.003
PMCID: PMC3922056
PMID: 22926687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]