1. Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Nov;136(2):142-52. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.006.
 Epub 2012 Aug 18.

α2-containing GABA(A) receptors: a target for the development of novel treatment 
strategies for CNS disorders.

Engin E(1), Liu J, Rudolph U.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Neuropharmacology, McLean Hospital, Belmont, MA 02478, 
USA.

GABA(A) receptors have important physiological functions, as revealed by 
pharmacological studies and experiments involving gene-targeted mouse models, 
and are the target of widely used drugs such as the benzodiazepines. In this 
review, we are summarizing current knowledge about the function of α2-containing 
GABA(A) receptors, a receptor subtype representing approximately 15-20% of all 
GABA(A) receptors. This receptor subtype mediates anxiolytic-like, 
reward-enhancing, and antihyperalgesic actions of diazepam, and has 
antidepressant-like properties. Secondary insufficiency of α2-containing GABA(A) 
receptors has been postulated to play a role in the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia, and may be involved in cognitive impairment in other disorders. 
Moreover, polymorphisms in the GABRA2 gene encoding the GABA(A) receptor α2 
subunit have been found to be linked to chronic alcohol dependence and to 
polydrug abuse. Thus, α2-containing GABA(A) receptors are involved in the 
regulation and/or modulation of emotional behaviors and of chronic pain, and 
appear to be a valid target for novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment 
of anxiety, depression, schizophrenia and chronic pain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.006
PMCID: PMC3478960
PMID: 22921455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: "In the last 
three years, UR has provided professional services for Sunovion and for Concert 
Pharmaceuticals. JL and EE declare that they have no conflict of interest."