1. Acta Med Iran. 2012;50(7):447-53.

Mutation screening in the mitochondrial D-loop region of tumoral and non-tumoral 
breast cancer in Iranian patients.

Rahmani B(1), Azimi C, Omranipour R, Raoofian R, Zendehdel K, Saee-Rad S, 
Heidari M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Iran.

The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations in mitochondrial coding and non coding 
regions seem to be important in carcinogenesis. The aim of this investigation 
was to evaluate coding region (mt-tRNA(Phe) and tRNA(Pro)) and non-coding 
sequence, mitochondrial displacement loop (mtDNA D-loop), in the cancerous and 
non-cancerous lesions of Iranian patients with breast cancer (BC). Genomic DNA 
was extracted from 50 breast tumors and surrounding normal tissue pairs as well 
as from 50 unrelated normal breast tissues from Iranian Kurdish population. 
Subsequently, PCR amplification was performed using specific primers, and then 
PCR products were subjected to direct sequencing. 41 genetic variants were 
identified in mtDNA D-loop among tumoral and non-tumoral tissues but not in 
tRNA(Phe) and tRNA(Pro) sequences. Our findings indicated that C182T, 194insT, 
285insA and 16342delT were just found in BC tumors whereas 302insC, C309T and 
C16069T found in both tumors and surrounding normal tissues. Although our 
findings showed that the observed genetic variations were not restricted to 
breast cancer tissues, some genetic changes were found only in BC tumors. Our 
results, in agreement with the evidence from earlier studies, confirm that the 
mtDNA genetic alterations might be implicated in tumor initiation, progression 
and development.

PMID: 22930374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]