1. Neurotherapeutics. 2012 Oct;9(4):814-26. doi: 10.1007/s13311-012-0140-y.

Sigma-1R agonist improves motor function and motoneuron survival in ALS mice.

Mancuso R(1), Oliván S, Rando A, Casas C, Osta R, Navarro X.

Author information:
(1)Group of Neuroplasticity and Regeneration, Institute of Neurosciences and 
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology, and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Bellaterra 08193, Spain.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by 
progressive weakness, muscle atrophy, and paralysis due to the loss of upper and 
lower motoneurons (MNs). Sigma-1 receptor (sigma-1R) activation promotes 
neuroprotection after ischemic and traumatic injuries to the central nervous 
system. We recently reported that sigma-1R agonist (PRE-084) improves the 
survival of MNs after root avulsion injury in rats. Moreover, a mutation of the 
sigma-1R leading to frontotemporal lobar degeneration/amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) was recently described in human patients. In the present study, 
we analyzed the potential therapeutic effect of the sigma-1R agonist (PRE-084) 
in the SOD1(G93A) mouse model of ALS. Mice were daily administered with PRE-084 
(0.25 mg/kg) from 8 to 16 weeks of age. Functional outcome was assessed by 
electrophysiological tests and computerized analysis of locomotion. 
Histological, immunohistochemical analyses and Western blot of the spinal cord 
were performed. PRE-084 administration from 8 weeks of age improved the function 
of MNs, which was manifested by maintenance of the amplitude of muscle action 
potentials and locomotor behavior, and preserved neuromuscular connections and 
MNs in the spinal cord. Moreover, it extended survival in both female and male 
mice by more than 15 %. Delayed administration of PRE-084 from 12 weeks of age 
also significantly improved functional outcome and preservation of the MNs. 
There was an induction of protein kinase C-specific phosphorylation of the NR1 
subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in SOD1(G93A) animals, and a 
reduction of the microglial reactivity compared with untreated mice. PRE-084 
exerts a dual therapeutic contribution, modulating NMDA Ca(2+) influx to protect 
MNs, and the microglial reactivity to ameliorate the MN environment. In 
conclusion, sigma-1R agonists, such as PRE-084, may be promising candidates for 
a therapeutical strategy of ALS.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-012-0140-y
PMCID: PMC3480575
PMID: 22935988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]