1. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Jan;49:13-21. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.08.016. Epub 2012
Aug  27.

A screen for inducers of p21(waf1/cip1) identifies HIF prolyl hydroxylase 
inhibitors as neuroprotective agents with antitumor properties.

Ma TC(1), Langley B(2), Ko B(2), Wei N(3), Gazaryan IG(2), Zareen N(4), 
Yamashiro DJ(3), Willis DE(2), Ratan RR(5).

Author information:
(1)Burke-Cornell Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White 
Plains, NY 10605, USA; Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 525 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA. 
Electronic address: tma@burke.org.
(2)Burke-Cornell Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White 
Plains, NY 10605, USA; Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 525 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Cell Biology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, 161 Fort Washington Avenue, New York, NY 
10032, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(5)Burke-Cornell Medical Research Institute, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White 
Plains, NY 10605, USA; Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical 
College of Cornell University, 525 East 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA. 
Electronic address: rratan@burke.org.

Preventing neuronal death is a priority for treating neurological diseases. 
However, therapies that inhibit pathological neuron loss could promote 
tumorigenesis by preventing the physiological death of cancerous cells. To avert 
this, we targeted the transcriptional upregulation of p21(waf1/cip1) (p21), an 
endogenous tumor suppressor with neuroprotective and pro-regenerative activity. 
We identified potential p21 indcuers by screening a FDA-approved drug and 
natural product small molecule library against hippocampal HT22 cells stably 
expressing a luciferase reporter driven by the proximal 60bp of the p21 
promoter, and tested them for neuroprotection from glutathione depletion 
mediated oxidative stress, and cytotoxicity to cancer cell lines (DLD-1, 
Neuro-2A, SH-SY5Y, NGP, CHLA15, CHP212, and SK-N-SH) in vitro. Of the p21 
inducers identified, only ciclopirox, a hypoxia-inducible factor 
prolyl-4-hydroxylase (HIF-PHD) inhibitor, simultaneously protected neurons from 
glutathione depletion and decreased cancer cell proliferation at concentrations 
that were not basally toxic to neurons. We found that other structurally 
distinct HIF-PHD inhibitors (desferrioxamine, 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate, and 
dimethyloxalyl glycine) also protected neurons at concentrations that killed 
cancer cells. HIF-PHD inhibitors stabilize HIF transcription factors, mediating 
genetic adaptation to hypoxia. While augmenting HIF stability is believed to 
promote tumorigenesis, we found that chronic HIF-PHD inhibition killed cancer 
cells, suggesting a protumorigenic role for these enzymes. Moreover, our 
findings suggest that PHD inhibitors can be used to treat neurological disease 
without significant concern for cell-autonomous tumor promotion.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.08.016
PMCID: PMC3706502
PMID: 22944173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]