1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jan;34(1):255-65. doi: 10.1002/humu.22214. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Calibration of multiple in silico tools for predicting pathogenicity of mismatch 
repair gene missense substitutions.

Thompson BA(1), Greenblatt MS, Vallee MP, Herkert JC, Tessereau C, Young EL, 
Adzhubey IA, Li B, Bell R, Feng B, Mooney SD, Radivojac P, Sunyaev SR, Frebourg 
T, Hofstra RM, Sijmons RH, Boucher K, Thomas A, Goldgar DE, Spurdle AB, 
Tavtigian SV.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston, Brisbane, Australia.

Classification of rare missense substitutions observed during genetic testing 
for patient management is a considerable problem in clinical genetics. The 
Bayesian integrated evaluation of unclassified variants is a solution originally 
developed for BRCA1/2. Here, we take a step toward an analogous system for the 
mismatch repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2) that confer colon 
cancer susceptibility in Lynch syndrome by calibrating in silico tools to 
estimate prior probabilities of pathogenicity for MMR gene missense 
substitutions. A qualitative five-class classification system was developed and 
applied to 143 MMR missense variants. This identified 74 missense substitutions 
suitable for calibration. These substitutions were scored using six different in 
silico tools (Align-Grantham Variation Grantham Deviation, multivariate analysis 
of protein polymorphisms [MAPP], MutPred, PolyPhen-2.1, Sorting Intolerant From 
Tolerant, and Xvar), using curated MMR multiple sequence alignments where 
possible. The output from each tool was calibrated by regression against the 
classifications of the 74 missense substitutions; these calibrated outputs are 
interpretable as prior probabilities of pathogenicity. MAPP was the most 
accurate tool and MAPP + PolyPhen-2.1 provided the best-combined model (R(2)  = 
0.62 and area under receiver operating characteristic = 0.93). The MAPP + 
PolyPhen-2.1 output is sufficiently predictive to feed as a continuous variable 
into the quantitative Bayesian integrated evaluation for clinical classification 
of MMR gene missense substitutions.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22214
PMCID: PMC4318556
PMID: 22949387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]