1. J Mol Biol. 2012 Nov 9;423(5):736-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.08.020. Epub
2012  Aug 29.

The structure of human GALNS reveals the molecular basis for 
mucopolysaccharidosis IV A.

Rivera-Colón Y(1), Schutsky EK, Kita AZ, Garman SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Lysosomal enzymes catalyze the breakdown of macromolecules in the cell. In 
humans, loss of activity of a lysosomal enzyme leads to an inherited metabolic 
defect known as a lysosomal storage disorder. The human lysosomal enzyme 
galactosamine-6-sulfatase (GALNS, also known as 
N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase and GalN6S; E.C. 3.1.6.4) is deficient in 
patients with the lysosomal storage disease mucopolysaccharidosis IV A (also 
known as MPS IV A and Morquio A). Here, we report the three-dimensional 
structure of human GALNS, determined by X-ray crystallography at 2.2Å 
resolution. The structure reveals a catalytic gem diol nucleophile derived from 
modification of a cysteine side chain. The active site of GALNS is a large, 
positively charged trench suitable for binding polyanionic substrates such as 
keratan sulfate and chondroitin-6-sulfate. Enzymatic assays on the 
insect-cell-expressed human GALNS indicate activity against synthetic substrates 
and inhibition by both substrate and product. Mapping 120 MPS IV A missense 
mutations onto the structure reveals that a majority of mutations affect the 
hydrophobic core of the structure, indicating that most MPS IV A cases result 
from misfolding of GALNS. Comparison of the structure of GALNS to paralogous 
sulfatases shows a wide variety of active-site geometries in the family but 
strict conservation of the catalytic machinery. Overall, the structure and the 
known mutations establish the molecular basis for MPS IV A and for the larger 
MPS family of diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.08.020
PMCID: PMC3472114
PMID: 22940367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]