1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(7):7963-7979. doi: 10.3390/ijms13077963. Epub 2012 Jun 
27.

DsHsp90 is involved in the early response of Dunaliella salina to environmental 
stress.

Wang SJ(1), Wu MJ(1)(2), Chen XJ(1)(2), Jiang Y(1), Yan YB(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of MOE, College of Life 
Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department of 
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular chaperone highly conserved across 
the species from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. Hsp90 is essential for cell 
viability under all growth conditions and is proposed to act as a hub of the 
signaling network and protein homeostasis of the eukaryotic cells. By 
interacting with various client proteins, Hsp90 is involved in diverse 
physiological processes such as signal transduction, cell mobility, heat shock 
response and osmotic stress response. In this research, we cloned the dshsp90 
gene encoding a polypeptide composed of 696 amino acids from the halotolerant 
unicellular green algae Dunaliella salina. Sequence alignment indicated that 
DsHsp90 belonged to the cytosolic Hsp90A family. Further biophysical and 
biochemical studies of the recombinant protein revealed that DsHsp90 possessed 
ATPase activity and existed as a dimer with similar percentages of secondary 
structures to those well-studied Hsp90As. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of 
the cloned genomic DNA fragment indicated that dshsp90 contained 21 exons 
interrupted by 20 introns, which is much more complicated than the other plant 
hsp90 genes. The promoter region of dshsp90 contained putative cis-acting stress 
responsive elements and binding sites of transcriptional factors that respond to 
heat shock and salt stress. Further experimental research confirmed that dshsp90 
was upregulated quickly by heat and salt shock in the D. salina cells. These 
findings suggested that dshsp90 might serve as a component of the early response 
system of the D. salina cells against environmental stresses.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms13077963
PMCID: PMC3430215
PMID: 22942684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]