1. Innate Immun. 2013;19(2):174-83. doi: 10.1177/1753425912455675. Epub 2012 Sep
4.

Polymorphisms and expression of TLR4 and 9 in malaria in two ethnic groups of 
Assam, northeast India.

Sawian CE(1), Lourembam SD, Banerjee A, Baruah S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, India.

Infectious diseases have been postulated to play an important role in exerting 
pressure and in selection of TLR polymorphisms. Single nucelotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of TLR4 have been reported to show unique distributions in populations 
from Africa, Asia and Europe, and malaria is suggested to influence these 
patterns. In this context, we examined association of TLR polymorphisms with the 
risk of malaria in two ethnic groups-the Austro-Asiatics and Tibeto-Burmans-from 
malaria endemic districts of Assam to understand the influence of malaria in 
selection of TLRs in these genetically-distinct populations. TLR9 (T-1237C) 
mutation was positively associated with complicated (P = 0.001) and frequent 
(P = 0.035) malaria in Austro-Asiatics (relative risk = 0.595 95% CI: 
0.479-0.836), but not in Tibeto-Burmans. Nonetheless, these alleles were not in 
Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium in Tibeto-Burmans (P < 0.001). In contrast, the TLR9 
1486T/C genotype was favourable where it was negatively associated with 
complicated malaria (Fishers exact P = 0.014). Sequencing data revealed that the 
two populations differed in nucleotide diversity of the TLR9 promoter region. 
Enhanced expression of TLR4 (P = 0.05), but not of TLR9, was associated with 
complicated malaria. Austro-Asiatics appeared to have accumulated favourable 
genotypes of TLR9, perhaps because of their longer exposure to malaria.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425912455675
PMID: 22948021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]