1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043057. Epub 2012 Aug
28.

P2RX7: expression responds to sleep deprivation and associates with rapid 
cycling in bipolar disorder type 1.

Backlund L(1), Lavebratt C, Frisén L, Nikamo P, Hukic Sudic D, Träskman-Bendz L, 
Landén M, Edman G, Vawter MP, Ösby U, Schalling M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. lena.backlund@sll.se

CONTEXT: Rapid cycling is a severe form of bipolar disorder with an increased 
rate of episodes that is particularly treatment-responsive to chronotherapy and 
stable sleep-wake cycles. We hypothesized that the P2RX7 gene would be affected 
by sleep deprivation and be implicated in rapid cycling.
OBJECTIVES: To assess whether P2RX7 expression is affected by total sleep 
deprivation and if variation in P2RX7 is associated with rapid cycling in 
bipolar patients.
DESIGN: Gene expression analysis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) 
from healthy volunteers and case-case and case-control SNP/haplotype association 
analyses in patients.
PARTICIPANTS: Healthy volunteers at the sleep research center, University of 
California, Irvine Medical Center (UCIMC), USA (n = 8) and Swedish outpatients 
recruited from specialized psychiatric clinics for bipolar disorder, diagnosed 
with bipolar disorder type 1 (n = 569; rapid cycling: n = 121) and anonymous 
blood donor controls (n = 1,044).
RESULTS: P2RX7 RNA levels were significantly increased during sleep deprivation 
in PBMCs from healthy volunteers (p = 2.3*10(-9)). The P2RX7 rs2230912 _A allele 
was more common (OR = 2.2, p = 0.002) and the ACGTTT haplotype in P2RX7 
(rs1718119 to rs1621388) containing the protective rs2230912_G allele 
(OR = 0.45-0.49, p = 0.003-0.005) was less common, among rapid cycling cases 
compared to non-rapid cycling bipolar patients and blood donor controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleep deprivation increased P2RX7 expression in healthy persons and 
the putatively low-activity P2RX7 rs2230912 allele A variant was associated with 
rapid cycling in bipolar disorder. This supports earlier findings of P2RX7 
associations to affective disorder and is in agreement with that particularly 
rapid cycling patients have a more vulnerable diurnal system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043057
PMCID: PMC3429455
PMID: 22952630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: LB has received consultancy 
fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb and has been reimbursed by Eli Lilly and 
Bristol-Myers Squibb for attending conferences and presenting lectures. UÖ has 
received grant/research support from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Janssen-Cilag and 
has been a consultant for or received fees for speaking and attending 
conferences from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Pfizer. GE has 
been a consultant for AstraZeneca and Janssen-Cilag and his wife is a 
shareholder of AstraZeneca. ML has been reimbursed by Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca and 
Wyeth for lectures, serves on advisory boards for AstraZeneca and Lundbeck, and 
has received research grants from AstraZeneca. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.