1. Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2012:131058. doi: 10.1155/2012/131058. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy in the 6-hydroxydopamine preclinical model 
of Parkinson's disease.

Galindo MF(1), Solesio ME, Atienzar-Aroca S, Zamora MJ, Jordán Bueso J.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neuropsicofarmacología Traslacional, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario de Albacete, C/Hermanos Falcó 37, 02006 Albacete, Spain.

We discuss the participation of mitochondrial dynamics and autophagy in the 
6-hydroxidopamine-induced Parkinson's disease model. The regulation of dynamic 
mitochondrial processes such as fusion, fission, and mitophagy has been shown to 
be an important mechanism controlling cellular fate. An imbalance in 
mitochondrial dynamics may contribute to both familial and sporadic 
neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease. With special attention 
we address the role of second messengers as the role of reactive oxygen species 
and the mitochondria as the headquarters of cell death. The role of molecular 
signaling pathways, for instance, the participation of Dynamin-related protein 
1(Drp1), will also be addressed. Furthermore evidence demonstrates the 
therapeutic potential of small-molecule inhibitors of mitochondrial division in 
Parkinson's disease. For instance, pharmacological inhibition of Drp1, through 
treatment with the mitochondrial division inhibitor-1, results in the abrogation 
of mitochondrial fission and in a decrease of the number of autophagic cells. 
Deciphering the signaling cascades that underlie mitophagy triggered by 6-OHDA, 
as well as the mechanisms that determine the selectivity of this response, will 
help to better understand this process and may have impact on human treatment 
strategies of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/131058
PMCID: PMC3431121
PMID: 22966477