1. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Oct 11;527(2):121-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.044.
Epub  2012 Aug 31.

NEDD9 rs760678 polymorphism and the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a 
meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Bi L, Wang H, Li Y, Di Q, Xu W, Qian Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, No. 300, Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 
210029, PR China.

The NEDD9 rs760678 polymorphism has been extensively investigated for 
association to Alzheimer's disease (AD), however, results of different studies 
have been inconsistent. The objective of this study is to assess the 
relationship of NEDD9 rs760678 polymorphism and AD risk by using meta-analysis. 
Systematic searches of electronic databases Pubmed and Embase, as well as hand 
searching of the references of identified articles were performed. Statistical 
analyses were performed using software Revman 4.2 and STATA 11.0. A total of 
4436 cases and 4420 controls in 11 case-control studies were included. The 
results indicated that the homozygote GG had a 13% decreased risk of AD, when 
compared with the C allele carriers (CC+CG) (OR=0.87, 95%CI=0.77-0.99, P=0.04 
for GG vs. CG+CC). In the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, significant decreased 
risk was associated with homozygote GG or G allele carriers in Caucasians 
(OR=0.84, 95%CI=0.74-0.96, P=0.008 for GG vs. CG+CC; OR=0.79, 95%CI=0.69-0.91, 
P=0.001 for GG vs. CC; OR=0.90, 95%CI=0.84-0.96, P=0.002 for G vs. C), but not 
in Asians. This meta-analysis suggests that the GG genotype of NEDD9 rs760678 
polymorphism would be a protective factor for AD in Caucasians but not in 
Asians. To further evaluate the effect of gene-gene and gene-environmental 
interactions between NEDD9 rs760678 polymorphism and the risk of AD, more 
studies with larger number of subjects are required.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.044
PMID: 22963925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]