1. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Sep 10;5:497. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-497.

Custom genotyping for substance addiction susceptibility genes in Jordanians of 
Arab descent.

Al-Eitan LN(1), Jaradat SA, Hulse GK, Tay GK.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Forensic Science, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling 
Highway, Crawley, WA, 6009, Australia. Laith_aleitan@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Both environmental and genetic factors contribute to individual 
susceptibility to initiation of substance use and vulnerability to addiction. 
Determining genetic risk factors can make an important contribution to 
understanding the processes leading to addiction. In order to identify gene(s) 
and mechanisms associated with substance addiction, a custom platform array 
search for a genetic association in a case/control of homogenous Jordanian Arab 
population was undertaken. Patients meeting the DSM-VI criteria for substance 
dependence (n = 220) and entering eight week treatment program at two Jordanian 
Drug Rehabilitation Centres were genotyped. In addition, 240 healthy controls 
were also genotyped. The sequenom MassARRAY system (iPLEX GOLD) was used to 
genotype 49 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 8 genes (DRD1, DRD2, 
DRD3, DRD4, DRD5, BDNF, SLC6A3 and COMT).
RESULTS: This study revealed six new associations involving SNPs within DRD2 
gene on chromosome 11. These six SNPs within the DRD2 were found to be most 
strongly associated with substance addiction in the Jordanian Arabic sample. The 
strongest statistical evidence for these new association signals were from 
rs1799732 in the C/-C promoter and rs1125394 in A/G intron 1 regions of DRD2, 
with the overall estimate of effects returning an odds ratio of 3.37 (χ2 (2, 
N = 460) = 21, p-value = 0.000026) and 1.78 (χ2 (2, N = 460) = 8, 
p-value = 0.001), respectively. It has been suggested that DRD2, dopamine 
receptor D2, plays an important role in dopamine secretion and the signal 
pathways of dopaminergic reward and drug addiction.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to show a genetic link to substance 
addiction in a Jordanian population of Arab descent. These findings may 
contribute to our understanding of drug addiction mechanisms in Middle Eastern 
populations and how to manage or dictate therapy for individuals. Comparative 
analysis with different ethnic groups could assist further improving our 
understanding of these mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-497
PMCID: PMC3477049
PMID: 22963930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]