1. Exp Ther Med. 2012 Apr;3(4):655-664. doi: 10.3892/etm.2012.454. Epub 2012 Jan 
13.

Association between IL6 -174G/C and cancer: A meta-analysis of 105,482 
individuals.

Liu RY(1), Song X, Chen P, Lei Z, Miao J, Yi N, Zhang K, Pasche B, Zhang HT.

Author information:
(1)Soochow University Laboratory of Cancer Molecular Genetics, Medical College 
of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, P.R. China ;

Interleukin-6 (IL6) is a pleiotropic inflammatory cytokine, which is implicated 
in the development and progression of several types of cancer. The -174G/C 
polymorphism of the IL6 gene controls serum levels of IL6 and may be associated 
with cancer risk, but the results from the published studies on the association 
between this polymorphism and cancer risk are conflicting. A comprehensive 
meta-analysis was conducted to assess the association of IL6 -174G/C with cancer 
risk. Studies were identified by searches of MEDLINE and HuGE Published 
Literature databases, with no restrictions. An eligible 83 articles involving 
44,735 cancer patients and 60,747 controls were included. Combined odds ratios 
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of the 
association between the IL6 -174 G/C polymorphism and cancer risk. Potential 
sources of heterogeneity were explored by meta-regression and sensitivity 
analysis. Overall, the IL6 -174G/C polymorphism was not significantly associated 
with cancer risk. However, cancer risk was increased for individuals with the CC 
genotype compared to those carrying the GG genotype in African populations 
(OR=1.83, 95% CI 1.26-2.67, P=0.002), but not in Caucasian populations (OR=1.00, 
95% CI 0.92-1.08, P=0.938). The present meta-analysis provides the first 
evidence of the ethnic-specific association of the IL6 -174G/C polymorphism with 
cancer risk. Further investigations with a large number of cases and controls 
are required to confirm the associations between this polymorphism and cancer in 
Africans.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2012.454
PMCID: PMC3438703
PMID: 22969947