1. Brain Pathol. 2013 May;23(3):254-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00634.x.
Epub  2012 Oct 23.

Suppressed expression of autophagosomal protein LC3 in cortical tubers of 
tuberous sclerosis complex.

Miyahara H(1), Natsumeda M, Shiga A, Aoki H, Toyoshima Y, Zheng Y, Takeuchi R, 
Murakami H, Masuda H, Kameyama S, Izumi T, Fujii Y, Takahashi H, Kakita A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, 
Niigata, Japan.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is characterized by benign tumors and 
hamartomas, including cortical tubers. Hamartin and tuberin, encoded by the TSC 
1 and 2 genes, respectively, constitute a functional complex that negatively 
regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, eventually 
promoting the induction of autophagy. In the present study, we assessed the 
induction of autophagy in cortical tubers surgically removed from seven patients 
with TSC in comparison with five controls of cortical tissue taken from non-TSC 
patients with epilepsy. Immunoblotting demonstrated a marked reduction of LC3B-I 
and LC3B-II in tubers relative to the controls. In tubers, strong, diffuse and 
dot-like immunoreactivity (IR) for LC3B was observed in dysmorphic neurons and 
balloon cells, but LC3B-IR in other neurons with normal morphology was 
significantly weaker than that in neurons in the controls. Immunoelectron 
microscopy revealed diffuse distribution of LC3B-IR within the cytoplasm of 
balloon cells. The dot-like pattern may correspond to abnormal aggregation 
bodies involving LC3. In an autopsy patient with TSC, we observed that LC3B-IR 
in neurons located outside of the tubers was preserved. Thus, autophagy is 
suppressed in tubers presumably through the mTOR pathway, and possibly a 
pathological autophagy reaction occurs in the dysmorphic neurons and balloon 
cells.

© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of 
Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00634.x
PMCID: PMC8029364
PMID: 22974335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]