1. Steroids. 2012 Nov;77(13):1313-20. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.08.015. Epub 
2012 Sep 12.

The cytochrome b5 dependent C-5(6) sterol desaturase DES5A from the endoplasmic 
reticulum of Tetrahymena thermophila complements ergosterol biosynthesis mutants 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Poklepovich TJ(1), Rinaldi MA, Tomazic ML, Favale NO, Turkewitz AP, Nudel CB, 
Nusblat AD.

Author information:
(1)Cátedra de Biotecnología y Microbiología Industrial, Facultad de Farmacia y 
Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Junín 956, (C1113AAD) Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Tetrahymena thermophila is a free-living ciliate with no exogenous sterol 
requirement. However, it can perform several modifications on externally added 
sterols including desaturation at C5(6), C7(8), and C22(23). Sterol desaturases 
in Tetrahymena are microsomal enzymes that require Cyt b(5), Cyt b(5) reductase, 
oxygen, and reduced NAD(P)H for their activity, and some of the genes encoding 
these functions have recently been identified. The DES5A gene encodes a C-5(6) 
sterol desaturase, as shown by gene knockout in Tetrahymena. To confirm and 
extend that result, and to develop new approaches to gene characterization in 
Tetrahymena, we have now, expressed DES5A in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The DES5A 
gene was codon optimized and expressed in a yeast mutant, erg3Δ, which is 
disrupted for the gene encoding the S. cerevisiae C-5(6) sterol desaturase ERG3. 
The complemented strain was able to accumulate 74% of the wild type level of 
ergosterol, and also lost the hypersensitivity to cycloheximide associated with 
the lack of ERG3 function. C-5(6) sterol desaturases are expected to function at 
the endoplasmic reticulum. Consistent with this, a GFP-tagged copy of Des5Ap was 
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum in both Tetrahymena and yeast. This work 
shows for the first time that both function and localization are conserved for a 
microsomal enzyme between ciliates and fungi, notwithstanding the enormous 
evolutionary distance between these lineages. The results suggest that 
heterologous expression of ciliate genes in S. cerevisiae provides a useful tool 
for the characterization of genes in Tetrahymena, including genes encoding 
membrane protein complexes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.08.015
PMCID: PMC3501532
PMID: 22982564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]