1. Gene. 2012 Dec 10;511(1):7-11. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.011. Epub 2012 Sep 
14.

The role of chemokine and chemokine receptor gene variants on the susceptibility 
and clinicopathological characteristics of bladder cancer.

Kucukgergin C(1), Isman FK, Dasdemir S, Cakmakoglu B, Sanli O, Gokkusu C, Seckin 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, 34093, Turkey.

The gene variants of the chemokine and chemokine receptor genes associated with 
inflammation may be involved in cancer initiation and progression. The aim of 
this study was to explore the possible association of monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 (MCP-1) A2518G, stromal cell derived factor 1 (SDF-1) 3'A and 
chemokine receptors CCR2A V64I, CCR5 Δ32, CCR5 59029 and CXCR4 gene 
polymorphisms with the risk and clinicopathological characteristics of bladder 
cancer (BC) in a Turkish population. The genotyping was done by PCR and 
PCR-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) methods in 142 
histologically confirmed BC patients and 197 controls. The SDF-1 3'AA genotype 
conferred significantly increased susceptibility to BC. The carriers with AA 
genotype or at least one A allele of CCR2 had an increased risk of developing 
BC. CCR5 wt/Δ32 genotype and CCR5 Δ32 allele were also observed to be involved 
in the susceptibility to BC. Additionally, the combination of CCR2 V64I and CCR5 
Δ32 (i.e., GG-wt/Δ32) was found to be associated with BC risk. With respect to 
the stage of BC, the AA genotype of SDF-1 and at least one T allele of CXCR4 
were significantly associated with high T stage as compared to GG genotype of 
SDF-1 and CC genotype of CXCR4. Furthermore, BC patients with AA genotype or at 
least one A allele of CCR2 had an increased risk of high grade and stage tumors 
as compared to those with GG genotype. Our results suggest that the genetic 
variants of SDF-1 3'A, CCR2A V64I and CCR5 Δ32 gene polymorphisms may modify the 
BC risk. Furthermore, SDF-1 3'A, CCR2A V64I and CXCR4 gene polymorphisms may 
contribute to the muscle invasive BC in a Turkish population.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.011
PMID: 22982413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]