1. Ann Hum Genet. 2012 Nov;76(6):500-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00728.x.
Epub  2012 Sep 19.

Shared genomic segment analysis: the power to find rare disease variants.

Knight S(1), Abo RP, Abel HJ, Neklason DW, Tuohy TM, Burt RW, Thomas A, Camp NJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84108, USA. stacey.knight@hsc.utah.edu

Shared genomic segment (SGS) analysis uses dense single nucleotide polymorphism 
genotyping in high-risk (HR) pedigrees to identify regions of sharing between 
cases. Here, we illustrate the power of SGS to identify dominant rare risk 
variants. Using simulated pedigrees, we consider 12 disease models based on 
disease prevalence, minor allele frequency and penetrance to represent disease 
loci that explain 0.2-99.8% of total disease risk. Pedigrees were required to 
contain ≥ 15 meioses between all cases and to be HR based on significant excess 
of disease (P < 0.001 or P < 0.00001). Across these scenarios, the power for a 
single pedigree ranged widely. Nonetheless, fewer than 10 pedigrees were 
sufficient for excellent power in the majority of models. Power increased with 
the risk attributable to the disease locus, penetrance and the excess of disease 
in the pedigree. Sharing allowing for one sporadic case was uniformly more 
powerful than sharing using all cases. Furthermore, an SGS analysis using a 
large attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis pedigree identified a 1.96 Mb 
region containing the known causal APC gene with genome-wide significance. SGS 
is a powerful method for detecting rare variants and a valuable complement to 
genome-wide association studies and linkage analysis.

© 2012 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2012 Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2012.00728.x
PMCID: PMC3879794
PMID: 22989048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest.