1. Oncology. 2012;83(5):264-72. doi: 10.1159/000342093. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Gene expression of vitamin D metabolic enzymes at baseline and in response to 
vitamin D treatment in thyroid cancer cell lines.

Bennett RG(1), Wakeley SE, Hamel FG, High RR, Korch C, Goldner WS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-4120, 
USA.

The association between vitamin D and thyroid cancer is unclear. It is unknown 
if CYP27A1 or CYP2R1 are present in normal thyroid or cancer cells and there is 
limited information regarding response to treatment with vitamin D. SV40 
immortalized follicular cells (N-thy) and six thyroid cancer cell lines were 
treated with 10 µM vitamin D(3), 0.1 µM 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) or vehicle × 24 h. 
CYP27A1, CYP2R1, CYP27B1 and CYP24A1 mRNA were measured using quantitative 
real-time-PCR before and after treatment. Cell proliferation was also evaluated 
in TPC1 and C643 cells after treatment with D(3), 25(OH)D(3) and 
1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Baseline CYP27A1 and CYP27B1 mRNA were present in all cells, 
CYP2R1 was higher and CYP24A1 mRNA was lower in cancer cell lines versus N-thy. 
TPC1 cells had increased CYP24A1 mRNA levels when treated with both D(3) (3.49, 
p < 0.001) and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) (5.05, p < 0.001). C643 cells showed increased 
CYP24A1 mRNA expression when treated with 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) (5.36, p < 0.001). 
D(3), 25(OH)D(3) and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) all significantly decreased cell 
proliferation in TPC1 and C643 cells. Overall, both cancerous and N-thy cell 
lines express CYP27A1 and CYP2R1 in addition to CYP27B1, establishing the 
potential to metabolize D(3) to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Additionally, vitamin D(3), 
25(OH)D(3) and 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) all had an antiproliferative effect on two 
thyroid cancer cell lines.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000342093
PMCID: PMC4266378
PMID: 22992568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest None of the authors 
report a conflict of interest