1. ISRN Obstet Gynecol. 2012;2012:878635. doi: 10.5402/2012/878635. Epub 2012 Sep
 13.

The multifaceted granulosa cell tumours-myths and realities: a review.

Kanthan R(1), Senger JL, Kanthan S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N-0W8 ; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Royal University Hospital, 103 Hospital Drive, Room 2868, G-Wing, Saskatoon, SK, 
Canada S7N-0W8.

Background. Granulosa cell tumors (GCTs), representing ~2% of ovarian tumours, 
are poorly understood neoplasms with unpredictable and undetermined biological 
behaviour. Design. 5 unusual presentations of GCT and a retrospective 14-year 
(1997-2011) surgical pathology review based on patient sex, age, tumour type and 
concurrent pathology findings are presented to discuss the "myths and realities" 
of GCTs in the context of relevant evidence-based literature. Results. The 5 
index cases included (1) a 5 month-old boy with a left testicular mass, (2) a 
7-day-old neonate with a large complex cystic mass in the abdomen, (3) a 
76-year-old woman with an umbilical mass, (4) a 64-year-old woman with a complex 
solid-cystic pelvic mass, and (5) a 45 year-old woman with an acute abdomen. 
Pathological analysis confirmed the final diagnosis as (1) juvenile GCT, (2) 
macrofollicular GCT, (3) recurrent GCT 32 years later, (4) collision tumour: 
colonic adenocarcinoma and GCT, and (5) ruptured GCT. Conclusion. GCT is best 
considered as an unusual indolent neoplasm of low malignant potential with late 
recurrences that can arise in the ovaries and testicles in both the young and 
the old. Multifaceted clinical presentations coupled with the unpredictable 
biological behaviour with late relapses are diagnostic pitfalls necessitating a 
high degree of suspicion for accurate clinical and pathological diagnosis.

DOI: 10.5402/2012/878635
PMCID: PMC3449135
PMID: 23008780