1. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13371-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01426-12. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

Influenza virus neuraminidases with reduced enzymatic activity that avidly bind 
sialic Acid receptors.

Zhu X(1), McBride R, Nycholat CM, Yu W, Paulson JC, Wilson IA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

Influenza virus neuraminidase (NA) cleaves off sialic acid from cellular 
receptors of hemagglutinin (HA) to enable progeny escape from infected cells. 
However, NA variants (D151G) of recent human H3N2 viruses have also been 
reported to bind receptors on red blood cells, but the nature of these receptors 
and the effect of the mutation on NA activity were not established. Here, we 
compare the functional and structural properties of a human H3N2 NA from 
A/Tanzania/205/2010 and its D151G mutant, which supports HA-independent receptor 
binding. While the wild-type NA efficiently cleaves sialic acid from both α2-6- 
and α2-3-linked glycans, the mutant exhibits much reduced enzymatic activity 
toward both types of sialosides. Conversely, while wild-type NA shows no 
detectable binding to sialosides, the D151G NA exhibits avid binding with broad 
specificity toward α2-3 sialosides. D151G NA binds the 3' sialyllactosamine 
(3'-SLN) and 6'-SLN sialosides with equilibrium dissociation constant (K(D)) 
values of 30.0 μM and 645 μM, respectively, which correspond to much higher 
affinities than the corresponding affinities (low mM) of HA to these glycans. 
Crystal structures of wild-type and mutant NAs reveal the structural basis for 
glycan binding in the active site by exclusively impairing the glycosidic bond 
hydrolysis step. The general significance of D151 among influenza virus NAs was 
further explored by introducing the D151G mutation into three N1 NAs and one N2 
NA, which all exhibited reduced enzymatic activity and preferential binding to 
α2-3 sialosides. Since the enzymatic and binding activities of NAs are not 
routinely assessed, the potential for NA receptor binding to contribute to 
influenza virus biology may be underappreciated.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01426-12
PMCID: PMC3503043
PMID: 23015718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]