1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45744. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045744. Epub 2012 Sep
27.

Transcriptome analysis of responses to rhodomyrtone in methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus.

Sianglum W(1), Srimanote P, Taylor PW, Rosado H, Voravuthikunchai SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Natural Products Research Center, Faculty of 
Science, Prince of Songkla University, Songkla, Thailand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(7). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/621cdbb7-0918-4ec4-8fa0-83ef4d97a344.

Rhodomyrtone, purified from Rhodomyrtus tomentosa (Aiton) Hassk, exhibits a high 
degree of potency against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). We 
recently demonstrated that exposure of MRSA to a subinhibitory concentration 
(0.174 µg/ml) of rhodomyrtone resulted in the alteration of expression of 
several functional classes of bacterial proteins. To provide further insight 
into the antibacterial mode of action of this compound, we determined the impact 
of exposure to rhodomyrtone on the gene transcriptional profile of MRSA using 
microarray analysis. Exposure of MRSA to subinhibitory concentrations (0.5MIC; 
0.5 µg/ml) of rhodomyrtone revealed significant modulation of gene expression, 
with induction of 64 genes and repression of 35 genes. Prominent changes in 
response to exposure to rhodomyrtone involved genes encoding proteins essential 
to metabolic pathways and processes such as amino acid metabolism, membrane 
function, ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transportation and lipoprotein and 
nucleotide metabolism. Genes involved in the synthesis of the aspartate family 
of amino acids, in particular proteins encoded by the dap operon were prominent. 
The diaminopimelate (DAP) biosynthetic pathway is the precursor of lysine 
synthesis and is essential for peptidoglycan biosynthesis. However, phenotypic 
analysis of the peptidoglycan amino acid content of rhodomyrtone-treated MRSA 
did not differ significantly from that extracted from control cells. Genes 
involved in the biosynthesis of amino acids and peptidoglycan, and a high 
affinity ATP-driven K ((+)) transport system, were investigated by quantitative 
reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) using EMRSA-16 1, 4, or 18 h after exposure 
to rhodomyrtone and in general the data concurred with that obtained by 
microarray, highlighting the relevance of the DAP biosynthetic pathway to the 
mode of action of rhodomyrtone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045744
PMCID: PMC3459976
PMID: 23029218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.