1. Lung Cancer. 2012 Dec;78(3):201-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.014. Epub
2012  Sep 29.

Analysis of EGFR, KRAS and P53 mutations in lung cancer using cells in the 
curette lavage fluid obtained by bronchoscopy.

Yamaguchi F(1), Kugawa S, Tateno H, Kokubu F, Fukuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Showa University, School of Medicine, 
1-5-8, Hatanodai, Tokyo 142-8666, Japan. f_y@med.showa-u.ac.jp

Histopathological samples are commonly used for molecular testing to detect both 
oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes in lung cancer. The purpose of this study 
was to determine the efficacy of using curette lavage fluid for molecular 
testing to detect EGFR, KRAS and P53 mutations in lung cancer patients. Samples 
were obtained from 77 lung cancer patients by bronchoscopy at the time of 
diagnosis, collected by scraping the site of the primary tumor lesion with a 
curette. DNA was extracted from cells in the curette lavage fluid, and PCRs were 
performed to amplify mutation hot spot regions in the EGFR, KRAS and P53 genes. 
The PCR products were direct-sequenced to detect mutations of each gene. The 
reference sequence of each gene was obtained from GenBank. Overall, 27% (21 of 
77) were found with EGFR mutations, 1% (1 of 77) with KRAS mutations, and 36% 
(28 of 77) with P53 mutations. KRAS mutations were not detected in patients 
harboring mutations in either EGFR or P53. P53 mutations were identified in 38% 
(8 of 21) of the patients with EGFR mutations, all of who had advanced lung 
cancer. Of these patients, a 62-year-old female current smoker was given 
EGFR-TKI as third-line therapy, with no improvement in clinical symptoms or 
results of radiographic examination. Multivariate analysis indicated that P53 
mutation rates in advanced-stage lung cancer were significantly higher than 
those in early-stage lung cancer (P=.017). In contrast, EGFR mutation rates were 
not significantly associated with staging. L747S in EGFR, described as a 
mutation associated with secondary resistance to EGFR-TKI, was detected in three 
patients who had never received EGFR-TKI, including one SCLC patient. It is 
possible to analyze EGFR, KRAS and P53 mutations using curette lavage fluid 
collected from lung cancer patients. This is useful when sufficient amounts of 
tumor samples cannot be obtained. Data from the current study suggest that EGFR 
mutations in concert with P53 mutations accelerate cancer development and lead 
to evolution of therapeutic resistance.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.014
PMID: 23026641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]