1. J Child Neurol. 2013 Oct;28(10):1259-65. doi: 10.1177/0883073812460581. Epub 
2012 Oct 3.

Novel mutation in Sjogren-Larsson syndrome is associated with divergent 
neurologic phenotypes.

Davis K(1), Holden KR, S'Aulis D, Amador C, Matheus MG, Rizzo WB.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
USA.

Sjögren-Larsson syndrome is an inherited disorder of lipid metabolism caused by 
mutations in the ALDH3A2 gene that codes for fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase, which 
results in accumulation of fatty aldehydes and alcohols and is characterized by 
ichthyosis, intellectual disability, and spastic diplegia/quadriplegia. The 
authors describe 2 unrelated Honduran patients who carried the same novel 
homozygous nonsense mutation (c.1309A>T, p.K437X) and ALDH3A2 DNA haplotype, but 
widely differed in disease severity. One patient exhibited spastic quadriplegia 
with unusual neuroregression, whereas the other patient had the usual static 
form of spastic diplegia with neurodevelopmental disabilities. Biochemical 
analyses showed a similar profound deficiency of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase 
activity and impaired fatty alcohol metabolism in both patients' cultured 
fibroblasts. These results indicate that variation in the neurologic phenotype 
of Sjögren-Larsson syndrome is not strictly determined by the ALDH3A2 mutation 
or the biochemical defect as expressed in cultured fibroblasts, but by 
unidentified epigenetic/environmental factors, gene modifiers, or other 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073812460581
PMCID: PMC6028016
PMID: 23034980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.