1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Dec 15;303(12):C1229-43. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00044.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Increased TMEM16A-encoded calcium-activated chloride channel activity is 
associated with pulmonary hypertension.

Forrest AS(1), Joyce TC, Huebner ML, Ayon RJ, Wiwchar M, Joyce J, Freitas N, 
Davis AJ, Ye L, Duan DD, Singer CA, Valencik ML, Greenwood IA, Leblanc N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, 
Nevada 89557-0573, USA.

Pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) are more depolarized and display 
higher Ca(2+) levels in pulmonary hypertension (PH). Whether the functional 
properties and expression of Ca(2+)-activated Cl- channels (Cl(Ca)), an 
important excitatory mechanism in PASMCs, are altered in PH is unknown. The 
potential role of Cl(Ca) channels in PH was investigated using the monocrotaline 
(MCT)-induced PH model in the rat. Three weeks postinjection with a single dose 
of MCT (50 mg/kg ip), the animals developed right ventricular hypertrophy (heart 
weight measurements) and changes in pulmonary arterial flow (pulse-waved Doppler 
imaging) that were consistent with increased pulmonary arterial pressure and PH. 
Whole cell patch experiments revealed an increase in niflumic acid 
(NFA)-sensitive Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) current [I(Cl(Ca))] density in PASMCs 
from large conduit and small intralobar pulmonary arteries of MCT-treated rats 
vs. aged-matched saline-injected controls. Quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot 
analysis revealed that the alterations in I(Cl(Ca)) were accompanied by parallel 
changes in the expression of TMEM16A, a gene recently shown to encode for Cl(Ca) 
channels. The contraction to serotonin of conduit and intralobar pulmonary 
arteries from MCT-treated rats exhibited greater sensitivity to nifedipine (1 
μM), an l-type Ca(2+) channel blocker, and NFA (30 or 100 μM, with or without 10 
μM indomethacin to inhibit cyclooxygenases) or T16A(Inh)-A01 (10 μM), 
TMEM16A/Cl(Ca) channel inhibitors, than that of control animals. In conclusion, 
augmented Cl(Ca)/TMEM16A channel activity is a major contributor to the changes 
in electromechanical coupling of PA in this model of PH. TMEM16A-encoded 
channels may therefore represent a novel therapeutic target in this disease.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00044.2012
PMCID: PMC3532492
PMID: 23034390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]