1. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Dec;23(23):4647-61. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0315. Epub
2012  Oct 3.

RhoD activated by fibroblast growth factor induces cytoneme-like cellular 
protrusions through mDia3C.

Koizumi K(1), Takano K, Kaneyasu A, Watanabe-Takano H, Tokuda E, Abe T, Watanabe 
N, Takenawa T, Endo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Yayoicho, Inageku, Chiba 
263-8522, Japan.

The small GTPase RhoD regulates actin cytoskeleton to collapse actin stress 
fibers and focal adhesions, resulting in suppression of cell migration and 
cytokinesis. It also induces alignment of early endosomes along actin filaments 
and reduces their motility. We show here that a constitutively activated RhoD 
generated two types of actin-containing thin peripheral cellular protrusions 
distinct from Cdc42-induced filopodia. One was longer, almost straight, 
immotile, and sensitive to fixation, whereas the other was shorter, undulating, 
motile, and resistant to fixation. Moreover, cells expressing wild-type RhoD 
extended protrusions toward fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2/4/8-coated beads. 
Stimulation of wild-type RhoD-expressing cells with these FGFs also caused 
formation of cellular protrusions. Nodules moved through the RhoD-induced longer 
protrusions, mainly toward the cell body. Exogenously expressed FGF receptor was 
associated with these moving nodules containing endosome-like vesicles. These 
results suggest that the protrusions are responsible for intercellular 
communication mediated by FGF and its receptor. Accordingly, the protrusions are 
morphologically and functionally equivalent to cytonemes. RhoD was activated by 
FGF2/4/8. Knockdown of RhoD interfered with FGF-induced protrusion formation. 
Activated RhoD specifically bound to mDia3C and facilitated actin polymerization 
together with mDia3C. mDia3C was localized to the tips or stems of the 
protrusions. In addition, constitutively activated mDia3C formed protrusions 
without RhoD or FGF stimulation. Knockdown of mDia3 obstructed RhoD-induced 
protrusion formation. These results imply that RhoD activated by FGF signaling 
forms cytoneme-like protrusions through activation of mDia3C, which induces 
actin filament formation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0315
PMCID: PMC3510025
PMID: 23034183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]