1. Antiviral Res. 2012 Dec;96(3):376-85. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.09.017.
Epub  2012 Oct 4.

Comparison of the protection of ferrets against pandemic 2009 influenza A virus 
(H1N1) by 244 DI influenza virus and oseltamivir.

Dimmock NJ(1), Dove BK, Meng B, Scott PD, Taylor I, Cheung L, Hallis B, Marriott 
AC, Carroll MW, Easton AJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. 
n.j.dimmock@warwick.ac.uk

The main antivirals employed to combat seasonal and pandemic influenza are 
oseltamivir and zanamivir which act by inhibiting the virus-encoded 
neuraminidase. These have to be deployed close to the time of infection and 
antiviral resistance to the more widely used oseltamivir has arisen relatively 
rapidly. Defective interfering (DI) influenza virus is a natural antiviral that 
works in a different way to oseltamivir and zanamivir, and a cloned version 
(segment 1 244 DI RNA in a cloned A/PR/8/34 virus; 244/PR8) has proved effective 
in preclinical studies in mice. The active principle is the DI RNA, and this is 
thought to interact with all influenza A viruses by inhibiting RNA virus 
synthesis and packaging of the cognate virion RNA into nascent DI virus 
particles. We have compared the ability of DI virus and oseltamivir to protect 
ferrets from intranasal 2009 pandemic influenza virus A/California/04/09 (A/Cal, 
H1N1). Ferrets were treated with a single 2 μg intranasal dose of 244 DI RNA 
delivered as 244/PR8 virus, or a total of 25mg/kg body weight of oseltamivir 
given as 10 oral doses over 5 days. Both DI virus and oseltamivir reduced day 2 
infectivity and the influx of cells into nasal fluids, and permitted the 
development of adaptive immunity. However DI virus, but not oseltamivir, 
significantly reduced weight loss, facilitated better weight gain, reduced 
respiratory disease, and reduced infectivity on days 4 and 6. 244 DI RNA was 
amplified by A/Cal by >25,000-fold, consistent with the amelioration of clinical 
disease. Treatment with DI virus did not delay clearance or cause persistence of 
infectious virus or DI RNA. Thus in this system DI virus was overall more 
effective than oseltamivir in combatting pandemic A/California/04/09.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.09.017
PMCID: PMC3526778
PMID: 23041142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]