1. Lancet Neurol. 2012 Nov;11(11):951-62. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70234-X.
Epub  2012 Oct 5.

Genetic risk factors for ischaemic stroke and its subtypes (the METASTROKE 
collaboration): a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies.

Traylor M(1), Farrall M, Holliday EG, Sudlow C, Hopewell JC, Cheng YC, Fornage 
M, Ikram MA, Malik R, Bevan S, Thorsteinsdottir U, Nalls MA, Longstreth W, 
Wiggins KL, Yadav S, Parati EA, Destefano AL, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Khan MS, 
Reiner AP, Helgadottir A, Achterberg S, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Abboud S, Schmidt 
R, Walters M, Chen WM, Ringelstein EB, O'Donnell M, Ho WK, Pera J, Lemmens R, 
Norrving B, Higgins P, Benn M, Sale M, Kuhlenbäumer G, Doney AS, Vicente AM, 
Delavaran H, Algra A, Davies G, Oliveira SA, Palmer CN, Deary I, Schmidt H, 
Pandolfo M, Montaner J, Carty C, de Bakker PI, Kostulas K, Ferro JM, van Zuydam 
NR, Valdimarsson E, Nordestgaard BG, Lindgren A, Thijs V, Slowik A, Saleheen D, 
Paré G, Berger K, Thorleifsson G; Australian Stroke Genetics Collaborative, 
Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2); Hofman A, Mosley TH, Mitchell 
BD, Furie K, Clarke R, Levi C, Seshadri S, Gschwendtner A, Boncoraglio GB, 
Sharma P, Bis JC, Gretarsdottir S, Psaty BM, Rothwell PM, Rosand J, Meschia JF, 
Stefansson K, Dichgans M, Markus HS; International Stroke Genetics Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Stroke and Dementia Research Centre, St George's University of London, 
London, UK.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2015 Aug;14(8):788. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00155-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2012 Nov;11(11):931-3. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70235-1.
    J Neurol. 2013 Feb;260(2):692-4. doi: 10.1007/s00415-013-6835-0.

BACKGROUND: Various genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been done in 
ischaemic stroke, identifying a few loci associated with the disease, but sample 
sizes have been 3500 cases or less. We established the METASTROKE collaboration 
with the aim of validating associations from previous GWAS and identifying novel 
genetic associations through meta-analysis of GWAS datasets for ischaemic stroke 
and its subtypes.
METHODS: We meta-analysed data from 15 ischaemic stroke cohorts with a total of 
12 389 individuals with ischaemic stroke and 62 004 controls, all of European 
ancestry. For the associations reaching genome-wide significance in METASTROKE, 
we did a further analysis, conditioning on the lead single nucleotide 
polymorphism in every associated region. Replication of novel suggestive signals 
was done in 13 347 cases and 29 083 controls.
FINDINGS: We verified previous associations for cardioembolic stroke near PITX2 
(p=2·8×10(-16)) and ZFHX3 (p=2·28×10(-8)), and for large-vessel stroke at a 9p21 
locus (p=3·32×10(-5)) and HDAC9 (p=2·03×10(-12)). Additionally, we verified that 
all associations were subtype specific. Conditional analysis in the three 
regions for which the associations reached genome-wide significance (PITX2, 
ZFHX3, and HDAC9) indicated that all the signal in each region could be 
attributed to one risk haplotype. We also identified 12 potentially novel loci 
at p<5×10(-6). However, we were unable to replicate any of these novel 
associations in the replication cohort.
INTERPRETATION: Our results show that, although genetic variants can be detected 
in patients with ischaemic stroke when compared with controls, all associations 
we were able to confirm are specific to a stroke subtype. This finding has two 
implications. First, to maximise success of genetic studies in ischaemic stroke, 
detailed stroke subtyping is required. Second, different genetic 
pathophysiological mechanisms seem to be associated with different stroke 
subtypes.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, UK Medical Research Council (MRC), Australian National 
and Medical Health Research Council, National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
including National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI), the National 
Institute on Aging (NIA), the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), 
and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70234-X
PMCID: PMC3490334
PMID: 23041239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]