1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e43939. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043939. Epub 2012 Oct
9.

Identification of functional SNPs in BARD1 gene and in silico analysis of 
damaging SNPs: based on data procured from dbSNP database.

Alshatwi AA(1), Hasan TN, Syed NA, Shafi G, Grace BL.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cancer Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Food Science and 
Nutrition, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. alialshatwi@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The BARD1 gene encodes for the BRCA1-associated RING domain (BARD1) 
protein. Germ line and somatic mutations in BARD1 are found in sporadic breast, 
ovarian and uterine cancers. There is a plethora of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) which may or may not be involved in the onset of female 
cancers. Hence, before planning a larger population study, it is advisable to 
sort out the possible functional SNPs. To accomplish this goal, data available 
in the dbSNP database and different computer programs can be used. To the best 
of our knowledge, until now there has been no such study on record for the BARD1 
gene. Therefore, this study was undertaken to find the functional nsSNPs in 
BARD1.
RESULT: 2.85% of all SNPs in the dbSNP database were present in the coding 
regions. SIFT predicted 11 out of 50 nsSNPs as not tolerable and PolyPhen 
assessed 27 out of 50 nsSNPs as damaging. FastSNP revealed that the rs58253676 
SNP in the 3' UTR may have splicing regulator and enhancer functions. In the 5' 
UTR, rs17489363 and rs17426219 may alter the transcriptional binding site. The 
intronic region SNP rs67822872 may have a medium-high risk level. The protein 
structures 1JM7, 3C5R and 2NTE were predicted by PDBSum and shared 100% 
similarity with the BARD1 amino acid sequence. Among the predicted nsSNPs, 
rs4986841, rs111367604, rs13389423 and rs139785364 were identified as 
deleterious and damaging by the SIFT and PolyPhen programs. Additionally, 
I-Mutant showed a decrease in stability for these nsSNPs upon mutation. Finally, 
the ExPASy-PROSIT program revealed that the predicted deleterious mutations are 
contained in the ankyrin ring and BRCT domains.
CONCLUSION: Using the available bioinformatics tools and the data present in the 
dbSNP database, the four nsSNPs, rs4986841, rs111367604, rs13389423 and 
rs139785364, were identified as deleterious, reducing the protein stability of 
BARD1. Hence, these SNPs can be used for the larger population-based studies of 
female cancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043939
PMCID: PMC3467277
PMID: 23056176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.