1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):811-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2119-5. Epub 2012 
Oct 11.

Quantitative assessment of the influence of PPARG P12A polymorphism on 
gestational diabetes mellitus risk.

Wang C(1), Li X, Huang Z, Qian J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Planning, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan 
University, No. 419 Fangxie Road, Shanghai, 200011, People's Republic of China.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPARG) is a member of the 
nuclear hormone receptor superfamily that has attracted considerable attention 
as a candidate gene for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) based on its 
function as a key factor involved in the regulation of adipocyte differentiation 
as well as lipid and glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Many studies 
have examined the association between P12A polymorphism (rs1801282) in the PPARG 
gene and risk of GDM, but the results have been inconsistent. To derive a more 
precise estimation of the relationship, a meta-analysis of 2,858 GDM patients 
and 6,890 controls from nine published case-control studies was performed. An 
overall random effects odds ratio of 0.89 (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 
0.77-1.04, P = 0.15) was found for 12A allele. In the subgroup analysis by 
ethnicity, significantly decreased risks were found in East Asians, while no 
significant associations were detected among Caucasian and Middle Eastern 
populations. Similar results were also observed using dominant genetic model. 
This meta-analysis suggested an overall weak association between the P12A 
polymorphism and GDM risk among East Asians. However, additional very 
large-scale studies are warranted to provide conclusive evidence on the effects 
of the PPARG gene on risk of GDM.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-012-2119-5
PMID: 23054024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]