1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046795. Epub 2012 Oct
8.

Potassium acts as a GTPase-activating element on each nucleotide-binding domain 
of the essential Bacillus subtilis EngA.

Foucher AE(1), Reiser JB, Ebel C, Housset D, Jault JM.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Structurale, Universit√© Joseph Fourier Grenoble 1, 
Grenoble, France.

EngA proteins form a unique family of bacterial GTPases with two GTP-binding 
domains in tandem, namely GD1 and GD2, followed by a KH (K-homology) domain. 
They have been shown to interact with the bacterial ribosome and to be involved 
in its biogenesis. Most prokaryotic EngA possess a high GTPase activity in 
contrast to eukaryotic GTPases that act mainly as molecular switches. Here, we 
have purified and characterized the GTPase activity of the Bacillus subtilis 
EngA and two shortened EngA variants that only contain GD1 or GD2-KH. 
Interestingly, the GTPase activity of GD1 alone is similar to that of the whole 
EngA, whereas GD2-KH has a 150-fold lower GTPase activity. At physiological 
concentration, potassium strongly stimulates the GTPase activity of each protein 
construct. Interestingly, it affects neither the affinities for nucleotides nor 
the monomeric status of EngA or the GD1 domain. Thus, potassium likely acts as a 
chemical GTPase-activating element as proposed for another bacterial GTPase like 
MnmE. However, unlike MnmE, potassium does not promote dimerization of EngA. In 
addition, we solved two crystal structures of full-length EngA. One of them 
contained for the first time a GTP-like analogue bound to GD2 while GD1 was 
free. Surprisingly, its overall fold was similar to a previously solved 
structure with GDP bound to both sites. Our data indicate that a significant 
structural change must occur upon K(+) binding to GD2, and a comparison with T. 
maritima EngA and MnmE structures allowed us to propose a model explaining the 
chemical basis for the different GTPase activities of GD1 and GD2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046795
PMCID: PMC3466195
PMID: 23056455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.