1. Int J Endocrinol. 2012;2012:945608. doi: 10.1155/2012/945608. Epub 2012 Sep
27.

Arginine 16 Glycine Polymorphism in β2-Adrenergic Receptor Gene is Associated 
with Obesity, Hyperlipidemia, Hyperleptinemia, and Insulin Resistance in Saudis.

Daghestani MH(1), Warsy A, Daghestani MH, Al-Odaib AN, Eldali A, Al-Eisa NA, 
Omer SA, Hassan ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Female Center for Scientific and Medical Colleges, 
King Saud University, P.O. Box 22452, Riyadh 11495, Saudi Arabia ; Department of 
Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, P.O. Box 3354, 
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

Background. Several studies have shown an association between codon 16 
polymorphism of the β2AR gene and obesity. Methods. We studied the association 
between Arg16Gly polymorphism and obesity and its influence on anthropometric 
parameters, lipids, insulin resistance and leptin in Saudi individuals. The 
study group included 329 individuals (males: 109 and females: 220). Metabolic 
parameters, including glucose, lipids, insulin, and leptin were analyzed and 
anthropometric parameters including waist and hip circumference, waist/hip (W/H) 
ratio, and body mass index (BMI) were measured and HOMA-IR was calculated. 
Genotyping was conducted by DNA sequencing of 353 bp fragments, carrying the 
Arg16Gly polymorphic site. Results and Conclusion. Overweight and obese subjects 
had a significantly higher frequency of Gly16 (0.375 and 0.38, resp.) compared 
with normal-weight subjects (0.200). In addition, subjects carrying Gly16 allele 
regardless of their BMI had greater waist and hip circumference, W/H ratio, 
plasma lipids, leptin, glucose level, and insulin resistance as judged from the 
HOMA-IR, compared to those with the wild-type allele. The findings of this study 
show a significant association between the Arg16Gly polymorphism in β2AR gene 
and the development of insulin resistance, overweight, and obesity in Saudi 
populations with an influence on the levels of lipid and leptin.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/945608
PMCID: PMC3463944
PMID: 23056045