1. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Oct 10;4(155):155ra137. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.3004373.

Neural stem cell engraftment and myelination in the human brain.

Gupta N(1), Henry RG, Strober J, Kang SM, Lim DA, Bucci M, Caverzasi E, Gaetano 
L, Mandelli ML, Ryan T, Perry R, Farrell J, Jeremy RJ, Ulman M, Huhn SL, 
Barkovich AJ, Rowitch DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2012 Dec 19;4(165):165er8.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Dec;8(12):659. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.224.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare leukodystrophy caused by mutation 
of the proteolipid protein 1 gene. Defective oligodendrocytes in PMD fail to 
myelinate axons, causing global neurological dysfunction. Human central nervous 
system stem cells (HuCNS-SCs) can develop into oligodendrocytes and confer 
structurally normal myelin when transplanted into a hypomyelinating mouse model. 
A 1-year, open-label phase-1 study was undertaken to evaluate safety and to 
detect evidence of myelin formation after HuCNS-SC transplantation. Allogeneic 
HuCNS-SCs were surgically implanted into the frontal lobe white matter in four 
male subjects with an early-onset severe form of PMD. Immunosuppression was 
administered for 9 months. Serial neurological evaluations, developmental 
assessments, and cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and MR spectroscopy, 
including high-angular resolution diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), were performed 
at baseline and after transplantation. The neurosurgical procedure, 
immunosuppression regimen, and HuCNS-SC transplantation were well tolerated. 
Modest gains in neurological function were observed in three of the four 
subjects. No clinical or radiological adverse effects were directly attributed 
to the donor cells. Reduced T1 and T2 relaxation times were observed in the 
regions of transplantation 9 months after the procedure in the three subjects. 
Normalized DTI showed increasing fractional anisotropy and reduced radial 
diffusivity, consistent with myelination, in the region of transplantation 
compared to control white matter regions remote to the transplant sites. These 
phase 1 findings indicate a favorable safety profile for HuCNS-SCs in subjects 
with PMD. The MRI results suggest durable cell engraftment and donor-derived 
myelin in the transplanted host white matter.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3004373
PMCID: PMC3893824
PMID: 23052294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: D.H.R. has nothing to 
disclose. S.L.H. is employed by the sponsor StemCells Inc., and other primary 
study personnel (N.G., R.G.H., J.S., S.-M.K., T.R., R.P., R.J.J., M.U., and 
A.J.B.) received partial salary support from the sponsor. HuCNS-SC for use in 
PMD is claimed by a host of U.S. patents issued to StemCells Inc.: U.S. patent 
nos. 5,968,829 (“Human CNS neural stem cells”); 7,361,505 (“Multipotent neural 
stem cell compositions”); 7,153,686 (“Compositions of enriched central nervous 
system stem cell and progenitor cell populations”); 6,777,233 (“Cultures of 
human CNS neural stem cells”); 5,851,832 (“In vitro growth and proliferation of 
multipotent neural stem cells and their progeny”); 6,497,872 (“Neural 
transplantation using proliferated multipotent neural stem cells and their 
progeny”); and 7,166,277 (“Remyelination of neurons using multipotent neural 
stem cell progeny”).