1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Dec;5(12):1368-74. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0233. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

A phase III skin cancer chemoprevention study of DFMO: long-term follow-up of 
skin cancer events and toxicity.

Kreul SM(1), Havighurst T, Kim K, Mendonça EA, Wood GS, Snow S, Borich A, Verma 
A, Bailey HH.

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Dec;5(12):1341-4. doi: 
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0429.

Decreasing the incidence of nonmelanoma skin cancer (NMSC) is of great 
importance in regards to future healthcare services. Given the previously 
reported preventive effects of α-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) in skin and 
colon cancer trials, we determined appropriate cause to update the clinical data 
on the subjects from the recently reported randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled phase III skin cancer prevention study of DFMO. Our intention 
was to retrospectively assess the further incidence of skin cancer, other 
malignancies, and adverse events of patients accrued to our phase III skin 
cancer prevention study of DFMO. Clinical records of 209 University of Wisconsin 
(UW) Health subjects were reviewed, and 2,092.7 person years of on study (884.3 
person years) and poststudy (1,208.4 person years) follow-up for these patients 
were assessed for new NMSC events and recurrence rates from the on study period, 
the poststudy period, and the two study periods combined. No evidence of 
increased significant diagnoses or serious adverse events was observed in the 
DFMO participants. The initially observed, marginally significant reduction (P = 
0.069) in NMSC rates for DFMO subjects relative to placebo continued without 
evidence of rebound. Event rates after discontinuation from study for total 
NMSCs (DFMO 0.236 NMSC/person/year, placebo 0.297, P = 0.48) or the subtypes of 
basal cell carcinomas (BCC; DFMO 0.179 BCC/person/year, placebo 0.190, P = 0.77) 
and squamous cell carcinomas (SCC; DFMO 0.057 SCC/person/year, placebo 0.107, P 
= 0.43) are listed. Follow-up data revealed a persistent but insignificant 
reduction in new NMSCs occurring in DFMO subjects without evidence of latent or 
cumulative toxicity relative to placebo subjects.

©2012 AACR

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0233
PMCID: PMC3518692
PMID: 23060038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest No 
authors had any potential conflicts of interest to disclose.