1. J Phys Chem B. 2012 Nov 15;116(45):13320-30. doi: 10.1021/jp305118n. Epub 2012
 Nov 2.

Validation of response function construction and probing heterogeneous protein 
hydration by intrinsic tryptophan.

Qin Y(1), Chang CW, Wang L, Zhong D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, and Program of Biophysics, 191 West Woodruff Avenue, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Protein solvation dynamics usually occur on multiple time scales with site 
specificity, and the characterization of such heterogeneous dynamics requires a 
convenient optical probe. We proposed a tryptophan methodology, and with 
site-directed mutagenesis we can use a tryptophan scan to probe any desirable 
position around protein surfaces. Here, we report our extended solvation model 
for construction of response functions for probes such as tryptophan with 
multiple emission peaks and lifetimes. We show our systematic construction 
procedure and careful analyses of the possible missing percentage of an initial 
ultrafast component with the established zero-time emission spectrum and limited 
temporal resolution through two methods of the direct mapping of 
femtosecond-resolved fluorescence spectra (3D FRES) and the constructed FRES 
(2D) from the fluorescence transients. We unambiguously validate our extended 
model with reexamination of solvation dynamics (methanol, water, and proteins) 
using conventional dye coumarin, intrinsic tryptophan, and cofactor flavin. 
Using mutant proteins of GB1, we show again the generality of the powerful probe 
tryptophan for protein hydration (solvation) and the slowdown of the hydration 
layer dynamics especially at the water-protein interface. These results justify 
the necessity of our extended solvation model, clarify the confusion of protein 
hydration in the recent literature, and establish the universal optical probe of 
tryptophan for heterogeneous protein dynamics.

DOI: 10.1021/jp305118n
PMCID: PMC3499651
PMID: 23075091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]