1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046982. Epub 2012 Oct 
10.

Association of GSTM1 null allele with prostate cancer risk: evidence from 36 
case-control studies.

Wei B(1), Xu Z, Zhou Y, Ruan J, Cheng H, Xi B, Zhu M, Jin K, Zhou D, Hu Q, Wang 
Q, Wang Z, Yan Z, Xuan F, Huang X, Zhang J, Zhou H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Affiliated Wuxi People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Wuxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) is thought to be involved in 
detoxifying several carcinogens and may play a vital role in tumorigenesis. 
Numerous studies have evaluated the association between GSTM1 null/present 
polymorphism and risk of prostate cancer (PCa). However, the results remain 
inconsistent. To derive a more precise estimation, we performed a meta-analysis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A comprehensive search was conducted to identify 
all eligible case-control studies. We used odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) to assess the strength of the association. The overall 
association was significant (OR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.11-1.48, P = 0.001). Moreover, 
subgroup analyses showed GSTM1 null genotype significantly associated with PCa 
risk among Asians (OR = 1.35, 95% CI: 1.03-1.78, P = 0.03) but not among 
Caucasians (OR = 1.12, 95% CI: 0.96-1.31, P = 0.16). In addition, we did not 
find that smoking modified the genotype effect on the risk of PCa.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The present meta-analysis suggested that GSTM1 null 
allele was a low-penetrant risk factor for PCa among Asians.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046982
PMCID: PMC3468624
PMID: 23071687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.