1. Diabet Med. 2013 Mar;30(3):338-44. doi: 10.1111/dme.12046.

Longitudinal association between medication adherence and glycaemic control in 
Type 2 diabetes.

Aikens JE(1), Piette JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
aikensj@umich.edu

AIM: Despite the widespread assumption that adherence drives glycaemic control, 
there is little published support for this in Type 2 diabetes. The study 
objective was to determine whether self-reported medication adherence predicts 
future glycaemic control in Type 2 diabetes, after accounting for baseline 
control.
METHODS: Medication adherence (4-item Morisky scale), glycaemic control 
(HbA(1c)%), and other variables were assessed in 287 adult primary care patients 
prescribed oral medication (40% also on insulin) for Type 2 diabetes. Glycaemic 
control was reassessed 6 months later. Regression analyses examined concurrent 
and future glycaemic control as a function of baseline medication adherence 
after adjustment for baseline glycaemia and other potential confounders.
RESULTS: Only half of patients reported high adherence. Cross-sectional adjusted 
analysis replicated prior reports of an adherence-HbA(1c) association (P = 
0.011). Even after adjusting for baseline HbA(1c), each one-point increase in 
baseline Morisky total score was associated with a 1.8 mmol/mol (or 0.16%) 
increase in HbA(1c) measured 6 months later. Additionally, baseline endorsement 
of forgetting to take medication was associated with a 4.7 mmol/mol (or 0.43%) 
increase in 6-month HbA(1c) (P = 0.005). This effect persisted after adjusting 
for psychological distress and did not vary by key demographic and medical 
features.
CONCLUSIONS: Even after stringent adjustment for baseline glycaemic control, 
self-reported adherence to diabetes medication predicts long-term glycaemic 
control. The Morisky scale is an easy-to-use clinical tool to identify patients 
whose glycaemic control will subsequently worsen, regardless of age, gender and 
psychological distress.

© 2012 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

DOI: 10.1111/dme.12046
PMCID: PMC3567301
PMID: 23075262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None declared.