1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2012 Dec 1;11(12):933-41. doi:
10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.09.006.  Epub 2012 Oct 15.

Transcriptional responses to loss of RNase H2 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Arana ME(1), Kerns RT, Wharey L, Gerrish KE, Bushel PR, Kunkel TA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Laboratory of Structural Biology, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, DHHS, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

We report here the transcriptional responses in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to 
deletion of the RNH201 gene encoding the catalytic subunit of RNase H2. Deleting 
RNH201 alters RNA expression of 349 genes by â‰¥1.5-fold (q-value <0.01), of which 
123 are upregulated and 226 are downregulated. Differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) include those involved in stress responses and genome maintenance, 
consistent with a role for RNase H2 in removing ribonucleotides incorporated 
into DNA during replication. Upregulated genes include several that encode 
subunits of RNA polymerases I and III, and genes involved in ribosomal RNA 
processing, ribosomal biogenesis and tRNA modification and processing, 
supporting a role for RNase H2 in resolving R-loops formed during transcription 
of rRNA and tRNA genes. A role in R-loop resolution is further suggested by a 
higher average GC-content proximal to the transcription start site of 
downregulated as compared to upregulated genes. Several DEGs are involved in 
telomere maintenance, supporting a role for RNase H2 in resolving RNA-DNA 
hybrids formed at telomeres. A large number of DEGs encode nucleases, helicases 
and genes involved in response to dsRNA viruses, observations that could be 
relevant to the nucleic acid species that elicit an innate immune response in 
RNase H2-defective humans.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2012.09.006
PMCID: PMC3535280
PMID: 23079308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared