1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Feb;34(2):309-16. doi: 10.1002/humu.22232. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Destabilization and mislocalization of POU3F4 by C-terminal frameshift 
truncation and extension mutation.

Choi BY(1), Kim DH, Chung T, Chang M, Kim EH, Kim AR, Seok J, Chang SO, Bok J, 
Kim D, Oh SH, Park WY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

Most X-linked nonsyndromic hearing loss is caused by various types of mutations 
of the POU domain class 3 transcription factor 4 gene (POU3F4). We found five 
unique missense and frameshift truncation and extension mutations in Korean 
patients. Two missense mutations (p.Thr211Met and p.Gln229Arg) disturbed 
transcriptional activity. Two frameshift extension mutations (p.Thr354GlnfsX115 
and p.X362ArgextX113) were located outside of POU domain and nuclear 
localization signal (NLS) at the C-terminus. POU3F4 protein levels were low and 
could be restored by MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, in vitro. These mutant 
POU3F4 proteins were exclusively localized to the cytoplasm and did not have 
transcriptional activity. Frameshift mutation (p.Leu317PhefsX12) in POU3F4 leads 
to the truncation of the C-terminal 44 amino acids spanning the POU domain and 
NLS. This frameshift truncation mutant protein was located in both the nucleus 
and cytoplasm and was present at low protein levels. This mutant was also 
transcriptionally inactive, even in the presence of MG132. From these results, 
we conclude that frameshift truncation and extension mutations in the C-terminus 
of POU3F4 lead to cytoplasmic localization and subsequent proteosomal 
degradation due to structural aberrations, which cause transcriptional 
inactivity and thus nonsyndromic hearing loss.

Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22232
PMID: 23076972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]