1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012 Dec;23(9):946-53. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2012.10.001.
 Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Epithelial stem cells and implications for wound repair.

Plikus MV(1), Gay DL, Treffeisen E, Wang A, Supapannachart RJ, Cotsarelis G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kligman Laboratories, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Activation of epithelial stem cells and efficient recruitment of their 
proliferating progeny plays a critical role in cutaneous wound healing. The 
reepithelialized wound epidermis has a mosaic composition consisting of progeny 
that can be traced back both to epidermal and several types of hair follicle 
stem cells. The contribution of hair follicle stem cells to wound epidermis is 
particularly intriguing as it involves lineage identity change from follicular 
to epidermal. Studies from our laboratory show that hair follicle-fated bulge 
stem cells commit only transient amplifying epidermal progeny that participate 
in the initial wound re-epithelialization, but eventually are outcompeted by 
other epidermal clones and largely disappear after a few months. Conversely, 
recently described stem cell populations residing in the isthmus portion of hair 
follicle contribute long-lasting progeny toward wound epidermis and, arguably, 
give rise to new interfollicular epidermal stem cells. The role of epithelial 
stem cells during wound healing is not limited to regenerating stratified 
epidermis. By studying regenerative response in large cutaneous wounds, our 
laboratory uncovered that epithelial cells in the center of the wound can 
acquire greater morphogenetic plasticity and, together with the underlying wound 
dermis, can engage in an embryonic-like process of hair follicle neogenesis. 
Future studies should uncover the cellular and signaling basis of this 
remarkable adult wound regeneration phenomenon.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2012.10.001
PMCID: PMC3518754
PMID: 23085626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]