1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Feb;1828(2):535-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.10.011. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

The melanocortin 4 receptor: oligomer formation, interaction sites and 
functional significance.

Chapman KL(1), Findlay JB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Membrane and Systems Biology, Faculty of Biological Science, 
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK. kchapman@imperial.ac.uk

This study involves the structural and functional properties of the recombinant 
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC(4)R) expressed in the HEK-293 cell line. Using 
co-immuno-purification approaches, the receptor appears to be an oligomer, which 
can be crosslinked through disulphide bonds involving a native cysteine residue 
(84) to give a dimeric species. This position is located near the cytosolic 
region of transmembrane segment 2 and it is suggested that this is an 
interacting interface between MC(4)R monomers. Using co-expression of the native 
protein and a C84A mutant, it appears that the receptor also forms higher order 
oligomers via alternative interfaces. Interestingly, disulphide crosslink 
formation does not occur if the receptor is uncoupled from its G-protein, even 
though the oligomeric state is preserved. This suggests that the conformational 
changes, which occur on activation, affect the TM2 interface. The pharmacology 
of the agonist, NDP-MSH, indicates that the MC(4)R retains high affinity for the 
ligand in the absence of the G-protein but occupancy for the ligand is 
increased. The data can be interpreted to suggest that the G-protein exerts a 
negative allosteric effect on the receptor. Co-expression of one receptor 
lacking the ability to signal with another, which cannot bind the agonist, 
restored ligand-dependent activation of the G-protein to situations in which 
neither receptor on its own could activate the G-protein. Such transactivation 
suggests meaningful cross talk between the receptor subunits in the oligomeric 
complex. These studies demonstrate further unique features of the MC(4)R.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.10.011
PMID: 23088915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]