1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047708. Epub 2012 Oct 
17.

Measurements of CFTR-mediated Cl- secretion in human rectal biopsies constitute 
a robust biomarker for Cystic Fibrosis diagnosis and prognosis.

Sousa M(1), Servidoni MF, Vinagre AM, Ramalho AS, Bonadia LC, Felício V, Ribeiro 
MA, Uliyakina I, Marson FA, Kmit A, Cardoso SR, Ribeiro JD, Bertuzzo CS, Sousa 
L, Kunzelmann K, Ribeiro AF, Amaral MD.

Author information:
(1)BioFIG - Centre for Biodiversity, Functional and Integrative Genomics, 
Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is caused by ∼1,900 mutations in the CF 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene encoding for a cAMP-regulated 
chloride (Cl(-)) channel expressed in several epithelia. Clinical features are 
dominated by respiratory symptoms, but there is variable organ involvement thus 
causing diagnostic dilemmas, especially for non-classic cases.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To further establish measurement of CFTR 
function as a sensitive and robust biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis of CF, 
we herein assessed cholinergic and cAMP-CFTR-mediated Cl(-) secretion in 524 
freshly excised rectal biopsies from 118 individuals, including patients with 
confirmed CF clinical diagnosis (n=51), individuals with clinical CF suspicion 
(n=49) and age-matched non-CF controls (n=18). Conclusive measurements were 
obtained for 96% of cases. Patients with "Classic CF", presenting earlier onset 
of symptoms, pancreatic insufficiency, severe lung disease and low 
Shwachman-Kulczycki scores were found to lack CFTR-mediated Cl(-) secretion 
(<5%). Individuals with milder CF disease presented residual CFTR-mediated Cl(-) 
secretion (10-57%) and non-CF controls show CFTR-mediated Cl(-) secretion ≥ 
30-35% and data evidenced good correlations with various clinical parameters. 
Finally, comparison of these values with those in "CF suspicion" individuals 
allowed to confirm CF in 16/49 individuals (33%) and exclude it in 28/49 (57%). 
Statistical discriminant analyses showed that colonic measurements of 
CFTR-mediated Cl(-) secretion are the best discriminator among 
Classic/Non-Classic CF and non-CF groups.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Determination of CFTR-mediated Cl(-) secretion in 
rectal biopsies is demonstrated here to be a sensitive, reproducible and robust 
predictive biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of CF. The method also has 
very high potential for (pre-)clinical trials of CFTR-modulator therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047708
PMCID: PMC3474728
PMID: 23082198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.