1. Genet Mol Res. 2012 Dec 19;11(4):4646-53. doi: 10.4238/2012.October.19.1.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the ORM1-like 3 gene associated with 
childhood asthma in a Chinese population.

Yang FF(1), Huang Y, Li QB, Dai JH, Fu Z.

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based genome-wide association studies have 
revealed that polymorphisms of the ORM1-like 3 (ORMDL3) gene are associated with 
childhood asthma. We investigated genetic associations of SNPs in and around the 
ORMDL3 gene with childhood asthma in a Chinese population. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from peripheral venous blood drawn from 152 subjects with childhood 
asthma and from 190 control subjects. SNP genotyping was performed with the 
MassARRAY system (Sequenom) by means of matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Among the six SNPs, only 
the genotype frequencies of rs7216389 were significantly different between 
asthmatic children and controls. Asthmatic children had a significantly higher 
frequency of T alleles [odds ratio (OR) = 1.653, 95% confidence interval (95%CI) 
= 1.170-2.333] in rs7216389, than controls. The TT genotype of rs7216389 was 
found to be a significant risk factor for childhood asthma by logistic 
regression analysis (OR = 1.704, 95%CI = 1.105-2.628). There was no significant 
association between the TT genotype of rs7216389 and clinical features of 
childhood asthma. We conclude that the ORMDL3 gene influences childhood asthma 
and that the TT genotype of the rs7216389 polymorphism is associated with 
childhood asthma in the Chinese population.

DOI: 10.4238/2012.October.19.1
PMID: 23096927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]