1. Genet Mol Res. 2012 Dec 17;11(4):4342-50. doi: 10.4238/2012.October.9.3.

Clinical and molecular genetic study of 12 Italian families with autosomal 
recessive Stargardt disease.

Oldani M(1), Marchi S, Giani A, Cecchin S, Rigoni E, Persi A, Podavini D, 
Guerrini A, Nervegna A, Staurenghi G, Bertelli M.

Author information:
(1)Eye Clinic, Department of Clinical Science "Luigi Sacco", Sacco Hospital, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Stargardt disease was diagnosed in 12 patients from 12 families using complete 
ophthalmologic examination, fundus photography, fundus autofluorescence, and 
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. DNA was extracted for polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and direct DNA sequencing (ABCA4 gene). Genetic counseling 
and eye examination were offered to 16 additional family members. Various 
patterns of presentation were observed in patients with clinical diagnoses of 
Stargardt disease. The genetic study identified 2 mutations in 75% of families 
(9/12); a second mutation could not be found in the remaining 25% of families 
(3/12). The most frequent mutation was G1961E, found in 17% of families (2/12). 
This finding is similar to that of a previous analysis report of an Italian 
patient series. Four new mutations were also identified: Tyr1858Asp, 
Leu1195fsX1196, p.Tyr850Cys, and p.Thr959Ala. Our results suggest that PCR and 
direct DNA sequencing are the most appropriate techniques for the analysis of 
the ABCA4 gene. However, this method requires supplementation with specific PCR 
analysis to diagnose large deletions. The study of the families identified 
healthy carriers and affected subjects in presymptomatic stages and was also 
useful for evaluating the risk of transmission to progeny. Combined 
ophthalmologic and genetic evaluation enabled better clinical management of 
these families.

DOI: 10.4238/2012.October.9.3
PMID: 23096905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]