1. J Korean Med Sci. 2012 Oct;27(10):1162-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.10.1162. 
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Serum thioredoxin 1 level has close relation with myocardial damage amount in 
acute myocardial infarction patients.

Shim YK(1), Kim JT, Seong MH, Kim YJ, Shim TJ, Kim SM, Lee SY, Bae JW, Kim KS, 
Hwang KK, Kim DW, Cho MC.

Author information:
(1)Regional Cardiovascular Disease Center, Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Chungbuk National University Hospital, Cheongju, Korea.

Thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) is one of important anti-oxidative molecules to overcome 
the oxidative stress. The aim of the present study is to investigate the 
clinical relationship between serum concentration of Trx-1 on the 
pre-percutaneous coronary intervention (prePCI) and myocardial damage amount in 
the patients with acute myocardial infarction with the culprit lesion in only 
the left anterior descending artery on coronary angiography (n = 100). Initial 
value of creatine kinase (CK) was 368.3 ± 531.4 U/L, and MB isoenzyme of CK 
(CK-MB) level was 22.92 ± 33.8 ng/mL, and cardiac specific troponin T (cTnT) 
level was 0.61 ± 1.6 ng/mL. Positive correlations were observed between prePCI 
Trx-1 level and initial CK (P = 0.005, r = 0.281), and cTnT (P < 0.001, r = 
0.453), peak CK (P = 0.001, r = 0.316) in all patients, but the statistical 
relation was observed only in ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 
patients (P = 0.008, r = 0.329 for initial CK, P = 0.001, r = 0.498 for initial 
cTnT, P = 0.005, r = 0.349 for peak CK), not in Non-STEMI patients. 
Conclusively, we consider prePCI serum Trx-1 as a predictor for myocardial 
damage amount in patients with STEMI.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.10.1162
PMCID: PMC3468751
PMID: 23091312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]