1. Genet Mol Res. 2012 Oct 15;11(4):3744-54. doi: 10.4238/2012.October.15.6.

Novel SNPs of the mannan-binding lectin 2 gene and their association with 
production traits in Chinese Holsteins.

Zhao ZL(1), Wang CF, Li QL, Ju ZH, Huang JM, Li JB, Zhong JF, Zhang JB.

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary, Jilin University, Changchun, P.R. 
China.

The mannan-binding lectin gene (MBL) participates as an opsonin in the innate 
immune system of mammals, and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in MBL 
cause various immune dysfunctions. In this study, we detected SNPs in MBL2 at 
exon 1 using polymerase chain reaction single-strand conformation polymorphism 
analysis and DNA sequencing techniques in 825 Chinese Holstein cows. Four new 
SNPs with various allele frequencies were also found. The g.1164 G>A SNP was 
predicted to substitute arginine with glutamine at the N-terminus of the 
cysteine-rich domain. In the collagen-like domain, SNPs g.1197 C>A and g.1198 
G>A changed proline to glutamine, whereas SNP g.1207 T>C was identified as a 
synonymous mutation. Correlation analysis showed that the g.1197 C>A marker was 
significantly correlated to somatic cell score (SCS), and the g.1164 G>A locus 
had significant effects on SCS, fat content, and protein content (P < 0.05), 
suggesting possible roles of these SNPs in the host response against mastitis. 
Nine haplotypes and nine haplotype pairs corresponding to the loci of the 4 
novel SNPs were found in Chinese Holsteins. Haplotype pairs MM, MN, and BQ were 
correlated with the lowest SCS; MN with the highest protein yield; MM with the 
highest protein rate, and MN with the highest 305- day milk yield. Thus, MM, MN, 
and BQ are possible candidates for marker-assisted selection in dairy cattle 
breeding programs.

DOI: 10.4238/2012.October.15.6
PMID: 23096694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]