1. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(10):e1002980. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002980. Epub 2012
 Oct 18.

The respiratory syncytial virus polymerase has multiple RNA synthesis activities 
at the promoter.

Noton SL(1), Deflub√© LR, Tremaglio CZ, Fearns R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an RNA virus in the Family Paramyxoviridae. 
Here, the activities performed by the RSV polymerase when it encounters the 
viral antigenomic promoter were examined. RSV RNA synthesis was reconstituted in 
vitro using recombinant, isolated polymerase and an RNA oligonucleotide template 
representing nucleotides 1-25 of the trailer complement (TrC) promoter. The RSV 
polymerase was found to have two RNA synthesis activities, initiating RNA 
synthesis from the +3 site on the promoter, and adding a specific sequence of 
nucleotides to the 3' end of the TrC RNA using a back-priming mechanism. 
Examination of viral RNA isolated from RSV infected cells identified RNAs 
initiated at the +3 site on the TrC promoter, in addition to the expected +1 
site, and showed that a significant proportion of antigenome RNAs contained 
specific nucleotide additions at the 3' end, demonstrating that the observations 
made in vitro reflected events that occur during RSV infection. Analysis of the 
impact of the 3' terminal extension on promoter activity indicated that it can 
inhibit RNA synthesis initiation. These findings indicate that RSV 
polymerase-promoter interactions are more complex than previously thought and 
suggest that there might be sophisticated mechanisms for regulating promoter 
activity during infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002980
PMCID: PMC3475672
PMID: 23093940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.