1. Thorax. 2013 Feb;68(2):131-41. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201719. Epub 2012
Oct  25.

Aberrantly activated EGFR contributes to enhanced IL-8 expression in COPD 
airways epithelial cells via regulation of nuclear FoxO3A.

Ganesan S(1), Unger BL, Comstock AT, Angel KA, Mancuso P, Martinez FJ, Sajjan 
US.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5688, USA.

BACKGROUND: Decreased activity of forkhead transcription factor class O 
(FoxO)3A, a negative regulator of NF-ÎºB-mediated chemokine expression, is 
implicated in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). 
Previously, we showed that quercetin reduces lung inflammation in a murine model 
of COPD. Here, we examined the mechanisms underlying decreased FoxO3A activation 
and its modulation by quercetin in COPD human airway epithelial cells and in a 
COPD mouse model.
METHODS: Primary COPD and normal human airway epithelial cells were treated with 
quercetin, LY294002 or erlotinib for 2 weeks. IL-8 was measured by ELISA. 
FoxO3A, Akt, and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) phosphorylation 
and nuclear FoxO3A levels were determined by Western blot analysis. Effects of 
quercetin on lung chemokine expression, nuclear FoxO3A levels and 
phosphorylation of EGFR and Akt were determined in COPD mouse model.
RESULTS: Compared with normal, COPD cells showed significantly increased IL-8, 
which negatively correlated with nuclear FoxO3A levels. COPD bronchial biopsies 
also showed reduced nuclear FoxO3A. Decreased FoxO3A in COPD cells was 
associated with increased phosphorylation of EGFR, Akt and FoxO3A and treatment 
with quercetin, LY294002 or erlotinib increased nuclear FoxO3A and decreased 
IL-8 and phosphorylation of Akt, EGFR and FoxO3A, Compared with control, 
elastase/LPS-exposed mice showed decreased nuclear FoxO3A, increased chemokines 
and phosphorylation of EGFR and Akt. Treatment with quercetin partially reversed 
these changes.
CONCLUSIONS: In COPD airways, aberrant EGFR activity increases PI 
3-kinase/Akt-mediated phosphorylation of FoxO3A, thereby decreasing nuclear 
FoxO3A and increasing chemokine expression. Quercetin restores nuclear FoxO3A 
and reduces chemokine expression partly by modulating EGFR/PI 3-kinase/Akt 
activity.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2012-201719
PMCID: PMC6712980
PMID: 23099361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]