1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Feb;55:54-62. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.09.012. Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Urinary conjugated α-tocopheronolactone--a biomarker of oxidative stress in 
children with type 1 diabetes.

Sharma G(1), Muller DP, O'Riordan SM, Bryan S, Dattani MT, Hindmarsh PC, Mills 
K.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Research Group, Clinical & Molecular Genetics Unit, University 
College London Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Increased oxidative stress has been implicated in both the onset and the 
progression of diabetes mellitus and its complications. The development of easy 
to measure biomarkers of oxidative stress would, therefore, help in determining 
in a prospective manner the impact of glycemic control on oxidative stress and 
macrovascular disease in patients with diabetes. We report the development and 
validation of a novel method to directly measure the urinary concentrations of 
the conjugated metabolites of vitamin E (α-tocopherol) and investigate whether 
the oxidized metabolite α-tocopheronolactone (α-TL) could be used as a biomarker 
of oxidative stress in children with type 1 diabetes. A novel method using 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was developed and used to measure 
directly and rapidly the urinary concentrations of the glucuronidated and 
sulfated metabolites of α-tocopherol in 32 young patients with type 1 diabetes 
and age-matched controls. The mean concentrations of the glucuronidated and 
sulfated conjugates of α-TL were all highly significantly increased in the 
children with type 1 diabetes (p<0.001). The results suggest that the 
measurement of the urinary concentrations of α-TL conjugates may provide a 
useful biomarker of oxidative stress in diabetes and possibly in other clinical 
conditions in which oxidative stress has been implicated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.09.012
PMCID: PMC3573235
PMID: 23108104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]