1. J Neurosci. 2012 Oct 31;32(44):15611-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2339-12.2012.

The anterior cingulate cortex may enhance inhibition of lateral prefrontal 
cortex via m2 cholinergic receptors at dual synaptic sites.

Medalla M(1), Barbas H.

Author information:
(1)Neural Systems Laboratory and Department of Health Sciences, Boston 
University and School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (DLPFC) 
share robust excitatory connections. However, during rapid eye movement (REM) 
sleep, when cortical activity is dominated by acetylcholine, the ACC is 
activated but DLPFC is suppressed. Using pathway tracing and electron microscopy 
in nonhuman primates (Macaca mulatta), we tested the hypothesis that the 
opposite states may reflect specific modulation by acetylcholine through 
strategic synaptic localization of muscarinic m2 receptors, which inhibit 
neurotransmitter release presynaptically, but are thought to be excitatory 
postsynaptically. In the ACC pathway to DLPFC (area 32 to area 9), m2 receptors 
predominated in ACC axon terminals and in more than half of the targeted 
dendrites of presumed inhibitory neurons, suggesting inhibitory cholinergic 
influence. In contrast, in a pathway linking the DLPFC area 46 to DLPFC area 9, 
postsynaptic m2 receptors predominated in targeted spines of presumed excitatory 
neurons, consistent with their mutual activation in working memory. These novel 
findings suggest that presynaptic and postsynaptic specificity of m2 cholinergic 
receptors may help explain the differential engagement of ACC and DLPFC areas in 
REM sleep for memory consolidation and synergism in awake states for cognitive 
control.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2339-12.2012
PMCID: PMC3523186
PMID: 23115196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]