1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 21;287(52):43630-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421172. Epub 
2012 Oct 31.

Reduced PDZ interactions of rescued ΔF508CFTR increases its cell surface 
mobility.

Valentine CD(1), Lukacs GL, Verkman AS, Haggie PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California 
94143-0521, USA.

Deletion of phenylalanine 508 (ΔF508) in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) plasma membrane chloride channel is the most common 
cause of cystic fibrosis (CF). Though several maneuvers can rescue endoplasmic 
reticulum-retained ΔF508CFTR and promote its trafficking to the plasma membrane, 
rescued ΔF508CFTR remains susceptible to quality control mechanisms that lead to 
accelerated endocytosis, ubiquitination, and lysosomal degradation. To 
investigate the role of scaffold protein interactions in rescued ΔF508CFTR 
surface instability, the plasma membrane mobility of ΔF508CFTR was measured in 
live cells by quantum dot single particle tracking. Following rescue by low 
temperature, chemical correctors, thapsigargin, or overexpression of GRASP55, 
ΔF508CFTR diffusion was more rapid than that of wild-type CFTR because of 
reduced interactions with PDZ domain-containing scaffold proteins. Knock-down of 
the plasma membrane quality control proteins CHIP and Hsc70 partially restored 
ΔF508CFTR-scaffold association. Quantitative comparisons of CFTR cell surface 
diffusion and endocytosis kinetics suggested an association between reduced 
scaffold binding and CFTR internalization. Our surface diffusion measurements in 
live cells indicate defective scaffold interactions of rescued ΔF508CFTR at the 
cell surface, which may contribute to its defective peripheral processing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421172
PMCID: PMC3527949
PMID: 23115232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]