1. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:208204. doi: 10.1155/2012/208204. Epub 2012 Oct
 16.

Ectonucleotidases in solid organ and allogeneic hematopoietic cell 
transplantation.

Chernogorova P(1), Zeiser R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Freiburg University Medical Center, 
Albert-Ludwigs-University, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. 
petya.chernogorova@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Extracellular nucleotides are ubiquitous signalling molecules which modulate 
distinct physiological and pathological processes. Nucleotide concentrations in 
the extracellular space are strictly regulated by cell surface enzymes, called 
ectonucleotidases, which hydrolyze nucleotides to the respective nucleosides. 
Recent studies suggest that ectonucleotidases play a significant role in 
inflammation by adjusting the balance between ATP, a widely distributed 
proinflammatory danger signal, and the anti-inflammatory mediator adenosine. 
There is increasing evidence for a central role of adenosine in 
alloantigen-mediated diseases such as solid organ graft rejection and acute 
graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). Solid organ and hematopoietic cell 
transplantation are established treatment modalities for a broad spectrum of 
benign and malignant diseases. Immunological complications based on the 
recognition of nonself-antigens between donor and recipient like transplant 
rejection and GvHD are still major challenges which limit the long-term success 
of transplantation. Studies in the past two decades indicate that purinergic 
signalling influences the severity of alloimmune responses. This paper focuses 
on the impact of ectonucleotidases, in particular, NTPDase1/CD39 and 
ecto-5'-nucleotidase/CD73, on allograft rejection, acute GvHD, and 
graft-versus-leukemia effect, and on possible clinical implications for the 
modulation of purinergic signalling after transplantation.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/208204
PMCID: PMC3482062
PMID: 23125523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]