1. Chromatographia. 2012 Nov;75(21-22):1235-1246. doi: 10.1007/s10337-012-2310-9.
 Epub 2012 Sep 15.

Linear Solvation Energy Relationships in the Determination of Specificity and 
Selectivity of Stationary Phases.

Studzińska S(1), Buszewski B.

Author information:
(1)Chair of Environmental Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Faculty of Chemistry, 
Nicolaus Copernicus University, 7 Gagarin St., 87-100 Toruń, Poland.

The retention of fifty structurally different compounds has been studied using 
linear solvation energy relationships. Investigations were performed with the 
use of six various stationary phases with two mobile phases (50/50 % v/v 
methanol/water and 50/50 % v/v acetonitrile/water). Packing materials were 
home-made and functionalized with octadecyl, alkylamide, cholesterol, 
alkyl-phosphate and phenyl molecules. This is the first attempt to compare all 
of these stationary phases synthesized on the same silica gel batch. Therefore, 
all of them may be compared in more complex and believable way, than it was 
performed earlier in former investigations. The phase properties (based on 
Abraham model) were used to the classification of stationary phases according to 
their interaction properties. The hydrophilic system properties s, a, b indicate 
stronger interactions between solute and mobile phase for most of the columns. 
Both e and v cause greater retention as a consequence of preferable interactions 
with stationary phase by electron pairs and cavity formation as well as 
hydrophobic bonds. However, alkyl-phosphate phase has different retention 
properties, as it was expressed by positive sign of s coefficient. It may be 
concluded that most important parameters influencing the retention of compounds 
are volume and hydrogen bond acceptor basicity. The LSER coefficients showed 
also the dependency on the type of organic modifier used as a mobile phase 
component.

DOI: 10.1007/s10337-012-2310-9
PMCID: PMC3477586
PMID: 23125462