1. BMC Genomics. 2012 Nov 8;13:601. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-601.

Root transcriptional responses of two melon genotypes with contrasting 
resistance to Monosporascus cannonballus (Pollack et Uecker) infection.

Roig C(1), Fita A, Ríos G, Hammond JP, Nuez F, Picó B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Conservation and Breeding of the Agricultural Biodiversity, 
Universitat Politècnica de València (COMAV-UPV), Camino de Vera s/n, 46022, 
Valencia, Spain. croig@btc.upv.es

BACKGROUND: Monosporascus cannonballus is the main causal agent of melon vine 
decline disease. Several studies have been carried out mainly focused on the 
study of the penetration of this pathogen into melon roots, the evaluation of 
symptoms severity on infected roots, and screening assays for breeding programs. 
However, a detailed molecular view on the early interaction between M. 
cannonballus and melon roots in either susceptible or resistant genotypes is 
lacking. In the present study, we used a melon oligo-based microarray to 
investigate the gene expression responses of two melon genotypes, Cucumis melo 
'Piel de sapo' ('PS') and C. melo 'Pat 81', with contrasting resistance to the 
disease. This study was carried out at 1 and 3 days after infection (DPI) by M. 
cannonballus.
RESULTS: Our results indicate a dissimilar behavior of the susceptible vs. the 
resistant genotypes from 1 to 3 DPI. 'PS' responded with a more rapid infection 
response than 'Pat 81' at 1 DPI. At 3 DPI the total number of differentially 
expressed genes identified in 'PS' declined from 451 to 359, while the total 
number of differentially expressed transcripts in 'Pat 81' increased from 187 to 
849. Several deregulated transcripts coded for components of Ca2+ and jasmonic 
acid (JA) signalling pathways, as well as for other proteins related to defence 
mechanisms. Transcriptional differences in the activation of the JA-mediated 
response in 'Pat 81' compared to 'PS' suggested that JA response might be 
partially responsible for their observed differences in resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: As a result of this study we have identified for the first time a 
set of candidate genes involved in the root response to the infection of the 
pathogen causing melon vine decline. This information is useful for 
understanding the disease progression and resistance mechanisms few days after 
inoculation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-601
PMCID: PMC3542287
PMID: 23134692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]