1. Sci Signal. 2012 Nov 6;5(249):ra80. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003065.

Proliferative and antiapoptotic signaling stimulated by nuclear-localized PDK1 
results in oncogenesis.

Kikani CK(1), Verona EV, Ryu J, Shen Y, Ye Q, Zheng L, Qian Z, Sakaue H, 
Nakamura K, Du J, Ji Q, Ogawa W, Sun LZ, Dong LQ, Liu F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Enhanced activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is a hallmark of many 
human tumors because it promotes cell proliferation and survival through several 
mechanisms. One of these mechanisms is the phosphorylation of the serine and 
threonine kinase Akt at the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane by 
phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1), which is recruited and 
activated by binding to the phosphoinositides produced by PI3K. We previously 
demonstrated increased nuclear accumulation of PDK1 in cells with enhanced PI3K 
activity. We report that nuclear PDK1 promoted cell proliferation by suppressing 
FOXO3A-dependent transcription of the gene encoding p27Kip1 (an inhibitor of 
cell cycle progression), whereas it enhanced cell survival by inhibiting the 
activation of c-Jun amino-terminal kinase. Cells with nuclear-localized PDK1 
showed anchorage-independent growth, and when injected into mice, these cells 
induced the formation of solid tumors. In human prostate tumors, cytoplasmic 
localization of PDK1 correlated only with early-stage, low-risk tumors, whereas 
nuclear PDK1 localization correlated with high-risk tumors. Together, our 
findings suggest a role for nuclear-translocated PDK1 in oncogenic cellular 
transformation and tumor progression in mice and humans.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2003065
PMCID: PMC6408955
PMID: 23131847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]