1. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 15;176(12):1101-9. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws190. Epub 2012
 Nov 6.

Diabetes and obesity-related genes and the risk of neural tube defects in the 
national birth defects prevention study.

Lupo PJ(1), Canfield MA, Chapa C, Lu W, Agopian AJ, Mitchell LE, Shaw GM, Waller 
DK, Olshan AF, Finnell RH, Zhu H.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Center, Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Texas, Houston, 
TX, USA.

Few studies have evaluated genetic susceptibility related to diabetes and 
obesity as a risk factor for neural tube defects (NTDs). The authors 
investigated 23 single nucleotide polymorphisms among 9 genes (ADRB3, ENPP1, 
FTO, LEP, PPARG, PPARGC1A, SLC2A2, TCF7L2, and UCP2) associated with type 2 
diabetes or obesity. Samples were obtained from 737 NTD case-parent triads 
included in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study during 1999-2007. 
Log-linear models were used to evaluate maternal and offspring genetic effects. 
After application of the false discovery rate, there were 5 significant maternal 
genetic effects. The less common alleles at the 4 FTO single nucleotide 
polymorphisms showed a reduction of NTD risk (for rs1421085, relative risk (RR) 
= 0.73 (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.62, 0.87); for rs8050136, RR = 0.79 (95% 
CI: 0.67, 0.93); for rs9939609, RR = 0.79 (95% CI: 0.67, 0.94); and for 
rs17187449, RR = 0.80 (95% CI: 0.68, 0.95)). Additionally, maternal LEP 
rs2071045 (RR = 1.31, 95% CI: 1.08, 1.60) and offspring UCP2 rs660339 (RR = 
1.32, 95% CI: 1.06, 1.64) were associated with NTD risk. Furthermore, the 
maternal genotype for TCF7L2 rs3814573 suggested an increased NTD risk among 
obese women. These findings indicate that maternal genetic variants associated 
with glucose homeostasis may modify the risk of having an NTD-affected 
pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kws190
PMCID: PMC3571234
PMID: 23132673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]