1. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Jan 4;532:64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.10.062. Epub
2012  Nov 9.

No association of ZNF804A rs1344706 with white matter integrity in 
schizophrenia: a tract-based spatial statistics study.

Wei Q(1), Kang Z, Diao F, Guidon A, Wu X, Zheng L, Li L, Guo X, Hu M, Zhang J, 
Liu C, Zhao J.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Institute of The Second Xiangya Hospital, Key Laboratory of 
Psychiatry and Mental Health of Hunan Province, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410011, PR China.

Altered brain connectivity has been widely considered as a genetic risk 
mechanism for schizophrenia. Of the many susceptibility genes identified so far, 
ZNF804A (rs1344706) is the first common genetic variant associated with 
schizophrenia on a genome-wide level. Previous fMRI studies have found that 
carriers of rs1344706 exhibit altered functional connectivity. However, the 
relationship between ZNF804A and white matter structural connectivity in 
patients of schizophrenia remains unknown. In this study, 100 patients with 
schizophrenia and 69 healthy controls were genotyped at the single nucleotide 
polymorphism rs1344706. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was conducted and 
analyzed with tract-based spatial statistics. Systematic statistical analysis 
was conducted on multiple diffusion indices, including fractional anisotropy, 
axial diffusivity, radial diffusivity, and mean diffusivity. Unpaired two-sample 
t-test revealed significant differences in fractional anisotropy and diffusivity 
between schizophrenia and control groups. A two-way ANOVA analysis was conducted 
to assess the main effects of and the interaction between schizophrenia and 
ZNF804A. Although significant main effects of the diagnosis of schizophrenia 
were found on radial diffusivity, no association between the ZNF804A (rs1344706) 
and white matter connectivity was found in the entire group of subjects or in a 
selected subgroup of age-matched subjects (n=72).

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.10.062
PMCID: PMC4154480
PMID: 23147122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No conflict of interest 
declared.