1. Gene. 2013 Feb 1;514(1):41-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.001. Epub 2012 Nov
10.

An association between -866G/A polymorphism in the promoter of UCP2 and obesity: 
a meta-analysis.

Liu L(1), Zhao X, Kang S, Zhang D.

Author information:
(1)Department of public health, Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao, 
China.

-866G/A polymorphism in the promoter of UCP2 gene has been reported to be 
associated with obesity, but the results remain inconclusive. To assess the 
relation of UCP2 -866G/A polymorphism and obesity susceptibility, a 
meta-analysis was performed. PubMed, ISI, Wanfang database, VIP and CBM were 
searched to identify relevant studies up to July 31, 2012. Odds ratios (OR) and 
95% confidence interval (95% CI) were pooled using fixed or random effect 
models. Subgroup analysis was performed by ethnicity (categorized as Asian and 
European). Heterogeneity and publication bias evaluation were performed to 
validate the credibility. Meta-regression and the 'leave one out' sensitive 
analysis were used to explore the potential sources of between-study 
heterogeneity. 14 studies were included in this meta-analysis. After exclusion 
of articles that deviated from the HWE in controls, and were the key 
contributors to between-study heterogeneity, the meta-analysis showed a 
significant association of the A allele with reduced risk of obesity in overall 
analysis and in European in the dominant, codominant and additional models. In 
Asian, no significant association was found between the -866G/A in UCP2 gene and 
obesity susceptibility. The meta-analysis suggested that UCP2 -866G/A 
polymorphism was associated with obesity. The A allele may be an important 
protective factor for obesity in European, but not in Asian. Further studies are 
needed to elucidate the relationship.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.001
PMID: 23147265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]