1. Transl Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 13;2(11):e186. doi: 10.1038/tp.2012.89.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for panic disorder in the 
Japanese population.

Otowa T(1), Kawamura Y, Nishida N, Sugaya N, Koike A, Yoshida E, Inoue K, Yasuda 
S, Nishimura Y, Liu X, Konishi Y, Nishimura F, Shimada T, Kuwabara H, Tochigi M, 
Kakiuchi C, Umekage T, Miyagawa T, Miyashita A, Shimizu E, Akiyoshi J, Someya T, 
Kato T, Yoshikawa T, Kuwano R, Kasai K, Kato N, Kaiya H, Tokunaga K, Okazaki Y, 
Tanii H, Sasaki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Panic disorder (PD) is a moderately heritable anxiety disorder whose 
pathogenesis is not well understood. Due to the lack of power in previous 
association studies, genes that are truly associated with PD might not be 
detected. In this study, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 
two independent data sets using the Affymetrix Mapping 500K Array or Genome-Wide 
Human SNP Array 6.0. We obtained imputed genotypes for each GWAS and performed a 
meta-analysis of two GWAS data sets (718 cases and 1717 controls). For 
follow-up, 12 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested in 329 cases 
and 861 controls. Gene ontology enrichment and candidate gene analyses were 
conducted using the GWAS or meta-analysis results. We also applied the polygenic 
score analysis to our two GWAS samples to test the hypothesis of polygenic 
components contributing to PD. Although genome-wide significant SNPs were not 
detected in either of the GWAS nor the meta-analysis, suggestive associations 
were observed in several loci such as BDKRB2 (P=1.3 × 10(-5), odds ratio=1.31). 
Among previous candidate genes, supportive evidence for association of NPY5R 
with PD was obtained (gene-wise corrected P=6.4 × 10(-4)). Polygenic scores 
calculated from weakly associated SNPs (P<0.3 and 0.4) in the discovery sample 
were significantly associated with PD status in the target sample in both 
directions (sample I to sample II and vice versa) (P<0.05). Our findings suggest 
that large sets of common variants of small effects collectively account for 
risk of PD.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2012.89
PMCID: PMC3565774
PMID: 23149450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]