1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Nov 12;7:88. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-88.

Clinical features and predictors for disease natural progression in adults with 
Pompe disease: a nationwide prospective observational study.

van der Beek NA(1), de Vries JM, Hagemans ML, Hop WC, Kroos MA, Wokke JH, de 
Visser M, van Engelen BG, Kuks JB, van der Kooi AJ, Notermans NC, Faber KG, 
Verschuuren JJ, Reuser AJ, van der Ploeg AT, van Doorn PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus 
MC University Medical Center, 's-Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands. n.beek@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Due partly to physicians' unawareness, many adults with Pompe 
disease are diagnosed with great delay. Besides, it is not well known which 
factors influence the rate of disease progression, and thus disease outcome. We 
delineated the specific clinical features of Pompe disease in adults, and mapped 
out the distribution and severity of muscle weakness, and the sequence of 
involvement of the individual muscle groups. Furthermore, we defined the natural 
disease course and identified prognostic factors for disease progression.
METHODS: We conducted a single-center, prospective, observational study. Muscle 
strength (manual muscle testing, and hand-held dynamometry), muscle function 
(quick motor function test), and pulmonary function (forced vital capacity in 
sitting and supine positions) were assessed every 3-6 months and analyzed using 
repeated-measures ANOVA.
RESULTS: Between October 2004 and August 2009, 94 patients aged between 25 and 
75 years were included in the study. Although skeletal muscle weakness was 
typically distributed in a limb-girdle pattern, many patients had unfamiliar 
features such as ptosis (23%), bulbar weakness (28%), and scapular winging 
(33%). During follow-up (average 1.6 years, range 0.5-4.2 years), skeletal 
muscle strength deteriorated significantly (mean declines of -1.3% point/year 
for manual muscle testing and of -2.6% points/year for hand-held dynamometry; 
both p<0.001). Longer disease duration (>15 years) and pulmonary involvement 
(forced vital capacity in sitting position <80%) at study entry predicted faster 
decline. On average, forced vital capacity in supine position deteriorated by 
1.3% points per year (p=0.02). Decline in pulmonary function was consistent 
across subgroups. Ten percent of patients declined unexpectedly fast.
CONCLUSIONS: Recognizing patterns of common and less familiar characteristics in 
adults with Pompe disease facilitates timely diagnosis. Longer disease duration 
and reduced pulmonary function stand out as predictors of rapid disease 
progression, and aid in deciding whether to initiate enzyme replacement therapy, 
or when.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-88
PMCID: PMC3551719
PMID: 23147228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]