1. Tumour Biol. 2013 Feb;34(1):493-504. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0574-1. Epub 2012
 Nov 11.

Adiponectin (ADIPOQ) rs2241766 G/T polymorphism is associated with risk of 
cancer: evidence from a meta-analysis.

Zhou W(1), Liu Y, Zhong DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Renmin Road No.139, Changsha City, 410011, Hunan Province, 
China.

Associations between adiponectin (ADIPOQ) genetic polymorphisms (rs2241766 G/T 
and rs266729 G/C) and cancer risk have been extensively studied in the past 
decade, while conflicting results were reported. Therefore, this study would 
explore the associations by using a meta-analysis. The databases of Medline, 
Embase, and Wangfang were retrieved, and the latest updated time was 1 August 
2012. Effect sizes of odds ratio and 95 % confidence interval (OR and 95 % CI) 
were calculated by using a fixed- or random-effect model. A total of 12 studies 
with 10,368 participants were identified for association between ADIPOQ 
rs2241766 G/T and risk of cancer, and ten studies with 12,665 participants were 
for association between ADIPOQ rs266729 G/C and risk of cancer. Overall combined 
analyses indicated that neither ADIPOQ rs2241766 G/T nor rs266729 G/C was 
associated with risk of cancer incidence (OR (95 % CI), 0.89 (0.61-1.30) for GG 
vs. TT and 0.94 (0.83-1.06) for G carriers vs. T carriers for rs2241766 G/T; 
0.99 (0.85-1.16) for GG vs. CC and 0.96 (0.87-1.06) for G carriers vs. C 
carriers for rs266729 G/C). When stratified analyses were conducted according to 
the participants' ethnicity, sources of controls, types of cancer, and sample 
size, we found that G allele of ADIPOQ rs2241766 G/T was significantly 
associated with decreased risk of cancer based on population-based case-control 
studies (OR (95 % CI), 0.65 (0.50-0.85) for GG vs. TT and 0.88 (0.79-0.98) for G 
carriers vs. T carriers). In contrast, there was no association between rs266729 
G/C polymorphism and risk of cancer when subgroup analyses were conducted. In 
summary, this meta-analysis indicated that ADIPOQ rs2241766 G/T rather than 
rs266729 G/C polymorphism was closely associated with risk of cancer 
development.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-012-0574-1
PMID: 23143890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]