1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Mar;87(6):2299-303. doi:
10.1073/pnas.87.6.2299.

Secretin: structure of the precursor and tissue distribution of the mRNA.

Kopin AS(1), Wheeler MB, Leiter AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, New England Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111.

Secretin is a 27-amino acid gastrointestinal hormone that stimulates the 
secretion of bicarbonate-rich pancreatic fluid. The unusually high number of 
serine, leucine, and arginine residues in secretin has precluded the use of 
oligonucleotides to screen cDNA libraries to isolate a secretin cDNA. In the 
present study, a short cDNA encoding porcine secretin was amplified from 
duodenal mucosal first-strand cDNA template by using 16,384- and 4096-fold 
degenerate primers in the DNA polymerase chain reaction. From the sequence of 
the amplified cDNA, an unambiguous oligonucleotide probe was designed to screen 
a cDNA library. Here we report the sequences of cDNAs encoding the porcine and 
rat secretin precursors. The predicted amino acid sequences reveal that each 
precursor consists of a signal peptide, an N-terminal peptide, secretin, and a 
72-amino acid C-terminal peptide. Secretin has been highly conserved through 
evolution. Rat secretin differs from its porcine counterpart by a single 
glutamine-for-arginine substitution at position 14. In contrast, the amino acid 
sequences of the C-terminal peptides are only 39% conserved between the two 
species, suggesting that the C-terminal peptide does not have an essential 
physiologic function. RNA blot hybridizations reveal that the rat secretin gene 
is expressed throughout the small intestine. Although secretin immunoreactivity 
has been localized in the central nervous system by some laboratories, we are 
unable to detect secretin mRNA in tissues of the central nervous system by 
Northern blot hybridization.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.87.6.2299
PMCID: PMC53674
PMID: 2315322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]