1. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 14;12:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-520.

Serological identification of Tektin5 as a cancer/testis antigen and its 
immunogenicity.

Hanafusa T(1), Mohamed AE, Domae S, Nakayama E, Ono T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Research, Advanced Science Research Center, Okayama 
University, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Identification of new cancer antigens is necessary for the efficient 
diagnosis and immunotherapy. A variety of tumor antigens have been identified by 
several methodologies. Among those antigens, cancer/testis (CT) antigens have 
became promising targets.
METHODS: The serological identification of antigens by the recombinant 
expression cloning (SEREX) methodology has been successfully used for the 
identification of cancer/testis (CT) antigens. We performed the SEREX analysis 
of colon cancer.
RESULTS: We isolated a total of 60 positive cDNA clones comprising 38 different 
genes. They included 2 genes with testis-specific expression profiles in the 
UniGene database, such as TEKT5 and a CT-like gene, A kinase anchoring protein 3 
(AKAP3). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that the expression of 
TEKT5 was restricted to the testis in normal adult tissues. In malignant 
tissues, TEKT5 was aberrantly expressed in a variety of cancers, including colon 
cancer. A serological survey of 101 cancer patients with different cancers by 
ELISA revealed antibodies to TEKT5 in 13 patients, including colon cancer. None 
of the 16 healthy donor serum samples were reactive in the same test.
CONCLUSION: We identified candidate new CT antigen of colon cancer, TEKT5. The 
findings indicate that TEKT5 is immunogenic in humans, and suggest its potential 
use as diagnostic as well as an immunotherapeutic reagent for cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-520
PMCID: PMC3522552
PMID: 23151147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]