1. J Mol Diagn. 2013 Jan;15(1):94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2012.09.001. Epub
2012  Nov 15.

Detection of BRAF p.V600E mutations in melanomas: comparison of four methods 
argues for sequential use of immunohistochemistry and pyrosequencing.

Colomba E(1), Hélias-Rodzewicz Z, Von Deimling A, Marin C, Terrones N, Pechaud 
D, Surel S, Côté JF, Peschaud F, Capper D, Blons H, Zimmermann U, Clerici T, 
Saiag P, Emile JF.

Author information:
(1)EA4340, University of Versailles, Boulogne, France.

BRAF p.V600 mutation detection recently became necessary to treat metastatic 
melanoma patients with vemurafenib. This study compares different methods of 
detection of BRAF mutations. Melanoma samples from 111 patients were analyzed 
for BRAF mutations, and for 89 of them, results were obtained with the four 
following methods: Sanger sequencing, real-time PCR, immunohistochemistry, and 
pyrosequencing. All samples contained at least 60% of tumor cells. Directional 
Sanger sequencing of PCR products failed to detect 3 of 40 p.V600E-mutated cases 
(7.5%) (sensitivity, 92.5%; 95% CI, 78.5% to 98.0%). BRAF p.V600E-specific 
real-time PCR identified 39 of 40 p.V600E-mutated cases (97.6%) (sensitivity, 
97.5%; 95% CI, 87.1% to 99.6%) and all 39 wild-type (WT) cases and surprisingly 
was also positive for 6/6 p.V600K (specificity, 87.8%; 95% CI, 75.8% to 94.3%). 
However, other mutations, p.V600R (n = 1), p.K601E (n = 2), and p.600_601delinsE 
(n = 1), were not detected. Immunohistochemistry with VE1, specific for p.V600E, 
identified all p.V600E and WT cases (sensitivity, 100%; 95% CI, 91.2% to 100%) 
but was negative for all other BRAF mutations. Pyrosequencing successfully 
identified all WT and mutated cases. Immunohistochemistry is highly specific for 
p.V600E, and could be used as a first-line method, as is currently performed for 
HER2 amplification detection. Pyrosequencing proved to be the most efficient 
method to detect BRAF mutations in melanomas and could be performed on 
VE1-negative or uninterpretable cases.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the 
Association for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2012.09.001
PMID: 23159108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]