1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Dec 13;53(13):8232-7. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.12-11025.

Mutations in RPGR and RP2 account for 15% of males with simplex retinal 
degenerative disease.

Branham K(1), Othman M, Brumm M, Karoukis AJ, Atmaca-Sonmez P, Yashar BM, 
Schwartz SB, Stover NB, Trzupek K, Wheaton D, Jennings B, Ciccarelli ML, 
Jayasundera KT, Lewis RA, Birch D, Bennett J, Sieving PA, Andreasson S, Duncan 
JL, Fishman GA, Iannaccone A, Weleber RG, Jacobson SG, Heckenlively JR, Swaroop 
A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, 
Kellogg Eye Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the proportion of male patients presenting simplex retinal 
degenerative disease (RD: retinitis pigmentosa [RP] or cone/cone-rod dystrophy 
[COD/CORD]) with mutations in the X-linked retinal degeneration genes RPGR and 
RP2.
METHODS: Simplex males were defined as patients with no known affected family 
members. Patients were excluded if they had a family history of parental 
consanguinity. Blood samples from a total of 214 simplex males with a diagnosis 
of retinal degeneration were collected for genetic analysis. The patients were 
screened for mutations in RPGR and RP2 by direct sequencing of PCR-amplified 
genomic DNA.
RESULTS: We identified pathogenic mutations in 32 of the 214 patients screened 
(15%). Of the 29 patients with a diagnosis of COD/CORD, four mutations were 
identified in the ORF15 mutational hotspot of the RPGR gene. Of the 185 RP 
patients, three patients had mutations in RP2 and 25 had RPGR mutations 
(including 12 in the ORF15 region).
CONCLUSIONS: This study represents mutation screening of RPGR and RP2 in the 
largest cohort, to date, of simplex males affected with RP or COD/CORD. Our 
results demonstrate a substantial contribution of RPGR mutations to retinal 
degenerations, and in particular, to simplex RP. Based on our findings, we 
suggest that RPGR should be considered as a first tier gene for screening 
isolated males with retinal degeneration.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-11025
PMCID: PMC3522443
PMID: 23150612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: K. Branham, None; M. Othman, None; 
M. Brumm, None; A.J. Karoukis, None; P. Atmaca-Sonmez, None; B.M. Yashar, None; 
S.B. Schwartz, None; N.B. Stover, None; K. Trzupek, None; D. Wheaton, None; B. 
Jennings, None; M.L. Ciccarelli, None; K.T. Jayasundera, None; R.A. Lewis, None; 
D. Birch, None; J. Bennett, None; P.A. Sieving, None; S. Andreasson, None; J.L. 
Duncan, None; G.A. Fishman, None; A. Iannaccone, None; R.G. Weleber, None; S.G. 
Jacobson, None; J.R. Heckenlively, None; A. Swaroop, None