1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049158. Epub 2012 Nov 
13.

Common FLG mutation K4671X not associated with atopic dermatitis in Han Chinese 
in a family association study.

Cheng R(1), Li M, Zhang H, Guo Y, Chen X, Tao J, Jiang A, Gan J, Qi H, Yu H, 
Liao W, Yao Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Filaggrin gene (FLG) mutations have been identified as the cause of 
ichthyosis vulgaris (IV) and major predisposing factors for atopic dermatitis 
(AD). The relationship among AD, IV and FLG mutations has not been clarified 
yet. Mutations 3321delA and K4671X, two of the most common mutations in Chinese 
patients, were both statistically associated with AD in case-control studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A group of 100 family trios (a total of 300 members with 
one affected AD proband and both parents) were recruited and screened for three 
filaggrin null mutations (3222del4, 3321delA and K4671X). The subjects' 
manifestations of AD and IV were assessed by two experienced dermatologists and 
recorded in detail. The relationship of common mutations to AD were assessed 
using both case-control and family-based tests of association. Filaggrin 
expression was measured in skin of 3 subjects with K4671X heterozygote and the 
normal control using quantitative real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Of 100 probands for AD, 22 were carriers for common FLG mutations and 
only 2 of them were from 40 none-IV family trios (5.00%), consistent with that 
of the healthy control group (3.99%, P>0.05). Significant statistical 
associations were revealed between AD and 3321delA (P<0.001, odds ratio 12.28, 
95% confidence interval 3.35-44.98) as well as K4671X (P = 0.002, odds ratio 
4.53, 95% confidence interval 1.77-11.60). The family-based approach revealed 
that 3321delA was over-transmitted to AD offspring from parents (T:U = 12∶1, 
P = 0.003) but failed to demonstrate transmission disequilibrium between K4671X 
and AD (T:U = 10∶8, P = 0.815). Moreover, compared to the normal control, 
filaggrin expression at both mRNA and protein levels in epidermis of subjects 
with K4671X(heter) was not reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: AD patients from none-IV family trios have low probability of 
carrying FLG mutations. The present family samples confirmed the susceptibility 
of mutation 3321delA to AD in Han Chinese. K4671X was not a pathogenic mutation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049158
PMCID: PMC3496733
PMID: 23152869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.