1. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2013 Jan;67(1):64-70. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2012.178. Epub 2012
Nov  21.

Aged garlic extract reduces blood pressure in hypertensives: a dose-response 
trial.

Ried K(1), Frank OR, Stocks NP.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of General Practice, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia. karinried@niim.com.au

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Hypertension affects about 30% of adults worldwide. 
Garlic has blood pressure-lowering properties and the mechanism of action is 
biologically plausible. Our trial assessed the effect, dose-response, 
tolerability and acceptability of different doses of aged garlic extract as an 
adjunct treatment to existing antihypertensive medication in patients with 
uncontrolled hypertension.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: A total of 79 general practice patients with uncontrolled 
systolic hypertension participated in a double-blind randomised 
placebo-controlled dose-response trial of 12 weeks. Participants were allocated 
to one of three garlic groups with either of one, two or four capsules daily of 
aged garlic extract (240/480/960 mg containing 0.6/1.2/2.4 mg of 
S-allylcysteine) or placebo. Blood pressure was assessed at 4, 8 and 12 weeks 
and compared with baseline using a mixed-model approach. Tolerability was 
monitored throughout the trial and acceptability was assessed at 12 weeks by 
questionnaire.
RESULTS: Mean systolic blood pressure was significantly reduced by 
11.8±5.4 mm Hg in the garlic-2-capsule group over 12 weeks compared with placebo 
(P=0.006), and reached borderline significant reduction in the garlic-4-capsule 
group at 8 weeks (-7.4±4.1 mm Hg, P=0.07). Changes in systolic blood pressure in 
the garlic-1-capsule group and diastolic blood pressure were not significantly 
different to placebo. Tolerability, compliance and acceptability were high in 
all garlic groups (93%) and highest in the groups taking one or two capsules 
daily.
CONCLUSIONS: Our trial suggests aged garlic extract to be an effective and 
tolerable treatment in uncontrolled hypertension, and may be considered as a 
safe adjunct treatment to conventional antihypertensive therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/ejcn.2012.178
PMCID: PMC3561616
PMID: 23169470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]