1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049534. Epub 2012 Nov 
14.

A truncated AdeS kinase protein generated by ISAba1 insertion correlates with 
tigecycline resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii.

Sun JR(1), Perng CL, Chan MC, Morita Y, Lin JC, Su CM, Wang WY, Chang TY, Chiueh 
TS.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Science, National Defense Medical Center, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Over-expression of AdeABC efflux pump stimulated continuously by the mutated 
AdeRS two component system has been found to result in antimicrobial resistance, 
even tigecycline (TGC) resistance, in multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii (MRAB). Although the insertion sequence, ISAba1, contributes to one of 
the AdeRS mutations, the detail mechanism remains unclear. In the present study 
we collected 130 TGC-resistant isolates from 317 carbapenem resistant MRAB 
(MRAB-C) isolates, and 38 of them were characterized with ISAba1 insertion in 
the adeS gene. The relationship between the expression of AdeABC efflux pump and 
TGC resistant was verified indirectly by successfully reducing TGC resistance 
with NMP, an efflux pump inhibitor. Further analysis showed that the remaining 
gene following the ISAba1 insertion was still transcribed to generate a 
truncated AdeS protein by the Pout promoter on ISAba1 instead of frame shift or 
pre-termination. Through introducing a series of recombinant adeRS constructs 
into a adeRS knockout strain, we demonstrated the truncated AdeS protein was 
constitutively produced and stimulating the expression of AdeABC efflux pump via 
interaction with AdeR. Our findings suggest a mechanism of antimicrobial 
resistance induced by an aberrant cytoplasmic sensor derived from an insertion 
element.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049534
PMCID: PMC3498117
PMID: 23166700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.