1. J Lipid Res. 2013 Feb;54(2):552-60. doi: 10.1194/jlr.P033266. Epub 2012 Nov
15.

Novel common and rare genetic determinants of paraoxonase activity: FTO, 
SERPINA12, and ITGAL.

Kim DS(1), Burt AA, Crosslin DR, Robertson PD, Ranchalis JE, Boyko EJ, Nickerson 
DA, Furlong CE, Jarvik GP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, 
WA, USA.

HDL-associated paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity is associated with cardiovascular 
and other human diseases. As the role of genetic variants outside of the PON 
gene cluster on PON1 activity is unknown, we sought to identify common and rare 
variants in such loci. We typed 33,057 variants on the CVD chip in 1,362 
subjects to test for their effects on adjusted-PON1 activity. Three novel genes 
(FTO, ITGAL, and SERPINA12) and the PON gene cluster had SNPs associated with 
PON1 arylesterase (AREase) activity. These loci were carried forward for 
rare-variant analysis using Exome chip genotypes in an overlapping subset of 
1,051 subjects using sequence kernel association testing. PON1 (P = 2.24 × 
10(-4)), PON3 (P = 0.022), FTO (P = 0.019), and SERPINA12 (P = 0.039) had both 
common and rare variants associated with PON1 AREase. ITGAL variants were 
associated with PON1 activity when using weighted sequence kernel association 
testing (SKAT) analysis (P = 2.63 × 10(-3)). When adjusting for the initial 
common variants, SERPINA12 became marginally significant (P = 0.09), whereas all 
other findings remained significant (P < 0.05), suggesting independent 
rare-variant effects. We present novel findings that common and rare variants in 
FTO, SERPINA12, and ITGAL predict PON1 activity. These results further link PON1 
to diabetes and inflammation and may inform the role of HDL in human disease.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.P033266
PMCID: PMC3588879
PMID: 23160181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]