1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049885. Epub 2012 Nov 
14.

Physical organization of DNA by multiple non-specific DNA-binding modes of 
integration host factor (IHF).

Lin J(1), Chen H, Dröge P, Yan J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
Singapore.

The integration host factor (IHF) is an abundant nucleoid-associated protein and 
an essential co-factor for phage λ site-specific recombination and gene 
regulation in E. coli. Introduction of a sharp DNA kink at specific cognate 
sites is critical for these functions. Interestingly, the intracellular 
concentration of IHF is much higher than the concentration needed for 
site-specific interactions, suggesting that non-specific binding of IHF to DNA 
plays a role in the physical organization of bacterial chromatin. However, it is 
unclear how non-specific DNA association contributes to DNA organization. By 
using a combination of single DNA manipulation and atomic force microscopy 
imaging methods, we show here that distinct modes of non-specific DNA binding of 
IHF result in complex global DNA conformations. Changes in KCl and IHF 
concentrations, as well as tension applied to DNA, dramatically influence the 
degree of DNA-bending. In addition, IHF can crosslink DNA into a highly compact 
DNA meshwork that is observed in the presence of magnesium at low concentration 
of monovalent ions and high IHF-DNA stoichiometries. Our findings provide 
important insights into how IHF contributes to bacterial chromatin organization, 
gene regulation, and biofilm formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049885
PMCID: PMC3498176
PMID: 23166787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.