1. Leukemia. 2013 Apr;27(4):907-13. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.305. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Prediction of outcomes in patients with Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic 
phase treated with nilotinib after imatinib resistance/intolerance.

Jabbour E(1), le Coutre PD, Cortes J, Giles F, Bhalla KN, Pinilla-Ibarz J, 
Larson RA, Gattermann N, Ottmann OG, Hochhaus A, Hughes TP, Saglio G, Radich JP, 
Kim DW, Martinelli G, Reynolds J, Woodman RC, Baccarani M, Kantarjian HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, MD Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. ejabbour@mdanderson.org

The purpose was to assess predictive factors for outcome in patients with 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in chronic phase (CML-CP) treated with nilotinib 
after imatinib failure. Imatinib-resistant and -intolerant patients with CML-CP 
(n=321) were treated with nilotinib 400 mg twice daily. Of 19 baseline patient 
and disease characteristics and two response end points analyzed, 10 independent 
prognostic factors were associated with progression-free survival (PFS). In the 
multivariate analysis, major cytogenetic response (MCyR) within 12 months, 
baseline hemoglobin â‰¥ 120 g/l, baseline basophils <4%, and absence of baseline 
mutations with low sensitivity to nilotinib were associated with PFS. A 
prognostic score was created to stratify patients into five groups (best group: 
0 of 3 unfavorable risk factors and MCyR by 12 months; worst group: 3 of 3 
unfavorable risk factors and no MCyR by 12 months). Estimated 24-month PFS rates 
were 90%, 79%, 67% and 37% for patients with prognostic scores of 0, 1, 2 and 3, 
respectively, (no patients with score of 4). Even in the presence of poor 
disease characteristics, nilotinib provided significant clinical benefit in 
patients with imatinib-resistant or -intolerant CML. This system may yield 
insight on the prognosis of patients.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2012.305
PMCID: PMC4140185
PMID: 23174881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest: EJ received honoraria from 
Novartis and BMS. PDlC acted as a consultant and received honoraria for Novartis 
and BMS and received research funding from Novartis. JEC acted as a consultant 
for Novartis, BMS, and Pfizer and received research funding from Novartis, BMS, 
Pfizer, Ariad, and Chemgenex. FJG acted as a consultant, received honoraria, and 
research funding from Novartis. KNB received honoraria and research funding from 
Novartis. JP-I acted as a consultant for Novartis and BMS and received honoraria 
from Novartis. RAL acted as a consultant, received honoraria, and received 
research funding from Novartis, NG received honoraria and research funding from 
Novartis. OGO acted as a consultant, received honoraria, and research funding 
from Novartis. A.H. acted as a consultant for Novartis, BMS, Pfizer, and Ariad; 
and received honoraria and research funding from Novartis, BMS, and Pfizer. TPH 
acted as a consultant and received research funding from Novartis, BMS, and 
Ariad. GS acted as a consultant for Novartis, BMS, and Pfizer and received 
honoraria from BMS and Novartis. JPR acted as a consultant for Novartis, BMS, 
Ariad, and Pfizer and received research funding from Novartis. D-WK received 
honoraria from Novartis and BMS and received research funding from Novartis, 
BMS, Pfizer, and Ariad. GM acted as a consultant for Novartis, BMS, Pfizer, and 
Genzyme; received honoraria from Novartis and BMS; and research funding from 
Novartis. JR and RCW are Novartis employees and stock owners. MB acted as a 
consultant for Novartis, BMS, and Pfizer; received honoraria from Novartis, BMS, 
and Pfizer; and received research funding from Novartis. HMK acted as a 
consultant for Novartis and received research funding from Novartis, BMS, and 
Pfizer.