1. EPMA J. 2010 Jun;1(2):305-16. doi: 10.1007/s13167-010-0029-y. Epub 2010 Jun
12.

Tau pathology: predictive diagnostics, targeted preventive and personalized 
medicine and application of advanced research in medical practice.

Gozes I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry The Lily and Avraham 
Gildor Chair for the Investigation of Growth Factors and The Adams Super Center 
for Brain Studies Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
69978 Israel.

Microtubules are key cytoskeletal elements found in all eukaryotic cells. The 
microtubule shaft is composed of the heterodimer protein, tubulin and decorated 
with multiple microtubule associated protein, regulating microtubule function. 
Tau (tubulin associated unit) or MAPT (microtubule associated protein tau), 
among the first microtubule associated proteins to be identified, was implicated 
in microtubule initiation as well as assembly, with increased expression in 
neurons and specific association with axonal microtubules. Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) is the most prevalent tauopathy, exhibiting tau-neurofibrillary tangles 
associated with cognitive dysfunction. AD is also characterized by β-amyloid 
plaques. An abundance of tau inclusions, in the absence of β-amyloid deposits, 
can be found in Pick's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and other diseases, collectively described as 
tauopathies. The increase in tau pathology in AD correlates with the associated 
cognitive decline. The current manuscript touches on the variability as well as 
common denominators of the various tau pathologies coupled to new 
approaches/current innovation in treatment of tauopathies in favor of advanced 
technologies in predictive diagnostics, targeted preventive and personalized 
medicine (PPPM).

DOI: 10.1007/s13167-010-0029-y
PMCID: PMC3405325
PMID: 23199066