1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:570948. doi:
10.1155/2012/570948.  Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Treatment with ginger ameliorates fructose-induced Fatty liver and 
hypertriglyceridemia in rats: modulation of the hepatic carbohydrate response 
element-binding protein-mediated pathway.

Gao H(1), Guan T, Li C, Zuo G, Yamahara J, Wang J, Li Y.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 
400016, China.

Ginger has been demonstrated to improve lipid derangements. However, its 
underlying triglyceride-lowering mechanisms remain unclear. Fructose 
overconsumption is associated with increase in hepatic de novo lipogenesis, 
thereby resulting in lipid derangements. Here we found that coadministration of 
the alcoholic extract of ginger (50â€‰mg/kg/day, oral gavage, once daily) over 5 
weeks reversed liquid fructose-induced increase in plasma triglyceride and 
glucose concentrations and hepatic triglyceride content in rats. Plasma 
nonesterified fatty acid concentration was also decreased. Attenuation of the 
increased vacuolization and Oil Red O staining area was evident on histological 
examination of liver in ginger-treated rats. However, ginger treatment did not 
affect chow intake and body weight. Further, ginger treatment suppressed 
fructose-stimulated overexpression of carbohydrate response element-binding 
protein (ChREBP) at the mRNA and protein levels in the liver. Consequently, 
hepatic expression of the ChREBP-targeted lipogenic genes responsible for fatty 
acid biosynthesis was also downregulated. In contrast, expression of neither 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor- (PPAR-) alpha and its downstream 
genes, nor PPAR-gamma and sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1c was 
altered. Thus the present findings suggest that in rats, amelioration of 
fructose-induced fatty liver and hypertriglyceridemia by ginger treatment 
involves modulation of the hepatic ChREBP-mediated pathway.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/570948
PMCID: PMC3502023
PMID: 23193424