1. ScientificWorldJournal. 2012;2012:545293. doi: 10.1100/2012/545293. Epub 2012 
Oct 23.

Treatment of thoracolumbar spinal infections through anterolateral approaches 
using expandable titanium mesh cage for spine reconstruction.

Roberto T(1), Daniele M, Martina C, Tiziano de G, Roberto D.

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgery, Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis (PVO) is still a rare pathology. However, its 
incidence is on the rise. This is due to an increasing population with 
predisposing factors. Also, the availability of more effective diagnostic tools 
has brought it increasingly to the surgeon's attention. In this study the 
patients were treated in the Neurosurgery Division of the Department of 
Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry of the Sapienza University of Rome, between 
2001 and 2009. They had thoracolumbar pyogenic spondylitis. This study was 
undertaken in order to identify the correct diagnostic and therapeutic treatment 
needed in such cases. From the cases studied here, it is evident that spinal 
infections can be extremely insidious and that diagnosis tends to be reached 
late. Surgery, along with the antibiotic treatment, allows for eradication of 
the causes of the pathology by the reclamation of the affected region. Surgery 
is also fundamental in helping to recover vital functions and in restoring as 
much as possible the correct curvature of the rachises. The use of an 
anterolateral approach is dictated by the necessity of obtaining 360Â° stability 
as well as by the need to clear away extensive infections, which are not always 
reachable using a posterior approach.

DOI: 10.1100/2012/545293
PMCID: PMC3485901
PMID: 23193382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]