1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Oct 22;13(10):13713-25. doi: 10.3390/ijms131013713.

The role of neurotrophins in multiple sclerosis-pathological and clinical 
implications.

Kalinowska-Lyszczarz A(1), Losy J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry and Neuropathology, Chair of Neurology, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, 49, Przybyszewskiego st., 60-355 Poznan, Poland. 
akalinowskalyszczarz@ump.edu.pl.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating and 
neurodegenerative disease of the central nervous system (CNS) with unknown 
etiology. It was recently suggested that autoimmunity, which had long been 
considered to be destructive in MS, might also play a protective role in the CNS 
of MS patients. Neurotrophins are polypeptides belonging to the neurotrophic 
factor family. While neurotrophins mediate cell survival and proliferation in 
the nervous system, they are also expressed within peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells fraction (PBMCs) of immunological system. In MS additional neurotrophic 
support from PBMCs might compensate relative neurotrophins deficiency in the 
damaged CNS tissue that needs to be repaired. Failure to produce the adequate 
neurotrophins concentrations might result in decreased protection of the CNS, 
consequently leading to increased atrophy, which is the main determinant of MS 
patients' end-point disability. There are several lines of evidence, both from 
clinical research and animal models, suggesting that neurotrophins play a 
pivotal role in neuroprotective and neuroregenerative processes that are often 
defective in the course of MS. It seems that neuroprotective strategies might be 
used as potentially valuable add-on therapies, alongside traditional 
immunomodulatory treatment in multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms131013713
PMCID: PMC3497350
PMID: 23202976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]