1. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jan 16;135(2):669-82. doi: 10.1021/ja306028q. Epub 2012
Dec  27.

High-affinity, small-molecule peptidomimetic inhibitors of MLL1/WDR5 
protein-protein interaction.

Karatas H(1), Townsend EC, Cao F, Chen Y, Bernard D, Liu L, Lei M, Dou Y, Wang 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan 48109, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) is a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) 
methyltransferase, and targeting the MLL1 enzymatic activity has been proposed 
as a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of acute leukemia harboring 
MLL1 fusion proteins. The MLL1/WDR5 protein-protein interaction is essential for 
MLL1 enzymatic activity. In the present study, we designed a large number of 
peptidomimetics to target the MLL1/WDR5 interaction based upon -CO-ARA-NH-, the 
minimum binding motif derived from MLL1. Our study led to the design of 
high-affinity peptidomimetics, which bind to WDR5 with K(i) < 1 nM and function 
as potent antagonists of MLL1 activity in a fully reconstituted in vitro H3K4 
methyltransferase assay. Determination of co-crystal structures of two potent 
peptidomimetics in complex with WDR5 establishes their structural basis for 
high-affinity binding to WDR5. Evaluation of one such peptidomimetic, MM-102, in 
bone marrow cells transduced with MLL1-AF9 fusion construct shows that the 
compound effectively decreases the expression of HoxA9 and Meis-1, two critical 
MLL1 target genes in MLL1 fusion protein mediated leukemogenesis. MM-102 also 
specifically inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in leukemia cells 
harboring MLL1 fusion proteins. Our study provides the first proof-of-concept 
for the design of small-molecule inhibitors of the WDR5/MLL1 protein-protein 
interaction as a novel therapeutic approach for acute leukemia harboring MLL1 
fusion proteins.

DOI: 10.1021/ja306028q
PMCID: PMC5180416
PMID: 23210835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare the following 
competing financial interest(s): Asentage has licensed the technology related to 
this manuscript. Shaomeng Wang is a co-founder for Ascentage, owns stocks in 
Ascentage, and serves as a consultant for Ascentage.