1. Nat Med. 2013 Jan;19(1):50-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.3029. Epub 2012 Dec 9.

Epigenetic expansion of VHL-HIF signal output drives multiorgan metastasis in 
renal cancer.

Vanharanta S(1), Shu W, Brenet F, Hakimi AA, Heguy A, Viale A, Reuter VE, Hsieh 
JJ, Scandura JM, Massagu√© J.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Feb;13(2):78. doi: 10.1038/nrc3450.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Feb;11(2):77-9. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2013.307.

Inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene, VHL, is an 
archetypical tumor-initiating event in clear cell renal carcinoma (ccRCC) that 
leads to the activation of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors (HIFs). 
However, VHL mutation status in ccRCC is not correlated with clinical outcome. 
Here we show that during ccRCC progression, cancer cells exploit diverse 
epigenetic alterations to empower a branch of the VHL-HIF pathway for 
metastasis, and the strength of this activation is associated with poor clinical 
outcome. By analyzing metastatic subpopulations of VHL-deficient ccRCC cells, we 
discovered an epigenetically altered VHL-HIF response that is specific to 
metastatic ccRCC. Focusing on the two most prominent pro-metastatic VHL-HIF 
target genes, we show that loss of Polycomb repressive complex 2 
(PRC2)-dependent histone H3 Lys27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) activates HIF-driven 
chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) expression in support of chemotactic 
cell invasion, whereas loss of DNA methylation enables HIF-driven cytohesin 1 
interacting protein (CYTIP) expression to protect cancer cells from death 
cytokine signals. Thus, metastasis in ccRCC is based on an epigenetically 
expanded output of the tumor-initiating pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.3029
PMCID: PMC3540187
PMID: 23223005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.