1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jan;161A(1):131-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35700. Epub 2012
 Dec 7.

Cerebellar and posterior fossa malformations in patients with autism-associated 
chromosome 22q13 terminal deletion.

Aldinger KA(1), Kogan J, Kimonis V, Fernandez B, Horn D, Klopocki E, Chung B, 
Toutain A, Weksberg R, Millen KJ, Barkovich AJ, Dobyns WB.

Author information:
(1)Committee on Neurobiology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The 22q13.3 deletion causes a neurodevelopmental syndrome, also known as 
Phelan-McDermid syndrome (MIM #606232), characterized by developmental delay and 
severe delay or absence of expressive speech. Two patients with hemizygous 
chromosome 22q13.3 telomeric deletion were referred to us when brain-imaging 
studies revealed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (CBVH). To determine whether 
developmental abnormalities of the cerebellum are a consistent feature of the 
22q13.3 deletion syndrome, we examined brain-imaging studies for 10 unrelated 
subjects with 22q13 terminal deletion. In seven cases where the availability of 
DNA and array technology allowed, we mapped deletion boundaries using 
comparative intensity analysis with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
microarrays. Approximate deletion boundaries for three additional cases were 
derived from clinical or published molecular data. We also examined 
brain-imaging studies for a patient with an intragenic SHANK3 mutation. We 
report the first brain-imaging data showing that some patients with 22q13 
deletions have severe posterior CBVH, and one individual with a SHANK3 mutation 
has a normal cerebellum. This genotype-phenotype study suggests that the 22q13 
deletion phenotype includes abnormal posterior fossa structures that are 
unlikely to be attributed to SHANK3 disruption. Other genes in the region, 
including PLXNB2 and MAPK8IP2, display brain expression patterns and mouse 
mutant phenotypes critical for proper cerebellar development. Future studies of 
these genes may elucidate their relationship to 22q13.3 deletion phenotypes.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35700
PMCID: PMC3733662
PMID: 23225497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.