1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Mar;52(3):287-96. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22028. Epub 
2012 Dec 8.

Polymorphisms of TNF and IL-10 genes and clinical outcome of patients with 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Lech-Maranda E(1), Mlynarski W, Grzybowska-Izydorczyk O, Borowiec M, Pastorczak 
A, Cebula-Obrzut B, Klimkiewicz-Wojciechowska G, Wcislo M, Majewski M, Kotkowska 
A, Robak T, Warzocha K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Institute of Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, 
Warsaw, Poland. ewamaranda@wp.pl

Genetic variations in tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) 
were reported to influence susceptibility to and outcome of patients with 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Therefore, we investigated whether single nucleotide 
polymorphisms in TNF and IL-10 may play a role in the clinical course of 
patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). TNF-308G>A, IL-10-3575T>A, and 
IL-10-1082A>G seem to be functionally relevant, were genotyped in 292 previously 
untreated patients with CLL. The control group consisted of 192 randomly 
selected blood donors. The patients carrying TNF-308GG and IL-10-1082AA 
genotypes presented a higher 3-year treatment-free survival (56.6 vs. 40.6%, P = 
0.05) as well as a 10-year overall survival (OS) rates (92.3 vs. 57.6%, P = 
0.005) than those with other TNF-308 and IL-10-1082 genotype combinations. 
Multivariate analysis demonstrated the Rai stage (P = 0.0002), IGHV mutation 
status (P = 0.01), TNF-308G>A (P = 0.03), and TNF/IL-10 polymorphism-based risk 
groups (P = 0.05) to be independent factors predicting OS. When the mutated IGHV 
patients were analyzed, the homozygotes TNF-308GG and IL-10-1082AA presented a 
higher 10-year OS rate than those carrying other TNF-308 and IL-10-1082 
genotypes (100 vs. 67.7%, P = 0.01). In the unmutated IGHV patients, only the 
TNF-308G>A polymorphism influenced OS. The genetic variations in TNF and IL-10 
genes work as independent predictors of survival and may play a role in the 
clinical course of CLL. It suggests inherited ability of the host to shift the 
balance between the Th1 and Th2 response, which in turn might contribute to the 
pathogenesis and prognosis of B-cell malignancies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22028
PMID: 23225254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]