1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 11;430(2):560-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.113. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Dominant-negative effects of LRRK2 heterodimers: a possible mechanism of 
neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease caused by LRRK2 I2020T mutation.

Ohta E(1), Kawakami F, Kubo M, Obata F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan.

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the molecule responsible for 
autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), PARK8, but the etiologic effects of 
its mutation remain unknown. In the present study, we investigated a novel 
mechanism for the neurodegeneration induced by I2020T mutant LRRK2. Using native 
gel electrophoresis and immunoprecipitation, we found that wild-type (WT) LRRK2 
formed a heterodimer with I2020T LRRK2 in transfected cells, and that the 
heterodimer exhibited a markedly lower intracellular protein level than the 
WT/WT-homodimer. An increased amount of I2020T LRRK2 decreased the protein level 
of co-transfected WT LRRK2. A pulse-chase experiment revealed that the 
intracellular protein lifetime of WT LRRK2 was shortened by co-transfection with 
I2020T LRRK2. These results suggest that I2020T LRRK2 enhances the intracellular 
degradation of WT LRRK2 through WT/I2020T-heterodimer formation. Overexpression 
of WT LRRK2 in HEK293 cells increased the phosphorylation level of Akt1 (S473), 
a possible physiological substrate of LRRK2, and made cells resistant to 
hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis. However, both Akt1 phosphorylation and 
apoptosis resistance were reduced in WT/I2020T-expressing cells in comparison 
with WT/WT-expressing cells. Reduction of Akt1 phosphorylation and apoptosis 
resistance were also evident when a neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y clone overexpressing 
WT LRRK2 was transfected with the I2020T LRRK2. Altogether, these results 
suggest that the I2020T mutation enhances the intracellular degradation of LRRK2 
through WT/I2020T-heterodimer formation, leading to reduced Akt1 phosphorylation 
and diminished protectivity against apoptosis. Our findings suggest the 
possibility of a dominant-negative mechanism of neurodegeneration in PD caused 
by I2020T LRRK2 mutation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.113
PMID: 23220480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]