1. Tumour Biol. 2013 Feb;34(1):337-47. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0555-4. Epub 2012 
Dec 14.

Part II. Mitochondrial mutational status of high nitric oxide adapted cell line 
BT-20 (BT-20-HNO) as it relates to human primary breast tumors.

De Vitto H(1), Mendonça BS, Elseth KM, Vesper BJ, Portari EA, Gallo CV, Paradise 
WA, Rumjanek FD, Radosevich JA.

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, IBqM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Mitochondria combine hydrogen and oxygen to produce heat and adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). As a toxic by-product of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), 
mitochondria generate reactive oxygen species (ROS). These free radicals may 
cause damage to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and other molecules in the cell. 
Nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role in the biology of human cancers, 
including breast cancer; however, it is still unclear how NO might affect the 
mitochondrial genome. The aim of the current study is to determine the role of 
mtDNA in the breast oncogenic process. Using DNA sequencing, we studied one 
breast cancer cell line as a model system to investigate the effects of 
oxidative stress. The BT-20 cell line was fully adapted to increasing 
concentrations of the NO donor DETA-NONOate and is referred to as BT-20-HNO, a 
high NO (HNO) cell line. The HNO cell line is biologically different from the 
"parent" cell line from which it originated. Moreover, we investigated 71 breast 
cancer biopsies and the corresponding noncancerous breast tissues. The free 
radical NO was able to generate somatic mtDNA mutations in the BT-20-HNO cell 
line that were missing in the BT-20 parent cell line. We identified two somatic 
mutations, A4767G and G13481A, which changed the amino acid residues. Another 
two point mutations were identified in the mtDNA initiation replication site at 
nucleotide 57 and at the 'hot spot' cytidine-rich D300-310 segment. Furthermore, 
the NO regulated the mtDNA copy number and selected different mtDNA populations 
by clonal expansion. Interestingly, we identified eight somatic mutations in the 
coding regions of mtDNAs of eight breast cancer patients (8/71, 11.2 %). All of 
these somatic mutations changed amino acid residues in the highly conserved 
regions of mtDNA which potentially leads to mitochondrial dysfunctions. The 
other two somatic mtDNA mutations in the displacement loop (D-loop) region 
[303:315 C(7-8)TC(6) and nucleotide 57] were distributed among 14 patients 
(14/71, 19.7 %). Importantly, of these 14 patients, six had mutations in the p53 
gene. These results validate the BT-20 parent/HNO cell line model system as a 
means to study ROS damage in mtDNA, as it parallels the results found in a 
subset of the patient population.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-012-0555-4
PMID: 23238816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]