1. J Mol Biol. 2013 Feb 22;425(4):697-712. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.002. Epub 
2012 Dec 10.

Intrinsic translocation barrier as an initial step in pausing by RNA polymerase 
II.

Imashimizu M(1), Kireeva ML, Lubkowska L, Gotte D, Parks AR, Strathern JN, 
Kashlev M.

Author information:
(1)Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, Frederick National 
Laboratory for Cancer Research (FNLCR), Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Pausing of RNA polymerase II (RNAP II) by backtracking on DNA is a major 
regulatory mechanism in control of eukaryotic transcription. Backtracking occurs 
by extrusion of the 3' end of the RNA from the active center after bond 
formation and before translocation of RNAP II on DNA. In several documented 
cases, backtracking requires a special signal such as A/T-rich sequences forming 
an unstable RNA-DNA hybrid in the elongation complex. However, other 
sequence-dependent backtracking signals and conformations of RNAP II leading to 
backtracking remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate with S. cerevisiae RNAP II 
that a cleavage-deficient elongation factor TFIIS (TFIIS(AA)) enhances 
backtracked pauses during regular transcription. This is due to increased 
efficiency of formation of an intermediate that leads to backtracking. This 
intermediate may involve misalignment at the 3' end of the nascent RNA in the 
active center of the yeast RNAP II, and TFIIS(AA) promotes formation of this 
intermediate at the DNA sequences, presenting a high-energy barrier to 
translocation. We proposed a three-step mechanism for RNAP II pausing in which a 
prolonged dwell time in the pre-translocated state increases the likelihood of 
the 3' RNA end misalignment facilitating a backtrack pausing. These results 
demonstrate an important role of the intrinsic blocks to forward translocation 
in pausing by RNAP II.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2012.12.002
PMCID: PMC7649676
PMID: 23238253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]