1. Eur Heart J. 2013 Jun;34(24):1826-33. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs431. Epub 2012
 Dec 17.

Genetically elevated non-fasting triglycerides and calculated remnant 
cholesterol as causal risk factors for myocardial infarction.

Jørgensen AB(1), Frikke-Schmidt R, West AS, Grande P, Nordestgaard BG, 
Tybjærg-Hansen A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry KB3011, Section for Molecular Genetics, 
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospitals and Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

AIMS: Elevated non-fasting triglycerides mark elevated levels of remnant 
cholesterol. Using a Mendelian randomization approach, we tested whether 
genetically increased remnant cholesterol in hypertriglyceridaemia due to 
genetic variation in the apolipoprotein A5 gene (APOA5) associates with an 
increased risk of myocardial infarction (MI).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We resequenced the core promoter and coding regions of 
APOA5 in individuals with the lowest 1% (n = 95) and highest 2% (n = 190) 
triglyceride levels in the Copenhagen City Heart Study (CCHS, n = 10 391). 
Genetic variants which differed in frequency between the two extreme 
triglyceride groups (c.-1131T > C, S19W, and c.*31C > T; P-value: 0.06 to 
<0.001), thus suggesting an effect on triglyceride levels, were genotyped in the 
Copenhagen General Population Study (CGPS), the CCHS, and the Copenhagen 
Ischemic Heart Disease Study (CIHDS), comprising a total of 5705 MI cases and 54 
408 controls. Genotype combinations of these common variants associated with 
increases in non-fasting triglycerides and calculated remnant cholesterol of, 
respectively, up to 68% (1.10 mmol/L) and 56% (0.40 mmol/L) (P < 0.001), and 
with a corresponding odds ratio for MI of 1.87 (95% confidence interval: 
1.25-2.81). Using APOA5 genotypes in instrumental variable analysis, the 
observational hazard ratio for a doubling in non-fasting triglycerides was 1.57 
(1.32-2.68) compared with a causal genetic odds ratio of 1.94 (1.40-1.85) (P for 
comparison = 0.28). For calculated remnant cholesterol, the corresponding values 
were 1.67(1.38-2.02) observational and 2.23(1.48-3.35) causal (P for comparison 
= 0.21).
CONCLUSION: These data are consistent with a causal association between elevated 
levels of remnant cholesterol in hypertriglyceridaemia and an increased risk of 
MI. Limitations include that remnants were not measured directly, and that APOA5 
genetic variants may influence other lipoprotein parameters.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs431
PMID: 23248205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]