1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(3):1873-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1190. Epub
2012  Dec 14.

High-throughput sequence analysis reveals structural diversity and improved 
potency among RNA inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase.

Ditzler MA(1), Lange MJ, Bose D, Bottoms CA, Virkler KF, Sawyer AW, Whatley AS, 
Spollen W, Givan SA, Burke DH.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 
USA.

Systematic evolution of ligands through exponential enrichment (SELEX) is a 
well-established method for generating nucleic acid populations that are 
enriched for specified functions. High-throughput sequencing (HTS) enhances the 
power of comparative sequence analysis to reveal details of how RNAs within 
these populations recognize their targets. We used HTS analysis to evaluate RNA 
populations selected to bind type I human immunodeficiency virus reverse 
transcriptase (RT). The populations are enriched in RNAs of independent lineages 
that converge on shared motifs and in clusters of RNAs with nearly identical 
sequences that share common ancestry. Both of these features informed inferences 
of the secondary structures of enriched RNAs, their minimal structural 
requirements and their stabilities in RT-aptamer complexes. Monitoring 
population dynamics in response to increasing selection pressure revealed RNA 
inhibitors of RT that are more potent than the previously identified 
pseudoknots. Improved potency was observed for inhibition of both purified RT in 
enzymatic assays and viral replication in cell-based assays. Structural and 
functional details of converged motifs that are obscured by simple consensus 
descriptions are also revealed by the HTS analysis. The approach presented here 
can readily be generalized for the efficient and systematic post-SELEX 
development of aptamers for down-stream applications.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gks1190
PMCID: PMC3561961
PMID: 23241386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]