1. J Chromatogr A. 2013 Jan 4;1271(1):207-16. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.11.046. 
Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Development of a chiral micellar electrokinetic chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry assay for simultaneous analysis of warfarin and hydroxywarfarin 
metabolites: application to the analysis of patients serum samples.

Wang X(1), Hou J, Jann M, Hon YY, Shamsi SA.

Author information:
(1)Center of Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia State University, 50 Decatur 
Street, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.

The enantioseparation of warfarin (WAR) along with the five positional and 
optical isomers is challenging because of the difficulty to simultaneously 
separate and quantitate these chiral compounds. Currently, no effective chiral 
CE-MS methods exist for the simultaneous enantioseparation of WAR and all its 
hydroxylated metabolites in a single run. Polymeric surfactants (aka. molecular 
micelles) are particularly compatible with micellar electrokinetic 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (MEKC-MS) because they have a wider elution 
window for enantioseparation and do not interfere with the MS detection of 
chiral drugs. Using polysodium N-undecenoyl-L,L-leucylvalinate (poly-L,L-SULV) 
as a chiral pseudophase in MEKC-MS baseline separation of WAR, its five 
metabolites along with the internal standard was obtained in 45 min. This is in 
comparison to 100 min required for separation of the same mixture with packed 
column CEC-MS using a vancomycin chiral stationary phase. Serum samples were 
extracted with mixed-mode anion-exchange (MAX) cartridge with recoveries of 
greater than 85.2% for all WAR and hydroxywarfarin (OH-WAR) metabolites. 
Utilizing the tandem MS and multiple reaction monitoring mode, the MEKC-MS/MS 
method was used to simultaneously generate calibration curves over a 
concentration range from 2 to 5000 ng/mL for R- and S-warfarin, 5 to 1000 ng/mL 
for R- and S-6-, 7-, 8- and 10-OH-WAR and 10 to 1000 ng/mL for R and 
S-4'-OH-WAR. For the first time, the limits of detection and quantitation for 
most WAR metabolites by MEKC-MS/MS were found to be at levels of 2 and 5 ng/mL, 
respectively. The method was successfully applied for the first time to analyze 
WAR and its metabolites in plasma samples of 55 patients undergoing WAR therapy, 
demonstrating the potential of chiral MEKC-MS/MS method to accurately quantitate 
with high sensitivity.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.11.046
PMCID: PMC3529819
PMID: 23246089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]