1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 May;70(9):1653-61. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1225-9.
Epub  2012 Dec 19.

Complex modulation of Ca(v)3.1 T-type calcium channel by nickel.

Nosal OV(1), Lyubanova OP, Naidenov VG, Shuba YM.

Author information:
(1)International Center of Molecular Physiology of the National Academy of 
Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.

Nickel is considered to be a selective blocker of low-voltage-activated T-type 
calcium channel. Recently, the Ni(2+)-binding site with critical histidine-191 
(H191) within the extracellular IS3-IS4 domain of the most Ni(2+)-sensitive 
Cav3.2 T-channel isoform has been identified. All calcium channels are 
postulated to also have intrapore-binding site limiting maximal current carried 
by permeating divalent cations (PDC) and determining the blockade by 
non-permeating ones. However, the contribution of the two sites to the overall 
Ni(2+) effect and its dependence on PDC remain uncertain. Here we compared 
Ni(2+) action on the wild-type "Ni(2+)-insensitive" Cav3.1w/t channel and 
Cav3.1Q172H mutant having glutamine (Q) equivalent to H191 of Cav3.2 replaced by 
histidine. Each channel was expressed in Xenopus oocytes, and Ni(2+) blockade of 
Ca(2+), Sr(2+), or Ba(2+) currents was assessed by electrophysiology. Inhibition 
of Cav3.1w/t by Ni(2+) conformed to two sites binding. Ni(2+) binding with 
high-affinity site (IC50 = 0.03-3 μM depending on PDC) produced maximal 
inhibition of 20-30% and was voltage-dependent, consistent with its location 
within the channel's pore. Most of the inhibition (70-80%) was produced by 
Ni(2+) binding with low-affinity site (IC50 = 240-700 μM). Q172H-mutation mainly 
affected low-affinity binding (IC50 = 120-160 μM). The IC50 of Ni(2+) binding 
with both sites in the Cav3.1w/t and Cav3.1Q172H was differentially modulated by 
PDC, suggesting a varying degree of competition of Ca(2+), Sr(2+), or Ba(2+) 
with Ni(2+). We conclude that differential Ni(2+)-sensitivity of T-channel 
subtypes is determined only by H-containing external binding sites, which, in 
the absence of Ni(2+), may be occupied by PDC, influencing in turn the channel's 
permeation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-012-1225-9
PMCID: PMC11113523
PMID: 23250353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]