1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Mar;34(3):481-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.22259. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Novel XPG (ERCC5) mutations affect DNA repair and cell survival after 
ultraviolet but not oxidative stress.

Soltys DT(1), Rocha CR, Lerner LK, de Souza TA, Munford V, Cabral F, Nardo T, 
Stefanini M, Sarasin A, Cabral-Neto JB, Menck CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is the most flexible of all known DNA-repair 
mechanisms, and XPG is a 3'-endonuclease that participates in NER. Mutations in 
this gene (ERCC5) may result in the human syndrome xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) 
and, in some cases, in the complex phenotype of Cockayne syndrome (CS). Two 
Brazilian XP siblings, who were mildly affected, were investigated and 
classified into the XP-G group. The cells from these patients were highly 
ultraviolet (UV) sensitive but not sensitive to photosensitized methylene blue, 
an agent that causes oxidative stress. This phenotype is in contrast to XP-G/CS 
cells, which are highly sensitive to this oxidative agent. Sequencing revealed a 
compound heterozygous genotype with two novel missense mutations: c.83C>A 
(p.Ala28Asp) and c.2904G>C (p.Trp968Cys). The first mutation maps to the 
catalytic site of the XPG protein, whereas the second may compromise binding to 
DNA. Functional assays indicated that the mutated alleles were unable to perform 
the complete repair of UV-irradiated plasmids; however, full correction was 
observed for oxidatively damaged plasmids. Therefore, the XP phenotype of these 
patients is caused by novel missense mutations that specifically affect DNA 
repair for UV- but not oxidative-stress-induced DNA damage, and implications for 
XP versus XP/CS phenotype are discussed.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22259
PMID: 23255472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]