1. J Pediatr. 2013 May;162(5):1041-6.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.11.035. Epub 
2012 Dec 20.

Arteriopathy, D-dimer, and risk of poor neurologic outcome in childhood-onset 
arterial ischemic stroke.

Goldenberg NA(1), Jenkins S, Jack J, Armstrong-Wells J, Fenton LZ, Stence NV, 
Oleszek J, Boada R, Wilkening GN, Wilkinson C, Soep JB, Miyamoto SD, Bajaj L, 
Mourani PM, Manco-Johnson MJ, Bernard TJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. neil.goldenberg@allkids.org

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether acute findings of cerebral arteriopathy, large 
infarct, and acutely elevated plasma D-dimer levels are independently prognostic 
of poor long-term neurologic outcome as measured at ≥ 1 year post-event in 
children with arterial ischemic stroke (AIS).
STUDY DESIGN: Sixty-one patients with childhood-onset (ie, >28 days of life) AIS 
were enrolled in a single-institution cohort study at Children's Hospital 
Colorado between February 2006 and June 2011. Data on demographic and diagnostic 
characteristics, antithrombotic treatments, and outcomes were systematically 
collected.
RESULTS: Cerebral arteriopathy and D-dimer levels >500 ng/mL (a measure of 
coagulation activation) were identified acutely in 41% and 31% of the cohort, 
respectively. Anticoagulation was administered in the acute period post-event in 
40% of the children, in the subacute period in 43%, and in the chronic period in 
28%. When not receiving anticoagulation, patients were routinely treated with 
aspirin 2-5 mg/kg once daily for a minimum of 1 year. Death, major bleeding 
(including intracranial hemorrhage), and recurrent AIS were infrequent. The 
Pediatric Stroke Outcome Measure at 1 year demonstrated poor outcome in 54% of 
the children. Acute cerebral arteriopathy and elevated D-dimer level were 
identified as putative prognostic factors for poor outcome; after adjustment for 
D-dimer, arteriopathy was an independent prognostic indicator (OR, 19.0; 95% CI, 
1.6-229.8; P = .02).
CONCLUSION: Arteriopathy and coagulation activation are highly prevalent in the 
acute period of childhood AIS. Although recurrent AIS and intracranial 
hemorrhage were infrequent in our cohort, one-half of children experienced a 
poor neurologic outcome at 1 year, the risk of which was increased by acute 
arteriopathy. Substantiation of these findings in multi-institutional cohort 
studies is warranted, toward risk stratification in childhood-onset AIS.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.11.035
PMCID: PMC4115645
PMID: 23260102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.