1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2013 Mar;151(3):451-61. doi: 10.1007/s12011-012-9570-y. 
Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Divalent heavy metal cations block the TRPV1 Ca(2+) channel.

Pecze L(1), Winter Z, Jósvay K, Ötvös F, Kolozsi C, Vizler C, Budai D, Letoha T, 
Dombi G, Szakonyi G, Oláh Z.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) is a non-selective cation 
channel involved in pain sensation and in a wide range of non-pain-related 
physiological and pathological conditions. The aim of the present study was to 
explore the effects of selected heavy metal cations on the function of TRPV1. 
The cations ranked in the following sequence of pore-blocking activity: Co(2+) 
[half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) = 13 μM] > Cd(2+) (I (50) = 38 
μM) > Ni(2+) (IC(50) = 62 μM) > Cu(2+) (IC(50) = 200 μM). Zn(2+) proved to be a 
weak (IC(50) = 27 μM) and only partial inhibitor of the channel function, 
whereas Mg(2+), Mn(2+) and La(3+) did not exhibit any substantial effect. 
Co(2+), the most potent channel blocker, was able not only to compete with 
Ca(2+) but also to pass with it through the open channel of TRPV1. In response 
to heat activation or vanilloid treatment, Co(2+) accumulation was verified in 
TRPV1-transfected cell lines and in the TRPV1+ dorsal root ganglion neurons. The 
inhibitory effect was also demonstrated in vivo. Co(2+) applied together with 
vanilloid agonists attenuated the nocifensive eye wipe response in mice. 
Different rat TRPV1 pore point mutants (Y627W, N628W, D646N and E651W) were 
created that can validate the binding site of previously used channel blockers 
in agonist-evoked (45)Ca(2+) influx assays in cells expressing TRPV1. The IC(50) 
of Co(2+) on these point mutants were determined to be reasonably comparable to 
those on the wild type, which suggests that divalent cations passing through the 
TRPV1 channel use the same negatively charged amino acids as Ca(2+).

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-012-9570-y
PMCID: PMC3566393
PMID: 23264033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]