1. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Feb 25;202(1-3):146-52. doi:
10.1016/j.cbi.2012.11.026.  Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Modulation of activity and inhibitor sensitivity of rabbit aldose reductase-like 
protein (AKR1B19) by oxidized glutathione and SH-reagents.

Endo S(1), Fujimoto A, Kumada S, Matsunaga T, Ohno S, Mano J, Tajima K, 
El-Kabbani O, Hara A.

Author information:
(1)Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu 501-1196, Japan. sendo@gifu-pu.ac.jp

Rabbit aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1B19 is an ortholog of human aldose 
reductase-like protein (ARLP), AKR1B10, showing 86% amino acid sequence 
identity. AKR1B19 exhibits the highest catalytic efficiency for 4-oxo-2-nonenal, 
a major product of lipid peroxidation, compared to known reductases of this 
aldehyde. In this study, we found that the reductase activity of AKR1B19 was 
activated to about 5-fold immediately after the addition of 10 μM SH-reagents 
(p-chloromercuriphenylsulfonic acid and p-chloromercuribenzoic acid) in the 
absence or presence of NADPH. In addition, a maximum of 3-fold activation of 
AKR1B19 was induced by incubation with glutathione disulfide (GSSG) for 1h. The 
activated enzyme was converted into the native enzyme by further incubation with 
dithiothreitol and glutathione. The activation was abolished by the C299S 
mutation of AKR1B19, and the glutathionylated Cys299 was identified by mass 
spectrometry analysis. The Cys299-modified enzyme displayed different kinetic 
alterations depending on substrates and inhibitors. In the reduction of 
4-oxo-2-nonenal, the catalytic efficiency was increased. Thus, AKR1B10 may be 
modulated by cellular ratio of GSSG/glutathione and more efficiently act as a 
detoxifying enzyme for the cytotoxic aldehyde under oxidatively stressed 
conditions. Furthermore, such an activity alteration by GSSG was not detected in 
AKR1B10 and rat ARLPs, suggesting the presence of a GSSG-binding site near 
Cys299 in AKR1B19.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.11.026
PMID: 23261715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]