1. Bone. 2013 Mar;53(1):269-76. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.12.007. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Measles virus nucleocapsid protein, a key contributor to Paget's disease, 
increases IL-6 expression via down-regulation of FoxO3/Sirt1 signaling.

Wang FM(1), Sarmasik A, Hiruma Y, Sun Q, Sammut B, Windle JJ, Roodman GD, Galson 
DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer 
Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 5117 Centre Avenue, 
Research Pavilion, Room 1.19b, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. fw2@iu.edu

Measles virus plays an important role as an environmental factor in the 
pathogenesis of Paget's disease (PD). Previous studies have shown that IL-6 is 
increased in the bone marrow of Paget's patients and that measles virus 
nucleocapsid protein (MVNP) induces IL-6 secretion by pagetic osteoclasts. 
Further, IL-6 plays a critical role in the development of pagetic osteoclasts 
and bone lesions induced by PD, but the mechanisms regulating IL-6 production by 
MVNP remain unclear. Our current studies revealed that MVNP expression in 
osteoclast precursors down-regulated Sirt1 mRNA and protein, a negative 
regulator of NF-κB activity, which is a key factor for IL-6 expression. MVNP 
expression in NIH3T3 cells also elevated Il-6 transcription and impaired the 
expression of Sirt1 mRNA both under basal conditions and upon activation of the 
Sirt1 upstream regulator FoxO3 by LY294002 (a PI3K/AKT inhibitor). Luciferase 
activity assays showed that constitutively active FoxO3 abolished the repressive 
effect of MVNP on reporters driven by either FoxO3 response elements or the 
Sirt1 promoter. Further, protein stability assays revealed that FoxO3 was 
degraded more rapidly in MVNP-expressing cells than in control cells following 
the addition of cycloheximide. Similarly, co-transfection of MVNP and FoxO3 into 
HEK293 cells demonstrated that MVNP decreased the protein levels of 
over-expressed FoxO3 in a dose-dependent manner. Treatment with the proteasome 
inhibitor, MG132, blocked the MVNP-triggered decrease of FoxO3, and the 
treatment with the serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitor, calyculin A, revealed 
that MVNP increased phosphorylation of FoxO3. Further, over-expression of Sirt1 
or treatment with the Sirt1 activator resveratrol blocked the increase in Il-6 
transcription by MVNP. Finally, resveratrol reduced the numbers of TRAP positive 
multi-nuclear cells in bone marrow cultures from TRAP-MVNP transgenic mice to 
wild type levels. These results indicate that MVNP decreases FoxO3/Sirt1 
signaling to enhance the levels of IL-6, which in part mediate MVNP's 
contribution to the development of Paget's disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.12.007
PMCID: PMC3552041
PMID: 23262029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]