1. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1026-37. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200026. Epub 2012
 Dec 26.

Mnk1 and 2 are dispensable for T cell development and activation but important 
for the pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Gorentla BK(1), Krishna S, Shin J, Inoue M, Shinohara ML, Grayson JM, Fukunaga 
R, Zhong XP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

T cell development and activation are usually accompanied by expansion and 
production of numerous proteins that require active translation. The eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) binds to the 5' cap structure of mRNA 
and is critical for cap-dependent translational initiation. It has been 
hypothesized that MAPK-interacting kinase 1 and 2 (Mnk1/2) promote cap-dependent 
translation by phosphorylating eIF4E at serine 209 (S209). Pharmacologic studies 
using inhibitors have suggested that Mnk1/2 have important roles in T cells. 
However, genetic evidence supporting such conclusions is lacking. Moreover, the 
signaling pathways that regulate Mnk1/2 in T cells remain unclear. We 
demonstrate that TCR engagement activates Mnk1/2 in primary T cells. Such 
activation is dependent on Ras-Erk1/2 signaling and is inhibited by 
diacylglycerol kinases α and ζ. Mnk1/2 double deficiency in mice abolishes 
TCR-induced eIF4E S209 phosphorylation, indicating their absolute requirement 
for eIF4E S209 phosphorylation. However, Mnk1/2 double deficiency does not 
affect the development of conventional αβ T cells, regulatory T cells, or NKT 
cells. Furthermore, T cell activation, in vivo primary and memory CD8 T cell 
responses to microbial infection, and NKT cell cytokine production were not 
obviously altered by Mnk1/2 deficiency. Although Mnk1/2 deficiency causes 
decreased IL-17 and IFN-γ production by CD4 T cells following immunization of 
mice with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein peptide in complete Freund's 
adjuvant, correlating with milder experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
scores, it does not affect Th cell differentiation in vitro. Together, these 
data suggest that Mnk1/2 has a minimal role in T cell development and activation 
but may regulate non-T cell lineages to control Th1 and Th17 differentiation in 
vivo.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200026
PMCID: PMC3552100
PMID: 23269249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]