1. Respir Care. 2013 Jan;58(1):123-41. doi: 10.4187/respcare.01963.

Hyperoxic acute lung injury.

Kallet RH(1), Matthay MA.

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Care Services, Department of Anesthesia, University of 
California, San Francisco at San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, 
California 94110, USA. rich.kallet@ucsf.edu

Prolonged breathing of very high F(IO(2)) (F(IO(2)) â‰¥ 0.9) uniformly causes 
severe hyperoxic acute lung injury (HALI) and, without a reduction of F(IO(2)), 
is usually fatal. The severity of HALI is directly proportional to P(O(2)) 
(particularly above 450 mm Hg, or an F(IO(2)) of 0.6) and exposure duration. 
Hyperoxia produces extraordinary amounts of reactive O(2) species that 
overwhelms natural anti-oxidant defenses and destroys cellular structures 
through several pathways. Genetic predisposition has been shown to play an 
important role in HALI among animals, and some genetics-based epidemiologic 
research suggests that this may be true for humans as well. Clinically, the risk 
of HALI likely occurs when F(IO(2)) exceeds 0.7, and may become problematic when 
F(IO(2)) exceeds 0.8 for an extended period of time. Both high-stretch 
mechanical ventilation and hyperoxia potentiate lung injury and may promote 
pulmonary infection. During the 1960s, confusion regarding the incidence and 
relevance of HALI largely reflected such issues as the primitive control of 
F(IO(2)), the absence of PEEP, and the fact that at the time both ALI and 
ventilator-induced lung injury were unknown. The advent of PEEP and precise 
control over F(IO(2)), as well as lung-protective ventilation, and other 
adjunctive therapies for severe hypoxemia, has greatly reduced the risk of HALI 
for the vast majority of patients requiring mechanical ventilation in the 21st 
century. However, a subset of patients with very severe ARDS requiring hyperoxic 
therapy is at substantial risk for developing HALI, therefore justifying the use 
of such adjunctive therapies.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.01963
PMCID: PMC3915523
PMID: 23271823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have disclosed no conflicts of 
interest.