1. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2012 Jan;2(1):387-99. doi: 10.1159/000339669. 
Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Blood Concentrations of Homocysteine and Methylmalonic Acid among Demented and 
Non-Demented Swedish Elderly with and without Home Care Services and Vitamin 
B(12) Prescriptions.

Hagnelius NO(1), Wahlund LO, Schneede J, Nilsson TK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Örebro University Hospital, School of 
Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Total plasma homocysteine (tHcy) has been suggested as a 
risk factor of dementia. Our aim was to investigate potential differences in 
tHcy status in relation to the prescription of vitamin B(12) and dementia 
diagnosis. We examined whether vitamin B(12) prescriptions, a family history of 
dementia, or the need for home care service might be associated with tHcy 
values.
METHODS: A cross-sectional monocenter study comprising 926 consecutive subjects 
attending our Memory Care Unit was conducted.
RESULTS: Demented subjects being prescribed vitamin B(12) had higher serum 
vitamin B(12) (p = 0.025) but also higher tHcy (p < 0.001) and serum 
methylmalonate (p = 0.032), and lower serum folate (p < 0.001) than those who 
did not receive vitamin B(12) prescriptions. tHcy levels were significantly 
higher in non-demented subjects receiving home care service (p = 0.007). This 
group also had lower serum albumin (dementia: p < 0.001; non-dementia: p = 
0.004). There was no difference in renal function (estimated glomerular 
filtration rate) in demented or non-demented subjects with or without vitamin 
B(12) prescriptions (dementia with/without vitamin B(12) prescription: p = 
0.561; non-dementia with/without vitamin B(12) prescription: p = 0.710).
CONCLUSION: Despite vitamin B(12) prescriptions, demented subjects had higher 
tHcy and methylmalonate values. The elevated metabolite values could not be 
explained by differences in renal function. Thus, elderly subjects on vitamin 
B(12) prescription appear to have unmet nutritional needs.

DOI: 10.1159/000339669
PMCID: PMC3522456
PMID: 23277779