1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2013 Jan 8;6(1):1. doi: 10.1186/1754-6834-6-1.

Characterization and genomic analysis of kraft lignin biodegradation by the 
beta-proteobacterium Cupriavidus basilensis B-8.

Shi Y(1), Chai L, Tang C, Yang Z, Zhang H, Chen R, Chen Y, Zheng Y.

Author information:
(1)School of Metallurgical Science and Engineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410017, PR China. Liyuan.chai@yahoo.com.cn.

BACKGROUND: Lignin materials are abundant and among the most important potential 
sources for biofuel production. Development of an efficient lignin degradation 
process has considerable potential for the production of a variety of chemicals, 
including bioethanol. However, lignin degradation using current methods is 
inefficient. Given their immense environmental adaptability and biochemical 
versatility, bacterial could be used as a valuable tool for the rapid 
degradation of lignin. Kraft lignin (KL) is a polymer by-product of the pulp and 
paper industry resulting from alkaline sulfide treatment of lignocellulose, and 
it has been widely used for lignin-related studies.
RESULTS: Beta-proteobacterium Cupriavidus basilensis B-8 isolated from erosive 
bamboo slips displayed substantial KL degradation capability. With initial 
concentrations of 0.5-6 g L-1, at least 31.3% KL could be degraded in 7 days. 
The maximum degradation rate was 44.4% at the initial concentration of 2 g L-1. 
The optimum pH and temperature for KL degradation were 7.0 and 30°C, 
respectively. Manganese peroxidase (MnP) and laccase (Lac) demonstrated their 
greatest level of activity, 1685.3 U L-1 and 815.6 U L-1, at the third and 
fourth days, respectively. Many small molecule intermediates were formed during 
the process of KL degradation, as determined using GC-MS analysis. In order to 
perform metabolic reconstruction of lignin degradation in this bacterium, a 
draft genome sequence for C. basilensis B-8 was generated. Genomic analysis 
focused on the catabolic potential of this bacterium against several 
lignin-derived compounds. These analyses together with sequence comparisons 
predicted the existence of three major metabolic pathways: β-ketoadipate, phenol 
degradation, and gentisate pathways.
CONCLUSION: These results confirmed the capability of C. basilensis B-8 to 
promote KL degradation. Whole genomic sequencing and systematic analysis of the 
C. basilensis B-8 genome identified degradation steps and intermediates from 
this bacterial-mediated KL degradation method. Our findings provide a 
theoretical basis for research into the mechanisms of lignin degradation as well 
as a practical basis for biofuel production using lignin materials.

DOI: 10.1186/1754-6834-6-1
PMCID: PMC3560178
PMID: 23298573