1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52844. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052844. Epub 2013 Jan
3.

Critical roles of Myc-ODC axis in the cellular transformation induced by 
myeloproliferative neoplasm-associated JAK2 V617F mutant.

Funakoshi-Tago M(1), Sumi K, Kasahara T, Tago K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacology, Keio University, Tokyo, 
Japan. tago-mg@pha.keio.ac.jp

The acquired mutation (V617F) of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is observed in the 
majority of patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). In the screening 
of genes whose expression was induced by JAK2 (V617F), we found the significant 
induction of c-Myc mRNA expression mediated by STAT5 activation. Interestingly, 
GSK-3β was inactivated in transformed Ba/F3 cells by JAK2 (V617F), and this 
enhanced the protein expression of c-Myc. The enforced expression of c-Myc 
accelerated cell proliferation but failed to inhibit apoptotic cell death caused 
by growth factor deprivation; however, the inhibition of GSK-3β completely 
inhibited the apoptosis of cells expressing c-Myc. Strikingly, c-Myc T58A mutant 
exhibited higher proliferative activity in a growth-factor-independent manner; 
however, this mutant failed to induce apoptosis. In addition, knockdown of c-Myc 
significantly inhibited the proliferation of transformed cells by JAK2 (V617F), 
suggesting that c-Myc plays an important role in oncogenic activity of JAK2 
(V617F). Furthermore, JAK2 (V617F) induced the expression of a target gene of 
c-Myc, ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), known as the rate-limiting enzyme in 
polyamine biosynthesis. An ODC inhibitor, difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), 
prevented the proliferation of transformed cells by JAK2 (V617F). Importantly, 
administration of DFMO effectively delayed tumor formation in nude mice 
inoculated with transformed cells by JAK2 (V617F), resulting in prolonged 
survival; therefore, ODC expression through c-Myc is a critical step for JAK2 
(V617F)-induced transformation and DFMO could be used as effective therapy for 
MPNs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052844
PMCID: PMC3536786
PMID: 23300995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.