1. J Lipid Res. 2013 Mar;54(3):649-661. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M031195. Epub 2013 Jan
10.

Structural and functional analysis of APOA5 mutations identified in patients 
with severe hypertriglyceridemia.

Mendoza-Barberá E(1), Julve J(2), Nilsson SK(3), Lookene A(4), Martín-Campos 
JM(1), Roig R(1), Lechuga-Sancho AM(5), Sloan JH(6), Fuentes-Prior P(1), 
Blanco-Vaca F(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research (IIB) Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute for Biomedical Research (IIB) Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain; 
CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, 08017 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Medical Biosciences/Physiological Chemistry, Umeå University, 
SE90187, Sweden.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Tallinn Technical University, Tallinn 12618, 
Estonia.
(5)Unidad de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario Puerta del Mar, 
11009 Cádiz, Spain.
(6)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN 46285.
(7)Institute for Biomedical Research (IIB) Sant Pau, 08025 Barcelona, Spain; 
CIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, 08017 Barcelona, Spain; 
Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

During the diagnosis of three unrelated patients with severe 
hypertriglyceridemia, three APOA5 mutations [p.(Ser232_Leu235)del, p.Leu253Pro, 
and p.Asp332ValfsX4] were found without evidence of concomitant LPL, APOC2, or 
GPIHBP1 mutations. The molecular mechanisms by which APOA5 mutations result in 
severe hypertriglyceridemia remain poorly understood, and the functional 
impairment/s induced by these specific mutations was not obvious. Therefore, we 
performed a thorough structural and functional analysis that included follow-up 
of patients and their closest relatives, measurement of apoA-V serum 
concentrations, and sequencing of the APOA5 gene in 200 nonhyperlipidemic 
controls. Further, we cloned, overexpressed, and purified both wild-type and 
mutant apoA-V variants and characterized their capacity to activate LPL. The 
interactions of recombinant wild-type and mutated apoA-V variants with liposomes 
of different composition, heparin, LRP1, sortilin, and SorLA/LR11 were also 
analyzed. Finally, to explore the possible structural consequences of these 
mutations, we developed a three-dimensional model of full-length, lipid-free 
human apoA-V. A complex, wide array of impairments was found in each of the 
three mutants, suggesting that the specific residues affected are critical 
structural determinants for apoA-V function in lipoprotein metabolism and, 
therefore, that these APOA5 mutations are a direct cause of 
hypertriglyceridemia.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M031195
PMCID: PMC3617940
PMID: 23307945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]