1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053540. Epub 2013 Jan
4.

Musashi-1 post-transcriptionally enhances phosphotyrosine-binding 
domain-containing m-Numb protein expression in regenerating gastric mucosa.

Takahashi T(1), Suzuki H, Imai T, Shibata S, Tabuchi Y, Tsuchimoto K, Okano H, 
Hibi T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

Expression of concern in
    PLoS One. 2023 Jan 11;18(1):e0278798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0278798.

OBJECTIVE: Upregulation of the RNA-binding protein Musashi-1 (Msi1) has been 
shown to occur in rat gastric corpus mucosa after ethanol-induced mucosal 
injury. However, there is no direct evidence linking Msi1 with gastric 
regeneration. We examined the process of tissue repair after acute gastric 
mucosal injury with Msi1-knock-out (KO) mice to clarify the role of Msi1 and 
Msi1-dependent regulation of m-Numb expression in regenerating gastric mucosa.
METHODS: Acute gastric injury was induced in Msi1-KO and wild-type ICR mice by 
administering absolute ethanol. Expression of the splicing variants of m-Numb 
mRNA and protein in the gastric mucosa were analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR and 
western blotting, respectively.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that phosphotyrosine-binding domain-containing m-Numb 
expression was significantly upregulated at both the mRNA and protein levels in 
wild-type mice at 3 h after ethanol-induced acute gastric injury. In contrast, 
in Msi1-KO mice, the m-Numb protein was expressed weakly, and was associated 
with delayed regeneration of the injured gastric mucosal epithelium. In the 
Msi1-KO mouse, the ratio of m-Numb mRNA to total m-Numb mRNA in the heavy 
polysome fractions was lower than that in the wild-type mouse. Further, we 
showed that m-Numb-enhancement in gastric mucous cells induced the expression of 
prostate stem cell antigen and metallothionein-2. Under the m-Numb enhancing 
condition, the gastric cells exhibited enhanced cell proliferation and were 
significantly more resistant to H(2)O(2)-induced cell death than control cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Msi1-dependent post-transcriptional enhancement of m-Numb is 
crucial in gastric epithelial regeneration.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053540
PMCID: PMC3537613
PMID: 23308249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.