1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr 15;22(8):1525-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt003. Epub 2013
Jan  9.

Enzyme replacement therapy rescues weakness and improves muscle pathology in 
mice with X-linked myotubular myopathy.

Lawlor MW(1), Armstrong D, Viola MG, Widrick JJ, Meng H, Grange RW, Childers MK, 
Hsu CP, O'Callaghan M, Pierson CR, Buj-Bello A, Beggs AH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Program in Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan 
Disease Research, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.

No effective treatment exists for patients with X-linked myotubular myopathy 
(XLMTM), a fatal congenital muscle disease caused by deficiency of the lipid 
phosphatase, myotubularin. The Mtm1δ4 and Mtm1 p.R69C mice model severely and 
moderately symptomatic XLMTM, respectively, due to differences in the degree of 
myotubularin deficiency. Contractile function of intact extensor digitorum 
longus (EDL) and soleus muscles from Mtm1δ4 mice, which produce no myotubularin, 
is markedly impaired. Contractile forces generated by chemically skinned single 
fiber preparations from Mtm1δ4 muscle were largely preserved, indicating that 
weakness was largely due to impaired excitation contraction coupling. Mtm1 
p.R69C mice, which produce small amounts of myotubularin, showed impaired 
contractile function only in EDL muscles. Short-term replacement of myotubularin 
with a prototypical targeted protein replacement agent (3E10Fv-MTM1) in Mtm1δ4 
mice improved contractile function and muscle pathology. These promising 
findings suggest that even low levels of myotubularin protein replacement can 
improve the muscle weakness and reverse the pathology that characterizes XLMTM.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt003
PMCID: PMC3605830
PMID: 23307925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]