1. Int J Exp Pathol. 2013 Feb;94(1):56-64. doi: 10.1111/iep.12006.

Premature death of TDP-43 (A315T) transgenic mice due to gastrointestinal 
complications prior to development of full neurological symptoms of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

Esmaeili MA(1), Panahi M, Yadav S, Hennings L, Kiaei M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Developmental Sciences, Center for 
Translational Neuroscience, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, USA.

Abnormal distribution, modification and aggregation of transactivation response 
DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) are the hallmarks of multiple neurodegenerative 
diseases, especially frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive 
inclusions (FTLD-U) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Transgenic mouse 
lines overexpressing wild-type or mutant TDP-43 exhibit ALS-like symptom, motor 
abnormalities and early paralysis followed by death. Reports on lifespan and 
phenotypic behaviour in Prp-TDP-43 (A315T) vary, and these animals are not fully 
characterized. Although it has been proposed that the approximate 20% loss of 
motor neurons at end stage is responsible for the severe weakness and death in 
TDP-43 mice, this degree of neurologic damage appears insufficient to cause 
death. Hence we studied these mice to further characterize and determine the 
reason for the death. Our characterization of TDP-43 transgenic mice showed that 
these mice develop ALS-like symptoms that later become compounded by 
gastrointestinal (GI) complications that resulted in death. This is the first 
report of a set of pathological evidence in the GI track that is strong 
indicator for the cause of death of Prp-hTDP-43 (A315T) transgenic mice.

© 2012 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2012 
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

DOI: 10.1111/iep.12006
PMCID: PMC3575874
PMID: 23317354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]