1. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013 Sep;37(9):1221-9. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2012.220. Epub 2013
 Jan 15.

Sex-specific effects of weight-affecting gene variants in a life course 
perspective--The HUNT Study, Norway.

Kvaløy K(1), Kulle B, Romundstad P, Holmen TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and General Practice, HUNT Research Center, 
Faculty of Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway.

OBJECTIVE: The impact of previously identified genetic variants directly or 
indirectly associated with obesity, were investigated at birth, adolescence and 
adulthood to provide knowledge concerning timing and mechanisms of obesity 
susceptibility with focus on sex differences.
DESIGN: Twenty four previously identified obesity- and eating disorder 
susceptibility loci were tested for association with adiposity traits at birth 
(ponderal index (PI)), adolescence and young adulthood (body mass index (BMI), 
waist circumference (WC) and waist-hip ratio (WHR)) in 1782 individuals from the 
HUNT study. Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) were evaluated individually 
and by haplotype sliding-window approach for windows50 kb (near-MC4R, FTO and 
near-BDNF). The analyses were performed on the total and sex stratified samples.
RESULTS: The most substantial effect on BMI was observed for the near-MC4R 
variants at adolescence and adulthood (adjusted P-values in adolescence: 0.002 
and 0.003 for rs17782313 and rs571312, respectively). The same variants showed 
inverse association with PI in males (adjusted P-values: 0.019-0.036). 
Furthermore, significant effects were observed at adolescence with BMI for the 
near-KCTD15 variant (rs11084753) (adjusted P=0.038) in the combined sample. The 
near-INSIG2 (rs7566605) was significantly associated to WHR in males and 
near-BDNF (rs925946) in the combined sample (adjusted P=0.027 and P=0.033, 
respectively). The OPRD1 locus was associated to BMI and WC in males both at 
adolescence and adulthood with highest effect in adults (adjusted P=0.058). 
Interaction with sex was identified for near-MC4R, OPRD1, COMT, near-BDNF and 
DRD2.
CONCLUSIONS: Most obesity susceptibility variants show stronger effect at 
adolescence than at birth and adulthood with a clear sex-specific effect at some 
loci. The near-MC4R locus exhibit inverse effect on weight at birth in boys 
compared with findings at adolescence and adulthood. Some variants less known 
for obesity-susceptibility such as OPRD1 were found to be associated to weight 
with strongest effects in males.

DOI: 10.1038/ijo.2012.220
PMID: 23318717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]