1. Aging Cell. 2013 Apr;12(2):237-46. doi: 10.1111/acel.12046. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

The role of lipid-related genes, aging-related processes, and environment in 
healthspan.

Kulminski AM(1), Culminskaya I, Arbeev KG, Ukraintseva SV, Stallard E, Arbeeva 
L, Yashin AI.

Author information:
(1)Center for Population Health and Aging, Duke University, Trent Hall, Room 
002, Box 90408, Durham, NC 27708, USA. alexander.kulminski@duke.edu

The inherent complexity of aging-related traits can temper progress in 
unraveling the genetic origins of healthspan. We focus on two generations in the 
Framingham Heart Study, the original (FHS) and offspring (FHSO) cohorts, to 
determine whether aging-related processes in changing environments can 
substantially impact the role of lipid-related genes discovered in candidate 
gene (the apolipoprotein E (APOE) e2/3/4 polymorphism) and genome-wide (the APOB 
rs1042034 (C/T)) studies, in regulation of total cholesterol (TC) and onset of 
cardiovascular disease (CVD). We demonstrate that the APOE e4 allele and APOB CC 
genotype can play detrimental, neutral, and protective sex-specific roles in the 
etiology of CVD at different ages and in different environments. We document 
antagonistic roles for the e4 allele in the onset of CVD characterized by 
detrimental effects at younger ages (RR≤ 75 years = 1.49, P = 7.5 × 10(-4) ) and 
protective effects at older ages (RR76+years = 0.77, P = 0.044) for FHS 
participants. We found that disregarding the role of aging erroneously nullifies 
the significant effects of the e4 allele in this sample (RR = 0.92, P = 0.387). 
The leading biogenetic pathways mediating genetic effects on CVD may be more 
relevant to lipid metabolism for APOB than APOE. Aging-related processes can 
modulate the strength of genetic associations with TC in the same individuals at 
different chronological ages. We found substantial differences in the effects of 
the same APOE and APOB alleles on CVD and TC across generations. The results 
suggest that aging-related processes in changing environments may play key roles 
in the genetics of healthspan. Detailed systemic integrative analyses may 
substantially advance the progress.

© 2013 The Authors Aging Cell © 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12046
PMCID: PMC3602307
PMID: 23320904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]