1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):3228-39. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt001. Epub
2013  Jan 16.

Nucleophosmin mutations alter its nucleolar localization by impairing 
G-quadruplex binding at ribosomal DNA.

Chiarella S(1), De Cola A, Scaglione GL, Carletti E, Graziano V, Barcaroli D, Lo 
Sterzo C, Di Matteo A, Di Ilio C, Falini B, Arcovito A, De Laurenzi V, Federici 
L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Sciences, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, 00185 
Rome, Italy.

Nucleophosmin (NPM1) is an abundant nucleolar protein implicated in ribosome 
maturation and export, centrosome duplication and response to stress stimuli. 
NPM1 is the most frequently mutated gene in acute myeloid leukemia. Mutations at 
the C-terminal domain led to variant proteins that aberrantly and stably 
translocate to the cytoplasm. We have previously shown that NPM1 C-terminal 
domain binds with high affinity G-quadruplex DNA. Here, we investigate the 
structural determinants of NPM1 nucleolar localization. We show that NPM1 
interacts with several G-quadruplex regions found in ribosomal DNA, both in 
vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the most common leukemic NPM1 variant completely 
loses this activity. This is the consequence of G-quadruplex-binding domain 
destabilization, as mutations aimed at refolding the leukemic variant also 
result in rescuing the G-quadruplex-binding activity and nucleolar localization. 
Finally, we show that treatment of cells with a G-quadruplex selective ligand 
results in wild-type NPM1 dislocation from nucleoli into nucleoplasm. In 
conclusion, this work establishes a direct correlation between NPM1 G-quadruplex 
binding at rDNA and its nucleolar localization, which is impaired in the acute 
myeloid leukemia-associated protein variants.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt001
PMCID: PMC3597674
PMID: 23328624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]