1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53613. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053613. Epub 2013 Jan
11.

Exomic sequencing of immune-related genes reveals novel candidate variants 
associated with alopecia universalis.

Lee S(1), Paik SH, Kim HJ, Ryu HH, Cha S, Jo SJ, Eun HC, Seo JS, Kim JI, Kwon 
OS.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute (GMI), Medical Research Center, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea.

Alopecia areata (AA) is a common autoimmune disorder mostly presented as round 
patches of hair loss and subclassified into alopecia totalis/alopecia 
universalis (AT/AU) based on the area of alopecia. Although AA is relatively 
common, only 5% of AA patients progress to AT/AU, which affect the whole scalp 
and whole body respectively. To determine genetic determinants of this orphan 
disease, we undertook whole-exome sequencing of 6 samples from AU patients, and 
26 variants in immune-related genes were selected as candidates. When an 
additional 14 AU samples were genotyped for these candidates, 6 of them remained 
at the level of significance in comparison with 155 Asian controls 
(p<1.92Ã—10(-3)). Linkage disequilibrium was observed between some of the most 
significant SNPs, including rs41559420 of HLA-DRB5 (p<0.001, OR 44.57) and 
rs28362679 of BTNL2 (p<0.001, OR 30.21). While BTNL2 was reported as a general 
susceptibility gene of AA previously, HLA-DRB5 has not been implicated in AA. In 
addition, we found several genetic variants in novel genes (HLA-DMB, TLR1, and 
PMS2) and discovered an additional locus on HLA-A, a known susceptibility gene 
of AA. This study provides further evidence for the association of previously 
reported genes with AA and novel findings such as HLA-DRB5, which might 
represent a hidden culprit gene for AU.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053613
PMCID: PMC3543254
PMID: 23326468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: JS is a PLOS ONE Editorial 
Board member. JS is a consultant for Macrogen and Psoma Therapeutics, and JK is 
a consultant for Psoma Therapeutics. This does not alter the authors' adherence 
to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.