1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2013 Jan 16;4(1):84-8. doi: 10.1021/cn300127h. Epub 2012
Oct  1.

Chronic SSRI treatment exacerbates serotonin deficiency in humanized Tph2 mutant 
mice.

Siesser WB(1), Sachs BD, Ramsey AJ, Sotnikova TD, Beaulieu JM, Zhang X, Caron 
MG, Gainetdinov RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, 
United States.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are a major class of 
antidepressants that act by blocking inward transport of serotonin (5-HT) into 
presynaptic neurons mediated by the serotonin transporter (SERT). Both reuptake 
and ongoing synthesis are essential in supporting intraneuronal serotonin 
concentrations in serotonergic neurons. A rare mutation in tryptophan 
hydroxylase 2 (Tph2), the rate limiting enzyme for 5-HT synthesis, was 
identified in several patients with major depression, and knock-in mice 
expressing the analogous mutation (R439H Tph2 KI) show 80% reduction in 5-HT 
synthesis and tissue levels. Chronic treatment with SSRIs (fluoxetine and 
paroxetine) resulted in a dramatic further depletion of 5-HT tissue levels in 
R439H Tph2 KI mice (down to 1-3% of wild type levels) while having little 
effects in wild-type controls. Treatment with the 5-HT precursor 
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) restored 5-HT tissue content in mutant mice, and 
cotreatment with 5-HTP and fluoxetine essentially prevented the depleting effect 
of a chronic SSRI. These data demonstrate that chronic SSRI treatment could 
further exacerbate the 5-HT deficiency in Tph2 mutation carriers, and this can 
be prevented by 5-HTP supplementation.

DOI: 10.1021/cn300127h
PMCID: PMC3547473
PMID: 23336047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]