1. J Neurosci Res. 2013 Apr;91(4):593-601. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23179. Epub 2013 Jan 
18.

Effects of blast-induced neurotrauma on the nucleus accumbens.

Sajja VS(1), Galloway M, Ghoddoussi F, Kepsel A, VandeVord P.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic and State 
University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.

Blast-induced neurotrauma (BINT) leads to deterioration at the cellular level, 
with adverse cognitive and behavioral outcomes. The nucleus accumbens (NAC) 
plays an important role in reward, addiction, aggression, and fear pathways. To 
identify the molecular changes and pathways affected at an acute stage in the 
NAC, this study focused on a time course analysis to determine the effects of 
blast on neurochemical and apoptotic pathways. By using a rodent model of BINT, 
acute damage to the NAC was assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
(¹H-MRS), high-performance liquid chromatography, immunohistochemistry, and 
Western blotting. The results demonstrated ongoing neuroprotective effects from 
elevated levels of Bcl-2, an antiapoptotic marker, at 24 hr and N-acetyl 
aspartate glutamate at 48 hr following blast exposure. Selective loss of 
serotonin levels at 24 hr, increased levels of inflammation (elevated 
glycerophosphocholine at 48 and 72 hr), and increased levels of glial fibrillary 
acidic protein were also observed at 24 and 48 hr, leading to disruptive energy 
status. Furthermore, active cell death was indicated by the increased levels of 
the apoptotic marker Bax, decreased actin levels, and signs excitotoxicity 
(glutamate/creatine). In addition, increased levels of caspase-3, an apoptotic 
marker, confirm active cell death in NAC. It is hypothesized that blast 
overpressure causes inflammation and neurochemical changes that trigger 
apoptosis in NAC. This cascade of events may lead to stress-related behavioral 
outcomes and psychiatric sequelae.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23179
PMID: 23335267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]