1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 May;48(5):619-25. doi:
10.1165/rcmb.2012-0371OC.

Fine characterization of the recurrent c.1584+18672A>G deep-intronic mutation in 
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene.

Costantino L(1), Rusconi D, Soldà G, Seia M, Paracchini V, Porcaro L, Asselta R, 
Colombo C, Duga S.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a 
Carattere Scientifico Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Splicing mutations account for approximately 12% of the 1,890 cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutations described in cystic 
fibrosis (CF). However, their impact on pre-mRNA processing frequently remains 
unclear. An interesting opportunity to study CFTR transcripts in vivo involves 
the use of RNA from nasal brushings. Through this approach we previously 
identified a deep-intronic mutation (c.1584+18672A>G) that activates a 104-base 
pair (bp) out-of-frame pseudoexon by creating a donor splice site. The screening 
of 230 patients with CF identified c.1584+18672A>G in three additional 
individuals, demonstrating that it is a recurrent, and potentially overlooked, 
mutation among Italian patients. Haplotype analysis suggests that it originated 
from at least two independent events. To characterize the mutation further, a 
genomic region, including the activated pseudoexon and surrounding intronic 
sequences, was cloned into an expression vector and transfected into HeLa cells. 
RT-PCR analysis identified two alternative splicing products, produced by the 
activation of two different cryptic acceptor splice sites. One included the 
104-bp pseudoexon (78.7% of transcripts), and the other led to the inclusion of 
a 65-bp pseudoexon (21.3% of mRNAs). The allele-specific measurement of 
wild-type and aberrant splicings from the nasal-brushing RNA of the three 
probands with genotype F508del/c.1584+18672A>G demonstrated: (1) a low level of 
pseudoexon inclusion in the F508del transcript (not containing the splicing 
mutation); (2) residual wild-type splicing in the c.1584+18672A>G mRNA; (3) the 
degradation of aberrant transcripts; and (4) the relative strength of the 
different cryptic splice sites. Interestingly, the residual wild-type splicing 
detected in transcripts bearing the c.1584+18672A>G mutation correlates well 
with the milder clinical phenotype of patients.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0371OC
PMID: 23349053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]