1. Kidney Int. 2013 Apr;83(4):733-40. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.449. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Common genetic variants of the human uromodulin gene regulate transcription and 
predict plasma uric acid levels.

Han J(1), Liu Y, Rao F, Nievergelt CM, O'Connor DT, Wang X, Liu L, Bu D, Liang 
Y, Wang F, Zhang L, Zhang H, Chen Y, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2013 Aug;84(2):410-1. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.162.
    Kidney Int. 2013 Aug;84(2):411-3. doi: 10.1038/ki.2013.164.

Uromodulin (UMOD) genetic variants cause familial juvenile hyperuricemic 
nephropathy, characterized by hyperuricemia with decreased renal excretion of 
UMOD and uric acid, suggesting a role for UMOD in the regulation of plasma uric 
acid. To determine this, we screened common variants across the UMOD locus in 
one community-based Chinese population of 1000 individuals and the other 
population from 642 American twins and siblings of European and Hispanic 
ancestry. Transcriptional activity of promoter variants was estimated in 
luciferase reporter plasmids transfected into HEK-293 cells and mIMCD3 cells. In 
the primary Chinese population, we found that carriers of the GCC haplotype had 
higher plasma uric acid, and three promoter variants were associated with plasma 
uric acid. UMOD promoter variants displayed reciprocal effects on urine uric 
acid excretion and plasma uric acid concentration, suggesting a primary effect 
on renal tubular handling of urate. These UMOD genetic marker-on-trait 
associations for uric acid were replicated in the independent American cohort. 
Site-directed mutagenesis at trait-associated UMOD promoter variants altered 
promoter activity in transfected luciferase reporter plasmids. Thus, UMOD 
promoter variants seem to initiate a cascade of transcriptional and biochemical 
changes influencing UMOD secretion, leading to altered plasma uric acid levels.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2012.449
PMCID: PMC3687544
PMID: 23344472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure All authors participated in the work, 
and have seen the final results; none has conflict of interest. The work was 
supported by A grant of the Chinese 985 project (NCET-10-0186/BMU 20110156). The 
results presented in this paper have not been published previously in whole or 
part.