1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053768. Epub 2013 Jan
16.

Polymorphisms in the gene regions of the adaptor complex LAMTOR2/LAMTOR3 and 
their association with breast cancer risk.

De Araujo ME(1), Erhart G, Buck K, Müller-Holzner E, Hubalek M, Fiegl H, Campa 
D, Canzian F, Eilber U, Chang-Claude J, Coassin S, Haun M, Kedenko L, Paulweber 
B, Reitsamer R, Himmel I, Flesch-Janys D, Lamina C, Kronenberg F, Huber LA, 
Kloss-Brandstätter A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The late endosomal LAMTOR complex serves as a convergence point for 
both the RAF/MEK/ERK and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways. Interestingly, both of 
these signalling cascades play a significant role in the aetiology of breast 
cancer. Our aim was to address the possible role of genetic polymorphisms in 
LAMTOR2 and LAMTOR3 as genetic risk factors for breast cancer.
METHODOLOGY/RESULTS: We sequenced the exons and exon-intron boundaries of 
LAMTOR2 (p14) and LAMTOR3 (MP1) in 50 prospectively collected pairs of cancerous 
tissue and blood samples from breast cancer patients and compared their genetic 
variability. We found one single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in LAMTOR2 
(rs7541) and two SNPs in LAMTOR3 (rs2298735 and rs148972953) in both tumour and 
blood samples, but no somatic mutations in cancerous tissues. In addition, we 
genotyped all three SNPs in 296 samples from the Risk Prediction of Breast 
Cancer Metastasis Study and found evidence of a genetic association between 
rs148972953 and oestrogen (ER) and progesterone receptor negative status (PR) 
(ER: OR = 3.60 (1.15-11.28); PR: OR = 4.27 (1.43-12.72)). However, when we 
additionally genotyped rs148972953 in the MARIE study including 2,715 breast 
cancer cases and 5,216 controls, we observed neither a difference in genotype 
frequencies between patients and controls nor was the SNP associated with ER or 
PR. Finally, all three SNPs were equally frequent in breast cancer samples and 
female participants (n = 640) of the population-based SAPHIR Study.
CONCLUSIONS: The identified polymorphisms in LAMTOR2 and LAMTOR3 do not seem to 
play a relevant role in breast cancer. Our work does not exclude a role of other 
not yet identified SNPs or that the here annotated polymorphism may in fact play 
a relevant role in other diseases. Our results underscore the importance of 
replication in association studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053768
PMCID: PMC3547070
PMID: 23341997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Anita Kloss-Brandstätter 
and Florian Kronenberg are PLOS ONE Editorial Board members. The study was 
financially supported by Tiroler-Landeskrankenanstalten-GmbH (TILAK). This does 
not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data 
and materials.