1. Synapse. 2013 Jun;67(6):265-79. doi: 10.1002/syn.21637. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Deletion of the NMDA-NR1 receptor subunit gene in the mouse nucleus accumbens 
attenuates apomorphine-induced dopamine D1 receptor trafficking and acoustic 
startle behavior.

Glass MJ(1), Robinson DC, Waters E, Pickel VM.

Author information:
(1)Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York 
10065, USA. mjg2003@med.cornell.edu

The nucleus accumbens (Acb) contains subpopulations of neurons defined by their 
receptor content and potential involvement in sensorimotor gating and other 
behaviors that are dysfunctional in schizophrenia. In Acb neurons, the NMDA NR1 
(NR1) subunit is coexpressed not only with the dopamine D1 receptor (D1R), but 
also with the µ-opioid receptor (µ-OR), which mediates certain behaviors that 
are adversely impacted by schizophrenia. The NMDA-NR1 subunit has been suggested 
to play a role in the D1R trafficking and behavioral dysfunctions resulting from 
systemic administration of apomorphine, a D1R and dopamine D2 receptor agonist 
that impacts prepulse inhibition to auditory-evoked startle (AS). Together, this 
evidence suggests that the NMDA receptor may regulate D1R trafficking in Acb 
neurons, including those expressing µ-OR, in animals exposed to auditory startle 
and apomorphine. We tested this hypothesis by combining spatial-temporal gene 
deletion technology, dual labeling immunocytochemistry, and behavioral analysis. 
Deleting NR1 in Acb neurons prevented the increase in the dendritic density of 
plasma membrane D1Rs in single D1R and dual (D1R and µ-OR) labeled dendrites in 
the Acb in response to apomorphine and AS. Deleting NR1 also attenuated the 
decrease in AS induced by apomorphine. In the absence of apomorphine and 
startle, deletion of Acb NR1 diminished social interaction, without affecting 
novel object recognition, or open field activity. These results suggest that NR1 
expression in the Acb is essential for apomorphine-induced D1R surface 
trafficking, as well as auditory startle and social behaviors that are impaired 
in multiple psychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.21637
PMCID: PMC3894854
PMID: 23345061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]