1. Chem Phys Lipids. 2013 Feb-Mar;167-168:21-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2013.01.002. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Steric analysis of epoxyalcohol and trihydroxy derivatives of 
9-hydroperoxy-linoleic acid from hematin and enzymatic synthesis.

Thomas CP(1), Boeglin WE, Garcia-Diaz Y, O'Donnell VB, Brash AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232-6602, USA.

We characterize the allylic epoxyalcohols and their trihydroxy hydrolysis 
products generated from 9R- and 9S-hydroperoxy-octadecenoic acid (HPODE) under 
non-enzymatic conditions, reaction with hematin and subsequent acid hydrolysis, 
and enzymatic conditions, incubation with Beta vulgaris containing a 
hydroperoxide isomerase and epoxide hydrolase. The products were resolved by 
HPLC and the regio and stereo-chemistry of the transformations were determined 
through a combination of (1)H NMR and GC-MS analysis of dimethoxypropane 
derivatives. Four trihydroxy isomers were identified upon mild acid hydrolysis 
of 9S,10S-trans-epoxy-11E-13S-hydroxyoctadecenoate: 9S,10R,13S, 9S,12R,13S, 
9S,10S,13S and 9S,12S,13S-trihydroxy-octadecenoic acids, in the ratio 
40:26:22:12. We also identified a prominent δ-ketol rearrangement product from 
the hydrolysis as mainly the 9-hydroxy-10E-13-oxo isomer. Short incubation (5 
min) of 9R- and 9S-HPODE with B. vulgaris extract yielded the 9R- and 
9S-hydroxy-10E-12R,13S-cis-epoxy products respectively. Longer incubation (60 
min) gave one specific hydrolysis product via epoxide hydrolase, the 
9R/S,12S,13S-trihydroxyoctadecenoate. These studies provide a practical approach 
for the isolation and characterization of allylic epoxy alcohol and trihydroxy 
products using a combination of HPLC, GC-MS and (1)H NMR.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2013.01.002
PMCID: PMC3678760
PMID: 23352713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]