1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053190. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

FLT3 mutations in early T-cell precursor ALL characterize a stem cell like 
leukemia and imply the clinical use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Neumann M(1), Coskun E, Fransecky L, Mochmann LH, Bartram I, Sartangi NF, Heesch 
S, Gökbuget N, Schwartz S, Brandts C, Schlee C, Haas R, Dührsen U, Griesshammer 
M, Döhner H, Ehninger G, Burmeister T, Blau O, Thiel E, Hoelzer D, Hofmann WK, 
Baldus CD.

Author information:
(1)Charité, University Hospital Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Department of 
Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ETP-ALL) has been 
identified as high-risk subgroup of acute T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) with 
a high rate of FLT3-mutations in adults. To unravel the underlying 
pathomechanisms and the clinical course we assessed molecular alterations and 
clinical characteristics in a large cohort of ETP-ALL (n = 68) in comparison to 
non-ETP T-ALL adult patients. Interestingly, we found a high rate of 
FLT3-mutations in ETP-ALL samples (n = 24, 35%). Furthermore, FLT3 mutated 
ETP-ALL was characterized by a specific immunophenotype (CD2+/CD5-/CD13+/CD33-), 
a distinct gene expression pattern (aberrant expression of IGFBP7, WT1, GATA3) 
and mutational status (absence of NOTCH1 mutations and a low frequency, 21%, of 
clonal TCR rearrangements). The observed low GATA3 expression and high WT1 
expression in combination with lack of NOTCH1 mutations and a low rate of TCR 
rearrangements point to a leukemic transformation at the pluripotent 
prothymocyte stage in FLT3 mutated ETP-ALL. The clinical outcome in ETP-ALL 
patients was poor, but encouraging in those patients with allogeneic stem cell 
transplantation (3-year OS: 74%). To further explore the efficacy of targeted 
therapies, we demonstrate that T-ALL cell lines transfected with FLT3 expression 
constructs were particularly sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In 
conclusion, FLT3 mutated ETP-ALL defines a molecular distinct stem cell like 
leukemic subtype. These data warrant clinical studies with the implementation of 
FLT3 inhibitors in addition to early allogeneic stem cell transplantation for 
this high risk subgroup.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053190
PMCID: PMC3554732
PMID: 23359050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: TKI258 was a kind gift from 
Novartis (Basel, Switzerland). There are no further patents, products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authors‚ 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.