1. Mol Vis. 2013;19:85-99. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Involvement of corneal epithelial cells in the Th17 response in an in vitro 
bacterial inflammation model.

Arranz-Valsero I(1), Schulze U, Contreras-Ruiz L, García-Posadas L, López-García 
A, Paulsen F, Diebold Y.

Author information:
(1)Ocular Surface Group-IOBA, University of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.

PURPOSE: Staphylococcus aureus (SA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) are frequent 
causes of bacterial keratitis, an inflammatory process that can lead to vision 
loss. We used a human corneal epithelial (HCE) cell line to study the Th17 
inflammatory pathway, including interleukin (IL-) 6, IL-17, and associated 
receptors, in response to stimulation by SA and PA culture supernatants.
METHODS: Cells of the HCE cell line were exposed to either SA or PA supernatants 
in dilutions of 1:100 or 1:50, or to human recombinant IL-17A (20 ng/ml). Cell 
culture supernatants were collected at 6, 24, and 72 h, and protein and RNA were 
isolated. Expression of cytokine (IL-6, IL-17A), receptor (sIL-6R, IL-17RA), and 
mediator (soluble glycoprotein [sgp] 130, MIP3α) proteins and mRNAs were 
determined with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, immunohistochemistry, western 
blotting, and real-time, reverse-transcription quantitative PCR. In addition, 
IL-17RA was localized by transmission electron microscopy after immunogold 
labeling.
RESULTS: Basal secretion of IL-6 and IL-17A by HCE cells occurred in a 
time-dependent manner. Expression of IL-6 was significantly enhanced by SA 
stimulation, but not by PA stimulation. IL-6 mRNA expression was higher in the 
control and SA-stimulated cells at 6 and 24 h, but not at 72 h. In the 
PA-stimulated cells, mRNA levels were significantly lower than the controls at 6 
and 24 h. Expression of sIL-6R was not altered by SA or PA supernatants, but 
sgp130 expression was greater than controls at 6 h, less than controls at 24 h, 
and the same as controls at 72 h. HCE cells secreted IL-17A in a time-dependent 
manner that was not altered by stimulation; however, the IL-17A mRNA levels were 
lower than those of the controls at 6 h. With immunohistochemistry, IL-17RA was 
localized in perinuclear vesicles and in the cytosol and membranes of HCE cells. 
IL-17RA was also present in the epithelial cells from human ocular surface 
tissues. As quantified with western blotting, expression of IL-17RA was 
unchanged in HCE cells stimulated by SA or PA supernatants.
CONCLUSIONS: HCE cells react to bacterial inflammation by enhancing the 
secretion of IL-6 and by regulating the proinflammatory response with 
differential secretion of sgp130. Under normal conditions, HCE cells and ocular 
surface tissues express IL-17RA. Additionally, HCE cells express IL-17RA after 
bacterial stimulation. All of these molecules are involved in the Th17 
differentiation pathway, suggesting that corneal epithelial cells may act as 
indirect participants in the Th17 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3561074
PMID: 23378722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]