1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013 Sep;38(9):1532-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.12.022. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

The effects of exogenous progesterone on drug craving and stress arousal in 
cocaine dependence: impact of gender and cue type.

Fox HC(1), Sofuoglu M, Morgan PT, Tuit KL, Sinha R.

Author information:
(1)The Connecticut Mental Health Center, Yale University School of Medicine, 
Department of Psychiatry, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. Electronic 
address: helen.fox@yale.edu.

AIMS: Exogenous progesterone has been shown to attenuate the rewarding effects 
of cocaine. However, its effects on provoked drug craving, stress arousal and 
cognitive performance has not been systematically investigated in cocaine 
dependent men and women. Thus, we conducted a double-blind placebo-controlled 
study assessing the efficacy of progesterone in reducing provoked drug craving, 
stress system arousal and improving cognitive performance in cocaine dependent 
men and women.
METHODS: Forty-two early abstinent treatment-seeking cocaine dependent 
individuals were randomly assigned to either daily doses of placebo (12M/9F) or 
micronized progesterone (12M/9F) (400 mg/day), for 7 days. Under experimental 
conditions, all subjects were exposed to three 5-min personalized guided imagery 
conditions (stress, cocaine cue, relaxing), one per day, consecutively in a 
random, counterbalanced order. Subjective craving, mood, 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and cardiovascular output, and a cognitive 
measure of inhibitory control (Stroop Color Word Task) were assessed pre- and 
post imagery.
RESULTS: Progesterone relative to placebo significantly decreased cue-induced 
craving and cortisol responses and increased cue-induced ACTH. In addition, 
women but not men receiving progesterone reported lower ratings of negative 
emotion and higher ratings of relaxed mood following stress exposure. Improved 
Stroop performance was observed in all participants receiving progesterone, 
across all conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Progesterone was selectively effective in reducing cocaine 
cue-induced but not stress-related cocaine craving as well as specific measures 
of the provoked arousal state. Findings suggest that progesterone's effects on 
drug craving and arousal are moderated by both the type of environmental cue 
exposure and gender.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.12.022
PMCID: PMC3772967
PMID: 23374328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]