1. Methods Enzymol. 2013;522:391-408. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407865-9.00018-2.

Posttranslation modification of G protein-coupled receptor in relationship to 
biased agonism.

Zheng H(1), Loh HH, Law PY.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Biology Group, Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, 
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 
China. zhenhui2055@hotmail.com

Biased signaling has been reported with a series of G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs), including β(2)-adrenergic receptor and μ-opioid receptor (OPRM1). The 
concept of biased signaling suggests that the agonists of one particular 
receptor may activate the downstream signaling pathways with different 
efficacies. Thus in an extreme case, agonists might activate different sets of 
signaling pathways, which provide a new route to develop drugs with increased 
efficacies and decreased side effects. Among the many factors, posttranslation 
modifications of receptor proteins have major roles in influencing the biased 
signaling. Take OPRM1, for example, the phosphorylation and palmitoylation of 
receptor can regulate the biased signaling induced by agonists. Thus, by 
modulating these posttranslation modifications, the biased signaling of GPCRs 
can be regulated. In addition, although it is not considered as posttranslation 
modification normally, the distribution of GPCRs on cell membrane, especially 
the distribution between lipid-raft and non-raft microdomains, also contributes 
to the biased signaling. Thus in this chapter, we described the methods used in 
our laboratory to study receptor phosphorylation, receptor palmitoylation, and 
membrane distribution of receptor by using OPRM1 as a model. A functional model 
was also provided on these posttranslational modifications at the last section 
of this chapter.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407865-9.00018-2
PMCID: PMC3833076
PMID: 23374194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]