1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Mar 15;126(Pt 6):1333-44. doi: 10.1242/jcs.113928. Epub 2013 
Feb 1.

Differential phosphorylation of the phosphoinositide 3-phosphatase MTMR2 
regulates its association with early endosomal subtypes.

Franklin NE(1), Bonham CA, Xhabija B, Vacratsis PO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor, 
Ontario N9B3P4, Canada.

Myotubularin-related 2 (MTMR2) is a 3-phosphoinositide lipid phosphatase with 
specificity towards the D-3 position of phosphoinositol 3-phosphate [PI(3)P] and 
phosphoinositol 3,5-bisphosphate lipids enriched on endosomal structures. 
Recently, we have shown that phosphorylation of MTMR2 on Ser58 is responsible 
for its cytoplasmic sequestration and that a phosphorylation-deficient variant 
(S58A) targets MTMR2 to Rab5-positive endosomes resulting in PI(3)P depletion 
and an increase in endosomal signaling, including a significant increase in 
ERK1/2 activation. Using in vitro kinase assays, cellular MAPK inhibitors, siRNA 
knockdown and a phosphospecific-Ser58 antibody, we now provide evidence that 
ERK1/2 is the kinase responsible for phosphorylating MTMR2 at position Ser58, 
which suggests that the endosomal targeting of MTMR2 is regulated through an 
ERK1/2 negative feedback mechanism. Surprisingly, treatment with multiple MAPK 
inhibitors resulted in a MTMR2 localization shift from Rab5-positive endosomes 
to the more proximal APPL1-positive endosomes. This MTMR2 localization shift was 
recapitulated when a double phosphorylation-deficient mutant (MTMR2 S58A/S631A) 
was characterized. Moreover, expression of this double phosphorylation-deficient 
MTMR2 variant led to a more sustained and pronounced increase in ERK1/2 
activation compared with MTMR2 S58A. Further analysis of combinatorial 
phospho-mimetic mutants demonstrated that it is the phosphorylation status of 
Ser58 that regulates general endosomal binding and that the phosphorylation 
status of Ser631 mediates the endosomal shuttling between Rab5 and APPL1 
subtypes. Taken together, these results reveal that MTMR2 compartmentalization 
and potential subsequent effects on endosome maturation and endosome signaling 
are dynamically regulated through MAPK-mediated differential phosphorylation 
events.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.113928
PMID: 23378027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]