1. Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):522-35. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws345. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

A novel syndrome caused by the E410K amino acid substitution in the neuronal 
β-tubulin isotype 3.

Chew S(1), Balasubramanian R, Chan WM, Kang PB, Andrews C, Webb BD, MacKinnon 
SE, Oystreck DT, Rankin J, Crawford TO, Geraghty M, Pomeroy SL, Crowley WF Jr, 
Jabs EW, Hunter DG, Grant PE, Engle EC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):368-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt001.

Missense mutations in TUBB3, the gene that encodes the neuronal-specific protein 
β-tubulin isotype 3, can cause isolated or syndromic congenital fibrosis of the 
extraocular muscles, a form of complex congenital strabismus characterized by 
cranial nerve misguidance. One of the eight TUBB3 mutations reported to cause 
congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, c.1228G>A results in a TUBB3 
E410K amino acid substitution that directly alters a kinesin motor protein 
binding site. We report the detailed phenotypes of eight unrelated individuals 
who harbour this de novo mutation, and thus define the 'TUBB3 E410K syndrome'. 
Individuals harbouring this mutation were previously reported to have congenital 
fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, facial weakness, developmental delay and 
possible peripheral neuropathy. We now confirm by electrophysiology that a 
progressive sensorimotor polyneuropathy does indeed segregate with the mutation, 
and expand the TUBB3 E410K phenotype to include Kallmann syndrome 
(hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anosmia), stereotyped midface hypoplasia, 
intellectual disabilities and, in some cases, vocal cord paralysis, 
tracheomalacia and cyclic vomiting. Neuroimaging reveals a thin corpus callosum 
and anterior commissure, and hypoplastic to absent olfactory sulci, olfactory 
bulbs and oculomotor and facial nerves, which support underlying abnormalities 
in axon guidance and maintenance. Thus, the E410K substitution defines a new 
genetic aetiology for Moebius syndrome, Kallmann syndrome and cyclic vomiting. 
Moreover, the c.1228G>A mutation was absent in DNA from ∼600 individuals who had 
either Kallmann syndrome or isolated or syndromic ocular and/or facial 
dysmotility disorders, but who did not have the combined features of the TUBB3 
E410K syndrome, highlighting the specificity of this phenotype-genotype 
correlation. The definition of the TUBB3 E410K syndrome will allow clinicians to 
identify affected individuals and predict the mutation based on clinical 
features alone.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws345
PMCID: PMC3572929
PMID: 23378218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]