1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Feb 7;368(6):503-12. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1109034.

Genetic associations with valvular calcification and aortic stenosis.

Thanassoulis G(1), Campbell CY, Owens DS, Smith JG, Smith AV, Peloso GM, Kerr 
KF, Pechlivanis S, Budoff MJ, Harris TB, Malhotra R, O'Brien KD, Kamstrup PR, 
Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Allison MA, Aspelund T, Criqui MH, Heckbert 
SR, Hwang SJ, Liu Y, Sjogren M, van der Pals J, Kälsch H, Mühleisen TW, Nöthen 
MM, Cupples LA, Caslake M, Di Angelantonio E, Danesh J, Rotter JI, Sigurdsson S, 
Wong Q, Erbel R, Kathiresan S, Melander O, Gudnason V, O'Donnell CJ, Post WS; 
CHARGE Extracoronary Calcium Working Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and the Research Institute, McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Feb 7;368(6):569-70. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1215152.
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013 Apr;10(4):180. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2013.24.

BACKGROUND: Limited information is available regarding genetic contributions to 
valvular calcification, which is an important precursor of clinical valve 
disease.
METHODS: We determined genomewide associations with the presence of aortic-valve 
calcification (among 6942 participants) and mitral annular calcification (among 
3795 participants), as detected by computed tomographic (CT) scanning; the study 
population for this analysis included persons of white European ancestry from 
three cohorts participating in the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in 
Genomic Epidemiology consortium (discovery population). Findings were replicated 
in independent cohorts of persons with either CT-detected valvular calcification 
or clinical aortic stenosis.
RESULTS: One SNP in the lipoprotein(a) (LPA) locus (rs10455872) reached 
genomewide significance for the presence of aortic-valve calcification (odds 
ratio per allele, 2.05; P=9.0×10(-10)), a finding that was replicated in 
additional white European, African-American, and Hispanic-American cohorts 
(P<0.05 for all comparisons). Genetically determined Lp(a) levels, as predicted 
by LPA genotype, were also associated with aortic-valve calcification, 
supporting a causal role for Lp(a). In prospective analyses, LPA genotype was 
associated with incident aortic stenosis (hazard ratio per allele, 1.68; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 1.32 to 2.15) and aortic-valve replacement (hazard 
ratio, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.05 to 2.27) in a large Swedish cohort; the association 
with incident aortic stenosis was also replicated in an independent Danish 
cohort. Two SNPs (rs17659543 and rs13415097) near the proinflammatory gene IL1F9 
achieved genomewide significance for mitral annular calcification (P=1.5×10(-8) 
and P=1.8×10(-8), respectively), but the findings were not replicated 
consistently.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in the LPA locus, mediated by Lp(a) levels, is 
associated with aortic-valve calcification across multiple ethnic groups and 
with incident clinical aortic stenosis. (Funded by the National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1109034
PMCID: PMC3766627
PMID: 23388002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]