1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055501. Epub 2013 Jan
31.

Quantitative analysis of pancreatic polypeptide cell distribution in the human 
pancreas.

Wang X(1), Zielinski MC, Misawa R, Wen P, Wang TY, Wang CZ, Witkowski P, Hara M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United 
States of America.

Comment in
    Islets. 2013 Sep-Dec;5(5):226-8. doi: 10.4161/isl.26432.

The pancreatic islet is mainly composed of beta-, alpha- and delta-cells with 
small numbers of pancreatic polypeptide (PP) and epsilon cells. It is known that 
there is a region in the head of the pancreas that is rich in PP-cells. In the 
present study, we examined the distribution of PP-cells, and assessed the 
influence of the PP-cell rich region to quantify the total islet mass. 
Pancreatic tissues were collected from donors with no history of diabetes or 
pancreatic diseases (n = 12). A stereological approach with a computer-assisted 
large-scale analysis of whole pancreatic sections was applied to quantify the 
entire distribution of endocrine cells within a given section. The initial whole 
pancreas analysis showed that a PP-cell rich region was largely restricted to 
the uncinate process with a clear boundary. The distinct distribution of 
PP-cells includes irregularly shaped clusters composed solely of PP-cells. 
Furthermore, in the PP-cell rich region, beta- and alpha-cell mass is 
significantly reduced compared to surrounding PP-cell poor regions. The results 
suggest that the analysis of the head region should distinguish the PP-cell rich 
region, which is best examined separately. This study presents an important 
implication for the regional selection and interpretation of the results.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055501
PMCID: PMC3561199
PMID: 23383206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.