1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e53776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053776. Epub 2013 Feb
4.

Constitutive CCND1/CDK2 activity substitutes for p53 loss, or MYC or oncogenic 
RAS expression in the transformation of human mammary epithelial cells.

Junk DJ(1), Cipriano R, Stampfer M, Jackson MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.

Cancer develops following the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations 
that inactivate tumor suppressor genes and activate proto-oncogenes. 
Dysregulated cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) activity has oncogenic potential in 
breast cancer due to its ability to inactivate key tumor suppressor networks and 
drive aberrant proliferation. Accumulation or over-expression of cyclin D1 
(CCND1) occurs in a majority of breast cancers and over-expression of CCND1 
leads to accumulation of activated CCND1/CDK2 complexes in breast cancer cells. 
We describe here the role of constitutively active CCND1/CDK2 complexes in human 
mammary epithelial cell (HMEC) transformation. A genetically-defined, stepwise 
HMEC transformation model was generated by inhibiting p16 and p53 with shRNA, 
and expressing exogenous MYC and mutant RAS. By replacing components of this 
model, we demonstrate that constitutive CCND1/CDK2 activity effectively confers 
anchorage independent growth by inhibiting p53 or replacing MYC or oncogenic RAS 
expression. These findings are consistent with several clinical observations of 
luminal breast cancer sub-types that show elevated CCND1 typically occurs in 
specimens that retain wild-type p53, do not amplify MYC, and contain no RAS 
mutations. Taken together, these data suggest that targeted inhibition of 
constitutive CCND1/CDK2 activity may enhance the effectiveness of current 
treatments for luminal breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053776
PMCID: PMC3563539
PMID: 23390492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Mark Jackson is a 
current PLOS ONE Editorial board member. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The other 
authors have declared that no competing interests exist.