1. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Nov;52 Suppl 1(0 1):E80-6. doi: 10.1002/mc.22016. Epub 2013
 Feb 6.

A sequence variant in the phospholipase C epsilon C2 domain is associated with 
esophageal carcinoma and esophagitis.

Wang LD(1), Bi X, Song X, Pohl NM, Cheng Y, Zhou Y, Shears S, Ansong E, Xing M, 
Wang S, Xu XC, Huang P, Xu L, Wang L, Fan Z, Zhao X, Dong H, Meltzer SJ, Ding I, 
Yang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, China; Henan 
Key Laboratory for Esophageal Cancer Research, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism (rs2274223: A5780G:His1927Arg) in the 
phospholipase C epsilon gene (PLCϵ) was recently identified as a susceptibility 
locus for esophageal cancer in Chinese subjects. To determine the underlying 
mechanisms of PLCϵ and this SNP in esophageal carcinogenesis, we analyzed PLCϵ 
genotypes, expression, and their correlation in esophageal cancer cell lines, 
non-transformed esophageal cells, 58 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and 
10,614 non-cancer subjects from China. We found that the G allele (AG or GG) was 
associated with increased PLCϵ mRNA and protein expression in esophageal cancer 
tissues and in esophageal cancer cell lines. G allele was also associated with 
higher enzyme activity, which might be associated with increased protein 
expression. Quantitative analysis of the C2 domain sequences revealed that A:G 
allelic imbalance was strongly linked to esophageal malignancy. Moreover, the 
analysis of 10,614 non-cancer subjects demonstrated that the G allele was 
strongly associated with moderate to severe esophagitis in the subjects from the 
high-incidence areas of China (OR 6.03, 95% CI 1.59-22.9 in high-incidence area 
vs. OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.33-1.64 in low-incidence area; P = 0.008). In conclusion, 
the PLCϵ gene, particularly the 5780G allele, might play a pivotal role in 
esophageal carcinogenesis via upregulating PLCϵ mRNA, protein, and enzyme 
activity, and augmenting inflammatory process in esophageal epithelium. Thus, 
5780G allele may constitute a promising biomarker for esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma risk stratification, early detection, and progression prediction.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22016
PMCID: PMC3931523
PMID: 23390063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: nothing to declare.