1. Hepatology. 2013 Jul;58(1):171-81. doi: 10.1002/hep.26311. Epub 2013 May 14.

Polymorphisms in the coding region of X-ray repair complementing group 4 and 
aflatoxin B1-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Long XD(1), Yao JG, Zeng Z, Ma Y, Huang XY, Wei ZH, Liu M, Zhang JJ, Xue F, Zhai 
B, Xia Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, the Affiliated Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

X-ray repair complementing group 4 (XRCC4) is very important in maintaining 
overall genome stability and may play an important role in carcinogenesis. We 
aimed to investigate the role of polymorphisms in the coding region of this gene 
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) caused by aflatoxin B1 (AFB1). A 
hospital-based case-control study, including 1,499 HCC cases and 2,045 controls 
without any liver diseases or tumors, was conducted in a high AFB1 exposure area 
(the Guangxi region) to assess the relationship between 21 polymorphisms in the 
coding region of XRCC4 and AFB1-related HCC risk and prognosis. Among these 21 
polymorphisms, only rs28383151 modified HCC risk. These individuals with the 
genotypes of rs28383151 A alleles (rs28383151-GA/AA), compared with the 
homozygote of rs28383151 G alleles (rs28383151-GG), faced increasing risk of HCC 
(odds ratio [OR]: 2.17; 95% confidence interval: 1.77-2.67). Significant 
interactive effects between risk genotypes (OR, >1) and AFB1 exposure status 
were also observed in the joint-effects analysis. Furthermore, this polymorphism 
was correlated not only with lower XRCC4-expressing levels, but also with higher 
AFB1-DNA adducts levels and increasing TP53M and portal vein tumor risk. The 
rs28383151 polymorphism modified the recurrence-free survival and overall 
survival of HCC patients, especially under high AFB1 exposure conditions. 
Additionally, this polymorphism multiplicatively interacted with the glutathione 
S-transferase M1 polymorphism with respect to HCC risk (ORinteraction = 2.13).
CONCLUSION: Genetic polymorphisms in the coding region of XRCC4 may be risk and 
prognostic biomarkers of AFB1-related HCC, and rs28383151 is such a potential 
candidate.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.26311
PMID: 23390017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]