1. Anticancer Res. 2013 Feb;33(2):671-7.

The contribution of caveolin-1 genotype and phenotype to hepatocellular 
carcinoma.

Hsu CM(1), Yang MD, Tsai CW, Ho CY, Chang WS, Chang SC, Jeng LB, Tsai Y, Tsai 
FJ, Bau DT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, Terry Fox Cancer Research Lab, China Medical 
University Hospital, 2 Yuh-Der Road, Taichung, 404 Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common types of 
malignant tumors worldwide, for which the prevalence and mortality rates are 
very high in Taiwan. Caveolin-1 (CAV-1) is a main structural protein of caveolae 
and plays a regulatory role in signaling pathways and tumorigenesis. High 
expression of Cav-1 in mouse HCC is positively correlated with higher cell 
invasive capacity, but the contribution of CAV-1 genetic variants during HCC 
progression is still largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the 
contribution of CAV-1 variant to the risk of HCC from the analyses of DNA, RNA 
and proteins.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We enrolled 298 patients with HCC and 298 cancer-free 
controls, frequency-matched by age and gender in this case-control study. 
Firstly, the associations of six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the 
Cav-1 gene at C521A (rs1997623), G14713A (rs3807987), G21985A (12672038), 
T28608A (rs3757733), T29107A (rs7804372), and G32124A (rs3807992) with HCC risk 
in a Taiwanese population were evaluated. Secondly, thirty HCC tissue samples 
with variant genotypes were tested to estimate for CAV-1 mRNA expression by 
real-time quantitative reverse transcription. Finally, the HCC tissue samples of 
variant genotypes were examined by western blotting to estimate their CAV-1 
protein expression patterns.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the HCC and control groups 
in the distributions of the CAV-1 G14713A genotypes (p=0.0124), and these 
carrying AG and AA genotypes had a higher risk for HCC, compared with those with 
the GG genotype (odds ratio=1.51 and 1.94, respectively). Patients with CAV-1 
G14713A AG or AA genotype had higher levels of mRNA (p=0.0001) and protein 
(p=0.0019) than those with the GG genotype.
CONCLUSION: Our multi-approach findings at the DNA, RNA and protein levels 
suggest that CAV-1 may play a critical role in HCC carcinogenesis, and serve as 
a target for HCC therapy.

PMID: 23393366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]