1. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 13;33(7):2732-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4762-12.2013.

The disruption of Celf6, a gene identified by translational profiling of 
serotonergic neurons, results in autism-related behaviors.

Dougherty JD(1), Maloney SE, Wozniak DF, Rieger MA, Sonnenblick L, Coppola G, 
Mahieu NG, Zhang J, Cai J, Patti GJ, Abrahams BS, Geschwind DH, Heintz N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Psychiatry, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. jdougherty@genetics.wustl.edu

The immense molecular diversity of neurons challenges our ability to understand 
the genetic and cellular etiology of neuropsychiatric disorders. Leveraging 
knowledge from neurobiology may help parse the genetic complexity: identifying 
genes important for a circuit that mediates a particular symptom of a disease 
may help identify polymorphisms that contribute to risk for the disease as a 
whole. The serotonergic system has long been suspected in disorders that have 
symptoms of repetitive behaviors and resistance to change, including autism. We 
generated a bacTRAP mouse line to permit translational profiling of serotonergic 
neurons. From this, we identified several thousand serotonergic-cell expressed 
transcripts, of which 174 were highly enriched, including all known markers of 
these cells. Analysis of common variants near the corresponding genes in the 
AGRE collection implicated the RNA binding protein CELF6 in autism risk. 
Screening for rare variants in CELF6 identified an inherited premature stop 
codon in one of the probands. Subsequent disruption of Celf6 in mice resulted in 
animals exhibiting resistance to change and decreased ultrasonic vocalization as 
well as abnormal levels of serotonin in the brain. This work provides a 
reproducible and accurate method to profile serotonergic neurons under a variety 
of conditions and suggests a novel paradigm for gaining information on the 
etiology of psychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4762-12.2013
PMCID: PMC3711589
PMID: 23407934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]