1. J Pathol. 2013 May;230(1):17-27. doi: 10.1002/path.4176. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

TSC1 involvement in bladder cancer: diverse effects and therapeutic 
implications.

Guo Y(1), Chekaluk Y, Zhang J, Du J, Gray NS, Wu CL, Kwiatkowski DJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Translational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

TSC1 is often mutated in bladder cancer. However the importance of this event in 
disease pathogenesis and its implications for therapy are uncertain. We used 
genomic sequencing to examine the involvement of TSC1 in bladder cancer, and 
signalling pathway analysis and small-molecule screening to identify targeted 
therapeutic strategies in TSC1 mutant bladder cancer cell lines. TSC1 loss of 
heterozygosity was seen in 54% of bladder cancers. Two (4.9%) of these 41 
bladder cancers had TSC1 mutations by exon-based sequencing. Analysis of 27 
bladder cancer cell lines demonstrated inactivating TSC1 mutations in three: 
RT-4, HCV29, 97-1. Interestingly, only RT-4 showed classic feedback inhibition 
of AKT, and was highly sensitive to treatment with mTOR inhibitors rapamycin and 
Torin1. 97-1 cells showed constitutive EGFR activation, and were highly 
sensitive to combined treatment with the mTOR inhibitor Torin1 and EGFR 
inhibitors Lapatinib or Afatinib. A BRAF missense mutation G469V was found in 
HCV29 cells, and AKT activation was dependent on BRAF, but independent of ERK. A 
kinase inhibitor screen of HCV29 cells showed strong growth inhibition by the 
Hsp90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922, and we then found synergistic inhibitory effects of 
NVP-AUY922 combined with either Torin1 or rapamycin on cell survival for both 
HCV29 and 97-1 cells. In aggregate, these findings indicate that there are 
highly variable mutation profiles and signalling pathway activation in 
TSC1-mutant bladder cancer. Furthermore, combined Hsp90/mTOR inhibition is a 
promising therapeutic approach for TSC1 mutant bladder cancer.

Copyright Â© 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4176
PMID: 23401075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]