1. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2013 May;34(2):107-13. doi:
10.1007/s10974-013-9338-9.  Epub 2013 Feb 18.

The green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits magnesium 
binding to the C-domain of cardiac troponin C.

Fuchs F(1), Grabarek Z.

Author information:
(1)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 Grove Street, Watertown, MA 
02472-2829, USA.

Cardiac muscle contraction is activated via the single Ca(2+)-binding site (site 
II) in the N-domain of troponin C (cTnC). The two Ca(2+)/Mg(2+) binding sites in 
the C-domain of cTnC (sites III and IV) have been considered to play a purely 
structural role in anchoring cTnC to the thin filament. However, several recent 
discoveries suggest a possible role of this domain in contractile regulation. 
The green tea polyphenol (-)-epigallocatechin 3-gallate (EGCg), which binds 
specifically to the C-domain of cTnC, reduces cardiac myofilament Ca(2+) 
sensitivity along with maximum force and acto-myosin ATPase activity. We have 
determined the effect of EGCg on Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) binding to the C-domain of 
cTnC. In the absence of Mg(2+) there was no significant effect of EGCg on the 
Ca(2+)-cTnC affinity. Surprisingly, in the presence of Mg(2+) EGCg caused an 
increase in Ca(2+) affinity for sites III and IV of cTnC. However, in the 
absence of Ca(2+) the addition of EGCg caused a significant reduction in 
Mg(2+)-cTnC affinity. This reduction is presumably responsible for the increase 
in Ca(2+)-cTnC affinity produced by EGCg in the presence of Mg(2+). We propose 
that the inhibitory effect of EGCg on myofilament Ca(2+) activation may be 
related to an enhanced Ca(2+)-Mg(2+)exchange at sites III and IV of cTnC, which 
might reduce the myosin crossbridge dependent component of thin filament 
activation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10974-013-9338-9
PMCID: PMC3637861
PMID: 23417789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]