1. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(7):1530-1542.e12. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.02.009. Epub 2013 Feb 16.

Yes-associated protein up-regulates Jagged-1 and activates the Notch pathway in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Tschaharganeh DF(1), Chen X, Latzko P, Malz M, Gaida MM, Felix K, Ladu S, Singer 
S, Pinna F, Gretz N, Sticht C, Tomasi ML, Delogu S, Evert M, Fan B, Ribback S, 
Jiang L, Brozzetti S, Bergmann F, Dombrowski F, Schirmacher P, Calvisi DF, 
Breuhahn K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cancer cells often lose contact inhibition to undergo 
anchorage-independent proliferation and become resistant to apoptosis by 
inactivating the Hippo signaling pathway, resulting in activation of the 
transcriptional co-activator yes-associated protein (YAP). However, the 
oncogenic mechanisms of YAP activity are unclear.
METHODS: By using cross-species analysis of expression data, the Notch ligand 
Jagged-1 (Jag-1) was identified as a downstream target of YAP in hepatocytes and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. We analyzed the functions of YAP in HCC 
cells via overexpression and RNA silencing experiments. We used transgenic mice 
that overexpressed a constitutively activated form of YAP (YAP(S127A)), and 
measured protein levels in HCC, colorectal and pancreatic tumor samples from 
patients.
RESULTS: Human HCC cell lines and mouse hepatocytes that overexpress YAP(S127A) 
up-regulated Jag-1, leading to activation of the Notch pathway and increased 
proliferation. Induction of Jag-1, activation of Notch, and cell proliferation 
required binding of YAP to its transcriptional partner TEA domain family member 
4 (TEAD4); TEAD4 binding required the Mst1/2 but not β-catenin signaling. Levels 
of YAP correlated with Jag-1 expression and Notch signaling in human tumor 
samples and correlated with shorter survival times of patients with HCC or 
colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional regulator YAP up-regulates Jag-1 to activate 
Notch signaling in HCC cells and mouse hepatocytes. YAP-dependent activity of 
Jag-1 and Notch correlate in human HCC and colorectal tumor samples with patient 
survival times, suggesting the use of YAP and Notch inhibitors as therapeutics 
for gastrointestinal cancer. Transcript profiling: microarray information was 
deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus database 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?token=jxepvsumwosqkve&acc=GSE35004).

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.02.009
PMCID: PMC3665638
PMID: 23419361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest No conflicts of financial 
interest to declare.