1. Anal Chem. 2013 Apr 2;85(7):3644-50. doi: 10.1021/ac303609n. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Directly coupled high-performance liquid chromatography-accelerator mass 
spectrometry measurement of chemically modified protein and peptides.

Thomas AT(1), Stewart BJ, Ognibene TJ, Turteltaub KW, Bench G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Accelerator Mass Spectrometry, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, California 94551, United States. thomas216@llnl.gov

Quantitation of low-abundance protein modifications involves significant 
analytical challenges, especially in biologically important applications, such 
as studying the role of post-translational modifications in biology and 
measurement of the effects of reactive drug metabolites. (14)C labeling combined 
with accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) provides exquisite sensitivity for such 
experiments. Here, we demonstrate real-time (14)C quantitation of 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separations by liquid sample 
accelerator mass spectrometry (LS-AMS). By enabling direct HPLC-AMS coupling, 
LS-AMS overcomes several major limitations of conventional HPLC-AMS, where 
individual HPLC fractions must be collected and converted to graphite before 
measurement. To demonstrate LS-AMS and compare the new technology to traditional 
solid sample AMS (SS-AMS), reduced and native bovine serum albumin (BSA) was 
modified by (14)C-iodoacetamide, with and without glutathione present, producing 
adducts on the order of 1 modification in every 10(6) to 10(8) proteins. (14)C 
incorporated into modified BSA was measured by solid carbon AMS and LS-AMS. BSA 
peptides were generated by tryptic digestion. Analysis of HPLC-separated 
peptides was performed in parallel by LS-AMS, fraction collection combined with 
SS-AMS, and (for peptide identification) electrospray ionization and tandem mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). LS-AMS enabled (14)C quantitation from ng sample sizes 
and was 100 times more sensitive to (14)C incorporated in HPLC-separated 
peptides than SS-AMS, resulting in a lower limit of quantitation of 50 zmol 
(14)C/peak. Additionally, LS-AMS turnaround times were minutes instead of days, 
and HPLC trace analyses required 1/6th the AMS instrument time required for 
analysis of graphite fractions by SS-AMS.

DOI: 10.1021/ac303609n
PMCID: PMC4034139
PMID: 23413773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.