1. Infect Immun. 2013 May;81(5):1439-49. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01193-12. Epub 2013 Feb
 19.

Mutations to essential orphan response regulator HP1043 of Helicobacter pylori 
result in growth-stage regulatory defects.

Olekhnovich IN(1), Vitko S, Chertihin O, Hontecillas R, Viladomiu M, 
Bassaganya-Riera J, Hoffman PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. io4n@virginia.edu

Helicobacter pylori establishes lifelong infections of the gastric mucosa, a 
niche considered hostile to most microbes. While responses to gastric acidity 
and local inflammation are understood, little is known as to how they are 
integrated into homeostatic control of cell division and growth-stage gene 
expression. Here we investigate the essential orphan response regulator HP1043, 
a member of the OmpR/PhoB subfamily of transcriptional regulators that is unique 
to the Epsilonproteobacteria and that lacks phosphorylation domains. To test the 
hypothesis that conformational changes in the homodimer might lead to defects in 
gene expression, we sought mutations that might alter DNA-binding efficiency. 
Two introduced mutations (C215S, C221S) C terminal to the DNA-binding domain of 
HP1043 (HP1043CC11) resulted in a 2-fold higher affinity for its own promoter by 
footprinting. Modeling studies with the crystal structure of HP1043 suggested 
that C215S might affect the helix-turn-helix domain. Genomic replacement of the 
hp1043 allele with the hp1043CC11 mutant allele resulted in a 2-fold decrease in 
protein levels, despite a dramatic increase in mRNA. The mutations did not 
affect in vitro growth rates or colonization efficiency in a mouse model. 
Proteomic profiling (CC11 mutant strain versus wild type) identified many 
expression differences, and quantitative PCR further revealed that 11 out of 12 
examined genes had lost growth-stage regulation and that 6 of the genes 
contained HP1043 binding consensus sequences within the promoter regions (fur, 
cagA, cag23, flhA, flip, and napA). Our studies show that mutations that affect 
DNA-binding affinity can be used to identify new members of the HP1043 regulon.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01193-12
PMCID: PMC3647984
PMID: 23429531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]