1. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2013 Mar-Apr;7(2):170-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2013.01.003. 
Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Salt sensitivity: a review with a focus on non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics.

Richardson SI(1), Freedman BI, Ellison DH, Rodriguez CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Hypertens. 2014 Jan;8(1):71. doi: 10.1016/j.jash.2013.04.012.

The purpose of this review is to summarize the available information regarding 
salt sensitivity particularly as it relates to non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics 
and to clarify possible etiologies, especially those that might shed light on 
potential treatment options. In non-Hispanic blacks, there is evidence that 
endothelial dysfunction, reduced potassium intake, decreased urinary kallikrein 
excretion, upregulation of sodium channel activity, dysfunction in atrial 
natriuretic peptide (ANP) production, and APOL1 gene nephropathy risk variants 
may cause or contribute to salt sensitivity. Supported treatment avenues include 
diets high in potassium and soybean protein, the components of which stimulate 
nitric oxide production. Racial heterogeneity complicates the study of salt 
sensitivity in Hispanic populations. Caribbean Hispanics, who have a higher 
proportion of African ancestry, may respond to commonly prescribed 
anti-hypertensive agents in a way that is characteristic of non-Hispanic black 
hypertensives. The low-renin hypertensive phenotype commonly seen in 
non-Hispanic blacks has been linked to salt sensitivity and may indicate an 
increased risk for salt sensitivity in a portion of the Hispanic population. In 
conclusion, increased morbidity and mortality associated with salt sensitivity 
mandates further studies evaluating the efficacy of tailored dietary and 
pharmacologic treatment in non-Hispanic blacks and determining the prevalence of 
low renin hypertension and salt sensitivity within the various subgroups of 
Hispanic Americans.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Society of Hypertension. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jash.2013.01.003
PMCID: PMC4574876
PMID: 23428408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]