1. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 20;33(8):3557-66. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2235-12.2013.

P2X7 receptor channels allow direct permeation of nanometer-sized dyes.

Browne LE(1), Compan V, Bragg L, North RA.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, and Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

P2X receptors are widely distributed in the nervous system, and P2X7 receptors 
have roles in neuropathic pain and in the release of cytokines from microglia. 
They are trimeric membrane proteins, which open an integral ion channel when 
ligated by extracellular ATP. This channel is preferentially permeable to small 
cations (sodium, potassium, calcium) but also allows permeation of larger 
cations such as N-methyl-d-glucamine. ATP also leads to entry of fluorescent 
dyes in many cells expressing P2X7 receptors, but controversy persists as to 
whether such large molecules pass directly through the open ion channel or enter 
the cell by a different route. We measured cellular fluorescence and membrane 
currents in individual human embryonic kidney cells expressing rat P2X7 
receptors. Introduction of positive side chains by mutagenesis into the inner 
half of the pore-forming second transmembrane domain of the receptor (T348K, 
D352N, D352K) increased relative permeability of chloride ions. It also promoted 
entry of the large (>1 nm) negative dye fluorescein-5-isothiocyanate while 
decreasing entry of the structurally similar but positive dye ethidium. 
Furthermore, larger cysteine-reactive methanethiosulfonates 
[sulforhodamine-methanethiosulfonate and 2-((biotinoyl)amino)ethyl 
methanethiosulfonate] reduced both ATP-evoked currents and dye entry when 
applied to open P2X7[G345C] receptors. The results demonstrate that the open 
channel of the P2X7 receptor can allow passage of molecules with sizes up to 1.4 
nm.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2235-12.2013
PMCID: PMC6619550
PMID: 23426683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]