1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1833(5):1244-55. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.006. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Annexin A7 trafficking to alveolar type II cell surface: possible roles for 
protein insertion into membranes and lamellar body secretion.

Chander A(1), Gerelsaikhan T, Vasa PK, Holbrook K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, 
NY, USA. Avinash.Jerath@sbumed.org

A role for annexin A7 (A7) is postulated in the obligatory fusion between 
lamellar bodies and the plasma membrane during surfactant secretion in alveolar 
type II cells. This study investigated if surfactant secretagogues increase cell 
surface A7, which could support A7 insertion into plasma membrane as annexin 
proteins reportedly lack membrane penetration ability. In vivo trafficking of A7 
to cell surface was determined by immuno-staining after non-permeabilizing 
fixation of alveolar type II cells. Stimulation with various secretagogues 
increased protein kinase-dependent staining for A7 and ABCA3 in comparison to 
control cells. Biotin-labeling of surface proteins showed ~4% of total A7 in 
control cells, which increased ~3-4 folds in stimulated type II cells. Increased 
cell surface A7 was also observed by protein cross-linking studies showing 
~70kDa A7-adduct in the membranes but not in the cytosol fraction of PMA- or 
A23187-stimulated cells. In vitro phosphorylation increased the Ca(2+)-dependent 
binding of recombinant A7 to lung plasma membranes; and subsequent cross-linking 
showed increased levels of ~70kDa A7-adduct. PMA-stimulation of type II cells 
increased A7 trafficking to lipid rafts suggesting that the latter are involved 
in A7 trafficking to the cell surface. However, in vitro membrane insertion of 
recombinant A7 and its tryptophan mutants as determined by fluorescence 
quenching with doxylPC suggested only shallow membrane insertion by A7. 
Together, our studies support in vivo association between surfactant secretion 
and cell surface A7 occurring by insertion into plasma membrane and by fusion of 
A7 containing lamellar bodies.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.006
PMCID: PMC3626109
PMID: 23434680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]