1. JIMD Rep. 2012;3:97-102. doi: 10.1007/8904_2011_71. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Adult-onset presentation of a hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria 
patient without prior history of neurological complications.

Tezcan K(1), Louie KT, Qu Y, Velasquez J, Zaldivar F, Rioseco-Camacho N, Camacho 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Kaiser Permanente, Sacramento, CA, USA.

The Hyperornithinemia-Hyperammonemia-Homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome is a 
disorder of the urea cycle and ornithine degradation pathway caused by mutations 
in the mitochondrial ornithine transporter, ORNT1 (SLC25A15). In general, the 
majority of patients with HHH syndrome come to medical attention during infancy 
or early school years with symptoms such as learning disabilities, changes in 
cognitive development, spasticity, or liver dysfunction. In this report, we 
describe a 35-year-old male of Indian descent who was diagnosed with HHH 
syndrome after he presented to the emergency room with gastroenteritis, 
disorientation, and slurred speech. Molecular analysis revealed that this 
patient was heterozygous for two ORNT1 mutations, p.[Gly220Arg(+)Arg275X] 
(c.[658G>A(+)823C>T]) that had been previously reported in homozygous probands 
who presented during the first year of life. Cellular studies revealed that the 
ORNT1 p.Gly220Arg mutation was nonfunctional but targeted to the mitochondria. 
Given that this patient was a successful college graduate on a vegetarian diet 
without a prior history of learning or neurological impairment, additional 
factors such as gene redundancy, environmental, and epigenetic factors may have 
contributed to the delay in onset of presentation and lack of any previous 
symptoms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of an 
adult-onset HHH syndrome presentation without a prior history of neurological or 
cognitive deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2011_71
PMCID: PMC3509867
PMID: 23430880