1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56775. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056775. Epub 2013 Feb
19.

Introducing the Algerian mitochondrial DNA and Y-chromosome profiles into the 
North African landscape.

Bekada A(1), Fregel R, Cabrera VM, Larruga JM, Pestano J, Benhamamouch S, 
Gonz√°lez AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Oran, Oran, 
Algeria.

North Africa is considered a distinct geographic and ethnic entity within 
Africa. Although modern humans originated in this Continent, studies of 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Y-chromosome genealogical markers provide evidence 
that the North African gene pool has been shaped by the back-migration of 
several Eurasian lineages in Paleolithic and Neolithic times. More recent 
influences from sub-Saharan Africa and Mediterranean Europe are also evident. 
The presence of East-West and North-South haplogroup frequency gradients 
strongly reinforces the genetic complexity of this region. However, this genetic 
scenario is beset with a notable gap, which is the lack of consistent 
information for Algeria, the largest country in the Maghreb. To fill this gap, 
we analyzed a sample of 240 unrelated subjects from a northwest Algeria 
cosmopolitan population using mtDNA sequences and Y-chromosome biallelic 
polymorphisms, focusing on the fine dissection of haplogroups E and R, which are 
the most prevalent in North Africa and Europe respectively. The Eurasian 
component in Algeria reached 80% for mtDNA and 90% for Y-chromosome. However, 
within them, the North African genetic component for mtDNA (U6 and M1; 20%) is 
significantly smaller than the paternal (E-M81 and E-V65; 70%). The unexpected 
presence of the European-derived Y-chromosome lineages R-M412, R-S116, R-U152 
and R-M529 in Algeria and the rest of the Maghreb could be the counterparts of 
the mtDNA H1, H3 and V subgroups, pointing to direct maritime contacts between 
the European and North African sides of the western Mediterranean. Female influx 
of sub-Saharan Africans into Algeria (20%) is also significantly greater than 
the male (10%). In spite of these sexual asymmetries, the Algerian uniparental 
profiles faithfully correlate between each other and with the geography.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056775
PMCID: PMC3576335
PMID: 23431392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.