1. Cephalalgia. 2013 Apr;33(6):398-407. doi: 10.1177/0333102412475236. Epub 2013 
Feb 19.

The familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 mutation K1336E affects direct G 
protein-mediated regulation of neuronal P/Q-type Ca2+ channels.

Garza-López E(1), González-Ramírez R, Gandini MA, Sandoval A, Felix R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Research and Advanced Studies of the 
National Polytechnic Institute Cinvestav-IPN, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 (FHM-1) is an autosomal dominant 
form of migraine with aura characterized by recurrent migraine, hemiparesis and 
ataxia. FHM-1 has been linked to missense mutations in the CACNA1A gene encoding 
the pore-forming subunit of the neuronal voltage-gated P/Q-type Ca(2+) channel 
(CaV2.1α1).
METHODS: Here, we explored the effects of the FHM-1 K1336E mutation on G 
protein-dependent modulation of the recombinant P/Q-type channel. The mutation 
was introduced into the human CaV2.1α1 subunit and its functional consequences 
investigated after heterologous expression in HEK-293 cells using patch-clamp 
recordings.
RESULTS: Functional analysis of the K1336E mutation revealed a reduction of 
Ca(2+) current densities, a ∼10 mV left-shift in the current-voltage 
relationship, and the slowing of current inactivation kinetics. When 
co-expressed along with the human μ-opioid receptor, application of the agonist 
DAMGO inhibited whole-cell currents through both the wild-type and the mutant 
channels. Prepulse facilitation was also reduced by the K1336E mutation. 
Likewise, the kinetic analysis of the onset and decay of facilitation showed 
that the mutation affects the apparent dissociation and reassociation rates of 
the Gβγ dimer from the channel complex.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the extent of G-protein-mediated 
inhibition is significantly reduced in the K1336E mutant CaV2.1 Ca(2+) channels. 
This alteration would contribute to render the neuronal network hyperexcitable, 
possibly as a consequence of reduced presynaptic inhibition, and may help to 
explain some aspects of the FHM-1 pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.1177/0333102412475236
PMID: 23430985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]