1. JIMD Rep. 2012;4:117-24. doi: 10.1007/8904_2011_83. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Alu-Alu Recombination Underlying the First Large Genomic Deletion in 
GlcNAc-Phosphotransferase Alpha/Beta (GNPTAB) Gene in a MLII Alpha/Beta Patient.

Coutinho MF(1), da Silva Santos L, Lacerda L, Quental S, Wibrand F, Lund AM, 
Johansen KB, Prata MJ, Alves S.

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Unit, Department of Genetics, CGMJM, INSA/IPATIMUP, 
Porto, Portugal.

Mucolipidosis type II α/β is a severe, autosomal recessive lysosomal storage 
disorder, caused by a defect in the GNPTAB gene that codes for the α/β subunits 
of the GlcNAc-phosphotransferase. To date, over 100 different mutations have 
been identified in MLII α/β patients, but no large deletions have been reported. 
Here we present the first case of a large homozygous intragenic GNPTAB gene 
deletion (c.3435-386_3602 + 343del897) encompassing exon 19, identified in a ML 
II α/β patient. Long-range PCR and sequencing methodologies were used to refine 
the characterization of this rearrangement, leading to the identification of a 
21 bp repetitive motif in introns 18 and 19. Further analysis revealed that both 
the 5' and 3' breakpoints were located within highly homologous Alu elements 
(Alu-Sz in intron 18 and Alu-Sq2, in intron 19), suggesting that this deletion 
has probably resulted from Alu-Alu unequal homologous recombination. RT-PCR 
methods were used to further evaluate the consequences of the alteration for the 
processing of the mutant pre mRNA GNPTAB, revealing the production of three 
abnormal transcripts: one without exon 19 (p.Lys1146_Trp1201del); another with 
an additional loss of exon 20 (p.Arg1145Serfs*2), and a third in which exon 19 
was substituted by a pseudoexon inclusion consisting of a 62 bp fragment from 
intron 18 (p.Arg1145Serfs*16). Interestingly, this 62 bp fragment corresponds to 
the Alu-Sz element integrated in intron 18.This represents the first description 
of a large deletion identified in the GNPTAB gene and contributes to enrich the 
knowledge on the molecular mechanisms underlying causative mutations in ML II.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2011_83
PMCID: PMC3509902
PMID: 23430906