1. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Dec 5;13(12):16624-35. doi: 10.3390/ijms131216624.

Modulation of MDR1 and MRP3 gene expression in lung cancer cells after 
paclitaxel and carboplatin exposure.

Melguizo C(1), Prados J, Luque R, Ortiz R, Caba O, Alvarez PJ, Gonzalez B, 
Aranega A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biopathology and Regenerative Medicine (IBIMER), Department of 
Anatomy and Human Embryology, School of Medicine, University of Granada, Granada 
E-18071, Spain. jcprados@ugr.es.

Carboplatin-paclitaxel is a reference regimen in the treatment of locally 
advanced or disseminated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This paper 
discusses the multidrug resistance developed with this drug combination, which 
is one of the major obstacles to successful treatment. In order to understand 
and overcome the drug resistance pattern of NSCLC after carboplatin plus 
paclitaxel exposure, levels of mRNA expression of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) 
and multidrug resistance-associated protein 3 (MRP3) were investigated in 
primary NSCLC cell lines (A-549 and A-427) and a metastasis-derived NSCLC cell 
line (NODO). Our results showed that exposure of the three NSCLC lines to plasma 
concentrations of paclitaxel (5 μM) produced an increase in MDR1 expression, 
while MRP3 showed no alteration in expression. By contrast, the same cells 
exposed to carboplatin plasma concentrations (30 μM) showed overexpression of 
MRP3. In these cells, MDR1 showed no expression changes. Interestingly, the 
combination of both paclitaxel and carboplatin caused increased expression of 
the MDR1 drug resistance gene rather than the individual treatments. These 
results suggest that carboplatin and paclitaxel may induce drug resistance 
mediated by MDR1 and MRP3, which may be enhanced by the simultaneous use of both 
drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms131216624
PMCID: PMC3546711
PMID: 23443122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]