1. BMC Genet. 2013 Mar 1;14:14. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-14.

A comparison of tests for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium in national genetic 
household surveys.

Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Joint Program in Survey Methodology, University of Maryland at College Park, 
College Park, MD 20742, USA. yli@survey.umd.edu

BACKGROUND: This study is motivated by National Household Surveys that collect 
genetic data, in which complex samples (e.g. stratified multistage cluster 
sample), partially from the same family, are selected. In addition to the 
differential selection probabilities of selecting households and persons within 
the sampled households, there are two levels of correlations of the collected 
genetic data in National Genetic Household Surveys (NGHS). The first level of 
correlation is induced by the hierarchical geographic clustered sampling of 
households and the second level of correlation is induced by biological 
inheritances from individuals sampled in the same household.
RESULTS: To test for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) in NGHS, two test 
statistics, the CCS method [1] and the QS method [2], appear to be the only 
existing methods that take account of both correlations. In this paper, I 
evaluate both methods in terms of the test size and power under a variety of 
complex designs with different weighting schemes and varying magnitudes of the 
two correlation effects. Both methods are applied to a real data example from 
the Hispanic Health and Nutrition Examination Survey with simulated genotype 
data.
CONCLUSIONS: The QS method maintains the nominal size well and consistently 
achieves higher power than the CCS method in testing HWE under a variety of 
sample designs, and therefore is recommended for testing HWE of genetic survey 
data with complex designs.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-14-14
PMCID: PMC3606615
PMID: 23448225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]