1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057283. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

Functional investigation of the plant-specific long coiled-coil proteins 
PAMP-INDUCED COILED-COIL (PICC) and PICC-LIKE (PICL) in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Venkatakrishnan S(1), Mackey D, Meier I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
United States of America.

We have identified and characterized two Arabidopsis long coiled-coil proteins 
PAMP-INDUCED COILED-COIL (PICC) and PICC-LIKE (PICL). PICC (147 kDa) and PICL 
(87 kDa) are paralogs that consist predominantly of a long coiled-coil domain 
(expanded in PICC), with a predicted transmembrane domain at the immediate 
C-terminus. Orthologs of PICC and PICL were found exclusively in vascular 
plants. PICC and PICL GFP fusion proteins are anchored to the cytoplasmic 
surface of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane by a C-terminal transmembrane 
domain and a short tail domain, via a tail-anchoring mechanism. T-DNA-insertion 
mutants of PICC and PICL as well as the double mutant show an increased 
sensitivity to the plant abiotic stress hormone abscisic acid (ABA) in a 
post-germination growth response. PICC, but not PICL gene expression is induced 
by the bacterial pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) flg22. T-DNA 
insertion alleles of PICC, but not PICL, show increased susceptibility to the 
non-virulent strain P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000 hrcC, but not to the virulent 
strain P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000. This suggests that PICC mutants are 
compromised in PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI). The data presented here provide 
first evidence for the involvement of a plant long coiled-coil protein in a 
plant defense response.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057283
PMCID: PMC3581476
PMID: 23451199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.