1. Adv Funct Mater. 2011 Dec 6;21(23):4423-4429. doi: 10.1002/adfm.201100946.
Epub  2011 Sep 28.

Preparation and Characterization of Molecularly Imprinted Polymeric 
Nanoparticles for Atrial Natriuretic Peptide (ANP).

Wang C(1), Howell M, Raulji P, Davis Y, Mohapatra S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. 
Downs Blvd. ; Nanomedicine Research Center, University of South Florida, 12901 
Bruce B. Downs Blvd.

Natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPRA), the receptor for the cardiac hormone 
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), is expressed abundantly on cancer cells and 
disruption of ANP-NPRA signaling inhibits tumor burden and metastasis. Since 
antagonists of NPRA signaling have not provided reproducible results, we 
reasoned that a synthetic neutralizing antibody to ANP, which has high 
selectivity and affinity for ANP, could be used to regulate ANP levels and 
attenuate NPRA signaling. In this study, we prepared molecularly imprinted 
polymer nanoparticles (MIPNPs) for ANP using a short peptide of ANP as the 
template and determined their binding affinity and selectivity. The MIPNPs were 
prepared by precipitation polymerization using NH2-SLRRSS-CONH2, which is a 
short peptide from ANP as template, methacrylic acid (MAA) and 
N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm) as functional monomers, bis-acrylamide (BIS) as 
crosslinker. The average diameter of MIPNPs and non-imprinted nanoparticles 
(NIPNPs) in water is 215.8 ±4.6 nm and 197.7±3.1 nm respectively. The binding 
isotherm analysis showed that MIPNPs have a much higher binding affinity for 
template peptide and ANP than NIPNPs. Scatchard analysis gave an equilibrium 
dissociation constant, Kd of 7.3 μM with a binding capacity 106.7 μmol/g for 
template peptide and Kd of 7.9 μM with a binding capacity of 36.0 μmol/g for 
ANP. Measurements of binding kinetics revealed that MIPNPs reach protein 
adsorption equilibrium in 30 min. MIPNPs found to have high specificity for ANP 
with little affinity for BSA or scrambled ANP peptide. MIPNPs also recognized 
and adsorbed ANP in cell culture media spiked with ANP and human plasma. Taken 
together, these results indicate that MIPNPs have high affinity and selectivity 
for ANP and can be used as a synthetic antibody for modulating ANP-NPRA 
signaling in cancers.

DOI: 10.1002/adfm.201100946
PMCID: PMC3583218
PMID: 23459692