1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56227. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056227. Epub 2013 Feb
15.

Increasing lysine content of waxy maize through introgression of opaque-2 and 
opaque-16 genes using molecular assisted and biochemical development.

Zhang W(1), Yang W, Wang M, Wang W, Zeng G, Chen Z, Cai Y.

Author information:
(1)Guizhou Institute of Upland Food Crops, Guizhou Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.

The low lysine content of waxy maize cannot meet the nutritional requirements of 
humans, livestock, or poultry. In the present study, the high-lysine genes o2 
and o16 were backcrossed into wx lines using the maize high-lysine inbreds 
TAIXI19 (o2o2) and QCL3021 (o16o16) as donors and the waxy maize inbred line 
QCL5019 (wxwx) as a receptor. In the triple-cross F1, backcross, and inbred 
generations, the SSR markers phi027 and phi112 within the wx and o2 genes and 
the SSR marker umc1121 linked to the o16 gene were used for foreground 
selection. Background selection of the whole-genome SSR markers was performed 
for the selected individuals. The grain lysine content was determined using the 
dye-binding lysine method. The waxiness of the grain was determined with the 
I2-KI staining and dual-wavelength spectrophotometric analysis. The BC2F2 
generation included 7 plants of genotype wxwxo2o2O16_, 19 plants of genotype 
wxwxo16o16O2_, and 3 plants of genotype wxwxo2o2o16o16. In these seeds, the 
average amylopectin content was 96.67%, 96.87%, and 96.62%, respectively, which 
is similar to that of QCL5019. The average lysine content was 0.555%, 0.380%, 
and 0.616%, respectively, representing increases of 75.1%, 19.9%, 94.3%, 
respectively, over QCL5019. The average genetic background recovery rate of the 
BC2F3 families was 95.3%, 94.3%, 94.2%, respectively. Among these 3 
wxwxo2o2O16O16 families, 4 wxwxo2o2O16o16 families, and 3 wxwxo2o2o16o16 
families, the longest imported parent donor fragment was 113.35 cM and the 
shortest fragment was 11.75 cM. No significant differences in lysine content 
were found between the BC2F4 seeds and the BC2F3 seeds in these 10 families. 
This allowed us to increase the lysine content of waxy corn and produce seeds 
with excellent nutritional characteristics suitable for human consumption, 
animal feed, and food processing. This may be of significance in the breeding of 
high-quality corn and in improvement of the nutrition of humans, livestock, and 
poultry.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056227
PMCID: PMC3574154
PMID: 23457531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.