1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057284. Epub 2013 Feb
26.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors-1 and -3 play distinct roles in the 
regulation of bladder cancer growth and metastasis: implications for therapeutic 
targeting.

Cheng T(1), Roth B, Choi W, Black PC, Dinney C, McConkey DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) are activated by mutation and 
overexpressed in bladder cancers (BCs), and FGFR inhibitors are currently being 
evaluated in clinical trials in BC patients. However, BC cells display marked 
heterogeneity in their responses to FGFR inhibitors, and the biological 
mechanisms underlying this heterogeneity are not well defined. Here we used a 
novel inhibitor of FGFRs 1-3 and RNAi to determine the effects of inhibiting 
FGFR1 or FGFR3 in a panel of human BC cell lines. We observed that FGFR1 was 
expressed in BC cells that also expressed the "mesenchymal" markers ZEB1 and 
vimentin, whereas FGFR3 expression was restricted to the E-cadherin- and 
p63-positive "epithelial" subset. Sensitivity to the growth-inhibitory effects 
of BGJ-398 was also restricted to the "epithelial" BC cells and it correlated 
directly with FGFR3 mRNA levels but not with the presence of activating FGFR3 
mutations. In contrast, BGJ-398 did not strongly inhibit proliferation but did 
block invasion in the "mesenchymal" BC cells in vitro. Similarly, BGJ-398 did 
not inhibit primary tumor growth but blocked the production of circulating tumor 
cells (CTCs) and the formation of lymph node and distant metastases in mice 
bearing orthotopically implanted "mesenchymal" UM-UC3 cells. Together, our data 
demonstrate that FGFR1 and FGFR3 have largely non-overlapping roles in 
regulating invasion/metastasis and proliferation in distinct "mesenchymal" and 
"epithelial" subsets of human BC cells. The results suggest that the tumor EMT 
phenotype will be an important determinant of the biological effects of FGFR 
inhibitors in patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057284
PMCID: PMC3582560
PMID: 23468956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
no competing interests.