1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e56222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056222. Epub 2013 Mar
1.

Design and selection of a camelid single-chain antibody yeast two-hybrid library 
produced de novo for the cap protein of porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2).

Fu X(1), Gao X, He S, Huang D, Zhang P, Wang X, Zhang S, Dang R, Yin S, Du E, 
Yang Z.

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A & F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 Apr 24;13(4):e0196619. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196619.

Nanobodies (or variable domain of the heavy chain of the heavy-chain antibodies, 
VHHs) are single-domain antigen-binding fragments derived from camelid heavy 
chain antibodies. Their comparatively small size, monomeric behavior, high 
stability, high solubility, and ability to bind epitopes inaccessible to 
conventional antibodies make them especially suitable for many therapeutic and 
biotechnological applications. In this paper, for the first time, we created the 
immunized Camelus Bactrianus VHH yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) library according to the 
Clontech Mate & Plate library construction system. The transformation efficiency 
and titer of the VHH Y2H library were 7.26×10(6) cfu/3 µg and 2×10(9) cfu/ml, 
which met the demand for Y2H library screening. Using as an example the porcine 
circovirus type 2 (PCV2) Cap protein as bait, we screened 21 positive 
Cap-specific VHH sequences. Among these sequences, 7 of 9 randomly selected 
clones were strongly positive as indicated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
either using PCV2 viral lysis or purified Cap protein as coated antigen. 
Additionally, the immunocytochemistry results further indicated that the 
screened VHHs could specifically detected PCV2 in the infected cells. All this 
suggests the feasibility of in vivo VHH throughput screening based on Y2H 
strategy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056222
PMCID: PMC3585807
PMID: 23469171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.