1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Apr;108(4):232-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.01.019.
Epub  2013 Feb 4.

Analysis of aberrant splicing and nonsense-mediated decay of the stop codon 
mutations c.109G>T and c.504_505delCT in 7 patients with HMG-CoA lyase 
deficiency.

Puisac B(1), Teresa-Rodrigo ME, Arnedo M, Gil-Rodríguez MC, Pérez-Cerdá C, Ribes 
A, Pié A, Bueno G, Gómez-Puertas P, Pié J.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of 
Pharmacology-Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Zaragoza, E-50009 
Zaragoza, Spain.

Eukaryotic cells can be protected against mutations that generate stop codons by 
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) and/or nonsense-associated altered splicing 
(NAS). However, the processes are only partially understood and do not always 
occur. In this work, we study these phenomena in the stop codon mutations 
c.109G>T (p.Glu37*) and c.504_505delCT; the second and third most frequent 
mutations in HMG-CoA lyase deficiency (MIM #246450). The deficiency affects the 
synthesis of ketone bodies and produces severe disorders during early childhood. 
We used a minigene approach, real-time quantitative PCR and the inhibition of 
NMD by puromycin treatment, to study the effect of stop codons on splicing (NAS) 
and NMD in seven patients. Surprisingly, none of the stop codons studied appears 
to be the direct cause of aberrant splicing. In the mutation c.109G>T, the 
splicing is due to the base change G>T at position 109, which is critical and 
cannot be explained by disruption of exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) elements, by 
the appearance of exonic splicing silencer (ESS) elements which were predicted 
by bioinformatic tools or by the stop codons. Moreover, the mutation 
c.504_505delCT produces two mRNA transcripts both with stop codons that generate 
simultaneous NMD phenomena. The effects of the mutations studied on splicing 
seemed to be similar in all the patients. Furthermore, we report a Spanish 
patient with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria and a novel missense mutation: 
c.825C>G (p.Asn275Lys).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.01.019
PMID: 23465862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]