1. J Psychopharmacol. 2014 Mar;28(3):220-6. doi: 10.1177/0269881113480989. Epub 
2013 Mar 7.

Neurotrophin 3 genotype and emotional adverse effects of osmotic-release oral 
system methylphenidate (OROS-MPH) in children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Park S(1), Kim BN, Kim JW, Shin MS, Cho SC, Kim JH, Son JW, Shin YM, Chung US, 
Han DH.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Seoul National University 
Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Neurotrophin 3 (NTF3) has been studied in relation to the pathophysiology of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and mood disorders as well as 
psychostimulant action. We hypothesized that the risk of an emotional side 
effect to methylphenidate (MPH) treatment may be associated with NTF3 genotypes. 
Ninety-six medication-na√Øve children with ADHD (mean age 8.70, standard 
deviation 1.41 years, 79 males) were genotyped and treated with MPH. At 
baseline, which was prior to MPH treatment, and after two weeks of medication, 
investigators asked children and their parents or caregivers about adverse 
events using a symptom rating scale. ADHD subjects with the A/A genotype at the 
NTF3 rs6332 polymorphism showed the highest 'Emotionality' and 
'Over-focus/euphoria' factor scores, followed by those with the G/A genotype and 
those with the G/G genotype (p=0.042 and p=0.045, respectively). ADHD subjects 
with the A/A genotype at the NTF3 rs6332 polymorphism showed the highest 
'Proneness to crying' and 'Nail biting' item scores, followed by those with the 
G/A genotype and those with the G/G genotype (p=0.047 and p=0.017, 
respectively). These data provide preliminary evidence that genetic variation in 
the NTF3 gene is related to susceptibility to emotional side effects in response 
to MPH treatment in Korean children with ADHD.

DOI: 10.1177/0269881113480989
PMID: 23471121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]