1. Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr. 2013 Apr;8(1):1-12. doi: 
10.1007/s11751-013-0156-9. Epub 2013 Mar 10.

Expandable intramedullary nails in lower limb trauma: a systematic review of 
clinical and radiological outcomes.

Rose DM(1), Smith TO, Nielsen D, Hing CB.

Author information:
(1)St George's Hospital, Blackshaw Road, Tooting, London, SW17 0QT, UK, 
davyrose@hotmail.com.

This study systematically reviews the evidence-base for the use of expandable 
nails in the treatment of acute diaphyseal fractures of the lower limb. Both 
electronic and hand searches were undertaken of the published and grey 
literature to 1 December 2011. A total of 154 citations were identified, of 
which 15 were deemed suitable and assessed with the Critical Appraisals Skills 
Programme tool. A total of 625 nailing procedures were performed in 620 
patients: 279 femoral and 346 tibial nails. The expandable nail was found to be 
significantly quicker to insert than interlocked nails (p < 0.05), and the total 
incidence of non-union or other complication was 13 and 14 % for expandable 
femoral and tibial nails, respectively. Notable complications with the 
expandable nail included fracture propagation on nail inflation in 2.5 % and 
post-operative shortening in 3.3 %. Device failure secondary to problems with 
the expansion mechanism was seen in 2.9 %. The rate of non-union and infection 
following expandable nailing was 3.1 and 1.4 %, respectively. Despite promising 
initial results, there remains a paucity of good quality studies to support the 
use of expandable nails over interlocked nails for the treatment of acute 
diaphyseal fractures of the lower limb.

DOI: 10.1007/s11751-013-0156-9
PMCID: PMC3623922
PMID: 23475316