1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058470. Epub 2013 Mar
5.

Regulation of ASPP2 interaction with p53 core domain by an intramolecular 
autoinhibitory mechanism.

Rotem-Bamberger S(1), Katz C, Friedler A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Givat Ram, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

ASPP2 is a key protein in regulating apoptosis both in p53-dependent 
and-independent pathways. The C-terminal part of ASPP2 contains four ankyrin 
repeats and an SH3 domain (Ank-SH3) that mediate the interactions of ASPP2 with 
apoptosis related proteins such as p53, Bcl-2 and the p65 subunit of NFκB. p53 
core domain (p53CD) binds the n-src loop and the RT loop of ASPP2 SH3. ASPP2 
contains a disordered proline rich domain (ASPP2 Pro) that forms an 
intramolecular autoinhibitory interaction with the Ank-SH3 domains. Here we show 
how this intramolecular interaction affects the intermolecular interactions of 
ASPP2 with p53, Bcl-2 and NFkB. We used biophysical methods to obtain better 
understanding of the relationship between ASPP2 and its partners for getting a 
comprehensive view on ASPP2 pathways. Fluorescence anisotropy competition 
experiments revealed that both ASPP2 Pro and p53CD competed for binding the 
n-src loop of the ASPP2 SH3, indicating regulation of p53CD binding to this loop 
by ASPP2 Pro. Peptides derived from the ASPP2-binding interface of Bcl-2 did not 
compete with p53CD or NFkB peptides for binding the ASPP2 n-src loop. However, 
p53CD displaced the NFκB peptide (residues 303-332) from its complex with ASPP2 
Ank-SH3, indicating that NFκB 303-332 and p53CD bind a partly overlapping site 
in ASPP2 SH3, mostly in the RT loop. These results are in agreement with 
previous docking studies, which showed that ASPP2 Ank-SH3 binds Bcl-2 and NFκB 
mostly via distinct sites from p53. However they show some overlap between the 
binding sites of p53CD and NFkB in ASPP2 Ank-SH3. Our results provide 
experimental evidence that the intramolecular interaction in ASPP2 regulates its 
binding to p53CD and that ASPP2 Ank-SH3 binds Bcl-2 and NFκB via distinct sites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058470
PMCID: PMC3589414
PMID: 23472201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.