1. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Oct 15;255:3-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.02.037. Epub
2013  Mar 6.

Development of transgenic animals for optogenetic manipulation of mammalian 
nervous system function: progress and prospects for behavioral neuroscience.

Ting JT(1), Feng G.

Author information:
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain & Cognitive 
Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: jtting@mit.edu.

Here we review the rapidly growing toolbox of transgenic mice and rats that 
exhibit functional expression of engineered opsins for neuronal activation and 
silencing with light. Collectively, these transgenic animals are enabling 
neuroscientists to access and manipulate the many diverse cell types in the 
mammalian nervous system in order to probe synaptic and circuitry connectivity, 
function, and dysfunction. The availability of transgenic lines affords 
important advantages such as stable and heritable transgene expression patterns 
across experimental cohorts. As such, the use of transgenic lines precludes the 
need for other costly and labor-intensive procedures to achieve functional 
transgene expression in each individual experimental animal. This represents an 
important consideration when large cohorts of experimental animals are desirable 
as in many common behavioral assays. We describe the diverse strategies that 
have been implemented for developing transgenic mouse and rat lines and 
highlight recent advances that have led to dramatic improvements in achieving 
functional transgene expression of engineered opsins. Furthermore, we discuss 
considerations and caveats associated with implementing recently developed 
transgenic lines for optogenetics-based experimentation. Lastly, we propose 
strategies that can be implemented to develop and refine the next generation of 
genetically modified animals for behaviorally-focused optogenetics-based 
applications.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.02.037
PMCID: PMC4030747
PMID: 23473879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]