1. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Feb 28;12(3):3495-9. doi: 10.4238/2013.February.28.7.

Association of APOA1 and APOA5 polymorphisms and haplotypes with lipid 
parameters in a Brazilian elderly cohort.

Furuya TK(1), Chen ES, Ota VK, Mazzotti DR, Ramos LR, Cendoroglo MS, Araujo LQ, 
Burbano RR, Smith MA.

Author information:
(1)Disciplina de Genética, Departamento de Morfologia e Genética, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Apolipoproteins have an important role in lipid metabolism and transport. 
Polymorphisms in the APOA1/C3/A4/A5 gene cluster have been associated with lipid 
alterations and cardiovascular diseases. We investigated APOA1 XmnI, APOA5 S19W, 
and APOA5 -1131T>C polymorphisms in 377 individuals from a cohort of a 
longitudinal Brazilian elderly study. Allele frequencies, genotype distribution, 
and association with major morbidities as well as with lipids, creatinine, 
albumin, urea, glycated hemoglobin, and fasting glucose serum levels were 
investigated. Linkage disequilibrium and haplotype associations were also 
analyzed. This is the first time that haplotypes involving these polymorphisms 
were evaluated. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. Minor allele frequencies 
were 0.119, 0.071, and 0.158 for XmnI, S19W, and -1131T>C polymorphisms, 
respectively. We found a significant association of the -1131C allele with low 
LDL-C levels. We also observed that XmnI and S19W polymorphisms were in linkage 
disequilibrium. The C/G haplotype, which is composed of the wild-type allele of 
XmnI and the minor allele of S19W, was associated with high total cholesterol 
serum levels in this elderly population. We conclude that the -1131T>C 
polymorphism and the C/G haplotype, including XmnI and S19W polymorphisms, are 
associated with alterations in lipid levels and may be risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease in the Brazilian elderly.

DOI: 10.4238/2013.February.28.7
PMID: 23479152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]