1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013 Dec;54(12):2639-44. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.784758.
Epub  2013 Apr 19.

Influence of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene polymorphisms on the 
outcome of pediatric patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma treated with high-dose 
methotrexate.

D'Angelo V(1), Ramaglia M, Iannotta A, Francese M, Pota E, Affinita MC, Pecoraro 
G, Indolfi C, Di Martino M, Di Pinto D, Buffardi S, Poggi V, Indolfi P, Casale 
F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Woman, Children and General and Specialized Surgery, Second 
University of Naples , Italy.

High-dose methotrexate (MTX) is a key component of most treatment protocols for 
childhood and adolescent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Recent studies have 
suggested that the toxicity of antifolate drugs, such as MTX, is affected by 
inherited single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in folate metabolizing genes. 
The aim of our study was to investigate the potential influence of the C677T and 
A1298C genetic variants of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene 
on the clinical toxicity and efficacy of MTX in pediatric patients with NHL (n = 
95) treated with therapeutic protocols Associazione Italiana Ematologia 
Oncologia Pediatrica (AIEOP) LNH-97 and EURO LB-02. We demonstrated that 
patients with the 677T genotype had an approximately six-fold greater risk of 
developing hematological toxicity compared with wild-type carriers, especially 
in the 1 g/m(2) treatment group (p = 0.01). Moreover, we identified a 
correlation between the risk of relapse and the T genotype: T carriers had 
reduced disease-free survival compared with wild-type patients (67% vs. 100%). 
Our data suggest a pharmacogenetic influence on the adverse effects of high-dose 
MTX in the 1 g/m(2) treatment group.

DOI: 10.3109/10428194.2013.784758
PMID: 23488607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]