1. Environ Microbiol. 2013 Aug;15(8):2342-59. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.12108. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

A highly conserved mycobacterial cholesterol catabolic pathway.

García-Fernández E(1), Frank DJ, Galán B, Kells PM, Podust LM, García JL, Ortiz 
de Montellano PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, 
CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Degradation of the cholesterol side-chain in Mycobacterium tuberculosis is 
initiated by two cytochromes P450, CYP125A1 and CYP142A1, that sequentially 
oxidize C26 to the alcohol, aldehyde and acid metabolites. Here we report 
characterization of the homologous enzymes CYP125A3 and CYP142A2 from 
Mycobacterium smegmatis mc(2) 155. Heterologously expressed, purified CYP125A3 
and CYP142A2 bound cholesterol, 4-cholesten-3-one, and antifungal azole drugs. 
CYP125A3 or CYP142A2 reconstituted with spinach ferredoxin and ferredoxin 
reductase efficiently hydroxylated 4-cholesten-3-one to the C-26 alcohol and 
subsequently to the acid. The X-ray structures of both substrate-free CYP125A3 
and CYP142A2 and of cholest-4-en-3-one-bound CYP142A2 reveal significant 
differences in the substrate binding sites compared with the homologous 
M. tuberculosis proteins. Deletion only of cyp125A3 causes a reduction of both 
the alcohol and acid metabolites and a strong induction of cyp142 at the mRNA 
and protein levels, indicating that CYP142A2 serves as a functionally redundant 
back up enzyme for CYP125A3. In contrast to M. tuberculosis, the 
M. smegmatis Δcyp125Δcyp142 double mutant retains its ability to grow on 
cholesterol albeit with a diminished capacity, indicating an additional level of 
redundancy within its genome.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.12108
PMCID: PMC3706556
PMID: 23489718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]