1. Andrology. 2013 May;1(3):440-50. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00070.x. Epub 
2013 Mar 15.

New point mutation in Golga3 causes multiple defects in spermatogenesis.

Bentson LF(1), Agbor VA, Agbor LN, Lopez AC, Nfonsam LE, Bornstein SS, Handel 
MA, Linder CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, New Mexico Highlands University, Las 
Vegas, NM 87701, USA.

Mice with repro27 exhibit fully penetrant male-specific infertility associated 
with a nonsense mutation in the golgin subfamily A member 3 gene (Golga3). 
GOLGA3 is a Golgi complex-associated protein implicated in protein trafficking, 
apoptosis, positioning of the Golgi and spermatogenesis. In repro27 mutant mice, 
a point mutation in exon 18 of the Golga3 gene that inserts a pre-mature 
termination codon leads to an absence of GOLGA3 protein expression. GOLGA3 
protein was undetectable in the brain, heart and liver in both mutant and 
control mice. Although spermatogenesis in Golga3(repro27) mutant mice appears to 
initiate normally, development is disrupted in late meiosis during the first 
wave of spermatogenesis, leading to significant germ cell loss between 15 and 
18 days post-partum (dpp). Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase dUTP-mediated 
Nick End Labeling analysis showed elevated DNA fragmentation in meiotic germ 
cells by 12 dpp, suggesting apoptosis as a mechanism of germ cell loss. The few 
surviving post-meiotic round spermatids exhibited abnormal spermiogenesis with 
defects in acrosome formation, head and tail development and extensive 
vacuolization in the seminiferous epithelium. Analysis of epididymal spermatozoa 
showed significantly low sperm concentration and motility and in vitro 
fertilization with mutant spermatozoa was unsuccessful. Golga3(repro27) mice 
lack GOLGA3 protein and thus provide an in vivo tool to aid in deciphering the 
role of GOLGA3 in Golgi complex positioning, cargo trafficking and apoptosis 
signalling in male germ cells.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00070.x
PMCID: PMC4134951
PMID: 23495255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest: The authors declare 
that there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudging the 
impartiality of the research reported.