1. Hum Mutat. 2013 Jun;34(6):801-11. doi: 10.1002/humu.22313. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Novel FOXF1 mutations in sporadic and familial cases of alveolar capillary 
dysplasia with misaligned pulmonary veins imply a role for its DNA binding 
domain.

Sen P(1), Yang Y, Navarro C, Silva I, Szafranski P, Kolodziejska KE, 
Dharmadhikari AV, Mostafa H, Kozakewich H, Kearney D, Cahill JB, Whitt M, Bilic 
M, Margraf L, Charles A, Goldblatt J, Gibson K, Lantz PE, Garvin AJ, Petty J, 
Kiblawi Z, Zuppan C, McConkie-Rosell A, McDonald MT, Peterson-Carmichael SL, 
Gaede JT, Shivanna B, Schady D, Friedlich PS, Hays SR, Palafoll IV, 
Siebers-Renelt U, Bohring A, Finn LS, Siebert JR, Galambos C, Nguyen L, Riley M, 
Chassaing N, Vigouroux A, Rocha G, Fernandes S, Brumbaugh J, Roberts K, Ho-Ming 
L, Lo IF, Lam S, Gerychova R, Jezova M, Valaskova I, Fellmann F, Afshar K, 
Giannoni E, Muhlethaler V, Liang J, Beckmann JS, Lioy J, Deshmukh H, Srinivasan 
L, Swarr DT, Sloman M, Shaw-Smith C, van Loon RL, Hagman C, Sznajer Y, Barrea C, 
Galant C, Detaille T, Wambach JA, Cole FS, Hamvas A, Prince LS, Diderich KE, 
Brooks AS, Verdijk RM, Ravindranathan H, Sugo E, Mowat D, Baker ML, Langston C, 
Welty S, Stankiewicz P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. psen@bcm.edu

Alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of pulmonary veins (ACD/MPV) is a 
rare and lethal developmental disorder of the lung defined by a constellation of 
characteristic histopathological features. Nonpulmonary anomalies involving 
organs of gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and genitourinary systems have been 
identified in approximately 80% of patients with ACD/MPV. We have collected DNA 
and pathological samples from more than 90 infants with ACD/MPV and their family 
members. Since the publication of our initial report of four point mutations and 
10 deletions, we have identified an additional 38 novel nonsynonymous mutations 
of FOXF1 (nine nonsense, seven frameshift, one inframe deletion, 20 missense, 
and one no stop). This report represents an up to date list of all known FOXF1 
mutations to the best of our knowledge. Majority of the cases are sporadic. We 
report four familial cases of which three show maternal inheritance, consistent 
with paternal imprinting of the gene. Twenty five mutations (60%) are located 
within the putative DNA-binding domain, indicating its plausible role in FOXF1 
function. Five mutations map to the second exon. We identified two additional 
genic and eight genomic deletions upstream to FOXF1. These results corroborate 
and extend our previous observations and further establish involvement of FOXF1 
in ACD/MPV and lung organogenesis.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22313
PMCID: PMC3663886
PMID: 23505205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.