1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Jun;121(6):334-7. doi: 
10.1055/s-0033-1334875. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Analyses of non-synonymous obesity risk alleles in SH2B1 (rs7498665) and APOB48R 
(rs180743) in obese children and adolescents undergoing a 1-year lifestyle 
intervention.

Volckmar AL(1), Pütter C, Song JY, Graniger J, Knoll N, Wolters B, Hebebrand J, 
Scherag A, Reinehr T, Hinney A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of -Duisburg-Essen, 
Germany.

Association of obesity risk alleles of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
near or in the SH2B adaptor protein 1 gene (SH2B1) and increased body mass index 
(BMI) has been often described. A gene in close proximity, apolipoprotein B48 
receptor gene (APOB48R), is tagged by the same SNP(s).We analyzed 454 overweight 
and obese children and adolescents (10.8±2.6 years, BMI-SDS 2.4±0.5; 55% girls) 
who completed a 1-year lifestyle intervention ('Obeldicks' program). Carriers of 
obesity risk alleles of non-synonymous SNPs in SH2B1 (rs7498665, Thr484Ala) or 
APOB48R (rs180743, Pro419Ala), as genotyped by TaqMan, were analysed for changes 
in anthropometrics (body-mass index (BMI), and standardized BMI (BMI-SDS)), 
blood pressure (systolic and diastolic) and plasma parameters (total 
cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, triacylglycerides, glucose, 
insulin, and HOMA).We observed no evidence for an association of the obesity 
risk alleles to alterations in any of the analyzed phenotypes. Both mean BMI and 
BMI-SDS improved during the intervention independent of genotype. The mean 
systolic blood pressure was lowered and concentrations of HDL-cholesterol 
increased significantly.The obesity risk alleles of non-synonymous SNPs at SH2B1 
and APOB48R have no strong effect on weight loss-related phenotypes in 
overweight children after a 1-year lifestyle intervention.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1334875
PMID: 23519644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]