1. Front Microbiol. 2013 Mar 21;4:58. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00058. eCollection 
2013.

Structural insights into diversity and n-alkane biodegradation mechanisms of 
alkane hydroxylases.

Ji Y(1), Mao G, Wang Y, Bartlam M.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pollution Processes and Environmental Criteria (Ministry of 
Education), Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution 
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University 
Tianjin, China ; State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai 
University Tianjin, China.

Environmental microbes utilize four degradation pathways for the oxidation of 
n-alkanes. Although the enzymes degrading n-alkanes in different microbes may 
vary, enzymes functioning in the first step in the aerobic degradation of 
alkanes all belong to the alkane hydroxylases. Alkane hydroxylases are a class 
of enzymes that insert oxygen atoms derived from molecular oxygen into different 
sites of the alkane terminus (or termini) depending on the type of enzymes. In 
this review, we summarize the different types of alkane hydroxylases, their 
degrading steps, and compare typical enzymes from various classes with regard to 
their three-dimensional structures, in order to provide insights into how the 
enzymes mediate their different roles in the degradation of n-alkanes and what 
determines their different substrate ranges. Through the above analyzes, the 
degrading mechanisms of enzymes can be elucidated and molecular biological 
methods can be utilized to expand their catalytic roles in the petrochemical 
industry or in bioremediation of oil-contaminated environments.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00058
PMCID: PMC3604635
PMID: 23519435