1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059306. Epub 2013 Mar
13.

Meckelin 3 is necessary for photoreceptor outer segment development in rat 
Meckel syndrome.

Tiwari S(1), Hudson S, Gattone VH 2nd, Miller C, Chernoff EA, Belecky-Adams TL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

Ciliopathies lead to multiorgan pathologies that include renal cysts, deafness, 
obesity and retinal degeneration. Retinal photoreceptors have connecting cilia 
joining the inner and outer segment that are responsible for transport of 
molecules to develop and maintain the outer segment process. The present study 
evaluated meckelin (MKS3) expression during outer segment genesis and determined 
the consequences of mutant meckelin on photoreceptor development and survival in 
Wistar polycystic kidney disease Wpk/Wpk rat using immunohistochemistry, 
analysis of cell death and electron microscopy. MKS3 was ubiquitously expressed 
throughout the retina at postnatal day 10 (P10) and P21. However, in the mature 
retina, MKS3 expression was restricted to photoreceptors and the retinal 
ganglion cell layer. At P10, both the wild type and homozygous Wpk mutant retina 
had all retinal cell types. In contrast, by P21, cells expressing rod- and 
cone-specific markers were fewer in number and expression of opsins appeared to 
be abnormally localized to the cell body. Cell death analyses were consistent 
with the disappearance of photoreceptor-specific markers and showed that the 
cells were undergoing caspase-dependent cell death. By electron microscopy, P10 
photoreceptors showed rudimentary outer segments with an axoneme, but did not 
develop outer segment discs that were clearly present in the wild type 
counterpart. At p21 the mutant outer segments appeared much the same as the P10 
mutant outer segments with only a short axoneme, while the wild-type controls 
had developed outer segments with many well-organized discs. We conclude that 
MKS3 is not important for formation of connecting cilium and rudimentary outer 
segments, but is critical for the maturation of outer segment processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059306
PMCID: PMC3596335
PMID: 23516626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.