1. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1491. doi: 10.1038/srep01491.

A polymorphism of HMGA1 is associated with increased risk of metabolic syndrome 
and related components.

Chiefari E(1), Tanyolaç S, Iiritano S, Sciacqua A, Capula C, Arcidiacono B, 
Nocera A, Possidente K, Baudi F, Ventura V, Brunetti G, Brunetti FS, Vero R, 
Maio R, Greco M, Pavia M, Hodoglugil U, Durlach V, Pullinger CR, Goldfine ID, 
Perticone F, Foti D, Brunetti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University Magna Græcia of Catanzaro, 88100 
Catanzaro, Italy.

The metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a common disorder, where systemic 
insulin-resistance is associated with increased risk for type 2 diabetes (T2D) 
and cardiovascular disease. Identifying genetic traits influencing risk and 
progression of MetS is important. We and others previously reported a functional 
HMGA1 gene variant, rs146052672, predisposing to T2D. Here we investigated the 
association of rs146052672 variant with MetS and related components. In a 
case-control study from Italy and Turkey, increased risk of MetS was seen among 
carriers of the HMGA1 variant. In the larger Italian cohort, this variant 
positively correlated with BMI, hyperglycemia and insulin-resistance, and 
negatively correlated with serum HDL-cholesterol. Association between 
rs146052672 variant and MetS occurred independently of T2D, indicating that 
HMGA1 gene defects play a pathogenetic role in MetS and other 
insulin-resistance-related conditions. Overall, our results indicate that the 
rs146052672 variant represents an early predictive marker of MetS, as well as a 
predictive tool for therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep01491
PMCID: PMC3603272
PMID: 23512162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]