1. ACS Chem Biol. 2013;8(6):1215-22. doi: 10.1021/cb400012k. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Chemical engineering and structural and pharmacological characterization of the 
α-scorpion toxin OD1.

Durek T(1), Vetter I, Wang CI, Motin L, Knapp O, Adams DJ, Lewis RJ, Alewood PF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Structural Biology, Institute for Molecular 
Bioscience, The University of Queensland , St Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia 4072.

Scorpion α-toxins are invaluable pharmacological tools for studying 
voltage-gated sodium channels, but few structure-function studies have been 
undertaken due to their challenging synthesis. To address this deficiency, we 
report a chemical engineering strategy based upon native chemical ligation. The 
chemical synthesis of α-toxin OD1 was achieved by chemical ligation of three 
unprotected peptide segments. A high resolution X-ray structure (1.8 Å) of 
synthetic OD1 showed the typical βαββ α-toxin fold and revealed important 
conformational differences in the pharmacophore region when compared with other 
α-toxin structures. Pharmacological analysis of synthetic OD1 revealed potent 
α-toxin activity (inhibition of fast inactivation) at Nav1.7, as well as Nav1.4 
and Nav1.6. In addition, OD1 also produced potent β-toxin activity at Nav1.4 and 
Nav1.6 (shift of channel activation in the hyperpolarizing direction), 
indicating that OD1 might interact at more than one site with Nav1.4 and Nav1.6. 
Investigation of nine OD1 mutants revealed that three residues in the reverse 
turn contributed significantly to selectivity, with the triple OD1 mutant (D9K, 
D10P, K11H) being 40-fold more selective for Nav1.7 over Nav1.6, while OD1 K11V 
was 5-fold more selective for Nav1.6 than Nav1.7. This switch in selectivity 
highlights the importance of the reverse turn for engineering α-toxins with 
altered selectivity at Nav subtypes.

DOI: 10.1021/cb400012k
PMID: 23527544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]