1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059210. Epub 2013 Mar
18.

The nucleocapsid protein of Rift Valley fever virus is a potent human CD8+ T 
cell antigen and elicits memory responses.

Xu W(1), Watts DM, Costanzo MC, Tang X, Venegas LA, Jiao F, Sette A, Sidney J, 
Sewell AK, Wooldridge L, Makino S, Morrill JC, Peters CJ, Kan-Mitchell J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science and Border Biomedical Research Center, The 
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas, United States of America.

There is no licensed human vaccine currently available for Rift Valley Fever 
Virus (RVFV), a Category A high priority pathogen and a serious zoonotic threat. 
While neutralizing antibodies targeting the viral glycoproteins are protective, 
they appear late in the course of infection, and may not be induced in time to 
prevent a natural or bioterrorism-induced outbreak. Here we examined the 
immunogenicity of RVFV nucleocapsid (N) protein as a CD8(+) T cell antigen with 
the potential for inducing rapid protection after vaccination. HLA-A*0201 
(A2)-restricted epitopic determinants were identified with N-specific CD8(+) T 
cells from eight healthy donors that were primed with dendritic cells transduced 
to express N, and subsequently expanded in vitro by weekly re-stimulations with 
monocytes pulsed with 59 15mer overlapping peptides (OLPs) across N. Two 
immunodominant epitopes, VT9 (VLSEWLPVT, N(121-129)) and IL9 (ILDAHSLYL, 
N165-173), were defined. VT9- and IL9-specific CD8(+) T cells identified by 
tetramer staining were cytotoxic and polyfunctional, characteristics deemed 
important for viral control in vivo. These peptides induced specific CD8(+) T 
cell responses in A2-transgenic mice, and more importantly, potent N-specific 
CD8(+) T cell reactivities, including VT9- and IL9-specific ones, were mounted 
by mice after a booster vaccination with the live attenuated RVF MP-12. Our data 
suggest that the RVFV N protein is a potent human T cell immunogen capable of 
eliciting broad, immunodominant CD8(+) T cell responses that are potentially 
protective. Understanding the immune responses to the nucleocapsid is central to 
the design of an effective RVFV vaccine irrespective of whether this viral 
protein is effective as a stand-alone immunogen or only in combination with 
other RVFV antigens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059210
PMCID: PMC3601065
PMID: 23527138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Co-author Dr. Douglas M. 
Watts is a PLOS ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The 
authors have also reviewed the authorsâ€™ declaration of potential competing 
interests for the re-submission according to PLOS ONE policy. All authors 
declared no competing interests.