1. Mediators Inflamm. 2013;2013:509089. doi: 10.1155/2013/509089. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

Dual effect of serum amyloid A on the invasiveness of glioma cells.

Knebel FH(1), Albuquerque RC, Massaro RR, Maria-Engler SS, Campa A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Análises Clínicas e Toxicológicas, Faculdade de Ciências 
Farmacêuticas, Universidade de São Paulo, Avenida Prof. Lineu Prestes, 580 
Cidade Universitária, 05508-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Evidence sustains a role for the acute-phase protein serum amyloid A (SAA) in 
carcinogenesis and metastasis, and the protein has been suggested as a marker 
for tumor progression. Nevertheless, the demonstration of a direct activity of 
SAA on tumor cells is still incipient. We have investigated the effect of human 
recombinant SAA (rSAA) on two human glioma cell lines, A172 and T98G. rSAA 
stimulated the [(3)H]-thymidine incorporation of both lines, but had dual 
effects on migration and invasiveness which varied according to the cell line. 
In T98G, the rSAA increased migration and invasion behaviors whereas in A172 it 
decreased these behaviors. These findings agree with the effect triggered by 
rSAA on matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) activities measured in a gelatinolytic 
assay. rSAA inhibited activity of both MMPs in A172 cells while increasing them 
in T98G cells. rSAA also affected the production of compounds present in the 
tumor microenvironment that orchestrate tumor progression, such as IL-8, the 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO). We also 
observed that both lines expressed all three of the isoforms of SAA: SAA1, SAA2, 
and SAA4. These data suggest that some tumor cells are responsive to SAA and, in 
these cases, SAA may have a role in cancer progression that varies according to 
the cell type.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/509089
PMCID: PMC3596950
PMID: 23533307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]