1. Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):881-9. doi: 10.1002/hep.26415. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Synergism of tapasin and human leukocyte antigens in resolving hepatitis C virus 
infection.

Ashraf S(1), Nitschke K, Warshow UM, Brooks CR, Kim AY, Lauer GM, Hydes TJ, 
Cramp ME, Alexander G, Little AM, Thimme R, Neumann-Haefelin C, Khakoo SI.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, UK.

CD8+ T-cell responses to hepatitis C virus (HCV) are important in generating a 
successful immune response and spontaneously clearing infection. Human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) class I presents viral peptides to CD8+ T cells to permit 
detection of infected cells, and tapasin is an important component of the 
peptide loading complex for HLA class I. We sought to determine if tapasin 
polymorphisms affected the outcome of HCV infection. Patients with resolved or 
chronic HCV infection were genotyped for the known G/C coding polymorphism in 
exon 4 of the tapasin gene. In a European, but not a US, Caucasian population, 
the tapasin G allele was significantly associated with the outcome of HCV 
infection, being found in 82.5% of resolvers versus 71.3% of persistently 
infected individuals (P = 0.02, odds ratio [OR] = 1.90 95% confidence interval 
[CI] = 1.11-3.23). This was more marked at the HLA-B locus at which 
heterozygosity of both tapasin and HLA-B was protective (P < 0.03). Individuals 
with an HLA-B allele with an aspartate at residue 114 and the tapasin G allele 
were more likely to spontaneously resolve HCV infection (P < 0.00003, OR = 3.2 
95% CI = 1.6-6.6). Additionally, individuals with chronic HCV and the 
combination of an HLA-B allele with an aspartate at residue 114 and the tapasin 
G allele also had stronger CD8+ T-cell responses (P = 0.02, OR = 2.58, 95% 
CI-1.05-6.5).
CONCLUSION: Tapasin alleles contribute to the outcome of HCV infection by 
synergizing with polymorphisms at HLA-B in a population-specific manner. This 
polymorphism may be relevant for peptide vaccination strategies against HCV 
infection.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.26415
PMCID: PMC3759612
PMID: 23532923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]