1. J Gen Virol. 2013 Jul;94(Pt 7):1624-1635. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.050153-0. Epub
2013  Mar 27.

Activation of CCR2+ human proinflammatory monocytes by human herpesvirus-6B 
chemokine N-terminal peptide.

Clark DJ(1), Catusse J(2)(1), Stacey A(3), Borrow P(3), Gompels UA(1).

Author information:
(1)Pathogen Molecular Biology Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, University of London, Keppel St., London WC1E 7HT, UK.
(2)University Clinic of Freiburg, Department of Hematology and Oncology, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, UK.

Human monocytes expressing CCR2 with CD14 and CD16 can mediate antigen 
presentation, and promote inflammation, brain infiltration and immunosenescence. 
Recently identified roles are in human immunodeficiency virus infection, 
tuberculosis and parasitic disease. Human herpesvirus 6B (HHV-6B) encodes a 
chemokine, U83B, which is monospecific for CCR2, and is distinct from the 
related HHV-6A U83A, which activates CCR1, CCR4, CCR5, CCR6 and CCR8 on immune 
effector cells and dendritic cells. These differences could alter 
leukocyte-subset recruitment for latent/lytic replication and associated 
neuroinflammatory pathology. Therefore, cellular interactions between U83A and 
U83B could help dictate potential tropism differences between these viruses. 
U83A specificity is maintained in the 38-residue N-terminal spliced-truncated 
form. Here, we sought to determine the basis for the chemokine receptor 
specificity differences and identify possible applications. To do this we first 
analysed variation in a natural host population in sub-Saharan Africa where both 
viruses are equally prevalent and compared these to global strains. Analyses of 
U83 N-terminal variation in 112 HHV-6A and HHV-6B infections identified 6/38 
U83A or U83B-specific residues. We also identified a unique single U83A-specific 
substitution in one U83B sequence, 'U83BA'. Next, the variation effects were 
tested by deriving N-terminal (NT) 17-mer peptides and assaying activation of ex 
vivo human leukocytes, the natural host and cellular target. Chemotaxis of CCR2+ 
leukocytes was potently induced by U83B-NT, but not U83BA-NT or U83A-NT. 
Analyses of the U83B-NT activated population identified migrated CCR2+, but not 
CCR5+, leukocytes. The U83BA-NT asparagine-lysine14 substitution disrupted 
activity, thus defining CCR2 specificity and acting as a main determinant for 
HHV-6A/B differences in cellular interactions. A flow-cytometry-based 
shape-change assay was designed, and used to provide further evidence that 
U83B-NT could activate CCR2+CD14+CD16+ monocytes. This defines a potential 
antiviral target for HHV-6A/B disease and novel peptide immunomodulator for 
proinflammatory monocytes.

DOI: 10.1099/vir.0.050153-0
PMID: 23535574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]