1. Protein Sci. 2013 Jun;22(6):755-61. doi: 10.1002/pro.2259. Epub 2013 May 8.

Crystallographic analysis of the ENTH domain from yeast epsin Ent2 that induces 
a cell division phenotype.

Costakes GT(1), Sen A, Aguilar RC, Stauffacher CV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907, USA.

Epsins are eukaryotic, endocytic adaptor proteins primarily involved in the 
early steps of clathrin mediated endocytosis. Two epsins exist in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, Ent1 and Ent2, with single epsin knockouts being viable, while the 
double knockout is not. These proteins contain a highly conserved Epsin 
N-terminal homology (ENTH) domain that is essential for cell viability. In 
addition, overexpression of the ENTH domain of Ent2 (ENTH2) was shown to play a 
role in cell division by interacting with the septin organizing, Cdc42 GTPase 
activating protein, Bem3, leading to increased cytokinesis failure. In contrast, 
overexpression of the ENTH domain of Ent1 (ENTH1) does not affect cytokinesis, 
despite being 75% identical to ENTH2. An ENTH2(N112D, S114E, E118Q) mutant that 
switches residues in loop 7 to those found correspondingly in ENTH1 was 
incapable of inducing the cytokinesis phenotype. In order to better understand 
the role of loop 7 in the ENTH2-induced phenotype at a molecular level, X-ray 
crystallography was used to elucidate the structures of yeast ENTH2(WT) and 
ENTH2(DEQ). Our results indicate that mutations did not affect the conformation 
of loop 7, but rather introduce an increased negative charge on a potential 
interaction interface. Morphological analysis of cells overexpressing ENTH2 loop 
7 mutants showed that the cytokinesis failure phenotype was abolished by the 
single mutants N112D, E118Q, and to a lesser extent by S114E. Taken together, 
our results indicate that the interaction surface that contains loop 7 and the 
specific nature of these residues are crucial for ENTH2 involvement in 
cytokinesis. This research provides insight into a molecular mechanism by which 
ENTH2, but not ENTH1, overexpression in yeast leads to cell division defects. 
Structural data of WT and mutant ENTH2 domains along with in vivo phenotypic 
analysis of ENTH2 overexpressing cells indicate that the biochemical nature of 
three loop 7 residues is crucial for its role in cytokinesis.

Â© 2013 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.2259
PMCID: PMC3690715
PMID: 23553749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]