1. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058795. Epub 2013 Mar
15.

PLCz functional haplotypes modulating promoter transcriptional activity are 
associated with semen quality traits in Chinese Holstein bulls.

Pan Q(1), Ju Z, Huang J, Zhang Y, Qi C, Gao Q, Zhou L, Li Q, Wang L, Zhong J, 
Liu M, Wang C.

Author information:
(1)Dairy Cattle Research Center, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Science, 
Jinan, PR China.

The sperm-specific phospholipase C zeta (PLCz) is a candidate sperm-borne 
oocyte-activating factor that triggers a characteristic series of physiological 
stimuli via cytoplasmic Ca(2+) oscillations during fertilization. The molecular 
mechanisms involved in the regulation of PLCz gene expression remain largely 
unknown. To explore the genetic variations in the 5'-flanking region of the PLCz 
gene and their common haplotypes in Chinese Holstein bulls, as well as to 
determine whether these variations affect bovine semen quality traits and 
transcriptional activity, DNA samples were collected from Chinese Holstein bulls 
and sequenced for the identification of genetic variants in the 5'-flanking 
region of PLCz. Two genetic variants were identified, and their haplotypic 
profiles were constructed. The two novel genetic variations (g. -456 G>A and g. 
+65 T>C) were genotyped in 424 normal Chinese Holstein bulls. Bioinformatics 
analysis revealed that both loci are in transcription factor binding sites of 
the core promoter region. The association studies revealed that the two genetic 
variations and their haplotype combinations significantly affected semen quality 
traits. Using serially truncated constructs of the bovine PLCz promoters and the 
luciferase reporter, we found that a 726 bp (-641 nt to +112 nt) fragment 
constitutes the core promoter region. Furthermore, four haplotypes, H1H1 (GTGT), 
H2H2 (GCGC), H3H3 (ATAT), and H4H4 (ACAC), were significantly associated with 
semen quality traits and successfully transfected into MLTC-1 cell lines. The 
luciferase reporter assay showed that the different haplotypes exhibited 
distinct promoter activities. Maximal promoter activity was demonstrated by the 
H2H2 haplotypes, as compared with the other haplotypes. To the best of our 
knowledge, this study is the first report on genetic variants and their 
respective haplotypes in the 5'-flanking region of PLCz gene that can influence 
the semen quality of Chinese Holstein bulls as well as contribute to the 
transcriptional activity of the PLCz promoter.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058795
PMCID: PMC3598912
PMID: 23554927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.