1. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003231. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003231. Epub 
2013 Mar 21.

Enterovirus 71 protease 2Apro targets MAVS to inhibit anti-viral type I 
interferon responses.

Wang B(1), Xi X, Lei X, Zhang X, Cui S, Wang J, Jin Q, Zhao Z.

Author information:
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2017 Mar 2;13(3):e1006243. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006243.
    PLoS Pathog. 2024 May 6;20(5):e1012209. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012209.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is the major causative pathogen of hand, foot, and mouth 
disease (HFMD). Its pathogenicity is not fully understood, but innate immune 
evasion is likely a key factor. Strategies to circumvent the initiation and 
effector phases of anti-viral innate immunity are well known; less well known is 
whether EV71 evades the signal transduction phase regulated by a sophisticated 
interplay of cellular and viral proteins. Here, we show that EV71 inhibits 
anti-viral type I interferon (IFN) responses by targeting the mitochondrial 
anti-viral signaling (MAVS) protein--a unique adaptor molecule activated upon 
retinoic acid induced gene-I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation associated 
gene (MDA-5) viral recognition receptor signaling--upstream of type I interferon 
production. MAVS was cleaved and released from mitochondria during EV71 
infection. An in vitro cleavage assay demonstrated that the viral 2A protease 
(2A(pro)), but not the mutant 2A(pro) (2A(pro)-110) containing an inactivated 
catalytic site, cleaved MAVS. The Protease-Glo assay revealed that MAVS was 
cleaved at 3 residues between the proline-rich and transmembrane domains, and 
the resulting fragmentation effectively inactivated downstream signaling. In 
addition to MAVS cleavage, we found that EV71 infection also induced morphologic 
and functional changes to the mitochondria. The EV71 structural protein VP1 was 
detected on purified mitochondria, suggesting not only a novel role for 
mitochondria in the EV71 replication cycle but also an explanation of how 
EV71-derived 2A(pro) could approach MAVS. Taken together, our findings reveal a 
novel strategy employed by EV71 to escape host anti-viral innate immunity that 
complements the known EV71-mediated immune-evasion mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003231
PMCID: PMC3605153
PMID: 23555247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.