1. PLoS Biol. 2013;11(3):e1001506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001506. Epub 2013
Mar  12.

Neuronal expression of glucosylceramide synthase in central nervous system 
regulates body weight and energy homeostasis.

Nordström V(1), Willershäuser M, Herzer S, Rozman J, von Bohlen Und Halbach O, 
Meldner S, Rothermel U, Kaden S, Roth FC, Waldeck C, Gretz N, de Angelis MH, 
Draguhn A, Klingenspor M, Gröne HJ, Jennemann R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research 
Center, Heidelberg, Germany. v.nordstroem@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2013;11(3):e1001507. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001507.

Hypothalamic neurons are main regulators of energy homeostasis. Neuronal 
function essentially depends on plasma membrane-located gangliosides. The 
present work demonstrates that hypothalamic integration of metabolic signals 
requires neuronal expression of glucosylceramide synthase (GCS; 
UDP-glucose:ceramide glucosyltransferase). As a major mechanism of central 
nervous system (CNS) metabolic control, we demonstrate that GCS-derived 
gangliosides interacting with leptin receptors (ObR) in the neuronal membrane 
modulate leptin-stimulated formation of signaling metabolites in hypothalamic 
neurons. Furthermore, ganglioside-depleted hypothalamic neurons fail to adapt 
their activity (c-Fos) in response to alterations in peripheral energy signals. 
Consequently, mice with inducible forebrain neuron-specific deletion of the 
UDP-glucose:ceramide glucosyltransferase gene (Ugcg) display obesity, 
hypothermia, and lower sympathetic activity. Recombinant adeno-associated virus 
(rAAV)-mediated Ugcg delivery to the arcuate nucleus (Arc) significantly 
ameliorated obesity, specifying gangliosides as seminal components for 
hypothalamic regulation of body energy homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001506
PMCID: PMC3595213
PMID: 23554574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.