1. J Biomed Res. 2010 Sep;24(5):365-73. doi: 10.1016/S1674-8301(10)60049-8.

Arg462Gln and Asp541Glu polymorphisms in ribonuclease L and prostate cancer 
risk: a meta-analysis.

Mi Y(1), Yu Q, Min Z, Xu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, Feng N, Hua L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu Province, China.

OBJECTIVE: The association between ribonuclease L (RNASEL) gene polymorphisms 
and prostate cancer risk has been widely reported, but the results of these 
studies remained controversial and underpowered. We performed a meta-analysis of 
28 studies to evaluate the association between Arg462Gln and Asp541Glu 
polymorphisms in the RNASEL gene and prostate cancer risk.
METHODS: Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated to 
assess the association between RNASEL polymorphisms and prostate cancer risk.
RESULTS: A significantly increased prostate cancer risk was found for the 
Arg462Gln polymorphism in Africans (Gln/Gln vs Arg/Arg: OR = 2.50, 95%CI = 
1.28-4.87; Gln/Gln vs Gln/Arg + Arg/Arg: OR = 2.54, 95%CI = 1.30-4.95), but not 
in Europeans and Asians. Additionally, the Asp541Glu polymorphism was associated 
with increased total prostate cancer risk (Glu-allele vs Asp-allele: OR = 1.04, 
95%CI = 1.01-1.07; Glu/Glu vs Asp/Asp: OR = 1.22, 95%CI = 1.03-1.46; Glu/Glu vs 
Glu/Asp + Asp/Asp: OR = 1.09, 95%CI = 1.02-1.16). In the stratified analysis for 
the Asp541Glu polymorphism, there was a significantly increased prostate cancer 
risk in Africans and Europeans, and in hospital-based prostate cancer cases.
CONCLUSION: The meta-analysis results showed evidence that RNASEL Arg462Gln and 
Asp541Glu polymorphisms are associated with prostate cancer risk and could be 
low-penetrance prostate cancer susceptibility biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1016/S1674-8301(10)60049-8
PMCID: PMC3596682
PMID: 23554651