1. Cytokine. 2013 May;62(2):327-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.03.015. Epub 2013
Apr  9.

Protective effect of interleukin-23A (IL23A) haplotype variants on type 1A 
diabetes mellitus in a Brazilian population.

Costa VS(1), Santos AS, Fukui RT, Mattana TC, Matioli SR, Silva ME.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Carboidratos e Radioimunoensaio (LIM18), Faculdade de Medicina 
da Universidade de São Paulo, Departamento de Endocrinologia, Brazil. 
vinicius.scosta@usp.br

The Interleukin 23 (IL-23) has a central role in autoimmunity. Allelic variants 
of p19 subunit of IL-23 (IL23A) and IL-23 receptor (IL23R) genes and increased 
IL-23 serum concentrations were associated with autoimmune diseases. We 
therefore searched for variants of IL23A and IL23R that could predispose to Type 
1 diabetes (T1D). The coding regions and boundary intron sequences of IL23A were 
sequenced. Variants of IL23A and of IL23R were also genotyped. Pancreatic and 
extrapancreatic autoantibodies and IL-23 serum levels were determined. The 
cohort involved 370 patients with T1D and 351 healthy control subjects. We 
observed only one coding IL23A variant (rs11171806 G>A) out of the 6 described 
in databases. As the G alleles of rs11171806 and rs2066808 variants of IL23A 
gene were in strong linkage disequilibrium (D'=-0.825 for controls, p<2.0 × 
10(-6) and D'=-0.902, p<2.0 × 10(-17) for patients), further analyses were 
performed with the haplotypes. The GG haplotype was more frequent in controls 
(16.7%) than in T1D patients (9.5%), conferring a protection to T1D (OR=0.53; 
pc=0.0003). No association was found between IL23A allelic variants with age at 
diagnosis of diabetes, C-peptide levels or frequency of autoantibodies. IL23R 
variants (rs10889677 and rs11209026) frequency and IL-23 serum concentrations 
were similar between groups. The GG haplotype of lL23A variants (rs11171806 and 
rs2066808) was protective against T1D. IL23R variants (rs11209026 and 
rs10889677) were not associated with T1D. IL-23 serum concentrations did not 
differ between groups.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.03.015
PMID: 23579029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]