1. J Inflamm Res. 2013;6:35-43. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S39743. Epub 2013 Mar 3.

Anti-inflammatory agents of the carbamoylmethyl ester class: synthesis, 
characterization, and pharmacological evaluation.

Sadek B(1), Hamruoni AM, Adem A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

In this study, target compounds 5-12 were synthesized via acid amine coupling of 
ibuprofen and naproxen with methyl ester derivatives of amino acids, namely, 
l-proline, sarcosine, l-tyrosine, and l-glutamic acid. When tested for 
anti-inflammatory activity using the acute carrageenan-induced hind paw method 
in rats, compounds 5-12 showed significantly greater anti-inflammatory activity, 
in the range of 40.64%-87.82%, compared with a placebo control group (P < 
0.001). Among the newly synthesized compounds 5-12, naproxen derivatives 9-12 
with anti-inflammatory activity ranging between 66.99% and 87.82% showed 
significantly higher (P < 0.05) potency than ibuprofen derivatives 5-8 with 
inhibition in the range of 22.03%-52.91% and control groups of ibuprofen 
(76.34%) or naproxen (75.59%, P < 0.05). Moreover, derivatives 9-12 derived from 
naproxen, in particular compounds 9 and 10 which achieved 83.91% and 87.82% 
inhibition of inflammation, respectively, showed significantly (P < 0.05) higher 
potency than naproxen derivatives 11 and 12. Notably, among naproxen derivatives 
9-12, the gastric ulcerogenicity for 9 (ulcer index 11.73) and 10 (ulcer index 
12.30) was found to be significantly lower (P < 0.05) than that of the active 
ibuprofen and naproxen control groups with ulcer indices of 22.87 and 24.13, 
respectively. On the other hand, naproxen derivatives 9-11 showed significant 
inhibition (P < 0.05) of prostaglandin E2 synthesis when compared with the 
active control group receiving indomethacin, suggesting a correlation between 
the observed low ulcerogenicity and effect on prostaglandin E2 synthesis for 
compounds 9 and 10. However, significant inhibition of prostaglandin E2 observed 
for naproxen derivative 11 (107.51) did not correlate with its observed ulcer 
index (16.84). Our overall findings for carbamoylmethyl ester derivatives named 
5-12 clearly suggest that the compounds showing potent antiinflammatory effect.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S39743
PMCID: PMC3617817
PMID: 23576876