1. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3661-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3839.
Epub  2013 Apr 10.

DOG1 regulates growth and IGFBP5 in gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Simon S(1), Grabellus F, Ferrera L, Galietta L, Schwindenhammer B, Mühlenberg T, 
Taeger G, Eilers G, Treckmann J, Breitenbuecher F, Schuler M, Taguchi T, 
Fletcher JA, Bauer S.

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Center, Departments of Medical Oncology, Pathology and 
Neuropathology, Trauma and Orthopedic Surgery, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, 
West German Cancer Center, University Duisburg-Essen, University Hospital Essen, 
Germany.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are characterized by activating mutations 
of KIT or platelet-derived growth factor receptor α(PDGFRA), which can be 
therapeutically targeted by tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) such as imatinib. 
Despite long-lasting responses, most patients eventually progress after TKI 
therapy. The calcium-dependent chloride channel DOG1 (ANO1/TMEM16A), which is 
strongly and specifically expressed in GIST, is used as a diagnostic marker to 
differentiate GIST from other sarcomas. Here, we report that loss of DOG1 
expression occurs together with loss of KIT expression in a subset of GIST 
resistant to KIT inhibitors, and we illustrate the functional role of DOG1 in 
tumor growth, KIT expression, and imatinib response. Although DOG1 is a crucial 
regulator of chloride balance in GIST cells, we found that RNAi-mediated 
silencing or pharmacologic inhibition of DOG1 did not alter cell growth or KIT 
signaling in vitro. In contrast, DOG1 silencing delayed the growth of GIST 
xenografts in vivo. Expression profiling of explanted tumors after DOG1 blockade 
revealed a strong upregulation in the expression of insulin-like growth 
factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP5), a potent antiangiogenic factor implicated in 
tumor suppression. Similar results were obtained after selection of 
imatinib-resistant DOG1- and KIT-negative cells derived from parental DOG1 and 
KIT-positive GIST cells, where a 5,000-fold increase in IGFBP5 mRNA transcripts 
were documented. In summary, our findings establish the oncogenic activity of 
DOG1 in GIST involving modulation of IGF/IGF receptor signaling in the tumor 
microenvironment through the antiangiogenic factor IGFBP5.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3839
PMCID: PMC3694361
PMID: 23576565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: S. Bauer 
received honoraria and research support by Novartis and honoraria by Pfizer and 
Bayer; M. Schuler received research support and honoraria from Novartis and has 
also served as consultant / in advisory boards.