1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 Apr 12;13:82. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-82.

Fluorescence in situ Hybridization method using Peptide Nucleic Acid probes for 
rapid detection of Lactobacillus and Gardnerella spp.

Machado A(1), Almeida C, Salgueiro D, Henriques A, Vaneechoutte M, Haesebrouck 
F, Vieira MJ, Rodrigues L, Azevedo NF, Cerca N.

Author information:
(1)IBB - Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre of Biological 
Engineering, University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, Braga 4710-057, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a common vaginal infection occurring in 
women of reproductive age. It is widely accepted that the microbial switch from 
normal microflora to BV is characterized by a decrease in vaginal colonization 
by Lactobacillus species together with an increase of Gardnerella vaginalis and 
other anaerobes. Our goal was to develop and optimize a novel Peptide Nucleic 
Acid (PNA) Fluorescence in situ Hybridization assay (PNA FISH) for the detection 
of Lactobacillus spp. and G. vaginalis in mixed samples.
RESULTS: Therefore, we evaluated and validated two specific PNA probes by using 
36 representative Lactobacillus strains, 22 representative G. vaginalis strains 
and 27 other taxonomically related or pathogenic bacterial strains commonly 
found in vaginal samples. The probes were also tested at different 
concentrations of G. vaginalis and Lactobacillus species in vitro, in the 
presence of a HeLa cell line. Specificity and sensitivity of the PNA probes were 
found to be 98.0% (95% confidence interval (CI), from 87.8 to 99.9%) and 100% 
(95% CI, from 88.0 to 100.0%), for Lactobacillus spp.; and 100% (95% CI, from 
92.8 to 100%) and 100% (95% CI, from 81.5 to 100.0%) for G. vaginalis. Moreover, 
the probes were evaluated in mixed samples mimicking women with BV or normal 
vaginal microflora, demonstrating efficiency and applicability of our PNA FISH.
CONCLUSIONS: This quick method accurately detects Lactobacillus spp. and G. 
vaginalis species in mixed samples, thus enabling efficient evaluation of the 
two bacterial groups, most frequently encountered in the vagina.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-82
PMCID: PMC3637831
PMID: 23586331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]