1. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3248-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1578.
Epub  2013 Apr 11.

Single copies of mutant KRAS and mutant PIK3CA cooperate in immortalized human 
epithelial cells to induce tumor formation.

Wang GM(1), Wong HY, Konishi H, Blair BG, Abukhdeir AM, Gustin JP, Rosen DM, 
Denmeade SR, Rasheed Z, Matsui W, Garay JP, Mohseni M, Higgins MJ, Cidado J, 
Jelovac D, Croessmann S, Cochran RL, Karnan S, Konishi Y, Ota A, Hosokawa Y, 
Argani P, Lauring J, Park BH.

Author information:
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of , The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

The selective pressures leading to cancers with mutations in both KRAS and 
PIK3CA are unclear. Here, we show that somatic cell knockin of both KRAS G12V 
and oncogenic PIK3CA mutations in human breast epithelial cells results in 
cooperative activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in vitro, and leads to tumor 
formation in immunocompromised mice. Xenografts from double-knockin cells retain 
single copies of mutant KRAS and PIK3CA, suggesting that tumor formation does 
not require increased copy number of either oncogene, and these results were 
also observed in human colorectal cancer specimens. Mechanistically, the 
cooperativity between mutant KRAS and PIK3CA is mediated in part by Ras/p110α 
binding, as inactivating point mutations within the Ras-binding domain of PIK3CA 
significantly abates pathway signaling. In addition, Pdk1 activation of the 
downstream effector p90RSK is also increased by the combined presence of mutant 
KRAS and PIK3CA. These results provide new insights into mutant KRAS function 
and its role in carcinogenesis.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1578
PMCID: PMC3674106
PMID: 23580570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
B.H.P. has received research funding from GlaxoSmithKline in the past, though 
none of the studies presented here were supported by GlaxoSmithKline. B.H.P. is 
also a paid consultant for GlaxoSmithKline and Horizon Discovery, LTD and sits 
on the scientific advisory board of Horizon Discovery, LTD. Under separate 
licensing agreements between Horizon Discovery, LTD and The Johns Hopkins 
University, B.H.P. is entitled to a share of royalties received by the 
University on sales of products. The terms of this arrangement are being managed 
by the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its conflict of interest 
policies. All other authors declare no potential conflicts.