1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

PLoS One. 2013 Apr 9;8(4):e55695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055695. Print 2013.

Regulation of Cigarette Smoke (CS)-Induced Autophagy by Nrf2.

Zhu L(1), Barrett EC, Xu Y, Liu Z, Manoharan A, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(1). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/d13c3d06-8eb8-49ec-8326-2db7487a7a8a. Barret, Erika C 
[corrected to Barrett, Erika C].

Retraction in
    PLoS One. 2023 Aug 25;18(8):e0290862. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0290862.

Cigarette smoke (CS) has been reported to induce autophagy in airway epithelial 
cells. The subsequent autophagic cell death has been proposed to play an 
important pathogenic role in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); 
however, the underlying molecular mechanism is not entirely clear. Using CS 
extract (CSE) as a surrogate for CS, we found that it markedly increased the 
expressions of both LC3B-I and LC3B-II as well as autophagosomes in airway 
epithelial cells. This is in contrast to the common autophagy inducer (i.e., 
starvation) that increases LC3B-II but reduces LC3B-I. Further studies indicate 
that CSE regulated LC3B at transcriptional and post-translational levels. In 
addition, CSE, but not starvation, activated Nrf2-mediated adaptive response. 
Increase of cellular Nrf2 by either Nrf2 overexpression or the knockdown of 
Keap1 (an Nrf2 inhibitor) significantly repressed CSE-induced LC3B-I and II as 
well as autophagosomes. Supplement of NAC (a GSH precursor) or GSH recapitulated 
the effect of Nrf2, suggesting the increase of cellular GSH level is responsible 
for Nrf2 effect on LC3B and autophagosome. Interestingly, neither Nrf2 
activation nor GSH supplement could restore the repressed activities of mTOR or 
its downstream effctor-S6K. Thus, the Nrf2-dependent autophagy-suppression was 
not due to the re-activation of mTOR-the master repressor of autophagy. To 
search for the downstream effector of Nrf2 on LC3B and autophagosome, we tested 
Nrf2-dependent genes (i.e., NQO1 and P62) that are also increased by CSE 
treatment. We found that P62, but not NQO1, could mimic the effect of Nrf2 
activation by repressing LC3B expression. Thus, Nrf2->P62 appears to play an 
important role in the regulation of CSE-induced LC3B and autophagosome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055695
PMCID: PMC3621864
PMID: 23585825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.