1. Dev Neurobiol. 2013 Oct;73(10):723-43. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22086. Epub 2013 Aug 
20.

Akt regulates glutamate receptor trafficking and postsynaptic membrane 
elaboration at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction.

Lee HG(1), Zhao N, Campion BK, Nguyen MM, Selleck SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania, 16802.

The Akt family of serine-threonine kinases integrates a myriad of signals 
governing cell proliferation, apoptosis, glucose metabolism, and cytoskeletal 
organization. Akt affects neuronal morphology and function, influencing dendrite 
growth and the expression of ion channels. Akt is also an integral element of 
PI3Kinase-target of rapamycin (TOR)-Rheb signaling, a pathway that affects 
synapse assembly in both vertebrates and Drosophila. Our recent findings 
demonstrated that disruption of this pathway in Drosophila is responsible for a 
number of neurodevelopmental deficits that may also affect phenotypes associated 
with tuberous sclerosis complex, a disorder resulting from mutations 
compromising the TSC1/TSC2 complex, an inhibitor of TOR (Dimitroff et al., 
2012). Therefore, we examined the role of Akt in the assembly and physiological 
function of the Drosophila neuromuscular junction (NMJ), a glutamatergic synapse 
that displays developmental and activity-dependent plasticity. The single 
Drosophila Akt family member, Akt1 selectively altered the postsynaptic 
targeting of one glutamate receptor subunit, GluRIIA, and was required for the 
expansion of a specialized postsynaptic membrane compartment, the subsynaptic 
reticulum (SSR). Several lines of evidence indicated that Akt1 influences SSR 
assembly by regulation of Gtaxin, a Drosophila t-SNARE protein (Gorczyca et al., 
2007) in a manner independent of the mislocalization of GluRIIA. Our findings 
show that Akt1 governs two critical elements of synapse development, 
neurotransmitter receptor localization, and postsynaptic membrane elaboration.

Copyright Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dneu.22086
PMCID: PMC4352336
PMID: 23592328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]