1. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 11;8(4):e61326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061326. Print 
2013.

A non-synonymous coding variant (L616F) in the TLR5 gene is potentially 
associated with Crohn's disease and influences responses to bacterial flagellin.

Sheridan J(1), Mack DR, Amre DK, Israel DM, Cherkasov A, Li H, Grimard G, 
Steiner TS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Vancouver Hospital and University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Although numerous studies have implicated TLR5, or 
its ligands, bacterial flagellins, in the pathogenesis of Crohn's disease (CD), 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have not reported associations with the 
TLR5 gene. We aimed to examine potential CD-associated TLR5 variants and assess 
whether they modified inflammatory responses to bacterial flagellins.
METHODS AND PRINCIPAL RESULTS: A two-stage study was carried out. In stage 1, we 
genotyped tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tag-SNPs) in the TLR5 gene in 
a sample of CD cases (<20 years of age, N = 566) and controls (N = 536). Single 
SNP and haplotype analysis was carried out. In Stage 2, we assessed the 
functional significance of potential CD-associated variant(s) vis-Ã -vis effects 
on the inflammatory response to bacterial flagellin using HEK293T cells. We 
observed marginal association between a non-synonymous coding SNP rs5744174 (p = 
0.05) and CD. Associations between SNP rs851139 that is in high linkage 
disequilibrium (LD) with SNP rs5744174 were also suggested (p = 0.07). Haplotype 
analysis revealed that a 3 marker haplotype was significantly associated with CD 
(p = 0.01). Functional studies showed that the risk allele (616F) (corresponding 
to the C allele of SNP rs5744174) conferred significantly greater production of 
CCL20 in response to a range of flagellin doses than the comparator allele 
(616L).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that a non-synonymous coding variation in the 
TLR5 gene may confer modest susceptibility for CD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061326
PMCID: PMC3623901
PMID: 23593463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.