1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2014 Jan;24(1):27-33. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2013.01.011. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Insulin sensitivity, and β-cell function in relation to hemoglobin A1C.

Marini MA(1), Frontoni S(1), Succurro E(2), Arturi F(2), Sciacqua A(2), Hribal 
ML(2), Perticone F(2), Sesti G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome-Tor Vergata, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University "Magna Graecia" of 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University "Magna Graecia" of 
Catanzaro, Italy. Electronic address: sesti@unicz.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The A1C diagnostic criterion for identifying individuals at 
increased risk for diabetes, introduced by the American Diabetes Association in 
2010, was not defined on the basis of the principal pathophysiological 
abnormalities responsible for the development and progression of type 2 
diabetes; we therefore wished to gain a deeper insight into the metabolic 
abnormalities characterizing the group of at risk individuals with an A1C value 
of 5.7-6.4%.
METHODS AND RESULTS: As many as 338 non-diabetic offspring of type 2 diabetic 
patients were consecutively recruited. Insulin secretion was assessed using both 
indexes derived from oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), and intravenous glucose 
tolerance test (IVGTT). Insulin sensitivity was measured by hyperinsulinemic 
euglycemic clamp. As compared with subjects with A1C <5.7%, individuals with A1C 
of 5.7-6.4% exhibited lower insulin sensitivity after adjusting for age, gender 
and body mass index (BMI). Insulin secretion estimated from the OGTT, did not 
differ between the two groups. By contrast, as compared with subjects with A1C 
<5.7%, the acute insulin response (AIR) during an IVGTT and both IVGTT-derived 
and OGTT-derived disposition indexes were reduced in individuals with A1C of 
5.7-6.4% after adjusting for age, gender and BMI. As A1C increased to ≥ 5.7%, a 
sharp decrease in insulin sensitivity and β-cell function, measured as 
disposition index, was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Caucasian individuals with A1C ≥ 5.7% exhibit both core 
pathophysiological defects of type 2 diabetes i.e. insulin resistance and β-cell 
dysfunction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2013.01.011
PMID: 23601331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]