1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Aug;61:153-63. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.007. Epub
 2013 Apr 17.

Structural changes in the C-terminal regulatory region of the Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger 
mediate phosphorylation induced regulation.

Li X(1), Khan MF, Schriemer DC, Fliegel L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2H7, 
Canada.

The Na(+)/H(+) exchanger isoform 1 (NHE1) is a plasma membrane pH regulatory 
protein that removes one intracellular H(+) in exchange for an extracellular 
Na(+). NHE1 is regulated by phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic regulatory region 
and amino acids Ser(770) and Ser(771) of the regulatory domain are necessary for 
activation by sustained intracellular acidosis. The phosphomimetic mutations 
(S770D/S771D) resulted in an activated form of the protein. Immunoprecipitation 
of full length NHE1 protein showed that the phosphomimetic mutant had increased 
sensitivity to digestion with trypsin indicating a conformational change. 
Tryptic digestion of purified C-terminal regulatory region showed that the 
S770D/S771D mutation altered sensitivity to trypsin digestion. Wild type and 
phosphomimetic purified C-terminal region (577-815) of human NHE1 were compared 
and tryptophan fluorescence indicated that there were pH-dependent differences 
in the conformation of the proteins. Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
demonstrated that the phosphomimetic mutant had a more compact structure. 
Bottom-up hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry demonstrated that a 
peptide fragment containing the phosphomimetic mutations became strongly 
stabilized relative to the wild type protein. Overall, the results suggested 
that phosphorylation of S770/S771 changes the conformation of the C-terminal 
regulatory region in a pH-dependent manner, resulting in a more compact region 
that affects NHE1 activity. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 
"Na(+) Regulation in Cardiac Myocytes".

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.007
PMID: 23602949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]