1. Biochemistry. 2013 May 21;52(20):3601-8. doi: 10.1021/bi301657w. Epub 2013 May
 7.

Insights into BAY 60-2770 activation and S-nitrosylation-dependent 
desensitization of soluble guanylyl cyclase via crystal structures of homologous 
nostoc H-NOX domain complexes.

Kumar V(1), Martin F, Hahn MG, Schaefer M, Stamler JS, Stasch JP, van den Akker 
F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, United States.

The soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) is an important receptor for nitric oxide 
(NO). Nitric oxide activates sGC several hundred fold to generate cGMP from GTP. 
Because of sGC's salutary roles in cardiovascular physiology, it has received 
substantial attention as a drug target. The heme domain of sGC is key to its 
regulation as it not only contains the NO activation site but also harbors sites 
for NO-independent sGC activators as well an S-nitrosylation site (β1 C122) 
involved in desensitization. Here we report the crystal structure of the 
activator BAY 60-2770 bound to the Nostoc H-NOX domain that is homologous to 
sGC. The structure reveals that BAY 60-2770 has displaced the heme and acts as a 
heme mimetic via carboxylate-mediated interactions with the conserved YxSxR 
motif as well as hydrophobic interactions. Comparisons with the previously 
determined BAY 58-2667 bound structure reveal that BAY 60-2770 is more ordered 
in its hydrophobic tail region. sGC activity assays demonstrate that BAY 60-2770 
has about 10% higher fold maximal stimulation compared to BAY 58-2667. 
S-Nitrosylation of the BAY 60-2770 substituted Nostoc H-NOX domain causes subtle 
changes in the vicinity of the S-nitrosylated C122 residue. These shifts could 
impact the adjacent YxSxR motif and αF helix and as such potentially inhibit 
either heme incorporation or NO-activation of sGC and thus provide a structural 
basis for desensitization.

DOI: 10.1021/bi301657w
PMCID: PMC3775905
PMID: 23614626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]