1. Thromb Haemost. 2013 Jul;110(1):31-8. doi: 10.1160/TH12-10-0780. Epub 2013 Apr
 25.

Molecular basis of coagulation factor V deficiency caused by the R1698W 
inter-domain mutation.

Calzavarini S(1), Villoutreix BO, Lunghi B, Livaja R, Bernardi F, Dahlb√§ck B.

Author information:
(1)Sara Calzavarini, PhD, Service and Central Laboratory of Hematology, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and University of Lausanne, Rue du Bugnon 46, 
CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. sara.calzavarini@chuv.ch

Coagulation factor V (FV) deficiency is characterised by variable bleeding 
phenotypes and heterogeneous mutations. To add new insights into the FV 
genotype-phenotype relationship, we characterised the R1698W change in the A3 
domain, at the poorly investigated interface with the A2 domain. The FV R1698W 
mutation was responsible for a markedly reduced expression level (10% of FV-WT) 
and specific activity in thrombin generation (0.39). Interestingly, the FVa1698W 
showed rapid activity decay upon activation due to increased dissociation rate 
between the heavy and light chains. The importance of the size and charge of the 
residue at position 1698 was investigated by three additional recombinant 
mutants, FVR1698A, FVR1698Q, and FVR1698E. FVR1698A and FVR1698Q expression (30 
and 45% of FV-WT), specific activity (both 0.57) and stability were all reduced. 
Noticeably, FVR1698E showed normal activity and stability despite poor 
expression (10% of FV-WT). These data indicate the essential role of R1698 for 
normal biosynthetic process and support local flexibility for positively or 
negatively charged residues to produce stable and functional A3-A2 domain 
interactions. Their experimental alteration produces a gradient of FV defects, 
which help to interpret the wide spectrum of phenotypes in FV-deficient 
patients.

DOI: 10.1160/TH12-10-0780
PMID: 23616041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]