1. J Gastroenterol. 2014 Feb;49(2):332-42. doi: 10.1007/s00535-013-0795-0. Epub 
2013 Apr 24.

Genetic polymorphisms of OCT-1 confer susceptibility to severe progression of 
primary biliary cirrhosis in Japanese patients.

Ohishi Y(1), Nakamuta M, Ishikawa N, Saitoh O, Nakamura H, Aiba Y, Komori A, 
Migita K, Yatsuhashi H, Fukushima N, Kohjima M, Yoshimoto T, Fukuizumi K, 
Ishibashi M, Nishino T, Shirabe K, Taketomi A, Maehara Y, Ishibashi H, Nakamura 
M; PBC Study Group of NHOSLJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Clinical Research Institute, National Hospital 
Organization (NHO) Kyushu Medical Center, 1-8-1 Jigyouhama, Fukuoka, 810-8563, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: To identify the genetic factors involved in the pathogenesis of 
primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), we focused on the organic cation transporter 1 
(OCT1/SLC22A1), which is closely associated with phosphatidylcholine synthesis 
in hepatocytes.
METHODS: We selected four (rs683369, rs2282143, rs622342 and rs1443844) OCT-1 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and genotyped these SNPs using the 
TaqMan probe method in 275 Japanese PBC patients and 194 gender-matched, healthy 
volunteers as controls.
RESULTS: The Chi-square test revealed that the rs683369 variant allele (G) was 
associated with insusceptibility to PBC development [P = 0.009, odds ratio (OR) 
0.60, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.40-0.88] in an allele model, and that the 
rs683369 variant allele (G) was associated with jaundice-type progression in a 
minor allele dominant genotype model (P = 0.032, OR 3.10, 95 % CI 1.05-9.14). 
The OCT-1 rs2282143 variant (T) and rs622342 variant (C) were also associated 
with jaundice-type progression in a minor allele recessive genotype model 
(P = 0.0002, OR 10.58, 95 % CI 2.36-47.54, and P = 0.006, OR 7.84, 95 % CI 
1.39-44.36, respectively). Furthermore, the association of OCT-1 rs683369 and 
rs622342 with susceptibility to jaundice-type progression was confirmed by a 
replication study with a distinct set of PBC patients who underwent liver 
transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study is the first report on the association of OCT-1 
genetic polymorphisms with the overall development and jaundice-type progression 
of PBC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-013-0795-0
PMID: 23612856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]