1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 7;288(23):16495-16505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443580.
Epub  2013 Apr 23.

Phosphorylation of serine 399 in LKB1 protein short form by protein kinase Cζ is 
required for its nucleocytoplasmic transport and consequent AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK) activation.

Zhu H(1), Moriasi CM(1), Zhang M(1), Zhao Y(1), Zou MH(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma 73013.
(2)Section of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma 73013; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73013. Electronic 
address: ming-hui-zou@ouhsc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2019 Aug 9;294(32):12264. doi: 10.1074/jbc.AAC119.009664.

Two splice variants of LKB1 exist: LKB1 long form (LKB1(L)) and LKB1 short form 
(LKB1(S)). In a previous study, we demonstrated that phosphorylation of 
Ser-428/431 (in LKB1(L)) by protein kinase Cζ (PKCζ) was essential for 
LKB1-mediated activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in response to 
oxidants or metformin. Paradoxically, LKB1S also activates AMPK although it 
lacks Ser-428/431. Thus, we hypothesized that LKB1(S) contained additional 
phosphorylation sites important in AMPK activation. Truncation analysis and 
site-directed mutagenesis were used to identify putative PKCζ phosphorylation 
sites in LKB1(S). Substitution of Ser-399 to alanine did not alter the activity 
of LKB1(S), but abolished peroxynitrite- and metformin-induced activation of 
AMPK. Furthermore, the phosphomimetic mutation (S399D) increased the 
phosphorylation of AMPK and its downstream target phospho-acetyl-coenzyme A 
carboxylase (ACC). PKCζ-dependent phosphorylation of Ser-399 triggered 
nucleocytoplasmic translocation of LKB1(S) in response to metformin or 
peroxynitrite treatment. This effect was ablated by pharmacological and genetic 
inhibition of PKCζ, by inhibition of CRM1 activity and by substituting Ser-399 
with alanine (S399A). Overexpression of PKCζ up-regulated metformin-mediated 
phosphorylation of both AMPK (Thr-172) and ACC (Ser-79), but the effect was 
ablated in the S399A mutant. We conclude that, similar to Ser-428/431 (in 
LKB1(L)), Ser-399 (in LKB1(S)) is a PKCζ-dependent phosphorylation site 
essential for nucleocytoplasmic export of LKB1(S) and consequent AMPK 
activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.443580
PMCID: PMC3675585
PMID: 23612973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]