1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 Sep;229(2):253-65. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-013-3106-9. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Fenobam sulfate inhibits cocaine-taking and cocaine-seeking behavior in rats: 
implications for addiction treatment in humans.

Keck TM(1), Yang HJ, Bi GH, Huang Y, Zhang HY, Srivastava R, Gardner EL, Newman 
AH, Xi ZX.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Section, Molecular Targets and Medications Discovery 
Branch, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

RATIONALE: The metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 (mGluR5) has been 
reported to be critically involved in drug reward and addiction. Because the 
mGluR5 negative allosteric modulators (NAMs) 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)pyridine 
(MPEP) and 3-((2-methyl-1,3-thiazol-4-yl)ethynyl)pyridine (MTEP) significantly 
inhibit addictivelike behaviors of cocaine and other drugs of abuse in 
experimental animals, it has been suggested that mGluR5 NAMs may have 
translational potential for treatment of addiction in humans. However, neither 
MPEP nor MTEP have been evaluated in humans due to their off-target actions and 
rapid metabolism.
OBJECTIVES: Herein, we evaluate a potential candidate for translational 
addiction research: a new sulfate salt formulation of fenobam, a selective 
mGluR5 NAM that has been investigated in humans.
RESULTS: In rats, fenobam sulfate had superior pharmacokinetics compared to the 
free base, with improved maximal plasma concentration (C max) and longer half 
life. Oral (p.o.) administration of fenobam sulfate (30 or 60 mg/kg) inhibited 
intravenous (i.v.) cocaine self-administration, cocaine-induced reinstatement of 
drug-seeking behavior, and cocaine-associated cue-induced cocaine-seeking 
behavior in rats. Fenobam sulfate also inhibited p.o. sucrose 
self-administration and sucrose-induced reinstatement of sucrose-seeking 
behavior, but had no effect on locomotion.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides additional support for the role of mGluR5 
signaling in cocaine addiction and suggests that fenobam sulfate may have 
translational potential in medication development for the treatment of cocaine 
addiction in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-013-3106-9
PMCID: PMC4191672
PMID: 23615919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/conflict of interest: All authors 
hereby declare that, except for income received from their respective primary 
employers, no financial support or compensation has been received from any 
individual or corporate entity over the past three years for research or 
professional services. There are no personal financial holdings that could be 
perceived as constituting a potential conflict of interest.