1. Diabetologia. 2013 Jul;56(7):1512-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2916-y. Epub 2013
 Apr 27.

Prevalence of monogenic diabetes in the population-based Norwegian Childhood 
Diabetes Registry.

Irgens HU(1), Molnes J, Johansson BB, Ringdal M, Skrivarhaug T, Undlien DE, 
Søvik O, Joner G, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information:
(1)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science, 
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Monogenic diabetes (MD) might be misdiagnosed as type 1 
diabetes. The prevalence of MD among children with apparent type 1 diabetes has 
not been established. Our aim was to estimate the prevalence of common forms of 
MD in childhood diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated 2,756 children aged 0-14 years with newly diagnosed 
diabetes who had been recruited to the nationwide population-based Norwegian 
Childhood Diabetes Registry (NCDR), from July 2002 to March 2012. Completeness 
of ascertainment was 91%. Children diagnosed with diabetes who were 
under12 months of age were screened for mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS. 
Children without GAD and protein tyrosine phosphatase-like protein antibodies 
were screened in two ways. Those who had a parent with diabetes were screened 
for mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, INS and MT-TL1. Children with HbA1c <7.5% 
(<58 mmol/mol) and no insulin requirement were screened for mutations in GCK. 
Finally, we searched the Norwegian MODY Registry for children with genetically 
verified MD.
RESULTS: We identified 15 children harbouring a mutation in HNF1A, nine with one 
in GCK, four with one in KCNJ11, one child with a mutation in INS and none with 
a mutation in MT-TL1. The minimum prevalence of MD in the NCDR was therefore 
1.1%. By searching the Norwegian MODY Registry, we found 24 children with 
glucokinase-MODY, 15 of whom were not present in the NCDR. We estimated the 
minimum prevalence of MD among Norwegian children to be 3.1/100,000.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This is the first prevalence study of the common 
forms of MD in a nationwide, population-based registry of childhood diabetes. We 
found that 1.1% of patients in the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry had MD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-013-2916-y
PMID: 23624530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]