1. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Apr 29;14(5):9338-64. doi: 10.3390/ijms14059338.

Biomarkers for anti-angiogenic therapy in cancer.

Wehland M(1), Bauer J, Magnusson NE, Infanger M, Grimm D.

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Plastic, Aesthetic and Hand Surgery, Otto-von-Guericke-University 
Magdeburg, Leipziger Str. 44, Magdeburg D-39120, Germany. 
daniela.grimm@farm.au.dk.

Angiogenesis, the development of new vessels from existing vasculature, plays a 
central role in tumor growth, survival, and progression. On the molecular level 
it is controlled by a number of pro- and anti-angiogenic cytokines, among which 
the vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs), together with their related 
VEGF-receptors, have an exceptional position. Therefore, the blockade of VEGF 
signaling in order to inhibit angiogenesis was deemed an attractive approach for 
cancer therapy and drugs interfering with the VEGF-ligands, the VEGF receptors, 
and the intracellular VEGF-mediated signal transduction were developed. Although 
promising in pre-clinical trials, VEGF-inhibition proved to be problematic in 
the clinical context. One major drawback was the generally high variability in 
patient response to anti-angiogenic drugs and the rapid development of therapy 
resistance, so that, in total, only moderate effects on progression-free and 
overall survival were observed. Biomarkers predicting the response to 
VEGF-inhibition might attenuate this problem and help to further individualize 
drug and dosage determination. Although up to now no definitive biomarker has 
been identified for this purpose, several candidates are currently under 
investigation. This review aims to give an overview of the recent developments 
in this field, focusing on the most prevalent tumor species.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms14059338
PMCID: PMC3676786
PMID: 23629668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]