1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec;21(12):1349-55. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.86. Epub 2013
 May 1.

Platelet defects in congenital variant of Rett syndrome patients with FOXG1 
mutations or reduced expression due to a position effect at 14q12.

Goubau C(1), Devriendt K, Van der Aa N, Crepel A, Wieczorek D, Kleefstra T, 
Willemsen MH, Rauch A, Tzschach A, de Ravel T, Leemans P, Van Geet C, Buyse G, 
Freson K.

Author information:
(1)1] Department of cardiovascular sciences, Centre for Molecular and Vascular 
Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium [2] Department of Pediatrics, UZ Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.

The Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene encodes a transcriptional repressor essential 
for early development of the telencephalon. Intragenic mutations and gene 
deletions leading to haploinsufficiency cause the congenital variant of Rett 
syndrome. We here describe Rett syndrome-like patients, three of them carrying a 
balanced translocation with breakpoint in the chromosome 14q12 region, and one 
patient having a 14q12 microdeletion excluding the FOXG1 gene. The hypothesis of 
long-range FOXG1-regulatory elements in this region was supported by our finding 
of reduced FOXG1 mRNA and protein levels in platelets and skin fibroblasts from 
these cases. Given that FOXG1 is not only expressed in brain but also in 
platelets, we have studied platelet morphology in these patients and two 
additional patients with FOXG1 mutations. Electron microscopy of their platelets 
showed some enlarged, rounder platelets with often abnormal alpha, and fewer 
dense granules. Platelet function studies were possible in one 14q12 
translocation patient with a prolonged Ivy bleeding time and a patient with a 
heterozygous FOXG1 c.1248C>G mutation (p.Tyr416X). Both have a prolonged PFA-100 
occlusion time with collagen and epinephrine and reduced aggregation responses 
to low dose of ADP and epinephrine. Dense granule ATP secretion was normal for 
strong agonists but absent for epinephrine. In conclusion, our study shows that 
by using platelets functional evidence of cis-regulatory elements in the 14q12 
region result in reduced FOXG1 levels in patients' platelets having 
translocations or deletions in that region. These platelet functional 
abnormalities deserve further investigation regarding a non-transcriptional 
regulatory role for FOXG1 in these anucleated cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.86
PMCID: PMC3831085
PMID: 23632790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]