1. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Oct;34(10):2421-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.002. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

Short-term treatment with tolfenamic acid improves cognitive functions in 
Alzheimer's disease mice.

Subaiea GM(1), Adwan LI, Ahmed AH, Stevens KE, Zawia NH.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegeneration Laboratory, Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI, USA.

Tolfenamic acid lowers the levels of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) and 
amyloid beta (Aβ) when administered to C57BL/6 mice by lowering their 
transcriptional regulator specificity protein 1 (SP1). To determine whether 
changes upstream in the amyloidogenic pathway that forms Aβ plaques would 
improve cognitive outcomes, we administered tolfenamic acid for 34 days to 
hemizygous R1.40 transgenic mice. After the characterization of cognitive 
deficits in these mice, assessment of spatial learning and memory functions 
revealed that treatment with tolfenamic acid attenuated long-term memory and 
working memory deficits, determined using Morris water maze and the Y-maze. 
These improvements occurred within a shorter period of exposure than that seen 
with clinically approved drugs. Cognitive enhancement was accompanied by 
reduction in the levels of the SP1 protein (but not messenger RNA [mRNA]), 
followed by lowering both the mRNA and the protein levels of APP and subsequent 
Aβ levels. These findings provide evidence that tolfenamic acid can disrupt the 
pathologic processes associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and are relevant 
to its scheduled biomarker study in AD patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.002
PMCID: PMC3706573
PMID: 23639209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement The authors hereby declare 
they have no disclosures or conflicts of interest. The University of Rhode 
Island Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) has approved all 
animal studies conducted in this research.