1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jul;33(7):1655-62. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301523. Epub 2013 May 2.

Molecular basis of antiangiogenic thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeat domain 
interactions with CD36.

Klenotic PA(1), Page RC, Li W, Amick J, Misra S, Silverstein RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Antiangiogenic activity of thrombospondin-1 and related proteins is 
mediated by interactions between thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) domains and 
the CD36, LIMP-2, Emp sequence homology (CLESH) domain of the endothelial cell 
receptor CD36. We sought to characterize key molecular determinants of the 
interaction between thrombospondin-1 TSR domains and the CD36 CLESH domain.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Recombinant thrombospondin-1 TSR2 and TSR(2,3) constructs 
inhibited microvascular endothelial cell migration, microvascular endothelial 
cell tube formation, and vessel sprouting in aortic ring assays. Interaction 
with CD36 CLESH decoy peptides negated these effects. Mutational analyses 
identified a cluster of residues that confer positive charge to the TSR2 surface 
and mediate interaction with CD36 CLESH. Antiangiogenic activity was 
significantly reduced by charge-neutralizing mutations of the Arg-Trp ladder in 
TSR2, but not TSR3. Additionally, I438 and K464 of TSR2 were shown to be 
required for CD36 CLESH binding to TSR2. A complementary acidic cluster within 
CD36 CLESH is also required for antiangiogenic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombospondin-1 interacts with CD36 CLESH through electrostatic 
interactions mediated by a positively charged TSR2 surface and multiple 
negatively charged CD36 CLESH residues. Two key residues serve as specificity 
determinants that identify other TSR domains that interact with CD36 CLESH.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301523
PMCID: PMC3737738
PMID: 23640500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]