1. Cell Mol Bioeng. 2011 Jun 1;4(2):281-301. doi: 10.1007/s12195-011-0162-2.

Regulation of Adipose Tissue Metabolism in Humans: Analysis of Responses to the 
Hyperinsulinemic-Euglycemic Clamp Experiment.

Kim J(1), Saidel GM, Kalhan SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA ; Center for Modeling Integrated Metabolic Systems, 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA ; Department of 
Pathobiology, Lerner Research Institute, NE4-203, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The suppression of lipolysis is one of the key metabolic responses of the 
adipose tissue during hyperinsulinemia. The failure to respond and resulting 
increase in plasma fatty acids could contribute to the development of insulin 
resistance and perturbations in the fuel homeostasis in the whole body. In this 
study, a mechanistic, computational model of adipose tissue metabolism in vivo 
has been enhanced to simulate the physiological responses during 
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp experiment in humans. The model incorporates 
metabolic intermediates and pathways that are important in the fed state. In 
addition, it takes into account the heterogeneity of triose phosphate pools 
(glycolytic vs. glyceroneogenic), within the adipose tissue. The model can 
simulate not only steady-state responses at different insulin levels, but also 
concentration dynamics of major metabolites in the adipose tissue venous blood 
in accord with the in vivo data. Simulations indicate that (1) regulation of 
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) reaction is important when the intracellular lipolysis 
is suppressed by insulin; (2) intracellular diglyceride levels can affect the 
regulatory mechanisms; and (3) glyceroneogenesis is the dominant pathway for 
glycerol-3-phosphate synthesis even in the presence of increased glucose uptake 
by the adipose tissue. Reduced redox and increased phosphorylation states 
provide a favorable milieu for glyceroneogenesis in response to insulin. A 
parameter sensitivity analysis predicts that insulin-stimulated glucose uptake 
would be more severely affected by impairment of GLUT4 translocation and 
glycolysis than by impairment of glycogen synthesis and pyruvate oxidation. 
Finally, simulations predict metabolic responses to altered expression of 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEP-CK). Specifically, the increase in the 
rate of re-esterification of fatty acids observed experimentally with the 
overexpression of PEPCK in the adipose tissue would be accompanied by the 
up-regulation of acyl Co-A synthase.

DOI: 10.1007/s12195-011-0162-2
PMCID: PMC3641796
PMID: 23646067