1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Jul;40(7):4625-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2556-9. Epub
2013  May 8.

CCND1 G870A polymorphism interaction with cigarette smoking increases lung 
cancer risk: meta-analyses based on 5008 cases and 5214 controls.

Duan YZ(1), Zhang L, Liu CC, Zhu B, Zhuo WL, Chen ZT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, 400038, China.

Evidence indicates CCND1 G870A polymorphisms as a risk factor for a number of 
cancers. Increasing studies have been conducted on the association of CCND1 
G870A polymorphism with lung cancer risk. However, the results were 
controversial. The aim of the present study was to derive a more precise 
estimation of the relationship. Meta-analyses examining the association between 
CCND1 G870A polymorphism and lung cancer were performed. Subgroup analyses 
regarding ethnicity, smoking status, histological types and source of controls 
were also implemented. All eligible studies for the period up to May 2012 were 
identified. The overall data from ten case-control studies including 5,008 cases 
and 5,214 controls indicated that variant A allele may have an association with 
increased lung cancer risk (AA vs GG: OR = 1.21; 95 % CI = 1.08-1.36, dominant 
model: OR = 1.09; 95 % CI = 1.00-1.19, recessive model: OR = 1.23; 95 % CI = 
1.01-1.49). In the subgroup analysis by ethnicity, A allele may elevate lung 
cancer risk among Asians but not Caucasians or Mixed ethnicities. In smoking 
status subgroup, A allele was shown to associate with increased lung cancer risk 
among smokers but not non-smokers. In the subgroup analysis by histological 
types, increased cancer risks were shown in adenocarcinoma but not squamous cell 
carcinoma, under the homozygote comparison and recessive models. Collectively, 
the results of the present study suggest that CCND1 G870A polymorphism might be 
a low-penetrant risk factor for lung cancer, particularly among Asians and 
smokers. Moreover, homozygous AA alleles might have a correlation with increased 
lung adenocarcinoma susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-013-2556-9
PMID: 23653001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]