1. PLoS One. 2013 May 2;8(5):e62803. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062803. Print
2013.

Equivalent indels--ambiguous functional classes and redundancy in databases.

Assmus J(1), Kleffe J, Schmitt AO, Brockmann GA.

Author information:
(1)Breeding Biology and Molecular Genetics, Humboldt-Universit√§t zu Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany. Jens.Assmus@hu-berlin.de

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/7e304601-fc5c-40fe-857c-d6ea894d1647.

There is considerable interest in studying sequenced variations. However, while 
the positions of substitutions are uniquely identifiable by sequence alignment, 
the location of insertions and deletions still poses problems. Each insertion 
and deletion causes a change of sequence. Yet, due to low complexity or 
repetitive sequence structures, the same indel can sometimes be annotated in 
different ways. Two indels which differ in allele sequence and position can be 
one and the same, i.e. the alternative sequence of the whole chromosome is 
identical in both cases and, therefore, the two deletions are biologically 
equivalent. In such a case, it is impossible to identify the exact position of 
an indel merely based on sequence alignment. Thus, variation entries in a 
mutation database are not necessarily uniquely defined. We prove the existence 
of a contiguous region around an indel in which all deletions of the same length 
are biologically identical. Databases often show only one of several possible 
locations for a given variation. Furthermore, different data base entries can 
represent equivalent variation events. We identified 1,045,590 such problematic 
entries of insertions and deletions out of 5,860,408 indel entries in the 
current human database of Ensembl. Equivalent indels are found in sequence 
regions of different functions like exons, introns or 5' and 3' UTRs. One and 
the same variation can be assigned to several different functional 
classifications of which only one is correct. We implemented an algorithm that 
determines for each indel database entry its complete set of equivalent indels 
which is uniquely characterized by the indel itself and a given interval of the 
reference sequence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062803
PMCID: PMC3642179
PMID: 23658777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.