1. Stem Cells. 2013 Jul;31(7):1227-36. doi: 10.1002/stem.1384.

Concise review: pursuing self-renewal and pluripotency with the stem cell factor 
Nanog.

Saunders A(1), Faiola F, Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell 
Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Pluripotent embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells hold great 
promise for future use in tissue replacement therapies due to their ability to 
self-renew indefinitely and to differentiate into all adult cell types. 
Harnessing this therapeutic potential efficiently requires a much deeper 
understanding of the molecular processes at work within the pluripotency 
network. The transcription factors Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2 reside at the core of 
this network, where they interact and regulate their own expression as well as 
that of numerous other pluripotency factors. Of these core factors, Nanog is 
critical for blocking the differentiation of pluripotent cells, and more 
importantly, for establishing the pluripotent ground state during somatic cell 
reprogramming. Both mouse and human Nanog are able to form dimers in vivo, 
allowing them to preferentially interact with certain factors and perform unique 
functions. Recent studies have identified an evolutionary functional 
conservation among vertebrate Nanog orthologs from chick, zebrafish, and the 
axolotl salamander, adding an additional layer of complexity to Nanog function. 
Here, we present a detailed overview of published work focusing on Nanog 
structure, function, dimerization, and regulation at the genetic and 
post-translational levels with regard to the establishment and maintenance of 
pluripotency. The full spectrum of Nanog function in pluripotent stem cells and 
in cancer is only beginning to be revealed. We therefore use this evidence to 
advocate for more comprehensive analysis of Nanog in the context of disease, 
development, and regeneration.

Copyright Â© 2013 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1384
PMCID: PMC3706551
PMID: 23653415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]