1. PLoS One. 2013 May 8;8(5):e60272. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060272. Print
2013.

Structures of coxsackievirus, rhinovirus, and poliovirus polymerase elongation 
complexes solved by engineering RNA mediated crystal contacts.

Gong P(1), Kortus MG, Nix JC, Davis RE, Peersen OB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, Colorado, United States of America.

RNA-dependent RNA polymerases play a vital role in the growth of RNA viruses 
where they are responsible for genome replication, but do so with rather low 
fidelity that allows for the rapid adaptation to different host cell 
environments. These polymerases are also a target for antiviral drug 
development. However, both drug discovery efforts and our understanding of 
fidelity determinants have been hampered by a lack of detailed structural 
information about functional polymerase-RNA complexes and the structural changes 
that take place during the elongation cycle. Many of the molecular details 
associated with nucleotide selection and catalysis were revealed in our recent 
structure of the poliovirus polymerase-RNA complex solved by first purifying and 
then crystallizing stalled elongation complexes. In the work presented here we 
extend that basic methodology to determine nine new structures of poliovirus, 
coxsackievirus, and rhinovirus elongation complexes at 2.2-2.9 Ã… resolution. The 
structures highlight conserved features of picornaviral polymerases and the 
interactions they make with the template and product RNA strands, including a 
tight grip on eight basepairs of the nascent duplex, a fully pre-positioned 
templating nucleotide, and a conserved binding pocket for the +2 position 
template strand base. At the active site we see a pre-bound magnesium ion and 
there is conservation of a non-standard backbone conformation of the template 
strand in an interaction that may aid in triggering RNA translocation via 
contact with the conserved polymerase motif B. Moreover, by engineering 
plasticity into RNA-RNA contacts, we obtain crystal forms that are capable of 
multiple rounds of in-crystal catalysis and RNA translocation. Together, the 
data demonstrate that engineering flexible RNA contacts to promote crystal 
lattice formation is a versatile platform that can be used to solve the 
structures of viral RdRP elongation complexes and their catalytic cycle 
intermediates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060272
PMCID: PMC3648537
PMID: 23667424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: Co-author R.E.D. is an 
employee of CoCrystal Discovery, Inc., a biotechnology company developing 
antiviral therapeutics for human diseases. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.