1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2013;8:1595-607. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S43244. Epub 2013 May 3.

Induction of osteogenic differentiation of stem cells via a lyophilized microRNA 
reverse transfection formulation on a tissue culture plate.

Wu K(1), Xu J, Liu M, Song W, Yan J, Gao S, Zhao L, Zhang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, The Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNA (miRNA) regulation is a novel approach to manipulating the fate of 
mesenchymal stem cells, but an easy, safe, and highly efficient method of 
transfection is required. In this study, we developed an miRNA reverse 
transfection formulation by lyophilizing Lipofectamine 2000-miRNA lipoplexes on 
a tissue culture plate. The lipoplexes can be immobilized on a tissue culture 
plate with an intact pseudospherical structure and lyophilization without any 
lyoprotectant. In this study, reverse transfection resulted in highly efficient 
cellular uptake of miRNA and enabled significant manipulation of the 
intracellular target miRNA level. Reverse transfection formulations containing 
Lipofectamine 2000 1 μL per well generated much higher transfection efficiency 
without obvious cytotoxicity compared with conventional and other transfection 
methods. Further, the transfection efficiency of the reverse transfection 
formulations did not deteriorate during 90 days of storage at 4°C and -20°C. We 
then assessed the efficiency of the miRNA reverse transfection formulation in 
promoting osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. We found that 
transfection with anti-miR-138 and miR-148b was efficient for enhancing 
osteogenic differentiation, as indicated by enhanced osteogenesis-related gene 
expression, amount of alkaline phosphatase present, production of collagen, and 
matrix mineralization. Overall, the miRNA reverse transfection formulation 
developed in this study is a promising approach for miRNA transfection which can 
control stem cell fate and is suitable for loading miRNAs onto various 
biomaterials.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S43244
PMCID: PMC3647447
PMID: 23662054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]