1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jun 26;54(6):4351-7. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-11606.

Comprehensive mutation analysis by whole-exome sequencing in 41 Chinese families 
with Leber congenital amaurosis.

Chen Y(1), Zhang Q, Shen T, Xiao X, Li S, Guan L, Zhang J, Zhu Z, Yin Y, Wang P, 
Guo X, Wang J, Zhang Q.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a genetically heterogeneous disease 
with, to date, 19 identified causative genes. Our aim was to evaluate the 
mutations in all 19 genes in Chinese families with LCA.
METHODS: LCA patients from 41 unrelated Chinese families were enrolled, 
including 25 previously unanalyzed families and 16 families screened previously 
by Sanger sequencing, but with no identified mutations. Genetic variations were 
screened by whole-exome sequencing and then validated using Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: A total of 41 variants predicted to affect protein coding or splicing 
was detected by whole-exome sequencing, and 40 were confirmed by Sanger 
sequencing. Bioinformatic and segregation analyses revealed 22 potentially 
pathogenic variants (17 novel) in 15 probands, comprised of 3 of 16 previously 
analyzed families and 12 of 25 (48%) previously unanalyzed families. In the 
latter 12 families, mutations were found in CEP290 (three probands); GUCY2D (two 
probands); and CRB1, CRX, RPE65, IQCB1, LCA5, TULP1, and IMPDH1 (one proband 
each). Based on the results from 87 previously analyzed probands and 25 new 
cases, GUCY2D, CRB1, RPGRIP1, CEP290, and CRX were the five most frequently 
mutated genes, which was similar to the results from studies in Caucasian 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Whole-exome sequencing detected mutations in the 19 known LCA genes 
in approximately half of Chinese families with LCA. These results, together with 
our previous results, demonstrate the spectrum and frequency of mutations of the 
19 genes responsible for LCA in Han Chinese individuals. Whole-exome sequencing 
is an efficient method for detecting mutations in highly heterogeneous 
hereditary diseases. Chinese Abstract.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.13-11606
PMID: 23661368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]