1. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e62552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062552. Print
2013.

Variability of HIV-1 genomes among children and adolescents from São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Sanabani SS(1), Pessôa R, Soares de Oliveira AC, Martinez VP, Giret MT, de 
Menezes Succi RC, Carvalho K, Tomiyama CS, Nixon DF, Sabino EC, Kallas EG.

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Research Laboratory (LIM 03), School of Medicine, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. sabyem_63@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic variability is a major feature of the human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1) and considered the key factor to frustrating efforts to 
halt the virus epidemic. In this study, we aimed to investigate the genetic 
variability of HIV-1 strains among children and adolescents born from 1992 to 
2009 in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
METHODOLOGY: Plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were collected 
from 51 HIV-1-positive children and adolescents on ART followed between 
September 1992 and July 2009. After extraction, the genetic materials were used 
in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify the viral near full length 
genomes (NFLGs) from 5 overlapped fragments. NFLGs and partial amplicons were 
directly sequenced and data were phylogenetically inferred.
RESULTS: Of the 51 samples studied, the NFLGs and partial fragments of HIV-1 
from 42 PBMCs and 25 plasma were successfully subtyped. Results based on 
proviral DNA revealed that 22 (52.4%) patients were infected with subtype B, 16 
(38.1%) were infected with BF1 mosaic variants and 4 (9.5%) were infected with 
sub-subtype F1. All the BF1 recombinants were unique and distinct from any 
previously identified unique or circulating recombinant forms in South America. 
Evidence of dual infections was detected in 3 patients coinfected with the same 
or distinct HIV-1 subtypes. Ten of the 31 (32.2%) and 12 of the 21 (57.1%) 
subjects with recovered proviral and plasma, respectively, protease sequences 
were infected with major mutants resistant to protease inhibitors. The V3 
sequences of 14 patients with available sequences from PBMC/or plasma were 
predicted to be R5-tropic virus except for two patients who harbored an X4 
strain.
CONCLUSIONS: The high proportion of HIV-1 BF1 recombinant, coinfection rate and 
vertical transmission in Brazil merits urgent attention and effective measures 
to reduce the transmission of HIV among spouses and sex partners.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062552
PMCID: PMC3646872
PMID: 23667488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.