1. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jul;183(1):49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.03.009. Epub
2013  May 10.

Absence of SERPINB6A causes sensorineural hearing loss with multiple 
histopathologies in the mouse inner ear.

Tan J(1), Prakash MD, Kaiserman D, Bird PI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, 
Australia.

A homozygous mutation of SERPINB6, a gene encoding an intracellular protease 
inhibitor, has recently been associated with post-lingual, autosomal-recessive, 
nonsyndromic hearing loss in humans (DFNB91). Herein, we describe the 
physiological changes underlying SERPINB6 deficiency by analyzing mutant mice in 
which the orthologous gene is replaced by enhanced green fluorescent protein. 
SERPINB6A is present in the neurosensory epithelium, lateral wall, and spiral 
limbus of the cochlea, with highest levels in the inner and outer hair cells of 
the organ of Corti, cells lining the inner sulcus, and supporting cells 
distributed along the epithelial gap junction layer to the outer sulcus. 
Measurements of hearing thresholds in these mice demonstrated age-related 
hearing loss in all homozygous-null, but not heterozygous, mice. Hearing 
impairment was first detected at 3 weeks of age, affecting only high frequencies 
before spreading to other frequencies as the mice aged. The defect is associated 
with progressive cellular degeneration within the cochlea. This begins with the 
hair cells, then involves the primary auditory neurons, and, finally, the 
fibrocytes in the lateral wall. These findings establish these mutant mice as a 
suitable model system to elucidate how SERPINB6 deficiency causes deafness in 
humans.

Copyright Â© 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.03.009
PMID: 23669344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]