1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2013 Jul;97(7):924-8. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2013-303291. 
Epub 2013 May 17.

Immunohistochemical and molecular pathology of ocular uveal melanocytoma: 
evidence for somatic GNAQ mutations.

Mudhar HS(1), Doherty R, Salawu A, Sisley K, Rennie IG.

Author information:
(1)National Specialist Ophthalmic Pathology Service, Department of 
Histopathology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK. 
hardeep.mudhar@sth.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: Intraocular melanocytoma is a rare naevus variant that can be located 
at the optic disc or within the uvea, and belongs to the group of 
non-epithelial-associated melanocytic lesions. We wanted to gain an 
understanding of the role of GNAQ, GNA11 and BRAF V600E in the pathogenesis of 
uveal melanocytoma and in cases of transformation to uveal melanoma and also to 
perform a differential immunohistochemical study comparing melanocytoma with 
uveal melanoma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Two patients were identified with melanocytoma, one of 
which had transformed to melanoma. In the latter case, the melanocytoma 
exhibited an immunophenotype that featured nuclear p27 and no HMB45 staining, 
with very low Cyclin D1 expression compared with the melanoma that featured 
little nuclear but more cytoplasmic p27 positivity, much higher Cyclin D1 
expression and HMB45 positivity. The melanocytomas were negative for CD68 
allowing distinction from melanophages. Both melanocytomas and the melanoma 
harboured mutations in GNAQ, with no mutations of GNA11 or BRAF V600E.
CONCLUSIONS: GNAQ mutations are present in uveal melanocytomas and in a case of 
transformation to melanoma, implicating GNAQ-dependent mitogen activation 
signals, in the pathogenesis of uveal melanocytoma. This assists in explaining 
why a proportion of uveal melanocytoma can transform to uveal melanoma, known to 
harbour high-frequency GNAQ mutations at exon 5, codon 209.

DOI: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2013-303291
PMID: 23685997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]