1. J Exp Bot. 2013 Jul;64(10):2885-98. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert148. Epub 2013 May 22.

Differential accumulation of phenolic compounds and expression of related genes 
in black- and yellow-seeded Brassica napus.

Qu C(1), Fu F, Lu K, Zhang K, Wang R, Xu X, Wang M, Lu J, Wan H, Zhanglin T, Li 
J.

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Engineering Research Center for Rapeseed, College of Agronomy and 
Biotechnology, Southwest University, 216 Tiansheng Road, Beibei, Chongqing 
400716, People's Republic of China.

Developing yellow-seeded Brassica napus (rapeseed) with improved qualities is a 
major breeding goal. The intermediate and final metabolites of the 
phenylpropanoid and flavonoid pathways affect not only oil quality but also seed 
coat colour of B. napus. Here, the accumulation of phenolic compounds was 
analysed in the seed coats of black-seeded (ZY821) and yellow-seeded (GH06) B. 
napus. Using toluidine blue O staining and liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry, histochemical and biochemical differences were identified in the 
accumulation of phenolic compounds between ZY821 and GH06. Two and 13 unique 
flavonol derivatives were detected in ZY821 and GH06, respectively. Quantitative 
real-time PCR analysis revealed significant differences between ZY821 and GH06 
in the expression of common phenylpropanoid biosynthetic genes (BnPAL and 
BnC4H), common flavonoid biosynthetic genes (BnTT4 and BnTT6), anthocyanin- and 
proanthocyandin-specific genes (BnTT3 and BnTT18), proanthocyandin-specific 
genes (BnTT12, BnTT10, and BnUGT2) and three transcription factor genes (BnTTG1, 
BnTTG2, and BnTT8) that function in the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. These 
data provide insight into pigment accumulation in B. napus, and serve as a 
useful resource for researchers analysing the formation of seed coat colour and 
the underlying regulatory mechanisms in B. napus.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ert148
PMCID: PMC3697950
PMID: 23698630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]