1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Aug;51(8):2541-50. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00417-13. Epub 2013
 May 22.

Detection of epidemic USA300 community-associated methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus strains by use of a single allele-specific PCR assay 
targeting a novel polymorphism of Staphylococcus aureus pbp3.

Chadwick SG(1), Prasad A, Smith WL, Mordechai E, Adelson ME, Gygax SE.

Author information:
(1)Femeris Women's Health Research Center, Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, LLC, 
Genesis Biotechnology Group, Hamilton, New Jersey, USA.

In recent years, the dramatic increase in community-associated 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) infections has become a 
significant health care challenge. Early detection of CA-MRSA is important 
because of its increased virulence associated with the arginine catabolic mobile 
element (ACME), Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL), and other toxins that may 
contribute to disease severity. In particular, the USA300 epidemic clone has 
emerged and now represents the cause of as much as 98% of CA-MRSA skin and soft 
tissue infections in the United States. Current diagnostic assays used to 
identify CA-MRSA strains are based on complex multiplex PCRs targeting the 
staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCCmec) DNA junction, a multitude of 
genes, and noncoding DNA fragments or on a number of lengthy sequence-typing 
methods. Here, two nucleotide polymorphisms, G88A and G2047A, that were found to 
be in strict linkage disequilibrium in the S. aureus penicillin-binding protein 
3 (pbp3) gene were also found to be highly associated with the USA300 clone of 
CA-MRSA. Clinical isolates that contained this pbp3 allele were also positive 
for the presence of SCCmec type IV, the ACME, and the PVL toxin gene and matched 
the t008 or t121 molecular spa types, which are associated specifically with the 
USA300 CA-MRSA clone. A single allele-specific PCR targeting the G88A 
polymorphism was developed and was found to be 100% sensitive and specific for 
the detection of USA300 CA-MRSA and 91.5% sensitive and 100% specific for the 
detection of all CA-MRSA isolates in this study.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00417-13
PMCID: PMC3719641
PMID: 23698534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]