1. Tech Coloproctol. 2014 Mar;18(3):285-9. doi: 10.1007/s10151-013-1030-y. Epub 
2013 May 22.

Double heterozygosity for BRCA1 and hMLH1 gene mutations in a 46-year-old woman 
with five primary tumors.

Pedroni M(1), Di Gregorio C, Cortesi L, Reggiani Bonetti L, Magnani G, Simone 
ML, Medici V, Priore Oliva C, Marino M, Ponz de Leon M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Clinical Medicine and Public Health, University 
of Modena, Modena, Italy.

Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes predispose to hereditary breast 
cancer, whereas carriers of mutations in any of the mismatch repair genes (MMR; 
hMLH1, hMSH2, hMSH6, hPMS2) are highly susceptible to Lynch syndrome. In the 
present study, we describe a woman affected by unilateral breast cancer at the 
age of 35 years. After 4 years, during the follow-up she developed synchronous 
(and asymptomatic) endometrial cancer, ovarian carcinoma and renal clear cell 
carcinoma. After 7 years (at age 46), the patient developed an infiltrating 
carcinoma of the contralateral breast and died in a few months of metastatic 
disease. Initial investigations led to the detection of a constitutional 
mutation in the BRCA1 gene. The extended genealogical tree disclosed a suspected 
history of colorectal carcinoma in the maternal branch. Endometrial cancer of 
the proband was investigated for microsatellite instability (MSI) and 
immunohistochemical expression of MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 proteins. An high MSI 
status and lack of expression of MLH1 protein were detected. hMLH1 gene 
sequencing revealed the presence of a constitutional mutation, which was also 
found in the mother of the proband. Loss of the wild-type hMLH1 allele was 
detected in both breast tumors, thus suggesting that the MMR defect contributed 
to the development of the breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10151-013-1030-y
PMID: 23695190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]