1. Oncogene. 2013 Dec 5;32(49):5522-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.189. Epub 2013 May 
27.

Telomere dysfunction and activation of alternative lengthening of telomeres in 
B-lymphocytes infected by Epstein-Barr virus.

Kamranvar SA(1), Chen X, Masucci MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

Malignant cells achieve replicative immortality by two alternative mechanisms, a 
common one dependent on de novo synthesis of telomeric DNA by telomerase, and a 
rare one based on telomere recombination known as alternative lengthening of 
telomeres (ALT). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transforms human B-lymphocytes into 
lymphoblastoid cell lines with unlimited growth potential in vitro and in vivo. 
Here we show that newly EBV-infected cells exhibit multiple signs of telomere 
dysfunction, including the occurrence of extra-chromosomal telomeres, telomere 
fusion and telomere length heterogeneity, and undergo progressive increase in 
telomere length without a parallel increase in telomerase activity. This 
phenotype is accompanied by the accumulation of telomere-associated 
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies and telomeric-sister chromatid exchange, 
suggesting that EBV infection promotes the activation of ALT. Newly infected 
cells also display a significant reduction of telomere-associated TRF2 and 
express low levels of TRF1, TRF2, POT1 and ATRX, pointing to telomere 
de-protection as an important correlate of ALT activation. Collectively, these 
findings highlight the involvement of recombination-dependent mechanisms for 
maintenance of telomere homeostasis in EBV-induced B-cell immortalization.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.189
PMCID: PMC3898310
PMID: 23708666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]