1. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Aug;96(8):4857-69. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6467. Epub 2013 May
 22.

Newly identified mutations at the CSN1S1 gene in Ethiopian goats affect casein 
content and coagulation properties of their milk.

Mestawet TA(1), Girma A, Adnøy T, Devold TG, Vegarud GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway. danbebis@yahoo.com

Very high casein content and good coagulation properties previously observed in 
some Ethiopian goat breeds led to investigating the αs1-casein (CSN1S1) gene in 
these breeds. Selected regions of the CSN1S1 gene were sequenced in 115 goats 
from 5 breeds (2 indigenous: Arsi-Bale and Somali, 1 exotic: Boer, and 2 
crossbreeds: Boer × Arsi-Bale and Boer × Somali). The DNA analysis resulted in 
35 new mutations: 3 in exons, 3 in the 5' untranslated region (UTR), and 29 in 
the introns. The mutations in exons that resulted in an amino acid shift were 
then picked to evaluate their influence on individual casein content (αs1-, 
αs2-, β-, and κ-CN), micellar size, and coagulation properties in the milk from 
the 5 goat breeds. A mutation at nucleotide 10657 (exon 10) involved a 
transversion: CAG→CCG, resulting in an amino acid exchange Gln77→Pro77. This 
mutation was associated with the indigenous breeds only. Two new mutations, at 
nucleotide 6072 (exon 4) and 12165 (exon 12), revealed synonymous transitions: 
GTC→GTT in Val15 and AGA→AGG in Arg100 of the mature protein. Transitions G→A 
and C→T at nucleotides 1374 and 1866, respectively, occurred in the 5' UTR, 
whereas the third mutation involved a transversion T→G at nucleotide location 
1592. The goats were grouped into homozygote new (CC), homozygote reference 
(AA), and heterozygote (CA) based on the nucleotide that involved the 
transversion. The content of αs1-CN (15.32g/kg) in milk samples of goats 
homozygous (CC) for this newly identified mutation, Gln77→Pro77 was 
significantly higher than in milks of heterozygous (CA; 9.05g/kg) and reference 
(AA; 7.61g/kg) genotype animals. The αs2-, β-, and κ-CN contents showed a 
similar pattern. Milk from goats with a homozygous new mutation had 
significantly lower micellar size. Milk from both homozygote and heterozygote 
new-mutation goats had significantly shorter coagulation rate and stronger gel 
than the reference genotype. Except the transversion, the sequence corresponded 
to allele A and presumably derived from it. Therefore, this allele is denoted by 
A3. All goats from the reference genotype (AA) were homozygous for the allele at 
nucleotide position 1374 and 1866, whereas all mutations in the 5' UTR existed 
in a heterozygous form in both heterozygous (CA) and the new mutation (CC) 
genotype. The newly identified mutation (CC) detected in some of the goat breeds 
is, therefore, important in selection for genetic improvement and high-quality 
milk for the emerging goat cheese-producing industries. The finding will also 
benefit farmers raising these goat breeds due to the increased selling price of 
goats. Further studies should investigate the effect of this amino acid exchange 
on the secondary and tertiary structure of the αs1-CN molecule and on the 
susceptibility of peptide hydrolysis by digestive enzymes.

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2012-6467
PMID: 23706484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]