1. Mol Neurodegener. 2013 May 28;8:17. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-17.

Conformational templating of α-synuclein aggregates in neuronal-glial cultures.

Sacino AN(1), Thomas MA, Ceballos-Diaz C, Cruz PE, Rosario AM, Lewis J, Giasson 
BI, Golde TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genetic studies have established a causative role for α-synuclein 
(αS) in Parkinson's disease (PD), and the presence of αS aggregates in the form 
of Lewy body (LB) and Lewy neurite (LN) protein inclusions are defining 
pathological features of PD. Recent data has established that extracellular αS 
aggregates can induce intracellular αS pathologies supporting the hypothesis 
that αS pathology can spread via a "prion-like" self-templating mechanism.
RESULTS: Here we investigated the potential for conformational templating of αS 
intracellular aggregates by seeding using recombinant wild-type and PD-linked 
mutant (A53T and E46K) αS in primary mixed neuronal-glial cultures. We find that 
wild-type and A53T αS fibrils predominantly seed flame-like inclusions in both 
neurons and astrocytes of mixed primary cultures; whereas the structurally 
distinct E46K fibrils seed punctate, rounded inclusions. Notably, these 
differences in seeded inclusion formation in these cultures reflect differences 
in inclusion pathology seen in transgenic mice expressing the A53T or E46K αS 
mutants. We further show that the inclusion morphology is dictated primarily by 
the seed applied rather than the form of αS expressed. We also provide initial 
evidence that αS inclusion pathology can be passaged in primary astrocyte 
cultures.
CONCLUSION: These studies establish for the first time that αS aggregation in 
cultured cells can occur by a morphological self-templating mechanism.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-17
PMCID: PMC3671973
PMID: 23714769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]