1. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2013 Jul;162B(5):439-51. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.32168. Epub 2013 May 31.

A genome-wide association study of sleep habits and insomnia.

Byrne EM(1), Gehrman PR, Medland SE, Nyholt DR, Heath AC, Madden PA, Hickie IB, 
Van Duijn CM, Henders AK, Montgomery GW, Martin NG, Wray NR; Chronogen 
Consortium.

Collaborators: Amin N, Allebrandt KV, Müller-Myhsok B, Teder-Laving M, Hayward 
C, Esko T, van Mill JG, Melville SA, Vogelzangs N, Campbell H, Borovecki F, 
Huffman JE, Wichmann E, Oostra BA, Wright AF, Wilson JF, Pramstaller PP, Hicks 
AA, Merrow M, Rudan I, Penninx BW, Metspalu A, Meitinger T, Roenneberg T, van 
Duijn CM.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
e.byrne3@uq.edu.au

Several aspects of sleep behavior such as timing, duration and quality have been 
demonstrated to be heritable. To identify common variants that influence sleep 
traits in the population, we conducted a genome-wide association study of six 
sleep phenotypes assessed by questionnaire in a sample of 2,323 individuals from 
the Australian Twin Registry. Genotyping was performed on the Illumina 317, 370, 
and 610K arrays and the SNPs in common between platforms were used to impute 
non-genotyped SNPs. We tested for association with more than 2,000,000 common 
polymorphisms across the genome. While no SNPs reached the genome-wide 
significance threshold, we identified a number of associations in plausible 
candidate genes. Most notably, a group of SNPs in the third intron of the 
CACNA1C gene ranked as most significant in the analysis of sleep latency (P = 
1.3 × 10⁻⁶). We attempted to replicate this association in an independent sample 
from the Chronogen Consortium (n = 2,034), but found no evidence of association 
(P = 0.73). We have identified several other suggestive associations that await 
replication in an independent sample. We did not replicate the results from 
previous genome-wide analyses of self-reported sleep phenotypes after correction 
for multiple testing.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32168
PMCID: PMC4083458
PMID: 23728906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]