1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2014 Jun;29(6):971-7. doi: 10.1007/s00467-013-2486-8. Epub
2013  May 30.

DNA variant databases improve test accuracy and phenotype prediction in Alport 
syndrome.

International Alport Mutation Consortium; Savige J, Ars E, Cotton RG, Crockett 
D, Dagher H, Deltas C, Ding J, Flinter F, Pont-Kingdon G, Smaoui N, Torra R, 
Storey H.

X-linked Alport syndrome is a form of progressive renal failure caused by 
pathogenic variants in the COL4A5 gene. More than 700 variants have been 
described and a further 400 are estimated to be known to individual laboratories 
but are unpublished. The major genetic testing laboratories for X-linked Alport 
syndrome worldwide have established a Web-based database for published and 
unpublished COL4A5 variants ( 
https://grenada.lumc.nl/LOVD2/COL4A/home.php?select_db=COL4A5 ). This conforms 
with the recommendations of the Human Variome Project: it uses the Leiden Open 
Variation Database (LOVD) format, describes variants according to the human 
reference sequence with standardized nomenclature, indicates likely 
pathogenicity and associated clinical features, and credits the submitting 
laboratory. The database includes non-pathogenic and recurrent variants, and is 
linked to another COL4A5 mutation database and relevant bioinformatics sites. 
Access is free. Increasing the number of COL4A5 variants in the public domain 
helps patients, diagnostic laboratories, clinicians, and researchers. The 
database improves the accuracy and efficiency of genetic testing because its 
variants are already categorized for pathogenicity. The description of further 
COL4A5 variants and clinical associations will improve our ability to predict 
phenotype and our understanding of collagen IV biochemistry. The database for 
X-linked Alport syndrome represents a model for databases in other inherited 
renal diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-013-2486-8
PMID: 23720012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]