1. Leukemia. 2013 Sep;27(9):1874-81. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.163. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Survival and prognosis among 1545 patients with contemporary polycythemia vera: 
an international study.

Tefferi A(1), Rumi E, Finazzi G, Gisslinger H, Vannucchi AM, Rodeghiero F, Randi 
ML, Vaidya R, Cazzola M, Rambaldi A, Gisslinger B, Pieri L, Ruggeri M, Bertozzi 
I, Sulai NH, Casetti I, Carobbio A, Jeryczynski G, Larson DR, Müllauer L, 
Pardanani A, Thiele J, Passamonti F, Barbui T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. 
tefferi.ayalew@mayo.edu

Under the auspices of an International Working Group, seven centers submitted 
diagnostic and follow-up information on 1545 patients with World Health 
Organization-defined polycythemia vera (PV). At diagnosis, median age was 61 
years (51% females); thrombocytosis and venous thrombosis were more frequent in 
women and arterial thrombosis and abnormal karyotype in men. Considering 
patients from the center with the most mature follow-up information (n=337 with 
44% of patients followed to death), median survival (14.1 years) was 
significantly worse than that of the age- and sex-matched US population 
(P<0.001). In multivariable analysis, survival for the entire study cohort 
(n=1545) was adversely affected by older age, leukocytosis, venous thrombosis 
and abnormal karyotype; a prognostic model that included the first three 
parameters delineated risk groups with median survivals of 10.9-27.8 years 
(hazard ratio (HR), 10.7; 95% confidence interval (CI): 7.7-15.0). Pruritus was 
identified as a favorable risk factor for survival. Cumulative hazard of 
leukemic transformation, with death as a competing risk, was 2.3% at 10 years 
and 5.5% at 15 years; risk factors included older age, abnormal karyotype and 
leukocytes ≥15 × 10(9)/l. Leukemic transformation was associated with treatment 
exposure to pipobroman or P32/chlorambucil. We found no association between 
leukemic transformation and hydroxyurea or busulfan use.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2013.163
PMCID: PMC3768558
PMID: 23739289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]