1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 Nov;230(2):291-8. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-013-3153-2. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Antidepressant effects of AMPA and ketamine combination: role of hippocampal 
BDNF, synapsin, and mTOR.

Akinfiresoye L(1), Tizabi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Howard University College of Medicine, 520 W 
Street NW, Washington, DC, 20059, USA.

RATIONALE: A number of preclinical and clinical studies suggest that ketamine, a 
glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, has a rapid and lasting 
antidepressant effect when administered either acutely or chronically. It has 
been postulated that this effect is due to stimulation of 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we tested whether AMPA alone has an antidepressant 
effect and if the combination of AMPA and ketamine provides added benefit in 
Wistar-Kyoto rats, a putative animal model of depression.
RESULTS: Chronic AMPA treatment resulted in a dose-dependent antidepressant 
effect in both the forced swim test and sucrose preference test. Moreover, 
chronic administration (10-11 days) of combinations of AMPA and ketamine, at 
doses that were ineffective on their own, resulted in a significant 
antidepressant effect. The behavioral effects were associated with increases in 
hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor, synapsin, and mammalian target of 
rapamycin.
CONCLUSION: These findings are the first to provide evidence for an 
antidepressant effect of AMPA and suggest the usefulness of AMPA-ketamine 
combination in treatment of depression. Furthermore, these effects appear to be 
associated with increases in markers of hippocampal neurogenesis and 
synaptogenesis, suggesting a mechanism of their action.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-013-3153-2
PMCID: PMC3805670
PMID: 23732839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest