1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Jun 6;14:178. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-178.

Exploring the transcription factor activity in high-throughput gene expression 
data using RLQ analysis.

Baty F(1), RÃ¼diger J, Miglino N, Kern L, Borger P, Brutsche M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Cantonal Hospital St, Gallen, 
Rorschacherstrasse 95, CH-9007 St, Gallen, Switzerland. florent.baty@kssg.ch

BACKGROUND: Interpretation of gene expression microarray data in the light of 
external information on both columns and rows (experimental variables and gene 
annotations) facilitates the extraction of pertinent information hidden in these 
complex data. Biologists classically interpret genes of interest after 
retrieving functional information from a subset of genes of interest. 
Transcription factors play an important role in orchestrating the regulation of 
gene expression. Their activity can be deduced by examining the presence of 
putative transcription factors binding sites in the gene promoter regions.
RESULTS: In this paper we present the multivariate statistical method RLQ which 
aims to analyze microarray data where additional information is available on 
both genes and samples. As an illustrative example, we applied RLQ methodology 
to analyze transcription factor activity associated with the time-course effect 
of steroids on the growth of primary human lung fibroblasts. RLQ could 
successfully predict transcription factor activity, and could integrate various 
other sources of external information in the main frame of the analysis. The 
approach was validated by means of alternative statistical methods and 
biological validation.
CONCLUSIONS: RLQ provides an efficient way of extracting and visualizing 
structures present in a gene expression dataset by directly modeling the link 
between experimental variables and gene annotations.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-178
PMCID: PMC3686578
PMID: 23742070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]