1. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Jun;121(6):361-7. doi: 
10.1055/s-0033-1345122. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

IGF2 gene polymorphisms and IGF-II concentration are determinants of 
longitudinal weight trends in type 2 diabetes.

Narayanan RP(1), Fu B, Payton A, Hudson JE, Oliver RL, Anderson SG, Siddals KW, 
White A, Ollier WE, Heald AH, Gibson JM.

Author information:
(1)Vascular Research Group. ram.narayanan@manchester.ac.uk

The hypothesis of the study was that IGF2 gene polymorphisms were associated 
with longitudinal trends in weight through modification of IGF-II 
concentration.Observational study that explored associations of the IGF2 gene 
and baseline circulating IGF-II concentration with 'real-world' longitudinal 
trends in body-mass index in a type 2 diabetes population.26 haplotype tagging 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the IGF2 and H19 genes were studied 
in 485 Caucasian individuals in the Salford Longitudinal Diabetes Cohort. A 
generalised-estimating equation (GEE) model was used to separately study the 
association of SNPs and IGF-II concentration with 8-year longitudinal trends in 
body-mass index.High serum IGF-II concentration at baseline was associated with 
weight loss over the study period (β=-0.006, 95% CI -0.009 to -0.002, p<0.001). 
8 SNPs were associated with longitudinal body-mass index trends, of which 4 
retained significance after multiple -testing correction. 2 SNPs rs10770063 and 
rs3842767 were associated with both IGF-II concentration as well as longitudinal 
weight changes.We report novel associations between polymorphisms in the IGF2 
gene, with concentration of circulating IGF-II and also with longitudinal weight 
change in type 2 diabetes. Our data indicate that the IGF2 gene and its gene 
product may be important determinants of longitudinal weight trends in type 2 
diabetes.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1345122
PMID: 23757053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]