1. J Neurooncol. 2013 Sep;114(2):237-40. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1176-5. Epub
2013  Jun 12.

Salvage therapy with BRAF inhibitors for recurrent pleomorphic 
xanthoastrocytoma: a retrospective case series.

Chamberlain MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. chambemc@u.washington.edu

Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is a World Health Organization Grade 2 
glioma that is uncommon (<1 % all adult gliomas) and seen primarily in children 
and young adults. PXA has been demonstrated to manifest the V600E BRAF mutation 
in nearly 70 % of all tumors, a mutation that constitutively activates the 
BRAF/MEK signaling pathway. Assess response and toxicity of a BRAF inhibitor, 
vemurafenib, in recurrent PXA manifesting the V600E mutation. Four adults [2 
males; 2 female: median age 45 years (range 34-53)] with surgery, radiation and 
alkylator refractory recurrent PXA demonstrating the BRAF mutation (V600E) were 
treated with vemurafenib. A cycle of vemurafenib was defined as 4 weeks of 
continuous therapy. All toxicities seen were grade 2 and included arthralgia, 
photosensitivity, fatigue and nausea (1 patient each). The median number of 
cycles of therapy was 5 (range 2-10). Radiographic response was progressive 
disease in 1, stable disease in 2 and partial response in 1. Median progression 
free survival was 5 months (range 2-10 months). Median overall survival was 8 
months (range 4-14 months). In this small retrospective series of select 
patients with recurrent PXA manifesting the BRAF V600E activating mutation, 
vemurafenib appears to have single agent activity with manageable toxicity. 
Confirmation in a larger series of similar patients is required.

DOI: 10.1007/s11060-013-1176-5
PMID: 23756728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]