1. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jun 16;12:63. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-63.

Regulation of protumorigenic pathways by insulin like growth factor binding 
protein2 and its association along with β-catenin in breast cancer lymph node 
metastasis.

Sehgal P(1), Kumar N, Praveen Kumar VR, Patil S, Bhattacharya A, Vijaya Kumar M, 
Mukherjee G, Kondaiah P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Indian 
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India.

BACKGROUND: Insulin like growth factor binding proteins modulate the mitogenic 
and pro survival effects of IGF. Elevated expression of IGFBP2 is associated 
with progression of tumors that include prostate, ovarian, glioma among others. 
Though implicated in the progression of breast cancer, the molecular mechanisms 
involved in IGFBP2 actions are not well defined. This study investigates the 
molecular targets and biological pathways targeted by IGFBP2 in breast cancer.
METHODS: Transcriptome analysis of breast tumor cells (BT474) with stable 
knockdown of IGFBP2 and breast tumors having differential expression of IGFBP2 
by immunohistochemistry was performed using microarray. Differential gene 
expression was established using R-Bioconductor package. For validation, gene 
expression was determined by qPCR. Inhibitors of IGF1R and integrin pathway were 
utilized to study the mechanism of regulation of β-catenin. Immunohistochemical 
and immunocytochemical staining was performed on breast tumors and experimental 
cells, respectively for β-catenin and IGFBP2 expression.
RESULTS: Knockdown of IGFBP2 resulted in differential expression of 2067 up 
regulated and 2002 down regulated genes in breast cancer cells. Down regulated 
genes principally belong to cell cycle, DNA replication, repair, p53 signaling, 
oxidative phosphorylation, Wnt signaling. Whole genome expression analysis of 
breast tumors with or without IGFBP2 expression indicated changes in genes 
belonging to Focal adhesion, Map kinase and Wnt signaling pathways. 
Interestingly, IGFBP2 knockdown clones showed reduced expression of β- catenin 
compared to control cells which was restored upon IGFBP2 re-expression. The 
regulation of β-catenin by IGFBP2 was found to be IGF1R and integrin pathway 
dependent. Furthermore, IGFBP2 and β-catenin are co-ordinately overexpressed in 
breast tumors and correlate with lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights regulation of β-catenin by IGFBP2 in breast 
cancer cells and most importantly, combined expression of IGFBP2 and β-catenin 
is associated with lymph node metastasis of breast tumors.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-63
PMCID: PMC3698021
PMID: 23767917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]