1. Mol Vis. 2013 Jun 6;19:1238-46. Print 2013.

Interrogation of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha locus and 
corneal astigmatism in Australians of Northern European ancestry: results of a 
genome-wide association study.

Yazar S(1), Mishra A, Ang W, Kearns LS, Mountain JA, Pennell C, Montgomery GW, 
Young TL, Hammond CJ, Macgregor S, Mackey DA, Hewitt AW.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Western Australia, 
Lions Eye Institute, Perth, Australia. seyhanyazar@lei.org.au

PURPOSE: Corneal astigmatism is a common eye disorder characterized by 
irregularities in corneal curvature. Recently, the rs7677751 single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) at the platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) 
locus was found to be associated with corneal astigmatism in people of Asian 
ancestry. In the present study, we sought to replicate this finding and identify 
other genetic markers of corneal astigmatism in an Australian population of 
Northern European ancestry.
METHODS: Data from two cohorts were included in this study. The first cohort 
consisted of 1,013 individuals who were part of the Western Australian Pregnancy 
Cohort (Raine) Study: 20-year follow-up Eye Study. The second cohort comprised 
1,788 individuals of 857 twin families who were recruited through the Twins Eye 
Study in Tasmania and the Brisbane Adolescent Twin Study. Corneal astigmatism 
was calculated as the absolute difference between the keratometry readings in 
two meridians, and genotype data were extracted from genome-wide arrays. 
Initially, each cohort was analyzed separately, before being combined for meta- 
and subsequent genome-wide pathway analysis.
RESULTS: Following meta-analysis, SNP rs7677751 at the PDGFRA locus had a 
combined p=0.32. No variant was found to be statistically significantly 
associated with corneal astigmatism at the genome-wide level (p<5.0×10(-8)). The 
SNP with strongest association was rs1164064 (p=1.86×10(-6)) on chromosome 3q13. 
Gene-based pathway analysis identified a significant association between the 
Gene Ontology "segmentation" (GO:0035282) pathway, corrected p=0.009.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the PDGFRA locus does not transfer a major 
risk of corneal astigmatism in people of Northern European ancestry. 
Better-powered studies are required to validate the novel putative findings of 
our study.

PMCID: PMC3675057
PMID: 23761726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]