1. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;17(1):19-30. doi:
10.4103/2230-8210.107822.

The molecular mechanisms, diagnosis and management of congenital 
hyperinsulinism.

Senniappan S(1), Arya VB, Hussain K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children NHS Trust WC1N 3JH and Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the result of unregulated insulin secretion 
from the pancreatic Î²-cells leading to severe hypoglycaemia. In these patients 
it is important to make an accurate diagnosis and initiate the appropriate 
management so as to avoid hypoglycemic episodes and prevent the potentially 
associated complications like epilepsy, neurological impairment and cerebral 
palsy. At a genetic level abnormalities in eight different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, 
GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A and UCP2) have been reported with CHI. Loss of 
function mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 lead to the most severe forms of CHI which 
are usually medically unresponsive. At a histological level there are two major 
subgroups, diffuse and focal, each with a different genetic etiology. The focal 
form is sporadic in inheritance and is localized to a small region of the 
pancreas whereas the diffuse form is inherited in an autosomal recessive (or 
dominant) manner. Imaging using a specialized positron emission tomography scan 
with the isotope fluroine-18 L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenyalanine (18F-DOPA-PET-CT) is 
used to accurately locate the focal lesion pre-operatively and if removed can 
cure the patient from hypoglycemia. Understanding the molecular mechanisms, the 
histological basis, improvements in imaging modalities and surgical techniques 
have all improved the management of patients with CHI.

DOI: 10.4103/2230-8210.107822
PMCID: PMC3659902
PMID: 23776849

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No