1. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2013 Jul;30(7):963-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-013-0012-3. 
Epub 2013 Jun 19.

Activation of the LH receptor up regulates the type 2 adiponectin receptor in 
human granulosa cells.

Wickham EP 3rd(1), Tao T, Nestler JE, McGee EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA.

PURPOSE: Adiponectin is a predominantly adipocyte-derived hormone which 
influences insulin sensitivity and energy homeostasis through at least two 
receptors, AdipoR1 and AdipoR2. In animal models, adiponectin may regulate 
ovarian steroidogenesis, folliculogenesis, and ovulation. The receptors AdipoR1 
and AdipoR2 are present in the human ovary, but their regulation is unknown. In 
these studies, we determined the effects of LH receptor activation on the 
expression and function of the two adiponectin receptors in human granulosa 
cells.
METHODS: Granulosa cells were obtained at the time of oocyte retrieval in women 
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF). Cells were isolated and cultured for 
48 h in DMEM/F12 medium with 5 % FBS and 50 ug/ml gentamicin. Medium was changed 
to low serum for 12 h and cells were treated with hCG (100 ng/ml), forskolin (30 
μMol/L), or FSH (1 IU/ml) for 24 h for mRNA experiments. mRNA was isolated and 
RT PCR was performed using Taqman assays and quantification with the delta delta 
CT method. For immunocytochemistry, cells were grown on chamber slides and 
treated with hCG for 1 to 24 h and fixed with acetone. ICC was performed with 
polyclonal rabbit primary antibodies followed by alexa fluor goat anti-rabbit 
antibody and imaging with a fluorescence microscope and Zeiss software analysis. 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3βHSD) enzyme activity was determined by 
measuring the progesterone produced when cells were provided with an excess of 
22-hydroxy-cholesterol as substrate following an incubation with hCG (1 IU/ml) 
and/or adiponectin (10 ng/ml). Progesterone content in the media was determined 
by ELISA.
RESULTS: Messenger RNA for the two Adiponectin receptors is differentially 
regulated by activation of LHR with hCG treatment. AdipoR2 was increased nearly 
4-fold (p < 0.05), whereas AdipoR1 expression was not changed by hCG treatment. 
Treatment with either FSH or forskolin (an activator of cAMP) had similar 
effects. Basal AdipoR2 protein was fairly low in granulosa cells in culture 
however treatment of cells with hCG resulted in a discernible increase in 
immunodetectable cytoplasmic protein as early as 6 h after treatment and was 
maintained for at least 24 h. The number of cells positive for AdipoR2 at 6 h 
increased from a basal of 20 % to almost 60 % (p < 0.05). Adiponectin treatment 
of hCG-primed cells resulted in increased 3βHSD activity by approximately 60 % 
over hCG alone and more than 3-fold over basal levels.
CONCLUSIONS: AdipoR2 is regulated by the LH receptor function via a cAMP 
dependant mechanism. Increased expression of adipoR2 prior to and following 
ovulation may contribute to enhanced 3βHSD activity and increased progesterone 
secretion by the corpus luteum of the ovary. Dysregulation of adiponectin that 
may occur with PCOS may impair normal progesterone production.

DOI: 10.1007/s10815-013-0012-3
PMCID: PMC3725221
PMID: 23779096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]