1. Epigenetics. 2013 Jun;8(6):584-90. doi: 10.4161/epi.24621. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

Plasma total homocysteine is associated with DNA methylation in patients with 
schizophrenia.

Kinoshita M(1), Numata S, Tajima A, Shimodera S, Imoto I, Ohmori T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry; Course of Integrated Brain Sciences; Medical 
Informatics; Institute of Health Biosciences; The University of Tokushima 
Graduate School; Tokushima, Japan.

Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a devastating psychiatric disorder with a median lifetime 
prevalence rate of 0.7-0.8%. Elevated plasma total homocysteine has been 
suggested as a risk factor for SCZ, and various biological effects of 
hyperhomocysteinemia have been proposed to be relevant to the pathophysiology of 
SCZ. As increased attention is paid to aberrant DNA methylation in SCZ, 
homocysteine is attracting additional interest as a potential key substance. 
Homocysteine is formed in the methionine cycle, which is involved in one-carbon 
methyl group-transfer metabolism, and it acts as a methyl donor when it is 
converted to S-adenosyl-methionine. To date, no studies have examined the 
relationship between homocysteine and genome-wide DNA methylation in SCZ. We 
examined the relationship between plasma total homocysteine and DNA methylation 
patterns in the peripheral leukocytes of patients with SCZ (n = 42) using a 
quantitative high-resolution DNA methylation array (485,764 CpG sites). 
Significant homocysteine-related changes in DNA methylation were observed at 
1,338 CpG sites that were located across whole gene regions, including 
promoters, gene bodies and 3'-untranslated regions. Of the 1,338 sites, 758 
sites (56.6%) were located in the CpG islands (CGIs) and in the regions flanking 
CGIs (CGI: 15.8%; CGI shore: 28.2%; CGI shelf: 12.6%), and positive correlations 
between plasma total homocysteine and DNA methylation were observed 
predominantly at CpG sites in the CGIs. Our results suggest that homocysteine 
might play a role in the pathogenesis of SCZ via a molecular mechanism that 
involves alterations to DNA methylation.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.24621
PMCID: PMC3857338
PMID: 23774737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]