1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Sep 1;305(5):F679-90. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00407.2012. Epub 2013 Jun 19.

AMPK couples plasma renin to cellular metabolism by phosphorylation of ACC1.

Fraser SA(1), Choy SW, Pastor-Soler NM, Li H, Davies MR, Cook N, Katerelos M, 
Mount PF, Gleich K, McRae JL, Dwyer KM, van Denderen BJ, Hallows KR, Kemp BE, 
Power DA.

Author information:
(1)1Kidney Laboratory, Institute for Breathing and Sleep, University of 
Melbourne, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.

Salt reabsorption is the major energy-requiring process in the kidney, and 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is an important regulator of cellular 
metabolism. Mice with targeted deletion of the β1-subunit of AMPK (AMPK-β1(-/-) 
mice) had significantly increased urinary Na(+) excretion on a normal salt diet. 
This was associated with reduced expression of the β-subunit of the epithelial 
Na(+) channel (ENaC) and increased subapical tubular expression of 
kidney-specific Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransporter 2 (NKCC2) in the medullary thick 
ascending limb of Henle. AMPK-β1(-/-) mice fed a salt-deficient diet were able 
to conserve Na(+), but renin secretion increased 180% compared with control 
mice. Cyclooxygenase-2 mRNA also increased in the kidney cortex, indicating 
greater signaling through the macula densa tubular salt-sensing pathway. To 
determine whether the increase in renin secretion was due to a change in 
regulation of fatty acid metabolism by AMPK, mice with a mutation of the 
inhibitory AMPK phosphosite in acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 [ACC1-knockin (KI)(S79A) 
mice] were examined. ACC1-KI(S79A) mice on a normal salt diet had no increase in 
salt loss or renin secretion, and expression of NKCC2, Na(+)-Cl(-) 
cotransporter, and ENaC-β were similar to those in control mice. When mice were 
placed on a salt-deficient diet, however, renin secretion and cortical 
expression of cyclooxygenase-2 mRNA increased significantly in ACC1-KI(S79A) 
mice compared with control mice. In summary, our data suggest that renin 
synthesis and secretion are regulated by AMPK and coupled to metabolism by 
phosphorylation of ACC1.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00407.2012
PMCID: PMC3761205
PMID: 23785098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]