1. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):553-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.024. Epub 2013 Jun
 21.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FTO gene and their association with 
growth and meat quality traits in rabbits.

Zhang GW(1), Gao L, Chen SY, Zhao XB, Tian YF, Wang X, Deng XS, Lai SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu Campus, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China.

Fat mass and obesity associated (FTO) gene is an excellent candidate to affect 
the fatness and growth-related traits in pig and cattle. The aim of this study 
was to reveal the association between FTO and growth and meat quality traits in 
rabbits. A total of eight coding SNPs were detected, and four SNPs of them in 
exon 3 were further genotyped for association analysis in 442 rabbits from three 
breeds, including 248 New Zealand rabbits, 92 Ira rabbits, and 102 Champagne 
rabbits. Because there were significant differences for the allele and genotype 
frequencies among breeds, the association analysis was independently conducted 
in each breed only for these SNPs with minor allele frequency >5.0%. The results 
revealed that non-synonymous SNP c.499G>A (p.A167T) was significantly associated 
with body weight (BW) at 35, 70, and 84 days of age in New Zealand rabbits 
(P<0.01). The CC genotype of synonymous SNP c.660T>C was significantly 
associated with higher BW84, average daily weight gain, and intramuscular fat 
content of longissimus lumborum than TT and TC genotypes in Ira rabbits 
(P<0.05). There were no associations between the four SNPs and growth and meat 
quality traits in Champagne rabbits. Meanwhile, FTO SNPs were not associated 
with meat pH value. Our data indicated that FTO gene could be a candidate gene 
associated with growth and meat quality traits in rabbits. However, the 
breed-specific effect should be carefully taken into consideration.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.024
PMID: 23796799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]