1. BMC Biotechnol. 2013 Jun 26;13:52. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-13-52.

High level transient production of recombinant antibodies and antibody fusion 
proteins in HEK293 cells.

Jäger V, Büssow K, Wagner A, Weber S, Hust M, Frenzel A, Schirrmann T.

BACKGROUND: The demand of monospecific high affinity binding reagents, 
particularly monoclonal antibodies, has been steadily increasing over the last 
years. Enhanced throughput of antibody generation has been addressed by 
optimizing in vitro selection using phage display which moved the major 
bottleneck to the production and purification of recombinant antibodies in an 
end-user friendly format. Single chain (sc)Fv antibody fragments require 
additional tags for detection and are not as suitable as immunoglobulins (Ig)G 
in many immunoassays. In contrast, the bivalent scFv-Fc antibody format shares 
many properties with IgG and has a very high application compatibility.
RESULTS: In this study transient expression of scFv-Fc antibodies in human 
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells was optimized. Production levels of 10-20 mg/L 
scFv-Fc antibody were achieved in adherent HEK293T cells. Employment of 
HEK293-6E suspension cells expressing a truncated variant of the Epstein Barr 
virus (EBV) nuclear antigen (EBNA) 1 in combination with production under serum 
free conditions increased the volumetric yield up to 10-fold to more than 140 
mg/L scFv-Fc antibody. After vector optimization and process optimization the 
yield of an scFv-Fc antibody and a cytotoxic antibody-RNase fusion protein 
further increased 3-4-fold to more than 450 mg/L. Finally, an entirely new 
mammalian expression vector was constructed for single step in frame cloning of 
scFv genes from antibody phage display libraries. Transient expression of more 
than 20 different scFv-Fc antibodies resulted in volumetric yields of up to 600 
mg/L and 400 mg/L in average.
CONCLUSION: Transient production of recombinant scFv-Fc antibodies in HEK293-6E 
in combination with optimized vectors and fed batch shake flasks cultivation is 
efficient and robust, and integrates well into a high-throughput recombinant 
antibody generation pipeline.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-13-52
PMCID: PMC3699382
PMID: 23802841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]