1. Iran J Public Health. 2013 May 1;42(5):480-8. Print 2013.

Do Biochemical Markers and Apa I Polymorphism in IGF-II Gene Play a Role in the 
Association of Birth Weight and Later BMI?

Wu J(1), Ren J, Li Y, Wu Y, Gao E.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Epidemiology and Social Science on Reproductive Health, Shanghai 
Institute of Planned Parenthood Research/WHO Collaborating Center on Human 
Reproductive Health, Shanghai, China ; Dept. of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to explore the mechanisms underlying the 
association of birth weight with later body mass index (BMI) from the 
biochemical markers related to metabolism and the Apa I polymorphism in IGF-II 
gene.
METHODS: A total of 300 children were selected randomly from the Macrosomia 
Birth Cohort in Wuxi, China. The height and weight were measured and blood 
samples were collected. Plasma concentrations of 8 biochemical markers were 
detected. Apa I polymorphism was analyzed by polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: Biochemical markers were detected for 296 subjects and 271 subjects 
were genotyped for the Apa I polymorphism. No association was found between 
birth weight and 8 biochemical markers. In boys, the BMIs of AA, AG and GG 
genotypes were 16.10 ± 2.24 kg/m(2), 17.40 ± 3.20 kg/m(2), 17.65 ± 2.66 kg/m(2). 
And there was statistical difference among the three genotypes. But in girls, 
there was no statistical difference. The birth weights of AA, AG and GG 
genotypes were 3751.13 ± 492.43 g, 3734.00 ± 456.88 g, 3782.00 ± 461.78 g. And 
there was no statistical difference among the three genotypes.
CONCLUSION: Biochemical markers are not associated with birth weight. Apa I 
polymorphism may be related to childhood BMI, but it may be not associated with 
birth weight. Therefore, biochemical markers and Apa I polymorphism might not 
play a role in the association of birth weight and BMI.

PMCID: PMC3684456
PMID: 23802105