1. J Mol Diagn. 2013 Sep;15(5):710-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.05.006. Epub
2013  Jun 28.

Novel CFTR variants identified during the first 3 years of cystic fibrosis 
newborn screening in California.

Prach L(1), Koepke R, Kharrazi M, Keiles S, Salinas DB, Reyes MC, Pian M, 
Opsimos H, Otsuka KN, Hardy KA, Milla CE, Zirbes JM, Chipps B, O'Bra S, Saeed 
MM, Sudhakar R, Lehto S, Nielson D, Shay GF, Seastrand M, Jhawar S, Nickerson B, 
Landon C, Thompson A, Nussbaum E, Chin T, Wojtczak H; California Cystic Fibrosis 
Newborn Screening Consortium.

Collaborators: Wheeler-Dobrota N, Woodworth J, Perez M, Tsang M, Dawson D, 
Meuter C, Franz K, Edwards J.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Disease Screening Program, California Department of Public Health, 
Richmond, USA.

California uses a unique method to screen newborns for cystic fibrosis (CF) that 
includes gene scanning and DNA sequencing after only one California-40 cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) panel mutation has been 
identified in hypertrypsinogenemic specimens. Newborns found by sequencing to 
have one or more additional mutations or variants (including novel variants) in 
the CFTR gene are systematically followed, allowing for prospective assessment 
of the pathogenic potential of these variants. During the first 3 years of 
screening, 55 novel variants were identified. Six of these novel variants were 
discovered in five screen-negative participants and three were identified in 
multiple unrelated participants. Ten novel variants (c.2554_2555insT, p.F1107L, 
c.-152G>C, p.L323P, p.L32M, c.2883_2886dupGTCA, c.2349_2350insT, p.K114del, 
c.-602A>T, and c.2822delT) were associated with a CF phenotype (42% of 
participants were diagnosed at 4 to 25 months of age), whereas 26 were 
associated with CFTR-related metabolic syndrome to date. Associations with the 
remaining novel variants were confounded by the presence of other diseases or 
other mutations in cis or by inadequate follow-up. These findings have 
implications for how CF newborn screening and follow-up is conducted and will 
help guide which genotypes should, and which should not, be considered screen 
positive for CF in California and elsewhere.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the 
Association for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.05.006
PMCID: PMC5707181
PMID: 23810505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]