1. Neuroimage. 2013 Dec;83:35-44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.063. Epub
2013  Jun 28.

Serotonin 2A receptors contribute to the regulation of risk-averse decisions.

Macoveanu J(1), Rowe JB, Hornboll B, Elliott R, Paulson OB, Knudsen GM, Siebner 
HR.

Author information:
(1)Danish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Hvidovre, Denmark; Center for Integrated Molecular Brain Imaging, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: 
julianm@drcmr.dk.

Pharmacological studies point to a role of the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) 
in regulating the preference for risky decisions, yet the functional 
contribution of specific 5-HT receptors remains to be clarified. We used 
pharmacological fMRI to investigate the role of the 5-HT2A receptors in 
processing negative outcomes and regulating risk-averse behavior. During fMRI, 
twenty healthy volunteers performed a gambling task under two conditions: with 
or without blocking the 5-HT2A receptors. The volunteers repeatedly chose 
between small, likely rewards and large, unlikely rewards. Choices were balanced 
in terms of expected utility and potential loss. Acute blockade of the 5-HT2A 
receptors with ketanserin made participants more risk-averse. Ketanserin 
selectively reduced the neural response of the frontopolar cortex to negative 
outcomes that were caused by low-risk choices and were associated with large 
missed rewards. In the context of normal 5-HT2A receptor function, ventral 
striatum displayed a stronger response to low-risk negative outcomes in 
risk-taking as opposed to risk-averse individuals. This (negative) correlation 
between the striatal response to low-risk negative outcomes and risk-averse 
choice behavior was abolished by 5-HT2A receptor blockade. The results provide 
the first evidence for a critical role of 5-HT2A receptor function in regulating 
risk-averse behavior. We suggest that the 5-HT2A receptor system facilitates 
risk-taking behavior by modulating the outcome evaluation of "missed" reward. 
These results have implications for understanding the neural basis of abnormal 
risk-taking behavior, for instance in pathological gamblers.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.063
PMCID: PMC4330549
PMID: 23810974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]