1. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep. 2013 Mar 1;9(1):37-56. doi: 
10.1007/s11888-012-0154-1.

Prevention and Treatment of Colorectal Cancer by Natural Agents From Mother 
Nature.

Aggarwal B(1), Prasad S, Sung B, Krishnan S, Guha S.

Author information:
(1)Cytokine Research Laboratory, Department of Experimental Therapeutics;

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most commonly diagnosed cancer in the 
United States after cancers of the lung and the breast/prostate. While the 
incidence of CRC in the United States is among the highest in the world 
(approximately 52/100,000), its incidence in countries in India is among the 
lowest (approximately 7/100,000), suggesting that lifestyle factors may play a 
role in development of the disease. Whereas obesity, excessive alcohol 
consumption, a high-calorie diet, and a lack of physical activity promote this 
cancer, evidence indicates that foods containing folates, selenium, Vitamin D, 
dietary fiber, garlic, milk, calcium, spices, vegetables, and fruits are 
protective against CRC in humans. Numerous agents from "mother nature" (also 
called "nutraceuticals,") that have potential to both prevent and treat CRC have 
been identified. The most significant discoveries relate to compounds such as 
cardamonin, celastrol, curcumin, deguelin, diosgenin, thymoquinone, tocotrienol, 
ursolic acid, and zerumbone. Unlike pharmaceutical drugs, these agents modulate 
multiple targets, including transcription factors, growth factors, tumor cell 
survival factors, inflammatory pathways, and invasion and angiogenesis linked 
closely to CRC. We describe the potential of these dietary agents to suppress 
the growth of human CRC cells in culture and to inhibit tumor growth in animal 
models. We also describe clinical trials in which these agents have been tested 
for efficacy in humans. Because of their safety and affordability, these 
nutraceuticals provide a novel opportunity for treatment of CRC, an "old age" 
disease with an "age old" solution.

DOI: 10.1007/s11888-012-0154-1
PMCID: PMC3693477
PMID: 23814530