1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep;41(16):7783-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt569. Epub 2013
 Jun 27.

Tracking a refined eIF4E-binding motif reveals Angel1 as a new partner of eIF4E.

Gosselin P(1), Martineau Y, Morales J, Czjzek M, Glippa V, Gauffeny I, Morin E, 
Le Corguillé G, Pyronnet S, Cormier P, Cosson B.

Author information:
(1)UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7150, Mer et Santé, Station Biologique, F-29680 
Roscoff, France, CNRS, UMR 7150, Mer et Santé, Station Biologique, F-29680 
Roscoff, France. Université Européenne de Bretagne, Bretagne, Roscoff, France, 
INSERM, UMR 1037, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Toulouse 
31432, France, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7139, Végétaux Marins et Biomolécules, 
Station Biologique, F-29680 Roscoff, France, CNRS, UMR 7139, Végétaux Marins et 
Biomolécules, Station Biologique, F-29680 Roscoff, France, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 
FR2424, ABiMS, Station Biologique, F-29680 Roscoff, France and CNRS, FR2424, 
ABiMS, Station Biologique, F-29680 Roscoff, France.

The initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) is implicated in most of the crucial steps of 
the mRNA life cycle and is recognized as a pivotal protein in gene regulation. 
Many of these roles are mediated by its interaction with specific proteins 
generally known as eIF4E-interacting partners (4E-IPs), such as eIF4G and 4E-BP. 
To screen for new 4E-IPs, we developed a novel approach based on structural, in 
silico and biochemical analyses. We identified the protein Angel1, a member of 
the CCR4 deadenylase family. Immunoprecipitation experiments provided evidence 
that Angel1 is able to interact in vitro and in vivo with eIF4E. Point mutation 
variants of Angel1 demonstrated that the interaction of Angel1 with eIF4E is 
mediated through a consensus eIF4E-binding motif. Immunofluorescence and cell 
fractionation experiments showed that Angel1 is confined to the endoplasmic 
reticulum and Golgi apparatus, where it partially co-localizes with eIF4E and 
eIF4G, but not with 4E-BP. Furthermore, manipulating Angel1 levels in living 
cells had no effect on global translation rates, suggesting that the protein has 
a more specific function. Taken together, our results illustrate that we 
developed a powerful method for identifying new eIF4E partners and open new 
perspectives for understanding eIF4E-specific regulation.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt569
PMCID: PMC3763552
PMID: 23814182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]