1. FASEB J. 2013 Oct;27(10):4108-21. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-230193. Epub 2013 Jun 27.

Coxsackievirus B3 modulates cardiac ion channels.

Steinke K(1), Sachse F, Ettischer N, Strutz-Seebohm N, Henrion U, Rohrbeck M, 
Klosowski R, Wolters D, Brunner S, Franz WM, Pott L, Munoz C, Kandolf R, 
Schulze-Bahr E, Lang F, Klingel K, Seebohm G.

Author information:
(1)2Institut f체r Genetik von Herzerkrankungen (IfGH), Abteilung Myozellul채re 
Elektrophysiologie, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1 (Geb채ude D3), D-48149 M체nster. 
guiscard.seebohm@ukmuenster.de.

Infections with coxsackieviruses of type B (CVBs), which are known to induce 
severe forms of acute and chronic myocarditis, are often accompanied by 
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. The mechanisms underlying the 
development of virus-induced, life-threatening arrhythmias, which are 
phenotypically similar to those observed in patients having functionally 
impaired cardiac ion channels, remain, however, enigmatic. In the present study, 
we show, for the first time, modulating time-dependent effects of CVB3 on the 
cardiac ion channels KCNQ1, hERG1, and Cav1.2 in heterologous expression. 
Channel protein abundance in cellular plasma membrane and patterns of their 
subcellular distribution were altered in infected murine hearts. The antiviral 
compound AG7088 did not prevent these effects on channels. In silico analyses of 
infected human myocytes suggest pronounced alterations of electrical and calcium 
signaling and increased risk of arrhythmogenesis. These modifications are 
attenuated by the common Asian polymorphism KCNQ1 P448R, a genetic determinant 
preventing coxsackievirus-induced effects in vitro. This study provides a 
previously unknown explanation for the development of arrhythmias in enteroviral 
myocarditis, which will help to develop therapeutic strategies for arrhythmia 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-230193
PMID: 23825229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]