1. Biochemistry. 2013 Aug 6;52(31):5184-94. doi: 10.1021/bi400370w. Epub 2013 Jul
 22.

Pro-oxidant copper-binding mode of the Apo form of ALS-linked SOD1 mutant H43R 
denatured at physiological temperature.

Fujimaki N(1), Kitamura F, Takeuchi H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University , Aobayama, 
Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

The mutation of Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1), a major antioxidant enzyme, 
is associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). In a previous study, we 
showed that the metal-depleted apo form of an ALS-linked mutant, H43R, undergoes 
denaturation at physiological temperature (37 °C) in 90 min and acquires 
pro-oxidant activity in the presence of Cu(2+) and H2O2. In this study, we have 
examined the Cu(2+)-binding mode of denatured apo-H43R by circular dichroism 
(CD), fluorescent oxidation, UV Raman spectroscopy, and photooxidation. CD 
spectroscopy indicates that denatured apo-H43R loses native β-barrel structure 
and the binding of Cu(2+) to the denatured apo form induces local refolding. 
Fluorescent-oxidation assays in the absence and presence of Cu(2+) chelators 
show that denatured apo-H43R contains two Cu(2+)-binding sites with higher and 
lower Cu(2+) affinities and with pro-oxidant activities in the reverse order. UV 
Raman spectroscopy gives evidence that His residues are bound to Cu(2+) mainly 
through the imidazole Nτ atom at the higher-affinity site and through the Nπ 
atom at the lower-affinity site, sharing one His residue with each other. The 
Cu(2+)-binding mode of denatured apo-H43R is analogous to but different from the 
Cu,Zn-binding mode of the native holo form. Photooxidation experiments confirm 
the involvement of His residues in the pro-oxidant activity. Taken together, it 
is suggested that the binding of Cu(2+) induces the local refolding of denatured 
apo-H43R to create toxic catalytic centers that convert the enzyme from 
antioxidant to pro-oxidant, leading to the pathogenesis of ALS. His residues are 
essential for both Cu(2+)-binding and pro-oxidant activities.

DOI: 10.1021/bi400370w
PMID: 23837654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]