1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Dec;65:541-551. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.06.037. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

Cytochrome c peroxidase is a mitochondrial heme-based H2O2 sensor that modulates 
antioxidant defense.

Martins D(1), Kathiresan M(1), English AM(2).

Author information:
(1)PROTEO and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada, H4B 1R6.
(2)PROTEO and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Concordia University, 
Montreal, QC, Canada, H4B 1R6. Electronic address: ann.english@concordia.ca.

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a key signaling molecule that also induces 
apoptosis. Thus, cells must rapidly sense and tightly control H2O2 levels. 
Well-characterized cellular responses to exogenous H2O2 involve oxidation of 
specific cytosolic protein-based thiols but sensing of H2O2 generated by 
mitochondrial respiration is less well described. Here we provide substantial 
biochemical evidence that the heme enzyme Ccp1 (cytochrome c peroxidase), which 
is targeted to the intermembrane space, functions primarily as a mitochondrial 
H2O2 sensing and signaling protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Key evidence for 
a sensing role for Ccp1 is the significantly higher H2O2 accumulation in 
ccp1-null cells(ccp1Δ) vs ccp1(W191F) cells producing the catalytically inactive 
Ccp1(W191F) variant. In fact, intracellular H2O2 levels (ccp1Δ>wildtype 
>ccp1(W191F)) correlate inversely with the activity of the mitochondrial (and 
peroxisomal) heme catalase, Cta1 (ccp1Δ<wildtype <ccp1(W191F)). Mitochondrial 
Sod2 activity also varies in the three strains (ccp1Δ>wildtype >ccp1(W191F)) and 
ccp1Δ cells exhibit low superoxide levels. Notably, Ccp1(W191F) is a more 
persistent H2O2 signaling protein than wild-type Ccp1, and this enhanced 
mitochondrial H2O2 signaling decreases the mitochondrial fitness of ccp1(W191F) 
cells. However, these cells are fully protected from a bolus (0.4mM) of 
exogenous H2O2 added after 12h of growth, whereas the viability of ccp1Δ cells 
drops below 20%, which additionally associates Ccp1 with Yap1-dependent H2O2 
signaling. Combined, our results strongly implicate Ccp1, independent of its 
peroxidase activity, in mitochondrial H2O2 sensing and signaling to maintain 
reactive oxygen species homeostasis.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.06.037
PMID: 23831190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]