1. Front Immunol. 2013 Jul 3;4:170. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00170. eCollection 
2013.

Monitoring the Dynamics of T Cell Clonal Diversity Using Recombinant Peptide:MHC 
Technology.

Blanchfield JL(1), Shorter SK, Evavold BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA , 
USA.

The capacity to probe antigen specific T cells within the polyclonal repertoire 
has been revolutionized by the advent of recombinant peptide:MHC (pMHC) 
technology. Monomers and multimers of pMHC molecules can enrich for and identify 
antigen specific T cells to elucidate the contributions of T cell frequency, 
localization, and T cell receptor (TCR) affinity during immune responses. 
Two-dimensional (2D) measurements of TCR-pMHC interactions are at the forefront 
of this field because the biological topography is replicated such that TCR and 
pMHC are membrane anchored on opposing cells, allowing for biologically 
pertinent measures of TCR antigen specificity and diversity. 2D measurements of 
TCR-pMHC kinetics have also demonstrated increased fidelity compared to 
three-dimensional surface plasmon resonance data and are capable of detecting T 
cell affinities that are below the detection level of most pMHC multimers. 
Importantly, 2D techniques provide a platform to evaluate T cell affinity and 
antigen specificity against multiple protein epitopes within the polyclonal 
repertoire directly ex vivo from sites of ongoing immune responses. This review 
will discuss how antigen specific pMHC molecules, with a focus on 2D 
technologies, can be used as effective tools to evaluate the range of TCR 
affinities that comprise an immune response and more importantly how the breadth 
of affinities determine functional outcome against a given exposure to antigen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00170
PMCID: PMC3699728
PMID: 23840195