1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 3;8(7):e65202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065202. Print
2013.

Axon guidance of sympathetic neurons to cardiomyocytes by glial cell 
line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).

Miwa K(1), Lee JK, Takagishi Y, Opthof T, Fu X, Hirabayashi M, Watabe K, Jimbo 
Y, Kodama I, Komuro I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Research Institute of Environmental 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.

Molecular signaling of cardiac autonomic innervation is an unresolved issue. 
Here, we show that glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) promotes 
cardiac sympathetic innervation in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, ventricular 
myocytes (VMs) and sympathetic neurons (SNs) isolated from neonatal rat 
ventricles and superior cervical ganglia were cultured at a close distance. 
Then, morphological and functional coupling between SNs and VMs was assessed in 
response to GDNF (10 ng/ml) or nerve growth factor (50 ng/ml). As a result, 
fractions of neurofilament-M-positive axons and synapsin-I-positive area over 
the surface of VMs were markedly increased with GDNF by 9-fold and 25-fold, 
respectively, compared to control without neurotrophic factors. Pre- and 
post-synaptic stimulation of Î²1-adrenergic receptors (BAR) with nicotine and 
noradrenaline, respectively, resulted in an increase of the spontaneous beating 
rate of VMs co-cultured with SNs in the presence of GDNF. GDNF overexpressing 
VMs by adenovirus vector (AdGDNF-VMs) attracted more axons from SNs compared 
with mock-transfected VMs. In vivo, axon outgrowth toward the denervated 
myocardium in adult rat hearts after cryoinjury was also enhanced significantly 
by adenovirus-mediated GDNF overexpression. GDNF acts as a potent 
chemoattractant for sympathetic innervation of ventricular myocytes, and is a 
promising molecular target for regulation of cardiac function in diseased 
hearts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065202
PMCID: PMC3701054
PMID: 23843937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.