1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:891748. doi: 10.1155/2013/891748. Epub 2013
Jun  6.

Polyphenols: multipotent therapeutic agents in neurodegenerative diseases.

Bhullar KS(1), Rupasinghe HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Dalhousie 
University, Truro, NS, Canada B2N 5E3.

Aging leads to numerous transitions in brain physiology including synaptic 
dysfunction and disturbances in cognition and memory. With a few clinically 
relevant drugs, a substantial portion of aging population at risk for 
age-related neurodegenerative disorders require nutritional intervention. 
Dietary intake of polyphenols is known to attenuate oxidative stress and reduce 
the risk for related neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), stroke, multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's disease (PD), and 
Huntington's disease (HD). Polyphenols exhibit strong potential to address the 
etiology of neurological disorders as they attenuate their complex physiology by 
modulating several therapeutic targets at once. Firstly, we review the advances 
in the therapeutic role of polyphenols in cell and animal models of AD, PD, MS, 
and HD and activation of drug targets for controlling pathological 
manifestations. Secondly, we present principle pathways in which polyphenol 
intake translates into therapeutic outcomes. In particular, signaling pathways 
like PPAR, Nrf2, STAT, HIF, and MAPK along with modulation of immune response by 
polyphenols are discussed. Although current polyphenol researches have limited 
impact on clinical practice, they have strong evidence and testable hypothesis 
to contribute clinical advances and drug discovery towards age-related 
neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/891748
PMCID: PMC3690243
PMID: 23840922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]