1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 20;8(6):e66187. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066187. Print 
2013.

Comparison and analysis of zinc and cobalt-based systems as catalytic entities 
for the hydration of carbon dioxide.

Lau EY(1), Wong SE, Baker SE, Bearinger JP, Koziol L, Valdez CA, Satcher JH Jr, 
Aines RD, Lightstone FC.

Author information:
(1)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, California, USA.

In nature, the zinc metalloenzyme carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) efficiently 
catalyzes the conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) to bicarbonate under 
physiological conditions. Many research efforts have been directed towards the 
development of small molecule mimetics that can facilitate this process and thus 
have a beneficial environmental impact, but these efforts have met very limited 
success. Herein, we undertook quantum mechanical calculations of four mimetics, 
1,5,9-triazacyclododedacane, 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododedacane, 
tris(4,5-dimethyl-2-imidazolyl)phosphine, and tris(2-benzimidazolylmethyl)amine, 
in their complexed form either with the Zn(2+) or the Co(2+) ion and studied 
their reaction coordinate for CO2 hydration. These calculations demonstrated 
that the ability of the complex to maintain a tetrahedral geometry and bind 
bicarbonate in a unidentate manner were vital for the hydration reaction to 
proceed favorably. Furthermore, these calculations show that the catalytic 
activity of the examined zinc complexes was insensitive to coordination states 
for zinc, while coordination states above four were found to have an unfavorable 
effect on product release for the cobalt counterparts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066187
PMCID: PMC3688778
PMID: 23840420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.