1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2013 Sep;93(5):538-47. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2013.05.002. 
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Pathways of IL-1β secretion by macrophages infected with clinical Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis strains.

Krishnan N(1), Robertson BD, Thwaites G.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 
n.krishnan@imperial.ac.uk

The pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1β is a key mediator of inflammation and plays 
an important role in the host resistance to Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
infections. To date, most studies have examined the mechanisms of IL-1β 
secretion using laboratory strains of M. tuberculosis and the findings may not 
be widely applicable to contemporary clinical strains. Here, we investigated the 
primary pathways of IL-1β secretion in macrophages infected with a panel of 17 
clinical M. tuberculosis isolates, representing Euro-American, Indo-Oceanic and 
East-Asian/Beijing lineages. Our aim was to dissect the pathways involved in 
M. tuberculosis induced IL-1β secretion and to determine whether they are common 
to all clinical isolates. We found that the isolates were capable of eliciting 
variable concentrations of IL-1β from infected murine macrophages, but this 
phenomenon could not be attributed to differential IL-1β mRNA transcription or 
pro-IL-1β accumulation. We demonstrate that viable bacteria are required to 
induce IL-1β secretion from macrophages, but IL-1β secretion was only partially 
abrogated by caspase-1 inhibition. Almost complete IL-1β secretion inhibition 
was produced with combined caspase-1 and some serine protease inhibitors. Taken 
together, these findings demonstrate that clinical strains of M. tuberculosis 
employ a unique caspase-1 independent pathway to stimulate IL-1β secretion from 
macrophages.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2013.05.002
PMCID: PMC3759846
PMID: 23849220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]