1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2013;8:2333-50. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S31678. Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Systematic dielectrophoretic analysis of the Ara-C-induced NB4 cell apoptosis 
combined with gene expression profiling.

Lv Y(1), Zeng L, Zhang G, Xu Y, Lu Y, Mitchelson K, Cheng J, Xing W.

Author information:
(1)Medical Systems Biology Research Center, Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing, China.

Dielectrophoresis (DEP) can be used to noninvasively measure the dielectric 
state of the cell, and this data can be used to monitor cell health or 
apoptosis. In this study, we followed events associated with cytosine 
arabinoside (Ara-C)-induced apoptosis in NB4 cells using DEP analysis. Our data 
showed that the membrane capacitance of NB4 cells decreases from 9.42 to 7.63 
mF/m(2) in the first 2 hours following treatment with Ara-C, and that this 
decreased capacitance persists for >12 hours. Additionally, cytoplasmic 
conductivity decreases from 0.217 to 0.190 S/m within 2 hours of Ara-C 
treatment; this level is maintained for a short period of time before 
decreasing. We also investigated these events molecularly at the level of gene 
expression using microarray analysis and showed that the expression of genes 
related to membrane capacitance and cytoplasmic conductivity change dramatically 
as early as 2 hours post-Ara-C treatment, and further demonstrated a temporal 
relationship between the dielectric properties and key events in apoptosis. This 
study, integrating physical electrical properties of the cell membrane and 
cytoplasm with those of conductivity-related gene networks, provides new 
insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the initiation of apoptosis, 
establishing a systematic foundation for DEP application in follow-up drug 
screening and development of medicines for treating leukemia.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S31678
PMCID: PMC3700913
PMID: 23847416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]