1. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 15;191(4):1586-93. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300575. Epub
2013  Jul 15.

Human CD1a deficiency is common and genetically regulated.

Seshadri C(1), Shenoy M, Wells RD, Hensley-McBain T, Andersen-Nissen E, McElrath 
MJ, Cheng TY, Moody DB, Hawn TR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. seshadri@u.washington.edu

CD1 proteins evolved to present diverse lipid Ags to T cells. In comparison with 
MHC proteins, CD1 proteins exhibit minimal allelic diversity as a result of 
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). However, it is unknown if 
common SNPs in gene regulatory regions affect CD1 expression and function. We 
report surprising diversity in patterns of inducible CD1a expression on human 
dendritic cells (DCs), spanning the full range from undetectable to high 
density, a finding not seen with other CD1 isoforms. CD1a-deficient DCs failed 
to present mycobacterial lipopeptide to T cells but had no defects in 
endocytosis, cytokine secretion, or expression of costimulatory molecules after 
LPS treatment. We identified an SNP in the 5' untranslated region (rs366316) 
that was common and strongly associated with low CD1a surface expression and 
mRNA levels (p = 0.03 and p = 0.001, respectively). Using a CD1a 
promoter-luciferase system in combination with mutagenesis studies, we found 
that the polymorphic allele reduced luciferase expression by 44% compared with 
the wild-type variant (p < 0.001). Genetic regulation of lipid Ag presentation 
by varying expression on human DCs provides a mechanism for achieving population 
level differences in immune responses despite limited structural variation in 
CD1a proteins.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300575
PMCID: PMC3748949
PMID: 23858036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]