1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:803487. doi: 10.1155/2013/803487. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Genetic epidemiology, hematological and clinical features of hemoglobinopathies 
in Iran.

Rahimi Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran. rahimizus@yahoo.com

There is large variation in the molecular genetics and clinical features of 
hemoglobinopathies in Iran. Studying structural variants of hemoglobin 
demonstrated that the β-chain variants of hemoglobin S and D-Punjab are more 
prevalent in the Fars (southwestern Iran) and Kermanshah (western Iran) 
provinces, respectively. Also, α-chain variants of Hb Q-Iran and Hb Setif are 
prevalent in western Iran. The molecular basis and clinical severity of 
thalassemias are extremely heterogenous among Iranians due to the presence of 
multiethnic groups in the country. β-Thalassemia is more prevalent in northern 
and southern Iran. Among 52 different β-thalassemia mutations that have been 
identified among Iranian populations, IVSII-1 G:A is the most frequent mutation 
in most parts of the country. The presence of IVS I-5 G:C mutation with high 
frequency in southeastern Iran might reflect gene flow from neighboring 
countries. A wide spectrum of α-thalassemia alleles has been detected among 
Iranians with -α(3.7 kb) as the most prevalent α-thalassemia mutation. The 
prevention program of thalassemia birth in Iran has reduced the birth rate of 
homozygous β-thalassemia since the implementation of the program in 1997. In 
this review genetic epidemiology, clinical and hematological aspects of 
hemoglobinopathies, and the prevention programs of β-thalassemia in Iran will be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/803487
PMCID: PMC3703361
PMID: 23853772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]