1. Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;132(11):1311-20. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1337-9. Epub 2013
 Jul 13.

A hypofunctional PAX1 mutation causes autosomal recessively inherited 
otofaciocervical syndrome.

Pohl E(1), Aykut A, Beleggia F, Karaca E, Durmaz B, Keupp K, Arslan E, Palamar 
M, Yigit G, Özkinay F, Wollnik B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Faculty, University of 
Cologne, Kerpener Str. 34, 50931, Cologne, Germany.

Erratum in
    Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;132(11):1321. Onay, Melis Palamar [corrected to Palamar, 
Melis].

Otofaciocervical syndrome (OFCS) is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder 
characterized by facial dysmorphism, external ear anomalies with preauricular 
pits and hearing impairment, branchial cysts or fistulas, anomalies of the 
vertebrae and the shoulder girdle, and mild intellectual disability. In a large 
consanguineous family with OFCS from Turkey, we performed whole-exome sequencing 
(WES) of a single pooled DNA sample of four affected individuals. Filtering for 
variants with a percentage of alternate reads ≥ 90 % and a coverage of at least 
five reads identified only a single novel homozygous variant, c.497G>T, located 
in PAX1 that co-segregated with the disease in the family. PAX1 encodes a 
transcription factor with a critical role in pattern formation during 
embryogenesis in vertebrates. The mutation is predicted to substitute the 
glycine at position 166 to valine (p.G166V) within the highly conserved 
paired-box domain of the PAX1 protein. We performed a dual luciferase reporter 
assay to examine the transactivation of a regulatory sequence in the Nkx3-2 
promoter region, which is a direct target of mouse Pax1 transcriptional 
regulation. We observed a significantly reduced transactivation in HEK293T cells 
overexpressing Pax1(G157V) in comparison to Pax1(WT) expressing cells, 
indicating a reduced DNA-binding affinity of the mutant protein. Taken together, 
our results show that the strategy of pooling DNA is a powerful, cost-effective 
application for WES in consanguineous families and establish PAX1 as a new 
disease-causing gene for OFCS and as part of the EYA-DACH-SIX-PAX network, 
important in early embryogenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-013-1337-9
PMID: 23851939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]