1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 5;8(7):e65245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065245. Print
2013.

A unified framework for association analysis with multiple related phenotypes.

Stephens M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics and Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. mstephens@uchicago.edu

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 Mar 19;14(3):e0213951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213951.

We consider the problem of assessing associations between multiple related 
outcome variables, and a single explanatory variable of interest. This problem 
arises in many settings, including genetic association studies, where the 
explanatory variable is genotype at a genetic variant. We outline a framework 
for conducting this type of analysis, based on Bayesian model comparison and 
model averaging for multivariate regressions. This framework unifies several 
common approaches to this problem, and includes both standard univariate and 
standard multivariate association tests as special cases. The framework also 
unifies the problems of testing for associations and explaining associations - 
that is, identifying which outcome variables are associated with genotype. This 
provides an alternative to the usual, but conceptually unsatisfying, approach of 
resorting to univariate tests when explaining and interpreting significant 
multivariate findings. The method is computationally tractable genome-wide for 
modest numbers of phenotypes (e.g. 5-10), and can be applied to summary data, 
without access to raw genotype and phenotype data. We illustrate the methods on 
both simulated examples, and to a genome-wide association study of blood lipid 
traits where we identify 18 potential novel genetic associations that were not 
identified by univariate analyses of the same data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065245
PMCID: PMC3702528
PMID: 23861737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The author has declared 
that no competing interests exist.