1. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Nov;33(11):2851-8. doi: 10.1007/s00296-013-2824-y. Epub
2013  Jul 18.

A polymorphism in ERAP1 is associated with susceptibility to ankylosing 
spondylitis in a Turkish population.

Cinar M(1), Akar H, Yilmaz S, Simsek I, Karkucak M, Sagkan RI, Pekel A, Erdem H, 
Avci IY, Acikel C, Musabak U, Tunca Y, Pay S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Gulhane Military Medical Academy School of 
Medicine, Gn.Tevfik SaÄŸlam Cad., 06018, Etlik, Ankara, Turkey, 
muhcinar@hotmail.com.

We assessed the role played by the ERAP1 gene in Turkish patients with 
ankylosing spondylitis (AS) in terms of disease susceptibility, clinical 
manifestations, and disease severity. We included 150 consecutive AS patients 
who met the modified New York classification criteria and 150 healthy controls. 
We documented the presence of 10 ERAP1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
and HLA-B27 in these patients. ERAP1 SNPs were genotyped using competitive 
allele-specific polymerase chain reaction. Differences between genotype and 
allele frequencies were compared using the Pearson's Chi-square test. The 
associations between ERAP1 SNPs, on the one hand, and with disease severity and 
clinical findings, on the other, were determined. One SNP, rs26653, was 
significantly associated with AS susceptibility (OR 1.609, 95% CI 1.163-2.226; p 
= 0.004). The population-attributable risk of possession of the rs26653 SNP 
allele was 23.4%. No relationship was noted between HLA-B27 positivity and the 
distribution of rs26653 genotype frequency. No associations were seen between 
disease severity measures and clinical manifestations of AS. In summary, an 
ERAP1 polymorphism was associated with AS in a Turkish population. The 
contributions of HLA-B27 and the rs26653 SNP to AS pathogenesis appear to be 
independent.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-013-2824-y
PMID: 23864143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]