1. Genome Res. 2013 Oct;23(10):1580-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.159400.113. Epub 2013 Jul 
16.

Lamin A/C-promoter interactions specify chromatin state-dependent transcription 
outcomes.

Lund E(1), Oldenburg AR, Delbarre E, Freberg CT, Duband-Goulet I, Eskeland R, 
Buendia B, Collas P.

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Epigenetics Laboratory, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, and Norwegian Center for Stem Cell 
Research, Blindern, 0317 Oslo, Norway;

Comment in
    Nucleus. 2013 Nov-Dec;4(6):424-30. doi: 10.4161/nucl.26865.

The nuclear lamina is implicated in the organization of the eukaryotic nucleus. 
Association of nuclear lamins with the genome occurs through large chromatin 
domains including mostly, but not exclusively, repressed genes. How lamin 
interactions with regulatory elements modulate gene expression in different 
cellular contexts is unknown. We show here that in human adipose tissue stem 
cells, lamin A/C interacts with distinct spatially restricted subpromoter 
regions, both within and outside peripheral and intra-nuclear lamin-rich 
domains. These localized interactions are associated with distinct 
transcriptional outcomes in a manner dependent on local chromatin modifications. 
Down-regulation of lamin A/C leads to dissociation of lamin A/C from promoters 
and remodels repressive and permissive histone modifications by enhancing 
transcriptional permissiveness, but is not sufficient to elicit gene activation. 
Adipogenic differentiation resets a large number of lamin-genome associations 
globally and at subpromoter levels and redefines associated transcription 
outputs. We propose that lamin A/C acts as a modulator of local gene expression 
outcome through interaction with adjustable sites on promoters, and that these 
position-dependent transcriptional readouts may be reset upon differentiation.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.159400.113
PMCID: PMC3787256
PMID: 23861385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]