1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2013 Jul;13(7):871-82. doi: 
10.1586/14737140.2013.811174.

Genetic changes in nonepithelial ovarian cancer.

Van Nieuwenhuysen E(1), Lambrechts S, Lambrechts D, Leunen K, Amant F, Vergote 
I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gynecological Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Leuven Cancer Institute, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium. 
els.vannieuwenhuysen@uzleuven.be

Nonepithelial ovarian cancers (OCs), including sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) 
and germ cell tumors (GCTs), are an uncommon subset of OC, together accounting 
for 10% of all OCs. The etiology of these tumors remains largely unresolved. It 
is well established that tumorigenesis is the result of multiple genetic 
alterations driving a normal cell toward a malignant state. Much effort has been 
made into researching the molecular mechanisms underlying epithelial OC, but far 
less is known about the genetic changes in SCSTs and GCTs. Recently, a single 
point missense mutation (C134W) was found in the FOXL2 gene in approximately 95% 
of adult-type granulosa cell tumors, suggesting a key role for FOXL2 in these 
tumors. By contrast, the FOXL2 mutation was not found in the juvenile type. 
DICER1 somatic missense mutations were found in approximately 60% of 
Sertoli-Leydig tumors. Ovarian GCTs share many morphological features and a 
similar pattern of chromosomal alterations with testicular GCTs. In the latter, 
recent genome-wide association studies have identified seven susceptibility loci 
near KITLG, SPRY4, UKC2, BAK1, DMRT1, TERT and ATF7IP. All of the susceptibility 
loci detected thus far are all involved in primordial germ cell function or sex 
determination. TGF-β/BMP and Wnt/β-catenin signaling was absent in 
dysgerminomas, but present in yolk sac tumors, suggesting intertumoral 
heterogeneity. In this article, the authors aim to provide an overview of the 
current knowledge on the possible molecular changes in SCSTs and GCTs of the 
ovary.

DOI: 10.1586/14737140.2013.811174
PMID: 23875665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]