1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 16;8(7):e68467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068467. Print 
2013.

Dual regulatory roles of human AP-endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1) in CDKN1A/p21 
expression.

Sengupta S(1), Mitra S, Bhakat KK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

The human AP-endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1), an essential multifunctional protein 
involved in repair of oxidative DNA damage as well as in transcriptional 
regulation, is often overexpressed in tumor cells. APE1 was earlier shown to 
stimulate p53's DNA binding and its transactivation function in the expression 
of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 (CDKN1A) gene. Here, we show APE1's 
stable binding to p53 cis elements which are required for p53-mediated 
activation of p21 in p53-expressing wild type HCT116 cells. However, 
surprisingly, we observed APE1-dependent repression of p21 in isogenic p53-null 
HCT116 cells. Ectopic expression of p53 in the p53-null cells abrogated this 
repression suggesting that APE1's negative regulatory role in p21 expression is 
dependent on the p53 status. We then identified APE1's another binding site in 
p21's proximal promoter region containing cis elements for AP4, a repressor of 
p21. Interestingly, APE1 and AP4 showed mutual dependence for p21 repression. 
Moreover, ectopic p53 in p53-null cells inhibited AP4's association with APE1, 
their binding to the promoter and p21 repression. These results together 
establish APE1's role as a co-activator or co-repressor of p21 gene, dependent 
on p53 status. It is thus likely that APE1 overexpression and inactivation of 
p53, often observed in tumor cells, promote tumor cell proliferation by 
constitutively downregulating p21 expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068467
PMCID: PMC3713036
PMID: 23874636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.