1. Nutrients. 2013 Jul 19;5(7):2811-35. doi: 10.3390/nu5072811.

Peculiarities of one-carbon metabolism in the strict carnivorous cat and the 
role in feline hepatic lipidosis.

Verbrugghe A(1), Bakovic M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada. averbrug@uoguelph.ca

Research in various species has indicated that diets deficient in labile methyl 
groups (methionine, choline, betaine, folate) produce fatty liver and links to 
steatosis and metabolic syndrome, but also provides evidence of the importance 
of labile methyl group balance to maintain normal liver function. Cats, being 
obligate carnivores, rely on nutrients in animal tissues and have, due to 
evolutionary pressure, developed several physiological and metabolic 
adaptations, including a number of peculiarities in protein and fat metabolism. 
This has led to specific and unique nutritional requirements. Adult cats require 
more dietary protein than omnivorous species, maintain a consistently high rate 
of protein oxidation and gluconeogenesis and are unable to adapt to reduced 
protein intake. Furthermore, cats have a higher requirement for essential amino 
acids and essential fatty acids. Hastened use coupled with an inability to 
conserve certain amino acids, including methionine, cysteine, taurine and 
arginine, necessitates a higher dietary intake for cats compared to most other 
species. Cats also seemingly require higher amounts of several B-vitamins 
compared to other species and are predisposed to depletion during prolonged 
inappetance. This carnivorous uniqueness makes cats more susceptible to hepatic 
lipidosis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu5072811
PMCID: PMC3739000
PMID: 23877091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]