1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 18;8(7):e69083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069083. Print 
2013.

Runx transcription factors repress human and murine c-Myc expression in a 
DNA-binding and C-terminally dependent manner.

Jacobs PT(1), Cao L, Samon JB, Kane CA, Hedblom EE, Bowcock A, Telfer JC.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA.

The transcription factors Runx1 and c-Myc have individually been shown to 
regulate important gene targets as well as to collaborate in oncogenesis. 
However, it is unknown whether there is a regulatory relationship between the 
two genes. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of 
endogenous c-Myc by Runx1 in the human T cell line Jurkat and murine primary 
hematopoietic cells. Endogenous Runx1 binds to multiple sites in the c-Myc locus 
upstream of the c-Myc transcriptional start site. Cells transduced with a 
C-terminally truncated Runx1 (Runx1.d190), which lacks important cofactor 
interaction sites and can block C-terminal-dependent functions of all Runx 
transcription factors, showed increased transcription of c-Myc. In order to 
monitor c-Myc expression in response to early and transiently-acting Runx1.d190, 
we generated a cell membrane-permeable TAT-Runx1.d190 fusion protein. Murine 
splenocytes treated with TAT-Runx1.d190 showed an increase in the transcription 
of c-Myc within 2 hours, peaking at 4 hours post-treatment and declining 
thereafter. This effect is dependent on the ability of Runx1.d190 to bind to 
DNA. The increase in c-Myc transcripts is correlated with increased c-Myc 
protein levels. Collectively, these data show that Runx1 directly regulates 
c-Myc transcription in a C-terminal- and DNA-binding-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069083
PMCID: PMC3715461
PMID: 23874874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.