1. Cancer Lett. 2013 Oct 1;339(1):135-43. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.07.010. Epub
 2013 Jul 22.

The biological features of PanIN initiated from oncogenic Kras mutation in 
genetically engineered mouse models.

Shen R(1), Wang Q, Cheng S, Liu T, Jiang H, Zhu J, Wu Y, Wang L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) is the most common premalignant 
lesion of the pancreas. Further understanding of the biological behavior and 
molecular genetic alterations in the stepwise progression of PanINs is necessary 
toward the development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) interventions. 
In this study, we analyzed the morphological characteristics, molecular 
alterations, and biological behavior of pancreatic wild-type and neoplasia 
tissues, including analysis of PanIN cell line SH-PAN (isolated from Pdx-1-Cre; 
LSL-KrasG12D/+ mouse) and PDAC cell line DT-PCa (isolated from Pdx1-Cre; 
LSL-KrasG12D/+; LSL-Tp53R172H/+ mouse. Results show that KrasG12D induces ductal 
lesion PanINs. Increased expression of EGFR, Her-2/Neu, p-MAPK and β-Catenin was 
observed in low-grade PanINs. Tp53 was not expressed in wild-type and low-grade 
PanINs, however, increased expression was observed in high-grade PanINs. 
Furthermore, SH-PAN cells did not exhibit any colony formation and showed 
significantly lower migration and invasion ability compared with DT-PCa cells. 
Notably, we first found PPP2R2A (protein phosphatase 2, regulatory subunit B, 
alpha) expression was significantly higher in SH-PAN cells than DT-PCa cells, 
and was high in 96 of 172 peritumoral normal human pancreatic tissues and 20 of 
36 human low- or middle-grade PanIN tissues, whereas, was weak or negligible in 
12 of 20 human high-grade PanIN tissues and 124 of 172 human PDAC tissues 
post-operation. The expression of PPP2R2A appears to be correlated with clinical 
survival. Taken together, Kras(G12D) - driven PanIN showed the tumorigenic 
ability, however, did not undergo a malignant transformation, and decreased 
expression of PPP2R2A in PDACs may provided a new target for pancreatic 
carcinoma intervention.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.07.010
PMID: 23887057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]