1. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Oct;30(10):2268-85. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst124. Epub 2013 
Jul 24.

Expression and sequence evolution of aromatase cyp19a1 and other sexual 
development genes in East African cichlid fishes.

BÃ¶hne A(1), Heule C, Boileau N, Salzburger W.

Author information:
(1)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Sex determination mechanisms are highly variable across teleost fishes and 
sexual development is often plastic. Nevertheless, downstream factors 
establishing the two sexes are presumably conserved. Here, we study sequence 
evolution and gene expression of core genes of sexual development in a prime 
model system in evolutionary biology, the East African cichlid fishes. Using the 
available five cichlid genomes, we test for signs of positive selection in 28 
genes including duplicates from the teleost whole-genome duplication, and 
examine the expression of these candidate genes in three cichlid species. We 
then focus on a particularly striking case, the A- and B-copies of the aromatase 
cyp19a1, and detect different evolutionary trajectories: cyp19a1A evolved under 
strong positive selection, whereas cyp19a1B remained conserved at the protein 
level, yet is subject to regulatory changes at its transcription start sites. 
Importantly, we find shifts in gene expression in both copies. Cyp19a1 is 
considered the most conserved ovary-factor in vertebrates, and in all teleosts 
investigated so far, cyp19a1A and cyp19a1B are expressed in ovaries and the 
brain, respectively. This is not the case in cichlids, where we find new 
expression patterns in two derived lineages: the A-copy gained a novel 
testis-function in the Ectodine lineage, whereas the B-copy is overexpressed in 
the testis of the speciest-richest cichlid group, the Haplochromini. This 
suggests that even key factors of sexual development, including the sex steroid 
pathway, are not conserved in fish, supporting the idea that flexibility in 
sexual determination and differentiation may be a driving force of speciation.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/mst124
PMCID: PMC3773371
PMID: 23883521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]