1. Innate Immun. 2014 May;20(4):377-89. doi: 10.1177/1753425913493453. Epub 2013 
Jul 24.

Activation of NOD receptors by Neisseria gonorrhoeae modulates the innate immune 
response.

Mavrogiorgos N(1), Mekasha S, Yang Y, Kelliher MA, Ingalls RR.

Author information:
(1)1Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

NOD1 and NOD2 are members of the NOD-like receptor family of cytosolic pattern 
recognition receptors that recognize specific fragments of the bacterial cell 
wall component peptidoglycan. Neisseria species are unique amongst Gram-negative 
bacteria in that they turn over large amounts of peptidoglycan during growth. We 
examined the ability of NOD1 and NOD2 to recognize Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and 
determined the role of NOD-dependent signaling in regulating the immune response 
to gonococcal infection. Gonococci, as well as conditioned medium from 
mid-logarithmic phase grown bacteria, were capable of activating both human NOD1 
and NOD2, as well as mouse NOD2, leading to the activation of the transcription 
factor NF-ÎºB and polyubiquitination of the adaptor receptor-interacting 
serine-threonine kinase 2. We identified a number of cytokines and chemokines 
that were differentially expressed in wild type versus NOD2-deficient 
macrophages in response to gonococcal infection. Moreover, NOD2 signaling 
up-regulated complement pathway components and cytosolic nucleic acid sensors, 
suggesting a broad impact of NOD activation on innate immunity. Thus, NOD1 and 
NOD2 are important intracellular regulators of the immune response to infection 
with N. gonorrhoeae. Given the intracellular lifestyle of this pathogen, we 
believe these cytosolic receptors may provide a key innate immune defense 
mechanism for the host during gonococcal infection.

DOI: 10.1177/1753425913493453
PMCID: PMC3880408
PMID: 23884094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]