1. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Oct;51(10):3277-85. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01122-13. Epub
2013  Jul 24.

Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in panama is driven by clonal expansion of a 
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis strain related to the KZN 
extensively drug-resistant M. tuberculosis strain from South Africa.

Lanzas F(1), Karakousis PC, Sacchettini JC, Ioerger TR.

Author information:
(1)Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas de Estudios de la Salud, Panama, Republic of 
Panama.

Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is a significant health problem in 
Panama. The extent to which such cases are the result of primary or acquired 
resistance and the strain families involved are unknown. We performed 
whole-genome sequencing of a collection of 66 clinical MDR isolates, along with 
31 drug-susceptible isolates, that were isolated in Panama between 2001 and 
2010; 78% of the MDR isolates belong to the Latin American-Mediterranean (LAM) 
family. Drug resistance mutations correlated well with drug susceptibility 
profiles. To determine the relationships among these strains and to better 
understand the acquisition of resistance mutations, a phylogenetic tree was 
constructed based on a genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism analysis. The 
phylogenetic tree shows that the isolates are highly clustered, with a single 
strain (LAM9-c1) accounting for nearly one-half of the MDR isolates (29/66 
isolates). The LAM9-c1 strain was most prevalent among male patients of working 
age and was associated with high mortality rates. Members of this cluster all 
share identical mutations conferring resistance to isoniazid (KatG S315T 
mutation), rifampin (RpoB S531L mutation), and streptomycin (rrs C517T 
mutation). This evidence of primary resistance supports a model in which MDR-TB 
in Panama is driven by clonal expansion and ongoing transmission of several 
strains in the LAM family, including the highly successful MDR strain LAM9-c1. 
The phylogenetic analysis also shows that the LAM9-c1 strain is closely related 
to the KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) extensively drug-resistant TB strain identified in 
KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. The LAM9-c1 and KZN strains likely arose from a 
recent common ancestor that was transmitted between Panama and South Africa and 
had the capacity to tolerate an accumulation of multiple resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01122-13
PMCID: PMC3811646
PMID: 23884993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]