1. Liver Transpl. 2013 Oct;19(10):1151-8. doi: 10.1002/lt.23711.

Conversion from Prograf to Advagraf in adolescents with stable liver 
transplants: comparative pharmacokinetics and 1-year follow-up.

Carcas-Sansuán AJ(1), Hierro L, Almeida-Paulo GN, Frauca E, Tong HY, Díaz C, 
Piñana E, Frías-Iniesta J, Jara P.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Service, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain; 
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Autonomous University of Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.

The recommended dose of Advagraf for conversion from Prograf is considered to be 
1:1 on a milligram basis. However, the long-term equivalence of Prograf and 
Advagraf has been questioned. The relative bioavailability of Advagraf and 
Prograf was evaluated in a single-center, open-label study of 
Prograf-to-Advagraf conversion in 20 patients, ranging in age from 12 to 18 
years, who had a stable liver transplant and were receiving Prograf. After the 
supervised administration of Prograf for 7 days, the patients were converted to 
Advagraf. On days 7 and 14, serial blood samples were obtained for tacrolimus 
determinations. The pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated with a 
noncompartmental approach, and the relative bioavailability of both formulations 
was calculated according to standard statistical methods. Polymorphisms in 
cytochrome P450 3A5 (rs776746), adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette B1 
(rs1045642), POR*28 (rs1057868), and POR (rs2868177) were determined with 
standard methods. The clinical and analytical data from a 1-year follow-up 
period were collected for all patients 30, 90, 180, and 360 days after 
conversion. The mean ratios for Cmax and AUC0-24 were 96.9 (90% confidence 
interval = 85.37-110.19) and 100.1 (90% confidence interval = 90.8-112.1), 
respectively. No relationship was found between the patients' genotypes and the 
pharmacokinetic tacrolimus values. During the follow-up, biochemical parameters 
(aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, bilirubin, cystatin C, 
and creatinine) did not change significantly; 3 patients presented with relevant 
clinical events, but no event was considered to be related to tacrolimus. A 
decrease in tacrolimus blood levels and an increase in dose/level ratios were 
observed 3 and 6 months after conversion, but they returned to basal levels by 
month 12. In conclusion, conversion from Prograf to Advagraf with a 1:1 dose 
equivalence is appropriate as an initial guideline. Our 1-year follow-up showed 
a transient decrease in tacrolimus levels, so closer monitoring of tacrolimus 
levels may be required after conversion.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/lt.23711
PMID: 23894093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]