1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 Jul 30;13:178. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-178.

Comparison of CDC and sequence-based molecular typing of syphilis treponemes: 
tpr and arp loci are variable in multiple samples from the same patient.

Mikalová L(1), Pospíšilová P, Woznicová V, Kuklová I, Zákoucká H, Smajs D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic.

BACKGROUND: Molecular typing of syphilis-causing strains provides important 
epidemiologic data. We tested whether identified molecular subtypes were 
identical in PCR-positive parallel samples taken from the same patient at a same 
time. We also tested whether subtype prevalence differs in skin and blood 
samples.
RESULTS: Eighteen syphilis positive patients (showing both positive serology and 
PCR), with two PCR-typeable parallel samples taken at the same time, were tested 
with both CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and sequence-based 
typing. Samples taken from 9 of 18 patients were completely typed for TP0136, 
TP0548, 23S rDNA, arp, and tpr loci. The CDC typing revealed 11 distinct 
genotypes while the sequence-based typing identified 6 genotypes. When results 
from molecular typing of TP0136, TP0548, and 23S rDNA were analyzed in samples 
taken from the same patient, no discrepancies in the identified genotypes were 
found; however, there were discrepancies in 11 of 18 patients (61.1%) samples 
relative to the arp and tpr loci. In addition to the above described typing, 127 
PCR-positive swabs and whole blood samples were tested for individual genotype 
frequencies. The repetition number for the arp gene was lower in whole blood 
(WB) samples compared to swab samples. Similarly, the most common tpr RFLP type 
"d" was found to have lower occurrence rates in WB samples while type "e" had an 
increased occurrence in these samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Differences in the CDC subtypes identified in parallel samples 
indicated genetic instability of the arp and tpr loci and suggested limited 
applicability of the CDC typing system in epidemiological studies. Differences 
in treponemal genotypes detected in whole blood and swab samples suggested 
important differences between both compartments and/or differences in adherence 
of treponeme variants to human cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-178
PMCID: PMC3735398
PMID: 23898829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]