1. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Oct;8(4):1242-50. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1607. Epub 2013 Jul 
31.

Vascular endothelial growth factor ‑634G/C polymorphism is associated with 
increased breast cancer risk and aggressiveness.

Sa-Nguanraksa D(1), Chuangsuwanich T, Pongpruttipan T, Kummalue T, Rojananin S, 
Ratanawichhitrasin A, Prasarttong-Osoth P, Chuthatisith S, Pisarnturakit P, 
Aeumrithaicharoenchok W, Rushatamukayanunt P, Lohsiriwat V, Boonsripitayanon M, 
Malasit P, O-Charoenrat P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Head, Neck and Breast Surgery, Department of Surgery, Faculty of 
Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Polymorphisms in the promoter and 5' untranslated region of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) have been associated with VEGF levels. To investigate the 
role of VEGF polymorphisms in breast cancer, the VEGF ‑2578C/A, ‑1498C/T, 
‑1154G/A and ‑634G/C polymorphisms were genotyped in 483 breast cancer patients 
and 524 healthy controls. VEGF mRNA levels in breast cancer tissue were 
determined using semi‑quantitative RT‑PCR. The genotypes, ‑634G/C and ‑634C/C, 
were associated with an increased risk for breast cancer when compared with the 
‑634G/G genotype. The VEGF ‑634G/C genotype was associated with tumor size >20 
mm, perineural invasion and stage II‑IV. Individuals with ‑634C/C had lower 
disease‑free survival. Patients with the VEGF ‑634C/C genotype exhibited the 
highest VEGF mRNA levels. High VEGF mRNA expression correlated with tumor size 
>20 mm, presence of lymphovascular invasion and axillary nodal metastasis. These 
observations suggested that VEGF ‑634G/C polymorphisms have a significant role 
in breast cancer susceptibility and aggressiveness.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1607
PMID: 23904001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]