1. Biochemistry. 2013 Aug 27;52(34):5800-8. doi: 10.1021/bi400538w. Epub 2013 Aug
 16.

Double electron-electron resonance probes Ca²⁺-induced conformational changes 
and dimerization of recoverin.

Myers WK(1), Xu X, Li C, Lagerstedt JO, Budamagunta MS, Voss JC, Britt RD, Ames 
JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, California 95616, 
United States.

Recoverin, a member of the neuronal calcium sensor (NCS) branch of the 
calmodulin superfamily, is expressed in retinal photoreceptor cells and serves 
as a calcium sensor in vision. Ca²⁺-induced conformational changes in recoverin 
cause extrusion of its covalently attached myristate (termed Ca²⁺-myristoyl 
switch) that promotes translocation of recoverin to disk membranes during 
phototransduction in retinal rod cells. Here we report double electron-electron 
resonance (DEER) experiments on recoverin that probe Ca²⁺-induced changes in 
distance as measured by the dipolar coupling between spin-labels strategically 
positioned at engineered cysteine residues on the protein surface. The DEER 
distance between nitroxide spin-labels attached at C39 and N120C is 2.5 ± 0.1 nm 
for Ca²⁺-free recoverin and 3.7 ± 0.1 nm for Ca²⁺-bound recoverin. An additional 
DEER distance (5-6 nm) observed for Ca²⁺-bound recoverin may represent an 
intermolecular distance between C39 and N120. ¹⁵N NMR relaxation analysis and 
CW-EPR experiments both confirm that Ca²⁺-bound recoverin forms a dimer at 
protein concentrations above 100 μM, whereas Ca²⁺-free recoverin is monomeric. 
We propose that Ca²⁺-induced dimerization of recoverin at the disk membrane 
surface may play a role in regulating Ca²⁺-dependent phosphorylation of dimeric 
rhodopsin. The DEER approach will be useful for elucidating dimeric structures 
of NCS proteins in general for which Ca²⁺-induced dimerization is functionally 
important but not well understood.

DOI: 10.1021/bi400538w
PMCID: PMC3784611
PMID: 23906368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]