1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Oct;161A(10):2487-94. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36084. Epub 
2013 Aug 5.

Screening and familial characterization of copy-number variations in NR5A1 in 
46,XY disorders of sex development and premature ovarian failure.

Harrison SM(1), Campbell IM, Keays M, Granberg CF, Villanueva C, Tannin G, Zinn 
AR, Castrillon DH, Shaw CA, Stankiewicz P, Baker LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas.

The NR5A1 gene encodes for steroidogenic factor 1, a nuclear receptor that 
regulates proper adrenal and gonadal development and function. Mutations 
identified by NR5A1 sequencing have been associated with disorders of sex 
development (DSD), ranging from sex reversal to severe hypospadias in 46,XY 
patients and premature ovarian failure (POF) in 46,XX patients. Previous reports 
have identified four families with a history of both 46,XY DSD and 46,XX POF 
carrying segregating NR5A1 sequence mutations. Recently, three 46,XY DSD 
sporadic cases with NR5A1 microdeletions have been reported. Here, we identify 
the first NR5A1 microdeletion transmitted in a pedigree with both 46,XY DSD and 
46,XX POF. A 46,XY individual with DSD due to gonadal dysgenesis was born to a 
young mother who developed POF. Array CGH analysis revealed a maternally 
inherited 0.23 Mb microdeletion of chromosome 9q33.3, including the NR5A1 gene. 
Based on this finding, we screened patients with unexplained 46,XY DSD (n = 11), 
proximal hypospadias (n = 21) and 46,XX POF (n = 36) for possible NR5A1 
copy-number variations (CNVs) via multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA), but did not identify any additional CNVs involving NR5A1. 
These data suggest that NR5A1 CNVs are an infrequent cause of these disorders 
but that array CGH and MLPA are useful genomic screening tools to uncover the 
genetic basis of such unexplained cases. This case is the first report of a 
familial NR5A1 CNV transmitting in a pedigree, causing both the male and female 
phenotypes associated with NR5A1 mutations, and the first report of a NR5A1 CNV 
associated with POF.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36084
PMCID: PMC3788034
PMID: 23918653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.