1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Aug;140(3):587-601. doi: 
10.1007/s10549-013-2644-5. Epub 2013 Aug 3.

Associations with growth factor genes (FGF1, FGF2, PDGFB, FGFR2, NRG2, EGF, 
ERBB2) with breast cancer risk and survival: the Breast Cancer Health 
Disparities Study.

Slattery ML(1), John EM, Stern MC, Herrick J, Lundgreen A, Giuliano AR, Hines L, 
Baumgartner KB, Torres-Mejia G, Wolff RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, 383 Colorow, Salt Lake City, UT 
84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Growth factors (GF) stimulate cell proliferation through binding to cell 
membrane receptors and are thought to be involved in cancer risk and survival. 
We examined how genetic variation in epidermal growth factor (EGF), neuregulin 2 
(NRG2), ERBB2 (HER2/neu), fibroblast growth factors 1 and 2 (FGF1 and FGF2) and 
its receptor 2 (FGFR2), and platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGFB) 
independently and collectively influence breast cancer risk and survival. We 
analyzed data from the Breast Cancer Health Disparities Study which includes 
Hispanic (2,111 cases, 2,597 controls) and non-Hispanic white (1,481 cases, 
1,586 controls) women. Adaptive rank-truncated product (ARTP) analysis was 
conducted to determine gene significance. Odds ratios (OR) and 95 % confidence 
intervals were obtained from conditional logistic regression models to estimate 
breast cancer risk and Cox proportional hazard models were used to estimate 
hazard ratios (HR) of dying from breast cancer. We assessed Native American (NA) 
ancestry using 104 ancestry informative markers. We observed few significant 
associations with breast cancer risk overall or by menopausal status other than 
for FGFR2 rs2981582. This SNP was significantly associated with ER+/PR+ (OR 
1.66, 95 % CI 1.37-2.00) and ER+/PR- (OR 1.54, 95 % CI 1.03-2.31) tumors. 
Multiple SNPs in FGF1, FGF2, and NRG2 significantly interacted with multiple 
SNPs in EGFR, ERBB2, FGFR2, and PDGFB, suggesting that breast cancer risk is 
dependent on the collective effects of genetic variants in other GFs. Both FGF1 
and ERBB2 significantly influenced overall survival, especially among women with 
low levels of NA ancestry (P ARTP = 0.007 and 0.003, respectively). Our findings 
suggest that genetic variants in growth factors signaling appear to influence 
breast cancer risk through their combined effects. Genetic variation in ERBB2 
and FGF1 appear to be associated with survival after diagnosis with breast 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-013-2644-5
PMCID: PMC3860319
PMID: 23912956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None of the authors have 
any conflict of interest to report.