1. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2013 Dec;16(6):499-509. doi:
10.1007/s00737-013-0373-8.  Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Association study of the estrogen receptor gene ESR1 with postpartum 
depression--a pilot study.

Pinsonneault JK(1), Sullivan D, Sadee W, Soares CN, Hampson E, Steiner M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Program in Pharmacogenomics, The Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH, 43214, USA, 
pinsonneault.2@osu.edu.

Perinatal mood disorders, such as postpartum depression (PPD), are costly for 
society, with potentially serious consequences for mother and child. While 
multiple genes appear to play a role in PPD susceptibility, the contributions of 
specific genetic variations remain unclear. Previously implicated as a candidate 
gene, the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) is a key player in mediating 
hormonal differences during pregnancy and the postpartum period. This study 
addresses genetic factors in perinatal mood disorders, testing nine 
polymorphisms in ESR1. Two hundred fifty-seven postpartum women were screened 
for mood disorders, including 52 women with PPD and 32 without any symptoms of 
mood disorders. We detected a significant association for the upstream TA 
microsatellite repeat with Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale scores 
(p = 0.007). The same variant was also associated with the occurrence of PPD. 
Separately, 11 candidate functional polymorphisms in 7 additional genes were 
genotyped to investigate gene-gene interaction with the ESR1 TA repeat, 
identifying a potential interaction with the serotonin transporter. Our results 
support a role for ESR1 in the etiology of PPD, possibly through the modulation 
of serotonin signaling. Our findings for ESR1 could have broad implications for 
other disorders and therapies that involve estrogens.

DOI: 10.1007/s00737-013-0373-8
PMCID: PMC3833886
PMID: 23917948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.