1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;51(4):302-7.

[Mutation analysis of FAH gene in patients with tyrosinemia type 1].

[Article in Chinese]

Dou LM(1), Fang LJ, Wang XH, Lu W, Chen R, Li LT, Zhao J, Wang JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Childrens' Hospital of Fudan University, 
Shanghai 201102, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical features and mutations of the FAH gene.
METHOD: Clinical records of two cases were collected, and diagnosis was made 
according to the diagnostic criteria of the International Organization for Rare 
Disorders (NORD). Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes 
with QIAamp DNA Mini Kit. The DNA extracts were subjected to direct sequencing 
for 14 exons together with adjacent fragments of FAH gene using ABI Prism 3730 
Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) after PCR based on 
genomic DNA. The mutation source was verified by analyzing parents' exons 
corresponding to patients' mutation exons. The homology between human FAH enzyme 
and that of other species was surveyed using software Clustal X(European 
Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Saffron Walde, UK). Polyphen (Polymorphism 
Phenotyping), available online, were used to predict possible impact of an amino 
acid substitution on structure and function of FAH enzyme. Polyphen calculates 
position-specific independent counts (PISC) scores for two amino acid variants 
in polymorphic position. A PISC scores that differ by > 2 were regarded as 
indicating the probability of damaging variants.
RESULT: Patient 1 was a 5 months and 21 days-old boy who suffered from 
persistent diarrhea, hepatomegaly, ascites; Alpha-fetoprotein > 1210 µg/L, 
levels of tyrosine in blood and succinylacetone in urine were 110.8 µmol/L and 
83.7 µmol/L. His sister suffered from tyrosinemia type 1. Direct sequencing 
showed a G to A transition in CDS position 455 and 1027. He was compound 
heterozygous for the mutation c.455G > A/c.1027G > A, which predicts a change 
from tryptophan to a stop codon (TGG > TAG) at position 152 (W152X) and a change 
from glycine to arginine (GGG > AGG) at position 343 respectively. Patient 2 was 
a 6 year and 1 month-old girl with late-onset rickets who had signs of 
hepatosplenomegaly, rachitic rosary, windswept knees. Hypophosphatemia and 
alkaline phosphatase 1620 IU/L were detected. Alpha-fetoprotein 412.8 µg/L, 
levels of tyrosine in blood and succinylacetone in urine were 835.8 µmol/L and 
27.48 µmol/L. Rickets did not improve after administration of calcium and 
vitamine D3. She is homozygous for the mutation c.1027G > A/c.1027G > A, which 
predicts G343R. The parents were mutation carriers. Analysis by Clustal X on the 
alignment of amino acids residual reservation among different species showed 
that the locative amino acid was highly conserved. Polyphen software predicted 
G343R was probably damaging (PISC score 3.235).
CONCLUSION: Children with tyrosinemia type 1 can have manifestations of 
persistent diarrhea or late-onset rickets. Physical examination can reveal 
hepatosplenomegaly, laboratory tests indicate markedly elevated serum 
concentration of alpha-fetoprotein and alkaline phosphatase in plasma and 
succinylacetone in urine, other members in family may have tyrosinemias or 
parents are consanguineous. Mutations c.455G > A and c.1027G > A can be detected 
in FAH gene of Chinese children.

PMID: 23927806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]