1. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2013 Aug 8;2:22. doi: 10.1186/2162-3619-2-22. eCollection 
2013.

Hairy cell leukemia in kidney transplantation: lesson from a rare disorder.

Vinante F(1), Tomei P(2), Zaza G(2), Zamò A(3), Lupo A(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.
(2)Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, University Hospital of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.
(3)Section of Pathological Anatomy, Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, 
University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

We report here on the diagnosis and successful treatment of a case of hairy cell 
leukemia (HCL) that arose 15 years after kidney transplantation in a 51-year-old 
patient. As soon as the diagnosis was made, HCL was treated with 2-CDA, 
obtaining complete hematological remission. Immunosuppression with the 
calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporin was maintained, and the graft was preserved. 
In kidney transplant recipients supported with immunosuppressive drugs, 
post-transplant lymphoproliferative diseases (PTLDs) are frequent and typically 
related to immunosuppression via a loss of control of infectious/EBV-related 
proliferative stimuli. To date, HCL has not been considered among PTLDs. 
Recently, however, the oncogenic mutation V600E of the BRAF protein kinase has 
been found to be a hallmark of HCL, and calcineurin inhibitors have been shown 
to interfere with signaling downstream of V600E BRAF early on by counteracting 
senescence-associated mechanisms that protect against the oncogenic potential of 
the mutated kinase. Such a biochemical link between the oncogene-dependent 
signaling and calcineurin inhibitor activities suggests that HCL in transplanted 
patients might be a peculiar type of PTLD based on the presence of a specific 
mutation. This mechanism might also be involved in other neoplasias bearing the 
same or similar mutations, such as melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/2162-3619-2-22
PMCID: PMC3750510
PMID: 23927433