1. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2013 May;20(3):209-14. doi:
10.1053/j.ackd.2013.01.012.

Renal physiology of pregnancy.

Cheung KL(1), Lafayette RA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Pregnancy involves remarkable orchestration of physiologic changes. The kidneys 
are central players in the evolving hormonal milieu of pregnancy, responding and 
contributing to the changes in the environment for the pregnant woman and fetus. 
The functional impact of pregnancy on kidney physiology is widespread, involving 
practically all aspects of kidney function. The glomerular filtration rate 
increases 50% with subsequent decrease in serum creatinine, urea, and uric acid 
values. The threshold for thirst and antidiuretic hormone secretion are 
depressed, resulting in lower osmolality and serum sodium levels. Blood pressure 
drops approximately 10 mmHg by the second trimester despite a gain in 
intravascular volume of 30% to 50%. The drop in systemic vascular resistance is 
multifactorial, attributed in part to insensitivity to vasoactive hormones, and 
leads to activation of the renin-aldosterone-angiostensin system. A rise in 
serum aldosterone results in a net gain of approximately 1000 mg of sodium. A 
parallel rise in progesterone protects the pregnant woman from hypokalemia. The 
kidneys increase in length and volume, and physiologic hydronephrosis occurs in 
up to 80% of women. This review will provide an understanding of these important 
changes in kidney physiology during pregnancy, which is fundamental in caring 
for the pregnant patient.

Copyright Â© 2013 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ackd.2013.01.012
PMCID: PMC4089195
PMID: 23928384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]