1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003528. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003528. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Distinct binding and immunogenic properties of the gonococcal homologue of 
meningococcal factor h binding protein.

Jongerius I(1), Lavender H, Tan L, Ruivo N, Exley RM, Caesar JJ, Lea SM, Johnson 
S, Tang CM.

Author information:
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Neisseria meningitidis is a leading cause of sepsis and meningitis. The 
bacterium recruits factor H (fH), a negative regulator of the complement system, 
to its surface via fH binding protein (fHbp), providing a mechanism to avoid 
complement-mediated killing. fHbp is an important antigen that elicits 
protective immunity against the meningococcus and has been divided into three 
different variant groups, V1, V2 and V3, or families A and B. However, 
immunisation with fHbp V1 does not result in cross-protection against V2 and V3 
and vice versa. Furthermore, high affinity binding of fH could impair immune 
responses against fHbp. Here, we investigate a homologue of fHbp in Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae, designated as Gonococcal homologue of fHbp (Ghfp) which we show is 
a promising vaccine candidate for N. meningitidis. We demonstrate that Gfhp is 
not expressed on the surface of the gonococcus and, despite its high level of 
identity with fHbp, does not bind fH. Substitution of only two amino acids in 
Ghfp is sufficient to confer fH binding, while the corresponding residues in V3 
fHbp are essential for high affinity fH binding. Furthermore, immune responses 
against Ghfp recognise V1, V2 and V3 fHbps expressed by a range of clinical 
isolates, and have serum bactericidal activity against N. meningitidis 
expressing fHbps from all variant groups.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003528
PMCID: PMC3731240
PMID: 23935503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and have the 
following conflicts: Work in CMT's and SML's laboratory is supported by 
Novartis. This does not alter our adherence to all PLOS Pathogens policies on 
sharing data and materials.