1. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2013;24(2):117-21. doi: 10.4318/tjg.2013.0572.

Decrease in gastric cancer susceptibility by MTHFR C677T polymorphism in Ardabil 
Province, Iran.

Hosseini-Asl SS(1), Pourfarzi F, Barzegar A, Mazani M, Farahmand N, Niasti E, 
Yazdanbod A, Didevar R, Akhavan H, Malekzadeh R.

Author information:
(1)Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Gastrointestinal Research Center, 
Ardabil, Islamic Republic of Iran. saied.hosseiniasl@arums.ac.ir

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Gastric cancer, as the fourth most frequent malignancy 
worldwide, has the highest rate among cancer-related disorders in Ardabil 
province, located in North-West Iran. Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase is 
one of the cancer susceptibility genes with considerable polymorphisms. 
Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T leads to a decrease of about 30% in 
its product activity and is reported to have an effect on cancer susceptibility.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T genotyping was 
carried out by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism on peripheral blood DNA from 76 gastric cancer patients and 91 
healthy controls. The statistical significance was calculated by logistic 
regression analysis.
RESULTS: The mean age was 64.2±11.1 and 62.1±9.8 years for cases and controls, 
respectively. Among tumors, 35.5% were diffuse type and others were intestinal. 
The frequency of genotypes was 61.8%, 32.9%, and 5.3% among cases and 45.1%, 
50.6%, and 4.4% among controls for Ala/Ala, Ala/Val, and Val/Val, respectively. 
CT heterozygotes had lower susceptibility to gastric cancer (p=0.02). This 
relationship of significance was detected considering gender and age.
CONCLUSIONS: It was found that T allele has a protective association with age in 
the Ardabil province.

DOI: 10.4318/tjg.2013.0572
PMID: 23934457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]