1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2013;9(7):e1003161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003161. Epub 
2013 Jul 25.

Cell-cycle dependence of transcription dominates noise in gene expression.

Zopf CJ(1), Quinn K, Zeidman J, Maheshri N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Sep;14(9):596. doi: 10.1038/nrg3558.

The large variability in mRNA and protein levels found from both static and 
dynamic measurements in single cells has been largely attributed to random 
periods of transcription, often occurring in bursts. The cell cycle has a 
pronounced global role in affecting transcriptional and translational output, 
but how this influences transcriptional statistics from noisy promoters is 
unknown and generally ignored by current stochastic models. Here we show that 
variable transcription from the synthetic tetO promoter in S. cerevisiae is 
dominated by its dependence on the cell cycle. Real-time measurements of 
fluorescent protein at high expression levels indicate tetO promoters increase 
transcription rate âˆ¼2-fold in S/G2/M similar to constitutive genes. At low 
expression levels, where tetO promoters are thought to generate infrequent 
bursts of transcription, we observe random pulses of expression restricted to 
S/G2/M, which are correlated between homologous promoters present in the same 
cell. The analysis of static, single-cell mRNA measurements at different points 
along the cell cycle corroborates these findings. Our results demonstrate that 
highly variable mRNA distributions in yeast are not solely the result of 
randomly switching between periods of active and inactive gene expression, but 
instead largely driven by differences in transcriptional activity between G1 and 
S/G2/M.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003161
PMCID: PMC3723585
PMID: 23935476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.