1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69473. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069473. Print 
2013.

Early insights into the function of KIAA1199, a markedly overexpressed protein 
in human colorectal tumors.

Tiwari A(1), Schneider M, Fiorino A, Haider R, Okoniewski MJ, Roschitzki B, 
Uzozie A, Menigatti M, Jiricny J, Marra G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

We previously reported that the expression of KIAA1199 in human colorectal 
tumors (benign and malignant) is markedly higher than that in the normal colonic 
mucosa. In this study, we investigated the functions of the protein encoded by 
this gene, which are thus far unknown. Immunostaining studies were used to 
reveal its subcellular localization, and proteomic and gene expression 
experiments were conducted to identify proteins that might interact with 
KIAA1199 and molecular pathways in which it might play roles. Using colon cancer 
cell lines, we showed that both endogenous and ectopically expressed KIAA1199 is 
secreted into the extracellular environment. In the cells, it was found mainly 
in the perinuclear space (probably the ER) and cell membrane. Both cellular 
compartments were also over-represented in lists of proteins identified by mass 
spectrometry as putative KIAA1199 interactors and/or proteins encoded by genes 
whose transcription was significantly changed by KIAA1199 expression. These 
proteomic and transcriptomic datasets concordantly link KIAA1199 to several 
genes/proteins and molecular pathways, including ER processes like protein 
binding, transport, and folding; and Ca(2+), G-protein, ephrin, and Wnt 
signaling. Immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed KIAA1199's interaction with 
the cell-membrane receptor ephrin A2 and with the ER receptor ITPR3, a key 
player in Ca(2+) signaling. By modulating Ca(2+) signaling, KIAA1199 could 
affect different branches of the Wnt network. Our findings suggest it may 
negatively regulate the Wnt/CTNNB1 signaling, and its expression is associated 
with decreased cell proliferation and invasiveness.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069473
PMCID: PMC3720655
PMID: 23936024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.