1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;115:659-81. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52902-2.00039-4.

Hereditary gelsolin amyloidosis.

Kiuru-Enari S(1), Haltia M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Unit for Neuromuscular Diseases, Helsinki University 
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: 
sari.kiuru-enari@hus.fi.

Hereditary gelsolin amyloidosis (HGA) is an autosomally dominantly inherited 
form of systemic amyloidosis, characterized mainly by cranial and sensory 
peripheral neuropathy, corneal lattice dystrophy, and cutis laxa. HGA, 
originally reported from Finland and now increasingly from other countries in 
Europe, North and South America, and Asia, may still be underdiagnosed 
worldwide. It is the first and so-far only known disorder caused by a gelsolin 
gene defect, namely a G654A or G654T mutation. Gelsolin is a principal 
actin-modulating protein, implicated in multiple biological processes, also in 
the nervous system, e.g. axonal transport, myelination, neurite outgrowth, and 
neuroprotection. The gelsolin gene defect causes expression of variant gelsolin, 
followed by systemic deposition of gelsolin amyloid (AGel) in HGA patients and 
even other consequences on the metabolism and function of gelsolin. In HGA, 
specific therapy is not yet available but correct diagnosis enables adequate 
symptomatic treatment which decisively improves the quality of life in these 
patients. A transgenic murine model of HGA expressing AGel is available, in 
anticipation of new treatment options targeted toward this slowly progressive 
but devastating amyloidosis. Present and future lessons learned from HGA may be 
applicable even in diagnosis and treatment of other hereditary and sporadic 
amyloidoses.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52902-2.00039-4
PMID: 23931809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]