1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 6;8(8):e71886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071886. Print
2013.

Rab41 is a novel regulator of Golgi apparatus organization that is needed for 
ER-to-Golgi trafficking and cell growth.

Liu S(1), Hunt L, Storrie B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The 60(+) members of the mammalian Rab protein family group into 
subfamilies postulated to share common functionality. The Rab VI subfamily 
contains 5 Rab proteins, Rab6a/a', Rab6b, Rab6c and Rab41. High-level knockdown 
of Rab6a/a' has little effect on the tightly organized Golgi ribbon in HeLa 
cells as seen by fluorescence microscopy. In striking contrast, we found Rab41 
was strongly required for normal Golgi ribbon organization.
METHODS/RESULTS: Treatment of HeLa cells with Rab41 siRNAs scattered the Golgi 
ribbon into clustered, punctate Golgi elements. Overexpression of GDP-locked 
Rab41, but not wild type or GTP-locked Rab41, produced a similar Golgi 
phenotype. By electron microscopy, Rab41 depletion produced short, isolated 
Golgi stacks. Golgi-associated vesicles accumulated. At low expression levels, 
wild type and GTP-locked Rab41 showed little concentration in the Golgi region, 
but puncta were observed and most were in ruffled regions at the cell periphery. 
There was 25% co-localization of GTP-locked Rab41 with the ER marker, Sec61p. 
GDP-locked Rab41, as expected, displayed an entirely diffuse cytoplasmic 
distribution. Depletion of Rab41 or overexpression of GDP-locked Rab41 partially 
inhibited ER-to-Golgi transport of VSV-G protein. However, Rab41 knockdown had 
little, if any, effect on endosome-to-Golgi transport of SLTB. Additionally, 
after a 2-day delay, treatment with Rab41 siRNA inhibited cell growth, while 
overexpression of GDP-locked Rab41, but not wild type or GTP-locked Rab41, 
produced a rapid, progressive cell loss. In double knockdown experiments with 
Rab6, the Golgi ribbon was fragmented, a result consistent with Rab41 and Rab6 
acting in parallel.
CONCLUSION: We provide the first evidence for distinctive Rab41 effects on Golgi 
organization, ER-to-Golgi trafficking and cell growth. When combined with the 
evidence that Rab6a/a' and Rab6b have diverse roles in Golgi function, while 
Rab6c regulates mitotic function, our data indicate that Rab VI subfamily 
members, although related by homology and structure, share limited functional 
conservation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071886
PMCID: PMC3735572
PMID: 23936529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.