1. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(7):e1003511. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003511. Epub 2013 
Jul 25.

Enterovirus 71 binding to PSGL-1 on leukocytes: VP1-145 acts as a molecular 
switch to control receptor interaction.

Nishimura Y(1), Lee H, Hafenstein S, Kataoka C, Wakita T, Bergelson JM, Shimizu 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Musashimurayama-shi, Tokyo, Japan. ynishi@nih.go.jp

Some strains of enterovirus 71 (EV71), but not others, infect leukocytes by 
binding to a specific receptor molecule: the P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 
(PSGL-1). We find that a single amino acid residue within the capsid protein VP1 
determines whether EV71 binds to PSGL-1. Examination of capsid sequences of 
representative EV71 strains revealed that the PSGL-1-binding viruses had either 
a G or a Q at residue 145 within the capsid protein VP1 (VP1-145G or Q), whereas 
PSGL-1-nonbinding viruses had VP1-145E. Using site-directed mutagenesis we found 
that PSGL-1-binding strains lost their capacity to bind when VP1-145G/Q was 
replaced by E; conversely, nonbinding strains gained the capacity to bind PSGL-1 
when VP1-145E was replaced with either G or Q. Viruses with G/Q at VP1-145 
productively infected a leukocyte cell line, Jurkat T-cells, whereas viruses 
with E at this position did not. We previously reported that EV71 binds to the 
N-terminal region of PSGL-1, and that binding depends on sulfated tyrosine 
residues within this region. We speculated that binding depends on interaction 
between negatively charged sulfate groups and positively charged basic residues 
in the virus capsid. VP1-145 on the virus surface is in close proximity to 
conserved lysine residues at VP1-242 and VP1-244. Comparison of recently 
published crystal structures of EV71 isolates with either Q or E at VP1-145 
revealed that VP1-145 controls the orientation of the lysine side-chain of 
VP1-244: with VP1-145Q the lysine side chain faces outward, but with VP1-145E, 
the lysine side chain is turned toward the virus surface. Mutation of VP1-244 
abolished virus binding to PSGL-1, and mutation of VP1-242 greatly reduced 
binding. We propose that conserved lysine residues on the virus surface are 
responsible for interaction with sulfated tyrosine residues at the PSGL-1 
N-terminus, and that VP1-145 acts as a switch, controlling PSGL-1 binding by 
modulating the exposure of VP1-244K.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003511
PMCID: PMC3723564
PMID: 23935488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.