1. Neuroscience. 2013 Nov 12;252:109-17. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.07.015.
 Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Body mass index, but not FTO genotype or major depressive disorder, influences 
brain structure.

Cole JH(1), Boyle CP, Simmons A, Cohen-Woods S, Rivera M, McGuffin P, Thompson 
PM, Fu CH.

Author information:
(1)Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London SE5 
8AF, UK; Computational, Cognitive, and Clinical Neuroimaging Laboratory, 
Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, Burlington Danes Building, 
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK. Electronic address: 
james.cole@imperial.ac.uk.

Obesity and major depressive disorder (MDD) are highly prevalent and often 
comorbid health conditions. Both are associated with differences in brain 
structure and are genetically influenced. Yet, little is known about how 
obesity, MDD, and known risk genotypes might interact in the brain. Subjects 
were 81 patients with MDD (mean age 48.6 years) and 69 matched healthy controls 
(mean age 51.2 years). Subjects underwent 1.5T magnetic resonance imaging, 
genotyping for the fat mass and obesity associated (FTO) gene rs3751812 
polymorphism, and measurements for body mass index (BMI). We conducted a whole 
brain voxelwise analysis using tensor-based morphometry (TBM) to examine the 
main and interaction effects of diagnosis, BMI and FTO genotype. Significant 
effects of BMI were observed across widespread brain regions, indicating 
reductions in predominantly subcortical and white matter areas associated with 
increased BMI, but there was no influence of MDD or FTO rs3751812 genotype. 
There were no significant interaction effects. Within MDD patients, there was no 
effect of current depressive symptoms; however the use of antidepressant 
medication was associated with reductions in brain volume in the frontal lobe 
and cerebellum. Obesity affects brain structure in both healthy participants and 
MDD patients; this influence may account for some of the brain changes 
previously associated with MDD. BMI and the use of medication should ideally be 
measured and controlled for when conducting structural brain imaging research in 
MDD.

Copyright Â© 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.07.015
PMID: 23933215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]