1. Anim Biotechnol. 2013;24(4):268-77. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2013.781034.

A missense mutation in the rabbit melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene is 
associated with finishing weight in a meat rabbit line.

Fontanesi L(1), Scotti E, Cisarova K, Di Battista P, Dall'olio S, Fornasini D, 
Frabetti A.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences (DISTAL), Division of Animal 
Sciences , University of Bologna , Bologna , Italy.

In this study we resequenced 1729 bp of the rabbit melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4 
R) gene in 31 rabbits from different breeds/lines and identified ten 
polymorphisms: one was an indel and 9 were single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs). The indel and 5 SNPs were in the 5'-flanking region, 3 were synonymous 
SNPs and one was a missense mutation (c.101G>A; p.G34D), located in a conserved 
position of the extracellular tail of the MC4 R protein. The missense mutation 
was analyzed in a panel of 74 rabbits of different breeds and in 516 performance 
tested rabbits of a commercial paternal line under selection for growth 
efficiency. Association analysis indicated that rabbits with the less frequent 
genotype in this population (DD) had a lighter weight at 70 postnatal days than 
animals with genotype GD (P < 0.10) and animals with genotype GG (P < 0.05). 
This is the third study on candidate genes, after those on GH1 and IGF2 that 
reported a marker associated with finishing weight. Therefore, it seems that a 
candidate gene approach in rabbit based on previous information accumulated in 
other livestock species could be useful to identify genes explaining a fraction 
of variability of performance traits with potential application on rabbit 
breeding and selection.

DOI: 10.1080/10495398.2013.781034
PMID: 23947663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]