1. Stem Cell Rev Rep. 2014 Feb;10(1):60-8. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9466-z.

Neural crest stem cell-specific deletion of the Pygopus2 gene modulates hair 
follicle development.

Narytnyk A(1), Gillinder K, Verdon B, Clewes O, Sieber-Blum M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Centre for Life, Central 
Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.

We show that neural crest stem cells affect mouse hair follicle development. 
During embryogenesis hair follicle induction is regulated by complex reciprocal 
and functionally redundant signals between epidermis and dermis, which remain to 
be fully understood. Canonical Wnt signalling is a hallmark of neural crest 
cells and also a prerequisite for hair follicle induction prior to hair placode 
formation in the epidermis. As neural crest stem cells invade the epidermis 
during early embryonic development we aimed at determining whether neural crest 
cells affect hair follicle development. To attenuate, but not silence, canonical 
Wnt signalling specifically in neural crest cells, we analyzed 
Wnt1-cre(+/-)::Pygo2(-/-) mice in which the Î²-catenin co-activator gene, Pygopus 
2 (Pygo2), is deleted specifically in neural crest cells. Both, hair density and 
hair thickness were reduced in mutant mice. Furthermore, hair development was 
delayed and the relative ratio of hair types was affected. There was a decrease 
in zig-zag hairs and an increase in awl hairs. Mouse neural crest stem cells 
expressed ectodysplasin, an essential effector in the formation of zig-zag hair. 
Taken together, our data support the novel notion that neural crest cells are 
involved in the earliest stages of hair follicle development.

DOI: 10.1007/s12015-013-9466-z
PMCID: PMC3907677
PMID: 23955574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors indicate no potential conflicts of 
interest.