1. Gene. 2013 Oct 25;529(2):257-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.086. Epub 2013
Aug  14.

Single nucleotide polymorphism of CD40 in the 5'-untranslated region is 
associated with ischemic stroke.

Ma Y(1), Wang SX, Liu Y, Peng GG, Wang XM, Zhang B, Wu BH, Yu JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical 
College, Nanchong 637000, PR China.

OBJECTIVES: Ischemic stroke is influenced by both environmental and genetic 
factors. The CD40/CD40L system is related to proinflammatory and prothrombogenic 
responses, which are involved in the pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate association between the CD40 -1C/T single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and ischemic stroke in a Chinese population.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study including 286 ischemic stroke 
patients and 336 controls. CD40 -1C/T SNP was genotyped using polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and DNA sequencing 
methods, and evaluated its relevance to ischemic stroke susceptibility.
RESULTS: Significantly increased ischemic stroke risk was found to be associated 
with the T allele of CD40 -1C/T (OR=1.273, 95% CI=1.016-1.594). The frequencies 
of CT and TT/CT genotypes of CD40 -1C/T in ischemic stroke patients were 
significantly higher than those of controls, respectively (for CT: OR=2.350, 95% 
CI=1.601-3.449; for TT/CT: OR=2.148, 95% CI=1.479-3.119). And, similar results 
were obtained after adjusting non-matched variables. We found that the frequency 
of carried T genotypes (TT and TT/CT) was significantly increased in patients 
with history of stroke compared with patients without (for TT: OR=6.538, 
95%CI=1.655-25.833; for TT/CT: OR=3.469, 95%CI=1.031-11.670), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggested that the CD40 -1C/T polymorphism might 
contribute to the susceptibility to ischemic stroke in the Chinese population, 
and might be associated with history of previous stroke.

Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.086
PMID: 23954880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]