1. Gene. 2013 Dec 15;532(2):276-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.108. Epub 2013
Aug  17.

Genetic analysis of TMPRSS3 gene in the Korean population with autosomal 
recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss.

Lee J(1), Baek JI, Choi JY, Kim UK, Lee SH, Lee KY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National 
University, Daegu, South Korea.

The TMPRSS3 gene (DFNB8/10), which encodes a transmembrane serine protease, is a 
common hearing loss gene in several populations. Accurate functions of TMPRSS3 
in the hearing pathway are still unknown, but TMPRSS3 has been reported to play 
a crucial role in inner ear development or maintenance. To date, 16 pathogenic 
mutations have been identified in many countries, but no mutational studies of 
the TMPRSS3 gene have been conducted in the Korean hearing loss population. In 
this study, we performed genetic analysis of TMPRSS3 in 40 unrelated Korean 
patients with autosomal recessive hearing loss to identify the aspect and 
frequency of TMPRSS3 gene mutations in the Korean population. A total of 22 
variations were detected, including a novel variant (p.V291L) and a previously 
reported pathogenic mutation (p.A306T). The p.A306T mutation which has been 
detected in only compound heterozygous state in previous studies was identified 
in homozygous state for the first time in this study. Moreover, the clinical 
evaluation identified bilateral dilated vestibules in the patient with p.A306T 
mutation, and it suggested that p.A306T mutation of the TMPRSS3 gene might be 
associated with vestibular anomalies. In conclusion, this study investigated 
that only 2.5% of patients with autosomal recessive hearing loss were related to 
TMPRSS3 mutations suggesting low prevalence of TMPRSS3 gene in Korean hearing 
loss population. Also, it will provide the information of genotype-phenotype 
correlation to understand definite role of TMPRSS3 in the auditory system.

Â© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.108
PMID: 23958653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]