1. J Res Med Sci. 2013 Mar;18(Suppl 1):S6-S10.

Mutation analysis of CACNA1A gene in Iranian migrainous and review literatures.

Meamar R(1), Ostadsharif M, Saadatnia M, Ghorbani A, Nouri N, Dehghani L, Salehi 
M.

Author information:
(1)Isfahan Neurosciences Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical Science, 
Isfahan, Iran ; Department of Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad University, Najaf 
Abad Branch, Isfahan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: There are contrary results about the role of CACNA1A gene in the 
causation of common migraine in different populations. However, migraine may be 
genetically heterogeneous and more studies in different families and populations 
are required for a definite conclusion. The aim of this study was to surveyed 
leukocyte genomic DNA mutation of CACNA1A in Iranian migraine patients with [MA] 
and without aura [MO] who has family history of migraine and we performed a 
narrative review of all studies that evaluated CACNA1A gene, non-hemiplegic 
migraine [MA and MO] and FHM [familial hemiplegic migraine].
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 30 patients with family history of migraine were 
selected for mutations analysis for CACNA1A gene by PCR method. For review, we 
searched MEDLINE-PUBMED, ISI, Scopus and Cochrane databases up to December 2012.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis of the 4 exons of the CACNA1A gene in these patients 
revealed no mutations in this gene. Direct sequencing revealed a polymorphism 
previously reported G to A transition in the exon 16 [nt2369, Gâ†’A] in 9 
patients. In review, the correlation of FHM loci [CACNA1A gene] with MA and MO 
has been showed in different population and only small population from 
Caucasians presented this correlation.
CONCLUSION: CACNA1A is most likely not a major susceptibility gene for common 
migraine in Iranian maigrainous. It's essential to study more on larger series 
and covering all 47 exons of the CACNA1A gene to confirm this hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC3743323
PMID: 23961289

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.