1. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2459. doi: 10.1038/srep02459.

Silibinin suppresses EMT-driven erlotinib resistance by reversing the high 
miR-21/low miR-200c signature in vivo.

Cufí S(1), Bonavia R, Vazquez-Martin A, Oliveras-Ferraros C, Corominas-Faja B, 
Cuyàs E, Martin-Castillo B, Barrajón-Catalán E, Visa J, Segura-Carretero A, 
Joven J, Bosch-Barrera J, Micol V, Menendez JA.

Author information:
(1)Metabolism & Cancer Group, Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan 
Institute of Oncology, Girona, Catalonia, Spain.

The flavolignan silibinin was studied for its ability to restore drug 
sensitivity to EGFR-mutant NSCLC xenografts with epithelial-to-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT)-driven resistance to erlotinib. As a single agent, silibinin 
significantly decreased the tumor volumes of erlotinib-refractory NSCLC 
xenografts by approximately 50%. Furthermore, the complete abrogation of tumor 
growth was observed with the co-treatment of erlotinib and silibinin. Silibinin 
fully reversed the EMT-related high miR-21/low miR-200c microRNA signature and 
repressed the mesenchymal markers SNAIL, ZEB, and N-cadherin observed in 
erlotinib-refractory tumors. Silibinin was sufficient to fully activate a 
reciprocal mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) in erlotinib-refractory 
cells and prevent the highly migratogenic phenotype of erlotinib-resistant NSCLC 
cells. Given that the various mechanisms of resistance to erlotinib result from 
EMT, regardless of the EGFR mutation status, a water-soluble, silibinin-rich 
milk thistle extract might be a suitable candidate therapy for upcoming clinical 
trials aimed at preventing or reversing NSCLC progression following erlotinib 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep02459
PMCID: PMC3748425
PMID: 23963283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AstraZeneca (Spain) provided partial financial 
support for the present study via an educational grant to Dr. Javier A. Menendez 
and Dr. Joaquim Bosch-Barrera.