1. Springerplus. 2013 Jul 30;2:358. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-2-358. eCollection
2013.

Perihematomal glutamate level is associated with the blood-brain barrier 
disruption in a rabbit model of intracerebral hemorrhage.

Wu G(1), Sun S, Sheng F, Wang L, Wang F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital, Guiyang Medical College, No. 
28, Guiyijie Road, Liuguangmen, Guiyang City, Guizhou Province 550004 P R China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the relationship between the perihematomal glutamate 
levels and the blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability in a rabbit model of 
intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).
METHODS: Seventy-two rabbits were randomly divided into an intracerebral 
hemorrhage (ICH) model group and a normal control (NC) group, and each group of 
36 rabbits was subsequently divided into 6, 12, 18, 24, 48 and 72 h groups 
(n = 6 each). An ICH model was induced by stereotactic injection of autologous, 
arterial, non-anticoagulated blood into rabbit basal ganglia. The same 
procedures were performed in the NC group, but blood was not injected. The 
rabbits were sacrificed at specific time points after the experiment began 
depending on their group. Perihematomal brain tissues were collected to 
determine glutamate levels, BBB permeability and brain water content (BWC).
RESULTS: All of the assessed parameters were increased 6 hour after blood 
infusion and continued to gradually increase, peaking at 48 hours. Differences 
were observed when ICH values were compared with those of the NC group 
(p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Perihematomal glutamate increased significantly after ICH. High 
levels of glutamate are closely associated with BBB disruption and the brain 
edema. Therefore, glutamate may play an important role in the pathogenesis of 
secondary brain injury after (ICH).

DOI: 10.1186/2193-1801-2-358
PMCID: PMC3738910
PMID: 23961420