1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071258. 
eCollection 2013.

The 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO) disrupts mammary epithelial morphogenesis 
and promotes breast cancer cell migration.

Wu X(1), Gallo KA.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, United States of America.

Mitochondria play important roles in cancer progression and have emerged as 
viable targets for cancer therapy. Increasing levels of the outer mitochondrial 
membrane protein, 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO), are associated with 
advancing breast cancer stage. In particular, higher TSPO levels are found in 
estrogen receptor (ER)-negative breast tumors, compared with ER-positive tumors. 
In this study, we sought to define the roles of TSPO in the acquisition of 
breast cancer malignancy. Using a three-dimensional Matrigel culture system, we 
determined the impact of elevated TSPO levels on mammary epithelial 
morphogenesis. Our studies demonstrate that stable overexpression of TSPO in 
mammary epithelial MCF10A acini drives proliferation and provides partial 
resistance to luminal apoptosis, resulting in enlarged acinar structures with 
partially filled lumen that resemble early stage breast lesions leading to 
breast cancer. In breast cancer cell lines, TSPO silencing or TSPO 
overexpression significantly altered the migratory activity. In addition, we 
found that combination treatment with the TSPO ligands (PK 11195 or Ro5-4864) 
and lonidamine, a clinical phase II drug targeting mitochondria, decreased 
viability of ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. Taken together, these data 
demonstrate that increases in TSPO levels at different stages of breast cancer 
progression results in the acquisition of distinct properties associated with 
malignancy. Furthermore, targeting TSPO, particularly in combination with other 
mitochondria-targeting agents, may prove useful for the treatment of ER-negative 
breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071258
PMCID: PMC3743866
PMID: 23967175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.