1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 13;8(8):e70847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070847. 
eCollection 2013.

A hierarchical coarse-grained (all-atom-to-all-residue) computer simulation 
approach: self-assembly of peptides.

Pandey RB(1), Kuang Z, Farmer BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southern Mississippi, 
Hattiesburg, Mississippi, USA. ras.pandey@usm.edu

A hierarchical computational approach (all-atom residue to all-residue peptide) 
is introduced to study self-organizing structures of peptides as a function of 
temperature. A simulated residue-residue interaction involving all-atom 
description, analogous to knowledge-based analysis (with different input), is 
used as an input to a phenomenological coarse-grained interaction for large 
scales computer simulations. A set of short peptides P1 ((1)H (2)S (3)S (4)Y 
(5)W (6)Y (7)A (8)F (9)N (10)N (11)K (12)T) is considered as an example to 
illustrate the utility. We find that peptides assemble rather fast into globular 
aggregates at low temperatures and disperse as random-coil at high temperatures. 
The specificity of the mass distribution of the self-assembly depends on the 
temperature and spatial lengths which are identified from the scaling of the 
structure factor. Analysis of energy and mobility profiles, gyration radius of 
peptide, and radial distribution function of the assembly provide insight into 
the multi-scale (intra- and inter-chain) characteristics. Thermal response of 
the global assembly with the simulated residue-residue interaction is consistent 
with that of the knowledge-based analysis despite expected quantitative 
differences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070847
PMCID: PMC3742673
PMID: 23967121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.