1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013 Aug 22;15(4):R96. doi: 10.1186/ar4276.

Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with reduced adiposity but not with 
unfavorable major cardiovascular risk factor profiles and enhanced carotid 
atherosclerosis in black Africans from a developing population: a 
cross-sectional study.

Dessein PH, Woodiwiss AJ, Norton GR, Solomon A.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by inflamed 
joint-derived cytokine-mediated high-grade systemic inflammation that enhances 
cardiovascular metabolic risk and disease in developed populations. We 
investigated the potential impact of RA on cardiovascular risk factors including 
systemic inflammation and atherosclerosis, and their relationships in black 
Africans from a developing population.
METHODS: We evaluated demographic features, adiposity indices, major traditional 
cardiovascular risk factors, circulating C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 
concentrations and ultrasound determined carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) 
in 274 black Africans; 115 had established RA. Data were analyzed in 
confounder-adjusted mixed regression models.
RESULTS: The body mass index and waist-height ratio were lower in RA compared to 
non-RA subjects (29.2 (6.6) versus 33.7 (8.0), P < 0.0001 and 0.58 (0.09) versus 
0.62 (0.1), P = 0.0003, respectively). Dyslipidemia was less prevalent in 
patients with RA (odds ratio (OR) (95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.54 (0.30 to 
1.00)); this disparity was no longer significant after further adjustment for 
reduced adiposity and chloroquine use. RA was also not associated with 
hypertension, current smoking and diabetes. The number of major traditional risk 
factors did not differ by RA status (1.1 (0.8) versus 1.2 (0.9), P = 0.7). 
Circulating C-reactive protein concentrations were similar and serum 
interleukin-6 concentrations reduced in RA (7.2 (3.1) versus 6.7 (3.1) mg/l, P = 
0.7 and 3.9 (1.9) versus 6.3 (1.9) pg/ml, P < 0.0001, respectively). The cIMT 
was 0.700 (0.085) and 0.701 (0.111) mm in RA and non-RA subjects, respectively 
(P = 0.7). RA disease activity and severity parameters were consistently 
unrelated to systemic inflammation, despite the presence of clinically active 
disease in 82.6% of patients. In all participants, adiposity indices, smoking 
and converting angiotensin inhibitor non-use were associated with increased 
systemic inflammation, which related to more atherogenic lipid profiles, and 
circulating low density lipoprotein concentrations were associated with cIMT 
(partial R = 0.153, P = 0.032); RA did not impact on these relationships 
(interaction P â‰¥0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: Among black Africans, patients with established RA experience 
reduced overall and abdominal adiposity but no enhanced major traditional risk 
factor and atherosclerosis burden. This study further suggests that an absent 
interleukin-6 release by inflamed RA joints into the circulation may account for 
this unaltered cardiovascular disease risk.

DOI: 10.1186/ar4276
PMCID: PMC3979152
PMID: 23968456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]