1. Curr Psychiatry Rev. 2010 May 1;6(2):91-103. doi: 10.2174/157340010791196439.

The Genetics of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.

Bloch MH(1), Pittenger C.

Author information:
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut ; Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.

OCD is a psychiatric disorder with a lifetime prevalence of 1-3% and is a 
significant cause of disability worldwide. Family studies indicate that OCD has 
a significant hereditable component, with relatives of OCD cases being 4 times 
more likely to develop the disorder than the general population. Linkage studies 
in OCD have generally been underpowered and have failed to reach the statistical 
threshold for genome-wide significance, but they have nevertheless been useful 
for revealing potential regions of interest for future candidate gene studies. 
Candidate gene studies in OCD have thus far focused on genes involved in the 
serotonergic, dopaminergic, and glutamatergic pathways. These studies have been 
for the most part inconclusive, and failures to replicate have been the norm 
until very recently. The only genetic association replicated by multiple groups 
was with a glutamate transporter gene (SLC1A1). Genome-wide association studies 
in OCD are in progress, but final results have not yet been reported. As with 
the study of many other psychiatric disorders, an improved understanding of OCD 
will only be achieved (1) with larger collaborative efforts involving more 
probands, (2) the use of probands and controls drawn from 
epidemiologically-based populations rather than clinical samples, (3) developing 
a more precise phenotypic description of OCD and (4) measuring important 
environmental influences that affect OCD pathogenesis and severity.

DOI: 10.2174/157340010791196439
PMCID: PMC3747631
PMID: 23970845

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose