1. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 3;33(27):3604-11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.324. Epub 2013 Sep
2.

RGS6 suppresses Ras-induced cellular transformation by facilitating 
Tip60-mediated Dnmt1 degradation and promoting apoptosis.

Huang J(1), Stewart A(1), Maity B(1), Hagen J(1), Fagan RL(2), Yang J(1), Quelle 
DE(1), Brenner C(2), Fisher RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

The RAS protooncogene has a central role in regulation of cell proliferation, 
and point mutations leading to oncogenic activation of Ras occur in a large 
number of human cancers. Silencing of tumor-suppressor genes by DNA 
methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) is essential for oncogenic cellular transformation 
by Ras, and Dnmt1 is overexpressed in numerous human cancers. Here we provide 
new evidence that the pleiotropic regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) family 
member RGS6 suppresses Ras-induced cellular transformation by facilitating 
Tip60-mediated degradation of Dmnt1 and promoting apoptosis. Employing mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts from wild-type and RGS6(-/-) mice, we found that oncogenic 
Ras induced upregulation of RGS6, which in turn blocked Ras-induced cellular 
transformation. RGS6 functions to suppress cellular transformation in response 
to oncogenic Ras by downregulating Dnmt1 protein expression leading to 
inhibition of Dnmt1-mediated anti-apoptotic activity. Further experiments showed 
that RGS6 functions as a scaffolding protein for both Dnmt1 and Tip60 and is 
required for Tip60-mediated acetylation of Dnmt1 and subsequent Dnmt1 
ubiquitylation and degradation. The RGS domain of RGS6, known only for its 
GTPase-activating protein activity toward GÎ± subunits, was sufficient to mediate 
Tip60 association with RGS6. This work demonstrates a novel signaling action for 
RGS6 in negative regulation of oncogene-induced transformation and provides new 
insights into our understanding of the mechanisms underlying Ras-induced 
oncogenic transformation and regulation of Dnmt1 expression. Importantly, these 
findings identify RGS6 as an essential cellular defender against oncogenic 
stress and a potential therapeutic target for developing new cancer treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2013.324
PMCID: PMC4232305
PMID: 23995786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]