1. Mol Aspects Med. 2014 Apr;36:1-55. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2013.08.002. Epub 2013
Aug  30.

The molecular etiology and prevention of estrogen-initiated cancers: Ockham's 
Razor: Pluralitas non est ponenda sine necessitate. Plurality should not be 
posited without necessity.

Cavalieri E(1), Rogan E(2).

Author information:
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, 986805 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6805, 
USA; Department of Environmental, Agricultural and Occupational Health, College 
of Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 984388 Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-4388, USA. Electronic address: ecavalie@unmc.edu.
(2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, 986805 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-6805, 
USA; Department of Environmental, Agricultural and Occupational Health, College 
of Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 984388 Nebraska Medical 
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-4388, USA. Electronic address: egrogan@unmc.edu.

Elucidation of estrogen carcinogenesis required a few fundamental discoveries 
made by studying the mechanism of carcinogenesis of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH). The two major mechanisms of metabolic activation of PAH 
involve formation of radical cations and diol epoxides as ultimate carcinogenic 
metabolites. These intermediates react with DNA to yield two types of adducts: 
stable adducts that remain in DNA unless removed by repair and depurinating 
adducts that are lost from DNA by cleavage of the glycosyl bond between the 
purine base and deoxyribose. The potent carcinogenic PAH benzo[a]pyrene, 
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene, 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene and 3-methylcholanthrene 
predominantly form depurinating DNA adducts, leaving apurinic sites in the DNA 
that generate cancer-initiating mutations. This was discovered by correlation 
between the depurinating adducts formed in mouse skin by treatment with 
benzo[a]pyrene, dibenzo[a,l]pyrene or 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene and the 
site of mutations in the Harvey-ras oncogene in mouse skin papillomas initiated 
by one of these PAH. By applying some of these fundamental discoveries in PAH 
studies to estrogen carcinogenesis, the natural estrogens estrone (E1) and 
estradiol (E2) were found to be mutagenic and carcinogenic through formation of 
the depurinating estrogen-DNA adducts 4-OHE1(E2)-1-N3Ade and 4-OHE1(E2)-1-N7Gua. 
These adducts are generated by reaction of catechol estrogen quinones with DNA, 
analogously to the DNA adducts obtained from the catechol quinones of benzene, 
naphthalene, and the synthetic estrogens diethylstilbestrol and hexestrol. This 
is a weak mechanism of cancer initiation. Normally, estrogen metabolism is 
balanced and few estrogen-DNA adducts are formed. When estrogen metabolism 
becomes unbalanced, more catechol estrogen quinones are generated, resulting in 
higher levels of estrogen-DNA adducts, which can be used as biomarkers of 
unbalanced estrogen metabolism and, thus, cancer risk. The ratio of estrogen-DNA 
adducts to estrogen metabolites and conjugates has repeatedly been found to be 
significantly higher in women at high risk for breast cancer, compared to women 
at normal risk. These results indicate that formation of estrogen-DNA adducts is 
a critical factor in the etiology of breast cancer. Significantly higher adduct 
ratios have been observed in women with breast, thyroid or ovarian cancer. In 
the women with ovarian cancer, single nucleotide polymorphisms in the genes for 
two enzymes involved in estrogen metabolism indicate risk for ovarian cancer. 
When polymorphisms produce high activity cytochrome P450 1B1, an activating 
enzyme, and low activity catechol-O-methyltransferase, a protective enzyme, in 
the same woman, she is almost six times more likely to have ovarian cancer. 
These results indicate that formation of estrogen-DNA adducts is a critical 
factor in the etiology of ovarian cancer. Significantly higher ratios of 
estrogen-DNA adducts to estrogen metabolites and conjugates have also been 
observed in men with prostate cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma, compared to 
healthy men without cancer. These results also support a critical role of 
estrogen-DNA adducts in the initiation of cancer. Starting from the perspective 
that unbalanced estrogen metabolism can lead to increased formation of catechol 
estrogen quinones, their reaction with DNA to form adducts, and generation of 
cancer-initiating mutations, inhibition of estrogen-DNA adduct formation would 
be an effective approach to preventing a variety of human cancers. The dietary 
supplements resveratrol and N-acetylcysteine can act as preventing cancer agents 
by keeping estrogen metabolism balanced. These two compounds can reduce the 
formation of catechol estrogen quinones and/or their reaction with DNA. 
Therefore, resveratrol and N-acetylcysteine provide a widely applicable, 
inexpensive approach to preventing many of the prevalent types of human cancer.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2013.08.002
PMCID: PMC3938998
PMID: 23994691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]