1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2013 Nov;37:114-40. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2013.08.001.
 Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Photoreceptor cell death and rescue in retinal detachment and degenerations.

Murakami Y(1), Notomi S, Hisatomi T, Nakazawa T, Ishibashi T, Miller JW, Vavvas 
DG.

Author information:
(1)Retina Service, Angiogenesis Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, 
USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Photoreceptor cell death is the ultimate cause of vision loss in various retinal 
disorders, including retinal detachment (RD). Photoreceptor cell death has been 
thought to occur mainly through apoptosis, which is the most characterized form 
of programmed cell death. The caspase family of cysteine proteases plays a 
central role for inducing apoptosis, and in experimental models of RD, dying 
photoreceptor cells exhibit caspase activation; however, there is a paradox that 
caspase inhibition alone does not provide a sufficient protection against 
photoreceptor cell loss, suggesting that other mechanisms of cell death are 
involved. Recent accumulating evidence demonstrates that non-apoptotic forms of 
cell death, such as autophagy and necrosis, are also regulated by specific 
molecular machinery, such as those mediated by autophagy-related proteins and 
receptor-interacting protein kinases, respectively. Here we summarize the 
current knowledge of cell death signaling and its roles in photoreceptor cell 
death after RD and other retinal degenerative diseases. A body of studies 
indicate that not only apoptotic but also autophagic and necrotic signaling are 
involved in photoreceptor cell death, and that combined targeting of these 
pathways may be an effective neuroprotective strategy for retinal diseases 
associated with photoreceptor cell loss.

Copyright Â© 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2013.08.001
PMCID: PMC3871865
PMID: 23994436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]