1. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Aug 30;14(9):17830-44. doi: 10.3390/ijms140917830.

Trifluoroethanol modulates amyloid formation by the all α-helical URN1 FF 
domain.

Marinelli P(1), Castillo V, Ventura S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Autonomous University of 
Barcelona, Bellaterra E-08193, Spain.

Amyloid fibril formation is implicated in different human diseases. The 
transition between native α-helices and nonnative intermolecular β-sheets has 
been suggested to be a trigger of fibrillation in different conformational 
diseases. The FF domain of the URN1 splicing factor (URN1-FF) is a small all-α 
protein that populates a molten globule (MG) at low pH. Despite the fact that 
this conformation maintains most of the domain native secondary structure, it 
progressively converts into β-sheet enriched and highly ordered amyloid fibrils. 
In this study, we investigated if 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) induced 
conformational changes that affect URN1-FF amyloid formation. Despite TFE having 
been shown to induce or increase the aggregation of both globular and disordered 
proteins at moderate concentrations, we demonstrate here that in the case of 
URN1-FF it reinforces its intrinsic α-helical structure, which competes the 
formation of aggregated assemblies. In addition, we show that TFE induces 
conformational diversity in URN1-FF fibrils, in such a way that the fibrils 
formed in the presence and absence of the cosolvent represent different 
polymorphs. It is suggested that the effect of TFE on both the soluble and 
aggregated states of URN1-FF depends on its ability to facilitate hydrogen 
bonding.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms140917830
PMCID: PMC3794755
PMID: 23999589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]