1. Biochemistry. 2013 Sep 17;52(37):6548-58. doi: 10.1021/bi400973e. Epub 2013
Aug  30.

What's in your buffer? Solute altered millisecond motions detected by solution 
NMR.

Wong M(1), Khirich G, Loria JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and â€¡Department of Molecular Biophysics and 
Biochemistry, Yale University , New Haven, Connecticut 06520, United States.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry. 2013 Oct 8;52(40):7160.

To date, little work has been conducted on the relationship between solute and 
buffer molecules and conformational exchange motion in enzymes. This study uses 
solution NMR to examine the effects of phosphate, sulfate, and acetate in 
comparison to MES- and HEPES-buffered references on the chemical shift 
perturbation and millisecond, chemical, or conformational exchange motions in 
the enzyme ribonuclease A (RNase A), triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) and HisF. 
The results indicate that addition of these solutes has a small effect on (1)H 
and (15)N chemical shifts for RNase A and TIM but a significant effect for HisF. 
For RNase A and TIM, Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill relaxation dispersion 
experiments, however, show significant solute-dependent changes in 
conformational exchange motions. Some residues show loss of millisecond motions 
relative to the reference sample upon addition of solute, whereas others 
experience an enhancement. Comparison of exchange parameters obtained from fits 
of dispersion data indicates changes in either or both equilibrium populations 
and chemical shifts between conformations. Furthermore, the exchange kinetics 
are altered in many cases. The results demonstrate that common solute molecules 
can alter observed enzyme millisecond motions and play a more active role than 
what is routinely believed.

DOI: 10.1021/bi400973e
PMCID: PMC4096712
PMID: 23991940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]