1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 1;86(9):1328-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.011. 
Epub 2013 Aug 30.

3,4-Dihydroxy-5-nitrobenzaldehyde (DHNB) is a potent inhibitor of xanthine 
oxidase: a potential therapeutic agent for treatment of hyperuricemia and gout.

Lü JM(1), Yao Q, Chen C.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Surgeon Research Center, Division of Surgical Research, Michael E. 
DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Hyperuricemia, excess of uric acid in the blood, is a clinical problem that 
causes gout and is also considered a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. The 
enzyme xanthine oxidase (XO) produces uric acid during the purine metabolism; 
therefore, discovering novel XO inhibitors is an important strategy to develop 
an effective therapy for hyperuricemia and gout. We found that 
3,4-dihydroxy-5-nitrobenzaldehyde (DHNB), a derivative of the natural substance 
protocatechuic aldehyde, potently inhibited XO activity with an IC₅₀ value of 3 
μM. DHNB inhibited XO activity in a time-dependent manner, which was similar to 
that of allopurinol, a clinical XO inhibitory drug. DHNB displayed potent 
mixed-type inhibition of the activity of XO, and showed an additive effect with 
allopurinol at the low concentration. Structure-activity relationship studies of 
DHNB indicated that the aldehyde moiety, the catechol moiety, and nitration at 
C-5 were required for XO inhibition. DHNB interacted with the molybdenum center 
of XO and was slowly converted to its carboxylic acid at a rate of 10⁻¹⁰ 
mol/L/s. In addition, DHNB directly scavenged free radical DPPH and ROS, 
including ONOO⁻ and HOCl. DHNB effectively reduced serum uric acid levels in 
allantoxanamide-induced hyperuricemic mice. Furthermore, mice orally given a 
large dose (500 mg/kg) of DHNB did not show any side effects, while 42% of 
allopurinol (500 mg/kg)-treated mice died and their offspring lost their fur. 
Thus, DHNB could be an outstanding candidate for a novel XO inhibitory drug that 
has potent activity and low toxicity, as well as antioxidant activity and a 
distinct chemical structure from allopurinol.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.08.011
PMCID: PMC3816736
PMID: 23994369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]