1. Diabetes. 2013 Dec;62(12):4277-83. doi: 10.2337/db13-0129. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Genetic variation in CDH13 is associated with lower plasma adiponectin levels 
but greater adiponectin sensitivity in East Asian populations.

Gao H(1), Kim YM, Chen P, Igase M, Kawamoto R, Kim MK, Kohara K, Lee J, Miki T, 
Ong RT, Onuma H, Osawa H, Sim X, Teo YY, Tabara Y, Tai ES, van Dam RM.

Author information:
(1)Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, National University of Singapore and 
National University Health System, Singapore.

Variants in the CDH13 gene have been identified as determinants of blood levels 
of adiponectin, an insulin-sensitizing adipokine. However, their association 
with other metabolic risk factors remains unclear. We examined variants at CDH13 
in relation to total and high-molecular-weight (HMW) adiponectin using data from 
a genome-wide association study performed in 2,434 Singaporean Chinese with 
replication in up to 3,290 Japanese and 1,610 Koreans. The top signal rs4783244 
in CDH13 showed strong associations with total adiponectin (standardized β [β] = 
-0.34, 95% CI -0.38 to -0.30, P = 2.0 × 10(-70)), HMW adiponectin (β = -0.40, 
95% CI -0.43 to -0.36, P = 1.1 × 10(-117)), and the HMW-to-total adiponectin 
ratio (β = -0.44, 95% CI -0.49 to -0.40, P = 3.2 × 10(-83)). In the replication 
study, this single nucleotide polymorphism explained 4.1% of total and 6.5% of 
HMW adiponectin levels. No association was observed between rs4783244 and 
metabolic traits associated with insulin resistance before adjustment for HMW 
adiponectin levels. After adjustment for HMW adiponectin levels, the minor 
allele was associated with lower BMI (β = -0.15, 95% CI -0.19 to -0.11, P = 3.5 
× 10(-14)), homeostasis model assessment-insulin resistance index (β = -0.16, 
95% CI -0.20 to -0.12, P = 9.2 × 10(-16)), and triglycerides (β = -0.16, 95% CI 
-0.19 to -0.12, P = 1.3 × 10(-16)) and with higher HDL (β = 0.16, 95% CI 0.12 to 
0.19, P = 2.1 × 10(-17)). CDH13 variants strongly influence plasma total and HMW 
adiponectin levels in East Asian populations but appear to alter adiponectin 
sensitivity, resulting in better metabolic health than expected based on 
circulating adiponectin levels.

DOI: 10.2337/db13-0129
PMCID: PMC3837060
PMID: 24009259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]