1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Sep 5;14:601. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-601.

Insights into food preference in hybrid F1 of Siniperca chuatsi (♀) × Siniperca 
scherzeri (♂) mandarin fish through transcriptome analysis.

He S(1), Liang XF, Sun J, Li L, Yu Y, Huang W, Qu CM, Cao L, Bai XL, Tao YX.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, 
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Hubei Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Freshwater Aquaculture, Wuhan 430070, PR China. 
xufang_liang@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: As economically relevant traits, feeding behavior and food 
preference domestication determine production cost and profitability. Although 
there are intensive research efforts on feeding behavior and food intake, little 
is known about food preference. Mandarin fish accept only live prey fish and 
refuse dead prey fish or artificial diets. Very little is currently known about 
the genes regulating this unique food preference.
RESULTS: Using transcriptome sequencing and digital gene expression profiling, 
we identified 1,986 and 4,526 differentially expressed genes in feeders and 
nonfeeders of dead prey fish, respectively. Up-regulation of Crbp, Rgr and Rdh8, 
and down-regulation of Gc expression, consistent with greater visual ability in 
feeders, could promote positive phototaxis. Altered expressions of period, 
casein kinase and Rev-erbα might reset circadian phase. Down-regulation of 
orexigenic and up-regulation of anorexigenic genes in feeders were associated 
with lower appetite. The mRNA levels of Creb, c-fos, C/EBP, zif268, Bdnf and Syt 
were dramatically decreased in feeders, which might result in significant 
deficiency in memory retention of its natural food preference (live prey fish). 
There were roughly 100 times more potential SNPs in feeders than in nonfeeders.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, differential expression in the genes identified shed 
new light on why mandarin fish only feed on live prey fish, with pathways 
regulating retinal photosensitivity, circadian rhythm, appetite control, 
learning and memory involved. We also found dramatic difference in SNP abundance 
in feeders vs nonfeeders. These differences together might account for the 
different food preferences. Elucidating the genes regulating the unique food 
preference (live prey fish) in mandarin fish could lead to a better 
understanding of mechanisms controlling food preference in animals, including 
mammals.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-601
PMCID: PMC3846499
PMID: 24007400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]