1. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2012 Sep;20(5):433-45. doi: 
10.4062/biomolther.2012.20.5.433.

Immunomodulation of Fungal β-Glucan in Host Defense Signaling by Dectin-1.

Batbayar S(1), Lee DH, Kim HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, BK21 Cellular Stress Team, University of Seoul, 
Seoul 130-743, Korea.

During the course of evolution, animals encountered the harmful effects of 
fungi, which are strong pathogens. Therefore, they have developed powerful 
mechanisms to protect themselves against these fungal invaders. β-Glucans are 
glucose polymers of a linear β(1,3)-glucan backbone with β(1,6)-linked side 
chains. The immunostimulatory and antitumor activities of β-glucans have been 
reported; however, their mechanisms have only begun to be elucidated. Fungal and 
particulate β-glucans, despite their large size, can be taken up by the M cells 
of Peyer's patches, and interact with macrophages or dendritic cells (DCs) and 
activate systemic immune responses to overcome the fungal infection. The sampled 
β-glucans function as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and are 
recognized by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) on innate immune cells. 
Dectin-1 receptor systems have been incorporated as the PRRs of β-glucans in the 
innate immune cells of higher animal systems, which function on the front line 
against fungal infection, and have been exploited in cancer treatments to 
enhance systemic immune function. Dectin-1 on macrophages and DCs performs dual 
functions: internalization of β-glucan-containing particles and transmittance of 
its signals into the nucleus. This review will depict in detail how the 
physicochemical nature of β-glucan contributes to its immunostimulating effect 
in hosts and the potential uses of β-glucan by elucidating the dectin-1 signal 
transduction pathway. The elucidation of β-glucan and its signaling pathway will 
undoubtedly open a new research area on its potential therapeutic applications, 
including as immunostimulants for antifungal and anti-cancer regimens.

DOI: 10.4062/biomolther.2012.20.5.433
PMCID: PMC3762275
PMID: 24009832