1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 27;8(8):e73607. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073607. 
eCollection 2013.

IMD-0354 targets breast cancer stem cells: a novel approach for an adjuvant to 
chemotherapy to prevent multidrug resistance in a murine model.

Gomez-Cabrero A(1), Wrasidlo W, Reisfeld RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Although early detection of breast cancer improved in recent years, prognosis of 
patients with late stage breast cancer remains poor, mostly due to development 
of multidrug resistance (MDR) followed by tumor recurrence. Cancer stem cells 
(CSCs), with higher drug efflux capability and other stem cell-like properties, 
are concentrated in a side population (SP) of cells, which were proposed to be 
responsible for MDR and tumor repopulation that cause patients to succumb to 
breast cancer. Therefore, targeting of CSCs as an adjuvant to chemotherapy 
should be able to provide a more effective treatment of this disease. Here, we 
used IMD-0354, an inhibitor of NF-ÎºB, identified for targeting CSCs, in a 
combination therapy with doxorubicin encapsulated in targeted nanoparticles. 
IMD-0354 did target CSCs, evidenced by a decrease in the SP, demonstrated by the 
inhibition of the following: dye/drug efflux, reduction in ABC transporters as 
well as in colony formation in soft agar and low attachment plates. Decrease of 
stem-like gene expression of Oct4, Nanog and Sox2, and apoptosis resistance 
related to the Survivin gene also was observed after treatment with this 
compound. In addition, IMD-0354 targeted non-CSCs as indicated by reducing 
viability and increasing apoptosis. Targeted drug delivery, achieved with a 
legumain inhibitor, proved to enhance drug delivery under hypoxia, a hallmark of 
the tumor microenvironment, but not under normoxia. Together, this allowed a 
safe, non-toxic delivery of both anticancer agents to the tumor microenvironment 
of mice bearing syngeneic metastatic breast cancer. Targeting both bulk tumor 
cells with a chemotherapeutic agent and CSCs with IMD-0354 should be able to 
reduce MDR. This could eventually result in decreasing tumor recurrences and/or 
improve the outcome of metastatic disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073607
PMCID: PMC3754963
PMID: 24014113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declared that 
no competing interests exist.