1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 28;8(8):e72600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072600. 
eCollection 2013.

Relevance of baseline viral genetic heterogeneity and host factors for treatment 
outcome prediction in hepatitis C virus 1b-infected patients.

Saludes V(1), Bascuñana E, Jordana-Lluch E, Casanovas S, Ardèvol M, Soler E, 
Planas R, Ausina V, Martró E.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Service, Fundació Institut d'Investigació en Ciències de la 
Salut Germans Trias i Pujol, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain ; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud 
Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Only about 50% of patients chronically infected with HCV genotype 1 
(HCV-1) respond to treatment with pegylated interferon-alfa and ribavirin (dual 
therapy), and protease inhibitors have to be administered together with these 
drugs increasing costs and side-effects. We aimed to develop a predictive model 
of treatment response based on a combination of baseline clinical and viral 
parameters.
METHODOLOGY: Seventy-four patients chronically infected with HCV-1b and treated 
with dual therapy were studied (53 retrospectively -training group-, and 21 
prospectively -validation group-). Host and viral-related factors (viral load, 
and genetic variability in the E1-E2, core and Interferon Sensitivity 
Determining Region) were assessed. Multivariate discriminant analysis and 
decision tree analysis were used to develop predictive models on the training 
group, which were then validated in the validation group.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A multivariate discriminant predictive model was generated 
including the following variables in decreasing order of significance: the 
number of viral variants in the E1-E2 region, an amino acid substitution pattern 
in the viral core region, the IL28B polymorphism, serum GGT and ALT levels, and 
viral load. Using this model treatment outcome was accurately predicted in the 
training group (AUROC = 0.9444; 96.3% specificity, 94.7% PPV, 75% sensitivity, 
81% NPV), and the accuracy remained high in the validation group (AUROC = 
0.8148, 88.9% specificity, 90.0% PPV, 75.0% sensitivity, 72.7% NPV). A second 
model was obtained by a decision tree analysis and showed a similarly high 
accuracy in the training group but a worse reproducibility in the validation 
group (AUROC = 0.9072 vs. 0.7361, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: The baseline predictive models obtained including 
both host and viral variables had a high positive predictive value in our 
population of Spanish HCV-1b treatment naïve patients. Accurately identifying 
those patients that would respond to the dual therapy could help reducing 
implementation costs and additional side effects of new treatment regimens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072600
PMCID: PMC3755994
PMID: 24015264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.