1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Oct;43(10):945-53. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt131. Epub 2013 
Sep 5.

New challenges and inspired answers for anticancer drug discovery and 
development.

Utsugi T(1).

Author information:
(1)*Tsukuba Research Institute, Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, 3 Okubo, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan. t-utsugi@taiho.co.jp.

Many pharmaceutical companies worldwide specialize in oncology drug development 
and marketing. Among them, we have continued to take up the challenge of 
understanding the metabolism of pyrimidines as essential components of 
deoxyribonucleic acid for many years, and have provided unique products such as 
UFT(®) and TS-1 for cancer patients. Using our cumulative experience and 
knowledge, we are currently developing novel agents such as TAS-114, a dual 
inhibitor of deoxyuridine triphosphatase and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, 
and TAS-102, a unique pyrimidine derivative inducing deoxyribonucleic acid 
dysfunction in cancer cells. Regarding molecular-targeted drugs, we have made 
huge efforts to establish ideal drug discovery platforms for the last several 
years. For kinase inhibitors, we established three core platforms such as a 
kinase-directed chemical library, a kinase assay panel and a target selection 
informatics system. The core platforms were further combined with peripheral 
technologies to measure essential parameters such as physicochemical properties, 
pharmacokinetics, efficacy and toxicities. Unique drug candidates have been 
identified at an early stage by assessing all important parameters. Several 
promising programs are proceeding simultaneously in the clinical or preclinical 
development stage such as TAS-115, a dual inhibitor of c-Met and vascular 
endothelial growth factor receptor, TAS-2104, a selective Aurora A inhibitor, 
TAS-117, an allosteric Akt inhibitor, TAS-2985, an irreversible fibroblast 
growth factor receptor inhibitor and TAS-2913, a T790M mutant selective 
epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor. Other than kinase inhibitors, 
another drug discovery engine was established based on the fragment-based drug 
discovery technology. TAS-116, a new class of Hsp-90α/β inhibitor, is one of the 
products. Taiho's final goal is to provide innovative anticancer drugs together 
with companion diagnostics that are truly beneficial for patients.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyt131
PMCID: PMC3787805
PMID: 24014883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]