1. Biophys J. 2013 Sep 3;105(5):1217-26. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.07.041.

CD44 receptor unfolding enhances binding by freeing basic amino acids to contact 
carbohydrate ligand.

Favreau AJ(1), Faller CE, Guvench O.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 
Scarborough, Maine, USA.

The extracellular carbohydrate-binding domain of the Type I transmembrane 
receptor CD44 is known to undergo affinity switching, where change in 
conformation leads to enhanced binding of its carbohydrate ligand hyaluronan. 
Separate x-ray crystallographic and NMR experiments have led to competing 
explanations, with the former supporting minor conformational changes at the 
binding site and the latter a major order-to-disorder unfolding transition 
distant from the binding site. Here, all-atom explicit-solvent molecular 
dynamics studies employing adaptive biasing force sampling revealed a 
substantial favorable free-energy change associated with contact formation 
between the Arg(41) side chain and hyaluronan at the binding site, independent 
of whether the distant site was ordered or disordered. Analogous computational 
experiments on Arg(41)Ala mutants showed loss of this favorable free-energy 
change, consistent with existing experimental data. More provocatively, the 
simulation data revealed the molecular mechanism by which the order-to-disorder 
transition enhances hyaluronan binding: in the disordered state, a number of 
basic residues gain sufficient conformational freedom-lacking in the ordered 
state-to spontaneously form side-chain contacts with hyaluronan. Mutation of 
these residues to Ala had been known to decrease binding affinity, but there had 
previously been no structural explanation, given their lack of proximity to the 
carbohydrate-binding site in existing structures of the complex.

Copyright Â© 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.07.041
PMCID: PMC3762344
PMID: 24010665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]