1. Hypertension. 2013 Nov;62(5):844-52. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01428. 
Epub 2013 Sep 9.

Target sequencing, cell experiments, and a population study establish 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene as hypertension susceptibility 
gene.

Salvi E(1), Kuznetsova T, Thijs L, Lupoli S, Stolarz-Skrzypek K, D'Avila F, 
Tikhonoff V, De Astis S, Barcella M, Seidlerová J, Benaglio P, Malyutina S, Frau 
F, Velayutham D, Benfante R, Zagato L, Title A, Braga D, Marek D, Kawecka-Jaszcz 
K, Casiglia E, Filipovsky J, Nikitin Y, Rivolta C, Manunta P, Beckmann JS, 
Barlassina C, Cusi D, Staessen JA.

Author information:
(1)Studies Coordinating Centre, Research Unit Hypertension and Cardiovascular 
Epidemiology, KU Leuven Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Campus Sint 
Rafaël, Kapucijnenvoer 35, Block D, Box 7001, BE-3000 Leuven, Belgium. 
jan.staessen@med.kuleuven.be.

A case-control study revealed association between hypertension and rs3918226 in 
the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene promoter (minor/major allele, 
T/C allele). We aimed at substantiating these preliminary findings by target 
sequencing, cell experiments, and a population study. We sequenced the 140-kb 
genomic area encompassing the eNOS gene. In HeLa and HEK293T cells transfected 
with the eNOS promoter carrying either the T or the C allele, we quantified 
transcription by luciferase assay. In 2722 randomly recruited Europeans (53.0% 
women; mean age 40.1 years), we studied blood pressure change and incidence of 
hypertension in relation to rs3918226, using multivariable-adjusted models. 
Sequencing confirmed rs3918226, a binding site of E-twenty six transcription 
factors, as the single nucleotide polymorphism most closely associated with 
hypertension. In T compared with C transfected cells, eNOS promoter activity was 
from 20% to 40% (P<0.01) lower. In the population, systolic/diastolic blood 
pressure increased over 7.6 years (median) by 9.7/6.8 mm Hg in 28 TT homozygotes 
and by 3.8/1.9 mm Hg in 2694 C allele carriers (P≤0.0004). The blood pressure 
rise was 5.9 mm Hg systolic (confidence interval [CI], 0.6-11.1; P=0.028) and 
4.8 mm Hg diastolic (CI, 1.5-8.2; P=0.0046) greater in TT homozygotes, with no 
differences between the CT and CC genotypes (P≥0.90). Among 2013 participants 
normotensive at baseline, 692 (34.4%) developed hypertension. The hazard ratio 
and attributable risk associated with TT homozygosity were 2.04 (CI, 1.24-3.37; 
P=0.0054) and 51.0%, respectively. In conclusion, rs3918226 in the eNOS promoter 
tags a hypertension susceptibility locus, TT homozygosity being associated with 
lesser transcription and higher risk of hypertension.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.01428
PMID: 24019403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]