1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2013 Sep 3;7:116. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00116.

Convergence of genetic and environmental factors on parvalbumin-positive 
interneurons in schizophrenia.

Jiang Z(1), Cowell RM, Nakazawa K.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, National Institute of Mental 
Health, NIH Bethesda, MD, USA.

Schizophrenia etiology is thought to involve an interaction between genetic and 
environmental factors during postnatal brain development. However, there is a 
fundamental gap in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which 
environmental factors interact with genetic susceptibility to trigger symptom 
onset and disease progression. In this review, we summarize the most recent 
findings implicating oxidative stress as one mechanism by which environmental 
insults, especially early life social stress, impact the development of 
schizophrenia. Based on a review of the literature and the results of our own 
animal model, we suggest that environmental stressors such as social isolation 
render parvalbumin-positive interneurons (PVIs) vulnerable to oxidative stress. 
We previously reported that social isolation stress exacerbates many of the 
schizophrenia-like phenotypes seen in a conditional genetic mouse model in which 
NMDA receptors (NMDARs) are selectively ablated in half of cortical and 
hippocampal interneurons during early postnatal development (Belforte et al., 
2010). We have since revealed that this social isolation-induced effect is 
caused by impairments in the antioxidant defense capacity in the PVIs in which 
NMDARs are ablated. We propose that this effect is mediated by the 
down-regulation of PGC-1Î±, a master regulator of mitochondrial energy metabolism 
and anti-oxidant defense, following the deletion of NMDARs (Jiang et al., 2013). 
Other potential molecular mechanisms underlying redox dysfunction upon gene and 
environmental interaction will be discussed, with a focus on the unique 
properties of PVIs.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00116
PMCID: PMC3759852
PMID: 24027504