1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 May;22(5):610-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.197. Epub 2013
Sep  11.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency: functional 
consequences of four CYP11B1 mutations.

Menabò S(1), Polat S(2), Baldazzi L(1), Kulle AE(3), Holterhus PM(3), Grötzinger 
J(4), Fanelli F(5), Balsamo A(1), Riepe FG(3).

Author information:
(1)Program of Pediatric Endocrinology, Pediatric Unit, Department of Medical and 
Surgical Sciences; Azienda Policlinico S. Orsola Malpighi, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Erciyes University, Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics Department, Kayseri, 
Turkey.
(3)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital, Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Biochemical Institute, Christian-Albrecht-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Endocrinology Unit - Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences; Center for 
Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), Bologna, Italy.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 May;28(5):692. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-0587-y.

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is one of the most common autosomal 
recessive inherited endocrine disease. Steroid 11β-hydroxylase deficiency 
(11β-OHD) is the second most common form of CAH. The aim of the study was to 
study the functional consequences of three novel and one previously described 
CYP11B1 gene mutations (p.(Arg143Trp), p.(Ala306Val), p.(Glu310Lys) and 
p.(Arg332Gln)) detected in patients suffering from classical and non-classical 
11β-OHD. Functional analyses were performed by using a HEK293 cell in vitro 
expression system comparing wild type (WT) with mutant 11β-hydroxylase activity. 
Mutant proteins were examined in silico to study their effect on the 
three-dimensional structure of the protein. Two mutations (p.(Ala306Val) and 
p.(Glu310Lys)) detected in patients with classical 11β-OHD showed a nearly 
complete loss of 11β-hydroxylase activity. The mutations p.(Arg143Trp) and 
p.(Arg332Gln) detected in patients with non-classical 11β-OHD showed a partial 
functional impairment with approximately 8% and 6% of WT activity, respectively. 
Functional mutation analysis allows the classification of novel CYP11B1 
mutations as causes of classical and non-classical 11β-OHD. The detection of 
patients with non-classical phenotypes underscores the importance to screen 
patients with a phenotype comparable to non-classical 21-hydroxylase deficiency 
for mutations in the CYP11B1 gene in case of a negative analysis of the CYP21A2 
gene. As CYP11B1 mutations are most often individual for a family, the in vitro 
analysis of novel mutations is essential for clinical and genetic counselling.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.197
PMCID: PMC3992560
PMID: 24022297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]