1. J Math Chem. 2011 Jan 1;49(1):251-275. doi: 10.1007/s10910-010-9744-9.

Modeling the measurements of cellular fluxes in microbioreactor devices using 
thin enzyme electrodes.

Velkovsky M(1), Snider R, Cliffel DE, Wikswo JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 
37235, USA.

An analytic approach to the modeling of stop-flow amperometric measurements of 
cellular metabolism with thin glucose oxidase and lactate oxidase electrodes 
would provide a mechanistic understanding of the various factors that affect the 
measured signals. We divide the problem into two parts: (1) analytic formulas 
that provide the boundary conditions for the substrate and the hydrogen peroxide 
at the outer surface of the enzyme electrode layers and the electrode current 
expressed through these boundary conditions, and (2) a simple diffusion problem 
in the liquid compartment with the provided boundary conditions, which can be 
solved analytically or numerically, depending on the geometry of the 
compartment. The current in an amperometric stop-flow measurement of cellular 
glucose or lactate consumption/excretion is obtained analytically for two 
geometries, corresponding to devices developed at the Vanderbilt Institute for 
Integrative Biosystems Research and Education: a multianalyte nanophysiometer 
with effective one-dimensional diffusion and a multianalyte microphysiometer, 
for which plentiful data for metabolic changes in cells are available. The data 
are calibrated and fitted with the obtained time dependences to extract several 
cellular fluxes. We conclude that the analytical approach is applicable to a 
wide variety of measurement geometries and flow protocols.

DOI: 10.1007/s10910-010-9744-9
PMCID: PMC3768171
PMID: 24031115