1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 6;8(9):e73444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073444.
eCollection  2013.

Analyzing the modification of the Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 flagellar filament.

Bubendorfer S(1), Ishihara M, Dohlich K, Heiss C, Vogel J, Sastre F, Panico M, 
Hitchen P, Dell A, Azadi P, Thormann KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecophysiology, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial 
Microbiology, Marburg, Germany.

The unsheathed flagellar filament of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 is composed of 
two highly homologous flagellins, FlaA, and the major structural unit, FlaB. We 
identified a gene cluster, SO_3261-SO_3265 (now sfmABCDE), that is required for 
the formation of a fully functional filament and for motility. The predicted 
function of the corresponding gene products strongly indicated a role in 
flagellin modification. Accordingly, loss of sfmABCDE results in a significant 
mass shift of both FlaA and FlaB. Mass spectroscopy analysis and single residue 
substitutions identified five serine residues in both flagellins that are 
modified via O-linkage. Modeling of the flagellin structures strongly suggests 
that at least four of the modified residues are exposed to the filament's 
surface. However, none of the five serine residues solely is crucial for 
function and assembly. Structural analysis of the flagellin modification 
revealed that it likely contains a nonulosonic acid (274 Da) linked to each 
glycosylated serine. The putative nonulosonic acid is further substituted with a 
236 Da moiety which can carry additional methyl groups (250 Da, 264 Da). In 
addition, at least 5 lysine residues in FlaB and one in FlaA were found to be 
methylated. Based on homology comparisons we suggest that smfABCDE is required 
for species-specific flagellin modification in S. oneidensis MR-1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073444
PMCID: PMC3765264
PMID: 24039942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.