1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Oct;72(10):942-54. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182a5f96e.

Long-term analyses of innervation and neuromuscular integrity in the Trembler-J 
mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Nicks JR(1), Lee S, Kostamo KA, Harris AB, Sookdeo AM, Notterpek L.

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neuroscience and Neurology, College of Medicine, 
McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.

A large fraction of hereditary demyelinating neuropathies, classified as 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A, is associated with misexpression of 
peripheral myelin protein 22. In this study, we characterized morphologic and 
biochemical changes that occur with diseaseprogression in neuromuscular tissue 
of Trembler-J mice, a spontaneous rodent model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
type 1A. Using age-matched, 2- and 10-month-old, wild-type and Trembler-J mice, 
we observed neuromuscular deficits that progress from distal to proximal 
regions. The impairments in motor performance are underlined by degenerative 
events at distal nerve segments and structural alterations at nerve-muscle 
synapses. Furthermore, skeletal muscle of affected mice showed reduced myofiber 
diameter, increased expression of the muscle atrophy marker muscle ring-finger 
protein 1, and fiber type switching. A dietary intervention of intermittent 
fasting attenuated these progressive changes and supported distal nerve 
myelination and neuromuscular junction integrity. In addition to the 
well-characterized demyelination aspects of this model, our investigations 
identified distinct degenerative events in distal nerves and muscle of affected 
neuropathic mice. Therefore, therapeutic studies aimed at slowing or reversing 
the neuropathic features of these disorders should include the examination of 
muscle tissue, as well as neuromuscular contact sites.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182a5f96e
PMCID: PMC3810994
PMID: 24042197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]