1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073777.
eCollection  2013.

Association studies of MMP-9 in Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

He X(1), Zhang L, Yao X, Hu J, Yu L, Jia H, An R, Liu Z, Xu Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan Province, China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) share several 
clinical and neuropathologic features, and studies suggest that several gene 
mutations and polymorphisms are involved in both conditions. Matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is implicated in the pathogenesis of PD and ALS, and 
the C(-1562)T polymorphism in the MMP-9 gene leads to higher promoter activity. 
We therefore investigated whether this polymorphism predisposes to both PD and 
sporadic ALS (sALS). Samples from 351 subjects with PD and 351 healthy controls 
from two major cities in China were compared, while samples from 226 subjects 
with sALS were compared to the same number of controls from three centers in 
China. A possible association between the C(-1562)T polymorphism in the MMP-9 
gene and PD or sALS was assessed by restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) analysis. Our results show a significant association between the 
C(-1562)T polymorphism in the MMP-9 gene and risk of PD (odds ratio = 2.268, 95% 
CI 1.506-3.416, p<0.001) as well as risk of sALS (odds ratio = 2.163, 95% CI 
1.233-3.796, p = 0.006), supporting a role for MMP-9 polymorphism in the risk 
for PD and sALS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073777
PMCID: PMC3767588
PMID: 24040066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.