1. Biochemistry. 2013 Oct 15;52(41):7327-38. doi: 10.1021/bi4007786. Epub 2013
Oct  4.

Conserved Walker A cysteines 431 and 1074 in human P-glycoprotein are accessible 
to thiol-specific agents in the apo and ADP-vanadate trapped conformations.

Sim HM(1), Bhatnagar J, Chufan EE, Kapoor K, Ambudkar SV.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United 
States.

P-Glycoprotein (P-gp) is an ATP-binding cassette efflux transporter involved in 
the development of multidrug resistance in cancer cells. Although the mechanism 
of P-gp efflux has been extensively studied, aspects of its catalytic and 
transport cycle are still unclear. In this study, we used conserved C431 and 
C1074 in the Walker A motif of nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) as reporter 
sites to interrogate the interaction between the two NBDs during the catalytic 
cycle. Disulfide cross-linking of the C431 and C1074 residues in a Cys-less 
background can be observed in the presence of M14M and M17M cross-linkers, which 
have spacer arm lengths of 20 and 25 Ã…, respectively. However, cross-linking 
with both cross-linkers was prevented in the ADP-vanadate trapped (closed) 
conformation. Both C431 and C1074 alone or together (double mutant) in the apo 
and closed conformations were found to be accessible to fluorescein 5-maleimide 
(FM) and methanethiosulfonate derivatives of rhodamine and verapamil. In 
addition, C1074 showed 1.4- and 2-fold higher degrees of FM labeling than C431 
in the apo and closed conformations, respectively, demonstrating that C1074 is 
more accessible than C431 in both conformations. In the presence of P-gp 
substrates, cross-linking with M17M is still observed, suggesting that binding 
of substrate in the transmembrane domains does not change the accessibility of 
the cysteines in the NBDs. In summary, the cysteines in the Walker A motifs of 
NBDs of human P-gp are differentially accessible to thiol-specific agents in the 
apo and closed conformations.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4007786
PMCID: PMC3850068
PMID: 24053441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest