1. Balkan J Med Genet. 2012 Jun;15(1):19-24. doi: 10.2478/v10034-012-0003-1.

Influence of the SCN1A IVS5N + 5 G>A Polymorphism on Therapy with Carbamazepine 
for Epilepsy.

Sterjev Z(1), Kiteva G, Cvetkovska E, Petrov I, Kuzmanovski I, Ribarska T, 
Nestorovska K, Matevska N, Trajkovik-Jolevska S, Dimovski A, Suturkova Lj.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "St. 
Cyril and Methodius," Skopje, Republic of Macedonia.

Carbamazepine (CBZ) blocks neuronal sodium channels in a voltage- and 
frequency-dependent manner, delaying the recovery of the channels from the 
inactivated state, reducing the number of action potentials within a burst, and 
decreasing burst duration. The α-subunit of the first neuronal sodium channel 
(SCN1A) is a major gene in different epilepsies. A synonymous polymorphism 
(SCN1A IVS5N + 5 G>A or rs3812718) is common in exon 5 of this gene. Mutations 
in the α-unit of this gene are associated with CBZ-resistant epilepsy and a 
higher maintenance dose of CBZ. We have investigated the association of this 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and epilepsy, efficacy and dose-dependence 
of CBZ therapy in 147 adult Macedonian patients and 137 non epileptic controls. 
No significant differences in allelic frequencies and genotype distribution were 
found between patients and controls (p = 0.94278), or between CBZ-responsive and 
unresponsive patients (p = 0.55449). An association between the A allele and a 
higher maintenance dose in CBZ-responsive patients was detected. No statistical 
difference was found between the plasma levels of CBZ and genotype of patients 
receiving the same dose, indicating that the variant exerts its effect at the 
level of receptor responsiveness. The predictive value of pretreatment testing 
showed a minor insignificant difference between patients with different 
genotypes, primarily due to a small number of patients.

DOI: 10.2478/v10034-012-0003-1
PMCID: PMC3776651
PMID: 24052718