1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 15;8(8):e74047. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074047. 
eCollection 2013.

Structure of the HHARI catalytic domain shows glimpses of a HECT E3 ligase.

Spratt DE(1), Mercier P, Shaw GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

The ubiquitin-signaling pathway utilizes E1 activating, E2 conjugating, and E3 
ligase enzymes to sequentially transfer the small modifier protein ubiquitin to 
a substrate protein. During the last step of this cascade different types of E3 
ligases either act as scaffolds to recruit an E2 enzyme and substrate (RING), or 
form an ubiquitin-thioester intermediate prior to transferring ubiquitin to a 
substrate (HECT). The RING-inBetweenRING-RING (RBR) proteins constitute a unique 
group of E3 ubiquitin ligases that includes the Human Homologue of Drosophila 
Ariadne (HHARI). These E3 ligases are proposed to use a hybrid RING/HECT 
mechanism whereby the enzyme uses facets of both the RING and HECT enzymes to 
transfer ubiquitin to a substrate. We now present the solution structure of the 
HHARI RING2 domain, the key portion of this E3 ligase required for the RING/HECT 
hybrid mechanism. The structure shows the domain possesses two Zn²⁺-binding 
sites and a single exposed cysteine used for ubiquitin catalysis. A structural 
comparison of the RING2 domain with the HECT E3 ligase NEDD4 reveals a near 
mirror image of the cysteine and histidine residues in the catalytic site. 
Further, a tandem pair of aromatic residues exists near the C-terminus of the 
HHARI RING2 domain that is conserved in other RBR E3 ligases. One of these 
aromatic residues is remotely located from the catalytic site that is 
reminiscent of the location found in HECT E3 enzymes where it is used for 
ubiquitin catalysis. These observations provide an initial structural rationale 
for the RING/HECT hybrid mechanism for ubiquitination used by the RBR E3 
ligases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074047
PMCID: PMC3772753
PMID: 24058416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.