1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 17;8(9):e74703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074703. 
eCollection 2013.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms within LIPA (Lysosomal Acid Lipase A) gene are 
associated with susceptibility to premature coronary artery disease. a 
replication in the genetic of atherosclerotic disease (GEA) Mexican study.

Vargas-Alarcón G(1), Posadas-Romero C, Villarreal-Molina T, Alvarez-León E, 
Angeles J, Vallejo M, Posadas-Sánchez R, Cardoso G, Medina-Urrutia A, 
Kimura-Hayama E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio, 
Chávez, Mexico City, Mexico.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12). 
doi:10.1371/annotation/f99d1cf3-ad36-4185-bde4-a6bf654ccdf5.

AIM: The rs1412444 and rs2246833 polymorphisms within the LIPA gene were 
recently found to be significantly associated with coronary artery disease (CAD) 
in genome-wide association studies in Caucasian and Asian populations. The aim 
of the present study was to replicate this association in an independent 
population with a different genetic background.
METHODS: The rs1412444 and rs2246833 polymorphisms of the LIPA gene were 
genotyped by 5' exonuclease TaqMan genotyping assays in a sample of 899 Mexican 
patients with premature CAD, 270 individuals with subclinical atherosclerosis, 
and 677 healthy unrelated controls. Haplotypes were constructed after linkage 
disequilibrium analysis.
RESULTS: Under recessive and additive models, the rs1412444 T and rs2246833 T 
alleles were associated with an increased risk of premature CAD when compared to 
controls adjusting for age, gender, BMI, and total cholesterol (OR = 1.53, PRec 
= 0.0013 and OR = 1.34, PAdd = 5 × 10(-4) for rs1412444 and OR = 1.45, PRec = 
0.0039 and OR = 1.28, PAdd = 0.0023 for rs2246833). The effect of the two 
polymorphisms on various metabolic cardiovascular risk factors was analyzed in 
premature CAD and controls (CAC score = 0). The T alleles in both polymorphisms 
after adjusting for age, gender, BMI, and medication were associated with 
hypo-α-lipoproteinemia, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, metabolic 
syndrome, and type 2 diabetes mellitus using recessive and additive models. The 
polymorphisms were in strong linkage disequilibrium and, based on SNP functional 
prediction software, only the rs1412444 polymorphism seemed to be functional.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the rs1412444 and rs2246833 of the LIPA 
gene are shared susceptibility polymorphisms for CAD among different 
ethnicities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074703
PMCID: PMC3775807
PMID: 24069331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.