1. Eukaryot Cell. 2013 Dec;12(12):1600-8. doi: 10.1128/EC.00237-13. Epub 2013 Sep
 27.

The Taz1p transacylase is imported and sorted into the outer mitochondrial 
membrane via a membrane anchor domain.

Herndon JD(1), Claypool SM, Koehler CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope 
Medical Center, Duarte, California, USA.

Mutations in the mitochondrial transacylase tafazzin, Taz1p, in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae cause Barth syndrome, a disease of defective cardiolipin remodeling. 
Taz1p is an interfacial membrane protein that localizes to both the outer and 
inner membranes, lining the intermembrane space. Pathogenic point mutations in 
Taz1p that alter import and membrane insertion result in accumulation of 
monolysocardiolipin. In this study, we used yeast as a model to investigate the 
biogenesis of Taz1p. We show that to achieve this unique topology in 
mitochondria, Taz1p follows a novel import pathway in which it crosses the outer 
membrane via the translocase of the outer membrane and then uses the 
Tim9p-Tim10p complex of the intermembrane space to insert into the mitochondrial 
outer membrane. Taz1p is then transported to membranes of an intermediate 
density to reach a location in the inner membrane. Moreover, a pathogenic 
mutation within the membrane anchor (V224R) alters Taz1p import so that it 
bypasses the Tim9p-Tim10p complex and interacts with the translocase of the 
inner membrane, TIM23, to reach the matrix. Critical targeting information for 
Taz1p resides in the membrane anchor and flanking sequences, which are often 
mutated in Barth syndrome patients. These studies suggest that altering the 
mitochondrial import pathway of Taz1p may be important in understanding the 
molecular basis of Barth syndrome.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00237-13
PMCID: PMC3889572
PMID: 24078306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]