1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 20;8(9):e75836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075836. 
eCollection 2013.

Matrix metalloproteinase-10/TIMP-2 structure and analyses define conserved core 
interactions and diverse exosite interactions in MMP/TIMP complexes.

Batra J(1), Soares AS, Mehner C, Radisky ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Jacksonville, 
Florida, United States of America.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play central roles in vertebrate tissue 
development, remodeling, and repair. The endogenous tissue inhibitors of 
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) regulate proteolytic activity by binding tightly to 
the MMP active site. While each of the four TIMPs can inhibit most MMPs, binding 
data reveal tremendous heterogeneity in affinities of different TIMP/MMP pairs, 
and the structural features that differentiate stronger from weaker complexes 
are poorly understood. Here we report the crystal structure of the comparatively 
weakly bound human MMP-10/TIMP-2 complex at 2.1 Ã… resolution. Comparison with 
previously reported structures of MMP-3/TIMP-1, MT1-MMP/TIMP-2, MMP-13/TIMP-2, 
and MMP-10/TIMP-1 complexes offers insights into the structural basis of binding 
selectivity. Our analyses identify a group of highly conserved contacts at the 
heart of MMP/TIMP complexes that define the conserved mechanism of inhibition, 
as well as a second category of diverse adventitious contacts at the periphery 
of the interfaces. The AB loop of the TIMP N-terminal domain and the contact 
loops of the TIMP C-terminal domain form highly variable peripheral contacts 
that can be considered as separate exosite interactions. In some complexes these 
exosite contacts are extensive, while in other complexes the AB loop or 
C-terminal domain contacts are greatly reduced and appear to contribute little 
to complex stability. Our data suggest that exosite interactions can enhance 
MMP/TIMP binding, although in the relatively weakly bound MMP-10/TIMP-2 complex 
they are not well optimized to do so. Formation of highly variable exosite 
interactions may provide a general mechanism by which TIMPs are fine-tuned for 
distinct regulatory roles in biology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075836
PMCID: PMC3779175
PMID: 24073280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.