1. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Jan;61:55-71. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.09.013. Epub 2013
Sep  27.

Development of allosteric modulators of GPCRs for treatment of CNS disorders.

Nickols HH(1), Conn PJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Microbiology and 
Immunology, Vanderbilt University, USA.

The discovery of allosteric modulators of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) 
provides a promising new strategy with potential for developing novel treatments 
for a variety of central nervous system (CNS) disorders. Traditional drug 
discovery efforts targeting GPCRs have focused on developing ligands for 
orthosteric sites which bind endogenous ligands. Allosteric modulators target a 
site separate from the orthosteric site to modulate receptor function. These 
allosteric agents can either potentiate (positive allosteric modulator, PAM) or 
inhibit (negative allosteric modulator, NAM) the receptor response and often 
provide much greater subtype selectivity than orthosteric ligands for the same 
receptors. Experimental evidence has revealed more nuanced pharmacological modes 
of action of allosteric modulators, with some PAMs showing allosteric agonism in 
combination with positive allosteric modulation in response to endogenous ligand 
(ago-potentiators) as well as "bitopic" ligands that interact with both the 
allosteric and orthosteric sites. Drugs targeting the allosteric site allow for 
increased drug selectivity and potentially decreased adverse side effects. 
Promising evidence has demonstrated potential utility of a number of allosteric 
modulators of GPCRs in multiple CNS disorders, including neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's 
disease, as well as psychiatric or neurobehavioral diseases such as anxiety, 
schizophrenia, and addiction.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.09.013
PMCID: PMC3875303
PMID: 24076101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]