1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Oct;40(10):5931-41. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2700-6. Epub
2013  Sep 26.

Influence of interleukin gene polymorphisms on development of acute 
pancreatitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Yin YW(1), Sun QQ, Feng JQ, Hu AM, Liu HL, Wang Q.

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency, Chinese PLA Air Force General Hospital, 30 Fucheng 
Road, Haidian District, Beijing, 100142, China, shuaishuaijita@sohu.com.

Several epidemiological studies have assessed the associations of interleukin 
(IL) gene polymorphisms with acute pancreatitis (AP) in different populations. 
However, the results were inconclusive. Therefore, we performed the present 
study to comprehensively evaluate the associations of IL gene polymorphisms and 
susceptibility to AP. Systematic searches of the PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, 
CNKI, CBMdisc and Google Scholar until February 27, 2013, as well as hand 
searching of the references of identified articles were performed. Data were 
extracted using standardized forms and odds ratios (ORs) with 95 % confidence 
intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of associations. All 
statistical analyses were performed using Stata 11.0. Ten studies were included 
in our final combined analysis, covering a total of 1,220 AP cases and 1,351 
controls. The results showed evidence for significant association between IL-8 
-251 T/A (rs4073) polymorphism and AP risk, suggesting that IL-8 -251 A allele 
was associated with an increased risk of AP (for A allele vs. T allele: OR = 
1.36, 95 % CI 1.05-1.76, p = 0.02; for A/A vs. T/T: OR = 2.28, 95 % CI 
1.08-4.81, p = 0.03; for A/A+T/A vs. T/T: OR = 1.40, 95 % CI 1.11-1.77, p = 
0.005). However, there were no significant associations between IL-1β (IL-1β 
+3954 C/T (rs1143634) and IL-1β -511 C/T (rs16944)), IL-6 (IL-6 -174 G/C 
(rs1800795) and IL-6 -634 C/G (rs1800796)) and IL-10 (IL-10 -1082 A/G 
(rs1800896), IL-10 -819 C/T (rs1800871) and IL-10 -592 C/A (rs1800872)) gene 
polymorphisms and AP risk. In summary, the current study suggests that the IL-8 
-251 T/A polymorphism is associated with an increased risk of AP. In addition, 
there were no significant associations between IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-10 gene 
polymorphisms and AP risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-013-2700-6
PMID: 24072654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]