1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e76409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076409. 
eCollection 2013.

A novel MAPT mutation, G55R, in a frontotemporal dementia patient leads to 
altered Tau function.

Iyer A(1), Lapointe NE, Zielke K, Berdynski M, Guzman E, Barczak A, 
Chodakowska-Å»ebrowska M, Barcikowska M, Feinstein S, Zekanowski C.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular and 
Developmental Biology, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, 
California, United States of America.

Over two dozen mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule associated protein 
tau cause a variety of neurodegenerative dementias known as tauopathies, 
including frontotemporal dementia (FTD), PSP, CBD and Pick's disease. The vast 
majority of these mutations map to the C-terminal region of tau possessing 
microtubule assembly and microtubule dynamics regulatory activities as well as 
the ability to promote pathological tau aggregation. Here, we describe a novel 
and non-conservative tau mutation (G55R) mapping to an alternatively spliced 
exon encoding part of the N-terminal region of the protein in a patient with the 
behavioral variant of FTD. Although less well understood than the C-terminal 
region of tau, the N-terminal region can influence both MT mediated effects as 
well as tau aggregation. The mutation changes an uncharged glycine to a basic 
arginine in the midst of a highly conserved and very acidic region. In vitro, 
4-repeat G55R tau nucleates microtubule assembly more effectively than wild-type 
4-repeat tau; surprisingly, this effect is tau isoform specific and is not 
observed in a 3-repeat G55R tau versus 3-repeat wild-type tau comparison. In 
contrast, the G55R mutation has no effect upon the abilities of tau to regulate 
MT growing and shortening dynamics or to aggregate. Additionally, the mutation 
has no effect upon kinesin translocation in a microtubule gliding assay. 
Together, (i) we have identified a novel tau mutation mapping to a mutation 
deficient region of the protein in a bvFTD patient, and (ii) the G55R mutation 
affects the ability of tau to nucleate microtubule assembly in vitro in a 
4-repeat tau isoform specific manner. This altered capability could markedly 
affect in vivo microtubule function and neuronal cell biology. We consider G55R 
to be a candidate mutation for bvFTD since additional criteria required to 
establish causality are not yet available for assessment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076409
PMCID: PMC3785453
PMID: 24086739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.