1. Trials. 2013 Oct 1;14:317. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-14-317.

Intravenous transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells preconditioned with early 
phase stroke serum: current evidence and study protocol for a randomized trial.

Kim SJ(1), Moon GJ, Chang WH, Kim YH, Bang OY; STARTING-2 (STem cell Application 
Researches and Trials In NeuroloGy-2) collaborators.

Collaborators: Kim SJ, Ryoo S, Seo MH, Sung J, Lee JH, Nam JY, Kim DH, Cho YH, 
Moon GJ, Kang YM, Kim YM, Kim HS, Jang JH, Chang WH, Kim YH, Kim GM, Chung CS, 
Lee KH, Young Bang O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, 135-710, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, South Korea. 
nmboy@unitel.co.kr.

BACKGROUND: Recovery after a major stroke is usually limited, but cell therapy 
for patients with fixed neurologic deficits is emerging. Several recent clinical 
trials have investigated mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) therapy for patients with 
ischemic stroke. We previously reported the results of a controlled trial on the 
application of autologous MSCs in patients with ischemic stroke with a long-term 
follow-up of up to 5 years (the 'STem cell Application Researches and Trials In 
NeuroloGy' (STARTING) study). The results from this pilot trial are challenging, 
but also raise important issues. In addition, there have been recent efforts to 
improve the safety and efficacy of MSC therapy for stroke.
METHODS AND DESIGN: The clinical and preclinical background and the STARTING-2 
study protocol are provided. The trial is a prospective, randomized, open-label, 
blinded-endpoint (PROBE) clinical trial. Both acute and chronic stroke patients 
will be selected based on clinical and radiological features and followed for 3 
months after MSC treatment. The subjects will be randomized into one of two 
groups: (A) a MSC group (n = 40) or (B) a control group (n = 20). Autologous 
MSCs will be intravenously administered after ex vivo culture expansion with 
autologous ischemic serum obtained as early as possible, to enhance the 
therapeutic efficacy (ischemic preconditioning). Objective outcome measurements 
will be performed using multimodal MRI and detailed functional assessments by 
blinded observers.
DISCUSSION: This trial is the first to evaluate the efficacy of MSCs in patients 
with ischemic stroke. The results may provide better evidence for the 
effectiveness of MSC therapy in patients with ischemic stroke.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT01716481.

DOI: 10.1186/1745-6215-14-317
PMCID: PMC4016561
PMID: 24083670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]