1. Horm Cancer. 2014 Feb;5(1):22-32. doi: 10.1007/s12672-013-0161-y. Epub 2013
Oct  1.

17Beta-estradiol promotes aggressive laryngeal cancer through 
membrane-associated estrogen receptor-alpha 36.

Schwartz N(1), Chaudhri RA, Hadadi A, Schwartz Z, Boyan BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Meir Hospital, Tchernichovsky 59, Kfar Saba, 
44299, Israel.

17β-estradiol (E2) plays a key role in tumorigenesis by enhancing cell 
survivability and metastasis through its cytoplasmic receptors. Recently, a 
variant of estrogen receptor alpha, ERα36 has been implicated as a substantial 
mediator of E2's proliferative and antiapoptotic effects through rapid 
membrane-associated signaling, and cancers previously regarded as 
hormone-independent due to the absence of traditional receptors, may in fact be 
susceptible to E2. Despite rising from a secondary sex organ and having a clear 
gender disposition, laryngeal cancer is not uniformly accepted as hormone 
dependent, even in the face of compelling evidence of E2 responsiveness. The aim 
of this study was to further elucidate the role of E2 in the tumorigenesis of 
laryngeal cancer, both in vitro and in vivo. ERα36 presence was evaluated in 
membranes of the laryngeal carcinoma cell line, Hep2, as well as in laryngeal 
tumor samples. In vitro ERα36 was found to mediate rapid activation of protein 
kinase C and phospholipase D by E2, leading to increased proliferation and 
protection against chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, in response to 
E2 activation of ERα36, an upregulation of angiogenic and metastatic factors was 
observed. Clinical analysis of laryngeal tumors revealed a similar association 
between the amount of ERα36 and VEGF and indicated a role in lymph node 
metastasis. These findings present compelling evidence of ERα36-dependent E2 
signaling in laryngeal cancer. Thus, targeting ERα36 may reduce the deleterious 
effects of E2 in laryngeal cancer, ultimately suggesting the importance of 
antiestrogen therapy or the production of novel drugs that specifically target 
ERα36.

DOI: 10.1007/s12672-013-0161-y
PMCID: PMC3947116
PMID: 24081562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]