1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e76058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076058. 
eCollection 2013.

S100A14 interacts with S100A16 and regulates its expression in human cancer 
cells.

Sapkota D(1), Costea DE, Ibrahim SO, Johannessen AC, Bruland O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, the Gade Laboratory for Pathology, 
University of Bergen, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Both S100A14 and S100A16 are members of the multifunctional S100 protein family. 
Formation of homo/heterodimers is considered to be one of the major mechanisms 
for S100 proteins to execute their diverse cellular functions. By employing a 
classical Yeast two hybrid (Y-2 H) screen, we identified S100A16 as the single 
interaction partner of S100A14. This interaction was verified by 
co-immunoprecipitation, double indirect immunofluorescence and double 
immunostaining in specimens of oral squamous cell carcinoma and normal oral 
mucosa. The functional significance of this interaction was examined by 
employing retroviral mediated over-expression and knock-down of these proteins 
in several cancer cell-lines. Over-expression and knock-down of S100A14 led to 
concomitant up- and down-regulation of S100A16 protein in the cell-lines 
examined. However, there was no up-regulation of S100A16 mRNA upon S100A14 
over-expression, indicating that modulation of S100A16 expression was not due to 
enhanced transcriptional activity but possibly by post-transcriptional 
regulation. In contrary, over-expression of S100A16 was associated neither with 
the up-regulation of S100A14 mRNA nor its protein, suggesting a unidirectional 
regulation between S100A14 and S100A16. Cellular treatment with protein 
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide demonstrated a time-dependent intracellular 
degradation of both S100A16 and S100A14 proteins. Additionally, regulation of 
S100A16 and S100A14 degradation was found to be independent of the classical 
proteasomal and lysosomal pathways of protein degradation. Further studies will 
therefore be necessary to understand the functional significance of this 
interaction and the mechanisms on how S100A14 is involved in the regulation of 
S100A16 expression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076058
PMCID: PMC3785438
PMID: 24086685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.