1. J Neuroimmunol. 2013 Nov 15;264(1-2):54-64. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.09.015.  Epub 2013 Sep 21.

Potential role of A2A adenosine receptor in traumatic optic neuropathy.

Ahmad S(1), Fatteh N, El-Sherbiny NM, Naime M, Ibrahim AS, El-Sherbini AM, 
El-Shafey SA, Khan S, Fulzele S, Gonzales J, Liou GI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Georgia Regents University (GRU), Augusta, GA, 
USA; Departmet of Biological Sciences, College of Science and Arts, King 
Abdulaziz University, Rabigh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: sahmad@gru.edu.

In traumatic optic neuropathy (TON), apoptosis of retinal ganglion cells is 
closely related to the local production of reactive oxygen species and 
inflammatory mediators from activated microglial cells. Adenosine receptor A2A 
(A2AAR) has been shown to possess anti-inflammatory properties that have not 
been studied in TON. In the present study, we examined the role of A2AAR in 
retinal complications associated with TON. Initial studies in wild-type mice 
revealed that treatment with the A2AAR agonist resulted in marked decreases in 
the TON-induced microglial activation, retinal cell death and releases of 
reactive oxygen species and pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6. To 
further assess the role of A2AAR in TON, we studied the effects of A2AAR 
ablation on the TON-induced retinal abnormalities. A2AAR-/- mice with TON showed 
a significantly higher mRNA level of TNF-α, Iba1-1 in retinal tissue, and ICAM-1 
expression in retinal sections compared with wild-type mice with TON. To explore 
a potential mechanism by which A2AAR-signaling regulates inflammation in TON, we 
performed additional studies using hypoxia- or LPS-treated microglial cells as 
an in vitro model for TON. Activation of A2AAR attenuates hypoxia or LPS-induced 
TNF-α release and significantly repressed the inflammatory signaling, ERK in the 
activated microglia. Collectively, this work provides pharmacological and 
genetic evidence for A2AAR signaling as a control point of cell death in TON and 
suggests that the retinal protective effect of A2AAR is mediated by attenuating 
the inflammatory response that occurs in microglia via interaction with 
MAPKinase pathway.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.09.015
PMID: 24090652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]