1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):6657-64. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2780-3. Epub
2013  Oct 4.

Interaction between obesity-related genes, FTO and MC4R, associated to an 
increase of breast cancer risk.

da Cunha PA(1), de Carlos Back LK, Sereia AF, Kubelka C, Ribeiro MC, Fernandes 
BL, de Souza IR.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology, Embriology and Genetics Department (UFSC, BEG), Federal 
University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil.

Breast cancer (BC) is a complex disease and obesity is a well-known risk factor 
for its development, especially after menopause. Several studies have shown 
Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to overweight and obesity, such 
as: rs1121980 (T/C) and rs9939609 (A/T) in Fat Mass and Obesity Associated gene 
(FTO) and rs17782313 (T/C) in Melanocortin 4 Receptor gene (MC4R). Thus, we 
aimed to investigate the association between these obesity-related SNPs and BC 
risk. One hundred BC patients and 148 healthy women from Santa Catarina, Brazil 
entered the study. SNPs were genotyped using Taqman assays. For statistical 
analyses SNPStats and SPSS softwares were used. Association analyses were 
performed by logistic regression and were adjusted for age and Body mass index 
(BMI). Multiple SNPs inheritance models (log-additive, dominant, recessive, 
codominant) were performed to determine odds ratios (ORs), assuming 95 % 
confidence interval (CI) and P value = 0.05 as the significance limit. When 
analyzed alone, FTO rs1121980 and rs9939609 did not show significant 
associations with BC development, however MC4R rs17782313 showed increased risk 
for BC even after adjustments (P-value = 0.032). Interestingly, the interaction 
of FTO and MC4R polymorphisms showed a powerful association with BC. We observed 
a 4.59-fold increased risk for woman who have the allele combination C/T/C (FTO 
rs1121980/FTO rs9939609/MC4R rs17782313) (P-value = 0.0011, adjusted for age and 
BMI). We found important and unpublished associations between these 
obesity-related genes and BC risk. These associations seem to be independent of 
their effect on BMI, indicating a direct role of the interaction between FTO and 
MC4R polymorphisms in BC development.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-013-2780-3
PMID: 24091943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]