1. J Exp Med. 2013 Oct 21;210(11):2387-401. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130731. Epub 2013 
Oct 7.

Cgnz1 allele confers kidney resistance to damage preventing progression of 
immune complex-mediated acute lupus glomerulonephritis.

Ge Y(1), Jiang C, Sung SS, Bagavant H, Dai C, Wang H, Kannapell CC, Cathro HP, 
Gaskin F, Fu SM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology and 2 Center of Immunity, 
Inflammation and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine; 3 Department of 
Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology; 4 Division of Nephrology, 
Department of Medicine; 5 Department of Pharmacology; 6 Department of Pathology; 
and 7 Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences, University of 
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908.

Cgnz1 and Agnz1 on the distal region of mouse chromosome 1 are associated with 
chronic glomerulonephritis (cGN) and acute GN (aGN). NZM2328.Lc1R27 (R27) was 
generated by introgressing a C57L/J region where Cgnz1 is located to NZM2328. 
R27 female mice developed aGN mediated by immune complex (IC) deposition and 
complement activation without progression to cGN with severe proteinuria. End 
stage renal disease (ESRD) was not seen in R27 mice as old as 15 mo. Thus, aGN 
and cGN are under separate genetic control, and IC-mediated proliferative GN 
need not progress to cGN and ESRD. NZM2328 and R27 female mice have comparable 
immune and inflammatory parameters. In contrast to NZM2328, R27 mice were 
resistant to sheep anti-mouse GBM serum-induced nephritis, supporting the 
hypothesis that aGN is mediated by autoimmunity and resistance to the 
development of cGN is mediated by end organ resistance to damage. Thus, 
autoimmunity should be considered distinct from end organ damage. The Cgnz1 
region has been mapped to a 1.34 MB region with 45 genes. Nine candidate genes 
were identified. Clinical relevance of these observations is supported by case 
studies. Clinical implications and the significance to human lupus and other 
diseases are presented.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20130731
PMCID: PMC3804943
PMID: 24101379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]