1. Oncol Rep. 2013 Dec;30(6):3006-12. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2783. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

Prognostic value of mitochondrial DNA content and G10398A polymorphism in 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Xu H(1), He W, Jiang HG, Zhao H, Peng XH, Wei YH, Wei JN, Xie CH, Liang C, Zhong 
YH, Zhang G, Deng D, Zhou YF, Zhou FX.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation and Medical Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan 
University, Hubei Key Laboratory of Tumor Biological Behaviors and Hubei Cancer 
Clinical Study Center, Wuchang, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the leading causes of 
cancer-related mortality worldwide. Mitochondrial dysfunction has been 
postulated to render cancer cells resistant to apoptosis based on the Warburg 
hypothesis. However, few studies have investigated the prognostic value of 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and G10398A polymorphism in NSCLC patients. 
mtDNA copy number and G10398A polymorphism in 128 NSCLC tissue samples were 
assessed by real-time PCR (RT-PCR) and PCR-RFLP respectively, and their 
relationship to prognosis were analyzed by survival analysis and Cox 
proportional hazards model. In vitro, an mtDNA deletion A549 ρ(0) cell model was 
utilized to assess the function of mtDNA on radiosensitivity. Cell cycle 
distribution and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were analyzed to elucidate the 
potential mechanisms. For the whole group, the median follow-up time and overall 
survival time were 22.5 and 23.4 months, respectively. Patients with high mtDNA 
content had a marginally longer survival time than patients with low mtDNA 
content (P=0.053). Moreover, patients with high mtDNA content plus 10398G had a 
significantly longer overall survival time compared with those having low mtDNA 
content plus 10398A (47 vs. 27 months, P<0.05). In addition, multivariate 
analysis showed that stage and low mtDNA content plus 10398A were the two most 
independent prognostic factors. In vitro, the A549 ρ(0) cells showed more 
resistance to radiation than ρ(+) cells. Following radiation, ρ(0) cells showed 
delayed G2 arrest and lower ROS level as compared to ρ(+) cells. In conclusion, 
the present study suggests that in patients with NSCLC, low mtDNA content plus 
10398A could be a marker of poor prognosis which is associated with resistance 
to anticancer treatment caused by low mtDNA content plus 10398A polymorphism 
resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2013.2783
PMID: 24101028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]