1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 8;8(10):e75760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075760. 
eCollection 2013.

Sigma-1 receptor enhances neurite elongation of cerebellar granule neurons via 
TrkB signaling.

Kimura Y(1), Fujita Y, Shibata K, Mori M, Yamashita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan ; JST, CREST, 5, Sanbancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Sigma-1 receptor (Sig-1R) is an integral membrane protein predominantly 
expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum. Sig-1R demonstrates a high affinity to 
various synthetic compounds including well-known psychotherapeutic drugs in the 
central nervous system (CNS). For that, it is considered as an alternative 
target for psychotherapeutic drugs. On the cellular level, when Sig-1R is 
activated, it is known to play a role in neuroprotection and neurite elongation. 
These effects are suggested to be mediated by its ligand-operated molecular 
chaperone activity, and/or upregulation of various Ca(2+) signaling. In 
addition, recent studies show that Sig-1R activation induces neurite outgrowth 
via neurotrophin signaling. Here, we tested the hypothesis that Sig-1R 
activation promotes neurite elongation through activation of tropomyosin 
receptor kinase (Trk), a family of neurotrophin receptors. We found that 
2-(4-morpholinethyl)1-phenylcyclohexanecarboxylate (PRE-084), a selective Sig-1R 
agonist, significantly promoted neurite outgrowth, and K252a, a Trk inhibitor, 
attenuated Sig-1R-mediated neurite elongation in cerebellar granule neurons 
(CGNs). Moreover, we revealed that Sig-1R interacts with TrkB, and PRE-084 
treatment enhances phosphorylation of Y515, but not Y706. Thus, our results 
indicate that Sig-1R activation promotes neurite outgrowth in CGNs through Y515 
phosphorylation of TrkB.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075760
PMCID: PMC3793001
PMID: 24116072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.