1. Liver Int. 2014 Aug;34(7):1018-24. doi: 10.1111/liv.12342. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Diabetes mellitus and advanced liver fibrosis are risk factors for severe 
anaemia during telaprevir-based triple therapy.

Crismale JF(1), Martel-Laferrière V, Bichoupan K, Schonfeld E, Pappas A, Wyatt 
C, Odin JA, Liu LU, Schiano TD, Perumalswami PV, Bansal M, Dieterich DT, Branch 
AD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Liver Int. 2015 Feb;35(2):680-1. doi: 10.1111/liv.12677.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Adding telaprevir to pegylated-interferon and ribavirin 
increased both response rates and side effects of hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
treatment. We identified variables associated with severe anaemia during 
telaprevir-based triple therapy.
METHODS: An observational study was performed on 142 HCV-infected patients 
between June 2011 and March 2012. All subjects completed 12 weeks of 
telaprevir-based triple therapy or discontinued early because of anaemia. Severe 
anaemia was defined by a haemoglobin≤8.9 g/dl; advanced fibrosis was determined 
by Fib-4≥3.25.
RESULTS: The 47 (33%) patients who developed severe anaemia were similar to 
those who did not in sex, race, and prior response to dual therapy, but they 
were more likely to have diabetes (23.4% vs. 6.3%, P<0.01), advanced fibrosis 
(46.8% vs. 29.5%, P=0.04) and a history of anaemia during previous dual therapy 
(29.7% vs. 11.4%, P=0.02). Patients developing severe anaemia were older (59 vs. 
56 years, P=0.02), had lower baseline platelet counts (134 vs. 163×10(9) /L, 
P=0.04), haemoglobin (14.0 vs. 15.0 g/dl, P<0.01), estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (79 vs. 90 ml/min/1.73 m2, P=0.03) and a higher median 
ribavirin/weight ratio (14.9 vs. 13.2 mg/kg, P<0.01). In multivariable logistic 
regression, presence of diabetes (OR=5.61, 95% CI: 1.59-19.72), Fib-4≥3.25 
(OR=3.09, 95% CI: 1.28-7.46), higher ribavirin/weight ratio (OR=1.31 per mg/kg, 
95% CI: 1.13-1.52) and lower baseline haemoglobin (OR=0.57 per g/dl, 95% CI, 
0.41-0.80) were independently associated with developing severe anaemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Severe anaemia occurred in one-third of patients receiving 
telaprevir-based triple therapy. Risk was greater in patients with diabetes, 
advanced liver fibrosis, higher ribavirin/weight ratio and lower baseline 
haemoglobin.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.12342
PMCID: PMC3972374
PMID: 24118693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Guarantor of the article: 
Andrea D. Branch, Ph.D. Specific Author Contributions: Study conception and 
design, data collection, drafting of the manuscript: James F. Crismale. Study 
conception and design, data collection and analysis, critical revision of the 
manuscript: Valérie Martel-Laferrière. Data collection and analysis, critical 
revision of the manuscript: Kian Bichoupan. Data collection: Emily Schoenfeld. 
Data Collection: Alexis Pappas. Data collection and study supervision: Joseph A. 
Odin; data collection and study supervision: Lawrence L. Liu; data collection 
and study supervision: Thomas Schiano; data collection and study supervision: 
Ponni Perumalswami; data collection and study supervision: Meena Bansal; study 
conception and design, study supervision, critical revision of the manuscript: 
Christina Wyatt; study conception and design, study supervision, critical 
revision of the manuscript: Douglas T. Dieterich; study conception and design, 
study supervision, data collection and analysis, critical revision of the 
manuscript: Andrea D. Branch. All authors approved the final draft of this 
manuscript. Potential Competing Interests: Dr. Douglas Dieterich serves as a 
paid lecturer, consultant, and is a member on scientific advisory boards of 
companies which either develop or assess medicines used for the treatment of 
viral hepatitis. These companies include Gilead Sciences, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Novartis, Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Achillion, Tibotec, Idenix, Merck, Kadmon, 
Bayer Healthcare, Genentech and Hoffman-La Roche, Inc. and Bristol-Myers Squibb. 
Dr. Thomas Schiano is a paid lecturer, consultant, and a participant in the DSMB 
of companies that include Bristol-Myers Squibb/Sanofi-Aventis Partnership; 
Novartis; Pfizer Inc., and Salix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Dr. Andrea D. Branch is a 
paid consultant for Kadmon. James F. Crismale, Valérie Martel-Laferrière, Kian 
Bichoupan, Christina Wyatt, Joseph A. Odin, Lawrence U. Liu, Ponni V. 
Perumalswami, Meena Bansal, Emily Schoenfeld, and Alexis Pappas have no relevant 
disclosures.