1. Leukemia. 2014 Jan;28(1):108-17. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.263. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

SF3B1 mutations correlated to cytogenetics and mutations in NOTCH1, FBXW7, 
MYD88, XPO1 and TP53 in 1160 untreated CLL patients.

Jeromin S(1), Weissmann S(1), Haferlach C(1), Dicker F(1), Bayer K(1), Grossmann 
V(1), Alpermann T(1), Roller A(1), Kohlmann A(1), Haferlach T(1), Kern W(1), 
Schnittger S(1).

Author information:
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

We analyzed a large cohort of 1160 untreated CLL patients for novel genetic 
markers (SF3B1, NOTCH1, FBXW7, MYD88, XPO1) in the context of molecular, 
immunophenotypic and cytogenetic data. NOTCH1 mutations (mut) (12.3%), SF3B1mut 
(9.0%) and TP53mut (7.1%) were more frequent than XPO1mut (3.4%), FBXW7mut 
(2.5%) and MYD88mut (1.5%). SF3B1mut, NOTCH1mut, TP53mut and XPO1mut were highly 
correlated to unmutated, whereas MYD88mut were associated with mutated IGHV 
status. Associations of diverse cytogenetic aberrations and mutations emerged: 
(1) SF3B1mut with del(11q), (2) NOTCH1mut and FBXW7mut with trisomy 12 and 
nearly exclusiveness of SF3B1mut, (3) MYD88mut with del(13q) sole and low 
frequencies of SF3B1mut, NOTCH1mut and FBXW7mut. In patients with normal 
karyotype only SF3B1mut were frequent, whereas NOTCH1mut rarely occurred. An 
adverse prognostic impact on time to treatment (TTT) and overall survival (OS) 
was observed for SF3B1mut, NOTCH1mut and TP53 disruption. In multivariate 
analyses SF3B1mut, IGHV mutational status and del(11q) were the only independent 
genetic markers for TTT, whereas for OS SF3B1mut, IGHV mutational status and 
TP53 disruption presented with significant impact. Finally, our data suggest 
that analysis of gene mutations refines the risk stratification of cytogenetic 
prognostic subgroups and confirms data of a recently proposed model integrating 
molecular and cytogenetic data.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2013.263
PMID: 24113472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]