1. Pediatr Int. 2014 Apr;56(2):167-72. doi: 10.1111/ped.12222. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase polymorphisms and homocysteine level in 
heart defects.

Sahiner UM(1), Alanay Y, Alehan D, Tuncbilek E, Alikasifoglu M.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University School 
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: While several single nucleotide polymorphisms are known to influence 
the metabolism of folate, the methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene 
has been the most extensively studied. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the relationship between the MTHFR polymorphisms 1298A>C and 677C>T and 
congenital heart disease. In addition, the relationship between these gene 
polymorphisms and homocysteine level was determined in Turkish subjects.
METHODS: Patients with non-syndromic congenital heart defects who were admitted 
to the Pediatric Cardiology Unit at Hacettepe University Ihsan Dogramaci 
Children's Hospital, Ankara, Turkey between June 2002 and June 2003 were 
recruited for the study. A total of 163 children with congenital heart defects 
(mean age, 7.63 ± 6.03 years; M/F, 93/70) and 93 healthy controls were analyzed.
RESULTS: When evaluated either separately or together, there were no differences 
in the frequency of MTHFR 677C>T or 1298A>C polymorphisms between the children 
with congenital heart defects and the control group. The results were the same 
when considering only conotruncal defects. Those with the 677C>T polymorphism 
had significantly lower homocysteine level (P = 0.004), but the 1298A>C 
polymorphism was not related to homocysteine level.
CONCLUSION: No relationship was found between congenital heart defects and 
1298A>C or 677C>T polymorphisms. The 677C>T polymorphism was related to low 
homocysteine level. Because there is often much heterogeneity between 
populations, this study should be conducted in different populations and with 
larger numbers of participants.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatrics International © 2013 Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.12222
PMID: 24112451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]