1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2013 Oct 12;6(1):148. doi: 10.1186/1754-6834-6-148.

Xylo- and cello-oligosaccharide oxidation by gluco-oligosaccharide oxidase from 
Sarocladium strictum and variants with reduced substrate inhibition.

Vuong TV(1), Vesterinen AH, Foumani M, Juvonen M, Seppälä J, Tenkanen M, Master 
ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of 
Toronto, 200 College Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E5, Canada. 
emma.master@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: The oxidation of carbohydrates from lignocellulose can facilitate 
the synthesis of new biopolymers and biochemicals, and also reduce sugar 
metabolism by lignocellulolytic microorganisms, reserving aldonates for 
fermentation to biofuels. Although oxidoreductases that oxidize cellulosic 
hydrolysates have been well characterized, none have been reported to oxidize 
substituted or branched xylo-oligosaccharides. Moreover, this is the first 
report that identifies amino acid substitutions leading to GOOX variants with 
reduced substrate inhibition.
RESULTS: The recombinant wild type gluco-oligosaccharide oxidase (GOOX) from the 
fungus Sarocladium strictum, along with variants that were generated by 
site-directed mutagenesis, retained the FAD cofactor, and showed high activity 
on cello-oligosaccharide and xylo-oligosaccharides, including substituted and 
branched xylo-oligosaccharides. Mass spectrometric analyses confirmed that GOOX 
introduces one oxygen atom to oxidized products, and 1H NMR and tandem mass 
spectrometry analysis confirmed that oxidation was restricted to the anomeric 
carbon. The A38V mutation, which is close to a predicted divalent ion-binding 
site in the FAD-binding domain of GOOX but 30 Å away from the active site, 
significantly increased the kcat and catalytic efficiency of the enzyme on all 
oligosaccharides. Eight amino acid substitutions were separately introduced to 
the substrate-binding domain of GOOX-VN (at positions Y72, E247, W351, Q353 and 
Q384). In all cases, the Km of the enzyme variant was higher than that of GOOX, 
supporting the role of corresponding residues in substrate binding. Most 
notably, W351A increased Km values by up to two orders of magnitude while also 
increasing kcat up to 3-fold on cello- and xylo-oligosaccharides and showing no 
substrate inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence that S. strictum GOOX has 
broader substrate specificity than the enzyme name implies, and that substrate 
inhibition can be reduced by removing aromatic side chains in the -2 binding 
subsite. Of the enzyme variants, W351A might be particularly advantageous when 
oxidizing oligosaccharides present at high substrate concentrations often 
experienced in industrial processes.

DOI: 10.1186/1754-6834-6-148
PMCID: PMC4015748
PMID: 24119501