1. BMC Genomics. 2013 Oct 12;14:704. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-704.

Integrating microRNA and mRNA expression profiling in Symbiodinium 
microadriaticum, a dinoflagellate symbiont of reef-building corals.

Baumgarten S(1), Bayer T, Aranda M, Liew YJ, Carr A, Micklem G, Voolstra CR.

Author information:
(1)Red Sea Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 
(KAUST), 4700 KAUST, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia. 
christian.voolstra@kaust.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: Animal and plant genomes produce numerous small RNAs (smRNAs) that 
regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally affecting metabolism, 
development, and epigenetic inheritance. In order to characterize the repertoire 
of endogenous smRNAs and potential gene targets in dinoflagellates, we conducted 
smRNA and mRNA expression profiling over 9 experimental treatments of cultures 
from Symbiodinium microadriaticum, a photosynthetic symbiont of scleractinian 
corals.
RESULTS: We identified a set of 21 novel smRNAs that share stringent key 
features with functional microRNAs from other model organisms. smRNAs were 
predicted independently over all 9 treatments and their putative gene targets 
were identified. We found 1,720 animal-like target sites in the 3'UTRs of 12,858 
mRNAs and 19 plant-like target sites in 51,917 genes. We assembled a 
transcriptome of 58,649 genes and determined differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) between treatments. Heat stress was found to produce a much larger number 
of DEGs than other treatments that yielded only few DEGs. Analysis of DEGs also 
revealed that minicircle-encoded photosynthesis proteins seem to be common 
targets of transcriptional regulation. Furthermore, we identified the core RNAi 
protein machinery in Symbiodinium.
CONCLUSIONS: Integration of smRNA and mRNA expression profiling identified a 
variety of processes that could be under microRNA control, e.g. protein 
modification, signaling, gene expression, and response to DNA damage. Given that 
Symbiodinium seems to have a paucity of transcription factors and differentially 
expressed genes, identification and characterization of its smRNA repertoire 
establishes the possibility of a range of gene regulatory mechanisms in 
dinoflagellates acting post-transcriptionally.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-704
PMCID: PMC3853145
PMID: 24119094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]