1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 7;8(10):e76700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076700. 
eCollection 2013.

A remote palm domain residue of RB69 DNA polymerase is critical for enzyme 
activity and influences the conformation of the active site.

Jacewicz A(1), Trzemecka A, Guja KE, Plochocka D, Yakubovskaya E, Bebenek A, 
Garcia-Diaz M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Non-conserved amino acids that are far removed from the active site can 
sometimes have an unexpected effect on enzyme catalysis. We have investigated 
the effects of alanine replacement of residues distant from the active site of 
the replicative RB69 DNA polymerase, and identified a substitution in a weakly 
conserved palm residue (D714A), that renders the enzyme incapable of sustaining 
phage replication in vivo. D714, located several angstroms away from the active 
site, does not contact the DNA or the incoming dNTP, and our apoenzyme and 
ternary crystal structures of the Pol(D714A) mutant demonstrate that D714A does 
not affect the overall structure of the protein. The structures reveal a 
conformational change of several amino acid side chains, which cascade out from 
the site of the substitution towards the catalytic center, substantially 
perturbing the geometry of the active site. Consistent with these structural 
observations, the mutant has a significantly reduced k pol for correct 
incorporation. We propose that the observed structural changes underlie the 
severe polymerization defect and thus D714 is a remote, non-catalytic residue 
that is nevertheless critical for maintaining an optimal active site 
conformation. This represents a striking example of an action-at-a-distance 
interaction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076700
PMCID: PMC3792054
PMID: 24116139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.