1. Nitric Oxide. 2013 Nov 30;35:137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.09.005. Epub
2013  Oct 11.

In vitro organic nitrate bioactivation to nitric oxide by recombinant aldehyde 
dehydrogenase 3A1.

Lin S(1), Page NA, Fung SM, Fung HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 
14214, United States.

Organic nitrates (ORNs) are commonly used anti-ischemic and anti-anginal agents, 
which serve as an exogenous source of the potent vasodilator nitric oxide (NO). 
Recently, both mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2) and cytosolic 
aldehyde dehydrogenase-1a1 (ALDH1A1) have been shown to exhibit the ability to 
selectively bioactivate various ORNs in vitro. The objective of the present 
research was to examine the potential role of ALDH3A1, another major cytosolic 
isoform of ALDH, in the in vitro bioactivation of various ORNs, and to estimate 
the enzyme kinetic parameters toward ORNs through mechanistic modeling. The 
extent of bioactivation was assayed by exposing recombinant ALDH3A1 to various 
concentrations of ORNs, and measuring the concentration-time profiles of 
released NO via a NO-specific electrode. Metabolite formation kinetics was 
monitored for nitroglycerin (NTG) using LC/MS/MS. Our results showed that 
ALDH3A1 mRNA and protein were highly expressed in C57BL/6 mouse aortic, cardiac, 
and hepatic tissues, and it was able to release NO from several ORNs, including 
NTG, isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN), isosorbide-2-mononitrate (IS-2-MN), and 
nicorandil with similar Vmax (0.175-0.503nmol/min/mg of ALDH3A1), and Km values 
of 4.01, 46.5, 818 and 5.75×10(3)μM, respectively. However, activation of 
isosorbide-5-mononitrate (IS-5-MN) by ALDH3A1 was undetectable in vitro. ALDH3A1 
was also shown to denitrate NTG, producing primarily glyceryl 1,2-dinitrate 
(1,2-GDN) in preference to glyceryl 1,3-dinitrate (1,3-GDN). Therefore, ALDH3A1 
may contribute to the bioactivation of ORNs in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.niox.2013.09.005
PMCID: PMC3895916
PMID: 24126018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]