1. BMC Cell Biol. 2013 Oct 15;14:46. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-14-46.

Functional analysis of the rodent CK1tau mutation in the circadian clock of a 
marine unicellular alga.

van Ooijen G(1), Martin SF, Barrios-Llerena ME, Hindle M, Le Bihan T, O'Neill 
JS, Millar AJ.

Author information:
(1)SynthSys, University of Edinburgh, Waddington Building, The King's Buildings, 
Mayfield Road, Edinburgh EH9 3JD, UK. Gerben.vanOoijen@ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Casein Kinase 1 (CK1) is one of few proteins known to affect 
cellular timekeeping across metazoans, and the naturally occurring CK1tau 
mutation shortens circadian period in mammals. Functional conservation of a 
timekeeping function for CK1 in the green lineage was recently identified in the 
green marine unicell Ostreococcus tauri, in spite of the absence of CK1's 
transcriptional targets known from other species. The short-period phenotype of 
CK1tau mutant in mammals depends specifically on increased CK1 activity against 
PERIOD proteins. To understand how CK1 acts differently upon the algal clock, we 
analysed the cellular and proteomic effects of CK1tau overexpression in O. 
tauri.
RESULTS: Overexpression of the CK1tau in O. tauri induces period lengthening 
identical to overexpression of wild-type CK1, in addition to resistance to CK1 
inhibitor IC261. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry of CK1tau 
overexpressing algae revealed a total of 58 unique phospho-sites that are 
differentially responsive to CK1tau. Combined with CK1 phosphorylation site 
prediction tools and previously published wild-type CK1-responsive peptides, 
this study results in a highly stringent list of upregulated phospho-sites, 
derived from proteins containing ankyrin repeats, kinase proteins, and 
phosphoinositide-binding proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: The identical phenotype for overexpression of wild-type CK1 and 
CK1tau is in line with the absence of critical targets for rodent CK1tau in O. 
tauri. Proteomic analyses reveal that two thirds of previously reported CK1 
overexpression-responsive phospho-sites are shared with CK1tau. These results 
indicate that the two alleles are functionally indiscriminate in O. tauri, and 
verify the identified cellular CK1 target proteins in a minimal circadian model 
organism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2121-14-46
PMCID: PMC3852742
PMID: 24127907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]