1. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Mar;115(3):523-30. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24686.

Translation regulation and proteasome mediated degradation cooperate to keep 
stem-loop binding protein low in G1-phase.

Djakbarova U(1), Marzluff WF, Köseoğlu MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Fatih University Istanbul, 
Istanbul, Turkey; Bionanotechnology Center, Fatih University Istanbul, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

Histone mRNA levels are cell cycle regulated, and the major regulatory steps are 
at the posttranscriptional level. A major regulatory mechanism is S-phase 
restriction of Stem-loop binding protein (SLBP) which binds to the 3' end of 
histone mRNA and participates in multiple steps of histone mRNA metabolism, 
including 3' end processing, translation and regulation of mRNA stability. SLBP 
expression is cell cycle regulated without significant change in its mRNA level. 
SLBP expression is low in G1 until just before S phase where it functions and at 
the end of S phase SLBP is degraded by proteasome complex depending on 
phosphorylations on Thr60 and Thr61. Here using synchronized HeLa cells we 
showed that SLBP production rate is low in early G1 and recovers back to S phase 
level somewhere between early and mid-G1. Further, we showed that SLBP is 
unstable in G1 due to proteasome mediated degradation as a novel mechanism to 
keep SLBP low in G1. Finally, the S/G2 stable mutant form of SLBP is degraded by 
proteasome in G1, indicating that indicating that the SLBP degradation in G1 is 
independent of the previously identified SLBP degradation at S/G2. In 
conclusion, as a mechanism to limit histone production to S phase, SLBP is kept 
low in G1 phase due to cooperative action of translation regulation and 
proteasome mediated degradation which is independent of previously known S/G2 
degradation.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.24686
PMCID: PMC4391495
PMID: 24122909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors have no conflict of interest.