1. Learn Mem. 2013 Oct 15;20(11):617-27. doi: 10.1101/lm.031971.113.

Dopamine D1 sensitivity in the prefrontal cortex predicts general cognitive 
abilities and is modulated by working memory training.

Wass C(1), Pizzo A, Sauce B, Kawasumi Y, Sturzoiu T, Ree F, Otto T, Matzel LD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, 
USA.

A common source of variance (i.e., "general intelligence") underlies an 
individual's performance across diverse tests of cognitive ability, and evidence 
indicates that the processing efficacy of working memory may serve as one such 
source of common variance. One component of working memory, selective attention, 
has been reported to co-vary with general intelligence, and dopamine D1 
signaling in prefrontal cortex can modulate attentional abilities. Based on 
their aggregate performance across five diverse tests of learning, here we 
characterized the general cognitive ability (GCA) of CD-1 outbred mice. In 
response to a D1 agonist (SKF82958, 1 mg/kg), we then assessed the relationship 
between GCA and activation of D1 receptor (D1R)-containing neurons in the 
prelimbic region of the medial prefrontal cortex, the agranular insular cortex, 
and the dorsomedial striatum. Increased activation of D1R-containing neurons in 
the prelimbic cortex (but not the agranular insular cortex or dorsomedial 
striatum) was observed in animals of high GCA relative to those of low GCA 
(quantified by c-Fos activation in response to the D1 agonist). However, a 
Western blot analysis revealed no differences in the density of D1Rs in the 
prelimbic cortex between animals of high and low GCA. Last, it was observed that 
working memory training promoted an increase in animals' GCA and enhanced 
D1R-mediated neuronal activation in the prelimbic cortex. These results suggest 
that the sensitivity (but not density) of D1Rs in the prelimbic cortex may both 
regulate GCA and be a target for working memory training.

DOI: 10.1101/lm.031971.113
PMCID: PMC3799419
PMID: 24129098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]