1. J Clin Neurosci. 2014 Feb;21(2):198-202. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.04.017. Epub
 2013 Oct 13.

Association of the A1298C polymorphism in MTHFR gene with ischemic stroke.

Kang S(1), Wu Y(1), Liu L(1), Zhao X(1), Zhang D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Qingdao University Medical College, 38 Dengzhou 
Road, Qingdao 266021, China.
(2)Department of Public Health, Qingdao University Medical College, 38 Dengzhou 
Road, Qingdao 266021, China. Electronic address: zhangdf1961@126.com.

A meta-analysis was performed to assess the association between the 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) A1298C genetic polymorphism and 
ischemic stroke. A comprehensive search was conducted to identify all 
case-control or cohort studies. The fixed or random effect pooled measure was 
selected based on the homogeneity between studies, as assessed by I(2). 
Meta-regression was used to explore the potential sources of between-study 
heterogeneity. Publication bias was estimated using Egger's linear regression 
test. Thirteen case-control studies corresponded to the inclusion criteria 
comprising 2133 patients and 2572 controls which were included in the present 
meta-analysis. After excluding articles that deviated from Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium in controls and the key contributors to between-study heterogeneity, 
significant associations between MTHFR A1298C genetic polymorphism and risk of 
ischemic stroke were observed in dominant (odds ratio [OR] 1.227, 95% confidence 
interval [CI] 1.062-1.416) and codominant (OR 1.138, 95% CI 1.007-1.286) 
inheritance models. Moreover, in the subgroup analysis based on region (Asia and 
Europe), significant associations were observed in most genetic models in Asia 
but not in Europe. This meta-analysis suggests that MTHFR A1298C genetic 
polymorphism is associated with increased risk of ischemic stroke, and the C 
allele may be an important risk factor for ischemic stroke.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.04.017
PMID: 24128767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]