1. Biochemistry. 2013 Nov 12;52(45):8060-8. doi: 10.1021/bi4010123. Epub 2013 Nov
 1.

Residues flanking scissile bonds in Factor VIII modulate rates of cleavage and 
proteolytic activation catalyzed by Factor Xa.

Griffiths AE(1), Wintermute J, Newell-Caito JL, Fay PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester School of 
Medicine , 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, New York 14642, United States.

Factor Xa (FXa) proteolytically activates Factor VIII (FVIII) by cleaving P1 
residues Arg(372), Arg(740), and Arg(1689). The Arg(372) site represents the 
rate-limiting step for procofactor activation, whereas cleavage at Arg(740) is a 
fast step. FXa also catalyzes inactivating cleavages that occur on a slower time 
scale than the activating ones. To assess the role of sequences flanking the 
Arg(372) and Arg(740) sites, recombinant FVIII variants in which P3-P3' 
sequences were swapped individually or in combination were prepared. Replacing 
the Arg(372) flanking sequence with that from the Arg(740) site increased the 
rate of cleavage at Arg(372), as judged by the ~5-fold increased rate in A1 
subunit generation, and reduced the FVIIIa-dependent lag time for in situ FXa 
generation. The reciprocal swap yielded a nearly 2-fold increase in the rate of 
Arg(372) cleavage, while the combined double-swap variant showed a 10-fold rate 
increase at that site, consistent with the individual effects being additive. 
Although this cleavage represents the slow step for activation, the rate of this 
reaction appeared to be ~9-fold greater than the rate of the primary 
inactivating cleavage at Arg(336) in generating the A1(336) product. 
Interestingly, replacement of the Arg(372) flanking sequence with the Arg(740) 
sequence combined with an Arg(740)Gln mutation yielded both more rapid cleavage 
of the Arg(372) site and accelerated inactivating cleavages within the A1 
subunit. These results indicate that flanking sequences in part modulate the 
reaction rates required for procofactor activation and influence the capacity of 
FXa as an initial activator of FVIII rather than an inactivator.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4010123
PMID: 24128092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]