1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):6547-60. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2686-0. Epub
2013  Oct 17.

Folate intake and MTHFR polymorphism C677T is not associated with ovarian cancer 
risk: evidence from the meta-analysis.

Li C(1), Chen P, Hu P, Li M, Li X, Guo H, Li J, Chu R, Zhang W, Wang H.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China.

Folate is essential for DNA synthesis and methylation and implicated in the 
process of carcinogenesis. Several studies inconclusively suggested increased 
folate intake may reduce ovarian cancer risk. Studies concerning the association 
between C677T polymorphism in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), an 
important enzyme in folate metabolism, and ovarian cancer risk also resulted in 
no agreement. The meta-analysis was conducted based on current studies to assess 
the association between folate intake, the MTHFR C667T polymorphism and ovarian 
cancer risk. 1,158 cases out of 217,309 participants from four cohort studies, 
4,519 cases and 6,031 controls from four case-control studies about folate 
intake along with 5,617 cases and 9,808 controls from 10 publications concerning 
the polymorphism were pooled, respectively. We detected no significant 
association between total folate (RR = 1.04, 95 % confidence interval 
(CI) = 0.87-1.23) or dietary folate (RR = 0.88, 95 % CI = 0.75-1.05) intake and 
ovarian cancer risk, and also no significant relationship was found between 
MTHFR C677T polymorphism and ovarian cancer risk (TT vs. CC: odds ratio 
(OR) = 1.15, 95 % CI = 0.90-1.46; CT vs. CC: OR = 1.04, 95 % CI = 0.94-1.16). 
Our analysis indicated neither folate intake nor MTHFR C677T polymorphism is 
related to altered susceptibility of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-013-2686-0
PMID: 24129496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]