1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jun;51(6):414-9.

[Analysis of GALNS gene mutation in thirty-eight Chinese patients with 
mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye J(1), Lei HL, Zhang HW, Qiu WJ, Han LS, Wang Y, Li XY, Gu XF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinologic, Genetic and Metabolic 
Diseases,Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.

OBJECTIVE: Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) type IVA (MPS IVA) is an autosomal 
recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of 
N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase (GALNS) needed to degrade 
glycosaminoglycanes (GAGs), accumulation of GAGs in the tissue resulting in 
disorder of function. So far, the small number of articles about clinical study 
of Chinese MPS IVA were published and only one paper about gene mutation 
analysis was published. This study aimed to investigate the mutation spectrum 
and characteristic of GALNS gene in Chinese patients with MPS IVA who were 
diagnosed in our hospital.
METHOD: Thirty-eight patients from 36 families (male 17, female 21) were 
diagnosed as MPS IVA by GALNS activity determination [(0.85 ± 1.33) nmol/(17 
h·mg)] and clinical symptoms during 2006-2012. The average age of diagnosis was 
(5.7 ± 3.6) years. Mutation analysis of GALNS gene performed performed by 
PCR-direct DNA sequencing for 38 patients. PCR-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analysis was used for validating novel mutation, and also to assess 
amino acid conservation for novel missense variants in five different species. 
PolyPhen-2 tool was used to predict the possible impact of missense mutations on 
the structure and function of the human GALNS protein, etc. Analysis of GALNS 
activity and gene mutation in amniotic fluid were performed to provide the 
prenatal diagnosis for some families with MPS type IVA.
RESULT: (1) Thirty-eight kinds of mutation in GALNS gene were identified in 38 
patients of them, 71% were missense mutations. p. M318R was a hot-spot mutation 
(21%) tested. Five kinds of mutation i.e., p. P163H, p.G168L, p. A324E, p. L366P 
and p. F452L were only found in Chinese patients with MPS IVA. Eighteen kinds of 
novel mutation were detected including p. E315K, p.G304D, p.R251Q, p.Y240C, 
p.G161E, p.N32D, p.L390P, p. D60E, p. P420S, W403C/T404S, p.L454P, for p.W405X, 
p. M1I, c.409_ c.420del12, c.1176_1178del3, c.1046delG, c.1188delG and 
IVS9-2A>C. (2) The polymorphism of novel missense variants were ruled out by the 
PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and no related mutations 
were found in 50 normal controls. A splice site mutation IVS9-2A>C had been 
validated by reverse transcription PCR direct sequencing. The amino acid of 
mutant position of 10 kinds of missense variants are highly conserved and only 
p. L454 is moderately conserved position. These missense variants were predicted 
to cause damage to the structure and function of human GALNS protein possibly 
according to the PolyPhen-2 tool, so these novel missense variants may be 
disease-causing mutations. (3) Prenatal diagnosis was provided for 7 families 
and three fetuses were diagnosed as MPS IVA.
CONCLUSION: The GALNS gene mutation spectrum in Chinese patients with MPS IVA is 
really different from that in other countries, five kinds of mutation were only 
found in Chinese patients with MPS IVA. The reports of hot-spot mutation in 
Chinese patients were also different, and should be analyzed by more data of 
gene mutation analysis and epidemiological study.

PMID: 24120057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]