1. J Sports Sci Med. 2008 Sep 1;7(3):365-70. eCollection 2008.

Capsaicin supplementation fails to modulate autonomic and cardiac 
electrophysiologic activity during exercise in the obese: with variants of UCP2 
and UCP3 polymorphism.

Shin KO(1), Moritani T.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, Pusan National University , 
Geumjeong-gu, Busan 609735, Korea ; Laboratory of Applied Physiology, Graduate 
School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University , Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 
6068501, Japan.

We investigated the effects of capsaicin supplementation (150mg) on alterations 
of autonomic nervous system (ANS) activity associated with adverse effects of 
cardiac depolarization-repolarization intervals during aerobic exercise in obese 
humans. Nine obese males (26.1 Â± 1.5 yrs) volunteered between study designed. 
The cardiac ANS activities evaluated by means of heart rate variability of power 
spectral analysis and cardiac QT interval were continuously measured during 
5-min rest and 30-min exercise at 50% of maximal ventilation threshold 
(50%VTmax) on stationary ergometer with placebo (CON) or capsaicin (CAP) oral 
administration chosen at random. The uncoupling protein (UCP) 2 and UCP 3 
genetic variants of the subjects were analyzed by noninvasive genotyping method 
from collecting buccal mucosa cells. The results indicated that there were no 
significant differences in cardiac ANS activities during rest and exercise 
between CON and CAP trials. Although no significant difference, A/A allele of 
UCP2 polymorphism showed a reduced sympathetic nervous system (SNS) index 
activity compared to G/G + G/A allele during exercise intervention in our 
subjects. On the other hand, the data on cardiac QT interval showed no 
significant difference, indicating that oral administration of capsaicin did not 
cause any adverse effect on cardiac depolarization-repolarization. In 
conclusion, our results suggest that capsaicin supplementation 1 h before 
exercise intervention has no effect on cardiac ANS activities and cardiac 
electrical stability during exercise in obese individuals. Further studies 
should also consider genetic variants for exercise efficacy against obesity. Key 
pointsObese individuals possess reduced cardiac autonomic nervous activities, 
especially sympathetic nervous activity associated with thermogenesis induced by 
capsaicin.Lower sympathetic nervous activity may associate with -866 G/A 
variants of UCP2 polymorphism.Capsaicin ingestion, however, may consider as a 
safe nutrient-aid with no adverse effects of cardiac electrical stability.

PMCID: PMC3761897
PMID: 24149904