1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 16;8(10):e77691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077691. 
eCollection 2013.

Adherence as a predictor of the development of class-specific resistance 
mutations: the Swiss HIV Cohort Study.

von Wyl V(1), Klimkait T, Yerly S, Nicca D, Furrer H, Cavassini M, Calmy A, 
Bernasconi E, Böni J, Aubert V, Günthard HF, Bucher HC, Glass TR; Swiss HIV 
Cohort Study.

Collaborators: Aubert V, Barth J, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Böni J, Bucher HC, 
Burton-Jeangros C, Calmy A, Cavassini M, Egger M, Elzi L, Fehr J, Fellay J, 
Furrer H, Fux CA, Gorgievski M, Günthard H, Haerry D, Hasse B, Hirsch HH, Hösli 
I, Kahlert C, Kaiser L, Keiser O, Klimkait T, Kouyos R, Kovari H, Ledergerber B, 
Martinetti G, Martinez de Tejada B, Metzner K, Müller N, Nadal D, Pantaleo G, 
Rauch A, Regenass S, Rickenbach M, Rudin C, Schmid P, Schultze D, 
Schöni-Affolter F, Schüpbach J, Speck R, Staehelin C, Tarr P, Telenti A, Trkola 
A, Vernazza P, Weber R, Yerly S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Non-adherence is one of the strongest predictors of therapeutic 
failure in HIV-positive patients. Virologic failure with subsequent emergence of 
resistance reduces future treatment options and long-term clinical success.
METHODS: Prospective observational cohort study including patients starting new 
class of antiretroviral therapy (ART) between 2003 and 2010. Participants were 
naïve to ART class and completed ≥1 adherence questionnaire prior to resistance 
testing. Outcomes were development of any IAS-USA, class-specific, or M184V 
mutations. Associations between adherence and resistance were estimated using 
logistic regression models stratified by ART class.
RESULTS: Of 314 included individuals, 162 started NNRTI and 152 a PI/r regimen. 
Adherence was similar between groups with 85% reporting adherence ≥95%. Number 
of new mutations increased with increasing non-adherence. In NNRTI group, 
multivariable models indicated a significant linear association in odds of 
developing IAS-USA (odds ratio (OR) 1.66, 95% confidence interval (CI): 
1.04-2.67) or class-specific (OR 1.65, 95% CI: 1.00-2.70) mutations. Levels of 
drug resistance were considerably lower in PI/r group and adherence was only 
significantly associated with M184V mutations (OR 8.38, 95% CI: 1.26-55.70). 
Adherence was significantly associated with HIV RNA in PI/r but not NNRTI 
regimens.
CONCLUSION: Therapies containing PI/r appear more forgiving to incomplete 
adherence compared with NNRTI regimens, which allow higher levels of resistance, 
even with adherence above 95%. However, in failing PI/r regimens good adherence 
may prevent accumulation of further resistance mutations and therefore help to 
preserve future drug options. In contrast, adherence levels have little impact 
on NNRTI treatments once the first mutations have emerged.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077691
PMCID: PMC3797701
PMID: 24147057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The Swiss HIV Cohort Study 
drug resistance database was supported by a research grant from commercial 
sources - The Union Bank of Switzerland and Gilead Science. This does not alter 
the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.