1. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Feb;62:218-32. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.010. Epub 2013
Oct  16.

Neuroprotective effects of the Sigma-1 receptor (S1R) agonist PRE-084, in a 
mouse model of motor neuron disease not linked to SOD1 mutation.

Peviani M(1), Salvaneschi E(1), Bontempi L(1), Petese A(1), Manzo A(2), Rossi 
D(3), Salmona M(4), Collina S(3), Bigini P(4), Curti D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", Laboratory of 
Cellular & Molecular Neuropharmacology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology and Translational Immunology Research Laboratories (LaRIT), 
Division of Rheumatology, IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation/University of 
Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Drug Science, Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", Laboratory of 
Cellular & Molecular Neuropharmacology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. 
Electronic address: curtid@unipv.it.

The identification of novel molecular targets crucially involved in motor neuron 
degeneration/survival is a necessary step for the development of hopefully more 
effective therapeutic strategies for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
patients. In this view, S1R, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident receptor 
with chaperone-like activity, has recently attracted great interest. S1R is 
involved in several processes leading to acute and chronic neurodegeneration, 
including ALS pathology. Treatment with the S1R agonist PRE-084 improves 
locomotor function and motor neuron survival in presymptomatic and early 
symptomatic mutant SOD1-G93A ALS mice. Here, we tested the efficacy of PRE-084 
in a model of spontaneous motor neuron degeneration, the wobbler mouse (wr) as a 
proof of concept that S1R may be regarded as a key therapeutic target also for 
ALS cases not linked to SOD1 mutation. Increased staining for S1R was detectable 
in morphologically spared cervical spinal cord motor neurons of wr mice both at 
early (6th week) and late (12th week) phases of clinical progression. S1R signal 
was also detectable in hypertrophic astrocytes and reactive microglia of wr 
mice. Chronic treatment with PRE-084 (three times a week, for 8weeks), starting 
at symptom onset, significantly increased the levels of BDNF in the gray matter, 
improved motor neuron survival and ameliorated paw abnormality and grip strength 
performance. In addition, the treatment significantly reduced the number of 
reactive astrocytes whereas, that of CD11b+ microglial cells was increased. A 
deeper evaluation of microglial markers revealed significant increased number of 
cells positive for the pan-macrophage marker CD68 and of CD206+ cells, involved 
in tissue restoration, in the white matter of PRE-084-treated mice. The mRNA 
levels of TNF-α and IL-1β were not affected by PRE-084 treatment. Thus, our 
results support pharmacological manipulation of S1R as a promising strategy to 
cure ALS and point to increased availability of growth factors and modulation of 
astrocytosis and of macrophage/microglia as part of the mechanisms involved in 
S1R-mediated neuroprotection.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.010
PMID: 24141020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]