1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 15;8(10):e76055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076055. 
eCollection 2013.

Downregulation of microRNA-9 in iPSC-derived neurons of FTD/ALS patients with 
TDP-43 mutations.

Zhang Z(1), Almeida S, Lu Y, Nishimura AL, Peng L, Sun D, Wu B, Karydas AM, 
Tartaglia MC, Fong JC, Miller BL, Farese RV Jr, Moore MJ, Shaw CE, Gao FB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Transactive response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a major pathological 
protein in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS). There are many disease-associated mutations in TDP-43, and several 
cellular and animal models with ectopic overexpression of mutant TDP-43 have 
been established. Here we sought to study altered molecular events in FTD and 
ALS by using induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived patient neurons. We 
generated multiple iPSC lines from an FTD/ALS patient with the TARDBP A90V 
mutation and from an unaffected family member who lacked the mutation. After 
extensive characterization, two to three iPSC lines from each subject were 
selected, differentiated into postmitotic neurons, and screened for relevant 
cell-autonomous phenotypes. Patient-derived neurons were more sensitive than 
control neurons to 100 nM straurosporine but not to other inducers of cellular 
stress. Three disease-relevant cellular phenotypes were revealed under 
staurosporine-induced stress. First, TDP-43 was localized in the cytoplasm of a 
higher percentage of patient neurons than control neurons. Second, the total 
TDP-43 level was lower in patient neurons with the A90V mutation. Third, the 
levels of microRNA-9 (miR-9) and its precursor pri-miR-9-2 decreased in patient 
neurons but not in control neurons. The latter is likely because of reduced 
TDP-43, as shRNA-mediated TDP-43 knockdown in rodent primary neurons also 
decreased the pri-miR-9-2 level. The reduction in miR-9 expression was confirmed 
in human neurons derived from iPSC lines containing the more pathogenic TARDBP 
M337V mutation, suggesting miR-9 downregulation might be a common pathogenic 
event in FTD/ALS. These results show that iPSC models of FTD/ALS are useful for 
revealing stress-dependent cellular defects of human patient neurons containing 
rare TDP-43 mutations in their native genetic contexts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076055
PMCID: PMC3797144
PMID: 24143176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.