1. Chem Sci. 2013 Sep;4(9):3740-3747. doi: 10.1039/C3SC50858G.

Functional, metal-based crosslinkers for α-helix induction in short peptides.

Smith SJ(#)(1), Du K(#)(1), Radford RJ(1), Tezcan FA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San 
Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, California 92093-0356.
(#)Contributed equally

Many protein-protein interactions that play a central role in cellular processes 
involve α-helical domains. Consequently, there has been great interest in 
developing strategies for stabilizing short peptides in α-helical conformations 
toward the inhibition and interrogation of protein-protein interactions. Here, 
we show that tridentate Hybrid Coordination Motifs (HCMs), which consist of a 
natural (histidine, His) and an unnatural (8-hydroxyquinoline, Quin) metal 
binding functionality, can bind divalent metal ions with high affinity and 
thereby induce/stabilize an α-helical configuration in short peptide sequences. 
The Quin functionality is readily introduced onto peptide platforms both during 
or after solid-state peptide synthesis, demonstrating the preparative 
versatility of HCMs. A systematic study involving a series of HCM-bearing 
peptides has revealed the critical importance of the length of the linkage 
between the Quin moiety and the peptide backbone as well as the metal 
coordination geometry in determining the extent of α-helix induction. Through 
ZnII coordination or modification with ReI(Quin)(CO)3, the HCM-bearing peptides 
can be rendered luminescent in the visible region, thus showing that HCMs can be 
exploited to simultaneously introduce structure and functionality into short 
peptides.

DOI: 10.1039/C3SC50858G
PMCID: PMC3800689
PMID: 24156013