1. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(1):188-201. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02245-13. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Varicella-zoster virus ORF49 functions in the efficient production of progeny 
virus through its interaction with essential tegument protein ORF44.

Sadaoka T(1), Serada S, Kato J, Hayashi M, Gomi Y, Naka T, Yamanishi K, Mori Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Virology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

The ORF49 tegument protein of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is one of the core 
gene products that is conserved among herpesvirus family members. Although ORF49 
is known to be a cell-tropic factor, its detailed functions remain elusive. 
ORF44 is another core gene product reported to be essential, although its 
characterization and detailed functional analysis have not been reported. These 
two core gene products form a complex in other herpesviruses beyond the host 
species and herpesvirus subfamilies. Here, we show that complex formation 
between ORF44 and ORF49 is conserved in VZV. We serendipitously found that 
binding is eliminated by an amino acid substitution at position 129 
(phenylalanine 129), and four amino acids in the carboxyl-terminal half of the 
acidic cluster in ORF49 (i.e., aspartate-phenylalanine-aspartate-glutamate from 
positions 41 to 44 [41DFDE44]) were identified as its binding motif. Alanine 
substitutions in each domain rendered the ORF44F129A mutation lethal for VZV, 
similar to deletion of the entire ORF44. The phenotype of the ORF49-41AAAA44 
mutation was comparable to that of the ORF49-defective virus, including 
small-plaque formation, impaired growth, and low infectious virus production. 
These results suggest that the interaction between ORF44 and ORF49 is essential 
for their role in VZV infection and that ORF49 is required for the efficient 
production of infectious progeny virus mediated by the conserved interaction 
between the two proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02245-13
PMCID: PMC3911743
PMID: 24155375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]