1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Dec;65:137-46. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.10.007. Epub
 2013 Oct 21.

Tgfβ-Smad and MAPK signaling mediate scleraxis and proteoglycan expression in 
heart valves.

Barnette DN(1), Hulin A, Ahmed AS, Colige AC, Azhar M, Lincoln J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Graduate Program, Leonard M. Miller 
School of Medicine, P.O. Box 016189 (R-189), Miami, FL, USA; Center for 
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Research at Nationwide Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, OH 43205, USA; The Heart Center at 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Mature heart valves are complex structures consisting of three highly organized 
extracellular matrix layers primarily composed of collagens, proteoglycans and 
elastin. Collectively, these diverse matrix components provide all the necessary 
biomechanical properties for valve function throughout life. In contrast to 
healthy valves, myxomatous valve disease is the most common cause of mitral 
valve prolapse in the human population and is characterized by an abnormal 
abundance of proteoglycans within the valve tri-laminar structure. Despite the 
clinical significance, the etiology of this phenotype is not known. Scleraxis 
(Scx) is a basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor that we previously showed 
to be required for establishing heart valve structure during remodeling stages 
of valvulogenesis. In this study, we report that remodeling heart valves from 
Scx null mice express decreased levels of proteoglycans, particularly 
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs), while overexpression in embryonic 
avian valve precursor cells and adult porcine valve interstitial cells increases 
CSPGs. Using these systems we further identify that Scx is positively regulated 
by canonical Tgfβ2 signaling during this process and this is attenuated by MAPK 
activity. Finally, we show that Scx is increased in myxomatous valves from human 
patients and mouse models, and overexpression in human mitral valve interstitial 
cells modestly increases proteoglycan expression consistent with myxomatous 
mitral valve phenotypes. Together, these studies identify an important role for 
Scx in regulating proteoglycans in embryonic and mature valve cells and suggest 
that imbalanced regulation could influence myxomatous pathogenesis.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.10.007
PMCID: PMC3869408
PMID: 24157418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. The authors of this paper 
have no conflicts of interest.