1. Transplant Proc. 2013 Oct;45(8):3047-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.08.055.

Analysis of S gene mutation of the hepatitis B virus in adult liver transplant 
recipients showing resistance to hepatitis B immunoglobulin therapy.

Park GC(1), Hwang S, Ahn CS, Kim KH, Moon DB, Ha TY, Song GW, Jung DH, Shin YW, 
Kim SH, Chang KH, Namgoong JM, Park CS, Park HW, Park YH, Kang SH, Jung BH, Lee 
SG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Liver Transplantation, Department of 
Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: A considerable proportion of recipients of liver transplantations 
who are presented hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) monotherapy for hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) prophylaxis develop HBIG resistance. In this study, we investigated 
the mutation patterns in the major hydrophilic region (MHR) of amino acid 
sequences 100 to 160.
METHODS: Using the gene sequence analyzer for amino acid sequences 0 to 226 in 
the S/pre-S region we analyzed blood samples of 15 patients showing HBIG 
resistance after high-dose HBIG prophylaxis.
RESULTS: Various mutations in the MHR were observed in 14/15 samples: Gly145Arg 
mutation in 8/13 Adr subtype and 1/2 Ayw subtype samples (60%). The next most 
common mutation was Gly165Trp in 8/13 Adr subtype but neither of 2 Ayw subtype 
samples (53.3%). Concurrent antiviral resistance was noted in 5 patients: 
lamivudine (n = 5), or entecavir (n = 3), but not adefovir, suggesting the 
occurrence of simultaneous, antiviral cross-resistances. Two patients underwent 
retransplantation due to the progression of HBV infection despite vigorous 
antiviral therapy. At diagnosis of HBV recurrence, the mean HBV DNA load was 
6.5 × 10(6) copies/mL; 4 patients showed paradoxical coexistence of anti-HBs and 
HBsAg. Currently, 2 subjects show low-level HBV DNA replication in peripheral 
blood, although the other 12 had no DNA replication after prolonged antiviral 
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggested that various mutations in the "a" determinant 
were associated with HBIG resistance. Since treatment failure to rescue 
antiviral therapy was often associated with delayed detection of HBV recurrence 
rather than concurrent antiviral resistance, frequent HBV surveillance using 
more sensitive screening tests, such as HBeAg and HBV DNA polymerase chain 
reaction assay, seems to be mandatory.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.08.055
PMID: 24157033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]