1. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):6913-25. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2810-1. Epub
2013  Oct 23.

The MTR 2756A>G polymorphism and maternal risk of birth of a child with Down 
syndrome: a case-control study and a meta-analysis.

Coppedè F(1), Bosco P, Lorenzoni V, Migheli F, Barone C, Antonucci I, Stuppia L, 
Romano C, Migliore L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in Medicine and 
Surgery, University of Pisa, Via S. Giuseppe 22, 56126, Pisa, IT, Italy, 
f.coppede@geog.unipi.it.

Methionine synthase (MTR) is required for the conversion of homocysteine (hcy) 
to methionine in the one-carbon metabolic pathway. Previous studies 
investigating a common MTR 2756A>G polymorphism as a maternal risk factor for 
the birth of a child with Down syndrome (DS) are conflicting and limited by 
small case-control cohorts, and its contribution to circulating hcy levels is 
still debated. We performed a large case-control study and a meta-analysis of 
the literature to further address the role of MTR 2756A>G as a maternal risk 
factor for the birth of a child with DS. 286 mothers of a DS child (MDS) and 305 
control mothers of Italian origin were included in the case-control study. 
Genotyping was performed by means of PCR/RFLP technique. Data on circulating 
levels of hcy, folates, and vitamin B12 were available for 189 MDS and 194 
control mothers. The meta analysis of previous and present data involved a total 
of 8 studies (1,171 MDS and 1,402 control mothers). Both the case-control study 
and the meta-analysis showed no association of MTR 2756A>G with the maternal 
risk of birth of a child with DS (OR = 1.15; 95 % CI 0.85-1.55, and OR = 1.08; 
95 % CI 0.93-1.25, respectively), even after stratification of the overall data 
available for the meta-analysis into ethnic groups. No association of the 
studied polymorphism with circulating levels of hcy, folates, and vitamin B12 
was observed. Present data do not support a role for MTR 2756A>G as independent 
maternal risk factor for a DS birth.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-013-2810-1
PMID: 24150725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]