1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:863720. doi: 10.1155/2013/863720. Epub 2013 Sep 14.

7,8-Dihydroxyflavone suppresses oxidative stress-induced base modification in 
DNA via induction of the repair enzyme 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1.

Kim KC(1), Lee IK, Kang KA, Cha JW, Cho SJ, Na SY, Chae S, Kim HS, Kim S, Hyun 
JW.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Institute for Nuclear Science and Technology, Jeju 
National University, Jeju 690-756, Republic of Korea.

The modified guanine base 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) is abundantly produced by 
oxidative stress, can contribute to carcinogenesis, and can be removed from DNA 
by 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1 (OGG1), which acts as an 8-oxoG glycosylase 
and endonuclease. This study investigated the mechanism by which 
7,8-dihydroxyflavone (DHF) inhibits oxidative stress-induced 8-oxoG formation in 
hamster lung fibroblasts (V79-4). DHF significantly reduced the amount of 8-oxoG 
induced by hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) and elevated the levels of OGG1 mRNA and 
protein. DHF increased the binding of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 
2 (Nrf2) to antioxidant response element sequences in the upstream promoter 
region of OGG1. Moreover, DHF increased the nuclear levels of Nrf2, small Maf 
proteins, and the Nrf2/small Maf complex, all of which are decreased by H₂O₂ 
treatment. Likewise, the level of phosphorylated Akt, which activates Nrf2, was 
decreased by H₂O₂ treatment but restored by DHF treatment. The levels of OGG1 
and nuclear translocation of Nrf2 protein were decreased upon treatment with 
PI3K inhibitor or Akt inhibitor, and DHF treatment did not restore OGG1 and 
nuclear Nrf2 levels in these inhibitor-treated cells. Furthermore, PI3K and Akt 
inhibitors abolished the protective effects of DHF in cells undergoing oxidative 
stress. These data indicate that DHF induces OGG1 expression via the PI3K-Akt 
pathway and protects cells against oxidative DNA base damage by activating DNA 
repair systems.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/863720
PMCID: PMC3787557
PMID: 24151624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]