1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 15;441(2):371-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.064. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Two distinct WT1 mutations identified in patients and relatives with isolated 
nephrotic proteinuria.

Guaragna MS(1), Lutaif AC, Piveta CS, Belangero VM, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra G 
Jr, De Mello MP.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética - CBMEG, Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas, Unicamp, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Wilms' tumor type 1 gene (WT1) encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor that 
plays a key role during genitourinary development and in adult kidney. Mutations 
in exons 8 and 9 are associated with Denys-Drash Syndrome, whereas those 
occurring in the intron 9 donor splice site are associated with Frasier 
Syndrome. Familial cases of WT1 mutations are rare with only few cases described 
in the literature, whereas cases of WT1 mutations associated with isolated 
nephrotic proteinuria with or without focal segmental glomerular sclerosis 
(FSGS) are even rarer. Exons 8 and 9 of WT1 gene were analyzed in two 
non-related female patients and their parents. Patient 1, who presented with 
isolated nephrotic proteinuria and histologic pattern of FSGS, is heterozygous 
for the mutation c.1227+4C>T. This mutation was inherited from her mother, who 
had undergone kidney transplant due to FSGS. Patient 2 is heterozygous for the 
novel c.1178C>T transition inherited from her father. The putative effect of 
this nucleotide substitution on WT1 protein is p.Ser393Phe mutation located 
within the third zinc-finger domain. The patient and her father presented, 
respectively, isolated nephrotic proteinuria and chronic renal failure. These 
data highlight the importance of the inclusion of WT1 gene mutational analysis 
in patients with isolated nephrotic proteinuria, especially when similar 
conditions are referred to the family.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.064
PMID: 24161391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]