1. Cancer Cell Int. 2013 Oct 29;13(1):107. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-107.

FPGS rs1544105 polymorphism is associated with treatment outcome in pediatric 
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Liu SG, Gao C, Zhang RD, Jiao Y, Cui L, Li WJ, Chen ZP, Wu MY, Zheng HY, Zhao 
XX, Yue ZX, Li ZG(1).

Author information:
(1)Hematology Oncology Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of Pediatric Hematology 
Oncology, National Key Discipline of Pediatrics, Beijing Children's Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, 56 Nanlishi Road, 100045 Beijing, China. 
ericlzg70@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Folypolyglutamate synthase (FPGS) catalyzes the polyglutamation of 
folates and antifolates, such as methotrexate (MTX), to produce highly active 
metabolites. FPGS tag SNP rs1544105C > T is located in the gene promoter. The 
aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of rs1544105 polymorphism 
on the treatment outcome in pediatric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (BCP-ALL).
METHODS: This study enrolled 164 children with BCP-ALL. We genotyped the FPGS 
SNP rs1544105, and analyzed the associations between its genotypes and treatment 
outcome. We also examined FPGS mRNA levels by real-time PCR in 64 of the 164 
children, and investigated the function of this polymorphism on gene expression.
RESULTS: We found significantly poor relapse-free survival (RFS) (p = 0.010) and 
poor event-free survival (EFS) (p = 0.046) in carriers of CC genotype. 
Multivariable Cox regression analyses adjusted for possible confounding 
variables showed that, relative to the CT + TT genotypes, the CC genotype was an 
independent prognostic factor for poor RFS (hazard ratio [HR], 4.992.; 95% CI, 
1.550-16.078; p = 0.007). No association was found between any toxicity and 
rs1544105 polymorphism. Quantitative PCR results showed that individuals with 
the T allele had lower levels of FPGS transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that FPGS rs1544105C > T polymorphism might 
influence FPGS expression and affect treatment outcome in BCP-ALL patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-107
PMCID: PMC3819686
PMID: 24168269