1. Neuroimage Clin. 2013 Aug 13;3:171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.08.001. 
eCollection 2013.

Quantification of multiple-sclerosis-related brain atrophy in two heterogeneous 
MRI datasets using mixed-effects modeling.

Jones BC(1), Nair G, Shea CD, Crainiceanu CM, Cortese IC, Reich DS.

Author information:
(1)Translational Neuroradiology Unit, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, NIH, 10 Center Drive MSC 1400, Building 10 Room 5C103, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA ; Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Brain atrophy, measured by MRI, has been proposed as a useful surrogate marker 
for disease progression in multiple sclerosis (MS). However, it is 
conventionally assumed that the accurate quantification of brain atrophy is made 
difficult, if not impossible, by changes in the parameters of the MRI 
acquisition, which are almost inevitable over the course of a longitudinal study 
since MRI technology changes rapidly. This state of affairs can negatively 
affect clinical trial design and limit the use of historical data. Here, we 
investigate whether we can coherently estimate brain atrophy rates in a 
heterogeneous MS sample via linear mixed-effects multivariable regression, 
incorporating three critical assumptions: (1) using age at time of scanning, 
rather than time since baseline, as the regressor of interest; (2) scanning 
individuals with a variety of techniques; and (3) introducing a simple additive 
correction for major differences in MRI protocol. We fit the model to several 
measures of brain volume as the outcome in two MS populations: 1123 scans from 
195 cases acquired for over approximately 7 years in two natural history 
protocols (Cohort 1), and 1331 scans from 69 cases seen for over 11 years who 
were primarily treated with two specific MS disease-modifying therapies (Cohort 
2). We compared the mixed-effects model with additive correction for MRI 
acquisition parameters to a model fit without this correction and performed 
sample-size calculations to provide an estimate of the number of participants in 
an MS clinical trial that might be required to see a therapeutic effect of 
treatment using the approach described here. The results show that without the 
additive correction for T1-weighted protocol parameters, atrophy was 
underestimated and subject-specific estimates were more narrowly distributed 
about the population mean. Ventricular CSF is the most consistently estimated 
brain volume, with a mean of 2.8%/year increase in Cohort 1 and 4.4%/year 
increase in Cohort 2. An interesting observation was that gray matter volume 
decreased and white matter volume remained essentially unchanged in both 
cohorts, suggesting that changes in ventricular CSF volume are a surrogate for 
changes in gray matter volume. In conclusion, the mixed-effects modeling 
framework presented here allows effective use of heterogeneously acquired and 
historical data in the study of brain atrophy in MS, potentially simplifying the 
design of future single- and multi-site clinical trials and natural history 
studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.08.001
PMCID: PMC3791279
PMID: 24179861