1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Feb 1;87(3):515-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.10.017.
Epub  2013 Oct 30.

ABCC4 is regulated by microRNA-124a and microRNA-506.

Markova SM(1), Kroetz DL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences (SMM, DLK) and 
Institute for Human Genetics (DLK) , 1550 4th Street RH584E, San Francisco, CA 
94158-2911, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences (SMM, DLK) and 
Institute for Human Genetics (DLK) , 1550 4th Street RH584E, San Francisco, CA 
94158-2911, USA. Electronic address: deanna.kroetz@ucsf.edu.

Multidrug resistance protein 4 (MRP4, ABCC4) is an efflux membrane transporter 
expressed in renal tubules, hepatocytes, brain capillaries, prostate and blood 
cells. MRP4 drives energy dependent efflux of important physiological and 
pharmacological compounds. MRP4 expression and function is highly variable but 
cannot be fully attributed to known mechanisms. The goal of this study was to 
characterize ABCC4 regulation by miRNAs and to assess the influence of ABCC4 
3'-UTR polymorphisms on ABCC4 regulation by miRNAs. miR-124a and miR-506 
decreased MRP4 protein levels in HEK293T/17 cells 20-30% and MRP4 function by 
50%. These miRNAs did not affect ABCC4 mRNA expression. Moreover, miR-124a and 
miR-506 expression was negatively correlated with MRP4 protein expression in 26 
human kidney samples (Spearman r=-0.62, P=0.007 and r=-0.41, P=0.03 for miR-124a 
and miR-506, respectively). To assess the effect of ABCC4 3'-UTR polymorphisms, 
six common 3'-UTR haplotypes were inferred in Caucasians, African Americans and 
Asians and tested in luciferase reporter assays. Multiple ABCC4 3'-UTR 
haplotypes caused significant reductions in luciferase activity; in the presence 
of miR-124a or miR-506 mimics the luciferase activity of all six ABCC4 3'-UTR 
haplotypes was further reduced. Mutation of the putative binding site for 
miR-124a and miR-506 in the ABCC4 3'-UTR eliminated the effect of these miRNAs. 
In conclusion, ABCC4 is directly regulated by miR-124a and miR-506 but 
polymorphisms in the ABCC4 3'-UTR have no significant effect on this miRNA 
regulation. Regulation of ABCC4 by miRNAs represents a novel mechanism for 
regulation of MRP4 function.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.10.017
PMCID: PMC3927324
PMID: 24184504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]