1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 15;23(6):1619-30. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt552. Epub 2013
Nov  1.

SHOX triggers the lysosomal pathway of apoptosis via oxidative stress.

Hristov G(1), Marttila T, Durand C, Niesler B, Rappold GA, Marchini A.

Author information:
(1)Tumour Virology Division F010, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 242, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

The SHOX gene encodes for a transcription factor important for normal bone 
development. Mutations in the gene are associated with idiopathic short stature 
and are responsible for the growth failure and skeletal defects found in the 
majority of patients with LÃ©ri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer 
mesomelic dysplasia. SHOX is expressed in growth plate chondrocytes where it is 
supposed to modulate the proliferation, differentiation and cell death of these 
cells. Supporting this hypothesis, in vitro studies have shown that SHOX 
expression induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in both transformed and 
primary cells. In this study, we further characterized the cell death mechanisms 
triggered by SHOX and compared them with the effects induced by one clinically 
relevant mutant form of SHOX, detected in LWD patients (SHOX R153L) and a SHOX 
C-terminally truncated version (L185X). We show that SHOX expression in U2OS 
osteosarcoma cells leads to oxidative stress that, in turn, induces lysosomal 
membrane rupture with release of active cathepsin B to the cytosol and 
subsequent activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway characterized by 
mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and caspase activation. Importantly, 
cells expressing SHOX R153L or L185X did not display any of these features. 
Given the fact that many of the events observed in SHOX-expressing cells also 
characterize the complex cell death process occurring in the growth plate during 
endochondral ossification, our findings further support the hypothesis that SHOX 
may play a central role in the regulation of the cell death pathways activated 
during long bone development.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt552
PMID: 24186869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]