1. Cell Cycle. 2013 Dec 1;12(23):3689-701. doi: 10.4161/cc.26930. Epub 2013 Oct
25.

CDK1 stabilizes HIF-1α via direct phosphorylation of Ser668 to promote tumor 
growth.

Warfel NA(1), Dolloff NG, Dicker DT, Malysz J, El-Deiry WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology); Penn State Hershey Cancer 
Institute; Penn State College of Medicine; Hershey, PA USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a major mediator of tumor physiology, and 
its activation is correlated with tumor progression, metastasis, and therapeutic 
resistance. HIF-1 is activated in a broad range of solid tumors due to 
intratumoral hypoxia or genetic alterations that enhance its expression or 
inhibit its degradation. As a result, decreasing HIF-1α expression represents an 
attractive strategy to sensitize hypoxic tumors to anticancer therapies. Here, 
we show that cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) regulates the expression of 
HIF-1α, independent of its known regulators. Overexpression of CDK1 and/or 
cyclin B1 is sufficient to stabilize HIF-1α under normoxic conditions, whereas 
inhibition of CDK1 enhances the proteasomal degradation of HIF-1α, reducing its 
half-life and steady-state levels. In vitro kinase assays reveal that CDK1 
directly phosphorylates HIF-1α at a previously unidentified regulatory site, 
Ser668. HIF-1α is stabilized under normoxic conditions during G 2/M phase via 
CDK1-mediated phosphorylation of Ser668. A phospho-mimetic construct of HIF-1α 
at Ser668 (S668E) is significantly more stable under both normoxic and hypoxic 
conditions, resulting in enhanced transcription of HIF-1 target genes and 
increased tumor cell invasion and migration. Importantly, HIF-1α (S668E) 
displays increased tumor angiogenesis, proliferation, and tumor growth in vivo 
compared with wild-type HIF-1α. Thus, we have identified a novel link between 
CDK1 and HIF-1α that provides a potential molecular explanation for the elevated 
HIF-1 activity observed in primary and metastatic tumors, independent of 
hypoxia, and offers a molecular rationale for the clinical translation of CDK 
inhibitors for use in tumors with constitutively active HIF-1.

DOI: 10.4161/cc.26930
PMCID: PMC3903720
PMID: 24189531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]