1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e76376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076376. 
eCollection 2013.

Cultivation and complete genome sequencing of Gloeobacter kilaueensis sp. nov., 
from a lava cave in Kīlauea Caldera, Hawai'i.

Saw JH(1), Schatz M, Brown MV, Kunkel DD, Foster JS, Shick H, Christensen S, Hou 
S, Wan X, Donachie SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, 
Hawai'i, United States of America.

The ancestor of Gloeobacter violaceus PCC 7421(T) is believed to have diverged 
from that of all known cyanobacteria before the evolution of thylakoid membranes 
and plant plastids. The long and largely independent evolutionary history of G. 
violaceus presents an organism retaining ancestral features of early oxygenic 
photoautotrophs, and in whom cyanobacteria evolution can be investigated. No 
other Gloeobacter species has been described since the genus was established in 
1974 (Rippka et al., Arch Microbiol 100:435). Gloeobacter affiliated ribosomal 
gene sequences have been reported in environmental DNA libraries, but only the 
type strain's genome has been sequenced. However, we report here the cultivation 
of a new Gloeobacter species, G. kilaueensis JS1(T), from an epilithic biofilm 
in a lava cave in Kīlauea Caldera, Hawai'i. The strain's genome was sequenced 
from an enriched culture resembling a low-complexity metagenomic sample, using 9 
kb paired-end 454 pyrosequences and 400 bp paired-end Illumina reads. The JS1(T) 
and G. violaceus PCC 7421(T) genomes have little gene synteny despite sharing 
2842 orthologous genes; comparing the genomes shows they do not belong to the 
same species. Our results support establishing a new species to accommodate 
JS1(T), for which we propose the name Gloeobacter kilaueensis sp. nov. Strain 
JS1(T) has been deposited in the American Type Culture Collection (BAA-2537), 
the Scottish Marine Institute's Culture Collection of Algae and Protozoa (CCAP 
1431/1), and the Belgian Coordinated Collections of Microorganisms (ULC0316). 
The G. kilaueensis holotype has been deposited in the Algal Collection of the US 
National Herbarium (US# 217948). The JS1(T) genome sequence has been deposited 
in GenBank under accession number CP003587. The G+C content of the genome is 
60.54 mol%. The complete genome sequence of G. kilaueensis JS1(T) may further 
understanding of cyanobacteria evolution, and the shift from anoxygenic to 
oxygenic photosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076376
PMCID: PMC3806779
PMID: 24194836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dennis Kunkel is the owner 
of Dennis Kunkel Microscopy, Inc. There are no patents, products in development 
or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authors' adherence to 
all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in 
the guide for authors.