1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 24;8(10):e78500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078500. 
eCollection 2013.

Expression of the mismatch repair gene hMLH1 is enhanced in non-small cell lung 
cancer with EGFR mutations.

Li M(1), Zhang Q, Liu L, Lu W, Wei H, Li RW, Lu S.

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 
PR China.

Mismatch repair (MMR) plays a pivotal role in keeping the genome stable. MMR 
dysfunction can lead to carcinogenesis by gene mutation accumulation. HMSH2 and 
hMLH1 are two key components of MMR. High or low expression of them often mark 
the status of MMR function. Mutations (EGFR, KRAS, etc) are common in non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, it is not clear what role MMR plays in NSCLC 
gene mutations. The expression of MMR proteins hMSH2 and hMLH1, and the 
proliferation markers PCNA and Ki67 were measured by immunohistochemistry in 181 
NSCLCs. EGFR and KRAS mutations were identified by high resolution melting 
analysis. Stronger hMLH1 expression correlated to a higher frequency of EGFR 
mutations in exon 19 and 21 (p<0.0005). Overexpression of hMLH1 and the 
adenocarcinoma subtype were both independent factors that related to EGFR 
mutations in NSCLCs (p=0.013 and p<0.0005). The expression of hMLH1, hMSH2 and 
PCNA increased, while Ki67 expression significantly decreased (p=0.030) in 
NSCLCs with EGFR mutations. Overexpression of hMLH1 could be a new molecular 
marker to predict the response to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLCs. Furthermore, EGFR 
mutations might be an early event of NSCLC that occur before MMR dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078500
PMCID: PMC3812034
PMID: 24205245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This work was supported by 
the National Nature Science Funds in China (Fund No. 81071805) and Dalian 
Merricon Gene Diagnosis Technology Co., Ltd. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.