1. Cancer Sci. 2014 Jan;105(1):117-25. doi: 10.1111/cas.12320. Epub 2014 Jan 4.

Flumatinib, a selective inhibitor of BCR-ABL/PDGFR/KIT, effectively overcomes 
drug resistance of certain KIT mutants.

Zhao J(1), Quan H, Xu Y, Kong X, Jin L, Lou L.

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
China.

Activating mutations in KIT have been associated with gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors (GISTs). The tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate has 
revolutionized the treatment of GISTs. Unfortunately, primary or acquired 
resistance to imatinib does occur in GISTs and forms a major problem. Although 
sunitinib malate, a multi-kinase inhibitor, has shown effectiveness against 
imatinib-resistant GISTs, recent studies have indicated that some 
imatinib-resistant GISTs harboring secondary mutations in the KIT activation 
loop were also resistant to sunitinib. Therefore, new drugs capable of 
overcoming the dual drug resistance of GISTs probably have potential clinical 
utility. In this study, we investigated the efficacy of flumatinib, an inhibitor 
of BCR-ABL/PDGFR/KIT, against 32D cells transformed by various KIT mutants and 
evaluated its potency to overcome the drug resistance of certain mutants. 
Interestingly, our in vitro study revealed that flumatinib effectively overcame 
the drug resistance of certain KIT mutants with activation loop mutations (i.e., 
D820G, N822K, Y823D, and A829P). Our in vivo study consistently suggested that 
flumatinib had superior efficacy compared with imatinib or sunitinib against 32D 
cells with the secondary mutation Y823D. Molecular modeling of flumatinib docked 
to the KIT kinase domain suggested a special mechanism underlying the capability 
of flumatinib to overcome the drug-resistance conferred by activation loop 
mutations. These findings suggest that flumatinib could be a promising 
therapeutic agent against GISTs resistant to both imatinib and sunitinib because 
of secondary mutations in the activation loop.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japan Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12320
PMCID: PMC4317885
PMID: 24205792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]