1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 27;288(52):36762-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528000. Epub 
2013 Nov 11.

Common polymorphisms in human langerin change specificity for glycan ligands.

Feinberg H(1), Rowntree TJ, Tan SL, Drickamer K, Weis WI, Taylor ME.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, 
United Kingdom and.

Langerin, a C-type lectin on Langerhans cells, mediates carbohydrate-dependent 
uptake of pathogens in the first step of antigen presentation to the adaptive 
immune system. Langerin binds a diverse range of carbohydrates including high 
mannose structures, fucosylated blood group antigens, and glycans with terminal 
6-sulfated galactose. Mutagenesis and quantitative binding assays indicate that 
salt bridges between the sulfate group and two lysine residues compensate for 
the nonoptimal binding of galactose at the primary Ca(2+) site. A commonly 
occurring single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in human langerin results in 
change of one of these lysine residues, Lys-313, to isoleucine. Glycan array 
screening reveals that this amino acid change abolishes binding to 
oligosaccharides with terminal 6SO4-Gal and enhances binding to oligosaccharides 
with terminal GlcNAc residues. Structural analysis shows that enhanced binding 
to GlcNAc may result from Ile-313 packing against the N-acetyl group. The K313I 
polymorphism is tightly linked to another SNP that results in the change N288D, 
which reduces affinity for glycan ligands by destabilizing the Ca(2+)-binding 
site. Langerin with Asp-288 and Ile-313 shows no binding to 6SO4-Gal-terminated 
glycans and increased binding to GlcNAc-terminated structures, but overall 
decreased binding to glycans. Altered langerin function in individuals with the 
linked N288D and K313I polymorphisms may affect susceptibility to infection by 
microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528000
PMCID: PMC3873535
PMID: 24217250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]