1. Clin Chem. 2014 Feb;60(2):341-52. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2013.210658. Epub 2013
 Nov 8.

Comparison of mRNA splicing assay protocols across multiple laboratories: 
recommendations for best practice in standardized clinical testing.

Whiley PJ(1), de la Hoya M, Thomassen M, Becker A, Brandão R, Pedersen IS, 
Montagna M, Menéndez M, Quiles F, Gutiérrez-Enríquez S, De Leeneer K, Tenés A, 
Montalban G, Tserpelis D, Yoshimatsu T, Tirapo C, Raponi M, Caldes T, Blanco A, 
Santamariña M, Guidugli L, de Garibay GR, Wong M, Tancredi M, Fachal L, Ding YC, 
Kruse T, Lattimore V, Kwong A, Chan TL, Colombo M, De Vecchi G, Caligo M, 
Baralle D, Lázaro C, Couch F, Radice P, Southey MC, Neuhausen S, Houdayer C, 
Fackenthal J, Hansen TV, Vega A, Diez O, Blok R, Claes K, Wappenschmidt B, 
Walker L, Spurdle AB, Brown MA; ENIGMA consortium.

Author information:
(1)Genetics & Computational Biology Division, Queensland Institute of Medical 
Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia;

BACKGROUND: Accurate evaluation of unclassified sequence variants in cancer 
predisposition genes is essential for clinical management and depends on a 
multifactorial analysis of clinical, genetic, pathologic, and bioinformatic 
variables and assays of transcript length and abundance. The integrity of assay 
data in turn relies on appropriate assay design, interpretation, and reporting.
METHODS: We conducted a multicenter investigation to compare mRNA splicing assay 
protocols used by members of the ENIGMA (Evidence-Based Network for the 
Interpretation of Germline Mutant Alleles) consortium. We compared similarities 
and differences in results derived from analysis of a panel of breast cancer 1, 
early onset (BRCA1) and breast cancer 2, early onset (BRCA2) gene variants known 
to alter splicing (BRCA1: c.135-1G>T, c.591C>T, c.594-2A>C, c.671-2A>G, and 
c.5467+5G>C and BRCA2: c.426-12_8delGTTTT, c.7988A>T, c.8632+1G>A, and 
c.9501+3A>T). Differences in protocols were then assessed to determine which 
elements were critical in reliable assay design.
RESULTS: PCR primer design strategies, PCR conditions, and product detection 
methods, combined with a prior knowledge of expected alternative transcripts, 
were the key factors for accurate splicing assay results. For example, because 
of the position of primers and PCR extension times, several isoforms associated 
with BRCA1, c.594-2A>C and c.671-2A>G, were not detected by many sites. 
Variation was most evident for the detection of low-abundance transcripts (e.g., 
BRCA2 c.8632+1G>A Δ19,20 and BRCA1 c.135-1G>T Δ5q and Δ3). Detection of 
low-abundance transcripts was sometimes addressed by using more analytically 
sensitive detection methods (e.g., BRCA2 c.426-12_8delGTTTT ins18bp).
CONCLUSIONS: We provide recommendations for best practice and raise key issues 
to consider when designing mRNA assays for evaluation of unclassified sequence 
variants.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2013.210658
PMCID: PMC4351044
PMID: 24212087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' Disclosures or Potential Conflicts of 
Interest: Upon manuscript submission, all authors completed the author 
disclosure form. Disclosures and/or potential conflicts of interest: