1. Gene. 2014 Jan 25;534(2):236-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.052. Epub 2013 Nov
 6.

A novel P2RX2 mutation in an Italian family affected by autosomal dominant 
nonsyndromic hearing loss.

Faletra F(1), Girotto G(2), D'Adamo AP(3), Vozzi D(4), Morgan A(5), Gasparini 
P(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Via 
dell'Istria, 34137 Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: 
flavio.faletra@burlo.trieste.it.
(2)University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: 
giorgia.girotto@burlo.trieste.it.
(3)University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: 
pio.dadamo@burlo.trieste.it.
(4)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Via 
dell'Istria, 34137 Trieste, Italy. Electronic address: 
diego.vozzi@burlo.trieste.it.
(5)University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(6)Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Via 
dell'Istria, 34137 Trieste, Italy; University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. 
Electronic address: paolo.gasparini@burlo.trieste.it.

Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is a common disorder accounting for at least 60% 
of prelingual deafness. It is characterized by a large genetic heterogeneity, 
and despite the presence of a major gene, still there is a need to search for 
new causative mutations/genes. Very recently, a mutation within ATP-gated P2X(2) 
receptor (ligand-gated ion channel, purinergic receptor 2) gene (P2RX2) at 
DNFA41 locus has been reported leading to a bilateral and symmetrical 
sensorineural non-syndromic autosomal dominant HHL in two Chinese families. We 
performed a linkage analysis in a large Italian family with a dominant pattern 
of inheritance showing a significant 3.31 LOD score in a 2Mb region overlapping 
with the DNFA41 locus. Molecular analyses of P2RX2 identified a novel missense 
mutation (p.Gly353Arg) affecting a residue highly conserved across species. 
Visual inspection of the protein structure as obtained from comparative modeling 
suggests that substitution of the small glycine residue with a charged bulky 
residue such as an arginine that is close to the 'neck' of the region 
responsible for ion channel gating should have a high energetic cost and should 
lead to a severely destabilization of the fold. The identification of a second 
most likely causative mutation in P2RX2 gene further supports the possible role 
of this gene in causing autosomal dominant HHL.

Â© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.10.052
PMID: 24211385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]