1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2013 Dec 16;26(12):1832-9. doi: 10.1021/tx400212q. Epub 2013
 Nov 14.

Modification and functional inhibition of regulator of G-protein signaling 4 
(RGS4) by 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal.

Monroy CA(1), Doorn JA, Roman DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Experimental Therapeutics, Division 
of Medicinal and Natural Products Chemistry, University of Iowa College of 
Pharmacy , 115 South Grand Avenue, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, United States.

Oxidative stress has been implicated as a component of various pathologies 
including ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) and neurodegenerative diseases such 
as Parkinson's disease (PD) and schizophrenia. Similarly, regulator of G-protein 
signaling 4 (RGS4) has been implicated as an important player in each of these 
pathologies. RGS4, like other RGS proteins, is responsible for temporally 
regulating G-protein coupled receptor signaling by increasing the intrinsic 
GTPase activity of Gα subunit of the heterotrimeric signaling complex. In this 
study we evaluated whether modification by 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE), a common 
lipid peroxidation product, inhibits RGS4. Using immunoprecipitation, we first 
determined RGS4 modification was occurring in cells at concentrations of 4HNE 
within reported physiological conditions. Following this determination, we 
evaluated modification of RGS4 by 4HNE by both Western blot and mass 
spectrometry (MS). Once it was established that covalent modification occurred 
only on cysteine containing constructs, tryptic digest followed by mass 
spectrometry analysis revealed modification occurs at cysteine residues 71, 148, 
and 183. In order to determine the effect 4HNE had on RGS4 activity, a 
steady-state colorimetric assay was used to analyze the GAP activity of Δ51-RGS4 
as well as the cysteine null mutant. From the data, we determined that RGS4 
activity can be modulated by 4HNE through modification at cysteine residues 
similar to previously reported small molecule inhibition of RGS4.

DOI: 10.1021/tx400212q
PMCID: PMC4441825
PMID: 24229325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]