1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:624089. doi:
10.1155/2013/624089.  Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Inhibitory Effect of Dodonaea viscosa var. angustifolia on the Virulence 
Properties of the Oral Pathogens Streptococcus mutans and Porphyromonas 
gingivalis.

Patel M(1), Naidoo R, Owotade FJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Microbiology, Department of Clinical Microbiology and 
Infectious Diseases, National Health Laboratory Services and Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, Wits, Gauteng, 
Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

Aim. This study investigated the effect of Dodonaea viscosa var. angustifolia 
(DVA) on the virulence properties of cariogenic Streptococcus mutans and 
Porphyromonas gingivalis implicated in periodontal diseases. Methods. S. mutans 
was cultured in tryptone broth containing a crude leaf extract of DVA for 16 
hours, and the pH was measured after 10, 12, 14, and 16 h. Biofilms of S. mutans 
were grown on glass slides for 48 hours and exposed to plant extract for 30 
minutes; the adherent cells were reincubated and the pH was measured at various 
time intervals. Minimum bactericidal concentration of the extracts against the 
four periodontal pathogens was determined. The effect of the subinhibitory 
concentration of plant extract on the production of proteinases by P. gingivalis 
was also evaluated. Results. DVA had no effect on acid production by S. mutans 
biofilms; however, it significantly inhibited acid production in planktonic 
cells. Periodontal pathogens were completely eliminated at low concentrations 
ranging from 0.09 to 0.02 mg/mL of crude plant extracts. At subinhibitory 
concentrations, DVA significantly reduced Arg-gingipain (24%) and Lys-gingipain 
(53%) production by P. gingivalis (P ≤ 0.01). Conclusions. These results suggest 
that DVA has the potential to be used to control oral infections including 
dental caries and periodontal diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/624089
PMCID: PMC3816046
PMID: 24223061