1. N Engl J Med. 2013 Nov 14;369(20):1904-14. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1214747.

A novel prion disease associated with diarrhea and autonomic neuropathy.

Mead S(#)(1), Gandhi S(#)(1), Beck J(1), Caine D(1), Gallujipali D(1), Carswell 
C(1), Hyare H(1), Joiner S(1), Ayling H(1), Lashley T(1), Linehan JM(1), 
Al-Doujaily H(1), Sharps B(1), Revesz T(1), Sandberg MK(1), Reilly MM(1), 
Koltzenburg M(1), Forbes A(1), Rudge P(1), Brandner S(1), Warren JD(1), 
Wadsworth JDF(1), Wood NW(1), Holton JL(#)(1), Collinge J(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Prion Unit (S.M., J.B., C.C., S.J., J.M.L., 
H.A.-D., B.S., M.K.S., S.B., J.D.F.W., J.C.), Department of Molecular 
Neuroscience (S.G., N.W.W.), and Dementia Research Centre, Department of 
Neurodegenerative Disease (J.D.W.), and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases 
(M.M.R.), University College London (UCL) Institute of Neurology; the National 
Prion Clinic (S.M., D.C., D.G., H.H., P.R., J.C.), National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery (M.K.), UCL Hospitals National Health Service Trust 
(A.F.); and the Queen Square Brain Bank (H.A., T.L., T.R., J.L.H.) - all in 
London.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 9;370(2):188. Gallujipali, Dillip [corrected to 
Gajulapalli, Dilip].

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Jan;10(1):2. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.249.

BACKGROUND: Human prion diseases, although variable in clinicopathological 
phenotype, generally present as neurologic or neuropsychiatric conditions 
associated with rapid multifocal central nervous system degeneration that is 
usually dominated by dementia and cerebellar ataxia. Approximately 15% of cases 
of recognized prion disease are inherited and associated with coding mutations 
in the gene encoding prion protein (PRNP). The availability of genetic diagnosis 
has led to a progressive broadening of the recognized spectrum of disease.
METHODS: We used longitudinal clinical assessments over a period of 20 years at 
one hospital combined with genealogical, neuropsychological, neurophysiological, 
neuroimaging, pathological, molecular genetic, and biochemical studies, as well 
as studies of animal transmission, to characterize a novel prion disease in a 
large British kindred. We studied 6 of 11 affected family members in detail, 
along with autopsy or biopsy samples obtained from 5 family members.
RESULTS: We identified a PRNP Y163X truncation mutation and describe a distinct 
and consistent phenotype of chronic diarrhea with autonomic failure and a 
length-dependent axonal, predominantly sensory, peripheral polyneuropathy with 
an onset in early adulthood. Cognitive decline and seizures occurred when the 
patients were in their 40s or 50s. The deposition of prion protein amyloid was 
seen throughout peripheral organs, including the bowel and peripheral nerves. 
Neuropathological examination during end-stage disease showed the deposition of 
prion protein in the form of frequent cortical amyloid plaques, cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy, and tauopathy. A unique pattern of abnormal prion protein fragments 
was seen in brain tissue. Transmission studies in laboratory mice were negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal forms of prion protein that were found in multiple 
peripheral tissues were associated with diarrhea, autonomic failure, and 
neuropathy. (Funded by the U.K. Medical Research Council and others.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1214747
PMCID: PMC3863770
PMID: 24224623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]