1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 4;8(11):e78254. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078254. 
eCollection 2013.

RTK/ERK pathway under natural selection associated with prostate cancer.

Chen Y(1), Xin X, Li J, Xu J, Yu X, Li T, Mo Z, Hu Y.

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, 
Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China ; Department of Urology and 
Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, 
Nanning, China.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is a global disease causing large numbers of deaths every 
year. Recent studies have indicated the RTK/ERK pathway might be a key pathway 
in the development of PCa. However, the exact association and evolution-based 
mechanism remain unclear. This study was conducted by combining genotypic and 
phenotypic data from the Chinese Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics 
(ChinaPCa) with related databases such as the HapMap Project and Genevar. In 
this analysis, expression of quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) analysis, natural 
selection and gene-based pathway analysis were involved. The pathway analysis 
confirmed the positive relationship between PCa risk and several key genes. In 
addition, combined with the natural selection, it seems that 4 genes (EGFR, 
ERBB2, PTK2, and RAF1) with five SNPs (rs11238349, rs17172438, rs984654, 
rs11773818, and rs17172432) especially rs17172432, might be pivotal factors in 
the development of PCa. The results indicate that the RTK/ERK pathway under 
natural selection is a key link in PCa risk. The joint effect of the genes and 
loci with positive selection might be one reason for the development of PCa. 
Dealing with all the factors simultaneously might give insight into prevention 
and aid in predicting the success of potential therapies for PCa.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078254
PMCID: PMC3817240
PMID: 24223781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.