1. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jan;65(1):143-58. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert357. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

A chloroplast-targeted DnaJ protein contributes to maintenance of photosystem II 
under chilling stress.

Kong F(1), Deng Y, Zhou B, Wang G, Wang Y, Meng Q.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong 
Agricultural University, Tai'an, Shandong 271018, PR China.

DnaJ proteins act as essential molecular chaperones in protein homeostasis and 
protein complex stabilization under stress conditions. The roles of a tomato 
(Lycopersicon esculentum) chloroplast-targeted DnaJ protein (LeCDJ1), whose 
expression was upregulated by treatment at 4 and 42 Â°C, and with high light, 
NaCl, polyethylene glycol, and H2O2, were investigated here using sense and 
antisense transgenic tomatoes. The sense plants exhibited not only higher 
chlorophyll content, fresh weight and net photosynthetic rate, but also lower 
accumulation of reactive oxygen species and membrane damage under chilling 
stress. Moreover, the maximal photochemistry efficiency of photosystem II (PSII) 
(F v/F m) and D1 protein content were higher in the sense plants and lower in 
the antisense plants, and the photoinhibitory quenching was lower in the sense 
plants and higher in the antisense plants, suggesting that the inhibition of 
PSII was less severe in the sense plants and more severe in the antisense plants 
compared with the wild type. Furthermore, the PSII protein complexes were also 
more stable in the sense plants. Interestingly, the sense plants treated with 
streptomycin (SM), an inhibitor of organellar translation, still showed higher F 
v/F m, D1 protein content and PSII stability than the SM-untreated antisense 
plants. This finding suggested that the protective effect of LeCDJ1 on PSII was, 
at least partially, independent of D1 protein synthesis. Furthermore, 
chloroplast heat-shock protein 70 was identified as the partner of LeCDJ1. These 
results indicate that LeCDJ1 has essential functions in maintaining PSII under 
chilling stress.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ert357
PMCID: PMC3883286
PMID: 24227338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]