1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:827517. doi: 10.1155/2013/827517. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Immunization with a neural-derived peptide protects the spinal cord from 
apoptosis after traumatic injury.

Rodríguez-Barrera R(1), Fernández-Presas AM, García E, Flores-Romero A, Martiñón 
S, González-Puertos VY, Mestre H, Flores-Dominguez C, Rodriguez-Mata V, 
Königsberg M, Solano S, Ibarra A.

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Anáhuac México Norte, Edo. de 
México, CP 52786, Mexico ; Departamento de Ciencias de la Salud, División de 
Ciencias Biológicas y de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana 
Iztapalapa, DF, CP 09340, Mexico ; Centro de Investigación del Proyecto CAMINA 
A.C., DF, CP 14050, Mexico ; Posgrado en Biología Experimental, Universidad 
Autónoma Metropolitana Iztapalapa, DF, CP 09340, Mexico.

Apoptosis is one of the most destructive mechanisms that develop after spinal 
cord (SC) injury. Immunization with neural-derived peptides (INDPs) such as A91 
has shown to reduce the deleterious proinflammatory response and the amount of 
harmful compounds produced after SC injury. With the notion that the 
aforementioned elements are apoptotic inducers, we hypothesized that INDPs would 
reduce apoptosis after SC injury. In order to test this assumption, adult rats 
were subjected to SC contusion and immunized either with A91 or phosphate 
buffered saline (PBS; control group). Seven days after injury, animals were 
euthanized to evaluate the number of apoptotic cells at the injury site. 
Apoptosis was evaluated using DAPI and TUNEL techniques; caspase-3 activity was 
also evaluated. To further elucidate the mechanisms through which A91 exerts 
this antiapoptotic effects we quantified tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). To 
also demonstrate that the decrease in apoptotic cells correlated with a 
functional improvement, locomotor recovery was evaluated. Immunization with A91 
significantly reduced the number of apoptotic cells and decreased caspase-3 
activity and TNF-α concentration. Immunization with A91 also improved the 
functional recovery of injured rats. The present study shows the beneficial 
effect of INDPs on preventing apoptosis and provides more evidence on the 
neuroprotective mechanisms exerted by this strategy.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/827517
PMCID: PMC3819886
PMID: 24236295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]