1. Ann Hematol. 2014 Jan;93(1):57-64. doi: 10.1007/s00277-013-1945-4. Epub 2013
Nov  17.

Prognostic impact of blast cell counts in dysplastic bone marrow disorders (MDS 
and CMML I) with concomitant fibrosis.

Machherndl-Spandl S(1), Sega W, Bösmüller H, Germing U, Gruber Ch, Nachtkamp K, 
Reinecke P, Sperr WR, Wimazal F, Müllauer L, Sotlar K, Horny HP, Tüchler H, 
Valent P, Krieger O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Stem Cell Transplantation, Haemostaseology and 
Internal Oncology, KH Elisabethinen, Linz, Austria.

In a retrospective study, 43 patients with dysplastic neoplasms of the bone 
marrow (myelodysplastic syndromes and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative-overlap 
neoplasms) associated with marked (grades 2-3) fibrosis were examined. 
Histopathologic and morphologic findings as well as cytogenetic and molecular 
results were correlated with clinical endpoints. Multilineage dysplasia (34 of 
43 patients, 79 %) and hypercellular bone marrow (64 %) were found in most 
patients. In ten of 35 patients, poor risk karyotypes according to the 
International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) were recorded. The JAK2 V617F 
mutation was detected in four of 30 patients (13 %), and the KIT D816V mutation 
was found in two of 30 patients (6 %). Patients were mainly treated with 
palliative drugs and best supportive care. After an observation time of 1-41 
(median 21) months, ten of 43 patients (23 %) had developed a secondary acute 
leukemia. The median survival of all 43 patients was 21.4 months (range 1.8-88.2 
months). Of all prognostic parameters examined, the blast cell count at 
diagnosis was found to be a most reliable and most predictive marker concerning 
survival and leukemia progression. This confirms previous studies in dysplastic 
bone marrow neoplasms without fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-013-1945-4
PMID: 24241126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]