1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Nov 19;8:181. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-181.

Duodenal mucosal risk markers in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: 
effects of celecoxib/ursodeoxycholic acid co-treatment and comparison with 
patient controls.

van Heumen BW(1), Roelofs HM, te Morsche RH, Nagengast FM, Peters WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. w.peters@mdl.umcn.nl.

BACKGROUND: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a disease characterized by 
the development of hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps in the colorectum 
early in life. Virtually all patients with FAP will develop colorectal cancer 
before the age of 40 to 50 years, unless prophylactic colectomy is performed, 
which significantly improves their prognosis. The mortality pattern has changed 
and duodenal cancer now is one of the main cancer-related causes of death in 
these patients. Practically all patients with FAP develop premalignant duodenal 
adenomas, which may develop to duodenal cancer in approximately 3-7% of 
patients. Duodenal cancer in patients with FAP has a poor prognosis. The 
clinical challenge is to identify patients at high-risk for duodenal carcinoma. 
Chemoprevention would be desirable to avoid duodenectomy. The main goal of this 
study is to identify risk markers in normal duodenal mucosa of patients with 
FAP, that could help identify patients at increased risk for malignant 
transformation.
METHODS: Messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of glutathione S-transferase A1 (GSTA1), 
glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), KIAA1199, E-cadherin, peroxisome 
proliferative activated receptor δ (PPARδ), caspase-3, cyclin D1, β-catenin, and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) were measured in duodenal mucosa, using the QuantiGene 
2.0 Plex assay. Levels in normal appearing mucosa of patients with FAP (n = 37) 
were compared with levels in non-FAP patient controls (n = 16). In addition, 
levels before and after treatment with either celecoxib & ursodeoxycholic acid 
(UDCA, n = 14) or celecoxib & placebo (n = 13) were evaluated in patients with 
FAP.
RESULTS: mRNA levels of glutathione S-transferase A1 (28.16% vs. 38.24%, p = 
0.008) and caspase-3 (3.30% vs. 5.31%, p = 0.001) were significantly lower in 
patients with FAP vs. non-FAP patient controls, respectively. COX-2 mRNA levels 
in normal duodenal mucosa of patients with FAP were found to be unexpectedly 
low. None of the potential risk markers was influenced by celecoxib or celecoxib 
& UDCA.
CONCLUSIONS: Protection against toxins and carcinogens (GSTA1) and apoptosis 
(caspase-3) is low in patients with FAP, which could contribute to increased 
susceptibility for malignant transformation of duodenal mucosa.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: http://ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT00808743.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-181
PMCID: PMC4225600
PMID: 24245549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]