1. J Med Virol. 2014 Mar;86(3):437-45. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23839. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Variability in the precore and core promoter region of the hepatitis B virus 
genome.

Nordin M(1), Ingman M, Lindqvist B, Kidd-Ljunggren K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Measurement Technology and Industrial Electrical Engineering, 
Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.

There is increasing evidence that hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections with 
different genotypes and subgenotypes differ in response to treatment and 
long-term prognosis. The differences emerge from variability within the genomes 
that leads to structural deviations at the pregenomic level and to changes at 
the translational level. Naturally occurring HBV strains covering the four major 
genotypes A-D were obtained from 393 patients and part of the genome was 
amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), sequenced, and analyzed for 
mutational differences in the precore and core promoter regions. The study 
confirmed that core promoter and precore mutations occur at key positions 
(A1762T, G1764A, G1896A, and G1899A), and that the proportions of strains with 
seroconvertion in patients differ between the four HBV genotypes. A rare double 
mutation (C1857T together with G1897A) was observed, and C1856T was found 
together with the emerging G1898A mutation, which itself was found to be more 
widespread geographically than previously described. We found a novel mutation 
(T1850C), never before observed in human HBV strains but known from woodchuck 
hepatitis virus (WHV). A novel association of mutation C1773T with G1764T, 
C1766A, and G1757A was also found within a site already suggested to be a 
putative binding site for HNF-3. This novel association is proposed by us to be 
of importance for additional binding of HNH-2 to this site and is a better 
indicator of the emergence of the double mutation G1764T and C1766A than the 
G1757A mutation proposed previously.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23839
PMID: 24249691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]