1. J Med Virol. 2014 Mar;86(3):385-93. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23846. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

The evolution of HIV-1 group M genetic variability in Southern Cameroon is 
characterized by several emerging recombinant forms of CRF02_AG and viruses with 
drug resistance mutations.

Agyingi L(1), Mayr LM, Kinge T, Orock GE, Ngai J, Asaah B, Mpoame M, Hewlett I, 
Nyambi P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Science, University of Dschang, West Region, Cameroon; Department 
of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York.

The HIV epidemic in Cameroon is marked by a broad genetic diversity dominated by 
circulating recombinant forms (CRFs). Studies performed more than a decade ago 
in urban settings of Southern Cameroon revealed a dominance of the CRF02_AG and 
clade A variants in >90% of the infected subjects; however, little is known 
about the evolving viral variants circulating in this region. To document 
circulating HIV viral diversity, four regions of the viral genome (gag, PR, 
reverse transcriptase, env) in 116 HIV-1 positive individuals in Limbe, Southern 
Cameroon, were PCR-amplified. Sequences obtained at the RT and protease regions 
were analyzed for mutations that conferred drug resistance using the Stanford 
Drug Resistance Database. The present study reveals a broad genetic diversity 
characterized by several unique recombinant forms (URF) accounting for 36% of 
infections, 48.6% of patients infected with CRF02_AG, and the emergence of 
CRF22_01A1 in 7.2% of patients. Three out of 15 (20%) treated patients and 13 
out of 93 (13.9%) drug naïve patients harbor drug resistance mutations to RT 
inhibitors, while 3.2% of drug naïve patients harbor drug resistance mutations 
associated with protease inhibitors. The high proportion (13.9%) of drug 
resistance mutations among the drug naïve patients reveals the ongoing 
transmission of these viruses in this region of Cameroon and highlights the need 
for drug resistance testing before starting treatment for patients infected with 
HIV-1.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23846
PMCID: PMC4011137
PMID: 24248638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]