1. Electrophoresis. 2013 Dec;34(24):3361-9. doi: 10.1002/elps.201300399. Epub
2013  Nov 18.

Seven nonsynonymous SNPs in the gene encoding human deoxyribonuclease II may 
serve as a functional SNP potentially implicated in autoimmune dysfunction.

Kimura-Kataoka K(1), Ueki M, Takeshita H, Fujihara J, Iida R, Kato H, Yasuda T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Legal Medicine, Shimane University School of Medicine, Shimane, 
Japan.

Many nonsynonymous SNPs in the human DNase II gene (DNASE2), potentially 
relevant to autoimmunity in conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, have been 
identified, but only limited population data are available and no studies have 
evaluated whether such SNPs are functional. Genotyping of all the 15 
nonsynonymous human DNase II SNPs was performed in three ethnic groups including 
16 different populations using the PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
technique. A series of constructs corresponding to each SNP was examined. 
Fifteen nonsynonymous SNPs in the gene, except for p.Val206Ile in a Korean 
population, exhibited a mono-allelic distribution in all of the populations. On 
the basis of alterations in the activity levels resulting from the corresponding 
amino acid substitutions, four activity-abolishing and five activity-reducing 
SNPs were confirmed to be functional. The amino acid residues in 
activity-abolishing SNPs were conserved in animal DNase II. All the 
nonsynonymous SNPs that affected the catalytic activity of human DNase II showed 
extremely low genetic heterogeneity. However, a minor allele of seven SNPs 
producing a loss-of-function or extremely low activity-harboring variant could 
serve as a genetic risk factor for autoimmune dysfunction. These functional SNPs 
in DNASE2 may have clinical implications in relation to the prevalence of 
autoimmune diseases.

Â© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/elps.201300399
PMID: 24242851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]