1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e80008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080008. 
eCollection 2013.

The specificity of targeted vaccines for APC surface molecules influences the 
immune response phenotype.

Gr√∏deland G(1), Mjaaland S, Tunheim G, Fredriksen AB, Bogen B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway ; K.G. Jebsen Centre for Influenza Vaccine Research, University of 
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Different diseases require different immune responses for efficient protection. 
Thus, prophylactic vaccines should prime the immune system for the particular 
type of response needed for protection against a given infectious agent. We have 
here tested fusion DNA vaccines which encode proteins that bivalently target 
influenza hemagglutinins (HA) to different surface molecules on antigen 
presenting cells (APC). We demonstrate that targeting to MHC class II molecules 
predominantly induced an antibody/Th2 response, whereas targeting to CCR1/3/5 
predominantly induced a CD8(+)/Th1 T cell response. With respect to antibodies, 
the polarizing effect was even more pronounced upon intramuscular (i.m) delivery 
as compared to intradermal (i.d.) vaccination. Despite these differences in 
induced immune responses, both vaccines protected against a viral challenge with 
influenza H1N1. Substitution of HA with ovalbumin (OVA) demonstrated that 
polarization of immune responses, as a consequence of APC targeting specificity, 
could be extended to other antigens. Taken together, the results demonstrate 
that vaccination can be tailor-made to induce a particular phenotype of adaptive 
immune responses by specifically targeting different surface molecules on APCs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080008
PMCID: PMC3823800
PMID: 24244595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts. BB, ABF and GG are inventors 
on patent applications filed on the vaccine molecules by the TTO offices of the 
University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, according to institutional 
rules (US 2004/0253238 A1: Modified Antibody; 61538,186: Vaccibodies targeting 
to cross-presenting dendritic cells). BB is head of the Scientific panel, and 
ABF was at the time part-time CSO of the Vaccibody company. This does not alter 
the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.