1. Oncoimmunology. 2013 Oct 1;2(10):e26615. doi: 10.4161/onci.26615. Epub 2013
Oct  15.

BRAF inhibition is associated with increased clonality in tumor-infiltrating 
lymphocytes.

Cooper ZA(1), Frederick DT, Juneja VR, Sullivan RJ, Lawrence DP, Piris A, Sharpe 
AH, Fisher DE, Flaherty KT, Wargo JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology; University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center; Houston, TX USA ; Department of Genomic Medicine; University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center; Houston, TX USA.

There have been significant advances with regard to BRAF-targeted therapies 
against metastatic melanoma. However, the majority of patients receiving BRAF 
inhibitors (BRAFi) manifest disease progression within a year. We have recently 
shown that melanoma patients treated with BRAFi exhibit an increase in 
melanoma-associated antigens and in CD8+ tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in 
response to therapy. To characterize such a T-cell infiltrate, we analyzed the 
complementarity-determining region 3 (CDR3) of rearranged T-cell receptor (TCR) 
Î² chain-coding genes in tumor biopsies obtained before the initiation of BRAFi 
and 10-14 d later. We observed an increase in the clonality of 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in 7 of 8 patients receiving BRAFi, with a 
statistically significant 21% aggregate increase in clonality. Over 80% of 
individual T-cell clones detected after initiation of BRAFi treatment were new 
clones. Interestingly, the comparison of tumor infiltrates with clinical 
responses revealed that patients who had a high proportion of pre-existing 
dominant clones after the administration of BRAFi responded better to therapy 
than patients who had a low proportion of such pre-existing dominant clones 
following BRAFi. These data suggest that although the inhibition of BRAF in 
melanoma patients results in tumor infiltration by new lymphocytes, the response 
to treatment appears to be related to the presence of a pre-existing population 
of tumor-infiltrating T-cell clones.

DOI: 10.4161/onci.26615
PMCID: PMC3827093
PMID: 24251082