1. BMC Microbiol. 2013 Nov 19;13:262. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-262.

Regulation of the expression level of transcription factor XylS reveals new 
functional insight into its induction mechanism at the Pm promoter.

Zwick F(1), Lale R, Valla S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
Sem SÃ¦lands Vei 6/8, Trondheim N-7491, Norway. rahmi.lale@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: XylS is the positive regulator of the inducible Pm promoter, 
originating from Pseudomonas putida, where the system controls a biochemical 
pathway involved in degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons, which also act as 
inducers. The XylS/Pm positive regulator/promoter system is used for recombinant 
gene expression and the output from Pm is known to be sensitive to the 
intracellular XylS concentration.
RESULTS: By constructing a synthetic operon consisting of xylS and luc, the gene 
encoding luciferase, relative XylS expression levels could be monitored 
indirectly at physiological concentrations. Expression of XylS from inducible 
promoters allowed control over a more than 800-fold range, however, the 
corresponding output from Pm covered only an about five-fold range. The maximum 
output from Pm could not be increased by introducing more copies of the promoter 
in the cells. Interestingly, a previously reported XylS variant (StEP-13), known 
to strongly stimulate expression from Pm, caused the same maximum activity from 
Pm as wild-type XylS at high XylS expression levels. Under uninduced conditions 
expression from Pm also increased as a function of XylS expression levels, and 
at very high concentrations the maximum activity from Pm was the same as in the 
presence of inducer.
CONCLUSION: According to our proposed model, which is in agreement with current 
knowledge, the regulator, XylS, can exist in three states: monomers, dimers, and 
aggregates. Only the dimers are active and able to induce expression from Pm. 
Their maximum intracellular concentration and the corresponding output from Pm 
are limited by the concentration-dependent conversion into inactive aggregates. 
Maximization of the induction ratio at Pm can be obtained by expression of XylS 
at the level where aggregation occurs, which might be exploited for recombinant 
gene expression. The results described here also indicate that there might exist 
variants of XylS which can exist at higher active dimer concentrations and thus 
lead to increased expression levels from Pm.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-13-262
PMCID: PMC4225500
PMID: 24252441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]