1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Dec;12(12):2619-27. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0335. 
Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Is Wilms tumor a candidate neoplasia for treatment with WNT/β-catenin pathway 
modulators?--A report from the renal tumors biology-driven drug development 
workshop.

Perotti D(1), Hohenstein P, Bongarzone I, Maschietto M, Weeks M, Radice P, 
Pritchard-Jones K.

Author information:
(1)Corresponding Author: Kathy Pritchard-Jones, Hugh and Catherine Stevenson 
Professor of Pediatric Oncology, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford 
Street, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom. k.pritchard-jones@ucl.ac.uk.

The European Network for Cancer Research in Children and Adolescents consortium 
organized a workshop in Rome, in June 2012, on "Biology-Driven Drug Development 
Renal Tumors Workshop" to discuss the current knowledge in pediatric renal 
cancers and to recommend directions for further research. Wilms tumor is the 
most common renal tumor of childhood and represents a success of pediatric 
oncology, with cure rates of more than 85% of cases. However, a substantial 
minority (∼25%) responds poorly to current therapies and requires "high-risk" 
treatment or relapse. Moreover, the successfully treated majority are vulnerable 
to the late effects of treatment, with nearly one quarter reporting severe 
chronic health conditions by 25 years of follow-up. Main purposes of this 
meeting were to advance our understanding on the molecular drivers in Wilms 
tumor, their heterogeneity and interdependencies; to provide updates on the 
clinical-pathologic associations with biomarkers; to identify eligible 
populations for targeted drugs; and to model opportunities to use preclinical 
model systems and prioritize targeted agents for early phase clinical trials. At 
least three different pathways are involved in Wilms tumor; this review 
represents the outcome of the workshop discussion on the WNT/β-catenin pathway 
in Wilms tumorigenesis.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0335
PMCID: PMC3858246
PMID: 24258344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]