1. Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):541-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-500272. Epub 2013
 Nov 19.

Loss of Asxl1 leads to myelodysplastic syndrome-like disease in mice.

Wang J(1), Li Z, He Y, Pan F, Chen S, Rhodes S, Nguyen L, Yuan J, Jiang L, Yang 
X, Weeks O, Liu Z, Zhou J, Ni H, Cai CL, Xu M, Yang FC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, and.

ASXL1 is mutated/deleted with high frequencies in multiple forms of myeloid 
malignancies, and its alterations are associated with poor prognosis. De novo 
ASXL1 mutations cause Bohring-Opitz syndrome characterized by multiple 
congenital malformations. We show that Asxl1 deletion in mice led to 
developmental abnormalities including dwarfism, anophthalmia, and 80% embryonic 
lethality. Surviving Asxl1(-/-) mice lived for up to 42 days and developed 
features of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), including dysplastic neutrophils and 
multiple lineage cytopenia. Asxl1(-/-) mice had a reduced hematopoietic stem 
cell (HSC) pool, and Asxl1(-/-) HSCs exhibited decreased hematopoietic 
repopulating capacity, with skewed cell differentiation favoring granulocytic 
lineage. Asxl1(+/-) mice also developed mild MDS-like disease, which could 
progress to MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasm, demonstrating a haploinsufficient 
effect of Asxl1 in the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies. Asxl1 loss led to 
an increased apoptosis and mitosis in Lineage(-)c-Kit(+) (Lin(-)c-Kit(+)) cells, 
consistent with human MDS. Furthermore, Asxl1(-/-) Lin(-)c-Kit(+) cells 
exhibited decreased global levels of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 and altered expression 
of genes regulating apoptosis (Bcl2, Bcl2l12, Bcl2l13). Collectively, we report 
a novel ASXL1 murine model that recapitulates human myeloid malignancies, 
implying that Asxl1 functions as a tumor suppressor to maintain hematopoietic 
cell homeostasis. Future work is necessary to clarify the contribution of 
microenvironment to the hematopoietic phenotypes observed in the constitutional 
Asxl1(-/-) mice.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-500272
PMCID: PMC3901067
PMID: 24255920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]