1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 15;8(11):e80645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080645. 
eCollection 2013.

Development and implementation of a high-throughput compound screening assay for 
targeting disrupted ER calcium homeostasis in Alzheimer's disease.

Honarnejad K(1), Daschner A, Giese A, Zall A, Schmidt B, Szybinska A, Kuznicki 
J, Herms J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Brain Research, DZNE - German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Munich, Germany ; Center for Neuropathology and 
Prion Research; Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany ; Graduate School 
of Systemic Neurosciences, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany.

Disrupted intracellular calcium homeostasis is believed to occur early in the 
cascade of events leading to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology. Particularly 
familial AD mutations linked to Presenilins result in exaggerated agonist-evoked 
calcium release from endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Here we report the development 
of a fully automated high-throughput calcium imaging assay utilizing a 
genetically-encoded FRET-based calcium indicator at single cell resolution for 
compound screening. The established high-throughput screening assay offers 
several advantages over conventional high-throughput calcium imaging 
technologies. We employed this assay for drug discovery in AD by screening 
compound libraries consisting of over 20,000 small molecules followed by 
structure-activity-relationship analysis. This led to the identification of 
Bepridil, a calcium channel antagonist drug in addition to four further lead 
structures capable of normalizing the potentiated FAD-PS1-induced calcium 
release from ER. Interestingly, it has recently been reported that Bepridil can 
reduce Aβ production by lowering BACE1 activity. Indeed, we also detected 
lowered Aβ, increased sAPPα and decreased sAPPβ fragment levels upon Bepridil 
treatment. The latter findings suggest that Bepridil may provide a 
multifactorial therapeutic modality for AD by simultaneously addressing multiple 
aspects of the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080645
PMCID: PMC3829862
PMID: 24260442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.