1. J Proteome Res. 2014 Feb 7;13(2):422-32. doi: 10.1021/pr400814s. Epub 2013 Dec
 4.

Proteomics reveals age-related differences in the host immune response to 
sepsis.

Cao Z(1), Yende S, Kellum JA, Angus DC, Robinson RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and â€¡The Clinical Research, Investigation, and 
Systems Modeling of Acute Illness (CRISMA) Laboratory and Department of Critical 
Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, United 
States.

Sepsis is commonly caused by community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) and may develop 
into severe sepsis, characterized by multiple organ failure. The risk of severe 
sepsis among CAP patients and subsequent mortality increases sharply after the 
age of 65. The molecular mechanisms associated with this age-related risk are 
not fully understood. To better understand factors involved with increased 
incidence and mortality of severe sepsis in the elderly, we used a nested 
case-control study of patients enrolled in a multicenter observational cohort of 
2320 participants with CAP. We identified a total of 39 CAP patients 50-65 and 
70-85 years old who did or did not develop severe sepsis. Plasma samples were 
obtained on presentation to the emergency department and prior to therapeutic 
interventions. A semiquantitative plasma proteomics workflow was applied which 
incorporated tandem immunoaffinity depletion, iTRAQ labeling, strong cation 
exchange fractionation, and nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to 
high-resolution mass spectrometry. In total, 772 proteins were identified, of 
which 58 proteins exhibit statistically significant differences in expression 
levels among patients with severe sepsis as a function of age. Differentially 
expressed proteins are involved in pathways such as acute phase response, 
coagulation signaling, atherosclerosis signaling, lipid metabolism, and 
production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. This study provides 
insight into factors that may explain age-related differences in incidence of 
severe sepsis in the elderly.

DOI: 10.1021/pr400814s
PMCID: PMC3976438
PMID: 24266763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]