1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2012;2012:560514. doi: 10.6064/2012/560514. Epub 2012 May
 21.

The Association between COMT, BDNF, and NRG1 and Premorbid Social Functioning in 
Patients with Psychosis, Their Relatives, and Controls.

Walshe M(1), Vassos E, Picchioni M, Shaikh M, Toulopoulou T, Collier D, McDonald 
C, Murray R, Bramon E.

Author information:
(1)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, South London and Maudsley 
NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London, P.O. Box 
63, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF, UK.

We investigated the influences of putative candidate genes for psychosis on 
premorbid social adjustment and on premorbid schizoid-schizotypal traits. A 
family-based sample was used including 177 patients with schizophrenia or 
bipolar I disorder with a history of psychotic symptoms, 86 of their unaffected 
relatives, and 116 unrelated healthy controls. Association analyses on the 
combined sample were conducted using the Statistical Analysis for Genetic 
Epidemiology software (SAGE) and adjusting for age, sex, clinical group, and the 
family-based nature of the data. The COMT Val(158)Met and BDNF Val(66)Met 
polymorphisms showed no evidence of association with either phenotype. The SNP 
rs221533 of the NRG1 gene was significantly associated with premorbid adjustment 
in adolescence with TT homozygous subjects having a poorer performance than C 
allele carriers. In the context of neurodevelopmental disorders such as 
schizophrenia and other psychoses, this finding is plausible; however, it is 
preliminary and requires replication in an independent sample. In a broader 
sense, the use of intermediate quantitative phenotypes such as the ones 
presented in this study may be of help to understand the mechanism of action of 
genetic risk factors.

DOI: 10.6064/2012/560514
PMCID: PMC3820633
PMID: 24278715