1. Ann Neurol. 2014 Jan;75(1):147-54. doi: 10.1002/ana.24073. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

GRIN2B mutations in West syndrome and intellectual disability with focal 
epilepsy.

Lemke JR(1), Hendrickx R, Geider K, Laube B, Schwake M, Harvey RJ, James VM, 
Pepler A, Steiner I, Hörtnagel K, Neidhardt J, Ruf S, Wolff M, Bartholdi D, 
Caraballo R, Platzer K, Suls A, De Jonghe P, Biskup S, Weckhuysen S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, University Children's Hospital Inselspital, Bern, 
Switzerland; Partners of EuroEPINOMICS, RES consortium.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel epilepsy genes using a panel approach and describe 
the functional consequences of mutations.
METHODS: Using a panel approach, we screened 357 patients comprising a vast 
spectrum of epileptic disorders for defects in genes known to contribute to 
epilepsy and/or intellectual disability (ID). After detection of mutations in a 
novel epilepsy gene, we investigated functional effects in Xenopus laevis 
oocytes and screened a follow-up cohort.
RESULTS: We revealed de novo mutations in GRIN2B encoding the NR2B subunit of 
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in 2 individuals with West syndrome and 
severe developmental delay as well as 1 individual with ID and focal epilepsy. 
The patient with ID and focal epilepsy had a missense mutation in the 
extracellular glutamate-binding domain (p.Arg540His), whereas both West syndrome 
patients carried missense mutations within the NR2B ion channel-forming 
re-entrant loop (p.Asn615Ile, p.Val618Gly). Subsequent screening of 47 patients 
with unexplained infantile spasms did not reveal additional de novo mutations, 
but detected a carrier of a novel inherited GRIN2B splice site variant in close 
proximity (c.2011-5_2011-4delTC). Mutations p.Asn615Ile and p.Val618Gly cause a 
significantly reduced Mg(2+) block and higher Ca(2+) permeability, leading to a 
dramatically increased Ca(2+) influx, whereas p.Arg540His caused less severe 
disturbance of channel function, corresponding to the milder patient phenotype.
INTERPRETATION: We identified GRIN2B gain-of-function mutations as a cause of 
West syndrome with severe developmental delay as well as of ID with childhood 
onset focal epilepsy. Severely disturbed channel function corresponded to severe 
clinical phenotypes, underlining the important role of facilitated NMDA receptor 
signaling in epileptogenesis.

© 2014 The Authors. Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on 
behalf of Child Neurology Society/American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24073
PMCID: PMC4223934
PMID: 24272827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]