1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2012;2012:561761. doi: 10.6064/2012/561761. Epub 2012 Dec
 25.

The perception and endogenous modulation of pain.

Ossipov MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Pain is often perceived an unpleasant experience that includes sensory and 
emotional/motivational responses. Accordingly, pain serves as a powerful 
teaching signal enabling an organism to avoid injury, and is critical to 
survival. However, maladaptive pain, such as neuropathic or idiopathic pain, 
serves no survival function. Genomic studies of individuals with congenital 
insensitivity to pain or paroxysmal pain syndromes considerable increased our 
understanding of the function of peripheral nociceptors, and especially of the 
roles of voltage-gated sodium channels and of nerve growth factor (NGF)/TrkA 
receptors in nociceptive transduction and transmission. Brain imaging studies 
revealed a "pain matrix," consisting of cortical and subcortical regions that 
respond to noxious inputs and can positively or negatively modulate pain through 
activation of descending pain modulatory systems. Projections from the 
periaqueductal grey (PAG) and the rostroventromedial medulla (RVM) to the 
trigeminal and spinal dorsal horns can inhibit or promote further nociceptive 
inputs. The "pain matrix" can explain such varied phenomena as stress-induced 
analgesia, placebo effect and the role of expectation on pain perception. 
Disruptions in these systems may account for the existence idiopathic pan states 
such as fibromyalgia. Increased understanding of pain modulatory systems will 
lead to development of more effective therapeutics for chronic pain.

DOI: 10.6064/2012/561761
PMCID: PMC3820628
PMID: 24278716