1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 21;8(11):e80801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080801. 
eCollection 2013.

Stem cell antigen 1-positive mesenchymal cells are the origin of follicular 
cells during thyroid regeneration.

Okamoto M(1), Hayase S, Miyakoshi M, Murata T, Kimura S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Many tissues are thought to contain adult stem/progenitor cells that are 
responsible for repair of the tissue where they reside upon damage and/or 
carcinogenesis, conditions when cellular homeostasis becomes uncontrolled. While 
the presence of stem/progenitor cells of the thyroid has been suggested, how 
these cells contribute to thyroid regeneration remains unclear. Here we show the 
origin of thyroid follicular cells and the process of their maturation to become 
follicular cells during regeneration. By using β-galactosidase (β-gal) reporter 
mice in conjunction with partial thyroidectomy as a model for thyroid 
regeneration, and bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) long label-retaining cell analysis, 
we demonstrated that stem cell antigen 1 (Sca1) and BrdU-positive, but β-gal and 
NKX2-1 negative cells were found in the non-follicular mesenchymal area 7 days 
after partial thyroidectomy. They temporarily co-expressed cytokeratin 14, and 
were observed in part of follicles by day 35 post-partial thyroidectomy. Sca1, 
BrdU, β-gal, and NKX2-1-positive cells were found 120 days post-partial 
thyroidectomy. These results suggested that Sca1 and BrdU positive cells may 
participate in the formation of new thyroid follicles after partial 
thyroidectomy. The process of thyroid follicular cell regeneration was 
recapitulated in ex vivo thyroid slice collagen gel culture studies. These 
studies will facilitate research on thyroid stem/progenitor cells and their 
roles in thyroid diseases, particularly thyroid carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080801
PMCID: PMC3836768
PMID: 24278321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.