1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2013 Apr 12;6(4):546-56. doi: 10.3390/ph6040546.

An allosteric modulator of the adenosine A1 receptor improves cardiac function 
following ischaemia in murine isolated hearts.

Butcher A(1), Scammells PJ, White PJ, Devine SM, Rose'meyer RB.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, 
Southport, Queensland 4222, Australia. anna.butcher@griffithuni.edu.au.

The effect of an allosteric modulator of the adenosine A1 receptors was 
investigated using an ischaemia-reperfusion protocol in murine isolated hearts. 
Isolated hearts were perfused with Kreb-Henseleit solution gassed with carbogen 
gas (95% O2 and 5% CO2) in Langendorff mode and electrically paced at 480 bpm. 
Following 20 min equilibration and 20 min global normothermic ischaemia, the 
allosteric modulator VCP333 (1 μM) or the adenosine A1 receptor partial agonist 
VCP102 (10 μM) were infused after 5 min of reperfusion for 15 min. Upon 
termination of the drug treatment, reperfusion continued for a further 40 min. 
At the end of 60 min reperfusion, treatment with VCP333 or VCP102 improved the 
recovery of the left ventricular developed pressure when compared to control 
group responses (p < 0.05). Neither compound affected end diastolic pressure, 
coronary flow rates or dP/dtmax values when compared to control tissues during 
reperfusion (p > 0.05). The infusion of VCP102 or VCP333 during reperfusion 
reduced cardiac troponin I efflux to 6.7% and 25% respectively of control heart 
efflux (p < 0.05). This data indicates that the allosteric modulator of the 
adenosine A1 receptor (VCP333) has similar characteristics to the adenosine 
receptor partial agonist VCP102 as it improves cardiac function and reduces 
myocardial cell death following an ischaemic episode.

DOI: 10.3390/ph6040546
PMCID: PMC3816699
PMID: 24276124