1. Genes Brain Behav. 2013 Oct;12(7):732-40. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12070. Epub 2013
Aug  26.

MeCP2 R168X male and female mutant mice exhibit Rett-like behavioral deficits.

Schaevitz LR(1), Gómez NB, Zhen DP, Berger-Sweeney JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a regressive developmental disorder characterized by 
motor and breathing abnormalities, anxiety, cognitive dysfunction and seizures. 
Approximately 95% of RTT cases are caused by more than 200 different mutations 
in the X-linked gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2). While 
numerous transgenic mice have been created modeling common mutations in MeCP2, 
the behavioral phenotype of many of these male and, especially, female mutant 
mice has not been well characterized. Thorough phenotyping of additional RTT 
mouse models will provide valuable insight into the effects of Mecp2 mutations 
on behavior and aid in the selection of appropriate models, ages, sexes and 
outcome measures for preclinical trials. In this study, we characterize the 
phenotype of male and female mice containing the early truncating MeCP2 R168X 
nonsense point mutation, one of the most common in RTT individuals, and compare 
the phenotypes to Mecp2 null mutants. Mecp2(R168X) mutants mirror many clinical 
features of RTT. Mecp2(R168X/y) males exhibit impaired motor and cognitive 
function and reduced anxiety. The behavioral phenotype is less severe and with 
later onset in Mecp2(R168X/+) females. Seizures were noted in 3.7% of 
Mecp2(R168X) mutant females. The phenotype in Mecp2(R168X/y) mutant males is 
remarkably similar to our previous characterizations of Mecp2 null males, 
whereas Mecp2(R168X/+) females exhibit a number of phenotypic differences from 
females heterozygous for a null Mecp2 mutation. This study describes a number of 
highly robust behavioral paradigms that can be used in preclinical drug trials 
and underscores the importance of including Mecp2 mutant females in preclinical 
studies.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics 
Society.

DOI: 10.1111/gbb.12070
PMID: 24283265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]