1. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Nov 28;4(11):e934. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.462.

A feedback circuit between miR-133 and the ERK1/2 pathway involving an exquisite 
mechanism for regulating myoblast proliferation and differentiation.

Feng Y(1), Niu LL, Wei W, Zhang WY, Li XY, Cao JH, Zhao SH.

Author information:
(1)1] Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of 
Ministry of Agriculture, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China [2] Faculty of Life Science and 
Technology, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, PR 
China.

MiR-133 was found to be specifically expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle in 
previous studies. There are two members in the miR-133 family: miR-133a and 
miR-133b. Although previous studies indicated that miR-133a was related to 
myogenesis, the signaling pathways regulated by miR-133 were still not very 
clear. In this study, we showed that both miR-133a and miR-133b were upregulated 
during myogenesis through Solexa sequencing. We confirmed that miR-133 could 
promote myoblast differentiation and inhibit cell proliferation through the 
regulation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway 
in C2C12 cells. FGFR1 and PP2AC, which both participate in signal transduction 
of the ERK1/2 pathway, were found to be negatively regulated by miR-133a and 
miR-133b at the post-transcriptional level. Also, downregulation of ERK1/2 
phosphorylation by miR-133 was detected. FGFR1 and PP2AC were also found to 
repress C2C12 differentiation by specific siRNAs. In addition, we found that 
inhibition of ERK1/2 pathway activity can inhibit C2C12 cell proliferation and 
promote the initiation of differentiation but form short and small myotubes. 
Furthermore, we found that the expression of miR-133 was negatively regulated by 
ERK1/2 signaling pathway. In summary, we demonstrated the role of miR-133 in 
myoblast and further revealed a new feedback loop between miR-133 and the ERK1/2 
signaling pathway involving an exquisite mechanism for regulating myogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2013.462
PMCID: PMC3847338
PMID: 24287695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]