1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 10;289(2):1071-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491589. Epub
2013  Nov 26.

Decreased affinity of recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand (rhTRAIL) D269H/E195R to osteoprotegerin (OPG) 
overcomes TRAIL resistance mediated by the bone microenvironment.

Bosman MC(1), Reis CR, Schuringa JJ, Vellenga E, Quax WJ.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Groningen Research Institute 
of Pharmacy, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen and.

The bone marrow microenvironment provides important signals for the survival and 
proliferation of hematopoietic and malignant cells. In multiple myeloma, plasma 
cells are surrounded by stromal cells including osteoblasts. These stromal cells 
protect multiple myeloma cells from apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic 
agents. Osteoprotegerin (OPG), a soluble receptor of the cytokine TNF-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), is secreted by osteoblasts and has been 
implicated in the prevention of cell death induced by TRAIL in malignant cells. 
Previously, we have designed death receptor-specific TRAIL variants that induce 
apoptosis exclusively via one of its death receptors. Here, we have studied in 
detail the interaction between recombinant human (rhTRAIL) variants and OPG. We 
show that a DR5-specific variant (rhTRAIL D269H/E195R) displays a significantly 
decreased affinity to OPG. Furthermore, this rhTRAIL variant shows a much higher 
activity when compared with rhTRAIL WT and retains its effectiveness in inducing 
cell death in multiple myeloma cell lines, in the presence of OPG secreted by 
stromal cells. We also demonstrate that stromal cells are largely insensitive to 
high concentrations of this rhTRAIL variant. In conclusion, rhTRAIL D269H/E195R 
is a potential therapy for multiple myeloma due to its high effectiveness and 
diminished binding to OPG.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.491589
PMCID: PMC3887175
PMID: 24280212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]