1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014 Aug;264(5):409-21. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-013-0476-2. Epub 2013 Nov 29.

SPOCK3, a risk gene for adult ADHD and personality disorders.

Weber H(1), Scholz CJ, Jacob CP, Heupel J, Kittel-Schneider S, Erhardt A, Hempel 
S, Schmidt B, Kiel T, Gessner A, Lesch KP, Reif A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of 
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, Weber_H2@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most frequent psychiatric 
disorder in children, where it displays a global prevalence of 5 %. In up to 
50 % of the cases, ADHD may persist into adulthood (aADHD), where it is often 
comorbid with personality disorders. Due to a potentially heritable nature of 
this comorbidity, we hypothesized that their genetic framework may contain 
common risk-modifying genes. SPOCK3, a poorly characterized, putatively 
Ca(2+)-binding extracellular heparan/chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan gene 
encoded by the human chromosomal region 4q32.3, was found to be associated with 
polymorphisms among the top ranks in a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on 
ADHD and a pooled GWAS on personality disorder (PD). We therefore genotyped 48 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) representative of the SPOCK3 gene region 
in 1,790 individuals (n aADHD = 624, n PD = 630, n controls = 536). In this 
analysis, we found two SNPs to be nominally associated with aADHD (rs7689440, 
rs897511) and four PD-associated SNPs (rs7689440, rs897511, rs17052671 and 
rs1485318); the latter even reached marginal significance after rigorous 
Bonferroni correction. Bioinformatics tools predicted a possible influence of 
rs1485318 on transcription factor binding, whereas the other candidate SNPs may 
have effects on alternative splicing. Our results suggest that SPOCK3 may modify 
the genetic risk for ADHD and PD; further studies are, however, needed to 
identify the underlying mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00406-013-0476-2
PMID: 24292267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]