1. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Nov 7;12(4):5301-9. doi: 10.4238/2013.November.7.5.

ADAMTS14 gene polymorphism associated with knee osteoarthritis in Thai women.

Poonpet T(1), Honsawek S, Tammachote N, Kanitnate S, Tammachote R.

Author information:
(1)Biological Science Program, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent form of arthritis in the elderly. This 
disease is characterized by breakdown and loss of articular cartilage due to 
genetic, mechanical and environmental factors. Although the pathophysiology of 
OA is not completely known, several candidate genes have been reported to be 
associated with OA susceptibility. We assessed the association between genetic 
variation in the ADAMTS14 region and knee osteoarthritis susceptibility in the 
Thai population. The rs4747096 SNP was genotyped by PCR-RFLP on genomic DNA 
extracted from peripheral blood of 108 OA patients and 119 controls. The PCR 
product (196 bp) was digested with BspEI. A sample with the GG genotype showed 
two band sizes of 158 and 38 bp, while a sample with the AA genotype showed a 
single band size of 196 bp. Heterozygotes with the AG genotype showed all three 
corresponding bands. Genotype distributions, allele frequencies and model of 
inheritance in patients and controls were compared. In females, the frequency of 
the AA genotype and the A allele were significantly higher in knee OA patients 
than in controls [odds ratio (OR) = 2.79, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 
1.05-7.59 and OR = 1.58, 95%CI = 1.00-2.45, respectively]. Moreover, genotypic 
AA and AG were associated with significantly increased risk for knee OA when 
compared to GG (OR = 2.72, 95%CI = 1.10-6.87). No significant associations were 
observed in males. In conclusion, the nsSNP rs4747096 in ADAMTS14 was associated 
with knee OA in female Thai patients; therefore, the role of ADAMTS14 in OA 
seems to be gender-dependent.

DOI: 10.4238/2013.November.7.5
PMID: 24301791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]