1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov 18;7:216. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00216. 
eCollection 2013.

Early gene expression changes in spinal cord from SOD1(G93A) Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis animal model.

de Oliveira GP(1), Alves CJ, Chadi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuroregeneration Center, University of São Paulo 
School of Medicine São Paulo, Brazil.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset and fast progression 
neurodegenerative disease that leads to the loss of motor neurons. Mechanisms of 
selective motor neuron loss in ALS are unknown. The early events occurring in 
the spinal cord that may contribute to motor neuron death are not described, 
neither astrocytes participation in the pre-symptomatic phases of the disease. 
In order to identify ALS early events, we performed a microarray analysis 
employing a whole mouse genome platform to evaluate the gene expression pattern 
of lumbar spinal cords of transgenic SOD1(G93A) mice and their littermate 
controls at pre-symptomatic ages of 40 and 80 days. Differentially expressed 
genes were identified by means of the Bioconductor packages Agi4×44Preprocess 
and limma. FunNet web based tool was used for analysis of over-represented 
pathways. Furthermore, immunolabeled astrocytes from 40 and 80 days old mice 
were submitted to laser microdissection and RNA was extracted for evaluation of 
a selected gene by qPCR. Statistical analysis has pointed to 492 differentially 
expressed genes (155 up and 337 down regulated) in 40 days and 1105 (433 up and 
672 down) in 80 days old ALS mice. KEGG analysis demonstrated the 
over-represented pathways tight junction, antigen processing and presentation, 
oxidative phosphorylation, endocytosis, chemokine signaling pathway, ubiquitin 
mediated proteolysis and glutamatergic synapse at both pre-symptomatic ages. 
Ube2i gene expression was evaluated in astrocytes from both transgenic ages, 
being up regulated in 40 and 80 days astrocytes enriched samples. Our data 
points to important early molecular events occurring in pre-symptomatic phases 
of ALS in mouse model. Early SUMOylation process linked to astrocytes might 
account to non-autonomous cell toxicity in ALS. Further studies on the signaling 
pathways presented here may provide new insights to better understand the events 
triggering motor neuron death in this devastating disorder.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00216
PMCID: PMC3831149
PMID: 24302897