1. Tumour Biol. 2014 Apr;35(4):2893-903. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1457-9. Epub
2013  Dec 10.

The association between cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 and cervical 
cancer.

Liu P(1), Xu L, Sun Y, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Shandong University, 44 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, People's 
Republic of China.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) gene polymorphisms have 
been associated with many autoimmune diseases and malignancy susceptibility, but 
the relationship between CTLA-4 and cervical cancer is still controversial. 
Hence, a meta-analysis of the published studies for the CTLA-4 gene 
polymorphisms and the risk of cervical cancer was performed to evaluate the 
association between them. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) 
for the codominant, dominant, and recessive genetic models were assessed. The 
fixed or random effect pooled measure was selected on the basis of the 
heterogeneity test among studies. The heterogeneity among studies was evaluated 
using the I (2). Eight studies with 2,835 cases and 2,560 controls were 
included. In seven studies for the CTLA-4 +49A/G polymorphism, a significant 
association was showed between the A allele and the increased risk of cervical 
cancer in the codominant (OR 1.16, 95% CI 1.05-1.29), dominant (OR 1.18, 95% CI 
1.03-1.36), and recessive (OR 1.24, 95% CI 1.05-1.56) models. In five studies 
for the CTLA-4 -318C/T polymorphism, the meta-analysis showed a significant 
association of the C allele with the reduced risk of cervical cancer in the 
codominant (OR 0.79, 95% CI 0.66-0.94) and recessive (OR 0.76, 95% CI 0.63-0.93) 
models. This meta-analysis suggested that +49A/G and -318C/T polymorphisms of 
the CTLA-4 gene were significantly associated with the risk of cervical cancer. 
However, further studies are required to draw a solid conclusion on the relation 
between the CTLA-4 polymorphism and the risk of cervical cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-013-1457-9
PMID: 24317815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]