1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Feb;67:426-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.11.026. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

Developmental susceptibility of neurons to transient tetrahydrobiopterin 
insufficiency and antenatal hypoxia-ischemia in fetal rabbits.

Yu L(1), Vásquez-Vivar J(2), Jiang R(1), Luo K(1), Derrick M(1), Tan S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL 
60201, USA.
(2)Department of Biophysics and Free Radical Research Center & Redox Biology 
Program, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL 
60201, USA. Electronic address: sidtan@uchicago.edu.

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is important for normal brain development as 
congenital BH4 deficiencies manifest movement disorders at various childhood 
ages. BH4 transitions from very low levels in fetal brains to higher "adult" 
levels postnatally, with the highest levels in the thalamus. Maternal 
supplementation with the BH4 precursor sepiapterin reduces postnatal motor 
deficits and perinatal deaths after 40-min fetal hypoxia-ischemia (HI) at 70% 
gestation, suggesting that brain BH4 is important in improving function after 
HI. We tested the hypothesis that the intrinsically low concentrations of BH4 
made fetal neurons vulnerable to added insults. Brains were obtained from naïve 
fetal rabbits or after 40-min HI, at 70% (E22) and 92% gestation (E29). Neuronal 
cultures were prepared from basal ganglia, cortex, and thalamus, regions with 
different intrinsic levels of BH4. Cultures were grown with or without added BH4 
for 48h. Cell survival and mitochondrial function were determined by flow 
cytometry. At E22, thalamic cells had the lowest survival rate in a BH4-free 
milieu, in both control and HI groups, whereas BH4 supplementation ex vivo 
increased neuronal survival only in HI cells. Neuronal survival was similar in 
all regions without BH4 at E29. BH4 supplementation increased cell survival and 
cells with intact mitochondrial membrane potential, from basal ganglia and 
cortex, but not thalamus. After E29 HI, however, the benefit of BH4 was limited 
to cortical neurons. We conclude that BH4 is important for fetal neuronal 
survival after HI especially in the premature thalamus. Supplementation of BH4 
has a greater benefit at an earlier gestational age.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.11.026
PMCID: PMC3945116
PMID: 24316196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.