1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 28;8(11):e80902. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080902. 
eCollection 2013.

Adenosine Aâ‚‚A receptors in striatal glutamatergic terminals and GABAergic 
neurons oppositely modulate psychostimulant action and DARPP-32 phosphorylation.

Shen HY(1), Canas PM, Garcia-Sanz P, Lan JQ, Boison D, Moratalla R, Cunha RA, 
Chen JF.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropharmacology Lab, Department of Neurology, Boston University 
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Adenosine A2A receptors (A2AR) are located postsynaptically in striatopallidal 
GABAergic neurons, antagonizing dopamine D2 receptor functions, and are also 
located presynaptically at corticostriatal terminals, facilitating glutamate 
release. To address the hypothesis that these two A2AR populations differently 
control the action of psychostimulants, we characterized A2AR modulation of 
cocaine-induced effects at the level of DARPP-32 phosphorylation at Thr-34 and 
Thr-75, c-Fos expression, and psychomotor activity using two lines of cell-type 
selective A2AR knockout (KO) mice with selective A2AR deletion in GABAergic 
neurons (striatum-A2AR-KO mice), or with A2AR deletion in both striatal 
GABAergic neurons and projecting cortical glutamatergic neurons 
(forebrain-A2AR-KO mice). We demonstrated that striatum-A2AR KO mice lacked 
A2ARs exclusively in striatal GABAergic terminals whereas forebrain-A2AR KO mice 
lacked A2ARs in both striatal GABAergic and glutamatergic terminals leading to a 
blunted A2AR-mediated facilitation of synaptosomal glutamate release. The 
inactivation of A2ARs in GABAergic neurons reduced striatal DARPP-32 
phosphorylation at Thr-34 and increased its phosphorylation at Thr-75. 
Conversely, the additional deletion of corticostriatal glutamatergic A2ARs 
produced opposite effects on DARPP-32 phosphorylation at Thr-34 and Thr-75. This 
distinct modulation of DARPP-32 phosphorylation was associated with opposite 
responses to cocaine-induced striatal c-Fos expression and psychomotor activity 
in striatum-A2AR KO (enhanced) and forebrain-A2AR KO mice (reduced). Thus, A2ARs 
in glutamatergic corticostriatal terminals and in GABAergic striatal neurons 
modulate the action of psychostimulants and DARPP-32 phosphorylation in opposite 
ways. We conclude that A2ARs in glutamatergic terminals prominently control the 
action of psychostimulants and define a novel mechanism by which A2ARs fine-tune 
striatal activity by integrating GABAergic, dopaminergic and glutamatergic 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080902
PMCID: PMC3842921
PMID: 24312250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.