1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e79177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079177. 
eCollection 2013.

Construction and characterization of highly infectious full-length molecular 
clones of a HIV-1 CRF07_BC isolate from Xinjiang, China.

Wang Z(1), Hong K, Zhang J, Zhang L, Li D, Ren L, Liang H, Shao Y.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, Division 
of Research of Virology and Immunology, National Center for AIDS/STD Control and 
Prevention, China CDC, Beijing, China ; Collaborative Innovation Center for 
DiagnosisÂ and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, China.

Among the various subtypes of the M group of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
(HIV-1), clade CRF07_BC is the most prevalent in China. To date, no strong 
replicable CRF07_BC infectious clone has been constructed. Here we report on the 
construction and characterization of highly replicable infectious molecular 
clones from the isolate XJDC6291 of this HIV-1 subtype. Four full-length clones 
pXJDC2-7, pXJDC3-7, pXJDC2-6 and pXJDC3-6 were successfully produced, but only 
pXJDC2-7 presented detectable infectivity and replication capability. To improve 
the replication capability of pXJDC2-7, a 4.8 kb region spanning from the pol 
Integrase to nef gene of the clone was replaced by PCR products of the 
corresponding fragments from the original isolate XJDC6291, which produced two 
clones pXJDC13 and pXJDC17 that exhibited strong replication capability. The 
viral stocks obtained by pXJDC-13 and pXJDC-17 transfection into 293T cells 
replicated efficiently in human PBMCs, human primary CD4(+) T cells and 
displayed CCR5 tropism. Sequence alignment between pXJDC13, pXJDC17 and pXJDC2-7 
suggested that polymorphisms in the V1V2 region may influence infectivity, and 
reverse genetic experiment showed that V1V2 polymorphisms may influence the 
infectivity of the clones but did not affect the replication capability at a 
significant level. pXJDC13 and pXJDC17 displayed strong replication capability 
and are the first full-length infectious clones of HIV-1 CRF07_BC clade in the 
world. The availability of CRF07_BC infectious clones provides a useful tool for 
a wide range of studies, including antiretroviral drug and vaccine research as 
related to this HIV subtype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079177
PMCID: PMC3850540
PMID: 24324545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.