1. Biochemistry. 2014 Jan 14;53(1):90-100. doi: 10.1021/bi4014424. Epub 2013 Dec 
20.

Resonance Raman spectroscopy reveals that substrate structure selectively 
impacts the heme-bound diatomic ligands of CYP17.

Mak PJ(1), Gregory MC, Sligar SG, Kincaid JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Marquette University , Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53233, 
United States.

An important function of steroidogenic cytochromes P450 is the transformation of 
cholesterol to produce androgens, estrogens, and the corticosteroids. The 
activities of cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17) are essential in sex hormone 
biosynthesis, with severe developmental defects being a consequence of 
deficiency or mutations. The first reaction catalyzed by this multifunctional 
P450 is the 17α-hydroxylation of pregnenolone (PREG) to 17α-hydroxypregnenolone 
(17-OH PREG) and progesterone (PROG) to 17α-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OH PROG). 
The hydroxylated products then either are used for production of corticoids or 
undergo a second CYP17 catalyzed transformation, representing the first 
committed step of androgen formation. While the hydroxylation reactions are 
catalyzed by the well-known Compound I intermediate, the lyase reaction is 
believed to involve nucleophilic attack of the earlier peroxo- intermediate on 
the C20-carbonyl. Herein, resonance Raman (rR) spectroscopy reveals that 
substrate structure does not impact heme structure for this set of 
physiologically important substrates. On the other hand, rR spectra obtained 
here for the ferrous CO adducts with these four substrates show that substrates 
do interact differently with the Fe-C-O fragment, with large differences between 
the spectra obtained for the samples containing 17-OH PROG and 17-OH PREG, the 
latter providing evidence for the presence of two Fe-C-O conformers. 
Collectively, these results demonstrate that individual substrates can 
differentially impact the disposition of a heme-bound ligand, including 
dioxygen, altering the reactivity patterns in such a way as to promote preferred 
chemical conversions, thereby avoiding the profound functional consequences of 
unwanted side reactions.

DOI: 10.1021/bi4014424
PMCID: PMC3922198
PMID: 24328388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]