1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014 Feb;23(2):223-33. doi: 
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0573. Epub 2013 Dec 10.

Epigenetic research in cancer epidemiology: trends, opportunities, and 
challenges.

Verma M(1), Rogers S, Divi RL, Schully SD, Nelson S, Joseph Su L, Ross SA, Pilch 
S, Winn DM, Khoury MJ.

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program, Division 
of Cancer Control and Population Sciences; Division of Cancer Prevention, 
National Cancer Institute; Office of the Director, Information Resources and 
Services Branch, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland; and Office of Public Health Genomics, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.

Epigenetics is emerging as an important field in cancer epidemiology that 
promises to provide insights into gene regulation and facilitate cancer control 
throughout the cancer care continuum. Increasingly, investigators are 
incorporating epigenetic analysis into the studies of etiology and outcomes. To 
understand current progress and trends in the inclusion of epigenetics in cancer 
epidemiology, we evaluated the published literature and the National Cancer 
Institute (NCI)-supported research grant awards in this field to identify trends 
in epigenetics research. We present a summary of the epidemiologic studies in 
NCI's grant portfolio (from January 2005 through December 2012) and in the 
scientific literature published during the same period, irrespective of support 
from the NCI. Blood cells and tumor tissue were the most commonly used 
biospecimens in these studies, although buccal cells, cervical cells, sputum, 
and stool samples were also used. DNA methylation profiling was the focus of the 
majority of studies, but several studies also measured microRNA profiles. We 
illustrate here the current status of epidemiologic studies that are evaluating 
epigenetic changes in large populations. The incorporation of epigenomic 
assessments in cancer epidemiology studies has and is likely to continue to 
provide important insights into the field of cancer research.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0573
PMCID: PMC3925982
PMID: 24326628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict statement: This work was done by 
government staff. There was no grant for the work. There is no conflict.