1. Mol Cancer. 2013 Dec 9;12:155. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-155.

A TrkB-STAT3-miR-204-5p regulatory circuitry controls proliferation and invasion 
of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Bao W, Wang HH, Tian FJ, He XY, Qiu MT, Wang JY, Zhang HJ, Wang LH(1), Wan XP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, International Peace Maternity and 
Child Health Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No, 
910, Hengshan Road, Shanghai 200030, China. wanglihua6504@163.com.

BACKGROUND: We previously identified TrkB as an oncogene involved in promoting 
metastasis in endometrial carcinoma (EC). Here, we sought to delineate the 
effect of changes in TrkB expression on the global profile of microRNAs (miRNAs) 
in EC cells and further investigated the correlation between the expression of 
certain miRNA and TrkB in the clinicopathologic characteristics of EC patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR), we 
found that expression of TrkB mRNA has no significant difference in transcript 
levels between normal endometrium and EC cells captured by laser capture 
microdissection, while immunohistochemistry results demonstrated a markedly 
higher expression of TrkB protein in EC tissues. The microRNA array showed that 
ectopic overexpression and knockdown of TrkB expression caused global changes in 
miRNA expression in EC cells. qRT-PCR results showed that elevated TrkB 
repressed miR-204-5p expression in EC cells. Furthermore, immunoblotting assays 
revealed that TrkB overexpression in IshikawaTrkB cells noticeably increased 
JAK2 and STAT3 phosphorylation, which, however, was aborted by TrkB knockdown in 
HEC-1BshTrkB cells. Moreover, ChIP assays showed that phospho-STAT3 could 
directly bind to STAT3-binding sites near the TRPM3 promoter region upstream of 
miR-204-5p. Interestingly, using bioinformatics analysis and luciferase assays, 
we identified TrkB was a novel target of miR-204-5p. Functionally, the MTT 
assays, clonogenic and Transwell assays showed that miR-204-5p significantly 
suppressed the clonogenic growth, migration and invasion of EC cells. 
Furthermore, miR-204-5p also inhibited the growth of tumor xenografts bearing 
human EC cells. Importantly, we found lower miR-204-5p expression was associated 
with advanced FIGO stages, lymph node metastasis and probably a lower chance for 
survival in EC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study uncovers a new regulatory loop involving TrkB/miR-204-5p 
that is critical to the tumorigenesis of EC and proposes that reestablishment of 
miR-204-5p expression could be explored as a potential new therapeutic target 
for this disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-155
PMCID: PMC3879200
PMID: 24321270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]