1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 26;8(11):e81030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081030. 
eCollection 2013.

Canonical Wnt signaling promotes early hematopoietic progenitor formation and 
erythroid specification during embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Tarafdar A(1), Dobbin E, Corrigan P, Freeburn R, Wheadon H.

Author information:
(1)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, University of Glasgow, United 
Kingdom ; Biomedical Science Institute, University of Ulster, Northern Ireland, 
United Kingdom.

The generation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) during development is a 
complex process linked to morphogenic signals. Understanding this process is 
important for regenerative medicine applications that require in vitro 
production of HSC. In this study we investigated the effects of canonical 
Wnt/β-catenin signaling during early embryonic differentiation and hematopoietic 
specification using an embryonic stem cell system. Our data clearly demonstrates 
that following early differentiation induction, canonical Wnt signaling induces 
a strong mesodermal program whilst maintaining a degree of stemness potential. 
This involved a complex interplay between β-catenin/TCF/LEF/Brachyury/Nanog. 
β-catenin mediated up-regulation of TCF/LEF resulted in enhanced brachyury 
levels, which in-turn lead to Nanog up-regulation. During differentiation, 
active canonical Wnt signaling also up-regulated key transcription factors and 
cell specific markers essential for hematopoietic specification, in particular 
genes involved in establishing primitive erythropoiesis. This led to a 
significant increase in primitive erythroid colony formation. β-catenin 
signaling also augmented early hematopoietic and multipotent progenitor (MPP) 
formation. Following culture in a MPP specific cytokine cocktail, activation of 
β-catenin suppressed differentiation of the early hematopoietic progenitor 
population, with cells displaying a higher replating capacity and a propensity 
to form megakaryocytic erythroid progenitors. This bias towards erythroid 
lineage commitment was also observed when hematopoietic progenitors were 
directed to undergo myeloid colony formation. Overall this study underscores the 
importance of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling in mesodermal specification, 
primitive erythropoiesis and early hematopietic progenitor formation during 
hematopoietic induction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081030
PMCID: PMC3850021
PMID: 24324557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.