1. BMC Fam Pract. 2013 Dec 9;14:186. doi: 10.1186/1471-2296-14-186.

Prostate specific antigen testing in family practice: a cross sectional survey 
of self-reported rates of and reasons for testing participation and risk 
disclosure.

Carey M(1), Bryant J, Yoong SL, Russell G, Barker D, Sanson-Fisher R.

Author information:
(1)Priority Research Centre for Health Behaviour, Faculty of Health, University 
of Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, Australia. Mariko.Carey@newcastle.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Despite controversy about the benefits of routine prostate specific 
antigen (PSA) testing, rates of participation continue to rise. It is important 
to ensure that men are fully informed about the potential risks associated with 
this test. Little is known about the processes of shared decision making for PSA 
testing in the family practice setting. This study aimed to explore men's 
experiences of PSA testing participation and risk disclosure for PSA testing.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey of male family practice attendees aged 40 
years or older, with no previous history of prostate cancer, between June 2010 
and November 2011. Questions related to whether participants had undertaken PSA 
testing or discussed this with their doctor over the past 5 years, whether the 
patient or doctor had initiated the discussion, reasons for undergoing testing, 
and whether their doctor had discussed particular risks associated with PSA 
testing.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven percent (215/320) of men recalled having a PSA test in the 
past five years. Of the respondents who reported not having a test, 14% had 
discussed it with their doctor. The main reasons for having a PSA test were 
doctor recommendation and wanting to keep up to date with health tests. 
Thirty-eight percent or fewer respondents reported being advised of each 
potential risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite debate over the benefits of routine PSA testing, a high 
proportion of male family practice attendees report undertaking this test. Risks 
associated with testing appear to be poorly disclosed by general practitioners. 
These results suggest the need to improve the quality of informed consent for 
PSA testing in the family practice setting.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2296-14-186
PMCID: PMC4029150
PMID: 24321004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]