1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):3094-103. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536482. Epub 
2013 Dec 14.

Chronophin dimerization is required for proper positioning of its substrate 
specificity loop.

Kestler C(1), Knobloch G, Tessmer I, Jeanclos E, Schindelin H, Gohla A.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Würzburg, 
97078 Würzburg, Germany and.

Mammalian phosphatases of the haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily have 
emerged as important regulators of physiology and disease. Many of these enzymes 
are stable homodimers; however, the role of their dimerization is largely 
unknown. Here, we explore the function of the obligatory homodimerization of 
chronophin, a mammalian HAD phosphatase known to dephosphorylate pyridoxal 
5'-phosphate (PLP) and serine/threonine-phosphorylated proteins. The exchange of 
two residues in the murine chronophin homodimerization interface 
(chronophin(A194K,A195K)) yields a constitutive monomer both in vitro and in 
cells. The catalytic activity of monomeric chronophin toward PLP is strongly 
impaired. X-ray crystallographic studies of chronophin(A194K,A195K) revealed 
that dimer formation is essential for an intermolecular 
arginine-arginine-tryptophan stacking interaction that positions a critical 
histidine residue in the substrate specificity loop of chronophin for PLP 
coordination. Analysis of all available crystal structures of HAD hydrolases 
that are grouped together with chronophin in the C2a-type structural subfamily 
uncovered a highly conserved mode of dimerization that results in intermolecular 
contacts involving the substrate specificity loop. Our results explain how the 
dimerization of HAD hydrolases contributes to their catalytic efficiency and 
substrate specificity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536482
PMCID: PMC3908439
PMID: 24338687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]