1. J Bacteriol. 2014 Feb;196(4):903-10. doi: 10.1128/JB.01304-13. Epub 2013 Dec
13.

the Eutt enzyme of Salmonella enterica is a unique ATP:Cob(I)alamin 
adenosyltransferase metalloprotein that requires ferrous ions for maximal 
activity.

Moore TC(1), Mera PE, Escalante-Semerena JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.

ATP:co(I)rrinoid adenosyltransferase (ACAT) enzymes convert vitamin B12 to 
coenzyme B12. EutT is the least understood ACAT. We report the purification of 
EutT to homogeneity and show that, in vitro, free dihydroflavins drive the 
adenosylation of cob(II)alamin bound to EutT. Results of chromatography analyses 
indicate that EutT is dimeric in solution, and unlike other ACATs, EutT 
catalyzes the reaction with sigmoidal kinetics indicative of positive 
cooperativity for cob(II)alamin. Maximal EutT activity was obtained after 
metalation with ferrous ions. EutT/Fe(II) protein lost all activity upon 
exposure to air and H2O2, consistent with previously reported results indicating 
that EutT was an oxygen-labile metalloprotein containing a redox-active metal. 
Results of in vivo and in vitro analyses of single-amino-acid variants affecting 
a HX11CCXXC(83) motif conserved in EutT proteins showed that residues His67, 
Cys80, and Cys83 were required for EutT function in vivo, while Cys79 was not. 
Unlike that of other variants, the activity of the EutT(C80A) variant was 
undetectable in vitro, suggesting that Cys80 was critical to EutT function. 
Results of circular dichroism studies indicate that the presence or absence of a 
metal ion does not affect protein folding. EutT can now be purified in the 
presence of oxygen and reactivated with ferrous ions for maximal activity.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01304-13
PMCID: PMC3911174
PMID: 24336938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]