1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Jun;111(6):1200-9. doi: 10.1002/bit.25170. Epub 2013
Dec  28.

Visualizing infection spread: dual-color fluorescent reporting of virus-host 
interactions.

Swick A(1), Baltes A, Yin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, 1415 Engineering Drive, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706-1607; 
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery-Systems Biology Theme, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.

Although the molecular mechanisms by which host cells defend themselves against 
viral infection have been studied in great depth, and countermeasures viruses 
employ to suppress such defensive responses have been widely documented, 
relatively little attention has been devoted toward elucidating how such 
interactions between virus and host are resolved over multiple rounds of 
infection. Here, we describe the design, synthesis, and validation of a 
dual-color fluorescent reporter system to study how viral infections spread 
through a host cell monolayer and how the cellular innate immune system mounts 
an antiviral response. We employed recombinant, red fluorescent protein 
expressing mutants of a prototypical RNA virus, vesicular stomatitis virus to 
enable identification and tracking of infected cells. Further, we generated 
stable reporter cells that use green fluorescent protein to report on the 
expression of IFIT2, an interferon stimulated gene involved in the interference 
of viral protein translation, and a marker of antiviral defense activation. The 
presence of the fluorescent protein reporters had minimal effects on the normal 
behavior of the cells or viruses. Moreover, expression of the virus and cell 
reporters correlated with the kinetics of viral replication and activation of an 
anti-viral response, respectively. This two-color system enabled us to track and 
quantify in live cells how viral replication and activation of host defensive 
responses play out over multiple rounds of infection. Initial study of 
propagating infections demonstrated that antiviral activation over multiple 
rounds was critical for slowing and ultimately halting the spread of infection.

Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.25170
PMCID: PMC4004699
PMID: 24338628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no conflicts of 
interest exist.