1. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 15;19(24):6696-702. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1746.

BRAF fusions define a distinct molecular subset of melanomas with potential 
sensitivity to MEK inhibition.

Hutchinson KE(1), Lipson D, Stephens PJ, Otto G, Lehmann BD, Lyle PL, 
Vnencak-Jones CL, Ross JS, Pietenpol JA, Sosman JA, Puzanov I, Miller VA, Pao W.

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Cancer Biology, Biochemistry, 
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center; Departments of Pathology, Microbiology, and 
Immunology, Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine; Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee; Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, 
Massachusetts; and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Albany 
Medical College, Albany, New York.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6631. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0058.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6632. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1152.

PURPOSE: Recurrent "driver" mutations at specific loci in BRAF, NRAS, KIT, GNAQ, 
and GNA11 define clinically relevant molecular subsets of melanoma, but more 
than 30% are "pan-negative" for these recurrent mutations. We sought to identify 
additional potential drivers in "pan-negative" melanoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using a targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) assay 
(FoundationOne™) and targeted RNA sequencing, we identified a novel PAPSS1-BRAF 
fusion in a "pan-negative" melanoma. We then analyzed NGS data from 51 
additional melanomas genotyped by FoundationOne™, as well as melanoma RNA, 
whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing data in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 
to determine the potential frequency of BRAF fusions in melanoma. We 
characterized the signaling properties of confirmed molecular alterations by 
ectopic expression of engineered cDNAs in 293H cells.
RESULTS: Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in 
cells by ectopic expression of PAPSS1-BRAF was abrogated by mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibition but not by BRAF inhibition. NGS data 
analysis of 51 additional melanomas revealed a second BRAF fusion (TRIM24-BRAF) 
in a "pan-negative" sample; MAPK signaling induced by TRIM24-BRAF was also MEK 
inhibitor sensitive. Through mining TCGA skin cutaneous melanoma dataset, we 
further identified two potential BRAF fusions in another 49 "pan-negative" 
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF fusions define a new molecular subset of melanoma, potentially 
comprising 4% to 8% of "pan-negative" cases. Their presence may explain an 
unexpected clinical response to MEK inhibitor therapy or assist in selecting 
patients for MEK-directed therapy.

©2013 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1746
PMCID: PMC3880773
PMID: 24345920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: I. Puzanov and J.A. 
Sosman have participated as a consultant and on advisory boards, respectively, 
for GlaxoSmithKline. All Foundation Medicine, Inc. (FMI) authors are employees 
and stockholders in FMI.