1. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Mar;12(3):377-81. doi: 
10.1016/j.cgh.2013.12.007. Epub 2013 Dec 17.

DNA testing and molecular screening for colon cancer.

Carethers JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Electronic address: jcarethe@umich.edu.

Colon cancer develops and progresses as a consequence of abnormal cellular 
molecular changes, many of which result in mutant DNA. Modern molecular 
techniques allow examination of individual patient genetic data that ascribe 
risk, predict outcome, and/or modify an approach to therapy. DNA testing and 
molecular screening are in use today and are becoming a critical and necessary 
part of routine patient care. Assessing at-risk patients for hereditary colon 
cancer is predicted to move from individual gene testing that is commonly 
performed today to whole exome or whole genome sequencing, providing additional 
vast information of the patient's genome that might not be related to the colon 
cancer syndrome. Detecting mutant DNA from shed tumor cells in fecal material 
for colon cancer screening will increase in diagnostic accuracy over time, with 
improvements in the panel of mutant DNA being examined and through clinical 
testing. DNA mutations and other molecular changes detected directly from within 
the colon cancer help to inform and guide the physician for the best approach 
for optimal patient care and outcome. The use of epidermal growth factor 
receptor-targeted therapy in advanced colon cancer patients requires knowledge 
of the mutation status for KRAS and BRAF genes, and knowing the mutational 
status of PIK3CA may predict how patients respond to aspirin to prevent colon 
cancer recurrence. Biologically driven decision-making, or precision medicine, 
is becoming increasingly adopted for optimal care and outcome for colon cancer 
patients. Gastroenterologists will need to be increasingly aware.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cgh.2013.12.007
PMCID: PMC4151968
PMID: 24355100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The author discloses no 
conflicts.