1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 16;8(12):e81995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081995. 
eCollection 2013.

Identification of Navβ1 residues involved in the modulation of the sodium 
channel Nav1.4.

Islas AA(1), Sánchez-Solano A(1), Scior T(2), Millan-PerezPeña L(3), 
Salinas-Stefanon EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Biofísica, Instituto de Fisiología, Universidad Autónoma de 
Puebla, Puebla, Mexico.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, Puebla, 
Mexico.
(3)Centro de Química, Instituto de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, 
Puebla, Mexico.

Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) are heteromeric protein complexes that 
initiate action potentials in excitable cells. The voltage-gated sodium channel 
accessory subunit, Navβ1, allosterically modulates the α subunit pore structure 
upon binding. To date, the molecular determinants of the interface remain 
unknown. We made use of sequence, knowledge and structure-based methods to 
identify residues critical to the association of the α and β1 Nav1.4 subunits. 
The Navβ1 point mutant C43A disrupted the modulation of voltage dependence of 
activation and inactivation and delayed the peak current decay, the recovery 
from inactivation, and induced a use-dependent decay upon depolarisation at 1 
Hz. The Navβ1 mutant R89A selectively delayed channel inactivation and recovery 
from inactivation and had no effect on voltage dependence or repetitive 
depolarisations. Navβ1 mutants Y32A and G33M selectively modified the half 
voltage of inactivation without altering the kinetics. Despite low sequence 
identity, highly conserved structural elements were identified. Our models were 
consistent with published data and may help relate pathologies associated with 
VGSCs to the Navβ1 subunit.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081995
PMCID: PMC3864903
PMID: 24358138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.