1. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):958-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302341. Epub 2013 
Dec 23.

Autophagy induction by SIRT6 through attenuation of insulin-like growth factor 
signaling is involved in the regulation of human bronchial epithelial cell 
senescence.

Takasaka N(1), Araya J, Hara H, Ito S, Kobayashi K, Kurita Y, Wakui H, Yoshii Y, 
Yumino Y, Fujii S, Minagawa S, Tsurushige C, Kojima J, Numata T, Shimizu K, 
Kawaishi M, Kaneko Y, Kamiya N, Hirano J, Odaka M, Morikawa T, Nishimura SL, 
Nakayama K, Kuwano K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo 105-8461, Japan;

Cigarette smoke (CS)-induced cellular senescence has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and SIRT6, a histone 
deacetylase, antagonizes this senescence, presumably through the attenuation of 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-Akt signaling. Autophagy controls cellular 
senescence by eliminating damaged cellular components and is negatively 
regulated by IGF-Akt signaling through the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). 
SIRT1, a representative sirtuin family, has been demonstrated to activate 
autophagy, but a role for SIRT6 in autophagy activation has not been shown. 
Therefore, we sought to investigate the regulatory role for SIRT6 in autophagy 
activation during CS-induced cellular senescence. SIRT6 expression levels were 
modulated by cDNA and small interfering RNA transfection in human bronchial 
epithelial cells (HBECs). Senescence-associated Î²-galactosidase staining and 
Western blotting of p21 were performed to evaluate senescence. We demonstrated 
that SIRT6 expression levels were decreased in lung homogenates from chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease patients, and SIRT6 expression levels correlated 
significantly with the percentage of forced expiratory volume in 1 s/forced 
vital capacity. CS extract (CSE) suppressed SIRT6 expression in HBECs. 
CSE-induced HBEC senescence was inhibited by SIRT6 overexpression, whereas SIRT6 
knockdown and mutant SIRT6 (H133Y) without histone deacetylase activity enhanced 
HBEC senescence. SIRT6 overexpression induced autophagy via attenuation of 
IGF-Akt-mTOR signaling. Conversely, SIRT6 knockdown and overexpression of a 
mutant SIRT6 (H133Y) inhibited autophagy. Autophagy inhibition by knockdown of 
ATG5 and LC3B attenuated the antisenescent effect of SIRT6 overexpression. These 
results suggest that SIRT6 is involved in CSE-induced HBEC senescence via 
autophagy regulation, which can be attributed to attenuation of IGF-Akt-mTOR 
signaling.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302341
PMID: 24367027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]