1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e82220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082220. 
eCollection 2013.

EPS8 inhibition increases cisplatin sensitivity in lung cancer cells.

Gorsic LK(1), Stark AL(1), Wheeler HE(1), Wong SS(1), Im HK(2), Dolan ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Department of Health Studies, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 
United States of America.

Cisplatin, a commonly used chemotherapeutic, is associated with ototoxicity, 
renal toxicity and neurotoxicity, thus identifying means to increase the 
therapeutic index of cisplatin may allow for improved outcomes. A SNP 
(rs4343077) within EPS8, discovered through a genome wide association study of 
cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in lymphoblastoid cell lines 
(LCLs), provided impetus to further study this gene. The purpose of this work 
was to evaluate the role of EPS8 in cellular susceptibility to cisplatin in 
cancerous and non-cancerous cells. We used EPS8 RNA interference to determine 
the effect of decreased EPS8 expression on LCL and A549 lung cancer cell 
sensitivity to cisplatin. EPS8 knockdown in LCLs resulted in a 7.9% increase in 
cisplatin-induced survival (P = 1.98 × 10(-7)) and an 8.7% decrease in apoptosis 
(P = 0.004) compared to control. In contrast, reduced EPS8 expression in lung 
cancer cells resulted in a 20.6% decrease in cisplatin-induced survival (P = 
5.08 × 10(-5)). We then investigated an EPS8 inhibitor, mithramycin A, as a 
potential agent to increase the therapeutic index of cisplatin. Mithramycin A 
decreased EPS8 expression in LCLs resulting in decreased cellular sensitivity to 
cisplatin as evidenced by lower caspase 3/7 activation following cisplatin 
treatment (42.7% ± 6.8% relative to control P = 0.0002). In 5 non-small-cell 
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines, mithramycin A also resulted in decreased EPS8 
expression. Adding mithramycin to 4 NSCLC cell lines and a bladder cancer cell 
line, resulted in increased sensitivity to cisplatin that was significantly more 
pronounced in tumor cell lines than in LCL lines (p<0.0001). An EGFR mutant 
NSCLC cell line (H1975) showed no significant change in sensitivity to cisplatin 
with the addition of mithramycin treatment. Therefore, an inhibitor of EPS8, 
such as mithramycin A, could improve cisplatin treatment by increasing 
sensitivity of tumor relative to normal cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082220
PMCID: PMC3868552
PMID: 24367505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.