1. Front Microbiol. 2013 Dec 16;4:376. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00376. eCollection
 2013.

Dihydroxyacetone metabolism in Haloferax volcanii.

Ouellette M(1), Makkay AM(1), Papke RT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut Storrs, 
CT, USA.

Dihydroxyacetone (DHA) is a ketose sugar that can be produced by oxidizing 
glycerol. DHA in the environment is taken up and phosphorylated to DHA-phosphate 
by glycerol kinase or DHA kinase. In hypersaline environments, it is 
hypothesized that DHA is produced as an overflow product from glycerol 
utilization by organisms such as Salinibacter ruber. Previous research has 
demonstrated that the halobacterial species Haloquadratum walsbyi can use DHA as 
a carbon source, and putative DHA kinase genes were hypothesized to be involved 
in this process. However, DHA metabolism has not been demonstrated in other 
halobacterial species, and the role of the DHA kinase genes was not confirmed. 
In this study, we examined the metabolism of DHA in Haloferax volcanii because 
putative DHA kinase genes were annotated in its genome, and it has an 
established genetic system to assay growth of mutant knockouts. Experiments in 
which Hfx. volcanii was grown on DHA as the sole carbon source demonstrated 
growth, and that it is concentration dependent. Three annotated DHA kinase genes 
(HVO_1544, HVO_1545, and HVO_1546), which are homologous to the putative DHA 
kinase genes present in Hqm. walsbyi, as well as the glycerol kinase gene 
(HVO_1541), were deleted to examine the effect of these genes on the growth of 
Hfx. volcanii on DHA. Experiments demonstrated that the DHA kinase deletion 
mutant exhibited diminished, but not absence of growth on DHA compared to the 
parent strain. Deletion of the glycerol kinase gene also reduced growth on DHA, 
and did so more than deletion of the DHA kinase. The results indicate that Hfx. 
volcanii can metabolize DHA and that DHA kinase plays a role in this metabolism. 
However, the glycerol kinase appears to be the primary enzyme involved in this 
process. BLASTp analyses demonstrate that the DHA kinase genes are patchily 
distributed among the Halobacteria, whereas the glycerol kinase gene is widely 
distributed, suggesting a widespread capability for DHA metabolism.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00376
PMCID: PMC3863723
PMID: 24379808