1. Hum Mutat. 2014 Mar;35(3):368-76. doi: 10.1002/humu.22502. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Mucolipidosis II-related mutations inhibit the exit from the endoplasmic 
reticulum and proteolytic cleavage of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase precursor 
protein (GNPTAB).

De Pace R(1), Coutinho MF, Koch-Nolte F, Haag F, Prata MJ, Alves S, Braulke T, 
Pohl S.

Author information:
(1)Section Biochemistry, Children's Hospital, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Mucolipidosis (ML) II and MLIII alpha/beta are two pediatric lysosomal storage 
disorders caused by mutations in the GNPTAB gene, which encodes an α/β-subunit 
precursor protein of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. Considerable variations in the 
onset and severity of the clinical phenotype in these diseases are observed. We 
report here on expression studies of two missense mutations c.242G>T 
(p.Trp81Leu) and c.2956C>T (p.Arg986Cys) and two frameshift mutations 
c.3503_3504delTC (p.Leu1168GlnfsX5) and c.3145insC (p.Gly1049ArgfsX16) present 
in severely affected MLII patients, as well as two missense mutations c.1196C>T 
(p.Ser399Phe) and c.3707A>T (p.Lys1236Met) reported in more mild affected 
individuals. We generated a novel α-subunit-specific monoclonal antibody, 
allowing the analysis of the expression, subcellular localization, and 
proteolytic activation of wild-type and mutant α/β-subunit precursor proteins by 
Western blotting and immunofluorescence microscopy. In general, we found that 
both missense and frameshift mutations that are associated with a severe 
clinical phenotype cause retention of the encoded protein in the endoplasmic 
reticulum and failure to cleave the α/β-subunit precursor protein are associated 
with a severe clinical phenotype with the exception of p.Ser399Phe found in 
MLIII alpha/beta. Our data provide new insights into structural requirements for 
localization and activity of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase that may help to 
explain the clinical phenotype of MLII patients.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22502
PMID: 24375680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]