1. Toxins (Basel). 2013 Dec 27;6(1):108-51. doi: 10.3390/toxins6010108.

Cytotoxic and cytolytic cnidarian venoms. A review on health implications and 
possible therapeutic applications.

Mariottini GL(1), Pane L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth, Environment and Life Sciences, University of Genova, 
Viale Benedetto XV 5, Genova I-16132, Italy. gian.luigi.mariottini@unige.it.
(2)Department of Earth, Environment and Life Sciences, University of Genova, 
Viale Benedetto XV 5, Genova I-16132, Italy. pane@unige.it.

The toxicity of Cnidaria is a subject of concern for its influence on human 
activities and public health. During the last decades, the mechanisms of cell 
injury caused by cnidarian venoms have been studied utilizing extracts from 
several Cnidaria that have been tested in order to evaluate some fundamental 
parameters, such as the activity on cell survival, functioning and metabolism, 
and to improve the knowledge about the mechanisms of action of these compounds. 
In agreement with the modern tendency aimed to avoid the utilization of living 
animals in the experiments and to substitute them with in vitro systems, 
established cell lines or primary cultures have been employed to test cnidarian 
extracts or derivatives. Several cnidarian venoms have been found to have 
cytotoxic properties and have been also shown to cause hemolytic effects. Some 
studied substances have been shown to affect tumour cells and microorganisms, so 
making cnidarian extracts particularly interesting for their possible 
therapeutic employment. The review aims to emphasize the up-to-date knowledge 
about this subject taking in consideration the importance of such venoms in 
human pathology, the health implications and the possible therapeutic 
application of these natural compounds.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins6010108
PMCID: PMC3920253
PMID: 24379089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]