1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2014 May;40:1-15. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2013.12.004. 
Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Nature and nurture- genes and environment- predict onset and progression of 
macular degeneration.

Sobrin L(1), Seddon JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Ophthalmic Epidemiology and Genetics Service, New England Eye Center, Tufts 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Tufts University 
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical 
Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
jseddon@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common cause of irreversible visual 
loss and the disease burden is rising world-wide as the population ages. Both 
environmental and genetic factors contribute to the development of this disease. 
Among environmental factors, smoking, obesity and dietary factors including 
antioxidants and dietary fat intake influence onset and progression of AMD. 
There are also several lines of evidence that link cardiovascular, immune and 
inflammatory biomarkers to AMD. The genetic etiology of AMD has been and 
continues to be an intense and fruitful area of investigation. Genome-wide 
association studies have revealed numerous common variants associated with AMD 
and sequencing is increasing our knowledge of how rare genetic variants strongly 
impact disease. Evidence for interactions between environmental, therapeutic and 
genetic factors is emerging and elucidating the mechanisms of this interplay 
remains a major challenge in the field. Genotype-phenotype associations are 
evolving. The knowledge of non-genetic, modifiable risk factors along with 
information about heritability and genetic risk variants for this disease 
acquired over the past 25 years have greatly improved patient management and our 
ability to predict which patients will develop or progress to advanced forms of 
AMD. Personalized medicine and individualized prevention and treatment 
strategies may become a reality in the near future.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2013.12.004
PMCID: PMC6446565
PMID: 24374240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Tufts Medical Center: P.