1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014 Jul;46(7):1293-301. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0000000000000242.

Aerobic and strength training in concomitant metabolic syndrome and type 2 
diabetes.

Earnest CP(1), Johannsen NM, Swift DL, Gillison FB, Mikus CR, Lucia A, Kramer K, 
Lavie CJ, Church TS.

Author information:
(1)1Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UNITED KINGDOM; 2School of 
Kinesiology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA; 3Department of 
Kinesiology, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC; 4Division of Cardiology, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; 5Universidad Europea and Instituto 
de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (i+12), Madrid, SPAIN; 
6Division of Preventive Medicine, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton 
Rouge, LA; and 7Cardiac Rehabilitation and Prevention, Ochsner Clinical School, 
University of Queensland School of Medicine, John Ochsner Heart and Vascular 
Institute, New Orleans, LA.

PURPOSE: Concomitant type 2 diabetes (T2D) and metabolic syndrome exacerbates 
mortality risk; yet, few studies have examined the effect of combining (AER + 
RES) aerobic (AER) and resistance (RES) training for individuals with T2D and 
metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: We examined AER, RES, and AER + RES training (9 months) commensurate 
with physical activity guidelines in individuals with T2D (n = 262; 63% female, 
44% black). Primary outcomes were change in, and prevalence of, metabolic 
syndrome score at follow-up (mean and 95% confidence interval [CI]). Secondary 
outcomes included maximal cardiorespiratory fitness (VO2peak) and estimated METs 
from time-to-exhaustion (TTE) and exercise efficiency calculated as the slope of 
the line between ventilatory threshold, respiratory compensation, and maximal 
fitness. General linear models and bootstrapped Spearman correlations were used 
to examine changes in metabolic syndrome associated with training primary and 
secondary outcome variables.
RESULTS: We observed a significant decrease in metabolic syndrome scores (P for 
trend = 0.003) for AER (-0.59, 95% CI = -1.00 to -0.21) and AER + RES (-0.79, 
95% CI = -1.40 to -0.35), both being significant (P ≤ 0.02) versus control 
(0.26, 95% CI = -0.58 to 0.40) and RES (-0.13, 95% CI = -1.00 to 0.24). This led 
to a reduction in metabolic syndrome prevalence for the AER (56% vs 43%) and AER 
+ RES (55% vs 46%) groups between baseline and follow-up. The observed decrease 
in metabolic syndrome was mediated by significant improvements in exercise 
efficiency for the AER and AER + RES training groups (P < 0.05), which was more 
strongly related to TTE (25%-30%; r = -0.38, 95% CI = -0.55 to -0.19) than 
VO2peak (5%-6%; r = -0.24, 95% CI = -0.45 to -0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: AER and AER + RES training significantly improved metabolic 
syndrome scores and prevalence in patients with T2D. These improvements appear 
to be associated with improved exercise efficiency and are more strongly related 
to improved TTE versus VO2peak.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000242
PMCID: PMC4061275
PMID: 24389523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]