1. Curr Drug Targets. 2014 Jan;15(1):2-16. doi:
10.2174/1389450114666140106095151.

Targeting tumor suppressor networks for cancer therapeutics.

Guo XE, Ngo B, Modrek AS, Lee WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine. 240 Med Sci D, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. whlee@uci.edu.

Cancer is a consequence of mutations in genes that control cell proliferation, 
differentiation and cellular homeostasis. These genes are classified into two 
categories: oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Together, overexpression of 
oncogenes and loss of tumor suppressors are the dominant driving forces for 
tumorigenesis. Hence, targeting oncogenes and tumor suppressors hold tremendous 
therapeutic potential for cancer treatment. In the last decade, the predominant 
cancer drug discovery strategy has relied on a traditional reductionist approach 
of dissecting molecular signaling pathways and designing inhibitors for the 
selected oncogenic targets. Remarkable therapies have been developed using this 
approach; however, targeting oncogenes is only part of the picture. Our 
understanding of the importance of tumor suppressors in preventing tumorigenesis 
has also advanced significantly and provides a new therapeutic window of 
opportunity. Given that tumor suppressors are frequently mutated, deleted, or 
silenced with loss-of-function, restoring their normal functions to treat cancer 
holds tremendous therapeutic potential. With the rapid expansion in our 
knowledge of cancer over the last several decades, developing effective 
anticancer regimens against tumor suppressor pathways has never been more 
promising. In this article, we will review the concept of tumor suppression, and 
outline the major therapeutic strategies and challenges of targeting tumor 
suppressor networks for cancer therapeutics.

DOI: 10.2174/1389450114666140106095151
PMCID: PMC4032821
PMID: 24387338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]