1. Turk J Haematol. 2013 Jun;30(2):102-10. doi: 10.4274/Tjh.2013.0029. Epub 2013 
Jun 5.

Physiopathology, etiologic factors, diagnosis, and course of polycythemia vera 
as related to therapy according to william dameshek, 1940-1950.

Michiels JJ(1), Institute And Foundation G(1), Education Thrombocythemia Vera 
Study Group FO(1), Ewg Mpn TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

ACCORDING TO DAMESHEK, TRUE POLYCYTHEMIA (POLYCYTHEMIA VERA: PV) is a chronic 
myeloproliferative disorder of the total bone marrow without any evidence of 
invasiveness, in which erythrocytosis, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis are all 
simultaneously present. A possible hereditary or transmitted tendency may be 
present, but actual familial polycythemia is rare. As to the etiology, Dameshek 
proposed 2 highly speculative possibilities in 1950: the presence of excessive 
bone marrow stimulation by an unknown factor or factors, and a lack or a 
diminution in the normal inhibitory factor or factors. Dameshek's hypothesis was 
confirmed in 2005 by Vainchenker in France by the discovery of the acquired 
JAK2V617F mutation as the cause of 3 phenotypes of classical myeloproliferative 
neoplasms: essential thrombocythemia, PV, and myelofibrosis. The JAK2V617F 
mutation induces a loss of inhibitory activity of the JH2 pseudokinase part on 
the JH1 kinase part of Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). This leads to enhanced activity of 
the normal JH1 kinase activity of JAK2, which makes the mutated hematopoietic 
stem cells hypersensitive to the hematopoietic growth factors thrombopoietin, 
erythropoietin, insulin-like growth factor-1, stem cell factor, and granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor, resulting in trilinear myeloproliferation. In 
retrospect, the situation observed by Dameshek where all "stops" to blood 
production in the bone marrow are pulled in PV is caused by the JAK2V617F 
mutation. Dameshek considered PV patients as fundamentally normal and therefore 
the treatment should be as physiologic as possible. For this reason, a 
systematic phlebotomy/iron deficiency method of treatment was recommended; the 
use of radioactive phosphorus is reserved for refractory cases and cases of 
major thrombosis. If the patient lives long enough and does not succumb to the 
effects of thrombosis or other complications, the marrow will gradually show 
signs of diminished activity. The blood smear shows nucleated red cells, 
increased polychromatophilia, and immature granulocytes of various types. With 
increasing reduction of erythropoietic tissue, myelofibrosis becomes more of an 
organized mass of fibrous tissue. There is prominent extramedullary 
hematopoiesis in the spleen, which becomes extraordinarily large and in some 
cases occupies almost the entire abdominal cavity. The enlarged spleen is made 
up largely of metaplastic marrow tissue in primary myeloid metaplasia of the 
spleen.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared.

Publisher: Dameshek’e göre gerçek polistemi (polistemia vera: PV) eş zamanlı 
eritrositoz, lökositoz ve trombositozun olduğu, yayılma özelliği göstermeyen, 
tüm kemik iliğini ilgilendiren miyeloproliferatif bir hastalıktır. Olası 
kalıtsal veya iletilebilme eğilimi olabilir, ancak gerçek ailevi polistemi 
nadirdir. Etyolojiye yönelik olarak Dameshek 1950’de iki çok tartışmalı olasılık 
ileri sürmüştür: bilinmeyen faktör veya faktörlerce kemik iliğinin aşırı 
uyarılması ve normal baskılayıcı faktör veya faktörlerin eksikliği veya 
olmaması. Dameshek’in hipotezi 2005 yılında Fransa’da Vainchecker tarafından 3 
klasik miyeloproliferatif neoplazinin fenotipinin nedeni olarak edinsel 
JAK2V617F mutasyonunun keşfi ile ispatlandı: esansiyel trombositemi, PV ve 
miyelofibroz. JAK2V617F mutasyonu Janus kinaz 2 (JAK2)’nin parçası JH1 kinaz 
üzerinde yer alan JH2 yalancı kinazın baskılayıcı aktivitesinin kaybına neden 
olmaktadır. Bu durum JAK2’nin normal JH1 kinaz aktivitesinin artışına neden 
olarak mutasyona uğramış hematopoetik kök hücrelerini trombopoetin, 
eritropoetin, insulin-benzeri büyüme faktörü-1, kök hücre faktörü ve granülosit 
koloni uyarıcı faktor gibi hematopoetik büyüme faktörlerine karşı ileri derecede 
hassaslaştırmak suretiyle her üç seride miyeloproliferasyona neden olmaktadır. 
Sonuç olarak, Dameshek tarafından gözlemlenen durum PV’da kemik iliğinde kan 
üretiminini sınırlayan tüm kontrol basamaklarının JAK2V617F mutasyonu ile 
ortadan kaldırıldığıdır.Dameshek PV hastalarını özünde normal olarak 
değerlendirdiğinden tedavinin mümkün olduğunca fizyolojik olması gerekmekteydi. 
Bu nedenle, sistematik flebotomi/demir eksikliği tedavi metodu önerildi; 
radyoaktif fosfor kullanımı dirençli ve major trombozu olan hastalara saklandı. 
Hasta yeterince uzun yaşar ve tromboz etkisi ya da diğer komplikasyonlara bağlı 
kaybedilmezse, ilik giderek azalan aktivite belirtileri gösterecektir. Kan 
yaymasında çekirdekli eritrositler, artmış polikromatofili, değişik tiplerde 
olgunlaşmamış granülositler izlenir. Eritropoetik dokunun gittikçe azalmasıyla, 
miyelofibroz daha çok organize bir fibröz doku kitlesine dönüşür. Aşırı büyüyen 
ve bazı olgularda tüm karın boşluğunu dolduran dalakta belirgin ekstramedüller 
hematopoez vardır. Büyümüş dalak, büyük ölçüde dalağın primer miyeloid 
metaplazisi alanında yerleşen metastatik kemik iliğinden meydana gelir.

DOI: 10.4274/Tjh.2013.0029
PMCID: PMC3878466
PMID: 24385771