1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083169. 
eCollection 2013.

Transgenic hybrid poplar for sustainable and scalable production of the 
commodity/specialty chemical, 2-phenylethanol.

Costa MA(1), Marques JV(1), Dalisay DS(1), Herman B(1), Bedgar DL(1), Davin 
LB(1), Lewis NG(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington, United States of America.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington, United States of America ; Ealasid, Inc., Pullman, Washington, 
United States of America.

Fast growing hybrid poplar offers the means for sustainable production of 
specialty and commodity chemicals, in addition to rapid biomass production for 
lignocellulosic deconstruction. Herein we describe transformation of 
fast-growing transgenic hybrid poplar lines to produce 2-phenylethanol, this 
being an important fragrance, flavor, aroma, and commodity chemical. It is also 
readily converted into styrene or ethyl benzene, the latter being an important 
commodity aviation fuel component. Introducing this biochemical pathway into 
hybrid poplars marks the beginnings of developing a platform for a sustainable 
chemical delivery system to afford this and other valuable specialty/commodity 
chemicals at the scale and cost needed. These modified plant lines mainly 
sequester 2-phenylethanol via carbohydrate and other covalently linked 
derivatives, thereby providing an additional advantage of effective storage 
until needed. The future potential of this technology is discussed. MALDI 
metabolite tissue imaging also established localization of these metabolites in 
the leaf vasculature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083169
PMCID: PMC3873308
PMID: 24386157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal′s policy and have the following conflicts: One of the authors is the 
President of a company, Ealasid, Inc. that is planning to commercialize these 
developments. The authors are currently in a start-up phase and are applying for 
patent protection. U.S. patent application: Costa, M.A., Davin, L.B., Lewis, 
N.G. “Modified Plants for Producing Aroma/Fine/Specialty Chemicals” serial 
number 13/959,679 filed August 5, 2013. This confirms that this does not alter 
the authors′ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.