1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 24;52(2):145-58. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0243. Print
2014  Apr.

TRIB1 downregulates hepatic lipogenesis and glycogenesis via multiple molecular 
interactions.

Ishizuka Y(1), Nakayama K, Ogawa A, Makishima S, Boonvisut S, Hirao A, Iwasaki 
Y, Yada T, Yanagisawa Y, Miyashita H, Takahashi M, Iwamoto S; Jichi Medical 
University Promotion Team of Large-Scale Human Genome Bank for All over Japan.

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical 
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Department of 
Anatomy Division of Integrative Physiology, Department of Physiology, Jichi 
Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Health Care Food Research, Human 
Health Care Research, Research and Development, Kao Corporation, Sumida-ku, 
Tokyo 131-8501, Japan Jichi Medical University Health Care Center, 
Shimotsuke-shi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan Division of Inflammation Research, 
Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan 
Division of Community and Family Medicine, Center for Community Medicine, Jichi 
Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Mammalian tribbles homolog 1 (TRIB1) regulates hepatic lipogenesis and is 
genetically associated with plasma triglyceride (TG) levels and cholesterol, but 
the molecular mechanisms remain obscure. We explored these mechanisms in mouse 
livers transfected with a TRIB1 overexpression, a shRNA template or a control 
(LacZ) adenovirus vector. The overexpression of TRIB1 reduced, whereas induction 
of the shRNA template increased, plasma glucose, TG, and cholesterol and 
simultaneously hepatic TG and glycogen levels. The involvement of TRIB1 in 
hepatic lipid accumulation was supported by the findings of a human SNP 
association study. A TRIB1 SNP, rs6982502, was identified in an enhancer 
sequence, modulated enhancer activity in reporter gene assays, and was 
significantly (P=9.39 Ã— 10(-7)) associated with ultrasonographically diagnosed 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in a population of 5570 individuals. 
Transcriptome analyses of mouse livers revealed significant modulation of the 
gene sets involved in glycogenolysis and lipogenesis. Enforced TRIB1 expression 
abolished CCAAT/enhancer binding protein A (CEBPA), CEBPB, and MLXIPL proteins, 
whereas knockdown increased the protein level. Levels of TRIB1 expression 
simultaneously affected MKK4 (MAP2K4), MEK1 (MAP2K1), and ERK1/2 (MAPK1/3) 
protein levels and the phosphorylation of JNK, but not of ERK1/2. Pull-down and 
mammalian two-hybrid analyses revealed novel molecular interaction between TRIB1 
and a hepatic lipogenic master regulator, MLXIPL. Co-expression of TRIB1 and 
CEBPA or MLXIPL reduced their protein levels and proteasome inhibitors 
attenuated the reduction. These data suggested that the modulation of TRIB1 
expression affects hepatic lipogenesis and glycogenesis through multiple 
molecular interactions.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-13-0243
PMID: 24389359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]