1. Eur J Pediatr. 2014 Jun;173(6):799-804. doi: 10.1007/s00431-013-2252-8. Epub 
2014 Jan 4.

Two Japanese familial cases of Caffey disease with and without the common COL1A1 
mutation and normal bone density, and review of the literature.

Kitaoka T(1), Miyoshi Y, Namba N, Miura K, Kubota T, Ohata Y, Fujiwara M, Takagi 
M, Hasegawa T, JÃ¼ppner H, Ozono K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Caffey disease, also known as infantile cortical hyperostosis, is a rare bone 
disease characterized by acute inflammation with swelling of soft tissues and 
hyperostosis of the outer cortical surface in early infancy. The common 
heterozygous mutation of the COL1A1 gene, p.Arg1014Cys, has been reported in 
patients with Caffey disease. However, its pathogenesis remains to be 
elucidated, and the reason for the incomplete penetrance and transient course of 
the disease is still unclear. In the present study, we performed mutation 
analysis of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes and measured bone mineral density in two 
Japanese familial cases of Caffey disease. The index case and two clinically 
healthy members of one family carry the common heterozygous mutation; in 
contrast, no mutation in COL1A1 or COL1A2 was identified in the affected members 
of the second family. In addition, we found normal bone mineral density in adult 
patients of both families who have had an episode of cortical hyperostosis 
regardless of the presence or absence of the common p.Arg1014Cys mutation.
CONCLUSION: The results reveal that Caffey disease is genetically heterogeneous 
and that affected and unaffected adult patients with or without the common 
COL1A1 mutation have normal bone mineral density.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-013-2252-8
PMID: 24390061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]