1. Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2013 Jun;28(2):103-9. doi:
10.3803/EnM.2013.28.2.103.  Epub 2013 Jun 18.

Hemoglobin a1c is positively correlated with framingham risk score in older, 
apparently healthy nondiabetic korean adults.

Shin JH(1), Kang JI(2), Jung Y(2), Choi YM(2), Park HJ(2), So JH(2), Kim JH(2), 
Kim SY(2), Bae HY(2).

Author information:
(1)Miso Silver Hospital, Hwasun, Korea.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Chosun University Hospital, 
Chosun University School of Medicine, Gwangju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that elevated levels of hemoglobin 
A1c (HbA1c) are associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) in nondiabetic 
individuals. However, it is unclear whether HbA1c levels can serve as a simple 
screening marker for increased CVD risk in nondiabetic individuals. Our 
objective was to evaluate the relationship between HbA1c levels and CVD risk 
using the Framingham risk score (FRS) in older, apparently healthy nondiabetic 
Korean adults.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 2,879 Korean adults between the ages of 40 
and 79 who underwent voluntary health check-ups at the Health Promotion Center 
of our hospital from July 2009 to June 2011. Subjects were subdivided based on 
their HbA1c levels into four groups: tertiles within the HbA1c normal tolerance 
range and a group for subjects with an increased risk for diabetes (IRD).
RESULTS: The mean FRS for the upper tertile (9.6±3.8) group was significantly 
higher than that of the middle tertile (8.4±4.0) and lower tertile (7.6±3.8) 
groups. In addition, FRS was highest in the IRD group (10.5±3.7). Multiple 
linear regression analysis demonstrated that HbA1c levels exhibited a 
significant positive correlation with FRS when adjusted for confounding 
variables in all subjects (β±standard error [SE], 0.018±0.002; R (2), 0.131), 
women (β±SE, 0.023±0.003; R (2), 0.170), and men (β±SE, 0.016±0.004; R (2), 
0.109).
CONCLUSION: HbA1c levels were positively correlated with FRS in older, 
apparently healthy nondiabetic Korean adults. We propose that HbA1c levels may 
reflect CVD risk in nondiabetic individuals.

DOI: 10.3803/EnM.2013.28.2.103
PMCID: PMC3811715
PMID: 24396663

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.