1. Nature. 2014 Feb 20;506(7488):382-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12875. Epub 2013 Dec
25.

Selection and evaluation of clinically relevant AAV variants in a xenograft 
liver model.

Lisowski L(1), Dane AP(2), Chu K(3), Zhang Y(3), Cunningham SC(4), Wilson EM(5), 
Nygaard S(6), Grompe M(6), Alexander IE(7), Kay MA(3).

Author information:
(1)1] Stanford University, School of Medicine, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Genetics, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2] Gene Transfer, 
Targeting and Therapeutics Core, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 N. Torrey Pines Rd, San Diego, California 92037, USA (L.L.); Department of 
Haematology, University College London Cancer Institute, London WC1E 6BT, UK 
(A.P.D.).
(2)1] Gene Therapy Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and 
Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 4001, Westmead, 2145 New South 
Wales, Australia [2] Gene Transfer, Targeting and Therapeutics Core, The Salk 
Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 N. Torrey Pines Rd, San Diego, 
California 92037, USA (L.L.); Department of Haematology, University College 
London Cancer Institute, London WC1E 6BT, UK (A.P.D.).
(3)Stanford University, School of Medicine, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Genetics, 269 Campus Drive, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
(4)Gene Therapy Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and 
Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 4001, Westmead, 2145 New South 
Wales, Australia.
(5)Yecuris Corporation, Portland, Oregon 97062, USA.
(6)Oregon Stem Cell Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon 97239, USA.
(7)1] Gene Therapy Research Unit, The Children's Hospital at Westmead and 
Children's Medical Research Institute, Locked Bag 4001, Westmead, 2145 New South 
Wales, Australia [2] Discipline of Paediatrics and Child Health, The University 
of Sydney, 2145 New South Wales, Australia.

Recombinant adeno-associated viral (rAAV) vectors have shown early promise in 
clinical trials. The therapeutic transgene cassette can be packaged in different 
AAV capsid pseudotypes, each having a unique transduction profile. At present, 
rAAV capsid serotype selection for a specific clinical trial is based on 
effectiveness in animal models. However, preclinical animal studies are not 
always predictive of human outcome. Here, in an attempt to further our 
understanding of these discrepancies, we used a chimaeric human-murine liver 
model to compare directly the relative efficiency of rAAV transduction in human 
versus mouse hepatocytes in vivo. As predicted from preclinical and clinical 
studies, rAAV2 vectors functionally transduced mouse and human hepatocytes at 
equivalent but relatively low levels. However, rAAV8 vectors, which are very 
effective in many animal models, transduced human hepatocytes rather 
poorly-approximately 20 times less efficiently than mouse hepatocytes. In light 
of the limitations of the rAAV vectors currently used in clinical studies, we 
used the same murine chimaeric liver model to perform serial selection using a 
human-specific replication-competent viral library composed of DNA-shuffled AAV 
capsids. One chimaeric capsid composed of five different parental AAV capsids 
was found to transduce human primary hepatocytes at high efficiency in vitro and 
in vivo, and provided species-selected transduction in primary liver, cultured 
cells and a hepatocellular carcinoma xenograft model. This vector is an ideal 
clinical candidate and a reagent for gene modification of human xenotransplants 
in mouse models of human diseases. More importantly, our results suggest that 
humanized murine models may represent a more precise approach for both selecting 
and evaluating clinically relevant rAAV serotypes for gene therapeutic 
applications.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12875
PMCID: PMC3939040
PMID: 24390344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict statement: Oregon Health and Science 
University (OHSU) and MG have a significant financial interest in YecurisCorp., 
a company that has some commercial interests in the FRG mouse. MK has a minor 
equity stake with stock options value >$5000 and plays no role in the company. 
LW is an employee of Yecuris and has no equity. MG and Yecuris have no ownership 
or intellectual property rights to any of the new AAV vectors described herein 
including AAV-LK03.