1. Front Neural Circuits. 2013 Dec 20;7:202. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00202. 
eCollection 2013.

Regulation of thalamocortical axon branching by BDNF and synaptic vesicle 
cycling.

Granseth B(1), Fukushima Y(2), Sugo N(2), Lagnado L(3), Yamamoto N(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Laboratories, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka 
University Suita, Osaka, Japan ; Division of Cell Biology, Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University Linköping, Sweden.
(2)Neuroscience Laboratories, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka 
University Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex Brighton, 
UK.

During development, axons form branches in response to extracellular molecules. 
Little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms. Here, we investigate 
how neurotrophin-induced axon branching is related to synaptic vesicle cycling 
for thalamocortical axons. The exogenous application of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) markedly increased axon branching in thalamocortical 
co-cultures, while removal of endogenous BDNF reduced branching. Over-expression 
of a C-terminal fragment of AP180 that inhibits clathrin-mediated endocytosis 
affected the laminar distribution and the number of branch points. A 
dominant-negative synaptotagmin mutant that selectively targets synaptic vesicle 
cycling, strongly suppressed axon branching. Moreover, axons expressing the 
mutant synaptotagmin were resistant to the branch-promoting effect of BDNF. 
These results suggest that synaptic vesicle cycling might regulate BDNF induced 
branching during the development of the axonal arbor.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00202
PMCID: PMC3868945
PMID: 24391549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]