1. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2246-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02647-13. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Hantavirus GnT elements mediate TRAF3 binding and inhibit RIG-I/TBK1-directed 
beta interferon transcription by blocking IRF3 phosphorylation.

Matthys VS(1), Cimica V, Dalrymple NA, Glennon NB, Bianco C, Mackow ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Hantaviruses successfully replicate in primary human endothelial cells by 
restricting the early induction of beta interferon (IFN-β) and 
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Gn proteins from NY-1V, ANDV, and TULV, but 
not PHV, harbor elements in their 142-residue cytoplasmic tails (GnTs) that 
inhibit RIG-I/MAVS/TBK1-TRAF3-directed IFN-β induction. Here, we define GnT 
interactions and residues required to inhibit TRAF3-TBK1-directed IFN-β 
induction and IRF3 phosphorylation. We observed that GnTs bind TRAF3 via 
residues within the TRAF-N domain (residues 392 to 415) and that binding is 
independent of the MAVS-interactive TRAF-C domain (residues 415 to 568). We 
determined that GnT binding to TRAF3 is mediated by C-terminal degrons within 
NY-1V or ANDV GnTs and that mutations that add degrons to TULV or PHV GnTs 
confer TRAF3 binding. Further analysis of GnT domains revealed that TRAF3 
binding is a discrete GnT function, independent of IFN regulation, and that 
residues 15 to 42 from the NY-1V GnT C terminus are required for inhibiting 
TBK1-directed IFN-β transcription. Mutagenesis of the NY-1V GnT revealed that 
altering tyrosine 627 (Y627A/S/F) abolished GnT regulation of 
RIG-I/TBK1-directed IRF3 phosphorylation and transcriptional responses of ISRE, 
κB, and IFN-β promoters. Moreover, GnTs from NY-1V, ANDV, and TULV, but not PHV, 
inhibited RIG-I-directed IRF3 phosphorylation. Collectively, these findings 
suggest a novel role for GnTs in regulating RIG-I/TBK1 pathway-directed IRF3 
phosphorylation and IFN-β induction and define virulence determinants within 
GnTs that may permit the attenuation of pathogenic hantaviruses. IMPORTANCE 
These findings provide a mechanism for selected hantavirus GnT interactions to 
regulate RIG-I/TBK1 signaling responses required for IFN-β induction by 
inhibiting TBK1 phosphorylation of IRF3. These studies culminate in showing that 
a single GnT residue, Y627, is required for the NY-1V GnT to inhibit 
RIG-I/TBK1-directed IRF3 phosphorylation and IFN-β induction. These findings 
define a potential virulence determinant within the NY-1V GnT that may permit 
hantavirus attenuation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02647-13
PMCID: PMC3911538
PMID: 24390324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]