1. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):14-23. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0541. Epub
 2014 Jan 7.

Nicotine-mediated cell proliferation and tumor progression in smoking-related 
cancers.

Schaal C(1), Chellappan SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612. 
Srikumar.Chellappan@moffitt.org.

Tobacco smoke contains multiple classes of established carcinogens including 
benzo(a)pyrenes, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and tobacco-specific 
nitrosamines. Most of these compounds exert their genotoxic effects by forming 
DNA adducts and generation of reactive oxygen species, causing mutations in 
vital genes such as K-Ras and p53. In addition, tobacco-specific nitrosamines 
can activate nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) and to a certain extent 
β-adrenergic receptors (β-AR), promoting cell proliferation. Furthermore, it has 
been demonstrated that nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco smoke, 
can induce cell-cycle progression, angiogenesis, and metastasis of lung and 
pancreatic cancers. These effects occur mainly through the α7-nAChRs, with 
possible contribution from the β-ARs and/or epidermal growth factor receptors. 
This review article will discuss the molecular mechanisms by which nicotine and 
its oncogenic derivatives such as 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone 
and N-nitrosonornicotine induce cell-cycle progression and promote tumor growth. 
A variety of signaling cascades are induced by nicotine through nAChRs, 
including the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase pathway, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway, and janus-activated 
kinase/STAT signaling. In addition, studies have shown that nAChR activation 
induces Src kinase in a β-arrestin-1-dependent manner, leading to the 
inactivation of Rb protein and resulting in the expression of E2F1-regulated 
proliferative genes. Such nAChR-mediated signaling events enhance the 
proliferation of cells and render them resistant to apoptosis induced by various 
agents. These observations highlight the role of nAChRs in promoting the growth 
and metastasis of tumors and raise the possibility of targeting them for cancer 
therapy.

©2014 AACR.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0541
PMCID: PMC3915512
PMID: 24398389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]