1. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Feb;7(2):443-446. doi: 10.3892/etm.2013.1441. Epub 2013 Dec
 9.

C-reactive protein as a prognostic marker in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.

Deng ZC(1), Zhao P(2), Cao C(1), Sun SF(1), Zhao F(1), Lu CY(1), Ma HY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315020, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Haining People's Hospital, Haining, Zhejiang 
314400, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to evaluate whether circulating C-reactive protein (CRP) 
levels are a biomarker of systemic inflammation and a significant predictor of 
future chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) outcome. During the study, 
116 patients with stable COPD and 35 age- and gender-matched healthy subjects 
with normal pulmonary function were observed. Patient follow-up was also 
performed to evaluate the strength of the associations between CRP levels and 
future outcomes. The observations from the present study showed that serum CRP 
levels were significantly higher in stable COPD patients than in control 
subjects (4.48±0.83 vs. 1.01±0.27 mg/l, respectively; P<0.05). In addition, it 
was identified that a serum CRP concentration of >3 mg/l is a poor prognostic 
variable of COPD compared with a CRP concentration of ≤3 mg/l [hazard ratio 
(HR), 2.71; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.05-6.99; P<0.05]. A quantitative 
synthesis of four studies including 1,750 COPD patients was performed and 
statistically similar results were obtained (HR, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.14-2.07; 
P<0.01). The present study showed that circulating CRP levels are higher in 
stable COPD patients and, therefore, may be used as a long-term predictor of 
future outcomes. These observations highlight the importance of high sensitivity 
CRP assays in patients with stable COPD.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2013.1441
PMCID: PMC3881036
PMID: 24396422