1. Prion. 2013 Nov-Dec;7(6):457-63. doi: 10.4161/pri.27531. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

The metazoan protein disaggregase and amyloid depolymerase system: Hsp110, 
Hsp70, Hsp40, and small heat shock proteins.

Torrente MP(1), Shorter J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics; 805b Stellar-Chance Laboratories; 
Perelman School of Medicine; University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, PA USA.

A baffling aspect of metazoan proteostasis is the lack of an Hsp104 ortholog 
that rapidly disaggregates and reactivates misfolded polypeptides trapped in 
stress induced disordered aggregates, preamyloid oligomers, or amyloid fibrils. 
By contrast, in bacteria, protozoa, chromista, fungi, and plants, Hsp104 
orthologs are highly conserved and confer huge selective advantages in stress 
tolerance. Moreover, in fungi, the amyloid remodeling activity of Hsp104 has 
enabled deployment of prions for various beneficial modalities. Thus, a 
longstanding conundrum has remained unanswered: how do metazoan cells renature 
aggregated proteins or resolve amyloid fibrils without Hsp104? Here, we 
highlight recent advances that unveil the metazoan protein-disaggregase 
machinery, comprising Hsp110, Hsp70, and Hsp40, which synergize to dissolve 
disordered aggregates, but are unable to rapidly solubilize stable amyloid 
fibrils. However, Hsp110, Hsp70, and Hsp40 exploit the slow monomer exchange 
dynamics of amyloid, and can slowly depolymerize amyloid fibrils from their ends 
in a manner that is stimulated by small heat shock proteins. Upregulation of 
this system could have key therapeutic applications in various 
protein-misfolding disorders. Intriguingly, yeast Hsp104 can interface with 
metazoan Hsp110, Hsp70, and Hsp40 to rapidly eliminate disease associated 
amyloid. Thus, metazoan proteostasis is receptive to augmentation with exogenous 
disaggregases, which opens a number of therapeutic opportunities.

DOI: 10.4161/pri.27531
PMCID: PMC4201613
PMID: 24401655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]