1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e84947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084947.
eCollection  2014.

Toxin-independent virulence of Bacillus anthracis in rabbits.

Levy H(1), Glinert I(1), Weiss S(1), Sittner A(1), Schlomovitz J(1), Altboum 
Z(1), Kobiler D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Israel Institute for Biological Research, 
Ness Ziona, Israel.

The accepted paradigm states that anthrax is both an invasive and toxinogenic 
disease and that the toxins play a major role in pathogenicity. In the guinea 
pig (GP) model we have previously shown that deletion of all three toxin 
components results in a relatively moderate attenuation in virulence, indicating 
that B. anthracis possesses an additional toxin-independent virulence mechanism. 
To characterize this toxin-independent mechanism in anthrax disease, we 
developed a new rabbit model by intravenous injection (IV) of B. anthracis 
encapsulated vegetative cells, artificially creating bacteremia. Using this 
model we were able to demonstrate that also in rabbits, B. anthracis mutants 
lacking the toxins are capable of killing the host within 24 hours. This 
virulent trait depends on the activity of AtxA in the presence of pXO2, as, in 
the absence of the toxin genes, deletion of either component abolishes 
virulence. Furthermore, this IV virulence depends mainly on AtxA rather than the 
whole pXO1. A similar pattern was shown in the GP model using subcutaneous (SC) 
administration of spores of the mutant strains, demonstrating the generality of 
the phenomenon. The virulent strains showed higher bacteremia levels and more 
efficient tissue dissemination; however our interpretation is that tissue 
dissemination per se is not the main determinant of virulence whose exact nature 
requires further elucidation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084947
PMCID: PMC3885664
PMID: 24416317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.