1. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Feb 12;136(6):2529-37. doi: 10.1021/ja411338t. Epub 2014
Jan  27.

Flash memory: photochemical imprinting of neuronal action potentials onto a 
microbial rhodopsin.

Venkatachalam V(1), Brinks D, Maclaurin D, Hochbaum D, Kralj J, Cohen AE.

Author information:
(1)Departments of †Chemistry and Chemical Biology, ‡Physics, and §School of 
Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University , Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02138, United States.

We developed a technique, "flash memory", to record a photochemical imprint of 
the activity state--firing or not firing--of a neuron at a user-selected moment 
in time. The key element is an engineered microbial rhodopsin protein with three 
states. Two nonfluorescent states, D1 and D2, exist in a voltage-dependent 
equilibrium. A stable fluorescent state, F, is reached by a photochemical 
conversion from D2. When exposed to light of a wavelength λ(write), population 
transfers from D2 to F, at a rate determined by the D1 ⇌ D2 equilibrium. The 
population of F maintains a record of membrane voltage which persists in the 
dark. Illumination at a later time at a wavelength λ(read) excites fluorescence 
of F, probing this record. An optional third flash at a wavelength λ(reset) 
converts F back to D2, for a subsequent write-read cycle. The flash memory 
method offers the promise to decouple the recording of neural activity from its 
readout. In principle, the technique may enable one to generate snapshots of 
neural activity in a large volume of neural tissue, e.g., a complete mouse 
brain, by circumventing the challenge of imaging a large volume with 
simultaneous high spatial and high temporal resolution. The proof-of-principle 
flash memory sensors presented here will need improvements in sensitivity, 
speed, brightness, and membrane trafficking before this goal can be realized.

DOI: 10.1021/ja411338t
PMCID: PMC3985752
PMID: 24428326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]