1. Genetics. 2014 Apr;196(4):985-99. doi: 10.1534/genetics.113.158295. Epub 2014 
Jan 14.

Loss of Caenorhabditis elegans BRCA1 promotes genome stability during 
replication in smc-5 mutants.

Wolters S(1), Ermolaeva MA, Bickel JS, Fingerhut JM, Khanikar J, Chan RC, 
Schumacher B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genome Stability in Ageing and Disease, Medical Faculty, 
University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

DNA damage by ultraviolet (UV) light poses a risk for mutagenesis and a 
potential hindrance for cell cycle progression. Cells cope with UV-induced DNA 
damage through two general strategies to repair the damaged nucleotides and to 
promote cell cycle progression in the presence of UV-damaged DNA. Defining the 
genetic pathways and understanding how they function together to enable 
effective tolerance to UV remains an important area of research. The structural 
maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins form distinct complexes that maintain 
genome stability during chromosome segregation, homologous recombination, and 
DNA replication. Using a forward genetic screen, we identified two alleles of 
smc-5 that exacerbate UV sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Germ cells of 
smc-5-defective animals show reduced proliferation, sensitivity to perturbed 
replication, chromatin bridge formation, and accumulation of RAD-51 foci that 
indicate the activation of homologous recombination at DNA double-strand breaks. 
Mutations in the translesion synthesis polymerase polh-1 act synergistically 
with smc-5 mutations in provoking genome instability after UV-induced DNA 
damage. In contrast, the DNA damage accumulation and sensitivity of smc-5 mutant 
strains to replication impediments are suppressed by mutations in the C. elegans 
BRCA1/BARD1 homologs, brc-1 and brd-1. We propose that SMC-5/6 promotes 
replication fork stability and facilitates recombination-dependent repair when 
the BRC-1/BRD-1 complex initiates homologous recombination at stalled 
replication forks. Our data suggest that BRC-1/BRD-1 can both promote and 
antagonize genome stability depending on whether homologous recombination is 
initiated during DNA double-strand break repair or during replication stalling.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.113.158295
PMCID: PMC3982690
PMID: 24424777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]