1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;22(9):1085-92. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.292. Epub 2014
 Jan 15.

Rescue of wild-type E-cadherin expression from nonsense-mutated cancer cells by 
a suppressor-tRNA.

Bordeira-Carriço R(1), Ferreira D(1), Mateus DD(1), Pinheiro H(1), Pêgo AP(2), 
Santos MA(3), Oliveira C(4).

Author information:
(1)Expression Regulation in Cancer Group, Institute of Molecular Pathology and 
Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.
(2)1] INEB, Instituto de Engenharia Biomédica, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal [2] Universidade do Porto-Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar 
(ICBAS), Porto, Portugal [3] Universidade do Porto-Faculdade de Engenharia, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)RNA Biology Laboratory, Department of Biology and CESAM, University of 
Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
(4)1] Expression Regulation in Cancer Group, Institute of Molecular Pathology 
and Immunology of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal [2] 
Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) syndrome, although rare, is highly 
penetrant at an early age, and is severe and incurable because of ineffective 
screening tools and therapy. Approximately 45% of HDGC families carry germline 
CDH1/E-cadherin alterations, 20% of which are nonsense leading to premature 
protein truncation. Prophylactic gastrectomy is the only recommended approach 
for all asymptomatic CDH1 mutation carriers. Suppressor-tRNAs can replace 
premature stop codons (PTCs) with a cognate amino acid, inducing readthrough and 
generating full-length proteins. The use of suppressor-tRNAs in HDGC patients 
could therefore constitute a less invasive therapeutic option for nonsense 
mutation carriers, delaying the development of gastric cancer. Our analysis 
revealed that 23/108 (21.3%) of E-cadherin-mutant families carried nonsense 
mutations that could be potentially corrected by eight suppressor-tRNAs, and 
arginine was the most frequently affected amino acid. Using site-directed 
mutagenesis, we developed an arginine suppressor-tRNA vector to correct one HDGC 
nonsense mutation. E-cadherin- deficient cell lines were transfected with 
plasmids carrying simultaneously the suppressor-tRNA and wild-type or mutant 
CDH1 mini-genes. RT-PCR, western blot, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry and 
proximity ligation assay (PLA) were used to establish the model, and monitor 
mRNA and protein expression and function recovery from CDH1 vectors. Cells 
expressing a CDH1 mini-gene, carrying a nonsense mutation and the 
suppressor-tRNA, recovered full-length E-cadherin expression and its correct 
localization and incorporation into the adhesion complex. This is the first 
demonstration of functional recovery of a mutated causative gene in hereditary 
cancer by cognate amino acid replacement with suppressor-tRNAs. Of the HDGC 
families, 21.3% are candidates for correction with suppressor-tRNAs to 
potentially delay cancer onset.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.292
PMCID: PMC4135406
PMID: 24424122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]