1. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 2014 Apr;28(2):183-9. doi: 10.1007/s10557-013-6506-5.

AMP deaminase 1 gene polymorphism and heart disease-a genetic association that 
highlights new treatment.

Smolenski RT(1), Rybakowska I, Turyn J, Romaszko P, Zabielska M, Taegtmeyer A, 
Słomińska EM, Kaletha KK, Barton PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical University of Gdansk, Debinki 1, 80-211, 
Gdansk, Poland, rt.smolenski@gumed.edu.pl.

Nucleotide metabolism and signalling is directly linked to myocardial function. 
Therefore analysis how diversity of genes coding nucleotide metabolism related 
proteins affects clinical progress of heart disease could provide valuable 
information for development of new treatments. Several studies identified that 
polymorphism of AMP deaminase 1 gene (AMPD1), in particular the common C34T 
variant of this gene was found to benefit patients with heart failure and 
ischemic heart disease. However, these findings were inconsistent in subsequent 
studies. This prompted our detailed analysis of heart transplant recipients that 
revealed diverse effect: improved early postoperative cardiac function 
associated with C34T mutation in donors, but worse 1-year survival. Our other 
studies on the metabolic impact of AMPD1 C34T mutation revealed decrease in AMPD 
activity, increased production of adenosine and de-inhibition of AMP regulated 
protein kinase. Thus, genetic, clinical and biochemical studies revealed that 
while long term attenuation of AMPD activity could be deleterious, transient 
inhibition of AMPD activity before acute cardiac injury is protective. We 
suggest therefore that pharmacological inhibition of AMP deaminase before 
transient ischemic event such as during ischemic heart disease or cardiac 
surgery could provide therapeutic benefit.

DOI: 10.1007/s10557-013-6506-5
PMCID: PMC3955129
PMID: 24431031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]