1. Biochem J. 2014 Apr 1;459(1):103-15. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131378.

C-terminal peptides modelling constitutive PrPC processing demonstrate 
ameliorated toxicity predisposition consequent to α-cleavage.

Johanssen VA, Johanssen T, Masters CL(1), Hill AF, Barnham KJ, Collins SJ.

Author information:
(1)§Mental Health Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 
3010, Australia.

Misfolding of PrPC (cellular prion protein) to β-strand-rich conformations 
constitutes a key event in prion disease pathogenesis. PrPC can undergo either 
of two constitutive endoproteolytic events known as α- and β-cleavage, yielding 
C-terminal fragments known as C1 and C2 respectively. It is unclear whether 
C-terminal fragments generated through α- and β-cleavage, especially C2, 
influence pathogenesis directly. Consequently, we compared the biophysical 
properties and neurotoxicity of recombinant human PrP fragments recapitulating 
α- and β-cleavage, namely huPrP-(112-231) (equating to C1) and huPrP-(90-231) 
(equating to C2). Under conditions we employed, huPrP-(112-231) could not be 
induced to fold into a β-stranded isoform and neurotoxicity was not a feature 
for monomeric or multimeric assemblies. In contrast, huPrP-(90-231) easily 
adopted a β-strand conformation, demonstrated considerable thermostability and 
was toxic to neurons. Synthetic PrP peptides modelled on α- and β-cleavage of 
the unique Y145STOP (Tyr145→stop) mutant prion protein corroborated the 
differential toxicity observed for recombinant huPrP-(112-231) and 
huPrP-(90-231) and suggested that the persistence of soluble oligomeric 
β-strand-rich conformers was required for significant neurotoxicity. Our results 
additionally indicate that α- and β-cleavage of PrPC generate biophysically and 
biologically non-equivalent C-terminal fragments and that C1 generated through 
α-cleavage appears to be pathogenesis-averse.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20131378
PMID: 24438129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]