1. J Physiol. 2014 May 1;592(9):1957-73. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.264689. Epub 
2014 Jan 20.

Genetic ablation of ryanodine receptor 2 phosphorylation at Ser-2808 aggravates 
Ca(2+)-dependent cardiomyopathy by exacerbating diastolic Ca2+ release.

Liu B(1), Ho HT, Velez-Cortes F, Lou Q, Valdivia CR, Knollmann BC, Valdivia HH, 
Gyorke S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, 507 Davis Heart & Lung Research 
Institute (office), 473 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 
Â sandor.gyorke@osumc.edu.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2014 May 1;592(9):1911-2. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.272575.

Phosphorylation of the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) by protein kinase A 
(PKA) at Ser-2808 is suggested to mediate the physiological 'fight or flight' 
response and contribute to heart failure by rendering the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
(SR) leaky for Ca(2+). In the present study, we examined the potential role of 
RyR2 phosphorylation at Ser-2808 in the progression of Ca(2+)-dependent 
cardiomyopathy (CCM) by using mice genetically modified to feature elevated SR 
Ca(2+) leak while expressing RyR2s that cannot be phosphorylated at this site 
(S2808A). Surprisingly, rather than alleviating the disease phenotype, 
constitutive dephosphorylation of Ser-2808 aggravated CCM as manifested by 
shortened survival, deteriorated in vivo cardiac function, exacerbated SR Ca(2+) 
leak and mitochondrial injury. Notably, the deteriorations of cardiac function, 
myocyte Ca(2+) handling, and mitochondria integrity were consistently worse in 
mice with heterozygous ablation of Ser-2808 than in mice with complete ablation. 
Wild-type (WT) and CCM myocytes expressing unmutated RyR2s exhibited a high 
level of baseline phosphorylation at Ser-2808. Exposure of these CCM cells to 
protein phosphatase 1 caused a transitory increase in Ca(2+) leak attributable 
to partial dephosphorylation of RyR2 tetramers at Ser-2808 from more fully 
phosphorylated state. Thus, exacerbated Ca(2+) leak through partially 
dephosphorylated RyR2s accounts for the prevalence of the disease phenotype in 
the heterozygous S2808A CCM mice. These results do not support the importance of 
RyR2 hyperphosphorylation in Ca(2+)-dependent heart disease, and rather suggest 
roles for the opposite process, the RyR2 dephosphorylation at this residue in 
physiological and pathophysiological Ca(2+) signalling.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.264689
PMCID: PMC4230772
PMID: 24445321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]