1. Stem Cells. 2014 May;32(5):1289-300. doi: 10.1002/stem.1633.

Alk2 regulates early chondrogenic fate in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva 
heterotopic endochondral ossification.

Culbert AL(1), Chakkalakal SA, Theosmy EG, Brennan TA, Kaplan FS, Shore EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA; Center for Research in FOP and 
Related Disorders, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling is a critical regulator of cartilage 
differentiation and endochondral ossification. Gain-of-function mutations in 
ALK2, a type I BMP receptor, cause the debilitating disorder fibrodysplasia 
ossificans progressiva (FOP) and result in progressive heterotopic 
(extraskeletal) endochondral ossification within soft connective tissues. Here, 
we used murine mesenchymal progenitor cells to investigate the contribution of 
Alk2 during chondrogenic differentiation and heterotopic endochondral 
ossification (HEO). Alk2(R206H/+) (gain-of-function), Alk2(CKO) 
(loss-of-function), and wild-type mouse embryonic fibroblasts were evaluated for 
chondrogenic potential. Chondrogenic differentiation was accelerated in 
Alk2(R206H/+) cells, due in part to enhanced sensitivity to BMP ligand. In vivo, 
Alk2(R206H/+) cells initiated robust HEO and recruited wild-type cell 
contribution. Despite expression of other type I BMP receptors (Alk3 and Alk6), 
chondrogenesis of Alk2(CKO) cells was severely impaired by absence of Alk2 
during early differentiation. Alk2 is therefore a direct regulator of cartilage 
formation and mediates chondrogenic commitment of progenitor cells. These data 
establish that at least one effect of ALK2 gain-of-function mutations in FOP 
patients is enhanced chondrogenic differentiation which supports formation of 
heterotopic endochondral bone. This establishes ALK2 as a plausible therapeutic 
target during early chondrogenic stages of lesion formation for preventing 
heterotopic bone formation in FOP and other conditions.

Â© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1633
PMCID: PMC4419363
PMID: 24449086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
The authors indicate no potential conflicts of interest.