1. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Jan 10;13(1):139-51. doi: 10.4238/2014.January.10.5.

-174G/C polymorphism in the interleukin-6 promoter is differently associated 
with prostate cancer incidence depending on race.

Mandal S(1), Abebe F(2), Chaudhary J(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA jchaudhary@cau.edu.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6), a pro-inflammatory cytokine, is involved in prostate 
cancer progression, including androgen independence. Serum IL-6 levels also 
correlate with prostate tumor burden, prostate-specific antigen levels and 
metastasis. Since circulating cytokine levels vary considerably 
inter-individually, such variation could be linked to genetic factors, including 
genetic polymorphism. The -174G>C/rs1800795 polymorphism in the IL-6 promoter is 
functionally relevant in terms of transcriptional regulation and disease 
association. We investigated a possible association of the -174G/C polymorphism 
with prostate cancer. Since significant racial disparities exist in prostate 
cancer incidence, we also investigated this association between the -174G/C 
polymorphism and prostate cancer in Caucasians and African-Americans, 
separately. Direct sequencing of the PCR amplicon from genomic DNA was used for 
genotyping rs1800795 in all subjects [age-matched controls (N = 140) and 
prostate cancer patients (N = 164)]. Sample size and power was calculated using 
the PGA software. We found the GG genotype to be associated with increased risk 
of prostate cancer in Caucasian subjects, whereas the CC genotype was associated 
with increased risk in the African-American sample set. Such a dimorphic 
genotypic association with cancer and race is unique and suggests a complex 
gene-gene and gene-environment interaction.

DOI: 10.4238/2014.January.10.5
PMCID: PMC4038121
PMID: 24446297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.