1. Med Oncol. 2014 Mar;31(3):840. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0840-8. Epub 2014 Jan
21.

VHL and HIF-1α: gene variations and prognosis in early-stage clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma.

Lessi F(1), Mazzanti CM, Tomei S, Di Cristofano C, Minervini A, Menicagli M, 
Apollo A, Masieri L, Collecchi P, Minervini R, Carini M, Bevilacqua G.

Author information:
(1)Pisa Science Foundation, Via Castaldi, 2, 56100, Pisa, Italy, 
f.lessi@fondazionepisascienza.org.

Von Hipple-Lindau gene (VHL) inactivation represents the most frequent 
abnormality in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1α (HIF-1α) expression is regulated by O2 level. In normal O2 conditions, 
VHL binds HIF-1α and allows HIF-1α proteasomal degradation. A single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) has been found located in the oxygen-dependent degradation 
domain at codon 582 (C1772T, rs11549465, Pro582Ser). In hypoxia, VHL/HIF-1α 
interaction is abolished and HIF-1α activates target genes in the nucleus. This 
study analyzes the impact of genetic alterations and protein expression of VHL 
and the C1772T SNP of HIF-1α gene (HIF-1α) on prognosis in early-stage ccRCC 
(pT1a, pT1b, and pT2). Mutational analysis of the entire VHL sequence and the 
genotyping of HIF-1α C1772T SNP were performed together with VHL promoter 
methylation analysis and loss of heterozygosis (LOH) analysis at (3p25) locus. 
Data obtained were correlated with VHL and HIF-1α protein expression and with 
tumor-specific survival (TSS). VHL mutations, methylation status, and LOH were 
detected in 51, 11, and 12% of cases, respectively. Our results support the 
association between biallelic alterations and/or VHL silencing with a worse TSS. 
Moreover, we found a significant association between the HIF-1α C1772C genotype 
and a worse TSS. The same association was found when testing the presence of 
HIF-1α protein in the nucleus. Our results highlight the role of VHL/HIF-1α 
pathway in RCC and support the molecular heterogeneity of early-stage ccRCC. 
More important, we show the involvement of HIF-1α C1772T SNP in ccRCC 
progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0840-8
PMID: 24446253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]