1. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4719-25. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1617-6. Epub 2014
 Jan 23.

The CYP1B1 Leu432Val polymorphism and risk of urinary system cancers.

Liu Y(1), Lin CS, Zhang AM, Song H, Fan CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, General Hospital of Jinan Military Command, 25 Shifan 
Road, Jinan, 250031, China.

The cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) gene plays a key role in the metabolism of 
various carcinogens. The CYP1B1 Leu432Val polymorphism leads to leucine to 
valine substitution at codon 432. A lot of studies have shown that the CYP1B1 
Leu432Val polymorphism was associated with urinary system cancers, especially 
prostate cancer. However, the results were still inconclusive. In this 
meta-analysis, by searching online databases and references of related reviews, 
we identified 17 eligible studies to assess the relationship between CYP1B1 
Leu432Val polymorphism and urinary system cancers, including 7,783 cancer cases 
and 7,238 controls. By pooling all eligible studies, we found that the CYP1B1 
Leu432Val polymorphism was not associated with overall urinary system cancers. 
However, in subgroup analyses, we found that the variant 432Val allele 
significantly increased the risk of prostate cancer (Val vs. Leu, odds ratio 
(OR) = 1.064, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.981-1.154; Pheterogeneity = 0.002), 
while no association was found for bladder cancer (Val vs. Leu, OR = 0.942, 95% 
CI 0.853-1.041; Pheterogeneity = 0.504). No evidence of publication bias was 
found (Begg's test, P = 0.053; Egger's test, P = 0.073). In conclusion, based on 
17 eligible studies, we found that the CYP1B1 Leu432Val polymorphism was 
associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer, while no association of 
bladder cancer was observed.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-1617-6
PMID: 24453031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]