1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 15;9(1):e85198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085198. 
eCollection 2014.

Durable remission of renal cell carcinoma in conjuncture with graft versus host 
disease following allogeneic stem cell transplantation and donor lymphocyte 
infusion: rule or exception?

van Bergen CA(1), Verdegaal EM(2), Honders MW(1), Hoogstraten C(1), Steijn-van 
Tol AQ(2), de Quartel L(2), de Jong J(2), Meyering M(2), Falkenburg JH(1), 
Griffioen M(1), Osanto S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

Allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT) followed by donor lymphocyte 
infusion (DLI) can be applied as immunotherapeutic intervention to treat 
malignant diseases. Here, we describe a patient with progressive metastatic 
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) who was treated with T cell depleted 
non-myeloablative alloSCT and DLI resulting in disease regression accompanied by 
extensive graft versus host disease (GVHD). We characterized the specificity of 
this immune response, and detected a dominant T cell population recognizing a 
novel minor histocompatibility antigen (MiHA) designated LB-FUCA2-1V. T cells 
specific for LB-FUCA2-1V were shown to recognize RCC cell lines, supporting a 
dominant role in the graft versus tumor (GVT) reaction. However, coinciding with 
the gradual disappearance of chronic GVHD, the anti-tumor effect declined and 3 
years after alloSCT the metastases became progressive again. To re-initiate the 
GVT reaction, escalating doses of DLI were given, but no immune response could 
be induced and the patient died of progressive disease 8.5 years after alloSCT. 
Gene expression studies illustrated that only a minimal number of genes shared 
expression between RCC and professional antigen presenting cells but were not 
expressed by non-malignant healthy tissues, indicating that in patients 
suffering from RCC, GVT reactivity after alloSCT may be unavoidably linked to 
GVHD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085198
PMCID: PMC3893183
PMID: 24454818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.