1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 23;9(1):e85804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085804. 
eCollection 2014.

Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase a is a potential metastasis-associated marker of 
lung squamous cell carcinoma and promotes lung cell tumorigenesis and migration.

Du S(1), Guan Z(2), Hao L(3), Song Y(3), Wang L(3), Gong L(3), Liu L(3), Qi 
X(3), Hou Z(4), Shao S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Dalian Medical University, Liaoning, 
China ; Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University Cancer Center, 
Liaoning, China.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Dalian Medical University, Liaoning, 
China ; Liaoning Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Dalian Medical University, 
Liaoning, China.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Dalian Medical University, Liaoning, 
China.
(4)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University Cancer Center, 
Liaoning, China.

Expression of concern in
    PLoS One. 2023 Apr 24;18(4):e0285076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0285076.

Fructose-bisphosphate aldolase A (ALDOA) is a key enzyme in glycolysis and is 
responsible for catalyzing the reversible conversion of 
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to glyceraldehydes-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate. ALDOA contributes to various cellular functions such as muscle 
maintenance, regulation of cell shape and mobility, striated muscle contraction, 
actin filament organization and ATP biosynthetic process. Here, we reported that 
ALDOA is a highly expressed in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and its 
expression level is correlated with LSCC metastasis, grades, differentiation 
status and poor prognosis. Depletion of ALDOA expression in the lung squamous 
carcinoma NCI-H520 cells reduces the capabilities of cell motility and 
tumorigenesis. These data suggest that ALDOA could be a potential marker for 
LSCC metastasis and a therapeutic target for drug development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085804
PMCID: PMC3900443
PMID: 24465716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.