1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003895. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003895. Epub 
2014 Jan 23.

Preservation of tetherin and CD4 counter-activities in circulating Vpu alleles 
despite extensive sequence variation within HIV-1 infected individuals.

Pickering S(1), Hué S(2), Kim EY(3), Reddy S(3), Wolinsky SM(3), Neil SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, King's College School of Medicine, Guy's 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Centre for Medical Molecular Virology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United 
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr;10(4):e1004118.

The HIV-1 Vpu protein is expressed from a bi-cistronic message late in the viral 
life cycle. It functions during viral assembly to maximise infectious virus 
release by targeting CD4 for proteosomal degradation and counteracting the 
antiviral protein tetherin (BST2/CD317). Single genome analysis of vpu 
repertoires throughout infection in 14 individuals infected with HIV-1 clade B 
revealed extensive amino acid diversity of the Vpu protein. For the most part, 
this variation in Vpu increases over the course of infection and is associated 
with predicted epitopes of the individual's MHC class I haplotype, suggesting 
CD8+ T cell pressure is the major driver of Vpu sequence diversity within the 
host. Despite this variability, the Vpu functions of targeting CD4 and 
counteracting both physical virus restriction and NF-κB activation by tetherin 
are rigorously maintained throughout HIV-1 infection. Only a minority of 
circulating alleles bear lesions in either of these activities at any given 
time, suggesting functional Vpu mutants are heavily selected against even at 
later stages of infection. Comparison of Vpu proteins defective for one or 
several functions reveals novel determinants of CD4 downregulation, 
counteraction of tetherin restriction, and inhibition of NF-κB signalling. These 
data affirm the importance of Vpu functions for in vivo persistence of HIV-1 
within infected individuals, not simply for transmission, and highlight its 
potential as a target for antiviral therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003895
PMCID: PMC3900648
PMID: 24465210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.