1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e85942. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085942. 
eCollection 2014.

Biomarkers of TGF-β signaling pathway and prognosis of pancreatic cancer.

Javle M(1), Li Y(1), Tan D(2), Dong X(1), Chang P(1), Kar S(1), Li D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling pathway, may act both 
as a tumor suppressor and as a tumor promoter in pancreatic cancer, depending on 
tumor stage and cellular context. TGF-β pathway has been under intensive 
investigation as a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of cancer. We 
hypothesized a correlation between TGF-βR2/SMAD4 expression in the tumor, plasma 
TGF-β1 ligand level, genetic variation in TGF-B pathway and prognosis of 
pancreatic cancer.
METHOD: We examined TGF-βR2 and SMAD4 protein expression in biopsy or surgical 
samples from 91 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) using 
immunohistochemistry. Plasma level of TGF-β1 was measured in 644 patients with 
PDAC using ELISA. Twenty-eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of the 
TGF-β1, TGF-β2, TGF-β3, TGF-βR1, TGF-βR2, and SMAD4 genes were determined in 
1636 patients with PDAC using the Sequenom method. Correlation between protein 
expression in the tumor, plasma TGF-β1 level, and genotypes with overall 
survival (OS) was evaluated with Cox proportional regression models.
RESULTS: The expression level of TGF-βR2 and SMAD4 as an independent marker was 
not associated with OS. However, patients with both low nuclear staining of 
TGF-βR2 and high nuclear staining of SMAD4 may have better survival (P = 0.06). 
The mean and median level of TGF-β1 was 15.44 (SD: 10.99) and 12.61 
(interquartile range: 8.31 to 19.04) ng/ml respectively. Patients with advanced 
disease and in the upper quartile range of TGF-β1 level had significantly 
reduced survival than those with low levels (P = 0.02). A significant 
association of SMAD4 SNP rs113545983 with overall survival was observed 
(P<0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Our data provides valuable baseline information regarding the TGF-β 
pathway in pancreatic cancer, which can be utilized in targeted therapy clinical 
trials. High TGF-β1 plasma level, SMAD4 SNP or TGF-βR2/SMAD4 tumor protein 
expression may suggest a dependence on this pathway in patients with advanced 
pancreatic cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085942
PMCID: PMC3896410
PMID: 24465802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This research was partly 
funded by Imclone Inc (now Eli Lilly). The authors confirm that this funding 
sponsorship does not alter their adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.