1. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 21;9(1):e86497. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086497. 
eCollection 2014.

Environmental smoking and smoking onset in adolescence: the role of 
dopamine-related genes. Findings from two longitudinal studies.

Hiemstra M(1), Kleinjan M(1), van Schayck OC(2), Engels RC(1), Otten R(1).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Care and Public Health Research Institute (CAPHRI), Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Although environmental smoking (i.e., paternal and maternal smoking, sibling 
smoking, and peer smoking) is one of the most important factors for explaining 
adolescent smoking behavior, not all adolescents are similarly affected. The 
extent to which individuals are vulnerable to smoking in their environment might 
depend on genetic factors. The aim of this study was to examine the interplay 
between environmental smoking and genes encoding components of the dopaminergic 
system (i.e., dopamine receptor D2, D4, and dopamine transporter DAT1) in 
adolescent smoking onset. Data from two longitudinal studies were used. Study 1 
consisted of 991 non-smoking early adolescents (mean age = 12.52, SD = .57) 
whereas study 2 consisted of 365 non-smoking middle to late adolescents (mean 
age = 14.16, SD = 1.07) who were followed for 16 and 48 months, respectively. 
Logistic regression analyses were conducted using Mplus. In study 1, we found 
positive associations between parents' and friends' smoking at the first 
measurement and smoking status 16 months later. In study 2 we found a positive 
association between friends' smoking and smoking onset 48 months later. Neither 
study demonstrated any interaction effects of the DRD2, DRD4, or DAT1 genotypes. 
In conclusion, the effects of environmental smoking on smoking onset are similar 
for adolescent carriers and non-carriers of these specific genes related to the 
dopaminergic system.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086497
PMCID: PMC3897729
PMID: 24466121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.