1. Nature. 2014 Apr 3;508(7494):66-71. doi: 10.1038/nature13007. Epub 2014 Jan
29.

Poly(A)-tail profiling reveals an embryonic switch in translational control.

Subtelny AO(1), Eichhorn SW(2), Chen GR(3), Sive H(4), Bartel DP(3).

Author information:
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA [2] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA [4] Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA [5].
(2)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA [2] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA [4].
(3)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA [2] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical 
Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department 
of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA.
(4)1] Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Department of Biology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Poly(A) tails enhance the stability and translation of most eukaryotic messenger 
RNAs, but difficulties in globally measuring poly(A)-tail lengths have impeded 
greater understanding of poly(A)-tail function. Here we describe poly(A)-tail 
length profiling by sequencing (PAL-seq) and apply it to measure tail lengths of 
millions of individual RNAs isolated from yeasts, cell lines, Arabidopsis 
thaliana leaves, mouse liver, and zebrafish and frog embryos. Poly(A)-tail 
lengths were conserved between orthologous mRNAs, with mRNAs encoding ribosomal 
proteins and other 'housekeeping' proteins tending to have shorter tails. As 
expected, tail lengths were coupled to translational efficiencies in early 
zebrafish and frog embryos. However, this strong coupling diminished at 
gastrulation and was absent in non-embryonic samples, indicating a rapid 
developmental switch in the nature of translational control. This switch 
complements an earlier switch to zygotic transcriptional control and explains 
why the predominant effect of microRNA-mediated deadenylation concurrently 
shifts from translational repression to mRNA destabilization.

DOI: 10.1038/nature13007
PMCID: PMC4086860
PMID: 24476825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]