1. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2013;108 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):110-22. doi: 
10.1590/0074-0276130457.

COI barcode versus morphological identification of Culex (Culex) (Diptera: 
Culicidae) species: a case study using samples from Argentina and Brazil.

Laurito M(1), Oliveira TM(2), Almirón WR(1), Sallum MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas y Tecnológicas, Centro de 
Investigaciones Entomológicas de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Físicas 
y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Argentina, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biológicas y Tecnológicas, Centro de Investigaciones 
Entomológicas de Córdoba, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Físicas y Naturales, 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de Saúde Pública, Universidade de 
São Paulo, Brasil, São PauloSP, Departamento de Epidemiologia, Faculdade de 
Saúde Pública, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Sequences of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) mitochondrial gene from 
adults of 22 Culex (Culex) species from Argentina and Brazil were employed to 
assess species identification and to test the usefulness of COI for barcoding 
using the best close match (BCM) algorithm. A pairwise Kimura two-parameter 
distance matrix including the mean intra and interspecific distances for 71 COI 
barcode sequences was constructed. Of the 12 COI lineages recovered in the 
Neighbour-joining topology, five confirmed recognised morphological species (Cx. 
acharistus, Cx. chidesteri, Cx. dolosus, Cx. lygrus and Cx. saltanensis) with 
intraspecific divergences lower than 1.75%. Cx. bilineatus is formally 
resurrected from the synonymy of Cx. dolosus. Cx. maxi , Cx. surinamensis and 
the Coronator group species included were clustered into an unresolved lineage. 
The intraspecific distance of Cx. pipiens (3%) was almost twice the 
interspecific between it and Cx. quinquefasciatus (1.6%). Regarding the BCM 
criteria, the COI barcode successfully identified 69% of all species. The rest 
of the sequences, approximately 10%, 18% and 3%, remained as ambiguously, mis 
and unidentified, respectively. The COI barcode does not contain enough 
information to distinguish Culex (Cux.) species.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-0276130457
PMCID: PMC4109187
PMID: 24473810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]