1. J Med Chem. 2014 Feb 27;57(4):1573-82. doi: 10.1021/jm401902n. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

Bicyclic 1-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridine-3-carboxamide-containing HIV-1 
integrase inhibitors having high antiviral potency against cells harboring 
raltegravir-resistant integrase mutants.

Zhao XZ(1), Smith SJ, MÃ©tifiot M, Johnson BC, Marchand C, Pommier Y, Hughes SH, 
Burke TR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute-Frederick, National 
Institutes of Health , Frederick, Maryland 21702, United States.

Integrase (IN) inhibitors are the newest class of antiretroviral agents 
developed for the treatment of HIV-1 infections. Merck's Raltegravir (RAL) 
(October 2007) and Gilead's Elvitegravir (EVG) (August 2012), which act as IN 
strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs), were the first anti-IN drugs to be approved 
by the FDA. However, the virus develops resistance to both RAL and EVG, and 
there is extensive cross-resistance to these two drugs. New "2nd-generation" 
INSTIs are needed that will have greater efficacy against RAL- and EVG-resistant 
strains of IN. The FDA has recently approved the first second generation INSTI, 
GSK's Dolutegravir (DTG) (August 2013). Our current article describes the 
design, synthesis, and evaluation of a series of 
1,8-dihydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxamides, 
1,4-dihydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydro-1,8-naphthyridine-3-carboxamides, and 
1-hydroxy-2-oxo-1,2-dihydro-1,8-naphthyridine-3-carboxamides. This resulted in 
the identification of noncytotoxic inhibitors that exhibited single digit 
nanomolar EC50 values against HIV-1 vectors harboring wild-type IN in cell-based 
assays. Importantly, some of these new inhibitors retain greater antiviral 
efficacy compared to that of RAL when tested against a panel of IN mutants that 
included Y143R, N155H, G140S/Q148H, G118R, and E138K/Q148K.

DOI: 10.1021/jm401902n
PMCID: PMC3983366
PMID: 24471816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]