1. Parasite Immunol. 2014 Aug;36(8):367-76. doi: 10.1111/pim.12100.

Immunoregulation in human American leishmaniasis: balancing pathology and 
protection.

Gollob KJ(1), Viana AG, Dutra WO.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Medicine and Biomedicine, Institute for Education and 
Research, Hospital Santa Casa, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil; National Institute 
for Science and Technology - Tropical Diseases (INCT-DT), Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil.

Leishmaniasis covers a broad spectrum of diseases with distinct, and sometimes 
overlapping, characteristics. The common thread in all forms of leishmaniasis is 
the infection by the parasite Leishmania belonging to the genus Leishmania. Upon 
infection of humans, there can be at least three outcomes, (i) control of 
Leishmania by the host immune response resulting in asymptomatic disease, (ii) 
patent infection and development of a relatively mild form of leishmaniasis and 
(iii) patent infection and development of severe clinical forms. The factors 
that determine the outcome of an initial inoculation with Leishmania are many, 
with the species of Leishmania representing one of the strongest predictive 
factors for the development of a given clinical form of disease. This is seen 
with L. braziliensis and L. amazonensis, infection leading mostly to tegumentary 
forms of disease, and L. infantum with the potential to induce visceral disease. 
However, it is also clear that the host immune response is a key factor in 
disease progression, not only responsible for control of Leishmania, but also 
playing an important role in disease progression and pathology. This duality 
between protective and pathogenic immune responses in individuals infected with 
Leishmania in the Americas is the focus of this review.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12100
PMCID: PMC4113557
PMID: 24471648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]