1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2014 Jun;12(5):578-89. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12162. Epub 2014
Feb  1.

Related to ABA-Insensitive3(ABI3)/Viviparous1 and AtABI5 transcription factor 
coexpression in cotton enhances drought stress adaptation.

Mittal A(1), Gampala SS, Ritchie GL, Payton P, Burke JJ, Rock CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, USA.

Drought tolerance is an important trait being pursued by the agbiotech industry. 
Abscisic acid (ABA) is a stress hormone that mediates a multitude of processes 
in growth and development, water use efficiency (WUE) and gene expression during 
seed development and in response to environmental stresses. Arabidopsis 
B3-domain transcription factor Related to ABA-Insensitive3 (ABI3)/Viviparous1 
(namely AtRAV2) and basic leucine zipper (bZIPs) AtABI5 or AtABF3 transactivated 
ABA-inducible promoter:GUS reporter expression in a maize mesophyll protoplast 
transient assay and showed synergies in reporter transactivation when 
coexpressed. Transgenic cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) expressing AtRAV1/2 and/or 
AtABI5 showed resistance to imposed drought stress under field and greenhouse 
conditions and exhibited improved photosynthesis and WUEs associated with 
absorption through larger root system and greater leaf area. We observed synergy 
for root biomass accumulation in the greenhouse, intrinsic WUE in the field and 
drought tolerance in stacked AtRAV and AtABI5 double-transgenic cotton. We 
assessed AtABI5 and AtRAV1/2 involvement in drought stress adaptations through 
reactive oxygen species scavenging and osmotic adjustment by marker gene 
expression in cotton. Deficit irrigation-grown AtRAV1/2 and AtABI5 transgenics 
had 'less-stressed' molecular and physiological phenotypes under drought, likely 
due to improved photoassimilation and root and shoot sink strengths and enhanced 
expression of endogenous GhRAV and genes for antioxidant and osmolyte 
biosynthesis. Overexpression of bZIP and RAV TFs could impact sustainable cotton 
agriculture and potentially other crops under limited irrigation conditions.

Â© 2014 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.12162
PMCID: PMC4043863
PMID: 24483851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]