1. Oman Med J. 2014 Jan;29(1):55-9. doi: 10.5001/omj.2014.12.

Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia due to 17-alpha-hydoxylase/17,20-lyase Deficiency 
Presenting with Hypertension and Pseudohermaphroditism: First Case Report from 
Oman.

Mula-Abed WA(1), Pambinezhuth FB(2), Al-Kindi MK(1), Al-Busaidi NB(2), 
Al-Muslahi HN(2), Al-Lamki MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Royal Hospital, P.O. Box 1331, Seeb 111, 
Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.
(2)Centre, Royal Hospital, P.O. Box 1331, Seeb 111, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.
(3)Medical Endo-Metabolic Unit, Royal Hospital, P.O. Box 1331, Seeb 111, Muscat, 
Sultanate of Oman.

This is the first report of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to combined 
17α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase deficiency in an Omani patient who was initially 
treated for many years as a case of hypertension. CAH is an uncommon disorder 
that results from a defect in steroid hormones biosynthesis in the adrenal 
cortex. The clinical presentation depends on the site of enzymatic mutations and 
the types of accumulated steroid precursors. A 22-year-old woman who was 
diagnosed to have hypertension since the age of 10 years who was treated with 
anti-hypertensive therapy was referred to the National Diabetes and Endocrine 
Centre, Royal Hospital, Oman. The patient also had primary amenorrhea and 
features of sexual infantilism. Full laboratory and radio-imaging investigations 
were done. Adrenal steroids, pituitary function and karyotyping study were 
performed and the diagnosis was confirmed by molecular mutation study. 
Laboratory investigations revealed adrenal steroids and pituitary hormones 
profile in addition to 46XY karyotype that are consistent with the diagnosis of 
CAH due to 17α-hydroxylase deficiency. Extensive laboratory workup revealed low 
levels of serum cortisol (and its precursors 17α-hydroxyprogesterone and 
11-deoxycortisol), adrenal androgens (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and 
androstenedione), and estrogen (estradiol); and high levels of 
mineralocorticoids precursors (11-deoxycorticosterone and corticosterone) with 
high levels of ACTH, FSH and LH. Mutation analysis revealed CYP17A1-homozygous 
mutation (c.287G>A p.Arg96Gln) resulting in the complete absence of 
17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase activity. The patient was treated with dexamethasone 
and ethinyl estradiol with cessation of anti-hypertensive therapy. A review of 
the literature was conducted to identify previous studies related to this 
subtype of CAH. This is the first biochemically and genetically proven case of 
CAH due to 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency in Oman and in the Arab World 
described in the literature.

DOI: 10.5001/omj.2014.12
PMCID: PMC3910417
PMID: 24498484