1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e88190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088190.
eCollection  2014.

The ability to form homodimers is essential for RDM1 to function in RNA-directed 
DNA methylation.

Sasaki T(1), LorkoviÄ‡ ZJ(2), Liang SC(3), Matzke AJ(3), Matzke M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan ; 
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

RDM1 (RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION1) is a small plant-specific protein required 
for RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM). RDM1 interacts with RNA polymerase II 
(Pol II), ARGONAUTE4 (AGO4), and the de novo DNA methyltransferase DOMAINS 
REARRANGED METHYLTRANSFERASE2 (DRM2) and binds to methylated single stranded 
DNA. As the only protein identified so far that interacts directly with DRM2, 
RDM1 plays a pivotal role in the RdDM mechanism by linking the de novo DNA 
methyltransferase activity to AGO4, which binds short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) 
that presumably base-pair with Pol II or Pol V scaffold transcripts synthesized 
at target loci. RDM1 also acts together with the chromatin remodeler DEFECTIVE 
IN RNA-DIRECTED DNA METHYLATION1 (DRD1) and the 
structural-maintenance-of-chromosomes solo hinge protein DEFECTIVE IN MERISTEM 
SILENCING3 (DMS3) to form the DDR complex, which facilitates synthesis of Pol V 
scaffold transcripts. The manner in which RDM1 acts in both the DDR complex and 
as a factor bridging DRM2 and AGO4 remains unclear. RDM1 contains no known 
protein domains but a prior structural analysis suggested distinct regions that 
create a hydrophobic pocket and promote homodimer formation, respectively. We 
have tested several mutated forms of RDM1 altered in the predicted pocket and 
dimerization regions for their ability to complement defects in RdDM and 
transcriptional gene silencing, support synthesis of Pol V transcripts, form 
homodimers, and interact with DMS3. Our results indicate that the ability to 
form homodimers is essential for RDM1 to function fully in the RdDM pathway and 
may be particularly important during the de novo methylation step.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088190
PMCID: PMC3912163
PMID: 24498436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.