1. Age (Dordr). 2014 Jun;36(3):9622. doi: 10.1007/s11357-014-9622-7. Epub 2014
Feb  4.

Assessment of age-related changes in heritability and IGF-1 gene effect on 
circulating IGF-1 levels.

Franco L(1), Williams FM, Trofimov S, Malkin I, Surdulescu G, Spector T, 
Livshits G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Anthropology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

It is well established that insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) circulating 
levels correlate with age and that heritability and influence of IGF-1 gene 
variation on IGF-1 levels also well-known. However, the influence of age on the 
genetic factors determining IGF-1 levels is not clear. In this study, we 
compared heritability estimates between younger (<52 years) and older (>52 
years) twins and tested: (a) whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
lying within 100 kbp of the IGF-1 gene are also associated with IGF-1 variation 
and (b) whether associated SNPs show interaction with age on IGF-1 levels. To 
achieve these aims, we measured plasma levels of IGF-1 and genotyped 18 SNPs 
with minor allele frequency >0.1 in a large sample, 4,471 UK female twins. 
Heritability explained 42 % of IGF-1 variation adjusted for age and in 
unadjusted sample was independent of age. Ten SNPs in four haploblocks showed 
significant association with IGF-1 levels, with p = 0.01-0.0005. The most distal 
SNP was located up to 90 kbp from the IGF-1 gene. When their age-dependent 
effects were examined, one SNP, rs855203, showed significant (p = 0.0009) 
age-dependent interaction effect on IGF-1 levels variation. This is the first 
study to test the age × genotype interaction in IGF-1 levels. The genomic region 
marked by rs855203 may consequently be of significance for further molecular and 
pharmacogenetic research, in particular in advanced age.

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-014-9622-7
PMCID: PMC4082604
PMID: 24493200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]