1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 14;289(11):7907-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528489. Epub 
2014 Feb 4.

Specific contactin N-glycans are implicated in neurofascin binding and 
autoimmune targeting in peripheral neuropathies.

Labasque M(1), Hivert B, Nogales-Gadea G, Querol L, Illa I, Faivre-Sarrailh C.

Author information:
(1)From Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, Centre de Recherche en Neurobiologie et 
Neurophysiologie de Marseille-UMR7286, 13344 Marseille, France.

Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play a crucial role in the formation of the nodes 
of Ranvier and in the rapid propagation of the nerve impulses along myelinated 
axons. These CAMs are the targets of autoimmunity in inflammatory neuropathies. 
We recently showed that a subgroup of patients with aggressive chronic 
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) shows autoantibodies to 
contactin (1). The complex of contactin·Caspr·neurofascin-155 (NF155) enables 
the formation of paranodal junctions, suggesting that antibody attack against 
paranodes may participate in the severity of CIDP. In the present study, we 
mapped the molecular determinants of contactin targeted by the autoantibodies. 
In three patients, immunoreactivity was directed against the Ig domains of 
contactin and was dependent on N-glycans. The serum of one patient was 
selectively directed against contactin bearing mannose-rich N-glycans. 
Strikingly, the oligomannose type sugars of contactin are required for 
association with its glial partner NF155 (2). To investigate precisely the role 
of contactin N-glycans, we have mutated each of the nine consensus 
N-glycosylation sites independently. We found that the mutation of three sites 
(N467Q/N473Q/N494Q) in Ig domain 5 of contactin prevented soluble NF155-Fc 
binding. In contrast, these mutations did not abolish cis-association with 
Caspr. Next, we showed that the cluster of N-glycosylation sites (Asn-467, 
Asn-473, and Asn-494) was required for immunoreactivity in one patient. Using 
cell aggregation assays, we showed that the IgGs from the four CIDP patients 
prevented adhesive interaction between contactin·Caspr and NF155. Importantly, 
we showed that the anti-contactin autoantibodies induced alteration of paranodal 
junctions in myelinated neuronal culture. These results strongly suggest that 
antibodies to CAMs may be pathogenic and induce demyelination via functional 
blocking activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528489
PMCID: PMC3953301
PMID: 24497634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]