1. Curr Pharmacogenomics Person Med. 2013 Sep;11(3):224-230. doi: 
10.2174/18756921113119990004.

A Conceptual Model of Psychoneurological Symptom Cluster Variation in Women with 
Breast Cancer: Bringing Nursing Research to Personalized Medicine.

Starkweather AR(1), Lyon DE(1), Elswick RK Jr(1), Montpetit AJ(1), Conley Y(2), 
McCain NL(1).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University School of Nursing.
(2)University of Pittsburgh School of Nursing.

Personalized medicine applies knowledge about the patient's individual 
characteristics in relation to health and intervention outcomes, including 
treatment response and adverse side-effects, to develop a tailored treatment 
plan. For women with breast cancer, personalized medicine has substantially 
improved the rate of survival, however, a high proportion of these women report 
multiple, co-occurring psychoneurological symptoms over the treatment trajectory 
that adversely affect their quality of life. In a subset of these women, 
co-occurring symptoms referred to as symptoms clusters, can persist long after 
treatment has ended. Over the past decade, research from the field of nursing 
and other health sciences has specifically examined the potential underlying 
mechanisms of the psychoneurological symptom cluster in women with breast 
cancer. Recent findings suggest that epigenetic and genomic factors contribute 
to inter-individual variability in the experience of psychoneurological symptoms 
during and after breast cancer treatment. While nursing research has been 
underrepresented in the field of personalized medicine, these studies represent 
a shared goal; that is, to improve patient outcomes by considering the 
individual's risk of short- and long-term adverse symptoms. The aim of this 
paper is to introduce a conceptual model of the individual variations that 
influence psychoneurological symptoms in women with breast cancer, including 
perceived stress, hypothalamic-pituitary adrenocortical axis dysfunction, 
inflammation, as well as epigenetic and genomic factors. The proposed concepts 
will help bring nursing research and personalized medicine together, in hopes 
that this hitherto neglected and understudied area of biomedical research 
convergence may ultimately lead to the development of more targeted clinical 
nursing strategies in breast cancer patients with psychoneurological symptoms.

DOI: 10.2174/18756921113119990004
PMCID: PMC3909649
PMID: 24497894

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Non declared/applicable.