1. Cardiol Rev. 2014 Mar-Apr;22(2):97-104. doi: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000011.

Canagliflozin: a new class of antidiabetic agent targeting the sodium-glucose 
cotransporter.

Toderika Y(1), Ferguson N.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pharmacy Practice, Arnold & Marie Schwartz College of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long Island University, Brooklyn, NY.

Diabetes is a chronic disease that leads to multiple microvascular and 
macrovascular complications. It is the seventh leading cause of death in the 
United States with increased prevalence worldwide. There are multiple 
antihyperglycemic medication classes available on the market with advantages and 
disadvantages. Canagliflozin, a novel agent that lowers plasma glucose by 
decreasing glucose reabsorption at the proximal tubules of nephrons, inhibits 
the sodium-glucose cotransporter 2. Data suggest a decrease in hemoglobin A1C by 
about 1% in both fasting and postprandial plasma glucose levels, when 
canagliflozin was studied as monotherapy or with various combinations of 
metformin, pioglitazone, sulfonylurea, and insulin. Interestingly, canagliflozin 
use in geriatric patients and in those with renal impairment showed decreased 
efficacy and an increased risk of adverse reactions. These include, but are not 
limited to, hypotension, renal impairment, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, genital 
mycotic infections, hypersensitivity reactions, and increases in low-density 
lipoproteins. Hypoglycemia is a rare occurrence when canagliflozin is used alone 
but can occur more frequently when used in combination with sulfonylurea or 
insulin. This article reviews the pharmacology of canagliflozin, examines 
available clinical trials for efficacy and safety, and describes its role in 
diabetes management.

DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000011
PMID: 24500116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]