1. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Jul;35(7):1769-77. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.12.023. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

Severe amygdala dysfunction in a MAPT transgenic mouse model of frontotemporal 
dementia.

Cook C(1), Dunmore JH(1), Murray ME(1), Scheffel K(1), Shukoor N(1), Tong J(1), 
Castanedes-Casey M(1), Phillips V(1), Rousseau L(1), Penuliar MS(1), Kurti A(1), 
Dickson DW(2), Petrucelli L(2), Fryer JD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA; 
Neurobiology of Disease Program, Mayo Graduate School, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA; 
Neurobiology of Disease Program, Mayo Graduate School, Rochester, MN, USA. 
Electronic address: fryer.john@mayo.edu.

Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) is a 
neurodegenerative tauopathy caused by mutations in the tau gene (MAPT). 
Individuals with FTDP-17 have deficits in learning, memory, and language, in 
addition to personality and behavioral changes that are often characterized by a 
lack of social inhibition. Several transgenic mouse models expressing tau 
mutations have been tested extensively for memory or motor impairments, though 
reports of amygdala-dependent behaviors are lacking. To this end, we tested the 
rTg4510 mouse model on a behavioral battery that included amygdala-dependent 
tasks of exploration. As expected, rTg4510 mice exhibit profound impairments in 
hippocampal-dependent learning and memory tests, including contextual fear 
conditioning. However, rTg4510 mice also display an abnormal hyperexploratory 
phenotype in the open-field assay, elevated plus maze, light-dark exploration, 
and cued fear conditioning, indicative of amygdala dysfunction. Furthermore, 
significant tau burden is detected in the amygdala of both rTg4510 mice and 
human FTDP-17 patients, suggesting that the rTg4510 mouse model recapitulates 
the behavioral disturbances and neurodegeneration of the amygdala characteristic 
of FTDP-17.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.12.023
PMCID: PMC3992979
PMID: 24503275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: All authors 
declare no conflicts of interest. Mayo Clinic has no contracts relating to this 
research through which it may gain financially.