1. J Nucl Med. 2014 Mar;55(3):452-9. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.120873. Epub 2014
Feb  6.

Quantitative immunoPET of prostate cancer xenografts with 89Zr- and 124I-labeled 
anti-PSCA A11 minibody.

Knowles SM(1), Zettlitz KA, Tavaré R, Rochefort MM, Salazar FB, Stout DB, Yazaki 
PJ, Reiter RE, Wu AM.

Author information:
(1)Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, Department of Molecular and Medical 
Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of 
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.

Prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA) is expressed on the cell surface in 83%-100% 
of local prostate cancers and 87%-100% of prostate cancer bone metastases. In 
this study, we sought to develop immunoPET agents using (124)I- and 
(89)Zr-labeled anti-PSCA A11 minibodies (scFv-CH3 dimer, 80 kDa) and evaluate 
their use for quantitative immunoPET imaging of prostate cancer.
METHODS: A11 anti-PSCA minibody was alternatively labeled with (124)I- or 
(89)Zr-desferrioxamine and injected into mice bearing either matched 22Rv1 and 
22Rv1×PSCA or LAPC-9 xenografts. Small-animal PET data were obtained and 
quantitated with and without recovery coefficient-based partial-volume 
correction, and the results were compared with ex vivo biodistribution.
RESULTS: Rapid and specific localization to PSCA-positive tumors and 
high-contrast imaging were observed with both (124)I- and (89)Zr-labeled A11 
anti-PSCA minibody. However, the differences in tumor uptake and background 
uptake of the radiotracers resulted in different levels of imaging contrast. The 
nonresidualizing (124)I-labeled minibody had lower tumor uptake (3.62 ± 1.18 
percentage injected dose per gram [%ID/g] 22Rv1×PSCA, 3.63 ± 0.59 %ID/g LAPC-9) 
than the residualizing (89)Zr-labeled minibody (7.87 ± 0.52 %ID/g 22Rv1×PSCA, 
9.33 ± 0.87 %ID/g LAPC-9, P < 0.0001 for each), but the (124)I-labeled minibody 
achieved higher imaging contrast because of lower nonspecific uptake and better 
tumor-to-soft-tissue ratios (22Rv1×PSCA:22Rv1 positive-to-negative tumor, 13.31 
± 5.59 (124)I-A11 and 4.87 ± 0.52 (89)Zr-A11, P = 0.02). Partial-volume 
correction was found to greatly improve the correspondence between small-animal 
PET and ex vivo quantification of tumor uptake for immunoPET imaging with both 
radionuclides.
CONCLUSION: Both (124)I- and (89)Zr-labeled A11 anti-PSCA minibody showed 
high-contrast imaging of PSCA expression in vivo. However, the (124)I-labeled 
A11 minibody was found to be the superior imaging agent because of lower 
nonspecific uptake and higher tumor-to-soft-tissue contrast. Partial-volume 
correction was found to be essential for robust quantification of immunoPET 
imaging with both (124)I- and (89)Zr-labeled A11 minibody.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.113.120873
PMCID: PMC4052832
PMID: 24504052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]