1. Endocrinology. 2014 Apr;155(4):1353-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1944. Epub 2014
Feb  7.

Pharmacology and pathophysiology of mutated KCNJ5 found in adrenal 
aldosterone-producing adenomas.

Tauber P(1), Penton D, Stindl J, Humberg E, Tegtmeier I, Sterner C, Beuschlein 
F, Reincke M, Barhanin J, Bandulik S, Warth R.

Author information:
(1)Medical Cell Biology (P.T., J.S., E.H., I.T., C.S., S.B., R.W.), University 
of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany; Laboratoire de PhysioMédecine 
Moléculaire (D.P., J.B.), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, and 
Université de Nice Sophia Antipolis, FRE3472-Laboratoire de PhysioMédecine 
Moléculaire, 06108 Nice Cedex, France; Laboratories of Excellence, Ion Channel 
Science and Therapeutics (D.P., J.B.), France; and Medizinische Klinik und 
Poliklinik IV (F.B., M.R.), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, 80336 Munich, 
Germany.

Somatic mutations of the potassium channel KCNJ5 are found in 40% of aldosterone 
producing adenomas (APAs). APA-related mutations of KCNJ5 lead to a pathological 
Na(+) permeability and a rise in cytosolic Ca(2+), the latter presumably by 
depolarizing the membrane and activating voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels. The aim 
of this study was to further investigate the effects of mutated KCNJ5 channels 
on intracellular Na(+) and Ca(2+) homeostasis in human adrenocortical NCI-H295R 
cells. Expression of mutant KCNJ5 led to a 2-fold increase in intracellular 
Na(+) and, in parallel, to a substantial rise in intracellular Ca(2+). The 
increase in Ca(2+) appeared to be caused by activation of voltage-gated Ca(2+) 
channels and by an impairment of Ca(2+) extrusion by Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchangers. 
The mutated KCNJ5 exhibited a pharmacological profile that differed from the one 
of wild-type channels. Mutated KCNJ5 was less Ba(2+) and tertiapin-Q sensitive 
but was inhibited by blockers of Na(+) and Ca(2+)-transporting proteins, such as 
verapamil and amiloride. The clinical use of these drugs might influence 
aldosterone levels in APA patients with KCNJ5 mutations. This might implicate 
diagnostic testing of APAs and could offer new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2013-1944
PMID: 24506072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]