1. Br J Cancer. 2014 Apr 2;110(7):1878-90. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.29. Epub 2014
Feb  11.

Risk and prognosis of ovarian cancer in women with endometriosis: a 
meta-analysis.

Kim HS(1), Kim TH(1), Chung HH(1), Song YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, 101 Daekak-ro Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea.
(2)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, 101 Daekak-ro Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Republic of Korea [2] 
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 
110-799, Republic of Korea [3] Major in Biomodulation, World Class University, 
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The risk and prognosis of ovarian cancer have not been well 
established in women with endometriosis. Thus, we investigated the impact of 
endometriosis on the risk and prognosis for ovarian cancer, and evaluated 
clinicopathologic characteristics of endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer 
(EAOC) in comparison with non-EAOC.
METHODS: After we searched an electronic search to identify relevant studies 
published online between January 1990 and December 2012, we found 20 
case-control and 15 cohort studies including 444,255 patients from 1,625 
potentially relevant studies. In the meta-analysis, ovarian cancer risk by 
endometriosis and clinicopathologic characteristics were evaluated using risk 
ratio (RR) or standard incidence ratio (SIR), and prognosis was investigated 
using hazard ratio (HR) with 95% confidence interval (CI). Heterogeneity was 
evaluated using Higgins I(2) to select fixed-effect (I(2) â‰¤50%) or random 
effects models (I(2)>50%), and found no publication bias using funnel plots with 
Egger's test (P>0.05). Furthermore, we performed subgroup analyses based on 
study design, assessment of endometriosis, histology, disease status, quality of 
study and adjustment for potential confounding factors to minimise bias.
RESULTS: Endometriosis increased ovarian cancer risk in case-control or two-arm 
cohort studies (RR, 1.265; 95% CI, 1.214-1.318) and single-arm cohort studies 
(SIR, 1.797; 95% CI, 1.276-2.531), which were similar in subgroup analyses. 
Although progression-free survival was not different between EAOC and non-EAOC 
(HR, 1.023; 95% CI, 0.712-1.470), EAOC was associated with better overall 
survival than non-EAOC in crude analyses (HR, 0.778; 95% CI, 0.655-0.925). 
However, progression-free survival and overall survival were not different 
between the two groups in subgroup analyses. Stage I-II disease, grade 1 disease 
and nulliparity were more common in EAOC (RRs, 1.959, 1.319 and 1.327; 95% CIs, 
1.367-2.807, 1.149-1.514 and 1.245-1.415), whereas probability of optimal 
debulking surgery was not different between the two groups (RR, 1.403; 95% CI, 
0.915-2.152). Furthermore, endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas were more 
common in EAOC (RRs, 1.759 and 2.606; 95% CIs, 1.551-1.995 and 2.225-3.053), 
whereas serous carcinoma was less frequent in EAOC than in non-EAOC (RR, 0.733; 
95% CI, 0.617-0.871), and there was no difference in the risk of mucinous 
carcinoma between the two groups (RR, 0.805; 95% CI, 0.584-1.109). These 
clinicopathologic characteristics were also similar in subgroup analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis is strongly associated with the increased risk of 
ovarian cancer, and EAOC shows favourable characteristics including early-stage 
disease, low-grade disease and a specific histology such as endometrioid or 
clear cell carcinoma. However, endometriosis may not affect disease progression 
after the onset of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2014.29
PMCID: PMC3974076
PMID: 24518590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]