1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2014 Nov;36(8):624-9. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000116.

Venous thromboembolism at uncommon sites in neonates and children.

Pergantou H(1), Avgeri M, Komitopoulou A, Xafaki P, Kapsimali Z, Mazarakis M, 
Adamtziki E, Platokouki H.

Author information:
(1)Haemostasis Unit, Haemophilia Centre, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.

We retrospectively analyzed the data of 24 children (whereof 11 neonates), with 
non-central venous line-related and nonmalignancy-related venous thromboembolism 
(VTE) at uncommon sites, referred to our Unit from January 1999 to January 2012. 
Thirty patients who also suffered deep vein thrombosis, but in upper/low 
extremities, were not included in the analysis. The location of rare site VTE 
was: portal (n=7), mesenteric (n=2) and left facial vein (n=1), spleen (n=3), 
lung (n=3), whereas 10 neonates developed renal venous thrombosis. The majority 
of patients (91.7%) had at least 1 risk factor for thrombosis. Identified 
thrombophilic factors were: antiphospholipid antibodies (n=2), FV Leiden 
heterozygosity (n=6), MTHFR C677T homozygosity (n=4), protein S deficiency 
(n=2), whereas all neonates had age-related low levels of protein C and protein 
S. All but 6 patients received low-molecular-weight heparin, followed by 
warfarin in 55% of cases, for 3 to 6 months. Prolonged anticoagulation was 
applied in selected cases. During a median follow-up period of 6 years, the 
clinical outcome was: full recovery in 15 patients, evolution to both chronic 
portal hypertension and esophageal varices in 2 children, and progression to 
renal failure in 7 of 10 neonates. Neonates are greatly vulnerable to 
complications after VTE at uncommon sites, particularly renal. Future 
multicentre long-term studies on neonatal and pediatric VTE at unusual sites are 
considered worthwhile.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000116
PMID: 24517966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]