1. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Jul;35(7):1778.e9-1778.e23. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.014. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Genome-wide association study combining pathway analysis for typical sporadic 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Chinese Han populations.

Xie T(1), Deng L(2), Mei P(2), Zhou Y(1), Wang B(1), Zhang J(1), Lin J(2), Wei 
Y(2), Zhang X(3), Xu R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(2)Institute of Translational Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Guangdong Neuroscience Institute, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. Electronic address: xurenshi@yahoo.com.

Sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (sALS) is a severe neurodegenerative 
disease that causes progressive motor neuron death. Although the etiology of 
sALS remains unknown, genetic variants are thought to predispose individuals to 
the disease. Several recent genome-wide association studies have identified a 
number of loci that increase sALS susceptibility, but these only explain a small 
proportion of the disease. To extend the current genetic evidence and to 
identify novel candidates of sALS, we performed a pooling genome-wide 
association study by 859,311 autosomal single-nucleotide polymorphisms of 
IlluminaHumanOmniZhongHua-8 combining pathway analysis in 250 typical sALS cases 
precluding age, clinical course, and phenotype interference and 250 control 
subjects from Chinese Han populations (CHP). The results revealed that 8 novel 
loci of 1p34.3, 3p21.1, 3p22.2, 10p15.2, 22q12.1, 3q13.11, 11q25, 12q24.33, and 
5 previously reported loci of CNTN4 (kgp11325216), ATXN1 (kgp8327591), C9orf72 
(kgp6016770), ITPR2 (kgp3041552), and SOD1 (kgp10760302) were associated with 
sALS from CHP. Furthermore, the pathway analysis based on the Gene Set Analysis 
Toolkit V2 showed that 10 top pathways were strongly associated with sALS from 
CHP, and among them, the 7 most potentially candidate pathways were 
phosphatidylinositol signaling system, Wnt signaling pathway, axon guidance, 
MAPK signaling pathway, neurotrophin signaling pathway, arachidonic acid 
metabolism, and T-cell receptor signaling pathway, a total of 39 significantly 
associate genes in 7 candidate pathways was suggested to involve in the 
pathogenesis of sALS from CHP. In conclusion, our results revealed several new 
loci and pathways related to sALS from CHP and extend the association evidence 
for partial loci, genes, and pathways, which were previously identified in other 
populations. Thus, our data provided new clues for exploring the pathogenesis of 
sALS.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.01.014
PMID: 24529757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]