1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:736385. doi: 10.1155/2014/736385. Epub 2014 Jan 12.

Neurotoxicants are in the air: convergence of human, animal, and in vitro 
studies on the effects of air pollution on the brain.

Costa LG(1), Cole TB(2), Coburn J(3), Chang YC(3), Dao K(3), Roque P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Washington, 4225 Roosevelt, Suite No. 100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA ; Department 
of Neuroscience, University of Parma, Via Volturno 39, 43100 Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Washington, 4225 Roosevelt, Suite No. 100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA ; Center on 
Human Development and Disability, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(3)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Washington, 4225 Roosevelt, Suite No. 100, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

In addition to increased morbidity and mortality caused by respiratory and 
cardiovascular diseases, air pollution may also negatively affect the brain and 
contribute to central nervous system diseases. Air pollution is a mixture 
comprised of several components, of which ultrafine particulate matter (UFPM; 
<100 nm) is of much concern, as these particles can enter the circulation and 
distribute to most organs, including the brain. A major constituent of ambient 
UFPM is represented by traffic-related air pollution, mostly ascribed to diesel 
exhaust (DE). Human epidemiological studies and controlled animal studies have 
shown that exposure to air pollution may lead to neurotoxicity. In addition to a 
variety of behavioral abnormalities, two prominent effects caused by air 
pollution are oxidative stress and neuroinflammation, which are seen in both 
humans and animals and are confirmed by in vitro studies. Among factors which 
can affect neurotoxic outcomes, age is considered the most relevant. Human and 
animal studies suggest that air pollution (and DE) may cause developmental 
neurotoxicity and may contribute to the etiology of neurodevelopmental 
disorders, including autistic spectrum disorders. In addition, air pollution 
exposure has been associated with increased expression of markers of 
neurodegenerative disease pathologies.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/736385
PMCID: PMC3912642
PMID: 24524086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]