1. BMC Struct Biol. 2014 Feb 17;14:8. doi: 10.1186/1472-6807-14-8.

Molecular analysis of hyperthermophilic endoglucanase Cel12B from Thermotoga 
maritima and the properties of its functional residues.

Shi H, Zhang Y, Wang L, Li X, Li W, Wang F(1), Li X.

Author information:
(1)College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, 
China. lixq2002@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Although many hyperthermophilic endoglucanases have been reported 
from archaea and bacteria, a complete survey and classification of all sequences 
in these species from disparate evolutionary groups, and the relationship 
between their molecular structures and functions are lacking. The completion of 
several high-quality gene or genome sequencing projects provided us with the 
unique opportunity to make a complete assessment and thorough comparative 
analysis of the hyperthermophilic endoglucanases encoded in archaea and 
bacteria.
RESULTS: Structure alignment of the 19 hyperthermophilic endoglucanases from 
archaea and bacteria which grow above 80Â°C revealed that Gly30, Pro63, Pro83, 
Trp115, Glu131, Met133, Trp135, Trp175, Gly227 and Glu229 are conserved amino 
acid residues. In addition, the average percentage composition of residues 
cysteine and histidine of 19 endoglucanases is only 0.28 and 0.74 while it is 
high in thermophilic or mesophilic one. It can be inferred from the nodes that 
there is a close relationship among the 19 protein from hyperthermophilic 
bacteria and archaea based on phylogenetic analysis. Among these conserved amino 
acid residues, as far as Cel12B concerned, two Glu residues might be the 
catalytic nucleophile and proton donor, Gly30, Pro63, Pro83 and Gly227 residues 
might be necessary to the thermostability of protein, and Trp115, Met133, 
Trp135, Trp175 residues is related to the binding of substrate. Site-directed 
mutagenesis results reveal that Pro63 and Pro83 contribute to the 
thermostability of Cel12B and Met133 is confirmed to have role in enhancing the 
binding of substrate.
CONCLUSIONS: The conserved acids have been shown great importance to maintain 
the structure, thermostability, as well as the similarity of the enzymatic 
properties of those proteins. We have made clear the function of these conserved 
amino acid residues in Cel12B protein, which is helpful in analyzing other 
undetailed molecular structure and transforming them with site directed 
mutagenesis, as well as providing the theoretical basis for degrading cellulose 
from woody and herbaceous plants.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6807-14-8
PMCID: PMC3936955
PMID: 24529187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]