1. Gut. 2014 May;63(5):844-55. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306627. Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Hepatocellular carcinoma: clinical frontiers and perspectives.

Bruix J(1), Gores GJ, Mazzaferro V.

Author information:
(1)Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) Group, Liver Unit, Hospital Clinic 
Barcelona, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, , Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Gut. 2015 Mar;64(3):520-1. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308139.
    Gut. 2015 Mar;64(3):522. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308381.
    Gut. 2016 Apr;65(4):715-6. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-310292.
    Gut. 2017 Jun;66(6):1172-1173. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-312629.
    Gut. 2018 Feb;67(2):395-396. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2017-314138.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related 
death and is currently the main event leading to death in patients with 
cirrhosis. Evolving information suggests that the metabolic syndrome with 
non-alcoholic liver disease may be an important cause of HCC in addition to 
viral hepatitis and alcohol-induced liver disease. The molecular pathogenesis is 
extremely complex and heterogeneous. To date the molecular information has not 
impacted on treatment decisions. Periodic surveillance imaging of patients with 
cirrhosis is widely practiced, especially because diagnostic, radiographic 
criteria for early-stage HCC have been defined (including nodules between 1 and 
2 cm) and effective treatment is available for tumours detected at an early 
stage. Worldwide the approach to resection versus transplantation varies 
depending upon local resources, expertise and donor availability. The criteria 
for transplantation are discussed, and the controversial areas highlighted with 
evidence-based recommendations provided. Several approaches are available for 
intermediate stage disease, including radiofrequency ablation, transarterial 
chemoembolisation and radioembolisation; the rationale for these therapies is 
buttressed by appropriate outcome-based studies. For advanced disease, systemic 
therapy with sorafenib remains the option best supported by current data. Thus, 
while several trials have failed to improve the benefits of established 
therapies, studies assessing the sequential or combined application of those 
already known to be beneficial are needed. Also, new concepts are provided in 
regards to selecting and stratifying patients for second-line studies, which may 
help explain the failure of prior studies.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306627
PMCID: PMC4337888
PMID: 24531850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JB declares conflicts of 
interest due to consultancy/research studies with Abbott, Arqule, Bayer Shering 
Pharma, BTG Biocompatibles, BMS, Glaxo-Welcome, Imclone, Kowa, Lilly, Novartis, 
OSI, Shering-Plough (Merck) and Terumo. GJG declares conflicts of interest due 
to consultancy with Bayer, Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Chugai, Daiichi Sanyo, 
Delcath, Genentech, and Generon. VM declares conflict of interest due to 
consultancy with Bayer and BTG Biocompatibles.