1. Neuromuscul Disord. 2014 Apr;24(4):365-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nmd.2014.01.006. Epub
 2014 Jan 24.

Asymptomatic myotonia congenita unmasked by severe hypothyroidism.

Passeri E(1), Sansone VA(2), Verdelli C(3), Mendola M(1), Corbetta S(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Dept. Biomedical Sciences for Health, 
University of Milan, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato M.se, Milan, 
Italy.
(2)NEuroMuscular Omnicentre (NEMO), Fondazione Serena Onlus, Dept. Biomedical 
Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)Molecular Biology Laboratory, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato M.se, 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Endocrinology and Diabetology Unit, Dept. Biomedical Sciences for Health, 
University of Milan, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato M.se, Milan, 
Italy. Electronic address: sabrina.corbetta@unimi.it.

Myotonia congenita is an inherited muscle disorder sustained by mutations in the 
skeletal muscle chloride channel gene CLCN1. Symptoms vary from mild to severe 
and generalized myotonia and worsen with cold, stressful events and hormonal 
fluctuations. Here we report the case of a young woman who sought medical 
attention because of subacute onset of diffuse and severe limb myotonia. CLCN1 
gene sequencing showed a heterozygous transversion (T550M), two polymorphisms 
and one silent mutation. Thyroid function screening revealed severe 
hypothyroidism. She was placed on l-thyroxine replacement therapy which 
dramatically improved myotonia. We conclude that hypothyroidism unmasked a 
genetically determined, clinically asymptomatic chloride channelopathy. 
Diagnostic work-up in patients with clinically isolated myotonia should not be 
limited to genetic screening of non-dystrophic or dystrophic myotonias. 
Considering the high prevalence of hypothyroidism in females, systematic thyroid 
function screening by looking for additional hypothyroid symptoms and serum TSH 
levels measurement is mandatory in these patients.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmd.2014.01.006
PMID: 24530047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]