1. Discov Med. 2014 Feb;17(92):101-14.

Implementation of biomarker-driven cancer therapy: existing tools and remaining 
gaps.

Bailey AM(1), Mao Y, Zeng J, Holla V, Johnson A, Brusco L, Chen K, Mendelsohn J, 
Routbort MJ, Mills GB, Meric-Bernstam F.

Author information:
(1)Sheikh Khalifa Al Nahyan Ben Zayed Institute for Personalized Cancer Therapy, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

There has been growing interest in biomarker-driven personalized cancer therapy, 
also known as precision medicine. Recently, dozens of molecular tests, including 
next generation sequencing, have been developed to detect biomarkers that have 
the potential to predict response of cancers to particular targeted therapies. 
However, detection of cancer-related biomarkers is only the first step in the 
battle. Deciding what therapy options to pursue can also be daunting, especially 
when tumors harbor more than one potentially actionable aberration. Further, 
different mutations/variants in a single gene may have different functional 
consequences, and response to targeted agents may be context dependent. However, 
early clinical trials with new molecular entities are increasingly conducted in 
a biomarker-selected fashion, and even when trials are not biomarker-selected, 
much effort is placed on enrolling patients onto clinical trials where they have 
the highest probability of response. We review available molecular tests and 
therapy discerning tools, including tools available for assessing functional 
consequences of molecular alterations and tools for finding applicable clinical 
trials, which exist to help bridge the gap between detection of cancer-related 
biomarker to the initiation of biomarker-matched targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC4160907
PMID: 24534473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement No conflicts of interest, 
financial or otherwise, are declared by the author(s).