1. Int J Clin Pract. 2014 Jun;68(6):682-91. doi: 10.1111/ijcp.12384. Epub 2014
Feb  18.

The importance of weight management in type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Wilding JP(1).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK.

BACKGROUND: The obesity epidemic is driving the increased prevalence of type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and the vast majority of patients with T2DM are 
overweight or obese. Excess body weight is associated with the risk of 
cardiometabolic complications, which are major causes of morbidity and mortality 
in T2DM.
AIMS: To review evidence about effects of weight loss in pre-diabetes and 
established T2DM.
RESULTS: In prediabetes, weight loss has been shown to delay the onset or 
decrease the risk of T2DM, while in established T2DM weight loss has been shown 
to improve glycaemic control, with severe calorie restriction even reversing the 
progression of T2DM. Observational studies support the reduction in 
cardiovascular risk factors following weight loss in patients with T2DM. 
However, data from the randomised Look AHEAD trial revealed intensive weight 
loss interventions did not reduce the rate of cardiovascular events in 
overweight or obese adults with T2DM, and secondary analyses of other large 
cardiovascular outcomes trials have also been inconclusive. However, besides 
cardiovascular risk, other documented benefits of weight loss in T2DM include 
improvements in quality of life, mobility, and physical and sexual function.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians should encourage weight loss in all overweight patients 
with or at risk of T2DM, and should consider the impact on weight when choosing 
the most appropriate glucose-lowering therapies for these patients.

Â© 2014 The Authors International Journal of Clinical Practice Published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijcp.12384
PMCID: PMC4238418
PMID: 24548654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]