1. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Apr;25(8):1327-37. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0447. Epub 2014
 Feb 19.

The HOPS complex mediates autophagosome-lysosome fusion through interaction with 
syntaxin 17.

Jiang P(1), Nishimura T, Sakamaki Y, Itakura E, Hatta T, Natsume T, Mizushima N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School, and 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan Department of 
Physiology and Cell Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 
113-8519, Japan Research Center for Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan Molecular Profiling Research Center 
for Drug Discovery, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.

Membrane fusion is generally controlled by Rabs, soluble 
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors (SNAREs), and 
tethering complexes. Syntaxin 17 (STX17) was recently identified as the 
autophagosomal SNARE required for autophagosome-lysosome fusion in mammals and 
Drosophila. In this study, to better understand the mechanism of 
autophagosome-lysosome fusion, we searched for STX17-interacting proteins. 
Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis identified vacuolar protein 
sorting 33A (VPS33A) and VPS16, which are components of the homotypic fusion and 
protein sorting (HOPS)-tethering complex. We further confirmed that all HOPS 
components were coprecipitated with STX17. Knockdown of VPS33A, VPS16, or VPS39 
blocked autophagic flux and caused accumulation of STX17- and 
microtubule-associated protein light chain (LC3)-positive autophagosomes. The 
endocytic pathway was also affected by knockdown of VPS33A, as previously 
reported, but not by knockdown of STX17. By contrast, ultraviolet irradiation 
resistance-associated gene (UVRAG), a known HOPS-interacting protein, did not 
interact with the STX17-HOPS complex and may not be directly involved in 
autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Collectively these results suggest that, in 
addition to its well-established function in the endocytic pathway, HOPS 
promotes autophagosome-lysosome fusion through interaction with STX17.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E13-08-0447
PMCID: PMC3982997
PMID: 24554770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]