1. Caries Res. 2014;48(4):330-8. doi: 10.1159/000356299.

Genome-wide association study of primary dentition pit-and-fissure and smooth 
surface caries.

Zeng Z, Feingold E, Wang X, Weeks DE, Lee M, Cuenco DT, Broffitt B, Weyant RJ, 
Crout R, McNeil DW, Levy SM, Marazita ML, Shaffer JR.

Dental caries continues to be the most common chronic disease in children today. 
Despite the substantial involvement of genetics in the process of caries 
development, the specific genes contributing to dental caries remain largely 
unknown. We performed separate genome-wide association studies of smooth and 
pit-and-fissure tooth surface caries experience in the primary dentitions of 
self-reported white children in two samples from Iowa and rural Appalachia. In 
total, 1,006 children (ages 3-12 years) were included for smooth surface 
analysis, and 979 children (ages 4-14 years) for pit-and-fissure surface 
analysis. Associations were tested for more than 1.2 million single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, either genotyped or imputed. We detected genome-wide significant 
signals in KPNA4 (p value = 2.0E-9), and suggestive signals in ITGAL (p value = 
2.1E-7) and PLUNC family genes (p value = 2.0E-6), thus nominating these novel 
loci as putative caries susceptibility genes. We also replicated associations 
observed in previous studies for MPPED2 (p value = 6.9E-6), AJAP1 (p value = 
1.6E-6) and RPS6KA2 (p value = 7.3E-6). Replication of these associations in 
additional samples, as well as experimental studies to determine the biological 
functions of associated genetic variants, are warranted. Ultimately, efforts 
such as this may lead to a better understanding of caries etiology, and could 
eventually facilitate the development of new interventions and preventive 
measures.

Â© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000356299
PMCID: PMC4043868
PMID: 24556642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: All authors have no 
conflicts of interest.