1. Metab Brain Dis. 2014 Jun;29(2):333-40. doi: 10.1007/s11011-014-9503-x. Epub 
2014 Feb 25.

Haplotype-based study of the association of alcohol and 
acetaldehyde-metabolising genes with alcohol dependence (with or without 
comorbid anxiety symptoms) in a Cape Mixed Ancestry population.

Crawford A(1), Dalvie S, Lewis S, King A, Liberzon I, Fein G, Koenen K, Ramesar 
R, Stein DJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Oakfield 
House, Oakfield Grove, Bristol, BS8 2BN, UK, andrew.crawford@bristol.ac.uk.

Alcohol dependence (AD) has a large heritable component. Genetic variation in 
genes involved in the absorption and elimination of ethanol have been associated 
with AD. However, some of these polymorphisms are not present in an African 
population. Previous studies have reported that a type of AD which is 
characterized by anxious behaviour may be a genetically specific subtype of AD. 
We investigated whether variation in genes encoding cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) 
or acetaldehyde-metabolising enzymes (ALDH1A1, ALDH2) might alter the risk of 
AD, with and without symptoms of anxiety, in a Cape population with mixed 
ancestry. Eighty case control pairs (one with AD, one without AD) were recruited 
and individually matched for potential confounders. Genotype data were available 
for 29 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across the three genes. Linkage 
disequilibrium D' values were evaluated for all pairwise comparisons. Allele and 
haplotype frequencies were compared between cases and controls using a χ2 test. 
The ACAG haplotype in block 4 of the ALDH1A1 gene provided evidence of an 
association with AD (p = 0.03) and weak evidence of an association with AD 
without symptoms of anxiety (p = 0.06). When a genetic score was constructed 
using SNPs showing nominal evidence of association with AD, every extra risk 
allele increased the odds of AD by 35% (OR 1.35, 95% CI 1.08, 1.68, p = 0.008) 
and the odds of having AD with anxiety symptoms increased by 53% (OR 1.53, 95% 
CI 1.14, 2.05, p = 0.004). Although our results are supported by previous 
studies in other populations, they must be interpreted with caution due to the 
small sample size and the potential influence of population stratification.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-014-9503-x
PMCID: PMC4023075
PMID: 24567230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]