1. J Biomed Semantics. 2014 Feb 25;5(1):11. doi: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-11.

Benchmarking infrastructure for mutation text mining.

Klein A(1), Riazanov A, Hindle MM, Baker CJ.

Author information:
(1)Computer Science And Applied Statistics Department, University of New 
Brunswick, Saint John, Canada. artjom.unb@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Experimental research on the automatic extraction of information 
about mutations from texts is greatly hindered by the lack of consensus 
evaluation infrastructure for the testing and benchmarking of mutation text 
mining systems.
RESULTS: We propose a community-oriented annotation and benchmarking 
infrastructure to support development, testing, benchmarking, and comparison of 
mutation text mining systems. The design is based on semantic standards, where 
RDF is used to represent annotations, an OWL ontology provides an extensible 
schema for the data and SPARQL is used to compute various performance metrics, 
so that in many cases no programming is needed to analyze results from a text 
mining system. While large benchmark corpora for biological entity and relation 
extraction are focused mostly on genes, proteins, diseases, and species, our 
benchmarking infrastructure fills the gap for mutation information. The core 
infrastructure comprises (1) an ontology for modelling annotations, (2) SPARQL 
queries for computing performance metrics, and (3) a sizeable collection of 
manually curated documents, that can support mutation grounding and mutation 
impact extraction experiments.
CONCLUSION: We have developed the principal infrastructure for the benchmarking 
of mutation text mining tasks. The use of RDF and OWL as the representation for 
corpora ensures extensibility. The infrastructure is suitable for out-of-the-box 
use in several important scenarios and is ready, in its current state, for 
initial community adoption.

DOI: 10.1186/2041-1480-5-11
PMCID: PMC3939821
PMID: 24568600