1. Front Neurosci. 2014 Feb 7;8:14. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00014. eCollection 
2014.

Autonomic regulation of brown adipose tissue thermogenesis in health and 
disease: potential clinical applications for altering BAT thermogenesis.

Tupone D(1), Madden CJ(1), Morrison SF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Oregon Health and Science University 
Portland, OR, USA.

From mouse to man, brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a significant source of 
thermogenesis contributing to the maintenance of the body temperature 
homeostasis during the challenge of low environmental temperature. In rodents, 
BAT thermogenesis also contributes to the febrile increase in core temperature 
during the immune response. BAT sympathetic nerve activity controlling BAT 
thermogenesis is regulated by CNS neural networks which respond reflexively to 
thermal afferent signals from cutaneous and body core thermoreceptors, as well 
as to alterations in the discharge of central neurons with intrinsic 
thermosensitivity. Superimposed on the core thermoregulatory circuit for the 
activation of BAT thermogenesis, is the permissive, modulatory influence of 
central neural networks controlling metabolic aspects of energy homeostasis. The 
recent confirmation of the presence of BAT in human and its function as an 
energy consuming organ have stimulated interest in the potential for the 
pharmacological activation of BAT to reduce adiposity in the obese. In contrast, 
the inhibition of BAT thermogenesis could facilitate the induction of 
therapeutic hypothermia for fever reduction or to improve outcomes in stroke or 
cardiac ischemia by reducing infarct size through a lowering of metabolic oxygen 
demand. This review summarizes the central circuits for the autonomic control of 
BAT thermogenesis and highlights the potential clinical relevance of the 
pharmacological inhibition or activation of BAT thermogenesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00014
PMCID: PMC3916784
PMID: 24570653