1. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jun;35(6):5453-7. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1711-9. Epub 2014 
Feb 28.

Association between CLPTM1L-TERT rs401681 polymorphism and pancreatic cancer 
risk among Chinese Han population.

Liu C(1), Wang Y, Huang H, Wang C, Zhang H, Kong Y, Zhang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Air Force General Hospital of PLA, 30 
Fucheng Road, 100142, Beijing, China, liuchengli_beijing@163.com.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the human cancers with the highest fatality rates; 
however, the etiology still remains largely unknown. Recently, one genome-wide 
association study (GWAS), conducted exclusively among women of European 
ancestry, has discovered that cleft lip and palate transmembrane 1-like 
telomerase reverse transcriptase (CLPTM1L-TERT) rs401681 polymorphism was 
significantly associated with pancreatic cancer risk. Few studies have been 
conducted to evaluate whether this finding could be generalized to Chinese 
people. In the current study, we explored the association between rs401681 
polymorphism and risk of pancreatic cancer in a case-control study of 1,587 
Chinese people (including 766 pancreatic cancer cases and 821 healthy controls). 
Under the log-additive model, each additional copy of minor allele T was 
associated with a 1.24-fold increased risk of pancreatic cancer (odds ratio 
(OR)=1.24, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.06-1.44, P=5.61 Ã— 10(-3)). While 
compared with individuals with the CC genotype, the OR for developing pancreatic 
cancer was 1.09 (95 % CI 0.88-1.34) among those with the CT genotype and 1.66 
(95 % CI 1.20-2.29) among those with the TT genotype. Additional adjustments for 
the confounding factors did not change the results materially. Our data suggests 
that the T allele of rs401681 in CLPTM1L-TERT locus predisposes its carriers to 
pancreatic cancer, and further research into the function of CLPTM1L-TERT locus 
and its potential biological mechanism association may be warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-1711-9
PMID: 24577890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]