1. Nat Commun. 2014 Feb 28;5:3350. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4350.

Differential affinity of FLIP and procaspase 8 for FADD's DED binding surfaces 
regulates DISC assembly.

Majkut J(#)(1), Sgobba M(#)(1)(2), Holohan C(#)(1), Crawford N(1), Logan AE(1), 
Kerr E(1), Higgins CA(1), Redmond KL(1), Riley JS(1), Stasik I(1), Fennell 
DA(1)(3), Van Schaeybroeck S(1), Haider S(1)(4), Johnston PG(1), Haigh D(1), 
Longley DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, UK.
(2)Now at Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California.
(3)Now at Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, UK.
(4)Now at School of Pharmacy, University College London.
(#)Contributed equally

Death receptor activation triggers recruitment of FADD, which via its death 
effector domain (DED) engages the DEDs of procaspase 8 and its inhibitor FLIP to 
form death-inducing signalling complexes (DISCs). The DEDs of FADD, FLIP and 
procaspase 8 interact with one another using two binding surfaces defined by 
α1/α4 and α2/α5 helices, respectively. Here we report that FLIP has preferential 
affinity for the α1/α4 surface of FADD, whereas procaspase 8 has preferential 
affinity for FADD's α2/α5 surface. These relative affinities contribute to FLIP 
being recruited to the DISC at comparable levels to procaspase 8 despite lower 
cellular expression. Additional studies, including assessment of DISC 
stoichiometry and functional assays, suggest that following death receptor 
recruitment, the FADD DED preferentially engages FLIP using its α1/α4 surface 
and procaspase 8 using its α2/α5 surface; these tripartite intermediates then 
interact via the α1/α4 surface of FLIP DED1 and the α2/α5 surface of procaspase 
8 DED2.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4350
PMCID: PMC3942653
PMID: 24577104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]