1. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Feb 27;5(2):e1082. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.41.

DJ-1 protects against cell death following acute cardiac ischemia-reperfusion 
injury.

Dongworth RK(1), Mukherjee UA(1), Hall AR(1), Astin R(2), Ong SB(3), Yao Z(2), 
Dyson A(4), Szabadkai G(2), Davidson SM(1), Yellon DM(1), Hausenloy DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The Hatter Cardiovascular Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Consortium for Mitochondrial 
Research, University College London, London, UK.
(3)1] The Hatter Cardiovascular Institute, University College London, London, UK 
[2] Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences and Medical 
Engineering, Satellite Building V01, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor Bahru 
81310 UTM, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Medicine, University College London, London, UK.

Novel therapeutic targets are required to protect the heart against cell death 
from acute ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI). Mutations in the DJ-1 (PARK7) gene 
in dopaminergic neurons induce mitochondrial dysfunction and a genetic form of 
Parkinson's disease. Genetic ablation of DJ-1 renders the brain more susceptible 
to cell death following ischemia-reperfusion in a model of stroke. Although DJ-1 
is present in the heart, its role there is currently unclear. We sought to 
investigate whether mitochondrial DJ-1 may protect the heart against cell death 
from acute IRI by preventing mitochondrial dysfunction. Overexpression of DJ-1 
in HL-1 cardiac cells conferred the following beneficial effects: reduced cell 
death following simulated IRI (30.4±4.7% with DJ-1 versus 52.9±4.7% in control; 
n=5, P<0.05); delayed mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP) opening 
(a critical mediator of cell death) (260±33 s with DJ-1 versus 121±12 s in 
control; n=6, P<0.05); and induction of mitochondrial elongation (81.3±2.5% with 
DJ-1 versus 62.0±2.8% in control; n=6 cells, P<0.05). These beneficial effects 
of DJ-1 were absent in cells expressing the non-functional DJ-1(L166P) and 
DJ-1(Cys106A) mutants. Adult mice devoid of DJ-1 (KO) were found to be more 
susceptible to cell death from in vivo IRI with larger myocardial infarct sizes 
(50.9±3.5% DJ-1 KO versus 41.1±2.5% in DJ-1 WT; n≥7, P<0.05) and resistant to 
cardioprotection by ischemic preconditioning. DJ-1 KO hearts showed increased 
mitochondrial fragmentation on electron microscopy, although there were no 
differences in calcium-induced MPTP opening, mitochondrial respiratory function 
or myocardial ATP levels. We demonstrate that loss of DJ-1 protects the heart 
from acute IRI cell death by preventing mitochondrial dysfunction. We propose 
that DJ-1 may represent a novel therapeutic target for cardioprotection.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.41
PMCID: PMC3944257
PMID: 24577080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]