1. Cent European J Urol. 2011;64(3):168-74. doi: 10.5173/ceju.2011.03.art17. Epub
 2011 Sep 6.

Significance of CDKN2A gene A148T variant in patients with bladder cancer.

Borkowska E(1), Jędrzejczyk A(2), Kruk A(3), Pietrusiński M(1), Traczyk M(1), 
Rożniecki M(4), Kałużewski B(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Clinical and Laboratory Genetics, Medical University of Łódź, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Urology, John Paul II Regional Hospital in Bełchatów, Poland.
(3)Department of Ecology and Vertebrate Zoology, University of Łódź, Poland.
(4)The Clinic of Urology at the "Lekarze Urolodzy Rożniecki i Partnerzy" 
Non-Public Health Unit in Łask, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: The A148T polymorphism of CDKN2A gene is observed in various 
neoplasms with the incidence rate of 3-35%, however, rather little is known 
either about the frequency of its occurrence or of its significance in urinary 
bladder carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA was isolated from blood of 156 patients with urinary 
bladder carcinoma (130 men). In histopathology, 84 cases were classified as G1, 
42 as G2, and 30 as G3. The clinical stage was in 81 cases estimated at Ta and 
in 75 cases at T1-T4. A148T polymorphism was detected by the MSSCP technique and 
by sequencing.
RESULTS: A148T polymorphism was identified in 9/156 urinary bladder carcinoma 
cases (only in men). The obtained results were compared with the polymorphism 
incidence for the Polish population, estimated by Debniak et al. The occurrence 
in the group of the bladder cancer patients turned out higher (5.77%) from that 
in the control group (2.89%) (G test, table 2×2: NBLADDER CANCER = 156, NCONTROL 
= 1210, G = 4.298, p <0.05).
CONCLUSION: Summing up and taking into account the analysis of clinical 
parameters and the age of the disease occurrence, the A148T polymorphism of 
CDKN2A gene was identified in the study group only in men, in whom the disease 
was diagnosed above the age of 60, while the diagnosed neoplasms were in the 
majority of cases characterized by higher clinical stages and higher grades of 
malignancy. This has been the first study that attempted to show a potential 
association between A148T alterations and an increased risk for bladder cancer 
development.

DOI: 10.5173/ceju.2011.03.art17
PMCID: PMC3921733
PMID: 24578887