1. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 19;9(2):e89414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089414. 
eCollection 2014.

Effect of immunoglobin-like transcript 7 cross-linking on plasmacytoid dendritic 
cells differentiation into antigen-presenting cells.

Tavano B(1), Boasso A(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Section, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, Imperial College, 
London, United Kingdom.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are innate immunity effector cells which play 
a critical role in the transition from innate to adaptive immune response. 
Circulating blood pDC present an immature phenotype and can differentiate into 
either antigen-presenting cells (APC) or type I interferon (IFN-I)-producing 
cells (IPC). The immunoglobulin-like transcript (ILT)7 is a surface receptor 
expressed by immature pDC, and ILT7 cross-linking (XL-ILT7) inhibits IFN-I 
production by pDC in response to toll-like receptor (TLR)7 and 9 stimulation. We 
used peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy donors to test the 
effect of XL-ILT7 on 1) TLR7/9-mediated regulation of gut mucosal (α4β7 
integrin) and lymph node (CCR7) migration markers; and 2) the maturation of pDC 
into APC. We found that XL-ILT7 mitigated the upregulation of CCR7 and enhanced 
that of β7 on TLR7/9-stimulated pDC. TLR7/9 stimulation induced upregulation of 
CD40, CD80 and CD86. CD40 expression was partially reduced by XL-ILT7, whereas 
CD86 was further enhanced. Plasmacytoid DC stimulated with TLR9 ligand in 
presence of XL-ILT7 retained the ability to induce T cell proliferation and 
activation in response to staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) in pDC-T cell 
co-cultures. Our results suggest that XL-ILT7 favours the differentiation of 
immature pDC into APC rather than IPC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089414
PMCID: PMC3929723
PMID: 24586760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.