1. Genes Dev. 2014 Mar 15;28(6):561-75. doi: 10.1101/gad.233627.113. Epub 2014
Mar  3.

Diminished WNT -> β-catenin -> c-MYC signaling is a barrier for malignant 
progression of BRAFV600E-induced lung tumors.

Juan J(1), Muraguchi T, Iezza G, Sears RC, McMahon M.

Author information:
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center.

Oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) is proposed as a cellular defense mechanism 
that restrains malignant progression of oncogene-expressing, initiated tumor 
cells. Consistent with this, expression of BRAF(V600E) in the mouse lung 
epithelium elicits benign tumors that fail to progress to cancer due to an 
apparent senescence-like proliferative arrest. Here we demonstrate that nuclear 
β-catenin → c-MYC signaling is essential for early stage proliferation of 
BRAF(V600E)-induced lung tumors and is inactivated in the subsequent 
senescence-like state. Furthermore, either β-catenin silencing or 
pharmacological blockade of Porcupine, an acyl-transferase essential for WNT 
ligand secretion and activity, significantly inhibited BRAF(V600E)-initiated 
lung tumorigenesis. Conversely, sustained activity of β-catenin or c-MYC 
significantly enhanced BRAF(V600E)-induced lung tumorigenesis and rescued the 
anti-tumor effects of Porcupine blockade. These data indicate that early stage 
BRAF(V600E)-induced lung tumors are WNT-dependent and suggest that inactivation 
of WNT → β-catenin → c-MYC signaling is a trigger for the senescence-like 
proliferative arrest that constrains the expansion and malignant progression of 
BRAF(V600E)-initiated lung tumors. Moreover, these data further suggest that the 
trigger for OIS in initiated BRAF(V600E)-expressing lung tumor cells is not 
simply a surfeit of signals from oncogenic BRAF but an insufficiency of WNT → 
β-catenin → c-MYC signaling. These data have implications for understanding how 
genetic abnormalities cooperate to initiate and promote lung carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.233627.113
PMCID: PMC3967046
PMID: 24589553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]