1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;41(1):129-49. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131370.

Brain pyroglutamate amyloid-β is produced by cathepsin B and is reduced by the 
cysteine protease inhibitor E64d, representing a potential Alzheimer's disease 
therapeutic.

Hook G(1), Yu J(2), Toneff T(3), Kindy M(2), Hook V(3).

Author information:
(1)American Life Science Pharmaceuticals, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Departments of 
Neurosciences and Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.

Pyroglutamate amyloid-β peptides (pGlu-Aβ) are particularly pernicious forms of 
amyloid-β peptides (Aβ) present in Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. pGlu-Aβ 
peptides are N-terminally truncated forms of full-length Aβ peptides 
(flAβ(1-40/42)) in which the N-terminal glutamate is cyclized to pyroglutamate 
to generate pGlu-Aβ(3-40/42). β-secretase cleavage of amyloid-β precursor 
protein (AβPP) produces flAβ(1-40/42), but it is not yet known whether the 
β-secretase BACE1 or the alternative β-secretase cathepsin B (CatB) participate 
in the production of pGlu-Aβ. Therefore, this study examined the effects of gene 
knockout of these proteases on brain pGlu-Aβ levels in transgenic AβPPLon mice, 
which express AβPP isoform 695 and have the wild-type (wt) β-secretase activity 
found in most AD patients. Knockout or overexpression of the CatB gene reduced 
or increased, respectively, pGlu-Aβ(3-40/42), flAβ(1-40/42), and pGlu-Aβ plaque 
load, but knockout of the BACE1 gene had no effect on those parameters in the 
transgenic mice. Treatment of AβPPLon mice with E64d, a cysteine protease 
inhibitor of CatB, also reduced brain pGlu-Aβ(3-42), flAβ(1-40/42), and pGlu-Aβ 
plaque load. Treatment of neuronal-like chromaffin cells with CA074Me, an 
inhibitor of CatB, resulted in reduced levels of pGlu-Aβ(3-40) released from the 
activity-dependent, regulated secretory pathway. Moreover, CatB knockout and 
E64d treatment has been previously shown to improve memory deficits in the 
AβPPLon mice. These data illustrate the role of CatB in producing pGlu-Aβ and 
flAβ that participate as key factors in the development of AD. The advantages of 
CatB inhibitors, especially E64d and its derivatives, as alternatives to BACE1 
inhibitors in treating AD patients are discussed.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-131370
PMCID: PMC4059604
PMID: 24595198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]