1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 4;9(3):e90008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090008.
eCollection  2014.

The has-miR-526b binding-site rs8506G>a polymorphism in the lincRNA-NR_024015 
exon identified by GWASs predispose to non-cardia gastric cancer risk.

Fan QH(1), Yu R(2), Huang WX(3), Cui XX(1), Luo BH(1), Zhang LY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Suzhou Municipal Hospital, Affiliated Suzhou Hospital 
of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal surgery, Wu Jiang first people's hospital, 
Suzhou, China.

Gastric cancer including the cardia and non-cardia types is the second frequent 
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. A subset of non-cardia gastric cancer 
genetic susceptibility loci have been addressed among Asian through genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs). This study was to evaluate the effects of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) on 
non-cardia gastric cancer susceptibility in Chinese populations. We selected 
long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) located in non-cardia gastric cancer 
risk-related loci and identified 10 SNPs located within lincRNA exonic regions. 
We examined whether genetic polymorphisms in lincRNAs exons are associated with 
non-cardia gastric cancer risk in 438 non-cardia gastric cancer patients and 727 
control subjects in Chinese populations using logistic regression. Functional 
relevance was further examined by biochemical assays. We found that 
lincRNA-NR_024015 rs8506AA carrier was significantly associated with risk of 
non-cardia gastric cancer (adjusted odds ratio [OR] = 1.56, 95%CI = 1.03-2.39, 
compared with the rs8506 AG or GG genotype. Further stratification analysis 
showed that the risk effect was more pronounced in subgroups of smokers 
(P = 0.001). Biochemical analysis demonstrated that the G to A base change at 
rs8506G>A disrupts the binding site for has-miR-526b, thereby influencing the 
transcriptional activity of lincRNA-NR_024015 and affecting cell proliferation. 
Our present study established a robust association between the rs8506G>A 
polymorphism in the lincRNA-NR_024015 exon and the risk of non-cardia gastric 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090008
PMCID: PMC3942390
PMID: 24595048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.