1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(3):e90243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090243.
eCollection  2014.

Fibroblast growth factor 9 activates akt and MAPK pathways to stimulate 
steroidogenesis in mouse leydig cells.

Lai MS(1), Cheng YS(2), Chen PR(3), Tsai SJ(4), Huang BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Cell Biology and 
Anatomy, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Urology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital Douliou 
Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, National Cheng 
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(4)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) is a multifunctional polypeptide belonging to 
the FGF family and has functions related to bone formation, lens-fiber 
differentiation, nerve development, gap-junction formation and sex 
determination. In a previous study, we demonstrated that FGF9 stimulates the 
production of testosterone in mouse Leydig cells. In the present study, we used 
both primary mouse Leydig cells and MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells to further 
investigate the molecular mechanism of FGF9-stimulated steroidogenesis. Results 
showed that FGF9 significantly activated steroidogenesis in both mouse primary 
and tumor Leydig cells (p<0.05). Furthermore, FGF9 significantly induced the 
expression of phospho-Akt at 0.5 and 24 hr, phospho-JNK at 0.25, 0.5, and 24 hr, 
phospho-p38 at 0.5 hr, and phospho-ERK1/2 from 0.25 to 24 hr in primary Leydig 
cells (p<0.05). Also, FGF9 significantly up-regulated the expression of 
phospho-Akt at 3 hr, phospho-JNK at 0.25 hr, and phospho-ERK1/2 at 1 and 3 hr in 
MA-10 cells (p<0.05). Using specific inhibitors of Akt, JNK, p38, and ERK1/2, we 
further demonstrated that the inhibitors of Akt and ERK1/2 significantly 
suppressed the stimulatory effect of FGF9 on steroidogenesis in mouse Leydig 
cells. In conclusion, FGF9 specifically activated the Akt and ERK1/2 in normal 
mouse Leydig cells and the Akt, JNK and ERK1/2 in MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells 
to stimulate steroidogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090243
PMCID: PMC3946167
PMID: 24603862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.