1. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Apr;28(4):554-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1327. Epub 2014
Feb  25.

Constitutive somatostatin receptor subtype-3 signaling suppresses growth hormone 
synthesis.

Eigler T(1), Ben-Shlomo A, Zhou C, Khalafi R, Ren SG, Melmed S.

Author information:
(1)Pituitary Center, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, California 90048.

Somatostatin signals through somatostatin receptor subtypes (SSTR) 2 and 5 to 
attenuate GH secretion. Although expressed in normal pituitary glands and in 
GH-secreting pituitary tumors, SSTR3 function was unclear, and we have now 
determined the role of SSTR3 in somatotroph function. Stable rat pituitary tumor 
cell (GC) transfectants of human SSTR3 (GpSSTR3(WT)) showed suppression of rat 
(r) GH promoter activity, GH mRNA expression, and secreted GH concordant with 
suppressed cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling. In contrast, cAMP levels and 
GH expression were unchanged in cells expressing a mutant SSTR3 DRY motif 
(GpSSTR3(R141A)). GH expression was rescued by treatment of GpSSTR3(WT) with 
forskolin and 8-bromo-cAMP. GpSSTR3(WT) exhibited activation of glycogen 
synthase kinase3-β (GSK3-β), a PKA substrate, which was also reversed by 
8-Bromo-cAMP treatment. Moreover, SSTR3-dependent GH transcriptional inhibition 
was rescued by inhibition of GSK3-β. GpSSTR3(WT) exhibited elevated Pit-1 serine 
phosphorylation and decreased Pit-1 occupancy of the rGH promoter with sustained 
Pit-1 expression. GSK3-β and Pit-1 physically interacted with each other, 
indicating that Pit-1 may be a GSK3-β phosphorylation substrate. In conclusion, 
constitutive SSTR3 activity mediates transcriptional repression of GH through 
cAMP/PKA, leading to subsequent activation of GSK3-β and increased Pit-1 
phosphorylation and ultimately attenuating Pit-1 binding to the rGH promoter.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2013-1327
PMCID: PMC3968402
PMID: 24606125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]