1. Int J Cancer. 2014 Sep 15;135(6):1343-55. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28776. Epub 2014
Mar  4.

Genetic variants in the IL1A gene region contribute to intestinal-type gastric 
carcinoma susceptibility in European populations.

Durães C(1), Muñoz X, Bonet C, García N, Venceslá A, Carneiro F, Peleteiro B, 
Lunet N, Barros H, Lindkvist B, Boutron-Ruault MC, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Rizzato 
C, Trichopoulou A, Weiderpass E, Naccarati A, Travis RC, Tjønneland A, Gurrea 
AB, Johansson M, Riboli E, Figueiredo C, González CA, Capellà G, Machado JC, 
Sala N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto 
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.

The most studied genetic susceptibility factors involved in gastric carcinoma 
(GC) risk are polymorphisms in the inflammation-linked genes interleukin 1 (IL1) 
B and IL1RN. Despite the evidence pointing to the IL1 region, definite 
functional variants reproducible across populations of different genetic 
background have not been discovered so far. A high density linkage 
disequilibrium (LD) map of the IL1 gene cluster was established using HapMap to 
identify haplotype tagSNPs. Eighty-seven SNPs were genotyped in a Portuguese 
case-control study (358 cases, 1,485 controls) for the discovery analysis. A 
replication study, including a subset of those tagSNPs (43), was performed in an 
independent analysis (EPIC-EurGast) containing individuals from 10 European 
countries (365 cases, 1284 controls). Single SNP and haplotype block 
associations were determined for GC overall and anatomopathological subtypes. 
The most robust association was observed for SNP rs17042407, 16Kb upstream of 
the IL1A gene. Although several other SNP associations were observed, only the 
inverse association of rs17042407 allele C with GC of the intestinal type was 
observed in both studies, retaining significance after multiple testing 
correction (p = 0.0042) in the combined analysis. The haplotype analysis of the 
IL1A LD block in the combined dataset revealed the association between a common 
haplotype carrying the rs17042407 variant and GC, particularly of the intestinal 
type (p = 3.1 × 10(-5) ) and non cardia localisation (p = 4.6 × 10(-3) ). These 
results confirm the association of IL1 gene variants with GC and reveal a novel 
SNP and haplotypes in the IL1A region associated with intestinal type GC in 
European populations.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28776
PMID: 24615437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]