1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jun;99(6):E1072-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4206.
Epub  2014 Mar 11.

Exploring the association Between DICER1 mutations and differentiated thyroid 
carcinoma.

de Kock L(1), Sabbaghian N, Soglio DB, Guillerman RP, Park BK, Chami R, Deal CL, 
Priest JR, Foulkes WD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics (L.d.K.) and Program in Cancer Genetics, 
Department of Oncology and Human Genetics (W.D.F.), McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec H2W 1S6, Canada; Lady Davis Institute (L.d.K., N.S.), Segal Cancer 
Centre, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2, Canada; Department of 
Pathology (D.B.-D.S., R.C.) and Endocrine Service (C.L.D.), CHU-Sainte Justine 
and University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1C5, Canada; Department of 
Pediatric Radiology (R.P.G.), Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030; Center for Pediatric Oncology (B.-K.P.), 
National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, South Korea 410-769; and (J.R.P.) 
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55454.

CONTEXT: Carriers of germline DICER1 mutations are predisposed to a rare cancer 
syndrome, the DICER1 syndrome. Thyroid abnormalities are a common finding in 
DICER1 syndrome with multinodular goiter frequently present in many families in 
which a germline DICER1 mutation is segregating. Differentiated thyroid 
carcinoma (DTC) is infrequently seen in such pedigrees. In addition to germline 
DICER1 mutations, specific somatic mutations have been identified in the DICER1 
ribonuclease IIIb catalytic domain in several tumor types.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine whether such characteristic somatic DICER1 
mutations are present in DTCs that arise within germline DICER1 mutation 
carriers.
DESIGN AND SETTING: The study involved an opportunistic collection of 3 cases of 
DTC arising in individuals suspected to have DICER1 syndrome and hospital-based 
ascertainment and testing was implemented.
RESULTS: We identified somatic DICER1 mutations in 3 DTCs arising in unrelated 
germline DICER1 mutation carriers, all of whom had been diagnosed in infancy 
with pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB), were treated with chemotherapy, exposed 
frequently to diagnostic radiation, and subsequently developed DTC. The somatic 
mutations occurred within the DICER1 ribonuclease IIIb domain, affecting highly 
conserved amino acid residues central to the catalytic activity of the domain.
CONCLUSION: This report of somatic DICER1 mutations in DTC strengthens the 
association between DTC and the DICER1 syndrome. The possible association 
between germline DICER1 mutations, PPB treatment, and the risk of subsequent DTC 
must be considered by clinicians when treating PPB.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2013-4206
PMID: 24617712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]