1. Prostate. 2014 May;74(7):732-42. doi: 10.1002/pros.22793. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Carboxypeptidase-D is elevated in prostate cancer and its anti-apoptotic 
activity is abolished by combined androgen and prolactin receptor targeting.

Thomas LN(1), Merrimen J, Bell DG, Rendon R, Goffin V, Too CK.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Carboxypeptidase-D (CPD) cleaves C-terminal arginine for nitric 
oxide (NO) production. CPD and NO levels are upregulated by testosterone (T) and 
prolactin (PRL) to promote survival of prostate cancer (pCa) cells. This study 
evaluated CPD immunostaining and T/PRL regulation of CPD and NO levels in benign 
and malignant prostate tissues/cells to determine the role of CPD in pCa.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue microarrays (TMA) were used to 
determine CPD immunostaining in prostate specimens. QPCR and immunoblotting were 
used to quantify CPD mRNA/protein expression in prostate cells. NO production 
was measured using 4,5-diaminofluorescein diacetate assay.
RESULTS: CPD staining increased from 8.9 ± 3.8% (Mean ± SEM, n = 15) of benign 
epithelial cell area to 30.9 ± 2.9% (n = 30) of tumor cell area in one set of 
TMAs (P = 0.0008) and from 5.9 ± 0.9% (n = 45) of benign epithelial cell area to 
18.8 ± 1.9% (n = 55) of tumor area in another (P < 0.0001). IHC of prostate 
tissues (≥50 mm(2)) confirmed increased CPD staining, from 13.1 ± 2.9% in benign 
(n = 16) to 29.5 ± 4.4% in pCa (n = 31, P = 0.0095). T and/or PRL increased CPD 
expression in several pCa but not benign cell lines. T and PRL acted 
synergistically to increase NO production, which was abolished only when 
receptor antagonists flutamide and Δ1-9-G129R-hPRL were used together.
CONCLUSIONS: CPD immunostaining and T/PRL-stimulated CPD expression were higher 
in pCa than benign tissues/cells. Elevated CPD increased NO production, which 
was abolished when both AR and PRLR were inhibited. Our study implicates a 
critical role for the T/PRL-stimulated CPD-Arg-NO pathway in pCa progression, 
and suggests that AR+PRLR inhibition is a more effective treatment for pCa.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/pros.22793
PMID: 24615730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]