1. Adv Biomed Res. 2014 Jan 24;3:41. doi: 10.4103/2277-9175.125730. eCollection 
2014.

In silico study of ligand binding site of toll-like receptor 5.

Savar NS(1), Bouzari S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran ; 
Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad university, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptor-5 (TLR-5) is a member of TLRs family and 
responsible for bacterial flagellin recognition. The activation of TLR-5 with 
flagellin leads to initiation of signaling cascades, which in turn results in 
transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Regarding the critical role of 
TLR-5 agonists and antagonists in activation of innate immune responses, an 
increasing number of studies have focused on their therapeutic applications in 
drug and vaccine design. In this study, to identify the most critical region and 
residues of TLR-5 for interaction with flagellin, different truncated forms of 
TLR-5 were designed and subjected to protein-protein interaction studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The interactions of the full native TLR-5 and its 
truncated forms with bacterial flagellin (FliC) were evaluated using Hex docking 
server and molecular interaction analysis was performed using Dimplot analysis.
RESULTS: According to our in silico results, truncated form C (an amino acid 
sequence containing residues 174-401 of TLR-5) has the most suitable interaction 
with FliC and seven amino acids within this region were found to be crucial for 
the interaction with flagellin.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide new insights in to potential drug target 
sites of TLR-5, which may guide future TLR-5 targeting studies.

DOI: 10.4103/2277-9175.125730
PMCID: PMC3949343
PMID: 24627849

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.