1. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(8):1313-26. doi: 10.4161/cc.28293. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

Phospho-Bcl-xL(Ser62) influences spindle assembly and chromosome segregation 
during mitosis.

Wang J(1), Beauchemin M(1), Bertrand R(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche; Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM) 
and Institut du Cancer de Montréal; Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Centre de recherche; Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CRCHUM) 
and Institut du Cancer de Montréal; Montréal, Québec, Canada; Département de 
médecine; Université de Montréal; Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Functional analysis of a series of phosphorylation mutants reveals that 
Bcl-xL(Ser62Ala) influences cell entry into anaphase and mitotic exit in 
taxol-exposed cells compared with cells expressing wild-type Bcl-xL or a series 
of other phosphorylation mutants, an effect that appears to be independent of 
its anti-apoptotic activity. During normal mitosis progression, Bcl-xL(Ser62) is 
strongly phosphorylated by PLK1 and MAPK14/SAPKp38α at the prometaphase, 
metaphase, and the anaphase boundaries, while it is de-phosphorylated at 
telophase and cytokinesis. Phospho-Bcl-xL(Ser62) localizes in centrosomes with 
γ-tubulin and in the mitotic cytosol with some spindle-assembly checkpoint 
signaling components, including PLK1, BubR1, and Mad2. In taxol- and 
nocodazole-exposed cells, phospho-Bcl-xL(Ser62) also binds to Cdc20- Mad2-, 
BubR1-, and Bub3-bound complexes, while Bcl-xL(Ser62Ala) does not. Silencing 
Bcl-xL expression and expressing the phosphorylation mutant Bcl-xL(Ser62Ala) 
lead to an increased number of cells harboring mitotic spindle defects including 
multipolar spindle, chromosome lagging and bridging, aneuploidy with micro-, 
bi-, or multi-nucleated cells, and cells that fail to resolve undergo mitosis 
within 6 h. Together, the data indicate that during mitosis, Bcl-xL(Ser62) 
phosphorylation impacts on spindle assembly and chromosome segregation, 
influencing chromosome stability. Observations of mitotic cells harboring 
aneuploidy with micro-, bi-, or multi-nucleated cells, and cells that fail to 
resolve undergo mitosis within 6 h were also made with cells expressing the 
phosphorylation mutant Bcl-xL(Ser49Ala) and dual mutant Bcl-xL(Ser49/62Ala).

DOI: 10.4161/cc.28293
PMCID: PMC4014433
PMID: 24621501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]