1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e92058. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092058. 
eCollection 2014.

A novel chimeric avidin with increased thermal stability using DNA shuffling.

Taskinen B(1), Airenne TT(2), Jänis J(3), Rahikainen R(1), Johnson MS(2), 
Kulomaa MS(4), Hytönen VP(1).

Author information:
(1)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Fimlab Laboratories, 
Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Eastern Finland, Joensuu, Finland.
(4)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Avidins are a family of proteins widely employed in biotechnology. We have 
previously shown that functional chimeric mutant proteins can be created from 
avidin and avidin-related protein 2 using a methodology combining random 
mutagenesis by recombination and selection by a tailored biopanning protocol 
(phage display). Here, we report the crystal structure of one of the previously 
selected and characterized chimeric avidin forms, A/A2-1. The structure was 
solved at 1.8 Å resolution and revealed that the protein fold was not affected 
by the shuffled sequences. The structure also supports the previously observed 
physicochemical properties of the mutant. Furthermore, we improved the selection 
and screening methodology to select for chimeric avidins with slower 
dissociation rate from biotin than were selected earlier. This resulted in the 
chimeric mutant A/A2-B, which showed increased thermal stability as compared to 
A/A2-1 and the parental proteins. The increased stability was especially evident 
at conditions of extreme pH as characterized using differential scanning 
calorimetry. In addition, amino acid sequence and structural comparison of the 
chimeric mutants and the parental proteins led to the rational design of A/A2-B 
I109K. This mutation further decreased the dissociation rate from biotin and 
yielded an increase in the thermal stability.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092058
PMCID: PMC3954883
PMID: 24632863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.