1. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 15;192(8):3915-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302174. Epub
2014  Mar 14.

Gene expression in the Gitr locus is regulated by NF-κB and Foxp3 through an 
enhancer.

Tone Y(1), Kidani Y, Ogawa C, Yamamoto K, Tsuda M, Peter C, Waldmann H, Tone M.

Author information:
(1)Research Division of Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048;

Glucocorticoid-induced TNFR (Gitr) and Ox40, two members of the TNFR 
superfamily, play important roles in regulating activities of effector and 
regulatory T cells (Treg). Their gene expression is induced by T cell activation 
and further upregulated in Foxp3+ Treg. Although the role of Foxp3 as a 
transcriptional repressor in Treg is well established, the mechanisms underlying 
Foxp3-mediated transcriptional upregulation remain poorly understood. This 
transcription factor seems to upregulate expression not only of Gitr and Ox40, 
but also other genes, including Ctla4, Il35, Cd25, all critical to Treg 
function. To investigate how Foxp3 achieves such upregulation, we analyzed its 
activity on Gitr and Ox40 genes located within a 15.1-kb region. We identified 
an enhancer located downstream of the Gitr gene, and both Gitr and Ox40 promoter 
activities were shown to be upregulated by the NF-κB-mediated enhancer activity. 
We also show, using the Gitr promoter, that the enhancer activity was further 
upregulated in conjunction with Foxp3. Foxp3 appears to stabilize NF-κB p50 
binding by anchoring it to the enhancer, thereby enabling local accumulation of 
transcriptional complexes containing other members of the NF-κB and IκB 
families. These findings may explain how Foxp3 can activate expression of 
certain genes while suppressing others.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302174
PMCID: PMC3988904
PMID: 24634496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]