1. Melanoma Res. 2014 Jun;24(3):267-72. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000057.

Multiple primary melanomas versus single melanoma of the head and neck: a 
comparison of genetic, diagnostic, and therapeutic implications.

Pollio A(1), Tomasi A, Pellacani G, Ruini C, Mandel VD, Fortuna G, Seidenari S, 
Ponti G.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Padua bDepartment of 
Diagnostic and Clinical Medicine and Public Health cDepartment of Dermatology, 
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy dDepartment of Oral 
Medicine, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, North Carolina, USA.

Single primary and multiple primary melanomas (MPMs) of the head and neck region 
may be confused at first glance because of the common clinical and dermoscopic 
patterns. An inaccurate diagnosis may lead the clinician to a wrong diagnostic 
and therapeutic pathway because MPMs occurring in familial or sporadic settings 
are often involved in individual cancer susceptibility. We investigated the 
clinical, demographic, histological, and survival differences between MPMs and 
single melanoma occurring in the head and neck region. A retrospective analysis 
of medical and histologic records from 217 melanomas of the head and neck region 
was carried out. Malignant neoplasms affecting MPMs patients were also reported. 
Mutational analysis of specific genes was carried out when clinical data and 
family history were suggestive for a familial/hereditary setting. Two hundred 
and five out of 217 (94.5%) patients were affected by single primary melanoma 
and 12 (5.5%) by MPMs of the head and neck region. Individuals affected by MPMs 
were distinguished by a significantly higher mutation frequency and a higher 
prevalence of malignant neoplasms such as renal cancer. Genetic testing showed 
germline mutations affecting MITF E318K, CDKN2A genes. Our data highlight the 
importance of strict cancer surveillance in individuals with MPMs and the role 
of appropriate genetic counseling and testing in selected patients. Finally, 
personalized clinical and instrumental screening and follow-up strategies should 
also be based on mutational status. A heightened level of suspicion is required 
in the clinical management of mutation carriers.

DOI: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000057
PMID: 24638154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]