1. J Gen Physiol. 2014 Apr;143(4):499-512. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201311038. Epub 2014 
Mar 17.

Stoichiometry of altered hERG1 channel gating by small molecule activators.

Wu W(1), Sachse FB, Gardner A, Sanguinetti MC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 2 Nora 
Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, and 3 Department 
of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.

Voltage-gated K(+) channels are tetramers formed by coassembly of four identical 
or highly related subunits. All four subunits contribute to formation of the 
selectivity filter, the narrowest region of the channel pore which determines 
K(+) selective conductance. In some K(+) channels, the selectivity filter can 
undergo a conformational change to reduce K(+) flux by a mechanism called C-type 
inactivation. In human ether-a-go-go-related gene 1 (hERG1) K(+) channels, 
C-type inactivation is allosterically inhibited by ICA-105574, a substituted 
benzamide. PD-118057, a 2-(phenylamino) benzoic acid, alters selectivity filter 
gating to enhance open probability of channels. Both compounds bind to a 
hydrophobic pocket located between adjacent hERG1 subunits. Accordingly, a 
homotetrameric channel contains four identical activator binding sites. Here we 
determine the number of binding sites required for maximal drug effect and 
determine the role of subunit interactions in the modulation of hERG1 gating by 
these compounds. Concatenated tetramers were constructed to contain a variable 
number (zero to four) of wild-type and mutant hERG1 subunits, either L646E to 
inhibit PD-118057 binding or F557L to inhibit ICA-105574 binding. Enhancement of 
hERG1 channel current magnitude by PD-118057 and attenuated inactivation by 
ICA-105574 were mediated by cooperative subunit interactions. Maximal effects of 
the both compounds required the presence of all four binding sites. 
Understanding how hERG1 agonists allosterically modify channel gating may 
facilitate mechanism-based drug design of novel agents for treatment of long QT 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.201311038
PMCID: PMC3971662
PMID: 24638994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]