1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Jul;72:177-85. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.03.010. Epub
 2014 Mar 19.

Combined troponin I Ser-150 and Ser-23/24 phosphorylation sustains thin filament 
Ca(2+) sensitivity and accelerates deactivation in an acidic environment.

Nixon BR(1), Walton SD(1), Zhang B(1), Brundage EA(1), Little SC(1), Ziolo 
MT(1), Davis JP(1), Biesiadecki BJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Davis Heart and Lung Research 
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Davis Heart and Lung Research 
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic 
address: biesiadecki.1@osu.edu.

The binding of Ca(2+) to troponin C (TnC) in the troponin complex is a critical 
step regulating the thin filament, the actin-myosin interaction and cardiac 
contraction. Phosphorylation of the troponin complex is a key regulatory 
mechanism to match cardiac contraction to demand. Here we demonstrate that 
phosphorylation of the troponin I (TnI) subunit is simultaneously increased at 
Ser-150 and Ser-23/24 during in vivo myocardial ischemia. Myocardial ischemia 
decreases intracellular pH resulting in depressed binding of Ca(2+) to TnC and 
impaired contraction. To determine the pathological relevance of these 
simultaneous TnI phosphorylations we measured individual TnI Ser-150 (S150D), 
Ser-23/24 (S23/24D) and combined (S23/24/150D) pseudo-phosphorylation effects on 
thin filament regulation at acidic pH similar to that in myocardial ischemia. 
Results demonstrate that while acidic pH decreased thin filament Ca(2+) binding 
to TnC regardless of TnI composition, TnI S150D attenuated this decrease 
rendering it similar to non-phosphorylated TnI at normal pH. The dissociation of 
Ca(2+) from TnC was unaltered by pH such that TnI S150D remained slow, S23/24D 
remained accelerated and the combined S23/24/150D remained accelerated. This 
effect of the combined TnI Ser-150 and Ser-23/24 pseudo-phosphorylations to 
maintain Ca(2+) binding while accelerating Ca(2+) dissociation represents the 
first post-translational modification of troponin by phosphorylation to both 
accelerate thin filament deactivation and maintain Ca(2+) sensitive activation. 
These data suggest that TnI Ser-150 phosphorylation induced attenuation of the 
pH-dependent decrease in Ca(2+) sensitivity and its combination with Ser-23/24 
phosphorylation to maintain accelerated thin filament deactivation may impart an 
adaptive role to preserve contraction during acidic ischemia pH without slowing 
relaxation.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.03.010
PMCID: PMC4075059
PMID: 24657721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]