1. J Child Neurol. 2015 Feb;30(2):228-32. doi: 10.1177/0883073814527158. Epub
2014  Mar 20.

A novel SUCLA2 mutation in a Portuguese child associated with "mild" 
methylmalonic aciduria.

Nogueira C(1), Meschini MC(2), Nesti C(2), Garcia P(3), Diogo L(3), Valongo 
C(1), Costa R(4), Videira A(5), Vilarinho L(1), Santorelli FM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, National Institute of Health, INSA, Porto, Portugal.
(2)IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Hereditary Metabolic Diseases Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, CHUC, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(4)Pediatric Department, Cova da Beira Hospital Center, Covilhã, Portugal.
(5)ICBAS- Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(6)IRCCS Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy filippo3364@gmail.com.

Succinyl-coenzyme A synthase is a mitochondrial matrix enzyme that catalyzes the 
reversible synthesis of succinate and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from 
succinyl-coenzyme A and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in the tricarboxylic acid 
cycle. This enzyme is made up of α and β subunits encoded by SUCLG1 and SUCLA2, 
respectively. We present a child with severe muscular hypotonia, dystonia, 
failure to thrive, sensorineural deafness, and dysmorphism. Metabolic 
investigations disclosed hyperlactacidemia, moderate urinary excretion of 
methylmalonic acid, and elevated levels of C4-dicarboxylic carnitine in blood. 
We identified a novel homozygous p.M329V in SUCLA2. In cultured cells, the 
p.M329V resulted in a reduced amount of the SUCLA2 protein, impaired production 
of mitochondrial ATP, and enhanced production of reactive oxygen species, which 
was partially reduced by using 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide in 
the culture medium. Expanding the array of SUCLA2 mutations, we suggested that 
reactive oxygen species scavengers are likely to impact on disease prognosis.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073814527158
PMID: 24659738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]