1. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Jul 1;267:12-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.03.015. Epub
2014  Mar 19.

Genetic variations in dopamine and inhibitory control: lack of influence on 
action restraint.

Gurvich CT(1), Rossell SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Monash Alfred Psychiatry research centre (MAPrc), Monash University Central 
Clinical School and The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. Electronic 
address: caroline.gurvich@monash.edu.
(2)Monash Alfred Psychiatry research centre (MAPrc), Monash University Central 
Clinical School and The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia; Brain and 
Psychological Sciences Research Centre (BPsyC), Faculty of Life and Social 
Sciences, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia.

Failures of inhibitory control can severely affect everyday life in healthy 
individuals and represent a common feature of many neuropsychiatric conditions, 
particularly disorders with dopaminergic disturbances implicated. This study's 
aim was to examine the interacting influences of three common and functional 
gene variants that influence dopaminergic pathways on an aspect of inhibitory 
control (action restraint). Three hundred and twenty two healthy adults were 
selected from an international consortium linked to Brain Research and 
Integrative Neuroscience (BRAINnet). DNA was extracted from cheek swab samples 
and participants were genotyped for the Val158Met single nucleotide polymorphism 
on COMT (rs 4680), C957T on DRD2 (rs 6277) and the 40bp variable number of 
tandem repeat on the DAT1 (SLC6A3, 10/10 vs 9+). Response inhibition was 
measured using a computerised Go/No-Go task. Main effects and interactions 
between genotypes were explored. We did not observe a genotype effect on 
fundamental measures of response inhibition, i.e. reaction time (RT) and 
commission errors. RT variability was significantly increased in DRD2 C957T 
heterozygotes. In conclusion, this large, non-clinical study reveals that the 
selected genetic polymorphisms regulating dopamine (COMT, DRD2 and DAT1) do not 
influence one aspect of response inhibition, action restraint, as measured by 
the Go/No-Go task, reinforcing the neuropharmacological dissociation between 
stop-signal and Go/No-Go tasks. Genetic variation in striatal dopamine may, 
however, contribute to intraindividual RT variability.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.03.015
PMID: 24657591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]