1. Biomarkers. 2014 May;19(3):252-8. doi: 10.3109/1354750X.2014.902997. Epub 2014
 Mar 24.

Variant alleles of VEGF and risk of esophageal cancer and lymph node metastasis.

Gu H(1), Qiu W, Shi Y, Chen S, Yin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothorac Surgery, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu 
University , Zhenjiang , P.R. China and.

The variant alleles of the functional polymorphisms, VEGF -2578 C > A, -1498 
T > C and +936 C > T, were not associated with risk of esophageal cancer and 
lymph node metastasis. Compared with the most common haplotype, 
C-2578T-1498C+936, the A-2578C-1498C+936 haplotype was associated with a 
borderline significantly increased risk of esophageal cancer. C-2578C-1498C+936 
and A-2578T-1498T+936 haplotypes were associated with significantly increased 
risk of esophageal cancer. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent 
stimulator for angiogenesis. It has been implicated in the growth and metastasis 
of esophageal cancer. Three functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
VEGF (-2578 C > A, -1498 T > C and +936 C > T) are known to be related to VEGF 
expression. We conducted a case-control study to evaluate the effects of these 
three functional SNPs on the development of esophageal cancer and lymph node 
metastasis. A total of 497 cases and 380 controls were analyzed. Genotypes were 
determined by matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry and direct sequence methods. The variant alleles of the functional 
polymorphisms VEGF -2578 C > A, -1498 T > C and +936 C > T SNPs were not 
associated with esophageal cancer risk. These VEGF genotypes were not associated 
with the risk of esophageal cancer after stratification. Furthermore, no 
association was observed between VEGF -2578 C > A, -1498 T > C and +936 C > T 
polymorphisms and lymph node metastasis. Compared with the most common haplotype 
C-2578T-1498C+936, the A-2578C-1498C+936 haplotype was associated with a 
borderline significantly increased risk of esophageal cancer. C-2578C-1498C+936 
and A-2578T-1498T+936 haplotypes were associated with significantly increased 
risk of esophageal cancer. Variants in the functional polymorphisms of VEGF may 
not contribute to esophageal cancer and lymph node metastasis susceptibility. 
VEGF A-2578C-1498C+936, C-2578C-1498C+936 and A-2578T-1498T+936 haplotypes may 
be associated with increased risk of esophageal cancer. However, our results 
were obtained with a limited sample size and therefore this is a preliminary 
conclusion. Validation by a larger study with more diverse ethnic populations is 
needed.

DOI: 10.3109/1354750X.2014.902997
PMID: 24654773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]