1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Mar 20;8(3):e2746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002746.
 eCollection 2014 Mar.

Development of a novel, single-cycle replicable rift valley Fever vaccine.

Murakami S(1), Terasaki K(1), Ramirez SI(2), Morrill JC(1), Makino S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Department of Pathology, the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America; Center for Biodefense and 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America; UTMB Center for Tropical Diseases, the 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America; 
Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, the University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) (genus Phlebovirus, family Bunyaviridae) is an 
arbovirus that causes severe disease in humans and livestock in sub-Saharan 
African countries. Although the MP-12 strain of RVFV is a live attenuated 
vaccine candidate, neuroinvasiveness and neurovirulence of MP-12 in mice may be 
a concern when vaccinating certain individuals, especially those that are 
immunocompromised. We have developed a novel, single-cycle replicable MP-12 
(scMP-12), which carries an L RNA, M RNA mutant encoding a mutant envelope 
protein lacking an endoplasmic reticulum retrieval signal and defective for 
membrane fusion function, and S RNA encoding N protein and green fluorescent 
protein. The scMP-12 underwent efficient amplification, then formed plaques and 
retained the introduced mutation after serial passages in a cell line stably 
expressing viral envelope proteins. However, inoculation of the scMP-12 into 
na√Øve cells resulted in a single round of viral replication, and production of 
low levels of noninfectious virus-like particles. Intracranial inoculation of 
scMP-12 into suckling mice did not cause clinical signs or death, a finding 
which demonstrated that the scMP-12 lacked neurovirulence. Mice immunized with a 
single dose of scMP-12 produced neutralizing antibodies, whose titers were 
higher than in mice immunized with replicon particles carrying L RNA and S RNA 
encoding N protein and green fluorescent protein. Moreover, 90% of the 
scMP-12-immunized mice were protected from wild-type RVFV challenge by 
efficiently suppressing viremia and replication of the challenge virus in the 
liver and the spleen. These data demonstrated that scMP-12 is a safe and 
immunogenic RVFV vaccine candidate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002746
PMCID: PMC3961198
PMID: 24651859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.