1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Mar 20;14:214. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-214.

Loss of MTUS1/ATIP expression is associated with adverse outcome in advanced 
bladder carcinomas: data from a retrospective study.

Rogler A, Hoja S, Giedl J, Ekici AB, Wach S, Taubert H, Goebell PJ, Wullich B, 
St√∂ckle M, Lehmann J, Petsch S, Hartmann A, Stoehr R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Krankenhausstr, 8-10 
91054 Erlangen, Germany. Robert.stoehr@uk-erlangen.de.

BACKGROUND: Seventy percent of all bladder tumours tend to recur and need 
intensive surveillance, and a subset of tumours progress to muscle-invasive and 
metastatic disease. However, it is still difficult to find the adequate 
treatment for every individual patient as it is a very heterogeneous disease and 
reliable biomarkers are still missing. In our study we searched for new target 
genes in the critical chromosomal region 8p and investigated the potential 
tumour suppressor gene candidate MTUS1/ATIP in bladder cancer.
METHODS: MTUS1 was identified to be the most promising deleted target gene at 8p 
in aCGH analysis with 19 papillary bladder tumours. A correlation with bladder 
cancer was further validated using immunohistochemistry of 85 papillary and 236 
advanced bladder tumours and in functional experiments. Kaplan-Meier analysis 
and multivariate Cox-regression addressed overall survival (OS) and 
disease-specific survival (DSS) as a function of MTUS1/ATIP expression. 
Bivariate correlations investigated associations between MTUS1/ATIP expression, 
patient characteristics and histopathology. MTUS1 expression was analysed in 
cell lines and overexpressed in RT112, where impact on viability, proliferation 
and migration was measured.
RESULTS: MTUS1 protein expression was lost in almost 50% of all papillary and 
advanced bladder cancers. Survival, however, was only influenced in advanced 
carcinomas, where loss of MTUS1 was associated with adverse OS and DSS. In this 
cohort, there was also a significant correlation of MTUS1 expression and 
histological subtype: positive expression was detected in all micropapillary 
tumours and aberrant nuclear staining was detected in a subset of plasmocytoid 
urothelial carcinomas. MTUS1 was expressed in all investigated bladder cell 
lines and overexpression in RT112 led to significantly decreased viability.
CONCLUSIONS: MTUS1 is a tumour suppressor gene in cultured bladder cancer cells 
and in advanced bladder tumours. It might represent one new target gene at 
chromosome 8p and can be used as an independent prognostic factor for advanced 
bladder cancer patients. The limitation of the study is the retrospective data 
analysis. Thus, findings should be validated with a prospective advanced bladder 
tumour cohort.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-214
PMCID: PMC3994487
PMID: 24650297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]