1. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Mar 21;15:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-44.

Microglial Cx3cr1 knockout reduces prion disease incubation time in mice.

Grizenkova J, Akhtar S, Brandner S, Collinge J, Lloyd SE(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. s.lloyd@prion.ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Microglia are resident mononuclear phagocytes of the brain that 
become activated in response to insults including neurodegenerative diseases 
such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and prion disease. In the 
central nervous system the chemokine Cx3cl1 (Fractalkine) is expressed by 
neurons and its exclusive receptor Cx3cr1 is expressed solely on microglia. 
Cx3cl1/Cx3cr1 signalling is thought to maintain microglia in their resting state 
and disrupting this equilibrium may allow microglia to become activated. In 
prion disease, microglial proliferation has been suggested to contribute to 
overall disease progression, however, in different mouse models of 
neurodegeneration, loss of Cx3cr1 has been shown to either worsen or improve the 
phenotype depending on the paradigm.
RESULTS: To investigate the role of Cx3cl1/Cx3cr1 signalling in prion disease we 
infected Cx3cr1 null mice with three different strains of prions. Following 
challenge with Chandler/RML, ME7 and MRC2 prion strains, Cx3cr1 knockout mice 
showed highly significant reductions in incubation time. No differences were 
seen in the pattern and localisation of activated microglia in the brain or in 
the mRNA expression levels of chemokines/cytokines (Cxcl10, Il-12b, Il-1b, Arg-1 
and Cxc3l1).
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest a protective role for Cx3cl1/Cx3cr1 cross-talk in 
prion disease.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-44
PMCID: PMC3998043
PMID: 24655482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]