1. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2014 May;25(5):869-79. doi: 10.1007/s13361-014-0836-9.

Mass spectrometry combinations for structural characterization of 
sulfated-steroid metabolites.

Yan Y, Rempel DL, Holy TE, Gross ML.

Steroid conjugates, which often occur as metabolites, are challenging to 
characterize. One application is female-mouse urine, where steroid conjugates 
serve as important ligands for the pheromone-sensing neurons. Although the two 
with the highest abundance in mouse urine were previously characterized with 
mass spectrometry (MS) and NMR to be sulfated steroids, many more exist but 
remain structurally unresolved. Given that their physical and chemical 
properties are similar, they are likely to have a sulfated steroid ring 
structure. Because these compounds occur in trace amounts in mouse urine and 
elsewhere, their characterization by NMR will be difficult. Thus, MS methods 
become the primary approach for determining structure. Here, we show that a 
combination of MS tools is effective for determining the structures of sulfated 
steroids. Using 4-pregnene analogs, we explored high-resolving power MS (HR-MS) 
to determine chemical formulae; HD exchange MS (HDX-MS) to determine number of 
active, exchangeable hydrogens (e.g., OH groups); methoxyamine hydrochloride 
(MOX) derivatization MS, or reactive desorption electrospray ionization with 
hydroxylamine to determine the number of carbonyl groups; and tandem MS (MS(n)), 
high-resolution tandem MS (HRMS/MS), and GC-MS to obtain structural details of 
the steroid ring. From the fragmentation studies, we deduced three major 
fragmentation rules for this class of sulfated steroids. We also show that a 
combined MS approach is effective for determining structure of steroid 
metabolites, with important implications for targeted metabolomics in general 
and for the study of mouse social communication in particular.

DOI: 10.1007/s13361-014-0836-9
PMCID: PMC4449735
PMID: 24658800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]