1. Front Neurol. 2014 Mar 11;5:26. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00026. eCollection
2014.

Biochemical Distribution of Tau Protein in Synaptosomal Fraction of Transgenic 
Mice Expressing Human P301L Tau.

Sahara N(1), Murayama M(2), Higuchi M(3), Suhara T(3), Takashima A(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences , Chiba 
, Japan ; Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, RIKEN Brain Science Institute , 
Wako , Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, RIKEN Brain Science Institute , Wako , 
Japan.
(3)Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences , Chiba 
, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease, RIKEN Brain Science Institute , Wako , 
Japan ; Department of Aging Neurobiology, National Center for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology , Obu , Japan.

Alzheimer's disease is a progressive dementia that is characterized by a loss of 
recent memory. Evidence has accumulated to support the hypothesis that synapses 
are critical storage sites for memory. However, it is still uncertain whether 
tau protein is involved in associative memory storage and whether tau is 
distributed in mature brain synapses. To address this question, we examined the 
synaptosomal distribution of tau protein in both JNPL3 transgenic mice 
expressing human P301L tau and non-transgenic littermates. The JNPL3 mouse line 
is known as one of the mouse models of human tauopathy that develop motor and 
behavioral deficits with intracellular tau aggregates in the spinal cord and 
brainstem. The phenotype of disease progression is highly dependent on strain 
background. In this study, we confirmed that male JNPL3 transgenic mice with 
C57BL/6J strain background showed neither any sign of motor deficits nor 
accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau in the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction until 
18 months of age. Subcellular fractionation analysis showed that both mouse tau 
and human P301L tau were present in the synaptosomal fraction. Those tau 
proteins were less-phosphorylated than tau in the cytosolic fraction. Human 
P301L tau was preferentially distributed in the synaptosomal fraction while 
mouse endogenous tau was more distributed in the cytosolic fraction. 
Interestingly, a human-specific tau band with phosphorylation at Ser199 and 
Ser396 was observed in the synaptosomal fraction of JNPL3 mice. This tau was not 
identical to either tau species in cytosolic fraction or a prominent 
hyperphosphorylated 64 kDa tau species that was altered to tau pathology. These 
results suggest that exogenous human P301L tau induces synaptosomal distribution 
of tau protein with a certain phosphorylation. Regulating the synaptosomal tau 
level might be a potential target for a therapeutic intervention directed at 
preventing neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00026
PMCID: PMC3949102
PMID: 24653715