1. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 May;9(5):717-24. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000141.

Relationship between EGFR expression, EGFR mutation status, and the efficacy of 
chemotherapy plus cetuximab in FLEX study patients with advanced non-small-cell 
lung cancer.

Douillard JY(1), Pirker R, O'Byrne KJ, Kerr KM, Störkel S, von Heydebreck A, 
Grote HJ, Celik I, Shepherd FA.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancerologie de l'Ouest, Centre 
René Gauducheau, Saint-Herblain, France; †Department of Medicine I, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; ‡HOPE Directorate, St James's Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland; §Department of Pathology, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, 
United Kingdom; ‖Institute of Pathology, University of Witten/Herdecke and 
HELIOS Hospital Wuppertal, Wuppertal, Germany; ¶Global Biostatistics, #Biomarker 
Technologies & Operations, and **Translational Innovation Platform Oncology, 
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; and ††University Health Network, Department of 
Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The phase III FLEX study (NCT00148798) in advanced non-small-cell 
lung cancer indicated that the survival benefit associated with the addition of 
cetuximab to cisplatin and vinorelbine was limited to patients whose tumors 
expressed high levels of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
(immunohistochemistry score of ≥200; scale 0-300). We assessed whether the 
treatment effect was also modulated in FLEX study patients by tumor EGFR 
mutation status.
METHODS: A tumor mutation screen of EGFR exons 18 to 21 included 971 of 1125 
(86%) FLEX study patients. Treatment outcome in low and high EGFR expression 
groups was analyzed across efficacy endpoints according to tumor EGFR mutation 
status.
RESULTS: Mutations in EGFR exons 18 to 21 were detected in 133 of 971 tumors 
(14%), 970 of which were also evaluable for EGFR expression level. The most 
common mutations were exon 19 deletions and L858R (124 of 133 patients; 93%). In 
the high EGFR expression group (immunohistochemistry score of ≥200), a survival 
benefit for the addition of cetuximab to chemotherapy was demonstrated in 
patients with EGFR wild-type (including T790M mutant) tumors. Although patient 
numbers were small, those in the high EGFR expression group whose tumors carried 
EGFR mutations may also have derived a survival benefit from the addition of 
cetuximab to chemotherapy. Response data suggested a cetuximab benefit in the 
high EGFR expression group regardless of EGFR mutation status.
CONCLUSIONS: The survival benefit associated with the addition of cetuximab to 
first-line chemotherapy for advanced non-small-cell lung cancer expressing high 
levels of EGFR is not limited by EGFR mutation status.

DOI: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000141
PMID: 24662454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]