1. Int J Hematol. 2014;99(5):625-34. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1567-1. Epub 2014
Mar  28.

JAK2V617F mutation status and allele burden in classical Ph-negative 
myeloproliferative neoplasms in Japan.

Edahiro Y(1), Morishita S, Takahashi K, Hironaka Y, Yahata Y, Sunami Y, Shirane 
S, Tsutsui M, Noguchi M, Koike M, Imai K, Kirito K, Noda N, Sekiguchi Y, Tsuneda 
S, Ohsaka A, Araki M, Komatsu N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

JAK2V617F, a gain-of-function mutation in the tyrosine kinase JAK2, is 
frequently detected in classical myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). In the 
present study, we determined the JAK2V617F allele burden in Japanese MPN 
patients using alternately binding probe competitive-polymerase chain reaction, 
a highly quantitative method recently developed by our group. Although we 
observed strong similarities in terms of epidemiological parameters associated 
with the JAK2V617F allele burden between our cohort and others, we found a 
higher JAK2V617F allele burden in Japanese polycythemia vera (PV) patients and 
lower frequencies of thrombosis in Japanese MPN patients compared with previous 
reports. In addition, despite the presence of high red blood cell counts, some 
patients bearing the JAK2V617F mutation were not diagnosed as PV, as their 
hemoglobin values were lower than the WHO PV criterion. In these patients, the 
JAK2V617F allele burden was strikingly similar to that in PV patients fulfilling 
the 2008 WHO criteria, suggesting that these patients can be classified as PV. 
Although isotopic measurement of red cell mass (RCM) is required for definitive 
diagnosis of PV, our data suggest that precise measurement of the JAK2V617F 
allele burden may improve the diagnosis of PV when RCM has not been determined.

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-014-1567-1
PMID: 24677207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]