1. Mol Vis. 2014 Mar 14;20:334-40. eCollection 2014.

Pan-American mDNA haplogroups in Chilean patients with Leber's hereditary optic 
neuropathy.

Romero P(1), Fernández V(2), Slabaugh M(3), Seleme N(4), Reyes N(5), Gallardo 
P(4), Herrera L(6), Peña L(7), Pezo P(6), Moraga M(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Oftalmología, Hospital Clínico "José Joaquín Aguirre," 
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile ; Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(2)Departamento de Neuro-oftalmología Instituto Chileno de Neurocirugía, 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(4)Departamento de Oftalmología, Hospital Clínico "José Joaquín Aguirre," 
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital Regional de Concepción, Santiago, Chile.
(6)Programa de Genética Humana, ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Departamento de Oftalmología. Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

PURPOSE: The clinical impact of mDNA mutations on the development of Leber 
hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) may be modulated by mitochondrial 
haplogroups, which vary across populations. The aim of this research was to 
determine the clinical spectrum and molecular characteristics, including the 
haplogroup, of 15 South American families with LHON.
METHODS: This study was a prospective, observational study conducted between 
March 2006 and August 2012. All patients were referred to the Clinical Hospital 
of the University of Chile, where the clinical study was conducted. Molecular 
studies were conducted at the Biomedical Sciences Institute (ICBM) of the 
University of Chile. Fifteen index cases were identified with molecular analysis 
after initial neuroophthalmic examination at different centers throughout Chile. 
Clinical features of patients with LHON and maternal relatives of the 15 
families (75 individuals: 26 affected and 49 healthy carriers) were evaluated. 
The primary mDNA mutations (m.3460G>A, m.11778G>A, or m.14484T>C) were 
determined with restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis in all 
individuals. Mitochondrial haplogroups were determined with direct sequencing of 
two hypervariable regions (HV1 and HV2) and compared with reference sequences.
RESULTS: The m.11778G>A mutation was found in 59 subjects (78.7%), the 
m.14484T>C mutation was found in 12 subjects (16.0%), and the m.3460G>A mutation 
was found in four (5.3%) subjects. The average age of onset of symptoms in 
affected subjects was 22.2 years old (range 3 to 53 years); 21 (80.7%) were 
male, and five (19.3%) were female. Twelve families (80%) had Amerindian 
haplogroups: One family had the A2 haplogroup, four families had the B2i2 
haplogroup, six families had the C1b haplogroup, and one family had the D1g 
haplogroup.
CONCLUSIONS: In this limited sample size, the Amerindian haplogroup A2 was 
associated with delayed onset of disease in this population. Patients with 
haplogroup C retained better vision than the patients with other haplogroups in 
this population. Disease in subjects with haplogroup D appeared to be 
underrepresented compared to the population at large.

PMCID: PMC3962688
PMID: 24672219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]