1. J Histochem Cytochem. 2014 Jun;62(6):395-404. doi: 10.1369/0022155414530995. 
Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Validating Antibodies to the Cannabinoid CB2 Receptor: Antibody Sensitivity Is 
Not Evidence of Antibody Specificity.

Marchalant Y(1), Brownjohn PW(2), Bonnet A(1), Kleffmann T(1), Ashton JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille University, Neurobiologie des Interactions Cellulaires et 
Neurophysiopathologie, Marseille, France (YM,AB)Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology (PWB,JCA)Centre for Protein Research, Biochemistry Department, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand (TK).
(2)Aix-Marseille University, Neurobiologie des Interactions Cellulaires et 
Neurophysiopathologie, Marseille, France (YM,AB)Department of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology (PWB,JCA)Centre for Protein Research, Biochemistry Department, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand (TK) phil.brownjohn@gmail.com.

Antibody-based methods for the detection and quantification of membrane integral 
proteins, in particular, the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), have been 
plagued with issues of primary antibody specificity. In this report, we 
investigate one of the most commonly utilized commercial antibodies for the 
cannabinoid CB2 receptor, a GPCR, using immunoblotting in combination with mass 
spectrometry. In this way, we were able to develop powerful negative and novel 
positive controls. By doing this, we are able to demonstrate that it is possible 
for an antibody to be sensitive for a protein of interest-in this case CB2-but 
still cross-react with other proteins and therefore lack specificity. 
Specifically, we were able to use western blotting combined with mass 
spectrometry to unequivocally identify CB2 protein in over-expressing cell 
lines. This shows that a common practice of validating antibodies with positive 
controls only is insufficient to ensure antibody reliability. In addition, our 
work is the first to develop a label-free method of protein detection using mass 
spectrometry that, with further refinement, could provide unequivocal 
identification of CB2 receptor protein in native tissues.

Â© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1369/0022155414530995
PMCID: PMC4174627
PMID: 24670796

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.