1. J Pathog. 2014;2014:842469. doi: 10.1155/2014/842469. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

High Prevalence of Helicobacter pylori hopQ II Genotype Isolated from Iranian 
Patients with Gastroduodenal Disorders.

Talebi Bezmin Abadi A(1), Mohabbati Mobarez A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 100, 
3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Science, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.

Helicobacter pylori plays an important role in the pathogenesis of chronic 
gastritis, peptic ulceration, and noncardia gastric cancer. Several putative 
virulence factors for H. pylori have been identified including vacA, babA, and 
iceA. HopQ is one of the outer membrane proteins involved in bacterial adherence 
to gastric mucosa and has been suggested to also play a role in the virulence of 
H. pylori. Due to the substantial geographic differences in the prevalence of H. 
pylori virulence factors reported, the main purpose of the current study was to 
investigate the association between different H. pylori virulence hopQ alleles 
(types I and II) and patients with gastroduodenal disorders. The presence of H. 
pylori and hopQ alleles in gastric biopsy specimens was identified by specific 
PCR assays. H. pylori type II hopQ was found to be significantly associated with 
gastric cancer patients (odds ratio: 3.47, 95% CI: 1.56-5.89). Information about 
the prevalence of H. pylori hopQ type II can be used for determining the 
high-risk diseases type which is actually colonized by H. pylori hopQ type II 
positive strains. The presence of H. pylori hopQ type II should be investigated 
in different geographical regions as confirmatory findings may provide a 
definite biomarker attributed to the pathogenesis of certain severe digestive 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/842469
PMCID: PMC3941210
PMID: 24672729