1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093198. 
eCollection 2014.

Resistin in dairy cows: plasma concentrations during early lactation, expression 
and potential role in adipose tissue.

Reverchon M(1), Ramé C(1), Cognié J(1), Briant E(1), Elis S(1), Guillaume D(1), 
Dupont J(1).

Author information:
(1)INRA, UMR 7247 Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements, Nouzilly, 
France; CNRS, UMR6175 Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements, 
Nouzilly, France; Université François Rabelais de Tours, Tours, France; Institut 
Français du Cheval, Nouzilly, France.

Resistin is an adipokine that has been implicated in energy metabolism 
regulation in rodents but has been little studied in dairy cows. We determined 
plasma resistin concentrations in early lactation in dairy cows and investigated 
the levels of resistin mRNA and protein in adipose tissue and the 
phosphorylation of several components of insulin signaling pathways one week 
post partum (1 WPP) and at five months of gestation (5 MG). We detected resistin 
in mature bovine adipocytes and investigated the effect of recombinant bovine 
resistin on lipolysis in bovine adipose tissue explants. ELISA showed that 
plasma resistin concentration was low before calving, subsequently increasing 
and reaching a peak at 1 WPP, decreasing steadily thereafter to reach 
pre-calving levels at 6 WPP. Plasma resistin concentration was significantly 
positively correlated with plasma non esterified fatty acid (NEFA) levels and 
negatively with milk yield, dry matter intake and energy balance between WPP1 to 
WPP22. We showed, by quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting, that resistin 
mRNA and protein levels in adipose tissue were higher at WPP1 than at 5 MG. The 
level of phosphorylation of several early and downstream insulin signaling 
components (IRβ, IRS-1, IRS-2, Akt, MAPK ERK1/2, P70S6K and S6) in adipose 
tissue was also lower at 1 WPP than at 5 MG. Finally, we showed that recombinant 
bovine resistin increased the release of glycerol and mRNA levels for ATGL 
(adipose triglyceride lipase) and HSL (hormone-sensitive lipase) in adipose 
tissue explants. Overall, resistin levels were high in the plasma and adipose 
tissue and were positively correlated with NEFA levels after calving. Resistin 
is expressed in bovine mature adipocytes and promotes lipid mobilization in 
adipose explants in vitro.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093198
PMCID: PMC3968062
PMID: 24675707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.