1. Brain Res. 2014 May 14;1563:103-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.03.031. Epub 
2014 Mar 26.

Allopurinol reduces levels of urate and dopamine but not dopaminergic neurons in 
a dual pesticide model of Parkinson's disease.

Kachroo A(1), Schwarzschild MA(2).

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, 
USA. Electronic address: akach2@gmail.com.
(2)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, 
USA.

Robust epidemiological data link higher levels of the antioxidant urate to a 
reduced risk of developing Parkinson׳s disease (PD) and to a slower rate of its 
progression. Allopurinol, an inhibitor of xanthine oxidoreductase (XOR), blocks 
the oxidation of xanthine to urate. The present study sought to determine 
whether lowering levels of urate using allopurinol results in exacerbated 
neurotoxicity in a dual pesticide mouse model of PD. Although oral allopurinol 
reduced serum and striatal urate levels 4-fold and 1.3-fold, respectively, it 
did not alter the multiple motor deficits induced by chronic (7 week) 
intermittent (biweekly) exposure to intraperitoneal Paraquat (PQ) plus Maneb 
(MB). However, striatal dopamine content, which was unaffected after either 
allopurinol or chronic pesticide exposure alone, was significantly reduced by 
22% in mice exposed to the combination. Stereological assessment showed that the 
numbers of dopaminergic nigral neurons were significantly reduced by 29% and the 
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) negative neurons unaffected after PQ+MB treatments. 
This reduction in TH-positive neurons was not affected by allopurinol treatment. 
Of note, despite the expectation of exacerbated oxidative damage due to the 
reduction in urate, protein carbonyl levels, a marker of oxidative damage, were 
actually reduced in the presence of allopurinol. Overall, allopurinol lowered 
urate levels but did not exacerbate dopaminergic neuron degeneration, findings 
suggesting that basal levels of urate in mice do not appreciably protect against 
oxidative damage and neurotoxicity in the PQ+MB model of PD, and/or that 
allopurinol produces an antioxidant benefit offsetting its detrimental 
urate-lowering effect.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.03.031
PMCID: PMC4146456
PMID: 24680743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest