1. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Apr;29(2):119-30. doi: 10.1177/0748730414524898.

Insights into behavioral vulnerability to differential sleep pressure and 
circadian phase from a functional ADA polymorphism.

Reichert CF(1), Maire M, Gabel V, Viola AU, Kolodyazhniy V, Strobel W, GÃ¶tz T, 
Bachmann V, Landolt HP, Cajochen C, Schmidt C.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Chronobiology, Psychiatric Hospital of the University of Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.

Sleep loss affects human behavior in a nonuniform manner, depending on the 
cognitive domain and also the circadian phase. Besides, evidence exists about 
stable interindividual variations in sleep loss-related performance impairments. 
Despite this evidence, only a few studies have considered both circadian phase 
and neurobehavioral domain when investigating trait-like vulnerability to sleep 
manipulation. By applying a randomized, crossover design with 2 sleep pressure 
conditions (40 h sleep deprivation vs. 40 h multiple naps), we investigated the 
influence of a human adenosine deaminase (ADA) polymorphism (rs73598374) on 
several behavioral measures throughout nearly 2 circadian cycles. Confirming 
earlier studies, we observed that under sleep deprivation the previously 
reported vulnerable G/A-allele carriers felt overall sleepier than G/G-allele 
carriers. As expected, this difference was no longer present when sleep pressure 
was reduced by the application of multiple naps. Concomitantly, well-being was 
worse in the G/A genotype under sleep loss when compared to the nap protocol, 
and n-back working memory performance appeared to be specifically susceptible to 
sleep-wake manipulation in this genotype. When considering psychomotor vigilance 
performance, however, a higher sensitivity to sleep-wake manipulation was 
detected in homozygous participants, but specifically at the end of the night 
and only for optimal task performance. Although these data are based on a small 
sample size and hence require replication (12 G/A- and 12 G/G-allele carriers), 
they confirm the assumption that interindividual differences regarding the 
effect of sleep manipulation highly depend on the cognitive task and circadian 
phase, and thus emphasize the necessity of a multimethodological approach. 
Moreover, they indicate that napping might be suitable to counteract 
endogenously heightened sleep pressure depending on the neurobehavioral domain.

DOI: 10.1177/0748730414524898
PMID: 24682206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]