1. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2014 Mar;33(1):231-69. doi: 10.1007/s10555-014-9498-0.

Platelets and cancer: a casual or causal relationship: revisited.

Menter DG(1), Tucker SC, Kopetz S, Sood AK, Crissman JD, Honn KV.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, 77054, USA.

Human platelets arise as subcellular fragments of megakaryocytes in bone marrow. 
The physiologic demand, presence of disease such as cancer, or drug effects can 
regulate the production circulating platelets. Platelet biology is essential to 
hemostasis, vascular integrity, angiogenesis, inflammation, innate immunity, 
wound healing, and cancer biology. The most critical biological platelet 
response is serving as "First Responders" during the wounding process. The 
exposure of extracellular matrix proteins and intracellular components occurs 
after wounding. Numerous platelet receptors recognize matrix proteins that 
trigger platelet activation, adhesion, aggregation, and stabilization. Once 
activated, platelets change shape and degranulate to release growth factors and 
bioactive lipids into the blood stream. This cyclic process recruits and 
aggregates platelets along with thrombogenesis. This process facilitates wound 
closure or can recognize circulating pathologic bodies. Cancer cell entry into 
the blood stream triggers platelet-mediated recognition and is amplified by cell 
surface receptors, cellular products, extracellular factors, and immune cells. 
In some cases, these interactions suppress immune recognition and elimination of 
cancer cells or promote arrest at the endothelium, or entrapment in the 
microvasculature, and survival. This supports survival and spread of cancer 
cells and the establishment of secondary lesions to serve as important targets 
for prevention and therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10555-014-9498-0
PMCID: PMC4186918
PMID: 24696047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]