1. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Jun;9(6):2512-20. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2098. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

ABCG5/8 variants are associated with susceptibility to coronary heart disease.

Wu G(1), Li GB(2), Yao M(1), Zhang DQ(3), Dai B(2), Ju CJ(3), Han M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Office of Drug Clinical Trial Institution, The Fourth 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130011, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin 130011, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
Jilin 130011, P.R. China.

ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 5 (ABCG5) and ABCG8 are members of an 
ATP-binding cassette transporter superfamily. ABCG5 and ABCG8 variants affected 
serum levels of cholesterol and were considered as risk factors for coronary 
heart disease (CHD). The present control study analyzed ABCG5 and ABCG8 variants 
in a population for association with the risk of CHD. A total of 417 CHD 
patients and 267 controls were recruited for genotyping of four single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; i.e. i7892T>C in ABCG5 and Tyr54CysA>G, 
Thr400LysC>A and 5U145A>C in ABCG8) using quantitative PCR high-resolution 
melting (qPCR-HRM). Serum lipid levels were measured using an automatic 
biochemical analyzer. The association of ABCG5/8 variants with lipid levels was 
analyzed using a Chi-square test. The impact of candidate ABCG5/8 SNPs on CHD 
was evaluated in a dominant genetic model with stepwise multiple regression 
analysis. Subgroup analyses were performed with regard to these SNPs, tobacco 
smoking status, alcohol consumption and gender. Genotypic and allelic 
frequencies of ABCG8 Thr400LysC>A were significantly different (P<0.05) between 
CHD patients and controls. CC homozygotes of the ABCG8 Thr400LysC>A SNP had 
greater triglyceride levels than CA/AA carriers with CHD. Logistic analysis 
revealed CHD risk was significantly higher in CC homozygotes of ABCG8 
Thr400LysC>A than in carriers of the A allele (adjusted P=0.048; OR=2.034; 95% 
CI=0.983-4.207). Furthermore, there was a significant gene-tobacco smoking 
interaction. CC homozygotes of ABCG8 Thr400LysC>A SNP had significantly higher 
triglyceride concentrations (P=0.012) and an increased risk of CHD than tobacco 
smoking carriers of the A allele. The data from the current study suggested that 
ABCG8 Thr400LysC>A SNP genetic variants modulated plasma triglyceride levels and 
thereby affected CHD risk in the population studied. The genetic variant of 
ABCG8 also contributed to CHD risk through interaction with tobacco smoking.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2098
PMID: 24691589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]