1. J Vet Sci. 2014;15(3):361-7. doi: 10.4142/jvs.2014.15.3.361. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Detection of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus in oral fluid 
from naturally infected pigs in a breeding herd.

Trang NT(1), Hirai T, Yamamoto T, Matsuda M, Okumura N, Giang NT, Lan NT, 
Yamaguchi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, University of 
Miyazaki, Miyazaki 889-2192, Japan.

The objectives of the present study were to evaluate the anatomic localization 
of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) in naturally 
infected pigs and to determine whether oral fluid could be used to detect the 
virus in infected animals. Two sows, seven 2-month-old grower pigs, and 70 
6-month-old gilts were included in this study. PRRSV in sera and oral fluid were 
identified by nested reverse transcription PCR (nRT-PCR) while lung, tonsil, and 
tissue associated with oral cavity were subjected to nRT-PCR, 
immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization. In sows, PRRSV was identified 
in oral fluid and tonsils. PRRSV was also detected in oral fluid, tonsils, 
salivary glands, oral mucosa, and lungs of all seven grower pigs. However, 
viremia was observed in only two grower pigs. Double staining revealed that 
PRRSV was distributed in macrophages within and adjacent to the tonsillar crypt 
epithelium. In gilts, the North American type PRRSV field strain was detected 3 
to 8 weeks after introducing these animals onto the farm. These results confirm 
previous findings that PRRSV primarily replicates in tonsils and is then shed 
into oral fluid. Therefore, oral fluid sampling may be effective for the 
surveillance of PRRSV in breeding herds.

DOI: 10.4142/jvs.2014.15.3.361
PMCID: PMC4178137
PMID: 24690609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest.