1. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;33(6):378-87. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2269. Epub 2014
Apr  2.

Association between the XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism and head and neck cancer 
susceptibility: a meta-analysis based on case-control studies.

Liu C(1), Yin Q, Jiao G, Zhou X, Ying M, Gao W, Hu J, Wei L, Wang N, Wang Y.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University , Shanghai, People's Republic of China .

Published data regarding the association between the XRCC1 Arg399Gln 
polymorphism and head and neck cancer (HNC) susceptibility showed inconsistent 
results. This meta-analysis of eligible literatures was performed to draw a more 
precise estimation of the relationship. We systematically searched PubMed, 
Embase, and Web of Science with a time limit of Oct 28, 2013. Summary odds 
ratios (ORs) with 95% CIs were used to assess the strength of association 
between XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism and HNC susceptibility using random-effect 
model. A total of 27 case-control studies including 5942 cases and 9041 controls 
were included for analysis. Meta-analysis of total studies showed that the XRCC1 
Arg399Gln variant carriers were not susceptible to HNC (AA vs. GG: OR=0.92, 95% 
CI=0.77-1.11; AG vs. GG: OR=1.05, 95% CI=0.76-1.44; the dominant model AA+AG vs. 
GG: OR=1.00, 95% CI=0.78-1.29; the recessive model AA vs. AG+GG: OR=0.91, 95% 
CI=0.71-1.16). Further, subgroup analyses by ethnicity and source of controls 
did not identify any significant associations of XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism 
with head and neck susceptibility in any populations. Our meta-analysis 
suggested that the XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism was not a risk factor for HNC 
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2013.2269
PMID: 24694255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]