1. Stem Cell Res. 2014 May;12(3):716-29. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.02.008. Epub
2014  Mar 12.

uPAR and cathepsin B-mediated compartmentalization of JNK regulates the 
migration of glioma-initiating cells.

Alapati K(1), Kesanakurti D(1), Rao JS(2), Dasari VR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, University of Illinois College 
of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61605, USA.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, University of Illinois College 
of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61605, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, 
University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61605, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, University of Illinois College 
of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61605, USA. Electronic address: 
rdasari@uic.edu.

In the present study, we investigated the effect of simultaneous downregulation 
of uPAR and cathepsin B (pUC), alone or in combination with radiation, on 
JNK-MAPK signaling pathway in regulating the migration of non-GICs 
(glioma-initiating cells) and GICs. The increase in the expression of p-JNK with 
pUC treatment was mostly localized to nucleus whereas increase in the expression 
of p-JNK with radiation and overexpression of uPAR and cathepsin B was confined 
to cytoplasm of the cells. Depletion of cytosolic p-JNK with pUC treatment 
inhibited migration by downregulating the expression of the adapter proteins of 
the focal adhesion complex. We also observed that knockdown of uPAR and 
cathepsin B regulated the Ras-Pak-1 pathway to induce the translocation of p-JNK 
from cytosol to nucleus. In control cells, Pak-1 served as a functional 
inhibitor for MEKK-1, which inhibits the complex formation of MEKK-1 and p-JNK 
and thus inhibits the translocation of this complex into nucleus. Hence, we 
conclude that glioma cells utilize the availability of cytosolic p-JNK in 
driving the cells towards migration. Finally, treating the cells with pUC alone 
or in combination with radiation induced the translocation of the MEKK-1-p-JNK 
complex from cytosol to nucleus, thereby inhibiting the migration of glioma 
cells.

Copyright Â© 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.02.008
PMCID: PMC4061617
PMID: 24699410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]