1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 4;9(4):e93990. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093990.
eCollection  2014.

An Intronic SINE insertion in FAM161A that causes exon-skipping is associated 
with progressive retinal atrophy in Tibetan Spaniels and Tibetan Terriers.

Downs LM(1), Mellersh CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Kennel Club Genetics Centre, Animal Health Trust, Newmarket, United Kingdom.

Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) in dogs is characterised by the degeneration 
of the photoreceptor cells of the retina, resulting in vision loss and 
eventually complete blindness. The condition affects more than 100 dog breeds 
and is known to be genetically heterogeneous between breeds. Around 19 mutations 
have now been identified that are associated with PRA in around 49 breeds, but 
for the majority of breeds the mutation(s) responsible have yet to be 
identified. Using genome-wide association with 22 Tibetan Spaniel PRA cases and 
10 controls, we identified a novel PRA locus, PRA3, on CFA10 (p(raw) = 2.01 Ã— 
10(-5), p(genome) = 0.014), where a 3.8 Mb region was homozygous within 12 
cases. Using targeted next generation sequencing, a short interspersed nuclear 
element insertion was identified near a splice acceptor site in an intron of a 
provocative gene, FAM161A. Analysis of mRNA from an affected dog revealed that 
the SINE causes exon skipping, resulting in a frame shift, leading to a 
downstream premature termination codon and possibly a truncated protein product. 
This mutation segregates with the disease in 22 out of 35 cases tested (63%). Of 
the PRA controls, none are homozygous for the mutation, 15% carry the mutation 
and 85% are homozygous wildtype. This mutation was also identified in Tibetan 
Terriers, although our results indicate that PRA is genetically heterogeneous in 
both Tibetan Spaniels and Tibetan Terriers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093990
PMCID: PMC3976383
PMID: 24705771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.