1. J Med Case Rep. 2014 Apr 3;8:112. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-112.

A novel DICER1 mutation identified in a female with ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell 
tumor and multinodular goiter: a case report.

Rossing M, Gerdes AM, Juul A, Rechnitzer C, Rudnicki M, Nielsen FC, Vo Hansen 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Thomas.Van.Overeem.Hansen@regionh.dk.

INTRODUCTION: Germ-line mutations in the micro-ribonucleic acid processing gene 
DICER1 have been shown to predispose to a subset of benign tumors susceptible to 
malignant transformation, including ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, nontoxic 
multinodular goiter, multilocular cystic nephroma and pleuropulmonary blastoma, 
which can occur in children and young adults. This may be due to reduced Dcr-1 
homolog expression in carriers of germline mutations, which causes impairment of 
micro-ribonucleic acid processing and deregulates the growth and differentiation 
of target cells, leading to an increased risk of tumorigenesis. Many carriers of 
germ-line DICER1 mutations remain unaffected, but development of tumors within 
carriers is associated with varying prognoses.
CASE PRESENTATION: Despite the Dcr-1 homolog syndrome phenotype being 
incompletely defined, a DICER1 mutation was suspected when a girl (case 1 
patient) of Danish ethnicity presented with both an ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell 
tumor and a multinodular goiter at the age of 13 years. In addition, family 
history included a male sibling (case 2 patient) who also had a multinodular 
goiter and had undergone a hemithyroidectomy at the age of 14 years. Subsequent 
DICER1 screening of the girl identified two novel mutations in exon 21 - a 
nonsense (c.3647C>A, p.Ser1216*) and a missense (c.3649T>A, p.Tyr1217Asn) 
mutation. The siblings had inherited the mutations from their father and 
paternal grandfather, which both currently were asymptomatic, indicating reduced 
penetrance of the nonsense mutation. Analysis of the parents revealed that the 
mutations were present in cis, making the contribution of the missense mutation 
less significant.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel pathogenic DICER1 mutation (p.Ser1216*) in a 
Danish family associated with ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor and a 
multinodular goiter. A multinodular goiter was diagnosed in the siblings during 
childhood. Clinicians should be aware of a potential germ-line DICER1 mutation 
when evaluating multinodular goiter in young patients with or without a family 
history of thyroid diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-8-112
PMCID: PMC4234993
PMID: 24708902