1. Neuroreport. 2014 Jul 9;25(10):753-5. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000165.

Significantly decreased mRNA levels of BDNF and MEK1 genes in 
treatment-resistant depression.

Hong W(1), Fan J, Yuan C, Zhang C, Hu Y, Peng D, Wang Y, Huang J, Li Z, Yu S, 
Liu X, Wu Z, Chen J, Yi Z, Xu L, Fang Y.

Author information:
(1)aShanghai Mental Health Center, Division of Mood Disorders, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai bKey Laboratory of Animal Models 
and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming, China cDepartment of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The aim of the current study was to investigate whether the levels of mRNA 
expression of brain-derived neurotrophin factor (BDNF) and a related gene MEK1 
were more obviously decreased in treatment-resistant depression (TRD). In total, 
50 patients with major depressive disorder (including 26 with TRD and 24 with 
treatment-responsive depression) and 48 healthy controls were enrolled. BDNF and 
MEK1 mRNA levels in blood samples from all patients and controls were measured 
using reverse transcriptase-PCR. BDNF and MEK1 mRNA levels were significantly 
reduced in patients with major depressive disorder when compared with healthy 
controls (BDNF: P<0.01; MEK1: P<0.001), as well as among treatment-resistant 
depressive patients as compared with treatment-responsive depressive patients 
(BDNF: P<0.001; MEK1: P<0.01). Our findings support the hypothesis that BDNF and 
MEK1 mRNA expression levels are more obviously decreased in patients with TRD.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000165
PMCID: PMC4465888
PMID: 24709918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: There are no conflicts of 
interest.