1. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Jul;67:119-32. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.03.016. Epub 2014
Apr  2.

Phosphorylation of protein Tau by GSK3β prolongs survival of bigenic 
Tau.P301L×GSK3β mice by delaying brainstem tauopathy.

Crespo-Biel N(1), Theunis C(1), Borghgraef P(1), Lechat B(1), Devijver H(1), 
Maurin H(1), Van Leuven F(2).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Genetics Group - LEGTEGG, Dept. Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Experimental Genetics Group - LEGTEGG, Dept. Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: fred.vanleuven@med.kuleuven.be.

Tau.P301L transgenic mice suffer precocious mortality between ages 8 and 11 
months, resulting from upper airway defects caused by tauopathy in autonomic 
brainstem circuits that control breathing (Dutschmann et al., 2010). In 
individual mice, the clinical phenotype evolves progressively and rapidly 
(3-6weeks) from clasping, over general motor impairment to severe reduction in 
body-weight into the terminal phase that announces imminent death (<3days). 
Surprisingly, co-expression of GSK3β with Tau.P301L significantly prolonged 
survival of bigenic biGT mice (Terwel et al., 2008), which we here assign to 
delayed development of brainstem tauopathy. Eventually, brainstem tauopathy 
became as prominent in old biGT mice in the specified brainstem nuclei as in the 
parental Tau.P301L mice, resulting in similar clinical deterioration and 
terminal phase preceding death, although at later age. Biochemically, in both 
genotypes the pathway to neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads was 
similar: phosphorylation of protein Tau and formation of soluble oligomers and 
insoluble aggregates, ending in the typical tangles and threads of tauopathy. 
The extra GSK3β activity led to expected increased phosphorylation of protein 
Tau, particularly at residues S262 and S396, which we must conclude to delay the 
aggregation of protein Tau in the brainstem of aging biGT mice. The unexpected, 
paradoxical alleviation of the brainstem problems in biGT mice allowed them to 
grow older and thereby develop more severe tauopathy in forebrain than Tau.P301L 
mice, which succumb at younger age.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.03.016
PMID: 24704314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]