1. Rare Tumors. 2014 Mar 18;6(1):5037. doi: 10.4081/rt.2014.5037. eCollection
2014  Jan 23.

Renal cell carcinoma with rhabdoid and sarcomatoid features presented as a 
metastatic thigh mass with an unusual immunohistochemical profile.

Abdou AG(1), Kandil M(1), Elshakhs S(2), El-Dien MS(1), Abdallah R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Menofiya University , Shebein 
Elkom, Egypt.
(2)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Menofiya University , Shebein 
Elkom, Egypt.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) may metastasize anywhere in the body and sometimes 
the primary tumor is missing and necessitates extensive investigations to 
detect. In this report, we describe a case of RCC metastasizing to the thigh in 
a 70 year old male with a highly pleomorphic morphology suggesting a high grade 
sarcoma that showed unequivocal positivity for desmin directing the diagnosis 
for pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma. After completion of 33 cycles of radiotherapy, 
the patient developed large intraabdominal mass that showed conventional areas 
of RCC with immunoreactivity for CD10, CK, EMA, carbonic anhydrase IX and 
vimentin. The tumor cells in other areas resembled that of thigh mass which 
raised suspicions whether the two masses represented the same tumor or not. 
Surprisingly, the tumor cells of thigh mass showed diffuse positivity for CD10 
and focal expression for CK, EMA and carbonic anhydrase IX. Extensive 
investigations failed to detect any primary renal lesions. The present case 
demonstrated that RCC can metastasize to virtually any body site and can have 
significant morphologic overlap with other non-renal neoplasms. Absence of 
primary origin of RCC according to radiological and operative data should not 
hinder the diagnosis of metastatic RCC. RCC with sarcomatoid and rhabdoid 
features carries aggressive behavior manifested by great metastatic potential 
and short survival time.

DOI: 10.4081/rt.2014.5037
PMCID: PMC3977166
PMID: 24711903

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: the authors declare no 
potential conflict of interests.