1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Aug;41(8):4929-40. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3359-3. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Genetic polymorphisms in the CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 genes and susceptibility to 
bladder cancer: a meta-analysis.

Chen YZ(1), Li J, Zhao YX, Liu D, Wang HT, Gao Y, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Chongshan East Road No. 4, Huanggu District, Shenyang, 110032, 
People's Republic of China.

Retraction in
    Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1465. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3896-4.

The current meta-analysis of case-control studies was conducted to evaluated the 
relationships of genetic polymorphisms in the CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 genes with the 
susceptibility to bladder cancer, aiming at determine whether these 
polymorphisms may contribute to the pathogenesis of bladder cancer. Related 
articles were determined via searching the following electronic databases 
without any language restrictions: PubMed, CISCOM, CINAHL, Web of Science, 
Google Scholar, EBSCO, Cochrane Library, and CBM databases for relevant articles 
published before November 1st, 2013. STATA 12.0 software was also selected to 
deal with statistical data. The relationships were evaluated using the pooled 
odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI). Eleven case-control 
studies with a total of 2,609 bladder cancer patients and 2,634 healthy subjects 
met the inclusion criteria. The results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that 
CYP1A1 genetic polymorphisms were associated with increased risks of bladder 
cancer (allele model: RR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.07-1.30, P = 0.001; dominant model: RR 
= 1.15, 95% CI 1.05-1.27, P = 0.003; respectively), especially among 11599G>C, 
2455A>G, 3810T>C, and 113T>C polymorphisms. A subgroup analysis by ethnicity was 
conducted to investigate its effect on susceptibility to bladder cancer. The 
subgroup analysis results revealed positive significant correlations between 
CYP1A1 genetic polymorphisms and bladder cancer risk among Asians (allele model: 
RR = 1.26, 95% CI 1.10-1.44, P = 0.001; dominant model: RR = 1.22, 95% CI 
1.08-1.38, P = 0.001), but not among Caucasians (all P < 0.05). Nevertheless, we 
observed no significant correlations between CYP1B1 genetic polymorphisms and 
bladder cancer risk (all P > 0.05). Our meta-analysis indicates that CYP1A1 
genetic polymorphisms may be involved in the pathogenesis of bladder cancer, 
especially among 11599G>C, 2455A>G, 3810T>C, and 113T>C polymorphisms. However, 
CYP1B1 genetic polymorphisms may not be important determinants of bladder cancer 
susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3359-3
PMID: 24718782