1. Proteomics. 2014 May;14(10):1195-210. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201300432.

Top-down proteomics in health and disease: challenges and opportunities.

Gregorich ZR(1), Ge Y.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Training Program, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA; Department of Cell and Regenerative 
Biology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA.

Proteomics is essential for deciphering how molecules interact as a system and 
for understanding the functions of cellular systems in human disease; however, 
the unique characteristics of the human proteome, which include a high dynamic 
range of protein expression and extreme complexity due to a plethora of PTMs and 
sequence variations, make such analyses challenging. An emerging "top-down" 
MS-based proteomics approach, which provides a "bird's eye" view of all 
proteoforms, has unique advantages for the assessment of PTMs and sequence 
variations. Recently, a number of studies have showcased the potential of 
top-down proteomics for the unraveling of disease mechanisms and discovery of 
new biomarkers. Nevertheless, the top-down approach still faces significant 
challenges in terms of protein solubility, separation, and the detection of 
large intact proteins, as well as underdeveloped data analysis tools. 
Consequently, new technological developments are urgently needed to advance the 
field of top-down proteomics. Herein, we intend to provide an overview of the 
recent applications of top-down proteomics in biomedical research. Moreover, we 
will outline the challenges and opportunities facing top-down proteomics 
strategies aimed at understanding and diagnosing human diseases.

Â© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201300432
PMCID: PMC4100610
PMID: 24723472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.