1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Sep;127(6):405-13. doi: 10.1042/CS20130313.

Differential bradykinin B1 and B2 receptor regulation in cell death induced by 
hepatic ischaemia/reperfusion injury.

Paio MA(1), Kouyoumdjian M(2), Borges DR(1), Nagaoka MR(3).

Author information:
(1)*Department of Medicine, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)†Department of Biochemistry, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(3)‡Department of Biosciences, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São 
Paulo, Brazil.

The biological and pharmacological effects of BK (bradykinin) are mediated by 
two receptors: the constitutive B2R (B2 receptor) and the inducible B1R (B1 
receptor). BK plays a role in the hepatic microcirculation by inducing the PHR 
(portal hypertensive response) via B2R, whereas DABK (des-Arg9-BK), a B1R 
agonist, does not elicit the response. During IRI (ischaemia/reperfusion 
injury), important changes occur in the microcirculation, and cell death by 
necrosis and apoptosis is involved in poor graft function. The aim of the 
present study was to analyse the role of B1R and B2R in liver cell death induced 
by IRI. Livers from Wistar rats were submitted to ischaemia (4°C) for 4 or 24 h. 
After this period, livers were reperfused ex vivo with Krebs-Henseleit solution 
(37°C). BK or DABK was then injected as a bolus during reperfusion in the 
absence or presence of HOE-140 (a B2R antagonist) or DALBK 
(des-Arg(9)-Leu(8)-BK) (a B1R antagonist) respectively. Liver viability was 
analysed by glucose release and bile secretion. The PHR to kinins did not 
change. Cell death was higher in the DABK group and its antagonist significantly 
decreased cell death. Interestingly, the B1R antagonist did not alter the number 
of necrotic cells, but it decreased the number of apoptotic cells. On the other 
hand, the B2R antagonist decreased the number of necrotic cells, but did not 
alter the number of apoptotic cells. Therefore B1R may participate in apoptotic 
cell death signalling, and B2R may be involved in necrotic cell death.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20130313
PMID: 24724708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]