1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6196-207. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku263. Epub
2014  Apr 11.

CDK2-dependent phosphorylation of Suv39H1 is involved in control of 
heterochromatin replication during cell cycle progression.

Park SH(1), Yu SE(1), Chai YG(2), Jang YK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea Initiative for Biological 
Function & Systems, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Molecular and Life Science, Hanyang University, Ansan, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea Initiative for Biological 
Function & Systems, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea 
ykjang@yonsei.ac.kr.

Although several studies have suggested that the functions of heterochromatin 
regulators may be regulated by post-translational modifications during cell 
cycle progression, regulation of the histone methyltransferase Suv39H1 is not 
fully understood. Here, we demonstrate a direct link between Suv39H1 
phosphorylation and cell cycle progression. We show that CDK2 phosphorylates 
Suv39H1 at Ser391 and these phosphorylation levels oscillate during the cell 
cycle, peaking at S phase and maintained during S-G2-M phase. The CDK2-mediated 
phosphorylation of Suv39H1 at Ser391 results in preferential dissociation from 
chromatin. Furthermore, phosphorylation-mediated dissociation of Suv39H1 from 
chromatin causes an enhanced occupancy of JMJD2A histone demethylase on 
heterochromatin and alterations in inactive histone marks. Overexpression of 
phospho-mimic Suv39H1 induces early replication of heterochromatin, suggesting 
the importance of Suv39H1 phosphorylation in the replication of heterochromatin. 
Moreover, overexpression of phospho-defective Suv39H1 caused altered replication 
timing of heterochromatin and increases sensitivity to replication stress. 
Collectively, our data suggest that phosphorylation-mediated modulation of 
Suv39H1-chromatin association may be an initial step in heterochromatin 
replication.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku263
PMCID: PMC4041437
PMID: 24728993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]