1. Virology. 2014 Apr;454-455:11-24. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.01.020. Epub 2014 
Feb 20.

HIV-1 mutates to evade IFITM1 restriction.

Ding S(1), Pan Q(2), Liu SL(3), Liang C(4).

Author information:
(1)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 1E2; 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada H3A 2B4.
(2)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 1E2.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, School of Medicine, Bond 
Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211-7310, USA. 
Electronic address: liushan@missouri.edu.
(4)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 1E2; 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada H3A 2B4; Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada 
H3A 2B4. Electronic address: chen.liang@mcgill.ca.

Interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM) proteins inhibit the infection of a 
wide range of viruses including human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). At 
present, little is known about how viruses overcome IFITM restriction. In this 
study, we have utilized HIV-1 as a model and selected IFITM1-resistant viruses 
after multiple passages of HIV-1 in IFITM1-expressing SupT1 cells. Sequencing 
the entire viral genome revealed several mutations in the vpu and envelope 
genes, among which mutations Vpu34 and EnvG367E together enable efficient HIV-1 
replication in IFITM1-expressing cells. Vpu34 introduces a stop codon at amino 
acid position 35 of Vpu, whereas EnvG367E changes the G367 residue at the 
CD4-binding site of gp120. These two mutations do not appear to overcome the 
downregulation of viral p24 expression caused by IFITM1, but rather enhance 
HIV-1 replication by promoting cell-to-cell virus transmission. Altogether, our 
data demonstrate that HIV-1 can mutate to evade IFITM1 restriction by increasing 
cell-to-cell transmission.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.01.020
PMCID: PMC4274668
PMID: 24725927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]