1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jun;145(2):451-60. doi:
10.1007/s10549-014-2943-5.  Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Clinical and molecular characterization of the BRCA2 p.Asn3124Ile variant 
reveals substantial evidence for pathogenic significance.

Surowy HM(1), Sutter C, Mittnacht M, Klaes R, Schaefer D, Evers C, Burgemeister 
AL, Goehringer C, Dikow N, Heil J, Golatta M, Schott S, Schneeweiss A, Bugert P, 
Sohn C, Bartram CR, Burwinkel B.

Author information:
(1)Division Molecular Biology of Breast Cancer, Department of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 440, 69120, 
Heidelberg, Germany, h.surowy@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS) in the high-penetrance breast 
cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 represent a major obstacle in 
genetic counseling of high-risk breast cancer families. We analyzed a missense 
VUS located in BRCA2 (p.Asn3124Ile; HGVS: BRCA2 c.9371A > T) present in seven 
independent high-risk breast cancer families that were counseled and genetically 
tested in South-West Germany. The VUS was identified by DNA sequencing. We 
analyzed co-occurrence with deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations, segregation, 
evolutionary conservation, in silico impact prediction, and prevalence in the 
general population. All carriers of the VUS suffered from breast or ovarian 
cancer. In two families, an additional high burden of other cancers such as 
pancreatic, prostate, and gastric cancers was reported, one further family 
included two cases of male breast cancer. The VUS did not co-occur with 
deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations and segregated in two affected individuals of one 
family. In contrast to the 7/1,347 (0,5 %) tested high-risk BC families without 
clearly pathogenic mutations in BRCA1/2, none of 3,126 healthy population 
controls sharing the same ethnic and geographical background were found to carry 
this VUS (p = 0.0002). In-silico prediction revealed strong evolutionary 
conservation of the asparagine residue, residing in the C-terminal 
oligonucleotide-binding-fold-3 region, and a most likely damaging impact of this 
exchange on the protein structure. The BRCA2 p.Asn3124Ile (BRCA2 c.9371A > T) 
variant is a rare mutation with a damaging effect on the BRCA2 protein that is 
strongly associated with familial breast and ovarian cancer risk, indicating its 
most likely pathogenic nature and clinical relevance.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-014-2943-5
PMID: 24728577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]