1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2014 Apr 10;7(4):433-52. doi: 10.3390/ph7040433.

Amino Acid Prodrugs: An Approach to Improve the Absorption of HIV-1 Protease 
Inhibitor, Lopinavir.

Patel M(1), Mandava N(1), Gokulgandhi M(1), Pal D(1), Mitra AK(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City, 2464 Charlotte Street, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.
(2)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City, 2464 Charlotte Street, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
mitraa@umkc.edu.

Poor systemic concentrations of lopinavir (LPV) following oral administration 
occur due to high cellular efflux by P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug 
resistance-associated proteins (MRPs) and extensive metabolism by CYP3A4 
enzymes. In this study, amino acid prodrugs of LPV were designed and 
investigated for their potential to circumvent efflux processes and first pass 
effects. Three amino acid prodrugs were synthesized by conjugating isoleucine, 
tryptophan and methionine to LPV. Prodrug formation was confirmed by the LCMS/MS 
and NMR technique. Interaction of LPV prodrugs with efflux proteins were carried 
out in P-gp (MDCK-MDR1) and MRP2 (MDCK-MRP2) transfected cells. Aqueous 
solubility studies demonstrated that prodrugs generate higher solubility 
relative to LPV. Prodrugs displayed higher stability under acidic conditions and 
degraded significantly with rise in pH. Uptake and transport data suggested that 
prodrugs carry significantly lower affinity towards P-gp and MRP2 relative to 
LPV. Moreover, prodrugs exhibited higher liver microsomal stability relative to 
LPV. Hence, amino acid prodrug modification might be a viable approach for 
enhancing LPV absorption across intestinal epithelial and brain endothelial 
cells which expresses high levels of P-gp and MRP2.

DOI: 10.3390/ph7040433
PMCID: PMC4014701
PMID: 24727459