1. J Nucl Med. 2014 Jun;55(6):1029-34. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.113.130898. Epub 2014 
Apr 14.

Development of a Radiolabeled Irreversible Peptide Ligand for PET Imaging of 
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor.

Marquez BV(1), Ikotun OF(1), Parry JJ(2), Rogers BE(2), Meares CF(3), Lapi 
SE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, 
Saint Louis, Missouri; and.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, California.
(4)Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri lapis@mir.wustl.edu.

Imaging agents based on peptide probes have desirable pharmacokinetic properties 
provided that they have high affinities for their target in vivo. An approach to 
improve a peptide ligand's affinity for its target is to make this interaction 
covalent and irreversible. For this purpose, we evaluated a (64)Cu-labeled 
affinity peptide tag, (64)Cu-L19K-(5-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) 
((64)Cu-L19K-FDNB), which binds covalently and irreversibly to vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as a PET imaging agent. We compared the in vivo 
properties of (64)Cu-L19K-FDNB in VEGF-expressing tumor xenografts with its 
noncovalent binding analogs, (64)Cu-L19K-(2,4-dinitrophenyl) ((64)Cu-L19K-DNP) 
and (64)Cu-L19K.
METHODS: The L19K peptide (GGNECDIARMWEWECFERK-CONH2) was constructed with 
1,4,7-triazacyclononane-1,4,7-triacetic acid at the N terminus for radiolabeling 
with (64)Cu with a polyethylene glycol spacer between peptide and chelate. 
1,5-difluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene was conjugated at the C-terminal lysine for 
cross-linking to VEGF, resulting in L19K-FDNB. (64)Cu-L19K-FDNB was assayed for 
covalent binding to VEGF in vitro. As a control, L19K was conjugated to 
1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, resulting in L19K-DNP. PET imaging and 
biodistribution studies of (64)Cu-L19K-FDNB, (64)Cu-L19K-DNP, and the native 
(64)Cu-L19K were compared in HCT-116 xenografts. Blocking studies of 
(64)Cu-L19K-FDNB was performed with a coinjection of excess unlabeled L19K-FDNB.
RESULTS: In vitro binding studies confirmed the covalent and irreversible 
binding of (64)Cu-L19K-FDNB to VEGF, whereas (64)Cu-L19K-DNP and (64)Cu-L19K did 
not bind covalently. PET imaging showed higher tumor uptake with 
(64)Cu-L19K-FDNB than with (64)Cu-L19K-DNP and (64)Cu-L19K, with mean 
standardized uptake values of 0.62 ± 0.05, 0.18 ± 0.06, and 0.34 ± 0.14, 
respectively, at 24 h after injection (P < 0.05), and 0.53 ± 0.05, 0.32 ± 0.14, 
and 0.30 ± 0.09, respectively, at 48 h after injection (P < 0.05). Blocking 
studies with (64)Cu-L19K-FDNB in the presence of excess unlabeled peptide showed 
a 53% reduction in tumor uptake at 48 h after injection.
CONCLUSION: In this proof-of-concept study, the use of a covalent binding 
peptide ligand against VEGF improves tracer accumulation at the tumor site in 
vivo, compared with its noncovalent binding peptide analogs. This technique is a 
promising tool to enhance the potency of peptide probes as imaging agents.

© 2014 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.113.130898
PMID: 24732153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]