1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jul;13(7):1848-59. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0576. 
Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Evaluation of apoptosis induction by concomitant inhibition of MEK, mTOR, and 
Bcl-2 in human acute myelogenous leukemia cells.

Zhang W(1), Ruvolo VR(1), Gao C(1), Zhou L(1), Bornmann W(2), Tsao T(1), Schober 
WD(1), Smith P(3), Guichard S(3), Konopleva M(4), Andreeff M(4).

Author information:
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy; 
Departments of.
(2)Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas; and.
(3)Oncology iMED, AstraZeneca, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, United Kingdom.
(4)Authors' Affiliations: Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy; 
Departments of Leukemia and mandreef@mdanderson.org mkonople@mdanderson.org.

Aberrant activation of multiple signaling pathways is common in acute 
myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells, which can be linked to a poor prognosis for 
patients with this disease. Previous research with mTOR or MEK inhibitors 
revealed cytostatic, rather than cytotoxic, effects in in vitro and in vivo AML 
models. We evaluated the combination effect of the mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 and 
the MEK inhibitor selumetinib on human AML cell lines and primary AML samples. 
This combination demonstrated synergistic proapoptotic effects in AML cells with 
high basal activation of MEK and mTOR. We next incorporated the BH3 mimetic 
ABT-737 into this combination regimen to block Bcl-2, which further enhanced the 
apoptogenic effect of MEK/mTOR inhibition. The combination treatment also had a 
striking proapoptotic effect in CD33(+)/CD34(+) AML progenitor cells from 
primary AML samples with NRAS mutations. Mechanistically, upregulation of the 
proapoptotic protein Bim, accompanied by the downregulation of the antiapoptotic 
protein Mcl-1 (mainly via protein degradation), seemed to play critical roles in 
enhancing the combination drug effect. Furthermore, the modulation of survivin, 
Bax, Puma, and X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) 
expression suggested a role for mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in the 
cytotoxicity of the drug combination. Consequently, the concomitant blockade of 
prosurvival MEK/mTOR signaling and the deactivation of Bcl-2 could provide a 
mechanism-based integrated therapeutic strategy for the eradication of AML 
cells.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0576
PMCID: PMC4090272
PMID: 24739393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]