1. Cancer. 2014 Aug 1;120(15):2316-24. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28729. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

BRAF mutation predicts for poor outcomes after metastasectomy in patients with 
metastatic colorectal cancer.

Yaeger R(1), Cercek A, Chou JF, Sylvester BE, Kemeny NE, Hechtman JF, Ladanyi M, 
Rosen N, Weiser MR, Capanu M, Solit DB, D'Angelica MI, Vakiani E, Saltz LB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York.

BACKGROUND: BRAF mutations occur in 5% to 11% of patients with metastatic 
colorectal cancer (mCRC) and have been associated with poor prognosis. The 
current study was undertaken to determine the clinicopathologic characteristics, 
PIK3CA (phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha) 
mutation frequency, and outcomes after metastasectomy in patients with 
BRAF-mutant mCRC.
METHODS: Data from 1941 consecutive patients with mCRC who underwent KRAS/BRAF 
mutation testing between 2009 and 2012 at a single institution were identified 
to identify BRAF-mutant mCRC cases (92 cases). BRAF wild-type mCRC cases from 
2011 (423 cases) served as a control group.
RESULTS: BRAF-mutated mCRC was found to be significantly associated with older 
age at diagnosis, female sex, right-sided location, poorly differentiated 
morphology, and mucinous histology compared with wild-type cases. BRAF-mutant 
cases more frequently progressed from stage III disease (32% vs 17%; P = .003) 
and among those patients with stage III disease, T4 disease was more common (48% 
vs 27%; P = .05). PIK3CA was found to be co-mutated in 5% of BRAF-mutant tumors 
versus 17% of KRAS-mutant tumors (P < .01) and 4% of BRAF/KRAS wild-type cases. 
Patients with BRAF-mutated mCRC presented more frequently with peritoneal 
involvement (26% vs 14%; P < 0.01) and less frequently with liver-limited 
metastases (41% vs 63%; P < .01). Patients with BRAF-mutated mCRC were less 
likely to undergo metastasectomy (41% vs 26% at 2 years from diagnosis of 
metastatic disease; P < .01) and were found to have lower overall survival 
(P < .01) after metastasectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: BRAF-mutant mCRC is associated with worse clinical outcome. 
Patients with BRAF-mutant tumors more commonly develop peritoneal metastases, 
less frequently present with disease limited to the liver, and have shorter 
survival after metastasectomy compared with patients with BRAF wild-type tumors.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28729
PMCID: PMC4928876
PMID: 24737664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES Dr. Ladanyi has 
received fees from Puma Biotechnology and Novartis for work conducted outside of 
the current study.