1. Abdom Imaging. 2014 Oct;39(5):1027-35. doi: 10.1007/s00261-014-0136-7.

Abnormal findings on multiparametric prostate magnetic resonance imaging predict 
subsequent biopsy upgrade in patients with low risk prostate cancer managed with 
active surveillance.

Flavell RR(1), Westphalen AC, Liang C, Sotto CC, Noworolski SM, Vigneron DB, 
Wang ZJ, Kurhanewicz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San 
Francisco, 505 Parnassus Avenue, M-372, Box 0628, San Francisco, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the ability of multiparametric MR imaging to predict 
disease progression in patients with prostate cancer managed by active 
surveillance.
METHODS: Sixty-four men with biopsy-proven prostate cancer managed by active 
surveillance were included in this HIPPA compliant, IRB approved study. We 
reviewed baseline MR imaging scans for the presence of a suspicious findings on 
T2-weighted imaging, MR spectroscopic imaging (MRSI), and diffusion-weighted MR 
imaging (DWI). The Gleason grades at subsequent biopsy were recorded. A Cox 
proportional hazard model was used to determine the predictive value of MR 
imaging for Gleason grades, and the model performance was described using 
Harrell's C concordance statistic and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: The Cox model that incorporated T2-weighted MR imaging, DWI, and MRSI 
showed that only T2-weighted MR imaging and DWI are independent predictors of 
biopsy upgrade (T2; HR = 2.46; 95% CI 1.36-4.46; P = 0.003-diffusion; HR = 2.76; 
95% CI 1.13-6.71; P = 0.03; c statistic = 67.7%; 95% CI 61.1-74.3). There was an 
increasing rate of Gleason score upgrade with a greater number of concordant 
findings on multiple MR sequences (HR = 2.49; 95% CI 1.72-3.62; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal results on multiparametric prostate MRI confer an 
increased risk for Gleason score upgrade at subsequent biopsy in men with 
localized prostate cancer managed by active surveillance. These results may be 
of help in appropriately selecting candidates for active surveillance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00261-014-0136-7
PMCID: PMC4169752
PMID: 24740760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]