1. J Pharm Sci. 2014 Jun;103(6):1613-1627. doi: 10.1002/jps.23975. Epub 2014 Apr 
16.

Physical stability comparisons of IgG1-Fc variants: effects of N-glycosylation 
site occupancy and Asp/Gln residues at site Asn 297.

Alsenaidy MA(#)(1), Okbazghi SZ(#)(1), Kim JH(1), Joshi SB(1), Middaugh CR(1), 
Tolbert TJ(1), Volkin DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Macromolecule and Vaccine 
Stabilization Center, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The structural integrity and conformational stability of various IgG1-Fc 
proteins produced from the yeast Pichia pastoris with different glycosylation 
site occupancy (di-, mono-, and nonglycosylated) were determined. In addition, 
the physical stability profiles of three different forms of nonglycosylated Fc 
molecules (varying amino-acid residues at site 297 in the CH 2 domain due to the 
point mutations and enzymatic digestion of the Fc glycoforms) were also 
examined. The physical stability of these IgG1-Fc glycoproteins was examined as 
a function of pH and temperature by high-throughput biophysical analysis using 
multiple techniques combined with data visualization tools (three index 
empirical phase diagrams and radar charts). Across the pH range of 4.0-6.0, the 
di- and monoglycosylated forms of the IgG1-Fc showed the highest and lowest 
levels of physical stability, respectively, with the nonglycosylated forms 
showing intermediate stability depending on solution pH. In the aglycosylated Fc 
proteins, the introduction of Asp (D) residues at site 297 (QQ vs. DN vs. DD 
forms) resulted in more subtle changes in structural integrity and physical 
stability depending on solution pH. The utility of evaluating the conformational 
stability profile differences between the various IgG1-Fc glycoproteins is 
discussed in the context of analytical comparability studies.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.23975
PMCID: PMC4512762
PMID: 24740840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]