1. Front Biol (Beijing). 2013 Oct 1;8(5):508-532. doi: 10.1007/s11515-013-1276-9.

RasGRP Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factors in cancer.

Ksionda O(1), Limnander A(1), Roose JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

RasGRP proteins are activators of Ras and other related small GTPases by the 
virtue of functioning as guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). In 
vertebrates, four RasGRP family members have been described. RasGRP-1 through -4 
share many structural domains but there are also subtle differences between each 
of the different family members. Whereas SOS RasGEFs are ubiquitously expressed, 
RasGRP proteins are expressed in distinct patterns, such as in different cells 
of the hematopoietic system and in the brain. Most studies have concentrated on 
the role of RasGRP proteins in the development and function of immune cell types 
because of the predominant RasGRP expression profiles in these cells and the 
immune phenotypes of mice deficient for Rasgrp genes. However, more recent 
studies demonstrate that RasGRPs also play an important role in tumorigenesis. 
Examples are skin- and hematological-cancers but also solid malignancies such as 
melanoma or prostate cancer. These novel studies bring up many new and 
unanswered questions related to the molecular mechanism of RasGRP-driven 
oncogenesis, such as new receptor systems that RasGRP appears to respond to as 
well as regulatory mechanism for RasGRP expression that appear to be perturbed 
in these cancers. Here we will review some of the known aspects of RasGRP 
biology in lymphocytes and will discuss the exciting new notion that RasGRP Ras 
exchange factors play a role in oncogenesis downstream of various growth factor 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1007/s11515-013-1276-9
PMCID: PMC3987922
PMID: 24744772

Conflict of interest statement: Olga Ksionda, Andre Limnander, and Jeroen Roose 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.