1. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;33(8):537-42. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2247. Epub 2014
Apr  17.

Absence of association of interleukin-18 gene polymorphisms with primary immune 
thrombocytopenia in a Chinese Han population.

Li H(1), Xuan M, Xue F, Liu X, Zhang D, Fu R, Yang Y, Zhang X, Yang R.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and 
Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College , Tianjin, People's Republic of China .

Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is an inflammatory cytokine that plays an important role 
in autoimmune disease by inducing interferon-γ secretion. Considering the 
abnormal serum concentration of IL-18 in primary immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) 
patients and the regulated effect of IL-18 gene polymorphisms on its production, 
the aim of this study was to investigate a possible association between the 
IL-18 promoter polymorphisms (-137 G/C and -607 C/A sites) and genetic 
susceptibility to ITP in a Chinese Han population. A total of 181 ITP patients 
and 163 healthy controls were included in this study; IL-18 gene promoter 
polymorphisms were analyzed by a polymerase chain reaction with 
sequence-specific primers. No significant differences in genotype (-607: 
χ(2)=0.307, p=0.858; -137: χ(2)=0.378, p=0.828) and allele frequencies (-607: 
χ(2)=0.004, p=0.949; -137: χ(2)=0.307, p=0.858) were found between total ITP 
patients and normal controls. We further analyzed the association of IL-18 
polymorphisms with clinical parameters of ITP patients, including first onset 
age and clinical therapy response to glucocorticoids, and no difference was 
revealed. In conclusion, IL-18 promoter polymorphisms may not be associated with 
genetic susceptibility to ITP in a Chinese Han population.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2013.2247
PMCID: PMC4117256
PMID: 24742099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]