1. J Viral Hepat. 2014 Jul;21(7):458-65. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12163. Epub 2013 Aug
27.

HCV E1E2-MF59 vaccine in chronic hepatitis C patients treated with PEG-IFNα2a 
and Ribavirin: a randomized controlled trial.

Colombatto P(1), Brunetto MR, Maina AM, Romagnoli V, Almasio P, Rumi MG, Ascione 
A, Pinzello G, Mondelli M, Muratori L, Rappuoli R, Rosa D, Houghton M, Abrignani 
S, Bonino F.

Author information:
(1)Hepatology Unit, University Hospital of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Viral Hepat. 2014 Oct;21(10):751.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) vaccines may be able to increase viral clearance in 
combination with antiviral therapy. We analysed viral dynamics and HCV-specific 
immune response during retreatment for experienced patients in a phase Ib study 
with E1E2MF59 vaccine. Seventy-eight genotype 1a/1b patients [relapsers (30), 
partial responders (16) and nonresponders (32) to 
interferon-(IFN)/ribavirin-(RBV)] were randomly assigned to vaccine (V:23), 
Peg-IFNα2a-180-ug/qw and ribavirin 1000-1200-mg/qd for 48 weeks (P/R:25), or 
their combination (P/R + V:30). Vaccine (100 μg/0.5 mL) was administered 
intramuscularly at week 0-4-8-12-24-28-32-36. Neutralizing of binding (NOB) 
antibodies and lymphocyte proliferation assay (LPA) for E1E2-specific-CD4 + T 
cells were performed at week 0-12-16-48. Viral kinetics were analysed up to week 
16. The vaccine was safe, and a sustained virological response (SVR) was 
achieved in 4 P/R + V and 2 P/R patients. Higher SVR rates were observed in 
prior relapsers (P/R + V = 27.3%; P/R = 12.5%). Higher NOB titres and LPA 
indexes were found at week 12 and 16 in P/R + V as compared to P/R patients (P = 
0.023 and 0.025, P = 0.019 and <0.001, respectively). Among the 22 patients with 
the strongest direct antiviral effects of IFN (ε ≥ 0.800), those treated with 
P/R + V (10) reached lower HCV-RNA levels (P = 0.026) at week 16. HCV E1E2MF59 
vaccine in combination with Peg-IFNα2a + RBV was safe and elicited E1E2 
neutralizing antibodies and specific CD4 + T cell proliferation. Upon early 
response to IFN, vaccinations were associated with an enhanced second phase 
viral load decline. These results prompt phase II trials in combination with new 
antiviral therapies.

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Viral Hepatitis published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.12163
PMCID: PMC4166695
PMID: 24750327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]