1. Eur J Neurosci. 2014 Jul;40(2):2442-53. doi: 10.1111/ejn.12595. Epub 2014 Apr 
23.

Terminal hypothermic Tau.P301L mice have increased Tau phosphorylation 
independently of glycogen synthase kinase 3α/β.

Maurin H(1), Lechat B, Borghgraef P, Devijver H, Jaworski T, Van Leuven F.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Genetics Group LEGTEGG, Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 
Campus Gasthuisberg ON1 06.602, Herestraat 49, B-3000, Leuven, Belgium.

The microtubule-associated protein Tau is responsible for a large group of 
neurodegenerative disorders, known as tauopathies, including Alzheimer's 
disease. Tauopathy result from augmented and/or aberrant phosphorylation of Tau. 
Besides aging and various genetic and epigenetic defects that remain largely 
unknown, an important non-genetic agent that contributes is hypothermia, 
eventually caused by anesthesia. Remarkably, tauopathy in brains of hibernating 
mammals is not pathogenic, and, because it is fully reversible, is even 
considered to be neuroprotective. Here, we assessed the terminal phase of 
Tau.P301L mice and bigenic crosses with mice lacking glycogen synthase kinase 3 
(GSK3)α completely, or GSK3β specifically in neurons. We also analysed biGT 
bigenic mice that co-express Tau.P301L with GSK3β.S9A and develop severe 
forebrain tauopathy with age. We found that the precocious mortality of 
Tau.P301L mice was typified by hypothermia that aggravated Tau phosphorylation, 
but, surprisingly, independently of GSK3α/β. The important contribution of 
hypothermia at the time of death of mice with tauopathy suggests that body 
temperature should be included as a parameter in the analysis of pre-clinical 
models, and, by extension, in patients suffering from tauopathy.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.12595
PMID: 24754737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]