1. Hum Pathol. 2014 Jul;45(7):1388-96. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.02.012. Epub 
2014 Feb 26.

Mismatch repair protein immunohistochemistry: a useful population screening 
strategy for Lynch syndrome.

Musulén E(1), Sanz C(2), Muñoz-Mármol AM(2), Ariza A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, C/ Ctra 
de Canyet s/n, Badalona, 08916, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: 
emusulen@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, C/ Ctra 
de Canyet s/n, Badalona, 08916, Barcelona, Spain.

Lynch syndrome (LS), the most frequent form of hereditary colorectal cancer, 
shows a highly penetrant, autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Distinction 
of LS colorectal carcinoma instances from the much more common sporadic 
colorectal carcinoma cases is of paramount importance. Revised Bethesda 
Guidelines were developed to diagnose LS by evaluating a combination of clinical 
and pathologic data. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the usefulness 
of the pathology items included in the Revised Bethesda Guidelines. We have 
prospectively studied a series of 1624 consecutive colorectal carcinomas with an 
algorithm including immunohistochemical analysis of mismatch repair proteins and 
molecular study of microsatellite instability and BRAF c.1799 T > A (p.V600E) 
gene mutations. Patients with tumors showing LS features were referred for 
germline mutation analysis. By applying our algorithmic approach, we were able 
to identify LS features in 89 colorectal cancer patients, of whom only 27 met 
Revised Bethesda Guidelines pathology criteria. Of the 89 patients, 47 were then 
studied at the Genetic Counseling Unit, and LS was confirmed in 18, of whom 7 
had not been identified by the Revised Bethesda Guidelines. Our study shows that 
the Revised Bethesda Guidelines failed to detect 70% of patients at risk of LS. 
Our algorithmic approach is a realistic and effective tool for LS 
identification. We strongly recommend the implementation of universal population 
screening for LS among all patients with newly diagnosed colorectal carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.02.012
PMID: 24768606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]