1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 25;9(4):e96199. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096199. 
eCollection 2014.

Tyrosine phosphorylation within the intrinsically disordered cytosolic domains 
of the B-cell receptor: an NMR-based structural analysis.

Rosenlöw J(1), Isaksson L(1), Mayzel M(1), Lengqvist J(2), Orekhov VY(1).

Author information:
(1)The Swedish NMR Centre, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Proteomics Core Facility at Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are found extensively in cell signaling 
pathways where they often are targets of posttranslational modifications e.g. 
phosphorylation. Such modifications can sometimes induce or disrupt secondary 
structure elements present in the modified protein. CD79a and CD79b are 
membrane-spanning, signal-transducing components of the B-cell receptor. The 
cytosolic domains of these proteins are intrinsically disordered and each has an 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM). When an antigen binds to 
the receptor, conserved tyrosines located in the ITAMs are phosphorylated which 
initiate further downstream signaling. Here we use NMR spectroscopy to examine 
the secondary structure propensity of the cytosolic domains of CD79a and CD79b 
in vitro before and after phosphorylation. The phosphorylation patterns are 
identified through analysis of changes of backbone chemical shifts found for the 
affected tyrosines and neighboring residues. The number of the phosphorylated 
sites is confirmed by mass spectrometry. The secondary structure propensities 
are calculated using the method of intrinsic referencing, where the reference 
random coil chemical shifts are measured for the same protein under denaturing 
conditions. Our analysis revealed that CD79a and CD79b both have an overall 
propensity for α-helical structure that is greatest in the C-terminal region of 
the ITAM. Phosphorylation of CD79a caused a decrease in helical propensity in 
the C-terminal ITAM region. For CD79b, the opposite was observed and 
phosphorylation resulted in an increase of helical propensity in the C-terminal 
part.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096199
PMCID: PMC4000212
PMID: 24769851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.