1. BMC Microbiol. 2014 Apr 28;14:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-108.

Delineation of immunodominant and cytadherence segment(s) of Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae P1 gene.

Chourasia BK, Chaudhry R(1), Malhotra P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India. drramach@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Adhesion of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (M. pneumoniae) to host epithelial 
cells requires several adhesin proteins like P1, P30 and P116. Among these 
proteins, P1 protein has been inedited as one of the major adhesin and 
immunogenic protein present on the attachment organelle of M. pneumoniae. In the 
present study, we scanned the entire sequence of M. pneumoniae P1 protein to 
identify the immunodominant and cytadherence region(s). M. pneumoniae P1 gene 
was synthesized in four segments replacing all the UGA codons to UGG codons. 
Each of the four purified P1 protein fragment was analyzed for its 
immunogenicity with anti-M. pneumoniae M129 antibodies (Pab M129) and sera of M. 
pneumoniae infected patients by western blotting and ELISA. Antibodies were 
produced against all the P1 protein fragments and these antibodies were used for 
M. pneumoniae adhesion, M. pneumoniae adhesion inhibition and M. pneumoniae 
surface exposure assays using HEp-2 cells lines.
RESULTS: Our results show that the immunodominant regions are distributed 
throughout the entire length of P1 protein, while only the N- and C- terminal 
region(s) of P1 protein are surface exposed and block cytadhesion to HEp-2 
cells, while antibodies to two middle fragments failed to block cytadhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: These results have important implications in designing strategies 
to block the attachment of M. pneumoniae to epithelial cells, thus preventing 
the development of atypical pneumonia.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-14-108
PMCID: PMC4021176
PMID: 24774062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]