1. Vet Res. 2014 Apr 28;45(1):50. doi: 10.1186/1297-9716-45-50.

Use of "one-pot, mix-and-read" peptide-MHC class I tetramers and predictive 
algorithms to improve detection of cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses in cattle.

Svitek N(1), Hansen AM, Steinaa L, Saya R, Awino E, Nielsen M, Buus S, Nene V.

Author information:
(1)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), P,O, Box 30709, Nairobi 
00100, Kenya. n.svitek@cgiar.org.

Peptide-major histocompatibility complex (p-MHC) class I tetramer complexes have 
facilitated the early detection and functional characterisation of epitope 
specific CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). Here, we report on the generation 
of seven recombinant bovine leukocyte antigens (BoLA) and recombinant bovine 
Î²2-microglobulin from which p-MHC class I tetramers can be derived in ~48 h. We 
validated a set of p-MHC class I tetramers against a panel of CTL lines specific 
to seven epitopes on five different antigens of Theileria parva, a protozoan 
pathogen causing the lethal bovine disease East Coast fever. One of the p-MHC 
class I tetramers was tested in ex vivo assays and we detected T. parva specific 
CTL in peripheral blood of cattle at day 15-17 post-immunization with a live 
parasite vaccine. The algorithm NetMHCpan predicted alternative epitope 
sequences for some of the T. parva CTL epitopes. Using an ELISA assay to measure 
peptide-BoLA monomer formation and p-MHC class I tetramers of new specificity, 
we demonstrate that a predicted alternative epitope Tp229-37 rather than the 
previously reported Tp227-37 epitope is the correct Tp2 epitope presented by 
BoLA-6*04101. We also verified the prediction by NetMHCpan that the Tp587-95 
epitope reported as BoLA-T5 restricted can also be presented by BoLA-1*02301, a 
molecule similar in sequence to BoLA-T5. In addition, Tp587-95 specific bovine 
CTL were simultaneously stained by Tp5-BoLA-1*02301 and Tp5-BoLA-T5 tetramers 
suggesting that one T cell receptor can bind to two different BoLA MHC class I 
molecules presenting the Tp587-95 epitope and that these BoLA molecules fall 
into a single functional supertype.

DOI: 10.1186/1297-9716-45-50
PMCID: PMC4018993
PMID: 24775445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]