1. Sci Rep. 2014 Apr 28;4:4815. doi: 10.1038/srep04815.

Relating significance and relations of differentially expressed genes in 
response to Aspergillus flavus infection in maize.

Asters MC(1), Williams WP(2), Perkins AD(3), Mylroie JE(2), Windham GL(2), Shan 
X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology, and Plant 
Pathology, Mississippi State University, Mississippi State, Mississippi, USA.
(2)Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Corn 
Host Plant Resistance Research Unit, Mississippi State, Mississippi, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Mississippi State University, 
Mississippi State, Mississippi, USA.

Aspergillus flavus is a pathogenic fungus infecting maize and producing 
aflatoxins that are health hazards to humans and animals. Characterizing host 
defense mechanism and prioritizing candidate resistance genes are important to 
the development of resistant maize germplasm. We investigated methods amenable 
for the analysis of the significance and relations among maize candidate genes 
based on the empirical gene expression data obtained by RT-qPCR technique from 
maize inbred lines. We optimized a pipeline of analysis tools chosen from 
various programs to provide rigorous statistical analysis and state of the art 
data visualization. A network-based method was also explored to construct the 
empirical gene expression relational structures. Maize genes at the centers in 
the network were considered as important candidate genes for maize DNA marker 
studies. The methods in this research can be used to analyze large RT-qPCR 
datasets and establish complex empirical gene relational structures across 
multiple experimental conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep04815
PMCID: PMC4001098
PMID: 24770700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]