1. PLoS One. 2014 May 1;9(5):e96251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096251.
eCollection  2014.

Admission lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 activity is not associated 
with long-term clinical outcomes after ST-segment elevation myocardial 
infarction.

Woudstra P(1), Damman P(1), Kuijt WJ(1), Kikkert WJ(1), Grundeken MJ(1), van 
Brussel PM(1), Stroobants AK(2), van Straalen JP(2), Fischer JC(2), Koch KT(1), 
Henriques JP(1), Piek JJ(1), Tijssen JG(1), de Winter RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Heart Center, Academic Medical Center - University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academic Medical Center - University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) activity is a 
biomarker predicting cardiovascular diseases in a real-world. However, the 
prognostic value in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary 
intervention (pPCI) for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) on 
long-term clinical outcomes is unknown.
METHODS: Lp-PLA2 activity was measured in samples obtained prior to pPCI from 
consecutive STEMI patients in a high-volume intervention center from 2005 until 
2007. Five years all-cause mortality was estimated with the Kaplan-Meier method 
and compared among tertiles of Lp-PLA2 activity during complete follow-up and 
with a landmark at 30 days. In a subpopulation clinical endpoints were assessed 
at three years. The prognostic value of Lp-PLA2, in addition to the Thrombolysis 
In Myocardial Infarction or multimarker risk score, was assessed in 
multivariable Cox regression.
RESULTS: The cohort (n = 987) was divided into tertiles (low <144, intermediate 
144-179, and high >179 nmol/min/mL). Among the tertiles differences in baseline 
characteristics associated with long-term mortality were observed. However, no 
significant differences in five years mortality in association with Lp-PLA2 
activity levels were found; intermediate versus low Lp-PLA2 (HR 0.97; CI 95% 
0.68-1.40; p = 0.88) or high versus low Lp-PLA2 (HR 0.75; CI 95% 0.51-1.11; p = 
0.15). Both in a landmark analysis and after adjustments for the established 
risk scores and selection of cases with biomarkers obtained, non-significant 
differences among the tertiles were observed. In the subpopulation no 
significant differences in clinical endpoints were observed among the tertiles.
CONCLUSION: Lp-PLA2 activity levels at admission prior to pPCI in STEMI patients 
are not associated with the incidence of short and/or long-term clinical 
endpoints. Lp-PLA2 as an independent and clinically useful biomarker in the risk 
stratification of STEMI patients still remains to be proven.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096251
PMCID: PMC4006846
PMID: 24788873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The Lp-PLA2 sample kits 
were provided by Anton Jansen, diaDexus Inc. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.