1. Nat Commun. 2014 May 2;5:3726. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4726.

The malaria parasite egress protease SUB1 is a calcium-dependent redox switch 
subtilisin.

Withers-Martinez C(1), Strath M(1), Hackett F(1), Haire LF(2), Howell SA(2), 
Walker PA(2), Christodoulou E, Dodson GG(2), Blackman MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Parasitology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill 
Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.
(2)Division of Molecular Structure, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, 
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2014;5:4031. Evangelos, Christodoulou [corrected to 
Christodoulou, Evangelos].

Malaria is caused by a protozoan parasite that replicates within an 
intraerythrocytic parasitophorous vacuole. Release (egress) of malaria 
merozoites from the host erythrocyte is a highly regulated and calcium-dependent 
event that is critical for disease progression. Minutes before egress, an 
essential parasite serine protease called SUB1 is discharged into the 
parasitophorous vacuole, where it proteolytically processes a subset of parasite 
proteins that play indispensable roles in egress and invasion. Here we report 
the first crystallographic structure of Plasmodium falciparum SUB1 at 2.25 Ã…, in 
complex with its cognate prodomain. The structure highlights the basis of the 
calcium dependence of SUB1, as well as its unusual requirement for interactions 
with substrate residues on both prime and non-prime sides of the scissile bond. 
Importantly, the structure also reveals the presence of a solvent-exposed 
redox-sensitive disulphide bridge, unique among the subtilisin family, that 
likely acts as a regulator of protease activity in the parasite.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4726
PMCID: PMC4024747
PMID: 24785947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]