1. PLoS One. 2014 May 2;9(5):e96521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096521.
eCollection  2014.

High-quality NMR structure of human anti-apoptotic protein domain Mcl-1(171-327) 
for cancer drug design.

Liu G(1), Poppe L(2), Aoki K(3), Yamane H(3), Lewis J(3), Szyperski T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
New York, United States of America.
(2)Molecular Structure, Amgen, Thousand Oaks, California, United States of 
America.
(3)Protein Science, Amgen, Thousand Oaks, California, United States of America.

A high-quality NMR solution structure is presented for protein hMcl-1(171-327) 
which comprises residues 171-327 of the human anti-apoptotic protein Mcl-1 
(hMcl-1). Since this construct contains the three Bcl-2 homology (BH) sequence 
motifs which participate in forming a binding site for inhibitors of hMcl-1, it 
is deemed to be crucial for structure-based design of novel anti-cancer drugs 
blocking the Mcl1 related anti-apoptotic pathway. While the coordinates of an 
NMR solution structure for a corresponding construct of the mouse homologue 
(mMcl-1) are publicly available, our structure is the first atomic resolution 
structure reported for the 'apo form' of the human protein. Comparison of the 
two structures reveals that hMcl-1(171-327) exhibits a somewhat wider 
ligand/inhibitor binding groove as well as a different charge distribution 
within the BH3 binding groove. These findings strongly suggest that the 
availability of the human structure is of critical importance to support future 
design of cancer drugs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096521
PMCID: PMC4008586
PMID: 24789074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This study was funded by 
Amgen Inc. but there is no competing interest that can bias this work. This 
affiliation does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.