1. Nat Protoc. 2014;9(6):1213-28. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2014.080. Epub 2014 May 1.

Deep brain optical measurements of cell type-specific neural activity in 
behaving mice.

Cui G(1), Jun SB(2), Jin X(3), Luo G(1), Pham MD(1), Lovinger DM(4), Vogel 
SS(5), Costa RM(6).

Author information:
(1)Section on In Vivo Neural Function, Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience, 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Electronics Engineering, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)1] Section on In Vivo Neural Function, Laboratory for Integrative 
Neuroscience, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2] Molecular Neurobiology 
Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, 
USA.
(4)1] Section on In Vivo Neural Function, Laboratory for Integrative 
Neuroscience, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2] Section on Synaptic 
Pharmacology, Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(5)Section on Cellular Biophotonics, Laboratory for Molecular Physiology, 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)1] Section on In Vivo Neural Function, Laboratory for Integrative 
Neuroscience, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. [2] Champalimaud Neuroscience 
Programme at Instituto Gulbenkian de CiÃªncia, Oeiras, Portugal. [3] Champalimaud 
Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal.

Recent advances in genetically encoded fluorescent sensors enable the monitoring 
of cellular events from genetically defined groups of neurons in vivo. In this 
protocol, we describe how to use a time-correlated single-photon counting 
(TCSPC)-based fiber optics system to measure the intensity, emission spectra and 
lifetime of fluorescent biosensors expressed in deep brain structures in freely 
moving mice. When combined with Cre-dependent selective expression of 
genetically encoded Ca(2+) indicators (GECIs), this system can be used to 
measure the average neural activity from a specific population of cells in mice 
performing complex behavioral tasks. As an example, we used viral expression of 
GCaMPs in striatal projection neurons (SPNs) and recorded the fluorescence 
changes associated with calcium spikes from mice performing a lever-pressing 
operant task. The whole procedure, consisting of virus injection, behavior 
training and optical recording, takes 3-4 weeks to complete. With minor 
adaptations, this protocol can also be applied to recording cellular events from 
other cell types in deep brain regions, such as dopaminergic neurons in the 
ventral tegmental area. The simultaneously recorded fluorescence signals and 
behavior events can be used to explore the relationship between the neural 
activity of specific brain circuits and behavior.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2014.080
PMCID: PMC4100551
PMID: 24784819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]