1. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:728619. doi: 10.1155/2014/728619. Epub 2014 Mar
25.

The macrophage inflammatory proteins MIP1α (CCL3) and MIP2α (CXCL2) in 
implant-associated osteomyelitis: linking inflammation to bone degradation.

Dapunt U(1), Maurer S(2), Giese T(2), Gaida MM(3), Hänsch GM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Schlierbacher Landstraße 200a, 69118 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Immunology, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 305, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Bacterial infections of bones remain a serious complication of endoprosthetic 
surgery. These infections are difficult to treat, because many bacterial species 
form biofilms on implants, which are relatively resistant towards antibiotics. 
Bacterial biofilms elicit a progressive local inflammatory response, resulting 
in tissue damage and bone degradation. In the majority of patients, replacement 
of the prosthesis is required. To address the question of how the local 
inflammatory response is linked to bone degradation, tissue samples were taken 
during surgery and gene expression of the macrophage inflammatory proteins MIP1α 
(CCL3) and MIP2α (CXCL2) was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR. MIPs were 
expressed predominantly at osteolytic sites, in close correlation with CD14 
which was used as marker for monocytes/macrophages. Colocalisation of MIPs with 
monocytic cells could be confirmed by histology. In vitro experiments revealed 
that, aside from monocytic cells, also osteoblasts were capable of MIP 
production when stimulated with bacteria; moreover, CCL3 induced the 
differentiation of monocytes to osteoclasts. In conclusion, the multifunctional 
chemokines CCL3 and CXCL2 are produced locally in response to bacterial 
infection of bones. In addition to their well described chemokine activity, 
these cytokines can induce generation of bone resorbing osteoclasts, thus 
providing a link between bacterial infection and osteolysis.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/728619
PMCID: PMC3984830
PMID: 24795505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]