1. JIMD Rep. 2015;15:123-32. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_308. Epub 2014 May 6.

Dried blood spots allow targeted screening to diagnose mucopolysaccharidosis and 
mucolipidosis.

Cobos PN(1), Steglich C, Santer R, Lukacs Z, Gal A.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Clinical 
Chemistry, Hamburg University Medical Centre, Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: As patients with different types of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) and 
mucolipidosis (ML) may present with overlapping clinical features - including 
coarse face, hepatosplenomegaly, bone dysplasia and claw-hand deformities, 
collectively also called 'MPS-like phenotype', enzymatic and/or molecular 
genetic analyses are indispensable for accurate diagnosis and applying specific 
therapy. In this prospective study, we screened patients with symptoms 
compatible with MPS for MPS I, II (males) and VI.
METHODS: Dried blood spots/specimens (DBS) were collected from 200 patients with 
an MPS-like phenotype and analysed for activities of Î±-iduronidase (IDUA), 
iduronate-2-sulphatase (IDS), and arylsulphatase B (ARSB), the enzymes deficient 
in mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) type I, II and VI, respectively. For the samples 
with pathologic enzyme activity, mutational analysis was carried out using the 
same DBS.
RESULTS: Based on enzymatic analysis of 200 DBS samples, a total of 45 (22.5%) 
showed low activity; 17 for MPS I (8.5%), 11 for MPS II (5.5%) and 9 for MPS VI 
(4.5%). Enzyme activities were suggestive for ML II/III in 8 (4.0%) cases. For 
41 (91.1%) samples, DNA could be extracted from the filter paper. Mutations were 
identified in 11 (64.7%), 11 (100%), 9 (100%) and 5 (62.5%) patients putatively 
diagnosed biochemically with MPS I, II, VI, and ML II/III, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: DBS enzymatic analysis can be used to diagnose MPS/ML. Initial 
results should be confirmed by a second enzyme assay and/or by molecular genetic 
testing. Given the advantages of DBS over other sample types in terms of ease of 
collection, storage and transportation, DBS are particularly useful for 
screening patients with an MPS-like phenotype in regions lacking specialised 
laboratories. In order to ascertain the diagnosis in a large number of cases, 
patients should be assessed in parallel for at least MPS I, II and VI.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_308
PMCID: PMC4270870
PMID: 24798265