1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1359-68. eCollection 2014.

WNT3A gene expression is associated with isolated Hirschsprung disease 
polymorphism and disease status.

Chen D(1), Mi J(1), Liu X(2), Zhang J(3), Wang W(1), Gao H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University Shenyang 110004, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Pediatric Congenital Malformations, Ministry of Public 
Health, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University Shenyang 110004, China.
(3)Jinzhou Women and Children's Hospital Jinzhou, Liaoning, 121000, China.

WNT3A has been regarded as an activator of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. 
It has been found Wnt signaling pathway is closely related with embrionic 
development and Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). A common haplotype consisting of 
minor SNPs alleles located in the WNT3A gene has been described as a risk factor 
for various genetic disorders. However, whether WNT3A contributes to the onset 
of HSCR has not been identified. The present study aims to detect the 
interactions of genetic variations in the WNT3A gene and examine the biological 
expression levels with Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) in the Chinese people. We 
analyzed WNT3A gene (rs61743220, rs192966556 and rs145882986) variants in the 
whole blood samples from HSCR patients and normal children (control groups). 
WNT3A expression was also examined by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), 
western blotting and immunostaining. Consequently, when rs192966556 and 
rs145882986 alleles of the WNT3A gene lack the SNPs, they are especially 
associated with a greater risk of HSCR (OR [95% confidence interval]=1.791, 
p=0.001; OR [95% confidence interval]=1.556, p=0.003, respectively). The mRNA 
and protein expressions of WNT3A were higher in the aganglionic colon segment 
tissues than in the normal ganglionic segments tissues. Immunostaining indicates 
that the staining of WNT3A was much stronger (brown) in the aganglionic colon 
segment tissues than that in the normal ganglionic colon segment tissues 
(colorless or light yellow) in the mucous layer and muscular layer. Although 
preliminary, these results suggest that WNT3A may play an important role in the 
pathogenesis of HSCR.

PMCID: PMC4014216
PMID: 24817932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]