1. J Comp Pathol. 2014 Jul;151(1):25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2014.03.007. Epub
2014  Mar 27.

Succinate dehydrogenase subunit D and succinate dehydrogenase subunit B mutation 
analysis in canine phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma.

Holt DE(1), Henthorn P(2), Howell VM(3), Robinson BG(4), Benn DE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
dholt@vet.upenn.edu.
(2)Department of Clinical Studies, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Bill Walsh Translational Cancer Research Laboratory, Hormones and Cancer 
Group, Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Royal North Shore Hospital and 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Hormones and Cancer Group, Kolling Institute of 
Medical Research, Royal North Shore Hospital and University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.

Phaeochromocytomas (PCs) are tumours of the adrenal medulla chromaffin cells. 
Paragangliomas (PGLs) arise in sympathetic ganglia (previously called 
extra-adrenal PCs) or in non-chromaffin parasympathetic ganglia cells that are 
usually non-secretory. Parenchymal cells from these tumours have a common 
embryological origin from neural crest ectoderm. Several case series of canine 
PCs and PGLs have been published and a link between the increased incidence of 
chemoreceptor neoplasia in brachycephalic dog breeds and chronic hypoxia has 
been postulated. A similar link to hypoxia in man led to the identification of 
germline heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding succinate dehydrogenase 
subunit D (SDHD) and subsequently SDHA, SDHB and SDHC in similar tumours. We 
investigated canine PCs (n = 6) and PGLs (n = 2) for SDHD and SDHB mutations and 
in one PGL found a somatic SDHD mutation c.365A>G (p.Lys122Arg) in exon 4, which 
was not present in normal tissue from this brachycephalic dog. Two PCs were 
heterozygous for both c.365A>G (p.Lys122Arg) mutation and an exon 3 silent 
variant c.291G>A. We also identified the heterozygous SDHB exon 2 mutation 
c.113G>A (p.Arg38Gln) in a PC. These results illustrate that genetic mutations 
may underlie tumourigenesis in canine PCs and PGLs. The spontaneous nature of 
these canine diseases and possible association of PGLs with hypoxia in 
brachycephalic breeds may make them an attractive model for studying the 
corresponding human tumours.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2014.03.007
PMID: 24813157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]