1. PLoS One. 2014 May 13;9(5):e97258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097258. 
eCollection 2014.

Extracellular matrix regulates UNC-6 (netrin) axon guidance by controlling the 
direction of intracellular UNC-40 (DCC) outgrowth activity.

Yang Y(1), Lee WS(1), Tang X(1), Wadsworth WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

How extracellular molecules influence the direction of axon guidance is poorly 
understood. The HSN axon of Caenorhabditis elegans is guided towards a ventral 
source of secreted UNC-6 (netrin). The axon's outgrowth response to UNC-6 is 
mediated by the UNC-40 (DCC) receptor. We have proposed that in response to the 
UNC-6 molecule the direction of UNC-40-mediated axon outgrowth is stochastically 
determined. The direction of guidance is controlled by asymmetric cues, 
including the gradient of UNC-6, that regulate the probability that 
UNC-40-mediated axon outgrowth is directed on average, over time, in a specific 
direction. Here we provide genetic evidence that a specialized extracellular 
matrix, which lies ventral to the HSN cell body, regulates the probability that 
UNC-40-mediated axon outgrowth will be directed ventrally towards the matrix. We 
show that mutations that disrupt the function of proteins associated with this 
matrix, UNC-52 (perlecan), UNC-112 (kindlin), VAB-19 (Kank), and UNC-97 (PINCH), 
decrease the probability of UNC-40-mediated axon outgrowth in the ventral 
direction, while increasing the probability of outgrowth in the anterior and 
posterior directions. Other results suggest that INA-1 (Î± integrin) and MIG-15 
(NIK kinase) signaling mediate the response in HSN. Although the AVM axon also 
migrates through this matrix, the mutations have little effect on the direction 
of AVM axon outgrowth, indicating that responses to the matrix are 
cell-specific. Together, these results suggest that an extracellular matrix can 
regulate the direction of UNC-6 guidance by increasing the probability that 
UNC-40-mediated axon outgrowth activity will be oriented in a specific 
direction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097258
PMCID: PMC4019552
PMID: 24824544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.