1. Biology (Basel). 2012 Jul 26;1(2):245-59. doi: 10.3390/biology1020245.

Free Energy Profile of APOBEC3G Protein Calculated by a Molecular Dynamics 
Simulation.

Fukunishi Y(1), Hongo S(2), Lintuluoto M(3), Matsuo H(4).

Author information:
(1)Biomedicinal Information Research Center (BIRC), National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2-3-26, Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo 
135-0064, Japan. y-fukunishi@aist.go.jp.
(2)Division of Applied Life Science, Graduate School of Life and Environmental 
Science, Kyoto Prefectural University, Kyoto 606-8522, Japan. 
s_hongo@mei.kpu.ac.jp.
(3)Division of Applied Life Science, Graduate School of Life and Environmental 
Science, Kyoto Prefectural University, Kyoto 606-8522, Japan. masami@kpu.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. matsu029@umn.edu.

The human APOBEC3G protein (A3G) is a single-stranded DNA deaminase that 
inhibits the replication of retrotransposons and retroviruses, including HIV-1. 
Atomic details of A3G's catalytic mechanism have started to emerge, as the 
structure of its catalytic domain (A3Gctd) has been revealed by NMR and X-ray 
crystallography. The NMR and crystal structures are similar overall; however, 
differences are apparent for β2 strand (β2) and loops close to the catalytic 
site. To add some insight into these differences and to better characterize 
A3Gctd dynamics, we calculated its free energy profile by using the 
Generalized-Born surface area (GBSA) method accompanied with a molecular 
dynamics simulation. The GBSA method yielded an enthalpy term for A3Gctd's free 
energy, and we developed a new method that takes into account the distribution 
of the protein's dihedral angles to calculate its entropy term. The structure 
solved by NMR was found to have a lower energy than that of the crystal 
structure, suggesting that this conformation is dominant in solution. In 
addition, β2-loop-β2' configuration was stable throughout a 20-ns molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulation. This finding suggests that in solution A3Gctd is not 
likely to adopt the continuous β2 strand configuration present in the APOBEC2 
crystal structure. In the NMR structure, the solvent water accessibility of the 
catalytic Zn2+ was limited throughout the 20-ns MD simulation. This result 
explains previous observations in which A3G did not bind or catalyze single 
cytosine nucleotide, even when at excessive concentrations.

DOI: 10.3390/biology1020245
PMCID: PMC4009775
PMID: 24832225