1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 4;289(27):19120-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.549410. Epub 
2014 May 15.

Regulation of nuclear translocation of the Myb1 transcription factor by 
TvCyclophilin 1 in the protozoan parasite Trichomonas vaginalis.

Hsu HM(1), Chu CH(2), Wang YT(3), Lee Y(1), Wei SY(4), Liu HW(1), Ong SJ(3), 
Chen C(4), Tai JH(5).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Immunology and.
(2)Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Immunology and From the Department of 
Parasitology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University and.
(3)From the Department of Parasitology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University and.
(4)Structure Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 
11529, Taiwan.
(5)Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Immunology and From the Department of 
Parasitology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University and 
taijh@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

In Trichomonas vaginalis, a Myb1 protein was previously demonstrated to repress 
transcription of an iron-inducible ap65-1 gene. In this study, a human 
cyclophilin A homologue, TvCyclophilin 1 (TvCyP1), was identified as a 
Myb1-binding protein using a bacterial two-hybrid library screening system. The 
recombinant TvCyP1 exhibited typical peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity with 
kcat/Km of ∼7.1 μm(-1) s(-1). In a pulldown assay, the His-tagged Myb1 
interacted with a GST-TvCyP1 fusion protein, which had an enzymatic proficiency 
half that of recombinant TvCyP1. Both the enzymatic proficiency of GST-TvCyP1 
and its binding to His-Myb1 were eliminated by mutation of Arg(63) in the 
catalytic motif or inhibited by cyclosporin A. TvCyP1 was primarily localized to 
the hydrogenosomes by immunofluorescence assay, but it was also co-purified with 
Myb1 in certain vesicle fractions from differential and gradient 
centrifugations. Transgenic cells overexpressing HA-TvCyP1 had a higher level of 
nuclear Myb1 but a much lower level of Myb1 associated with the vesicles than 
control and those overexpressing HA-TvCyP1(R63A). Myb1 was detected at a much 
higher level in the HA-TvCyP1 protein complex than in the HA-TvCyP1(R63A) 
protein complex immunoprecipitated from P15 and P100, but not S100, fractions of 
postnuclear lysates. A TvCyP1-binding motif, (105)YGPKWNK(111), was identified 
in Myb1 in which Gly(106) and Pro(107) were essential for its binding to TvCyP1. 
Mutation of Gly(106) and Pro(107), respectively, in HA-Myb1 resulted in 
cytoplasmic retention and elevated nuclear translocation of the overexpressed 
protein. These results suggest that TvCyP1 may induce the release of Myb1 that 
is restrained to certain cytoplasmic vesicles prior to its nuclear 
translocation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.549410
PMCID: PMC4081949
PMID: 24831011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]