1. Elife. 2014 Apr 24;3:e02419. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02419.

The GTPase IFT27 is involved in both anterograde and retrograde intraflagellar 
transport.

Huet D(1), Blisnick T(2), Perrot S(2), Bastin P(3).

Author information:
(1)Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur & CNRS, Paris, France 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Cellule Pasteur-UPMC, Paris, France.
(2)Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur & CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)Trypanosome Cell Biology Unit, Institut Pasteur & CNRS, Paris, France 
pbastin@pasteur.fr.

The construction of cilia and flagella depends on intraflagellar transport 
(IFT), the bidirectional movement of two protein complexes (IFT-A and IFT-B) 
driven by specific kinesin and dynein motors. IFT-B and kinesin are associated 
to anterograde transport whereas IFT-A and dynein participate to retrograde 
transport. Surprisingly, the small GTPase IFT27, a member of the IFT-B complex, 
turns out to be essential for retrograde cargo transport in Trypanosoma brucei. 
We reveal that this is due to failure to import both the IFT-A complex and the 
IFT dynein into the flagellar compartment. To get further molecular insight 
about the role of IFT27, GDP- or GTP-locked versions were expressed in presence 
or absence of endogenous IFT27. The GDP-locked version is unable to enter the 
flagellum and to interact with other IFT-B proteins and its sole expression 
prevents flagellum formation. These findings demonstrate that a GTPase-competent 
IFT27 is required for association to the IFT complex and that IFT27 plays a role 
in the cargo loading of the retrograde transport machinery.DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02419.001.

Copyright © 2014, Huet et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.02419
PMCID: PMC4003483
PMID: 24843028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.