1. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2014 May;6(3):267-9. doi:
10.4168/aair.2014.6.3.267.  Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Laryngeal spasm mimicking asthma and vitamin d deficiency.

Masoero M(1), Bellocchia M(1), Ciuffreda A(1), Ricciardolo FL(2), Rolla G(1), 
Bucca C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin, Italy.

We present a woman with heterozygous carnitine palmitoyl transferase 2 (CPT-2) 
deficiency who in the last 6 months suffered from episodic dyspnea and choking. 
Symptoms could not be attributed to her muscular energy defect, since 
heterozygous CPT-2 deficiency is usually asymptomatic or causes only mild muscle 
fatigability. Myopathy is usually triggered by concurrent factors, either 
genetic (additional muscle enzymes defects) or acquired (metabolic stress). The 
patient was referred to our respiratory clinic for suspect bronchial asthma. 
Spirometry showed mild decrease in inspiratory flows. Methacholine challenge was 
negative. Dyspnea was triggered by hyperventilation-induced hypocapnia, which 
produced marked decrease in airflow rates, particularly in inspiratory flows, 
consistent with laryngospasm. Nutritional assessment of the patient showed low 
serum level of calcium and vitamin D, attributable to avoidance of milk and 
dairy products for lactose intolerance and to insufficient sunlight exposure. 
After calcium and vitamin D supplementation episodic laryngospasm disappeared 
and hypocapnic hyperventilation test induced very mild change in airflow rates. 
Calcium and vitamin D deficiency may favour laryngeal spasm mimicking asthma, 
particularly in subjects with underlying myopathy.

DOI: 10.4168/aair.2014.6.3.267
PMCID: PMC4021247
PMID: 24843804

Conflict of interest statement: There are no financial or other issues that 
might lead to conflict of interest.