1. J Biosci. 2014 Jun;39(3):505-12. doi: 10.1007/s12038-014-9428-x.

The rare intracellular RET mutation p.S891A in a Chinese Han family with 
familial medullary thyroid carcinoma.

Qi XP(1), Zhang RX, Cao JL, Chen ZG, Jin HY, Yang RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncologic and Urologic Surgery, the 117th PLA Hospital, Anhui 
Medical University, 40 Jichang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, 310004, China.

We report intracellular RET mutation in a Han Chinese pedigree with familial 
medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). Direct sequencing of RET proto-oncogene 
identified a missense c.2671T greater than G (p.S891A) mutation in 6 of 14 
family members. The single nucleotide polymorphisms c. 135A greater than G 
(p.A45A), IVS4 + 48A greater than G, c. 1296A greater than G (p.A432A), c. 2071G 
greater than A (p.G691S), c. 2307T greater than G (p.L769L) and a variant c. 
833C greater than A (p.T278N) were also found in 6 carriers. Among 5 of the 6 
carriers presented medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) as an isolated clinical 
phenotype, with elevated basal serum calcitonin (Ct). Two underwent 
non-normative thyroidectomy either two or four times without physician awareness 
or diagnosis of this disease at initial treatment, but with elevated Ct. One 
with elevated pre-Ct accepted total thyroidectomy (TT) with modified bilateral 
neck dissection (MBiND), and whose seventh posterior rib MTC metastases was 
confirmed 5 months after surgery. Moreover, results of two affected individuals 
with elevated Ct were reduced to normal after TT with MBiND or prophylactic VI 
compartmental dissection. However, only another carrier with the variant p.T278N 
had slightly elevated Ct rejected surgery and was strictly monitored. Given 
these case results, we suggest that screening of RET and pre-surgical Ct levels 
in the management of MTC patients is essential for earlier diagnosis and more 
normative initial treatment, that FMTC patients with cervical lymph nodes 
metastases may be cured by TT with MBiND, and that prophylactic VI compartmental 
dissection should be avoided when Ct levels are low.

DOI: 10.1007/s12038-014-9428-x
PMID: 24845513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]