1. Bioessays. 2014 Mar;36(3):305-15. doi: 10.1002/bies.201300141. Epub 2013 Dec
20.

Circadian rhythms and mood: opportunities for multi-level analyses in genomics 
and neuroscience: circadian rhythm dysregulation in mood disorders provides 
clues to the brain's organizing principles, and a touchstone for genomics and 
neuroscience.

Li JZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

In the healthy state, both circadian rhythm and mood are stable against 
perturbations, yet they are capable of adjusting to altered internal cues or 
ongoing changes in external conditions. The dual demands of stability and 
flexibility are met by the collective properties of complex neural networks. 
Disruption of this balance underlies both circadian rhythm abnormality and mood 
disorders. However, we do not fully understand the network properties that 
govern the crosstalk between the circadian system and mood regulation. This 
puzzle reflects a challenge at the center of neurobiology, and its solution 
requires the successful integration of existing data across all levels of neural 
organization, from molecules, cells, circuits, network dynamics, to integrated 
mental function. This essay discusses several open questions confronting the 
cross-level synthesis, and proposes that circadian regulation, and its role in 
mood, stands as a uniquely tractable system to study the causal mechanisms of 
neural adaptation. Also watch the Video Abstract. Editor's suggested further 
reading in BioEssays Major depressive disorder: A loss of circadian 
synchrony? Abstract.

© 2014 The Author. Bioessays published by WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.201300141
PMCID: PMC4033528
PMID: 24853393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]