1. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;52(3):321-31. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0297.

Three intragenic suppressors of a GTPase-deficient allele of GNAS associated 
with McCune-Albright syndrome.

Turcic K(1), Tobar-Rubin R(1), Janevska D(1), Carroll J(1), Din E(1), Alvarez 
R(1), Haick J(1), Pals-Rylaarsdam R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological ScienceBenedictine University, 5700 College Road, 
Lisle, Illinois 60532, USA.
(2)Department of Biological ScienceBenedictine University, 5700 College Road, 
Lisle, Illinois 60532, USA rrylaarsdam@ben.edu.

Gain-of-function mutations in heterotrimeric G-protein α subunits are associated 
with a variety of human diseases. McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS) is caused by 
mutations in GNAS, the gene encoding Gs. Alterations at Arg201 significantly 
reduce the GTPase activity of the protein, rendering it constitutively active. 
In this study, we have constructed a library of random mutations in a 
constitutively active yeast GPA1 gene carrying a mutation homologous to the 
McCune-Albright allele (Arg297His). Intragenic suppressors found at sites with 
homology to the human Gs protein were tested for their ability to suppress the 
constitutive activity of an Arg201His mutation in Gs. Three intragenic 
suppressors, at Phe142, Arg231, and Leu266, were able to suppress elevated basal 
cAMP responses caused by Arg201His when expressed in HEK293 cells. A range of 
amino acid substitutions was introduced at each of these sites to investigate 
the chemical requirements for intragenic suppression. The ability of Gs proteins 
carrying the suppressor mutations alone to mediate receptor-induced cAMP 
production was measured. These results offer potential sites on Gs that could 
serve as drug targets for MAS therapies.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/JME-13-0297
PMID: 24850831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]