1. Int J Biol Markers. 2014 Dec 9;29(4):e310-6. doi: 10.5301/jbm.5000095.

A pharmacogenetic survey of androgen receptor (CAG)n and (GGN)n polymorphisms in 
patients experiencing long term side effects after finasteride discontinuation.

Cecchin E(1), De Mattia E, Mazzon G, Cauci S, Trombetta C, Toffoli G.

Author information:
(1)1 Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology Unit, CRO Aviano National Cancer 
Institute, Aviano (Pordenone) - Italy.

Finasteride is a steroid 5-alpha-reductase inhibitor, approved for the treatment 
of androgenetic alopecia (AGA) and benign prostate hyperplasia. In some patients 
the treatment is associated with adverse side effects that could become 
persistent after therapy discontinuation, resulting in the so-called 
post-finasteride syndrome (PFS). A pharmacogenetic component in the response to 
finasteride treatment was previously demonstrated. Two polymorphisms (CAG) 
rs4045402 and (GGN) rs3138869 in the gene encoding for the androgen receptor 
(AR) have been hypothesized to play a role in finasteride sensitivity. We aimed 
to compare the rs4045402 and rs3138869 polymorphisms prevalence in a group of 69 
selected subjects (AGA+PFS) that used finasteride to treat alopecia and 
developed persistent side effects, with that in a group of 91 untreated subjects 
with AGA (AGA), and a group of 76 untreated subjects without AGA (NO-AGA). The 
rs4045402 and rs3138869 polymorphisms extreme-lengths alleles were more frequent 
among AGA+PFS (odds ratio, 5.88; 95% CI, 1.87-18.52) and AGA subjects (odds 
ratio, 3.55; 95% CI, 1.13-11.21) than among NO-AGA subjects, probably reflecting 
the genetic predisposing factors for AGA development. In conclusion, we 
described a predictive effect of the less common repeats' length CAG-rs4045402 
and GGN-rs3138869 on AGA development. Prospective trials are required to confirm 
our findings also in other ethnicities, and to highlight possible further 
pharmacogenetic predictive markers of susceptibility to adverse effects.

DOI: 10.5301/jbm.5000095
PMID: 24855036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]