1. Med Oncol. 2014 Jul;31(7):12. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0012-x. Epub 2014 May
27.

Investigation of the association of hRRM1 and p53R2 gene polymorphisms in head 
and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Orhan KS(1), Coskunpinar E, Kanliada D, Oltulu YM, Basaran B, Celik M, 
Cakmakoglu B, Deger K.

Author information:
(1)Department of ORL and Head and Neck Surgery, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, 
Istanbul University, 34390, Capa, Fatih, Istanbul, Turkey, 
ksorhan@istanbul.edu.tr.

Head and neck squamous epithelial cell cancer (HNSCC), the world's fifth most 
common type of cancers, is associated with short life expectancy and high death 
rates if not detected in early stages. The aim of this study was to investigate 
hRRM1 and p53R2 gene polymorphisms by using real-time PCR technique in patients 
with head and neck cancer. In total, 87 patients with head and neck malignancies 
and 87 control group who have not any malignancies were included in the study 
between January 2011 and February 2012 in Istanbul University Faculty of 
Medicine Department of ORL. In the study, real-time PCR was used to detect hRRM1 
(rs12806698 C/A) and p53R2 (rs2290707 G/T) gene polymorphisms in Turkish HNSCC 
patients and healthy individuals. Genomic DNA isolation was performed according 
to the kit protocol with spin column. LightCycler 1.5 system was used to perform 
SNP genotyping using hybridization probes consisting of 3'-fluorescein and a 
5'-LightCycler Red labeled pair of oligonucleotide probes. There were 
significant differences in the distribution of hRRM1 genotypes. Frequency of 
individuals with hRRM1 AA genotype was higher in patients with less 
differentiation when compared with well differentiation [p 0.025, Fisher's exact 
test, odds ratio (OR) 0.140, 95 % confidence intervals (CI) 0.024-0.797]. It is 
observed that A allele carriers have nearly twofold risk for development of the 
disease (p = 0.022; Ï‡ (2) 5.24; OR 2.02, 95 % CI 1.10-3.72).

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0012-x
PMID: 24861915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]