1. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2014 Mar 21;1(2):132-147. doi: 
10.1007/s40572-014-0012-1. eCollection 2014.

The Effects of Arsenic Exposure on Neurological and Cognitive Dysfunction in 
Human and Rodent Studies: A Review.

Tyler CR(1), Allan AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, NM USA.

Arsenic toxicity is a worldwide health concern as several millions of people are 
exposed to this toxicant via drinking water, and exposure affects almost every 
organ system in the body including the brain. Recent studies have shown that 
even low concentrations of arsenic impair neurological function, particularly in 
children. This review will focus on the current epidemiological evidence of 
arsenic neurotoxicity in children and adults, with emphasis on cognitive 
dysfunction, including learning and memory deficits and mood disorders. We 
provide a cohesive synthesis of the animal studies that have focused on neural 
mechanisms of dysfunction after arsenic exposure including altered epigenetics; 
hippocampal function; glucocorticoid and hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis 
(HPA) pathway signaling; glutamatergic, cholinergic and monoaminergic signaling; 
adult neurogenesis; and increased Alzheimer's-associated pathologies. Finally, 
we briefly discuss new studies focusing on therapeutic strategies to combat 
arsenic toxicity including the use of selenium and zinc.

DOI: 10.1007/s40572-014-0012-1
PMCID: PMC4026128
PMID: 24860722

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
Christina R. Tyler is a graduate student in the Neurosciences Department 
employed by the University of New Mexico. Dr. Andrea M. Allan is a tenured 
Professor at the University of New Mexico in the Neurosciences Department. She 
has received fees for participation in PHS1053 CSR study section grant review, 
as well as a Texas Tech speaking fee.