1. PeerJ. 2014 May 8;2:e379. doi: 10.7717/peerj.379. eCollection 2014.

Linking a genetic defect in migraine to spreading depression in a computational 
model.

Dahlem MA(1), Schumacher J(2), H체bel N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Humboldt Universit채t zu Berlin , Berlin , Germany.
(2)Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Technische Universit채t 
Berlin , Berlin , Germany.
(3)Department of Theoretical Physics, Technische Universit채t Berlin , Berlin , 
Germany.

Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is a rare subtype of migraine with aura. A 
mutation causing FHM type 3 (FHM3) has been identified in SCN1A encoding the 
Nav1.1 Na(+) channel. This genetic defect affects the inactivation gate. While 
the Na(+) tail currents following voltage steps are consistent with both 
hyperexcitability and hypoexcitability, in this computational study, we 
investigate functional consequences beyond these isolated events. Our extended 
Hodgkin-Huxley framework establishes a connection between genotype and cellular 
phenotype, i.e., the pathophysiological dynamics that spans over multiple time 
scales and is relevant to migraine with aura. In particular, we investigate the 
dynamical repertoire from normal spiking (milliseconds) to spreading depression 
and anoxic depolarization (tens of seconds) and show that FHM3 mutations render 
gray matter tissue more vulnerable to spreading depression despite opposing 
effects associated with action potential generation. We conclude that the 
classification in terms of hypoexcitability vs. hyperexcitability is too simple 
a scheme. Our mathematical analysis provides further basic insight into also 
previously discussed criticisms against this scheme based on psychophysical and 
clinical data.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.379
PMCID: PMC4017887
PMID: 24860703