1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 May 13;5:71. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00071. 
eCollection 2014.

Diversity and Bias through Receptor-Receptor Interactions in GPCR Heteroreceptor 
Complexes. Focus on Examples from Dopamine D2 Receptor Heteromerization.

Fuxe K(1), Tarakanov A(2), Romero Fernandez W(1), Ferraro L(3), Tanganelli S(3), 
Filip M(4), Agnati LF(5), Garriga P(6), Diaz-Cabiale Z(7), Borroto-Escuela 
DO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm , Sweden.
(2)St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation, Russian Academy of 
Sciences , Saint Petersburg , Russia.
(3)Pharmacology Section, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Ferrara , Ferrara , Italy.
(4)Laboratory of Drug Addiction Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, 
Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences , Kraków , Poland.
(5)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico , Venice Lido , Italy.
(6)Departament d'Enginyeria Química, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya , 
Barcelona , Spain.
(7)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Málaga , Málaga , 
Spain.

Allosteric receptor-receptor interactions in GPCR heteromers appeared to 
introduce an intermolecular allosteric mechanism contributing to the diversity 
and bias in the protomers. Examples of dopamine D2R heteromerization are given 
to show how such allosteric mechanisms significantly change the receptor 
protomer repertoire leading to diversity and biased recognition and signaling. 
In 1980s and 1990s, it was shown that neurotensin (NT) through selective 
antagonistic NTR-D2 like receptor interactions increased the diversity of DA 
signaling by reducing D2R-mediated dopamine signaling over D1R-mediated dopamine 
signaling. Furthermore, D2R protomer appeared to bias the specificity of the NTR 
orthosteric binding site toward neuromedin N vs. NT in the heteroreceptor 
complex. Complex CCK2R-D1R-D2R interactions in possible heteroreceptor complexes 
were also demonstrated further increasing receptor diversity. In D2R-5-HT2AR 
heteroreceptor complexes, the hallucinogenic 5-HT2AR agonists LSD and DOI were 
recently found to exert a biased agonist action on the orthosteric site of the 
5-HT2AR protomer leading to the development of an active conformational state 
different from the one produced by 5-HT. Furthermore, as recently demonstrated 
allosteric A2A-D2R receptor-receptor interaction brought about not only a 
reduced affinity of the D2R agonist binding site but also a biased modulation of 
the D2R protomer signaling in A2A-D2R heteroreceptor complexes. A conformational 
state of the D2R was induced, which moved away from Gi/o signaling and instead 
favored β-arrestin2-mediated signaling. These examples on allosteric 
receptor-receptor interactions obtained over several decades serve to illustrate 
the significant increase in diversity and biased recognition and signaling that 
develop through such mechanisms.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00071
PMCID: PMC4026686
PMID: 24860548