1. Gene Ther. 2014 Aug;21(8):739-50. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.48. Epub 2014 May 29.

Long-term functional duration of immune responses to HCV NS3/4A induced by DNA 
vaccination.

Ahlén G(1), Holmström F(1), Gibbs A(1), Alheim M(1), Frelin L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical Microbiology, F68, 
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

We have investigated the ability of hepatitis C virus non-structural (NS) 
3/4A-DNA-based vaccines to activate long-term cell-mediated immune responses in 
mice. Wild-type and synthetic codon optimized (co) NS3/4A DNA vaccines have 
previously been shown to be immunogenic in mice, rabbits and humans, although we 
have very poor knowledge about the longevity of the immune responses primed. We 
therefore analyzed the functionality of primed NS3/4A-specific immune responses 
in BALB/c (H-2(d)) and/or C57BL/6J (H-2(b)) mice 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12 and 16 months 
after the last immunization. Mice were immunized one, two, three or four times 
using gene gun delivery to the skin or by intramuscular administration. 
Immunological responses after immunization were monitored by protection against 
in vivo challenge of NS3/4A-expressing syngeneic tumor cells. In addition, 
functionality of the NS3/4A-specific T cells was analyzed by a standard 
cytotoxicity assay. First, we identified a new unique murine H-2(d)-restricted 
NS3/4A cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) epitope, which enabled us to study the 
epitope-specific immune responses. Our results show that the coNS3/4A vaccine 
was highly immunogenic by determination of interferon-γ/tumor necrosis factor-α 
production and lytic cytotoxic T cells, which could efficiently inhibit in vivo 
tumor growth. Importantly, we showed that one to four monthly immunizations 
protected mice from tumor development when challenged up to 16 months after the 
last immunization. When determining the functionality of NS3/4A-specific T cells 
in vitro, we showed detectable lytic activity up to 12 months after the last 
immunization. Thus, NS3/4A-based DNA vaccines activate potent cellular immune 
responses that are present and function in both BALB/c and C57BL/6J mice up to 
12-16 months after the last immunization. The induction of long-term immunity 
after NS3/4A DNA immunization has not been shown previously and supports the use 
of NS3/4A in hepatitis C virus vaccine compositions.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2014.48
PMCID: PMC4126484
PMID: 24871581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]