1. BMC Genet. 2014 May 22;15:60. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-15-60.

Mapping QTL conferring resistance in maize to gray leaf spot disease caused by 
Cercospora zeina.

Berger DK(1), Carstens M, Korsman JN, Middleton F, Kloppers FJ, Tongoona P, 
Myburg AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Science, Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology 
Institute (FABI), Plant Sciences Complex, University of Pretoria, Private Bag 
X20, Hatfield 0028, South Africa. dave.berger@fabi.up.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Gray leaf spot (GLS) is a globally important foliar disease of 
maize. Cercospora zeina, one of the two fungal species that cause the disease, 
is prevalent in southern Africa, China, Brazil and the eastern corn belt of the 
USA. Identification of QTL for GLS resistance in subtropical germplasm is 
important to support breeding programmes in developing countries where C. zeina 
limits production of this staple food crop.
RESULTS: A maize RIL population (F7:S6) from a cross between CML444 and SC 
Malawi was field-tested under GLS disease pressure at five field sites over 
three seasons in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Thirty QTL identified from eleven 
field trials (environments) were consolidated to seven QTL for GLS resistance 
based on their expression in at least two environments and location in the same 
core maize bins. Four GLS resistance alleles were derived from the more 
resistant parent CML444 (bin 1.10, 4.08, 9.04/9.05, 10.06/10.07), whereas the 
remainder were from SC Malawi (bin 6.06/6.07, 7.02/7.03, 9.06). QTLs in bin 4.08 
and bin 6.06/6.07 were also detected as joint QTLs, each explained more than 11% 
of the phenotypic variation, and were identified in four and seven environments, 
respectively. Common markers were used to allocate GLS QTL from eleven previous 
studies to bins on the IBM2005 map, and GLS QTL "hotspots" were noted. Bin 4.08 
and 7.02/7.03 GLS QTL from this study overlapped with hotspots, whereas the bin 
6.06/6.07 and bin 9.06 QTLs appeared to be unique. QTL for flowering time (bin 
1.07, 4.09) in this population did not correspond to QTL for GLS resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: QTL mapping of a RIL population from the subtropical maize parents 
CML444 and SC Malawi identified seven QTL for resistance to gray leaf spot 
disease caused by C. zeina. These QTL together with QTL from eleven studies were 
allocated to bins on the IBM2005 map to provide a basis for comparison. Hotspots 
of GLS QTL were identified on chromosomes one, two, four, five and seven, with 
QTL in the current study overlapping with two of these. Two QTL from this study 
did not overlap with previously reported QTL.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2156-15-60
PMCID: PMC4059882
PMID: 24885661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]