1. BMC Biotechnol. 2014 May 21;14:45. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-14-45.

Alcohol dehydrogenases from Kluyveromyces marxianus: heterologous expression in 
Escherichia coli and biochemical characterization.

Liang JJ(1), Zhang ML, Ding M, Mai ZM, Wu SX, Du Y, Feng JX.

Author information:
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Guangxi University, 100 Daxue Road, 
Nanning, Guangxi 530004, P, R, China. jjliang@gxu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Kluyveromyces marxianus has recently become a species of interest 
for ethanol production since it can produce ethanol at high temperature and on a 
wide variety of substrates. However, the reason why this yeast can produce 
ethanol at high temperature is largely unknown.
RESULTS: The ethanol fermentation capability of K. marxianus GX-UN120 at 40°С 
was found to be the same as that of Saccharomyces cerevisiae at 34°С. Zymogram 
analysis showed that alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (KmAdh1) was largely induced during 
ethanol production, KmAdh4 was constitutively expressed at a lower level and 
KmAdh2 and KmAdh3 were almost undetectable. The genes encoding the four alcohol 
dehydrogenases (ADHs) were cloned from strain GX-UN120. Each KmADH was expressed 
in Escherichia coli and each recombinant protein was digested with enterokinase 
to remove the fusion protein. The optimum pH of the purified recombinant KmAdh1 
was 8.0 and that of KmAdh2, KmAdh3 and KmAdh4 was 7.0. The optimum temperatures 
of KmAdh1, KmAdh2, KmAdh3 and KmAdh4 were 50, 45, 55 and 45°C, respectively. The 
K(m) values of the recombinant KmAdh1 and KmAdh2 were 4.0 and 1.2 mM for 
acetaldehyde and 39.7 and 49.5 mM for ethanol, respectively. The V(max) values 
of the recombinant KmAdh1 and KmAdh2 were 114.9 and 21.6 μmol min⁻¹ mg⁻¹ for 
acetaldehyde and 57.5 and 1.8 μmol min⁻¹ mg⁻¹ for ethanol, respectively. KmAdh3 
and KmAdh4 catalyze the oxidation reaction of ethanol to acetaldehyde but not 
the reduction reaction of acetaldehyde to ethanol, and the K(m) values of the 
recombinant KmAdh3 and KmAdh4 were 26.0 and 17.0 mM for ethanol, respectively. 
The V(max) values of the recombinant KmAdh3 and KmAdh4 were 12.8 and 56.2 μmol 
min⁻¹ mg⁻¹ for ethanol, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These data in this study collectively indicate that KmAdh1 is the 
primary ADH responsible for the production of ethanol from the reduction of 
acetaldehyde in K. marxianus. The relatively high optimum temperature of KmAdh1 
may partially explain the ability of K. marxianus to produce ethanol at high 
temperature. Understanding the biochemical characteristics of KmAdhs will 
enhance our fundamental knowledge of the metabolism of ethanol fermentation in 
K. marxianus.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6750-14-45
PMCID: PMC4062290
PMID: 24885162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]