1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e88443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088443.
eCollection  2014.

Effects of healthy ageing on activation pattern within the primary motor cortex 
during movement and motor imagery: an fMRI study.

Sharma N(1), Baron JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom; Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale 
(INSERM), Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Hopital Sainte-Anne, 
Université, Paris, France.

The increase in older adults over the coming decades will be accompanied by a 
greater burden of chronic neurological diseases affecting the motor system. The 
motor system adapts to maintain motor performance with the primary motor cortex 
(BA4) emerging as a pivotal node within this neuroplastic process. Studies of 
ageing often consider BA4 a homogenous area but cytoarchitectonic studies have 
revealed two subdivisions, an anterior (BA4a) and posterior subdivision (BA4p). 
Here we focus upon the effects of ageing on the involvement of BA4a and BA4p 
during movement and motor imagery (MI). Thirty-one right-handed healthy 
volunteers were recruited and screened for their ability to perform imagery (5 
subjects excluded). The sample was split into an older group (n = 13, mean age 
56.4 SD 9.4) and a younger group (n = 13, mean age 27.4 SD 5.3). We used an fMRI 
block-design (auditory-paced [1 Hz] right hand finger-thumb opposition sequence 
[2,3,4,5, 2...]) with MI & rest and actual movement & rest. We explored the 
distribution-based clustering and weighted laterality index within BA4a and 
BA4p. The involvement of BA4p during MI (measured with distribution-based 
clustering) was significantly greater in the older group (p<0.05) than in the 
younger group. Hemispheric balance of BA4p decreased with age during MI 
(Spearman rho -0.371; p<0.05), whereas that of BA4a decreased with age during 
actual movement (Spearman rho = -0.458 p<0.01). Irrespective of age, we found 
BA4 is involved during motor imagery, strengthening the rationale for its 
potential use in older subjects. These findings suggest that the functions of 
the subdivisions of BA4 are differentially affected by ageing and have 
implications regarding how ageing affects the cognitive processes underlying 
motor functions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088443
PMCID: PMC4041563
PMID: 24887402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.