1. Mol Cancer. 2014 May 29;13:130. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-130.

Yin Yang-1 suppresses invasion and metastasis of pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma by downregulating MMP10 in a MUC4/ErbB2/p38/MEF2C-dependent 
mechanism.

Zhang JJ, Zhu Y, Xie KL, Peng YP, Tao JQ, Tang J, Li Z, Xu ZK, Dai CC, Qian ZY, 
Jiang KR, Wu JL, Gao WT, Du Q, Miao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The first Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Jiangsu Province Academy of Clinical Medicine, Institute of 
Tumor Biology, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, People's Republic of China. 
miaoyi@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence indicates an important role of transcription 
factor Yin Yang-1 (YY1) in human tumorigenesis. However, its function in cancer 
remains controversial and the relevance of YY1 to pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains to be clarified.
METHODS: In this study, we detected YY1 expression in clinical PDAC tissue 
samples and cell lines using quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and 
western blotting. We also detected MUC4 and MMP10 mRNA levels in 108 PDAC 
samples using qRT-PCR and analyzed the correlations between YY1 and MUC4 or 
MMP10 expression. The role of YY1 in the proliferation, invasion and metastatic 
abilities of PDAC cells in vitro was studied by CCK-8 assay, cell migration and 
invasion assays. In vivo pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis was studied by a 
xenogenous subcutaneously implant model and a tail vein metastasis model. The 
potential mechanisms underlying YY1 mediated tumor progression in PDAC were 
explored by digital gene expression (DGE) sequencing, signal transduction 
pathways blockage experiments and luciferase assays. Statistical analysis was 
performed using the SPSS 15.0 software.
RESULTS: We found that the expression of YY1 in PDACs was higher compared with 
their adjacent non-tumorous tissues and normal pancreas tissues. However, PDAC 
patients with high level overexpression of YY1 had better outcome than those 
with low level overexpression. YY1 expression levels were statistically 
negatively correlated with MMP10 expression levels, but not correlated with MUC4 
expression levels. YY1 overexpression suppressed, whereas YY1 knockdown 
enhanced, the proliferation, invasion and metastatic properties of BXPC-3 cells, 
both in vitro and in vivo. YY1 suppresses invasion and metastasis of pancreatic 
cancer cells by downregulating MMP10 in a MUC4/ErbB2/p38/MEF2C-dependent 
mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggested that YY1 plays a negative role, i.e. is 
a tumor suppressor, in PDAC, and may become a valuable diagnostic and prognostic 
marker of PDAC.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-130
PMCID: PMC4047260
PMID: 24884523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]