1. Nutr J. 2014 May 3;13:43. doi: 10.1186/1475-2891-13-43.

Dietary ascorbic acid and subsequent change in body weight and waist 
circumference: associations may depend on genetic predisposition to obesity--a 
prospective study of three independent cohorts.

Larsen SC(1), Angquist L, Ahluwalia TS, Skaaby T, Roswall N, Tjønneland A, 
Halkjær J, Overvad K, Pedersen O, Hansen T, Linneberg A, Husemoen LL, Toft U, 
Heitmann BL, Sørensen TI.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospitals, the 
Capital Region, Nordre Fasanvej 57, Hovedvejen, entrance 5, ground floor, 2000, 
Frederiksberg Copenhagen, Denmark. Sofus.Christian.Larsen@regionh.dk.

BACKGROUND: Cross-sectional data suggests that a low level of plasma ascorbic 
acid positively associates with both Body Mass Index (BMI) and Waist 
Circumference (WC). This leads to questions about a possible relationship 
between dietary intake of ascorbic acid and subsequent changes in anthropometry, 
and whether such associations may depend on genetic predisposition to obesity. 
Hence, we examined whether dietary ascorbic acid, possibly in interaction with 
the genetic predisposition to a high BMI, WC or waist-hip ratio adjusted for BMI 
(WHR), associates with subsequent annual changes in weight (∆BW) and waist 
circumference (∆WC).
METHODS: A total of 7,569 participants' from MONICA, the Diet Cancer and Health 
study and the INTER99 study were included in the study. We combined 50 obesity 
associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in four genetic scores: a 
score of all SNPs and a score for each of the traits (BMI, WC and WHR) with 
which the SNPs associate. Linear regression was used to examine the association 
between ascorbic acid intake and ΔBW or ΔWC. SNP-score × ascorbic acid 
interactions were examined by adding product terms to the models.
RESULTS: We found no significant associations between dietary ascorbic acid and 
∆BW or ∆WC. Regarding SNP-score × ascorbic acid interactions, each additional 
risk allele of the 14 WHR associated SNPs associated with a ∆WC of 0.039 cm/year 
(P = 0.02, 95% CI: 0.005 to 0.073) per 100 mg/day higher ascorbic acid intake. 
However, the association to ∆WC only remained borderline significant after 
adjustment for ∆BW.
CONCLUSION: In general, our study does not support an association between 
dietary ascorbic acid and ∆BW or ∆WC, but a diet with a high content of ascorbic 
acid may be weakly associated to higher WC gain among people who are genetically 
predisposed to a high WHR. However, given the quite limited association any 
public health relevance is questionable.

DOI: 10.1186/1475-2891-13-43
PMCID: PMC4024624
PMID: 24886192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]