1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 4;15(1):432. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-432.

Transcriptomics of cryophilic Saccharomyces kudriavzevii reveals the key role of 
gene translation efficiency in cold stress adaptations.

Tronchoni J, Medina V, Guillamón JM, Querol A, Pérez-Torrado R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología, Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de los 
Alimentos (CSIC), Burjassot, P,O, Box 73E-46100 Valencia, Spain. 
rober@iata.csic.es.

BACKGROUND: Comparative transcriptomics and functional studies of different 
Saccharomyces species have opened up the possibility of studying and 
understanding new yeast abilities. This is the case of yeast adaptation to 
stress, in particular the cold stress response, which is especially relevant for 
the food industry. Since the species Saccharomyces kudriavzevii is adapted to 
grow at low temperatures, it has been suggested that it contains physiological 
adaptations that allow it to rapidly and efficiently acclimatise after cold 
shock.
RESULTS: In this work, we aimed to provide new insights into the molecular basis 
determining this better cold adaptation of S. kudriavzevii strains. To this end, 
we have compared S. cerevisiae and S. kudriavzevii transcriptome after yeast 
adapted to cold shock. The results showed that both yeast mainly activated the 
genes related to translation machinery by comparing 12°C with 28°C, but the S. 
kudriavzevii response was stronger, showing an increased expression of dozens of 
genes involved in protein synthesis. This suggested enhanced translation 
efficiency at low temperatures, which was confirmed when we observed increased 
resistance to translation inhibitor paromomycin. Finally, 35S-methionine 
incorporation assays confirmed the increased S. kudriavzevii translation rate 
after cold shock.
CONCLUSIONS: This work confirms that S. kudriavzevii is able to grow at low 
temperatures, an interesting ability for different industrial applications. We 
propose that this adaptation is based on its enhanced ability to initiate a 
quick, efficient translation of crucial genes in cold adaptation among others, a 
mechanism that has been suggested for other microorganisms.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-432
PMCID: PMC4058008
PMID: 24898014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]