1. J Neurochem. 2014 Sep;130(6):748-58. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12779. Epub 2014 Jun 28.

Functional characterization of the S41Y (C2755A) polymorphism of tryptophan 
hydroxylase 2.

Carkaci-Salli N(1), Salli U, Tekin I, Hengst JA, Zhao MK, Gilman TL, Andrews AM, 
Vrana KE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Human TPH2 (hTPH2) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in CNS serotonin 
biosynthesis. We characterized a single-nucleotide polymorphism (C2755A) in the 
hTPH2 gene that substitutes tyrosine for serine at position 41 in the regulatory 
domain of the enzyme. This polymorphism is associated with bipolar disorder and 
peripartum depression in a Chinese population. Recombinant h TPH2 human proteins 
were expressed in bacteria and also stably expressed in PC12 cells. Following 
bacterial expression and purification, the tyrosine for serine substitution at 
position 41 (S41Y) polymorphic enzyme displayed increased Vmax with unchanged Km 
values. By contrast, enzyme stability was decreased in vitro from 32 min to 4 
min (37 °C) for the S41Y enzyme (as compared to the wild-type enzyme). The S41Y 
polymorphism decreased cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A-mediated 
phosphorylation ~ 50% relative to wild-type hTPH2, suggesting that the S41Y 
mutation may disrupt the post-translational regulation of this enzyme. 
Transfected PC12 cells expressed hTPH2 mRNA, active protein, and synthesized and 
released serotonin. Paradoxically, while S41Y-transfected PC12 cells expressed 
higher levels of hTPH2 than wild type, they synthesized less serotonin. These 
findings suggest a modified regulation of the S41Y gene variant leading to 
altered regulation and reduced neurotransmitter synthesis that may contribute to 
association of the polymorphism with bipolar disorder and depression. We report 
the functional implications of a polymorphic human tryptophan hydroxylase-2 gene 
associated with depression and bipolar disorder. The polymorphic enzyme 
(serine-41 converted to tyrosine) has increased activity, but decreased enzyme 
stability and serotonin production. Moreover, cyclic AMP-dependent protein 
kinase (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of the mutant enzyme is decreased 
suggesting modified regulation of the S41Y variant leading to altered serotonin.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.12779
PMCID: PMC7336366
PMID: 24899127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]