1. Genes Nutr. 2014 Jul;9(4):412. doi: 10.1007/s12263-014-0412-8. Epub 2014 Jun
3.

Genetic predisposition scores for dyslipidaemia influence plasma lipid 
concentrations at baseline, but not the changes after controlled intake of n-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acids.

AlSaleh A(1), Maniou Z, Lewis FJ, Hall WL, Sanders TA, O'Dell SD.

Author information:
(1)Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division, School of Medicine, King's 
College London, Franklin-Wilkins Building, 150 Stamford Street, London, SE1 9NH, 
UK.

Inconsistent effects of fish oil supplementation on plasma lipids may be 
influenced by genetic variation. We investigated 12 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with dyslipidaemia in genome-wide association 
studies, in 310 participants randomised to treatment with placebo or 0.45, 0.9 
and 1.8 g/day eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5n-3, EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid 
(22:6n-3, DHA) (1.51:1) in a 12-month parallel controlled trial. Effects of risk 
alleles were assessed as trait-specific genetic predisposition scores (GPS) and 
singly. GPS were positively associated with baseline concentrations of plasma 
total cholesterol, low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol and triglyceride (TG) and 
negatively with high-density-lipoprotein cholesterol. The TG-GPS was associated 
with 0.210 mmol/L higher TG per risk allele (P < 0.0001), but no effects of 
single TG SNPs were significant at baseline. After treatment with EPA and DHA, 
TG-GPS was associated with 0.023 mmol/L lower TG per risk allele (P = 0.72). No 
interactions between GPS and treatment were significant; however, FADS1 SNP 
rs174546 C/T interaction with treatment was a significant determinant of plasma 
TG concentration (P = 0.047, n = 267). Concentration differed between genotype 
groups after the 1.8 g/day dose (P = 0.026), decreasing by 3.5 (95 % CI -15.1 to 
8.2) % in non-carriers of the risk T-allele (n = 30) and by 21.6 (95 % CI -32.1 
to -11.2) % in carriers (n = 37), who showed a highly significant difference 
between treatments (P = 0.007). Carriers of the FADS1 rs174546 risk allele could 
benefit from a high intake of EPA and DHA in normalising plasma TG.

DOI: 10.1007/s12263-014-0412-8
PMCID: PMC4169063
PMID: 24890013