1. Biochemistry. 2014 Jun 24;53(24):4004-14. doi: 10.1021/bi500072v. Epub 2014
Jun  13.

The ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, UbcM2, is restricted to monoubiquitylation by 
a two-fold mechanism that involves backside residues of E2 and Lys48 of 
ubiquitin.

Nguyen L(1), Plafker KS, Starnes A, Cook M, Klevit RE, Plafker SM.

Author information:
(1)Free Radical Biology and Aging Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation 
, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, United States.

Proteins can be modified on lysines (K) with a single ubiquitin (Ub) or with 
polymers of Ub (polyUb). These different configurations and their respective 
topologies are primary factors for determining whether substrates are targeted 
to the proteasome for degradation or directed to nonproteolytic outcomes. We 
report here on the intrinsic ubiquitylation properties of UbcM2 (UBE2E3/UbcH9), 
a conserved Ub-conjugating enzyme linked to cell proliferation, development, and 
the cellular antioxidant defense system. Using a fully recombinant 
ubiquitylation assay, we show that UbcM2 is severely limited in its ability to 
synthesize polyUb chains with wild-type Ub. Restriction to monoubiquitylation is 
governed by multiple residues on the backside of the enzyme, far removed from 
its active site, and by lysine 48 of Ub. UbcM2 with mutated backside residues 
can synthesize K63-linked polyUb chains and to a lesser extent K6- and 
K48-linked chains. Additionally, we identified a single residue on the backside 
of the enzyme that promotes monoubiquitylation. Together, these findings reveal 
that a combination of noncatalytic residues within the Ubc catalytic core domain 
of UbcM2 as well as a lysine(s) within Ub can relegate a Ub-conjugating enzyme 
to monoubiquitylate its cognate targets despite having the latent capacity to 
construct polyUb chains. The two-fold mechanism for restricting activity to 
monoubiquitylation provides added insurance that UbcM2 will not build polyUb 
chains on its substrates, even under conditions of high local Ub concentrations.

DOI: 10.1021/bi500072v
PMCID: PMC4072368
PMID: 24901938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]