1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Jul;21(7):609-16. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2839. Epub 2014 
Jun 8.

Nucleosome assembly is required for nuclear pore complex assembly in mouse 
zygotes.

Inoue A(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Program 
in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. [4] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(2)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Program 
in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Division of Hematology/Oncology, 
Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. [4] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA. [5] Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Packaging of DNA into nucleosomes not only helps to store genetic information 
but also creates diverse means for regulating DNA-templated processes. Attempts 
to reveal additional functions of the nucleosome have been unsuccessful, owing 
to cell lethality caused by nucleosome deletion. Taking advantage of the 
mammalian fertilization process, in which sperm DNA assembles into nucleosomes 
de novo, we generated nucleosome-depleted (ND) paternal pronuclei by depleting 
maternal histone H3.3 or its chaperone HIRA in mouse zygotes. We found that the 
ND pronucleus forms a nuclear envelope devoid of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). 
Loss of NPCs is accompanied by defective localization of ELYS, a nucleoporin 
essential for NPC assembly, to the nuclear rim. Interestingly, tethering ELYS to 
the nuclear rim of the ND nucleus rescues NPC assembly. Our study thus 
demonstrates that nucleosome assembly is a prerequisite for NPC assembly during 
paternal pronuclear formation.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2839
PMCID: PMC7700014
PMID: 24908396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]