1. BMC Med. 2014 Jun 5;12:94. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-12-94.

Do statins increase and Mediterranean diet decrease the risk of breast cancer?

de Lorgeril M(1), Salen P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire TIMC-IMAG, CNRS UMR 5525, PRETA Cœur & Nutrition, and Faculté de 
Médecine, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France. 
michel.delorgeril@ujf-grenoble.fr.

BACKGROUND: Physical exercise and healthy dietary habits are recommended to 
prevent breast cancer.
DISCUSSION: Increased intake of omega-3 fatty acids associated with decreased 
omega-6 - resulting in higher omega-3 to omega-6 ratio compared with 
Western-type diet - is inversely associated with breast cancer risk. The 
modernized Mediterranean diet with high omega-3 to omega-6 ratio, high fiber and 
polyphenol intake, and consumption of low-glycemic index foods reduces overall 
cancer risk and specifically breast cancer risk. It has been suggested that 
consuming no more than one alcoholic drink per day, preferably wine, is 
preferable. Eliminating environmental contaminants, including endocrine 
disruptors, and favoring organic foods to increase polyphenol intake and the 
omega-3 to omega-6 ratios were also shown to be beneficial. Cholesterol-lowering 
statins may decrease antitumor defenses; are toxic for the mitochondria; 
decrease the omega-3 to omega-6 ratio; increase body mass index, insulin 
resistance and diabetic risk; and have been associated with an increased breast 
cancer risk.
SUMMARY: Therefore, as well as making lifestyle changes to decrease breast 
cancer risk, we argue that physicians should carefully consider (and often 
avoid) therapies that may increase breast cancer or diabetes risk in high-risk 
women and women who wish to decrease their breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-12-94
PMCID: PMC4229881
PMID: 24903828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]