1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Dec;29(12):1996-2005. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12646.

Pretreatment prediction of the outcome of response-guided peginterferon-α and 
ribavirin therapy for chronic hepatitis C.

Masaki N(1), Sugiyama M, Shimada N, Tanaka Y, Nakamuta M, Izumi N, Watanabe S, 
Tsubota A, Komatsu M, Masaki T, Enomoto N, Yoneda M, Murata K, Ito K, Koike K, 
Mizokami M.

Author information:
(1)The Research Center for Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The accuracy for predicting virological outcomes of 
peginterferon-α and ribavirin therapy in patients with chronic hepatitis C is 
limited to approximately 80%, even with IL28B genotyping. Our in vitro study 
revealed that the numbers of (TA) dinucleotide repeats [(TA)n] of rs72258881, 
which is located in the promoter region of IL28B gene, might regulate IL28B 
transcription. We aimed to evaluate the usefulness of these host factors for 
predicting virological outcomes of this therapy in response-guided clinical 
settings.
METHODS: A nationwide, multi-center prospective study in Japan determined IL28B 
(rs8099917) genotype, (TA)n of rs72258881, and amino acid substitutions of 
hepatitis C virus and used these for multivariate analysis together with other 
parameters at pretreatment.
RESULTS: After enrolling 215 patients with genotype 1 and high viral load from 
23 hospitals between October 2009 and February 2011, intent-to-treat analysis 
identified 202 patients in whom the final virological outcomes could be 
determined. Non-virological response by non-TT genotype was predicted with 79.7% 
accuracy. When combined with the (TA)n, the incidences of virological response 
tended to be higher in the longer (TA)n group, regardless of rs8099917 genotype. 
Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that rs8099917 non-TT 
genotype (P < 0.001), shorter (TA)n (P = 0.011), mutation of amino acid 70 in 
the virus core region (P = 0.029), and lower levels of serum albumin (P = 0.036) 
were independently associated with non-virological response.
CONCLUSIONS: IL28B genotype and (TA)n of rs72258881 may independently affect 
virological outcomes of peginterferon-α and ribavirin as host factors, even in 
response-guided therapy.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology published by 
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing Asia 
Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.12646
PMCID: PMC4263356
PMID: 24910341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]