1. Mol Neurodegener. 2014 Jun 11;9:23. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-9-23.

Vacuolar protein sorting 35 (Vps35) rescues locomotor deficits and shortened 
lifespan in Drosophila expressing a Parkinson's disease mutant of Leucine-Rich 
Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2).

Linhart R, Wong SA, Cao J, Tran M, Huynh A, Ardrey C, Park JM, Hsu C, Taha S, 
Peterson R, Shea S, Kurian J, Venderova K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Thomas J, Long School of Pharmacy 
and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, 751 Brookside Rd, Stockton, CA 
95211, USA. kvenderova@pacific.edu.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common movement 
neurodegenerative movement disorder. An incomplete understanding of the 
molecular pathways involved in its pathogenesis impedes the development of 
effective disease-modifying treatments. To address this gap, we have previously 
generated a Drosophila model of PD that overexpresses PD pathogenic mutant form 
of the second most common causative gene of PD, Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 
(LRRK2).
FINDINGS: We employed this model in a genetic modifier screen and identified a 
gene that encodes for a core subunit of retromer - a complex essential for the 
sorting and recycling of specific cargo proteins from endosomes to the 
trans-Golgi network and cell surface. We present evidence that overexpression of 
the Vps35 or Vps26 component of the cargo-recognition subunit of the retromer 
complex ameliorates the pathogenic mutant LRRK2 eye phenotype. Furthermore, 
overexpression of Vps35 or Vps26 significantly protects from the locomotor 
deficits observed in mutant LRRK2 flies, as assessed by the negative geotaxis 
assay, and rescues their shortened lifespan. Strikingly, overexpressing Vps35 
alone protects from toxicity of rotenone, a neurotoxin commonly used to model 
parkinsonism, both in terms of lifespan and locomotor activity of the flies, and 
this protection is sustained and even augmented in the presence of mutant LRRK2. 
Finally, we demonstrate that knocking down expression of Vps35 in dopaminergic 
neurons causes a significant locomotor impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: From these results we conclude that LRRK2 plays a role in the 
retromer pathway and that this pathway is involved in PD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-9-23
PMCID: PMC4126812
PMID: 24915984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]