1. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jun 12;5(6):e1291. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.251.

Bcl-xL controls a switch between cell death modes during mitotic arrest.

Bah N(1), Maillet L(1), Ryan J(2), Dubreil S(1), Gautier F(3), Letai A(2), Juin 
P(4), Barillé-Nion S(1).

Author information:
(1)Team 8 'Cell survival and Tumor Escape in Breast Cancer', UMR 892 INSERM/6299 
CNRS/Université de Nantes, Institut de Recherche en Santé de l'Université de 
Nantes, 8 quai Moncousu, BP 70721, Nantes 1 44007, France.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 
02215, USA.
(3)1] Team 8 'Cell survival and Tumor Escape in Breast Cancer', UMR 892 
INSERM/6299 CNRS/Université de Nantes, Institut de Recherche en Santé de 
l'Université de Nantes, 8 quai Moncousu, BP 70721, Nantes 1 44007, France [2] 
Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest (ICO), Centre de Lutte contre le Cancer René 
Gauducheau, Boulevard Jacques Monod, Saint Herblain-Nantes 44805, France [3] 
Plateforme IMPACT Biogenouest, Institut de Recherche en Santé de l'Université de 
Nantes, 8 quai Moncousu, BP 70721, Nantes 1 44007, France.
(4)1] Team 8 'Cell survival and Tumor Escape in Breast Cancer', UMR 892 
INSERM/6299 CNRS/Université de Nantes, Institut de Recherche en Santé de 
l'Université de Nantes, 8 quai Moncousu, BP 70721, Nantes 1 44007, France [2] 
Institut de Cancérologie de l'Ouest (ICO), Centre de Lutte contre le Cancer René 
Gauducheau, Boulevard Jacques Monod, Saint Herblain-Nantes 44805, France.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Dis. 2014;5:e1429.

Antimitotic agents such as microtubule inhibitors (paclitaxel) are widely used 
in cancer therapy while new agents blocking mitosis onset are currently in 
development. All these agents impose a prolonged mitotic arrest in cancer cells 
that relies on sustained activation of the spindle assembly checkpoint and may 
lead to subsequent cell death by incompletely understood molecular events. We 
have investigated the role played by anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members in the 
fate of mitotically arrested mammary tumor cells treated with paclitaxel, or 
depleted in Cdc20, the activator of the anaphase promoting complex. Under these 
conditions, a weak and delayed mitotic cell death occurs that is caspase- and 
Bax/Bak-independent. Moreover, BH3 profiling assays indicate that viable cells 
during mitotic arrest are primed to die by apoptosis and that Bcl-xL is required 
to maintain mitochondrial integrity. Consistently, Bcl-xL depletion, or 
treatment with its inhibitor ABT-737 (but not with the specific Bcl-2 inhibitor 
ABT-199), during mitotic arrest converts cell response to antimitotics to 
efficient caspase and Bax-dependent apoptosis. Apoptotic priming under 
conditions of mitotic arrest relies, at least in part, on the phosphorylation on 
serine 62 of Bcl-xL, which modulates its interaction with Bax and its 
sensitivity to ABT-737. The phospho-mimetic S62D-Bcl-xL mutant is indeed less 
efficient than the corresponding phospho-deficient S62A-Bcl-xL mutant in 
sequestrating Bax and in protecting cancer cells from mitotic cell death or 
yeast cells from Bax-induced growth inhibition. Our results provide a rationale 
for combining Bcl-xL targeting to antimitotic agents to improve clinical 
efficacy of antimitotic strategy in cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.251
PMCID: PMC4611724
PMID: 24922075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]