1. Oncol Lett. 2014 Jun;7(6):1803-1811. doi: 10.3892/ol.2014.2029. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

SLC23A2-05 (rs4987219) and KRAS-LCS6 (rs61764370) polymorphisms in patients with 
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.

Santiago MB(1), DE Lima Marson FA(2), Secolin R(1), Ribeiro JD(3), Lima CS(4), 
Bertuzzo CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Pediatrics Research, CIPED, 
University of Campinas, University City Zeferino Vaz, Campinas, São Paulo 
13083-887, Brazil.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Pediatrics Research, CIPED, 
University of Campinas, University City Zeferino Vaz, Campinas, São Paulo 
13083-887, Brazil ; Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatrics Research, 
CIPED, University of Campinas, University City Zeferino Vaz, Campinas, São Paulo 
13083-887, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Pediatrics Research, CIPED, University 
of Campinas, University City Zeferino Vaz, Campinas, São Paulo 13083-887, 
Brazil.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Medical Sciences, University of Campinas, University City Zeferino Vaz, 
Campinas, São Paulo 13083-887, Brazil.

Cancer is a genetic disease that is highly influenced by environmental factors. 
To determine the risk factors of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, 
two polymorphisms, solute carrier family 23 member 2 (SLC23A2-05 [rs4987219]) 
and v-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS)-LCS6 
(rs61764370), and environmental factors, including smoking and alcohol 
consumption, were studied in a population. The present study included 165 males 
diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. The control group 
consisted of 230 healthy male subjects without cancer or a family history of 
cancer. The SLC23A2-05 and KRAS-LCS6 polymorphisms were analyzed by polymerase 
chain reaction followed by enzymatic digestion. All patients and healthy 
subjects were assessed with regard to their smoking habit and alcohol 
consumption as these are considered to be risk factors for cancer. The 
statistical analysis was performed using logistic regression, Fisher's exact and 
χ2 tests. Additional analyses were performed using the programs, multi-factor 
dimensionality reduction (MDR; version 2.0) and MDR permutation test (version 
0.4.7), which consider all variables as risk factors simultaneously. The results 
of the present study demonstrate that the SLC23A2-05 and KRAS-LCS6 polymorphisms 
are not a risk factor for squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. In the 
same samples, the association of alcohol consumption (P<0.001) and smoking habit 
(P<0.001) with cancer presence was positive when each variable was considered 
individually. Concerning the environmental factors, a positive association of 
smoking habit and alcohol consumption with cancer, although not with ethnicity 
(ratio, 1.0244; testing balance accuracy, 0.8733; P<0.001) was identified using 
the MDR tool, which analyzed the variables and polymorphism genotypes 
simultaneously. In conclusion, in the present study, squamous cell carcinoma of 
the head and neck was highly affected by environmental factors when compared 
with the affect of SLC23A2-05 and KRAS-LCS6 polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2029
PMCID: PMC4049758
PMID: 24932237