1. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jun 13;15(6):10724-37. doi: 10.3390/ijms150610724.

Weighted risk score-based multifactor dimensionality reduction to detect 
gene-gene interactions in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Li CF(1), Luo FT(2), Zeng YX(3), Jia WH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. zengyx@sysucc.org.cn.
(2)Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. luoft@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China. zengyx@sysucc.org.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China. jiaweih@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Determining the complex relationships between diseases, polymorphisms in human 
genes and environmental factors is challenging. Multifactor dimensionality 
reduction (MDR) has been proven to be capable of effectively detecting the 
statistical patterns of epistasis, although classification accuracy is required 
for this approach. The imbalanced dataset can cause seriously negative effects 
on classification accuracy. Moreover, MDR methods cannot quantitatively assess 
the disease risk of genotype combinations. Hence, we introduce a novel weighted 
risk score-based multifactor dimensionality reduction (WRSMDR) method that uses 
the Bayesian posterior probability of polymorphism combinations as a new 
quantitative measure of disease risk. First, we compared the WRSMDR to the MDR 
method in simulated datasets. Our results showed that the WRSMDR method had 
reasonable power to identify high-order gene-gene interactions, and it was more 
effective than MDR at detecting four-locus models. Moreover, WRSMDR reveals more 
information regarding the effect of genotype combination on the disease risk, 
and the result was easier to determine and apply than with MDR. Finally, we 
applied WRSMDR to a nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) case-control study and 
identified a statistically significant high-order interaction among three 
polymorphisms: rs2860580, rs11865086 and rs2305806.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms150610724
PMCID: PMC4100176
PMID: 24933637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]