1. Diabetes Educ. 2014 Sep-Oct;40(5):581-604. doi: 10.1177/0145721714540220. Epub
 2014 Jun 19.

Update on health literacy and diabetes.

Bailey SC(1), Brega AG(2), Crutchfield TM(3), Elasy T(4), Herr H(5), Kaphingst 
K(6), Karter AJ(7), Moreland-Russell S(5), Osborn CY(4), Pignone M(8), Rothman 
R(9), Schillinger D(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Outcomes and Policy, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA (Dr Bailey)
(2)Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health, Colorado School of 
Public Health, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA (Dr Brega)
(3)Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA (Ms Crutchfield)
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine and Public Health, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA (Drs Elasy, Osborn, and 
Rothman)
(5)Brown School of Social Work, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, 
USA (Ms Herr and Dr Moreland-Russell)
(6)Division of Public Health Sciences, Department of Surgery, School of 
Medicine, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA (Dr Kaphingst)
(7)Kaiser Permanente Division of Research, Oakland, CA, USA (Dr Karter)
(8)Division of General Internal Medicine and Clinical Epidemiology, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA (Dr Pignone)
(9)Vanderbilt Center for Health Services Research, Nashville, TN, USA (Dr 
Rothman)
(10)Division of General Internal Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco, and Center for Vulnerable Populations, San Francisco General 
Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA (Dr Schillinger)

PURPOSE: Inadequate literacy is common among patients with diabetes and may lead 
to adverse outcomes. The authors reviewed the relationship between literacy and 
health outcomes in patients with diabetes and potential interventions to improve 
outcomes.
METHODS: We reviewed 79 articles covering 3 key domains: (1) evaluation of 
screening tools to identify inadequate literacy and numeracy, (2) the 
relationships of a range of diabetes-related health outcomes with literacy and 
numeracy, and (3) interventions to reduce literacy-related differences in health 
outcomes.
RESULTS: Several screening tools are available to assess patients' print 
literacy and numeracy skills, some specifically addressing diabetes. Literacy 
and numeracy are consistently associated with diabetes-related knowledge. Some 
studies suggest literacy and numeracy are associated with intermediate outcomes, 
including self-efficacy, communication, and self-care (including adherence), but 
the relationship between literacy and glycemic control is mixed. Few studies 
have assessed more distal health outcomes, including diabetes-related 
complications, health care utilization, safety, or quality of life, but 
available studies suggest low literacy may be associated with increased risk of 
complications, including hypoglycemia. Several interventions appear to be 
effective in improving diabetes-related outcomes regardless of literacy status, 
but it is unclear if these interventions can reduce literacy-related differences 
in outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Low literacy is associated with less diabetes-related knowledge and 
may be related to other important health outcomes. Further studies are needed to 
better elucidate pathways by which literacy skills affect health outcomes. 
Promising interventions are available to improve diabetes outcomes for patients 
with low literacy; more research is needed to determine their effectiveness 
outside of research settings.

Â© 2014 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1177/0145721714540220
PMCID: PMC4174500
PMID: 24947871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]