1. Proteomics. 2014 Aug;14(16):1845-56. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400008. Epub 2014
Jul  16.

Extracellular vesicles shed from gefitinib-resistant nonsmall cell lung cancer 
regulate the tumor microenvironment.

Choi DY(1), You S, Jung JH, Lee JC, Rho JK, Lee KY, Freeman MR, Kim KP, Kim J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Chemistry, College of Applied Science, Kyung Hee 
University, Yongin, Republic of Korea.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), 
including gefitinib, are the first-line treatment of choice for nonsmall cell 
lung cancer patients who harbor activating EGFR mutations, however, acquired 
resistance to EGFR-TKIs is inevitable. The main objective of this study was to 
identify informative protein signatures of extracellular vesicles (EV) derived 
from gefitinib-resistant nonsmall cell lung cancer cells using proteomics 
analysis. Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis identified with high confidence (false 
discovery rate < 0.05, fold change ≥2) 664 EV proteins enriched in PC9R cells, 
which are resistant to gefitinib due to EGFR T790M mutation. Computational 
analyses suggested components of several signal transduction mechanisms 
including the AKT (also PKB, protein kinase B)/mTOR (mechanistic target of 
rapamycin) pathway are overrepresented in EV from PC9R cells. Treatment of 
recipient cells with EV harvested from PC9R cells increased phosphorylation of 
signaling molecules, and enhanced proliferation, invasion, and drug resistance 
to gefitinib-induced apoptosis. Dose- and time-dependent pharmaceutical 
inhibition of AKT/mTOR pathway overcame drug resistance of PC9R cells and those 
of H1975 exhibiting EGFR T790M mutation. Our findings provide new insight into 
an oncogenic EV protein signature regulating tumor microenvironment, and will 
aid in the development of novel diagnostic strategies for prediction and 
assessment of gefitinib resistance.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201400008
PMID: 24946052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]