1. J Cancer. 2014 May 31;5(6):480-90. doi: 10.7150/jca.8731. eCollection 2014.

Geldanamycin and Its Derivatives Inhibit the Growth of Myeloma Cells and Reduce 
the Expression of the MET Receptor.

Jurczyszyn A(1), Zebzda A(2), Czepiel J(3), Perucki W(4), Bazan-Socha S(5), 
Cibor D(3), Owczarek D(3), Majka M(2).

Author information:
(1)1. Department of Hematology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland.
(2)2. Department of Transplantology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland.
(3)3. Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(4)4. Students' Scientific Society, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 
Krakow, Poland.
(5)5. Second Department of Internal Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical 
College, Krakow, Poland.

Introduction. Geldanamycin (GA) is an ansamycin antibiotic that exhibits potent 
anti-neoplastic properties. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of GA 
and its derivatives on the growth and invasiveness of myeloma cell lines and 
CD138+ cells derived from the bone marrow of patients with multiple myeloma. 
Materials and methods. We evaluated cell proliferation, survival, apoptosis, 
cell cycle of myeloma cells, and the expression of cell surface proteins after 
incubation with geldanamycin or its derivatives. Results. GA and its analogs 
have an effect on myeloma cells by inhibiting their growth in a time and 
dose-dependent manner. Myeloma cell lines demonstrated decreased proliferation 
after incubation with 10 nM of GA or 100 nM GA analogs. The first significant 
effects of GA on U266 cells was observed after 24 hours. After 24 hours, U266 
cells incubated with 100 nM GA were in both early and late stages of apoptosis; 
17AEP and 17DMAG caused apoptosis of similar intensity to GA. It has been 
observed that GA and its derivatives cause caspase-3 activation. Analysis of the 
activity of AKT and MAP 42/44 kinases was performed by incubating U266 cells for 
24 and 48 hours in100 nM of GA and its derivatives. After 24 hours incubation, 
no significant changes in protein expression were observed, while after 48 
hours, the strongest changes were seen in AKT protein expression after 
incubation with GA and 17AEP-GA. In studies of the cell cycle, it was found that 
100 nM 17AEP-GA and 17-DMAP-GA cause cell cycle abnormalities. We observed a 
nearly two-fold increase in U266 cells in the G1 phase and a simultaneous 
decrease in the percentage of cells in the G2/M phase, indicating that cells 
were halted in the G1 phase. In the case of the INA6 cells, proliferation was 
halted in both the G1 and G2/M phases. Conclusions. GA and the analogues that we 
tested can inhibit myeloma cell growth by induction of apoptosis and blockage of 
cell cycle progression, and have an effect on the down-regulation of the MET 
receptor. The GA derivatives tested, despite their modifications still retain 
strong anticancer properties. Specifically, two analogues of GA, 17AEP-GA and 
17DMAG due to their properties can be more effective and safer chemotherapeutic 
agents than 17AAG, which is currently used and described in literature.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.8731
PMCID: PMC4066360
PMID: 24959301

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.