1. Eukaryot Cell. 2014 Aug;13(8):1077-84. doi: 10.1128/EC.00138-14. Epub 2014 Jun
 20.

Membrane fluidity and temperature sensing are coupled via circuitry comprised of 
Ole1, Rsp5, and Hsf1 in Candida albicans.

Leach MD(1), Cowen LE(2).

Author information:
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom Department 
of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada leah.cowen@utoronto.ca.

Temperature is a ubiquitous environmental variable which can profoundly 
influence the physiology of living cells as it changes over time and space. When 
yeast cells are exposed to a sublethal heat shock, normal metabolic functions 
become repressed and the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is activated, 
inducing heat shock proteins (HSPs). Candida albicans, the most prevalent human 
fungal pathogen, is an opportunistic pathogen that has evolved as a relatively 
harmless commensal of healthy individuals. Even though C. albicans occupies 
thermally buffered niches, it has retained the classic heat shock response, 
activating Hsf1 during slow thermal transitions such as the increases in 
temperature suffered by febrile patients. However, the mechanism of temperature 
sensing in fungal pathogens remains enigmatic. A few studies with Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae suggest that thermal stress is transduced into a cellular signal at 
the level of the membrane. In this study, we manipulated the fluidity of C. 
albicans membrane to dissect mechanisms of temperature sensing. We determined 
that in response to elevated temperature, levels of OLE1, encoding a fatty acid 
desaturase, decrease. Subsequently, loss of OLE1 triggers expression of FAS2, 
encoding a fatty acid synthase. Furthermore, depletion of OLE1 prevents full 
activation of Hsf1, thereby reducing HSP expression in response to heat shock. 
This reduction in Hsf1 activation is attributable to the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
Rsp5, which regulates OLE1 expression. To our knowledge, this is the first study 
to define a molecular link between fatty acid synthesis and the heat shock 
response in the fungal kingdom.

Copyright Â© 2014 Leach and Cowen.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.00138-14
PMCID: PMC4135801
PMID: 24951438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]