1. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Aug 15;25(16):2365-74. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-01-0690. Epub 
2014 Jun 25.

E-cadherin phosphorylation occurs during its biosynthesis to promote its cell 
surface stability and adhesion.

McEwen AE(1), Maher MT(1), Mo R(2), Gottardi CJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611Driskill Graduate Training Program in Life Sciences, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611.
(2)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611Molecular Oncology Group, Kadmon Research Institute, New York, 
NY 10016.
(3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL 60611 c-gottardi@northwestern.edu.

E-cadherin is highly phosphorylated within its β-catenin-binding region, and 
this phosphorylation increases its affinity for β-catenin in vitro. However, the 
identification of key serines responsible for most cadherin phosphorylation and 
the adhesive consequences of modification at such serines have remained unknown. 
In this study, we show that as few as three serines in the β-catenin-binding 
domain of E-cadherin are responsible for most radioactive phosphate 
incorporation. These serines are required for binding to β-catenin and the 
mutual stability of both E-cadherin and β-catenin. Cells expressing a 
phosphodeficient (3S>A) E-cadherin exhibit minimal cell-cell adhesion due to 
enhanced endocytosis and degradation through a lysosomal compartment. 
Conversely, negative charge substitution at these serines (3S>D) antagonizes 
cadherin endocytosis and restores wild-type levels of adhesion. The cadherin 
kinase is membrane proximal and modifies the cadherin before it reaches the cell 
surface. Together these data suggest that E-cadherin phosphorylation is largely 
constitutive and integral to cadherin-catenin complex formation, surface 
stability, and function.

© 2014 McEwen, Maher, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication 
it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-01-0690
PMCID: PMC4142610
PMID: 24966173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]