1. Anal Chem. 2014 Aug 5;86(15):7674-80. doi: 10.1021/ac5015645. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Measuring localized redox enzyme electron transfer in a live cell with 
conducting atomic force microscopy.

Alfonta L(1), Meckes B, Amir L, Schlesinger O, Ramachandran S, Lal R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, â€¡Ilse Katz Institute for Nanoscale Science and 
Technology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev , P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva, 
84105, Israel.

Bacterial systems are being extensively studied and modified for energy, 
sensors, and industrial chemistry; yet, their molecular scale structure and 
activity are poorly understood. Designing efficient bioengineered bacteria 
requires cellular understanding of enzyme expression and activity. An atomic 
force microscope (AFM) was modified to detect and analyze the activity of redox 
active enzymes expressed on the surface of E. coli. An insulated gold-coated 
metal microwire with only the tip conducting was used as an AFM cantilever and a 
working electrode in a three-electrode electrochemical cell. Bacteria were 
engineered such that alcohol dehydrogenase II (ADHII) was surface displayed. A 
quinone, an electron transfer mediator, was covalently attached site 
specifically to the displayed ADHII. The AFM probe was used to lift a single 
bacterium off the surface for electrochemical analysis in a redox-free buffer. 
An electrochemical comparison between two quinone containing mutants with 
different distances from the NAD(+) binding site in alcohol dehydrogenase II was 
performed. Electron transfer in redox active proteins showed increased 
efficiency when mediators are present closer to the NAD(+) binding site. This 
study suggests that an integrated conducting AFM used for single cell 
electrochemical analysis would allow detailed understanding of enzyme electron 
transfer processes to electrodes, the processes integral to creating efficiently 
engineered biosensors and biofuel cells.

DOI: 10.1021/ac5015645
PMCID: PMC4215851
PMID: 24979064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]