1. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Oct;94(1):56-69. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12688. Epub 2014 Jul 13.

Slow growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis at acidic pH is regulated by phoPR and 
host-associated carbon sources.

Baker JJ(1), Johnson BK, Abramovitch RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.

During pathogenesis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) colonizes environments, 
such as the macrophage or necrotic granuloma, that are acidic and rich in 
cholesterol and fatty acids. The goal of this study was to examine how acidic pH 
and available carbon sources interact to regulate Mtb physiology. Here we report 
that Mtb growth at acidic pH requires host-associated carbon sources that 
function at the intersection of glycolysis and the TCA cycle, such as pyruvate, 
acetate, oxaloacetate and cholesterol. In contrast, in other tested carbon 
sources, Mtb fully arrests its growth at acidic pH and establishes a state of 
non-replicating persistence. Growth-arrested Mtb is resuscitated by the addition 
of pyruvate suggesting that growth arrest is due to a pH-dependent checkpoint on 
metabolism. Additionally, we demonstrate that the phoPR two-component regulatory 
system is required to slow Mtb growth at acidic pH and functions to maintain 
redox homeostasis. Transcriptional profiling and functional metabolic studies 
demonstrate that signals from acidic pH and carbon source are integrated to 
remodel pathways associated with anaplerotic central metabolism, lipid anabolism 
and the regeneration of oxidized cofactors. Because phoPR is required for Mtb 
virulence in animals, we suggest that pH-driven adaptation may be critical to 
Mtb pathogenesis.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12688
PMCID: PMC4177513
PMID: 24975990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]