1. Virology. 2014 Aug;462-463:98-106. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.05.034. Epub 2014
 Jun 25.

The presence of glutamine at position 315 but not epitope masking predominantly 
hinders HIV subtype C neutralization by the anti-V3 antibody B4e8.

Manhas S(1), Chau D(1), Rempel C(1), Clark BE(1), Auyeung K(1), Pantophlet R(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, 
Burnaby, Canada V5A 1S6.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, British Columbia, 
Burnaby, Canada V5A 1S6; Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon 
Fraser University, British Columbia, Burnaby, Canada V5A 1S6. Electronic 
address: rpantophlet@sfu.ca.

Antibody B4e8 exhibits modest cross-neutralizing activity, with preference for 
HIV subtype B. This preference might be explained by B4e8׳s extensive 
interaction with Arg315, which occurs at the center of most subtype B V3 
sequences but is replaced by Gln in subtype C. The extent to which B4e8׳s 
ability to neutralize subtype C strains is hindered by Gln315 and/or other 
factors, e.g. epitope masking, is unclear. We confirmed here that an 
Arg315-to-Gln substitution in a subtype B virus abrogates B4e8 neutralizing 
activity. Conversely, B4e8-resistant subtype C viruses were rendered sensitive 
upon Gln 315-to-Arg substitution. V2 region swapping between B4e8-sensitive and- 
resistant subtype C strains revealed a role for V2 in limiting B4e8 access, but 
this was less significant than the absence of Arg315. Our findings, while 
illustrating the importance of Arg315 for B4e8, suggest that some subtype C 
strains may be vulnerable to B4e8 derivatives capable of binding stronger to 
Gln315-containing sequences.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.05.034
PMCID: PMC4125615
PMID: 24971702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]