1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 30;9(6):e101056. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101056. 
eCollection 2014.

HIV-1 and its gp120 inhibits the influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 life cycle in an 
IFITM3-dependent fashion.

Mesquita M(1), Fintelman-Rodrigues N(1), Sacramento CQ(1), Abrantes JL(1), Costa 
E(1), Temerozo JR(2), Siqueira MM(1), Bou-Habib DC(2), Souza TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Respiratory Viruses Laboratory, WHO/NIC, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Fiocruz, Rio 
de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory on Thymus Research, Oswaldo Cruz Institute/Fiocruz, Rio de 
Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

HIV-1-infected patients co-infected with A(H1N1)pdm09 surprisingly presented 
benign clinical outcome. The knowledge that HIV-1 changes the host homeostatic 
equilibrium, which may favor the patient resistance to some co-pathogens, 
prompted us to investigate whether HIV-1 infection could influence A(H1N1)pdm09 
life cycle in vitro. We show here that exposure of A(H1N1)pdm09-infected 
epithelial cells to HIV-1 viral particles or its gp120 enhanced by 25% the 
IFITM3 content, resulting in a decrease in influenza replication. This event was 
dependent on toll-like receptor 2 and 4. Moreover, knockdown of IFITM3 prevented 
HIV-1 ability to inhibit A(H1N1)pdm09 replication. HIV-1 infection also 
increased IFITM3 levels in human primary macrophages by almost 100%. 
Consequently, the arrival of influenza ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) to nucleus of 
macrophages was inhibited, as evaluated by different approaches. Reduction of 
influenza RNPs entry into the nucleus tolled A(H1N1)pdm09 life cycle in 
macrophages earlier than usual, limiting influenza's ability to induce TNF-Î±. As 
judged by analysis of the influenza hemagglutin (HA) gene from in vitro 
experiments and from samples of HIV-1/A(H1N1)pdm09 co-infected individuals, the 
HIV-1-induced reduction of influenza replication resulted in delayed viral 
evolution. Our results may provide insights on the mechanisms that may have 
attenuated the clinical course of Influenza in HIV-1/A(H1N1)pdm09 co-infected 
patients during the recent influenza form 2009/2010.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101056
PMCID: PMC4076258
PMID: 24978204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.