1. Eur J Med Chem. 2014 Dec 17;88:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.06.040. Epub 
2014 Jun 19.

Redox-based probes as tools to monitor oxidized protein tyrosine phosphatases in 
living cells.

Garcia FJ(1), Carroll KS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way, 
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way, 
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. Electronic address: KCarroll@scripps.edu.

Reversible oxidation of protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) has emerged as an 
important regulatory mechanism whereby reactive oxygen species (ROS) inactivates 
the PTP and promotes phosphorylation and induction of the signaling cascade. The 
lack of sensitive and robust methods to directly detect oxidized PTPs has made 
it difficult to understand the effects that PTP oxidative inactivation play in 
redox signaling. We report the use of redox-based probes to directly detect 
oxidized PTPs in a cellular context, which highlights the importance of direct 
approaches to assist in the study of physiological and pathophysiological PTP 
activity in redox regulation. We also demonstrate, as a proof-of-concept, that 
these redox-based probes serve as prototypes for the design and development of a 
new class of inhibitors for phosphatases. We envision a nucleophile reacting 
with the oxidized inactive catalytic cysteine to generate an irreversible 
thioether adduct which prevents the phosphatase from being reactivated and 
ultimately fortifies the signaling cascade. Our results reveal the potential of 
translation of our redox-based probes, which are used to understand redox cell 
circuitry and disease biology, to small-molecule nucleophile-based inhibitors, 
which may treat diseases associated with redox stress. This may have 
implications in the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cancer.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.06.040
PMCID: PMC4254195
PMID: 24974258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]