1. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 30;5:4209. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5209.

Differentiation-dependent requirement of Tsix long non-coding RNA in imprinted 
X-chromosome inactivation.

Maclary E(1), Buttigieg E(1), Hinten M(1), Gayen S(1), Harris C(1), Sarkar 
MK(1), Purushothaman S(2), Kalantry S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.
(2)Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, North 
Carolina 27834, USA.

Imprinted X-inactivation is a paradigm of mammalian transgenerational epigenetic 
regulation resulting in silencing of genes on the paternally inherited 
X-chromosome. The preprogrammed fate of the X-chromosomes is thought to be 
controlled in cis by the parent-of-origin-specific expression of two opposing 
long non-coding RNAs, Tsix and Xist, in mice. Exclusive expression of Tsix from 
the maternal-X has implicated it as the instrument through which the maternal 
germline prevents inactivation of the maternal-X in the offspring. Here, we show 
that Tsix is dispensable for inhibiting Xist and X-inactivation in the early 
embryo and in cultured stem cells of extra-embryonic lineages. Tsix is instead 
required to prevent Xist expression as trophectodermal progenitor cells 
differentiate. Despite induction of wild-type Xist RNA and accumulation of 
histone H3-K27me3, many Tsix-mutant X-chromosomes fail to undergo ectopic 
X-inactivation. We propose a novel model of lncRNA function in imprinted 
X-inactivation that may also apply to other genomically imprinted loci.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5209
PMCID: PMC4086345
PMID: 24979243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.