1. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Jul 1;4(9):1657-65. doi: 10.1534/g3.114.012914.

Parallel genome-wide fixation of ancestral alleles in partially outcrossing 
experimental populations of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Chandler CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY Oswego, Oswego, New York 13126 
christopher.chandler@oswego.edu.

Experimental evolution studies, coupled with new advances in DNA sequencing 
technology, have become a powerful tool for exploring how populations respond to 
selection at the genomic level. Recent experiments in microbes typically have 
found evidence for multiple novel mutations, which are usually fixed. In 
contrast, in animal model systems, evolutionary responses seem to involve more 
modest changes in the frequencies of pre-existing alleles, probably because 
these populations outcross and are usually initialized with greater levels of 
standing variation. In this experiment, I used whole-genome resequencing to 
estimate allele frequencies and look for novel substitutions in experimentally 
evolved populations of Caenorhabditis elegans. These populations were founded 
with a fixed pair of deleterious mutations introgressed into multiple wild 
genetic backgrounds and allowed to evolve for 50 generations with a mixed mating 
system. There is evidence for some recombination between ancestral haplotypes, 
but selective sweeps seem to have resulted in the fixation of large chromosomal 
segments throughout most of the genome. In addition, a few new mutations were 
detected. Simulations suggest that strong selection and low outcrossing rates 
are likely explanations for the observed outcomes, consistent with earlier work 
showing large fitness increases in these populations over 50 generations. These 
results also show clear parallels to population genetic patterns in C. elegans 
in nature: recent selective sweeps, high linkage disequilibrium, and low 
effective recombination rates. Thus, the genomic consequences of selection 
depend heavily on the biology of the organism in question, including its mating 
system and levels of genetic variation.

Copyright Â© 2014 Chandler.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.114.012914
PMCID: PMC4169157
PMID: 24989146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]