1. Biochemistry. 2014 Jul 22;53(28):4739-53. doi: 10.1021/bi500650h. Epub 2014
Jul  10.

Biosynthesis of a central intermediate in hydrogen sulfide metabolism by a novel 
human sulfurtransferase and its yeast ortholog.

Melideo SL(1), Jackson MR, Jorns MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College 
of Medicine , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, United States.

Human sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase (SQOR) catalyzes the conversion of H2S to 
thiosulfate, the first step in mammalian H2S metabolism. SQOR's inability to 
produce the glutathione persulfide (GSS(-)) substrate for sulfur dioxygenase 
(SDO) suggested that a thiosulfate:glutathione sulfurtransferase (TST) was 
required to provide the missing link between the SQOR and SDO reactions. 
Although TST could be purified from yeast, attempts to isolate the mammalian 
enzyme were not successful. We used bioinformatic approaches to identify genes 
likely to encode human TST (TSTD1) and its yeast ortholog (RDL1). Recombinant 
TSTD1 and RDL1 catalyze a predicted thiosulfate-dependent conversion of 
glutathione to GSS(-). Both enzymes contain a rhodanese homology domain and a 
single catalytically essential cysteine, which is converted to cysteine 
persulfide upon reaction with thiosulfate. GSS(-) is a potent inhibitor of TSTD1 
and RDL1, as judged by initial rate accelerations and â‰¥25-fold lower Km values 
for glutathione observed in the presence of SDO. The combined action of GSS(-) 
and SDO is likely to regulate the biosynthesis of the reactive metabolite. SDO 
drives to completion p-toluenethiosulfonate:glutathione sulfurtransferase 
reactions catalyzed by TSTD1 and RDL1. The thermodynamic coupling of the 
irreversible SDO and reversible TST reactions provides a model for the 
physiologically relevant reaction with thiosulfate as the sulfane donor. The 
discovery of bacterial Rosetta Stone proteins that comprise fusions of SDO and 
TSTD1 provides phylogenetic evidence of the association of these enzymes. The 
presence of adjacent bacterial genes encoding SDO-TSTD1 fusion proteins and 
human-like SQORs suggests these prokaryotes and mammals exhibit strikingly 
similar pathways for H2S metabolism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi500650h
PMCID: PMC4108183
PMID: 24981631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]