1. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jul 5;13:165. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-165.

HMGB1-mediated autophagy promotes docetaxel resistance in human lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Pan B, Chen D, Huang J, Wang R, Feng B, Song H(1), Chen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing 210002, P,R, China. songhaizhu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Docetaxel resistance remains a major obstacle in the treatment of 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) has been 
shown to promote autophagy protection in response to antitumor therapy, but the 
exact molecular mechanism underlying HMGB1-mediated autophagy has not been 
clearly defined.
METHODS: Lung adenocarcinoma (LAD) cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1-HMGB1 or 
HMGB1 shRNA, followed by docetaxel treatment. Cell viability and proliferation 
were tested by MTT assay and colony formation assay, respectively. Annexin V 
flow cytometric analysis and western blot analysis of activated caspase3 and 
cleaved PARP were used to evaluate apoptosis, while immunofluorescence 
microscopy and transmission electron microscopy were applied to assess autophagy 
activity. The formation of the Beclin-1-PI3K-III complex was examined by 
immunoprecipitation analysis. NOD/SCID mice were inoculated with 
docetaxel-resistant SPC-A1/DTX cells transfected with control or HMGB1 shRNA.
RESULTS: HMGB1 translocated from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in LAD cells 
exposed to docetaxel and acted as a positive regulator of autophagy, which 
inhibited apoptosis and increased drug resistance. Suppression of HMGB1 restored 
the sensitivity of LAD cells to docetaxel both in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistic 
investigation revealed that HMGB1 promoted the formation of the 
Beclin-1-PI3K-III complex through activating the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MEK)-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathway, 
thereby regulating autophagosome formation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that HMGB1-regulated autophagy is a 
significant contributor to docetaxel resistance in LAD cells. Suppression of 
HMGB1 or limiting HMGB1 cytosolic translocation diminished autophagic protection 
in response to docetaxel in LAD cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-165
PMCID: PMC4125709
PMID: 24996221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]