1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Jun 19;6:129. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00129. 
eCollection 2014.

Loss of UCHL1 promotes age-related degenerative changes in the enteric nervous 
system.

Coulombe J(1), Gamage P(2), Gray MT(1), Zhang M(1), Tang MY(1), Woulfe J(1), 
Saffrey MJ(2), Gray DA(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute Ottawa, 
ON, Canada.
(2)Biomedical Research Network, Department of Life, Health and Chemical 
Sciences, Open University Milton Keynes, UK.
(3)Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute Ottawa, 
ON, Canada ; Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, 
University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada.

UCHL1 (ubiquitin carboxyterminal hydrolase 1) is a deubiquitinating enzyme that 
is particularly abundant in neurons. From studies of a spontaneous mutation 
arising in a mouse line it is clear that loss of function of UCHL1 generates 
profound degenerative changes in the central nervous system, and it is likely 
that a proteolytic deficit contributes to the pathology. Here these effects were 
found to be recapitulated in mice in which the Uchl1 gene had been inactivated 
by homologous recombination. In addition to the previously documented 
neuropathology associated with loss of UCHL1 function, axonal swellings were 
detected in the striatum. In agreement with previously reported findings the 
loss of UCHL1 function was accompanied by perturbations in ubiquitin pools, but 
glutathione levels were also significantly depleted in the brains of the 
knockout mice, suggesting that oxidative defense mechanisms may be doubly 
compromised. To determine if, in addition to its role in the central nervous 
system, UCHL1 function is also required for homeostasis of the enteric nervous 
system the gastrointestinal tract was analyzed in UCHL1 knockout mice. The mice 
displayed functional changes and morphological changes in gut neurons that 
preceded degenerative changes in the brain. The changes were qualitatively and 
quantitatively similar to those observed in wild type mice of much greater age, 
and strongly resemble changes reported for elderly humans. UCHL1 knockout mice 
should therefore serve as a useful model of gut aging.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00129
PMCID: PMC4063237
PMID: 24994982