1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e101884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101884. 
eCollection 2014.

The Ser/Thr phosphatase PP2A regulatory subunit widerborst inhibits notch 
signaling.

Bose A(1), Majot AT(1), Bidwai AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, 
United States of America.

Drosophila Enhancer of split M8, an effector of Notch signaling, is regulated by 
protein kinase CK2. The phosphatase PP2A is thought to play an opposing 
(inhibitory) role, but the identity of the regulatory subunit was unknown. The 
studies described here reveal a role for the PP2A regulatory subunit widerborst 
(wdb) in three developmental contexts; the bristle, wing and the R8 
photoreceptors of the eye. wdb overexpression elicits bristle and wing defects 
akin to reduced Notch signaling, whereas hypomorphic mutations in this PP2A 
subunit elicit opposite effects. We have also evaluated wdb functions using 
mutations in Notch and E(spl) that affect the eye. We find that the eye and R8 
defects of the well-known Nspl mutation are enhanced by a hypomorphic allele of 
wdb, whereas they are strongly rescued by wdb overexpression. Similarly, ectopic 
wdb rescues the eye and R8 defects of the E(spl)D mutation, which affects the m8 
gene. In addition, wdb overexpression also rescues the bristle defects of 
ectopically expressed M8, or the eye and R8 defects of its CK2 phosphomimetic 
variant M8-S159D. The latter finding suggests that PP2A may target M8 at highly 
conserved residues in the vicinity of the CK2 site, whose phosphorylation 
controls repression of Atonal and the R8 fate. Together, the studies identify 
PP2A-Wdb as a participant in Notch signaling, and suggest that M8 activity is 
controlled by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. The conservation of the 
phosphorylation sites between Drosophila E(spl) and the HES/HER proteins from 
mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds and fish raises the prospect that this mode 
of regulation is widespread.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101884
PMCID: PMC4090204
PMID: 25006677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.