1. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec;70(3):1647-53. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0108-0.

Molecular epidemiologic correlation analysis between caspase3 gene polymorphism 
and gastric cancer susceptibility.

Li B(1), Liu H, Gong F, Sun P, Yan Y, Jia B.

Author information:
(1)Surgical Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 
100853, People's Republic of China.

The objective was to analyze the relation between gastric cancer susceptibility 
and gene polymorphism, providing a reference for epidemiologic research of 
gastric cancer etiology. Two hundred and eighty gastric cancer cases were 
selected, and 280 healthy cases with the same gender, age (Â± 5), and residence 
place were selected as control group, with proportion of 1:1. Tag single 
nucleotide polymorphism was used for screening polymorphism of caspase3, which 
was combined with logistic regression model and multi-point joint analysis to 
analyze relation between different genotypes and gastric susceptibility. In 
analysis of gene polymorphism of caspase3 intrinsic apoptotic pathway and 
gastric cancer susceptibility, polymorphism of CASP3 rs4647693, CASP3 rs12108497 
and CASP3 rs4647610 increased gastric cancer risk (rs4647693: ORGA 1.61, 95 % CI 
1.06-2.28; rs12108497: ORTC 1.55, 95 % CI 1.09-2.18; ORCC 2.45, 95 % CI 
1.08-4.16; rs4647610: ORAG 1.71, 95 % CI 1.14-2.31; ORGG 1.60, 95 % CI 
1.23-2.34). Gastric cancer risk of haplotype AGGC carrier was significantly 
higher than that of haplotype GGAT as control (OR 1.44, 95 % CI 1.07-2.19). Gene 
polymorphism and haplotype of caspase3 can increase gastric cancer risk. 
However, it still needs to be verified by a large-sample and multicenter 
epidemiologic research.

DOI: 10.1007/s12013-014-0108-0
PMID: 25002346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]