1. Oncol Lett. 2014 Aug;8(2):679-682. doi: 10.3892/ol.2014.2178. Epub 2014 May
26.

Role of PTCH1 gene methylation in gastric carcinogenesis.

Zuo Y(1), Song Y(1), Zhang M(1), Xu Z(1), Qian X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Hospital of Zhangjiagang, Zhangjiagang, 
Jiangsu 215600, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the role of PTCH1 methylation in gastric 
carcinogenesis and the therapeutic effect of the methylation inhibitor, 
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), in the treatment of gastric cancer. Total RNA 
was extracted from 20 gastric cancer tissues, their corresponding adjacent 
normal tissues and a gastric cancer AGS cell line. PTCH1 mRNA expression was 
detected by quantitative PCR, and the PTCH1 methylation of the promoter was 
examined by methylation-specific PCR. The AGS cells were treated with 5-Aza-dC; 
apoptosis and the cell cycle were examined by flow cytometry, and the PTCH1 
methylation level was observed. PTCH1 expression was negatively correlated with 
promoter methylation in the gastric cancer tissues, their corresponding adjacent 
normal tissues and the gastric cancer AGS cell line (r=-0.591, P=0.006). 
5-Aza-dC treatment caused apoptosis and the G0/G1 phase arrest of the AGS cells, 
and also induced the demethylation and increased expression of PTCH1. In 
conclusion, the study found that the hypermethylation of the PTCH1 gene promoter 
region is one of the main causes of low PTCH1 expression in AGS cells. 
Demethylation agent 5-Aza-dC can reverse the methylation status of PTCH1 and 
regulate the expression of PTCH1, indicating its potential role in gastric 
cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2014.2178
PMCID: PMC4081386
PMID: 25013484