1. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Sep;34(3):715-24. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1843. Epub 2014
Jul  9.

Comprehensive identification of essential pathways and transcription factors 
related to epilepsy by gene set enrichment analysis on microarray datasets.

He K(1), Xiao W(2), Lv W(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Stem Cell and Translational Medicine, School of Life Sciences, 
Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui 230601, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Pudong Hospital, Fudan University Pudong 
Medical Center, Pudong, Shanghai 201399, P.R. China.

Epilepsy is a common chronic neurological disorder characterized by seizures or 
convulsions, and is known to affect patients with primary brain tumors. The 
etiology of epilepsy is superficially thought to be multifactorial; however, the 
genetic factors which may be involved in the pathogenesis of seizures have not 
yet been elucidated, particularly at the pathway level. In the present study, in 
order to systematically investigate the gene regulatory networks involved in 
epilepsy, we employed a microarray dataset from the public database library of 
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) associated with tumor-induced epileptogenesis and 
applied gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on these data sets and performed 
candidate transcription factor (TF) selection. As a result, 68 upregulated 
pathways, including the extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction 
(P=0.004) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling 
pathways (P=0.045), as well as 4 downregulated pathways, including the GnRH 
signaling pathway (P=0.029) and gap junction (P=0.034) were identified as 
epileptogenesis-related pathways. The majority of these pathways identified have 
been previously reported and our results were in accordance with those reports. 
However, some of these pathways identified were novel. Finally, co-expression 
networks of the related pathways were constructed with the significant core 
genes and TFs, such as PPAR-γ and phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein. The 
results of our study may contribute to the improved understanding of the 
molecular mechanisms of epileptogenesis on a genome-wide level.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1843
PMCID: PMC4121356
PMID: 25016997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]