1. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 30;5(14):5494-509. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2131.

A nucleolin-DNMT1 regulatory axis in acute myeloid leukemogenesis.

Shen N(1), Yan F(1), Pang J(1), Wu LC(2), Al-Kali A(3), Litzow MR(3), Liu S(1).

Author information:
(1)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH.
(3)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

Nucleolin overexpression and DNA hypermethylation have been implicated in cancer 
pathogenesis, but whether and how these aberrations cooperate in controlling 
leukemia cell fate remains elusive. Here, we provide the first mechanistic 
insights into the role of nucleolin in leukemogenesis through creating a DNA 
hypermethylation profile in leukemia cells. We found that, in leukemia patients, 
nucleolin levels are significantly elevated and nucleolin overexpression 
strongly associates with DNMT upregulation and shorter survival. Enforced 
nucleolin expression augmented leukemia cell proliferation, whereas nucleolin 
dysfunction by RNA interference and inhibitory molecule AS1411 blocked leukemia 
cell clonogenic potential in vitro and impaired tumorigenesis in vivo. 
Mechanistic investigations showed that nucleolin directly activates NFκB 
signaling, and NFκB activates its downstream effector, DNA methylation 
machinery. Indeed, nucleolin overexpression increased NFκB phosphorylation and 
upregulated DNMT1 that is followed by DNA demethylation; by contrast, nucleolin 
dysfunction dephosphorylated NFκB and abrogated DNMT1 expression, which resulted 
in decreased global DNA methylation, restored p15INK4B expression and DNA 
hypomethylation on p15INK4B promoter. Notably, NFκB inactivation diminished, 
whereas NFκB overexpression enhanced DNMT1 promoter activity and endogenous 
DNMT1 expression. Collectively, our studies identify nucleolin as an 
unconventional epigenetic regulator in leukemia cells and demonstrate 
nucleolin-NFκB-DNMT1 axis as a new molecular pathway underlying AML 
leukemogenesis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2131
PMCID: PMC4170608
PMID: 25015109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state no conflict of interest.