1. Horm Metab Res. 2015 Jun;47(6):433-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1383651. Epub 2014
Jul  10.

Increased protein and mRNA expression of resistin after dexamethasone 
administration.

Sasayama D(1), Hori H(1), Nakamura S(2), Yamamoto N(1), Hattori K(1), Teraishi 
T(1), Ota M(1), Kunugi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1, Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, 
Japan.
(2)DNA Chip Research Inc., Yokohama, Japan.

Synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone are widely used to treat a 
variety of inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, but they may induce adverse 
events including hyperglycemia. To shed light on the effect and action mechanism 
of dexamethasone, we examined the alterations of gene expression levels caused 
by dexamethasone.Microarray analysis was performed on whole blood collected from 
24 physically healthy subjects at baseline and after dexamethasone 
administration. The expression levels of resistin mRNA were found to be 
significantly increased after the dexamethasone administration. In a separate 
sample of 12 subjects, we examined plasma resistin protein levels and found that 
they were increased after dexamethasone administration. Furthermore, the plasma 
mRNA and protein levels of resistin were significantly higher in individuals who 
carried the A allele of RETN single nucleotide polymorphism rs3219175 than in 
those who did not carry the allele. There was no significant interaction between 
the genotype and dexamethasone administration. No significant correlation was 
found between plasma levels of cortisol and resistin. Consistent with previous 
studies, the genotype of RETN rs3219175 was a strong determinant of resistin 
levels. The present study showed that oral administration of dexamethasone 
increases the protein and mRNA levels of resistin irrespective of the rs3219175 
genotype.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1383651
PMID: 25011018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]