1. Microb Cell Fact. 2014 Jul 11;13(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s12934-014-0096-1.

Improvement of L-phenylalanine production from glycerol by recombinant 
Escherichia coli strains: the role of extra copies of glpK, glpX, and tktA 
genes.

Gottlieb K, Albermann C, Sprenger GA.

BACKGROUND: For the production of L-phenylalanine (L-Phe), two molecules of 
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and one molecule erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P) are 
necessary. PEP stems from glycolysis whereas E4P is formed in the pentose 
phosphate pathway (PPP). Glucose, commonly used for L-Phe production with 
recombinant E. coli, is taken up via the PEP-dependent phosphotransferase system 
which delivers glucose-6-phosphate (G6P). G6P enters either glycolysis or the 
PPP. In contrast, glycerol is phosphorylated by an ATP-dependent glycerol kinase 
(GlpK) thus saving one PEP. However, two gluconeogenic reactions 
(fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, FBPase) are 
necessary for growth and provision of E4P. Glycerol has become an important 
carbon source for biotechnology and reports on production of L-Phe from glycerol 
are available. However, the influence of FBPase and transketolase reactions on 
L-Phe production has not been reported.
RESULTS: L-Phe productivity of parent strain FUS4/pF81 (plasmid-encoded genes 
for aroF, aroB, aroL, pheA) was compared on glucose and glycerol as C sources. 
On glucose, a maximal carbon recovery of 0.19 mM C(Phe)/C(Glucose) and a maximal 
space-time-yield (STY) of 0.13 g l(-1) h(-1) was found. With glycerol, the 
maximal carbon recovery was nearly the same (0.18 mM C(Phe)/C(Glycerol)), but 
the maximal STY was higher (0.21 g l(-1) h(-1)). We raised the chromosomal gene 
copy number of the genes glpK (encoding glycerol kinase), tktA (encoding 
transketolase), and glpX (encoding fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase) individually. 
Overexpression of glpK (or its feedback-resistant variant, glpK(G232D)) had 
little effect on growth rate; L-Phe production was about 30% lower than in 
FUS4/pF81. Whereas the overexpression of either glpX or tktA had minor effects 
on productivity (0.20 mM C(Phe)/C(Glycerol); 0.25 g l(-1) h(-1) and 0.21 mM 
C(Phe)/C(Glycerol); 0.23 g l(-1) h(-1), respectively), the combination of extra 
genes of glpX and tktA together led to an increase in maximal STY of about 80% 
(0.37 g l(-1) h(-1)) and a carbon recovery of 0.26 mM C(Phe)/C(Glycerol).
CONCLUSIONS: Enhancing the gene copy numbers for glpX and tktA increased L-Phe 
productivity from glycerol without affecting growth rate. Engineering of 
glycerol metabolism towards L-Phe production in E. coli has to balance the 
pathways of gluconeogenesis, glycolysis, and PPP to improve the supply of the 
precursors, PEP and E4P.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-014-0096-1
PMCID: PMC4227036
PMID: 25012491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]