1. BMC Public Health. 2014 Jul 14;14:716. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-716.

Lower health literacy predicts smoking relapse among racially/ethnically diverse 
smokers with low socioeconomic status.

Stewart DW(1), Cano MA, Correa-Fernández V, Spears CA, Li Y, Waters AJ, Wetter 
DW, Vidrine JI.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Health Disparities Research, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. DWStewart@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Nearly half of U.S. adults have difficulties with health literacy 
(HL), which is defined as the ability to adequately obtain, process, and 
understand basic health information. Lower HL is associated with negative health 
behaviors and poor health outcomes. Racial/ethnic minorities and those with low 
socioeconomic status (SES) are disproportionately affected by poor HL. They also 
have higher smoking prevalence and more difficulty quitting smoking. Thus, lower 
HL may be uniquely associated with poorer cessation outcomes in this population.
METHODS: This study investigated the association between HL and smoking 
cessation outcomes among 200, low-SES, racially/ethnically diverse smokers 
enrolled in smoking cessation treatment. Logistic regression analyses adjusted 
for demographics (i.e., age, gender, race/ethnicity, relationship status), 
SES-related characteristics (i.e., education, income), and nicotine dependence 
were conducted to investigate associations between HL and smoking relapse at the 
end of treatment (3 weeks post quit day).
RESULTS: Results indicated that smokers with lower HL (score of < 64.5 on the 
Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine [REALM]) were significantly more 
likely than those with higher HL (score of ≥ 64.5 on the REALM) to relapse by 
the end of treatment, even after controlling for established predictors of 
cessation including demographics, SES, and nicotine dependence (OR = 3.26; 95% 
CI = 1.14, 9.26).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that lower HL may serve as an independent risk 
factor for smoking relapse among low-SES, racially/ethnically diverse smokers 
enrolled in treatment. Future research is needed to investigate longitudinal 
relations between HL and cessation outcomes and potential mechanisms of this 
relationship.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-716
PMCID: PMC4226955
PMID: 25018151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]