1. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Oct 1;272:252-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.006. Epub 
2014 Jul 11.

Wheel running alters patterns of uncontrollable stress-induced cfos mRNA 
expression in rat dorsal striatum direct and indirect pathways: A possible role 
for plasticity in adenosine receptors.

Clark PJ(1), Ghasem PR(2), Mika A(2), Day HE(3), Herrera JJ(2), Greenwood BN(2), 
Fleshner M(2).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado Boulder, 354 UCB, Boulder, CO 
80309, United States. Electronic address: peter.clark@nih.gov.
(2)Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado Boulder, 354 UCB, Boulder, CO 
80309, United States.
(3)Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado Boulder, 354 UCB, Boulder, CO 
80309, United States; Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of 
Colorado Boulder, Muenzinger D244, 345 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309, United States.

Emerging evidence indicates that adenosine is a major regulator of striatum 
activity, in part, through the antagonistic modulation of dopaminergic function. 
Exercise can influence adenosine and dopamine activity, which may subsequently 
promote plasticity in striatum adenosine and dopamine systems. Such changes 
could alter activity of medium spiny neurons and impact striatum function. The 
purpose of this study was twofold. The first was to characterize the effect of 
long-term wheel running on adenosine 1 (A1R), adenosine 2A (A2AR), dopamine 1 
(D1R), and dopamine 2 (D2R) receptor mRNA expression in adult rat dorsal and 
ventral striatum structures using in situ hybridization. The second was to 
determine if changes to adenosine and dopamine receptor mRNA from running are 
associated with altered cfos mRNA induction in dynorphin- (direct pathway) and 
enkephalin- (indirect pathway) expressing neurons of the dorsal striatum 
following stress exposure. We report that chronic running, as well as acute 
uncontrollable stress, reduced A1R and A2AR mRNA levels in the dorsal and 
ventral striatum. Running also modestly elevated D2R mRNA levels in striatum 
regions. Finally, stress-induced cfos was potentiated in dynorphin and 
attenuated in enkephalin expressing neurons of running rats. These data suggest 
striatum adenosine and dopamine systems are targets for neuroplasticity from 
exercise, which may contribute to changes in direct and indirect pathway 
activity. These findings may have implications for striatum mediated motor and 
cognitive processes, as well as exercise facilitated stress-resistance.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.006
PMCID: PMC4196684
PMID: 25017571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]