1. Diabetes Ther. 2014 Dec;5(2):367-83. doi: 10.1007/s13300-014-0073-z. Epub 2014
 Jul 16.

The clinical development program of lixisenatide: a once-daily glucagon-like 
Peptide-1 receptor agonist.

Bain SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Science, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, 
SA2 8PP, UK, s.c.bain@swansea.ac.uk.

Lixisenatide (AVE0010) is a once-daily glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor 
agonist used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Phase II dose-finding and 
pharmacodynamic studies identified the 20 µg once-daily dose as having the 
optimum combination of efficacy, convenience and tolerability. Lixisenatide was 
prospectively investigated in a series of 11 multinational, randomised, 
controlled phase III trials (GLP-1 agonist AVE0010 in paTients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus for Glycemic cOntrol and sAfety evaLuation [GetGoal] 
programme) that included a direct head-to-head study with exenatide. The GetGoal 
programme established the efficacy and safety profile of lixisenatide 20 µg once 
daily across the spectrum of patients with type 2 diabetes, including patients 
not treated with anti-diabetic agents, those failing on oral agents and as an 
adjunct to basal insulin therapy. The main efficacy endpoints were met in all 
studies, with the baseline to endpoint reductions in HbA1c consistently ranging 
from 0.7% to 1.0%. In a head-to-head comparison with exenatide 10 μg twice 
daily, lixisenatide 20 μg once daily was non-inferior for HbA1c reduction, 
achieved with threefold fewer patients with symptomatic hypoglycemia events and 
better gastrointestinal tolerability. Three randomised trials of lixisenatide 
treatment added to basal insulin showed significantly improved glycemic control 
over placebo, with pronounced postprandial glucose reductions and good 
tolerability. Discontinuations for adverse events were consistently low, ranging 
from 2.5% to 10.4%. As the provision of individualized care moves center stage 
in diabetes management, lixisenatide with once-daily dosing, a single 
maintenance dose and fixed-dose pens offers an important treatment option for 
type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s13300-014-0073-z
PMCID: PMC4269639
PMID: 25027491