1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 15;15(1):595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-595.

Gene network-based analysis identifies two potential subtypes of small 
intestinal neuroendocrine tumors.

Kidd M(1), Modlin IM, Drozdov I.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. 
mark.kidd@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: Tumor transcriptomes contain information of critical value to 
understanding the different capacities of a cell at both a physiological and 
pathological level. In terms of clinical relevance, they provide information 
regarding the cellular "toolbox" e.g., pathways associated with malignancy and 
metastasis or drug dependency. Exploration of this resource can therefore be 
leveraged as a translational tool to better manage and assess neoplastic 
behavior. The availability of public genome-wide expression datasets, provide an 
opportunity to reassess neuroendocrine tumors at a more fundamental level. We 
hypothesized that stringent analysis of expression profiles as well as 
regulatory networks of the neoplastic cell would provide novel information that 
facilitates further delineation of the genomic basis of small intestinal 
neuroendocrine tumors.
RESULTS: We re-analyzed two publically available small intestinal tumor 
transcriptomes using stringent quality control parameters and network-based 
approaches and validated expression of core secretory regulatory elements e.g., 
CPE, PCSK1, secretogranins, including genes involved in depolarization e.g., 
SCN3A, as well as transcription factors associated with neurodevelopment 
(NKX2-2, NeuroD1, INSM1) and glucose homeostasis (APLP1). The candidate 
metastasis-associated transcription factor, ST18, was highly expressed 
(>14-fold, p < 0.004). Genes previously associated with neoplasia, CEBPA and 
SDHD, were decreased in expression (-1.5 - -2, p < 0.02). Genomic interrogation 
indicated that intestinal tumors may consist of two different subtypes, 
serotonin-producing neoplasms and serotonin/substance P/tachykinin lesions. QPCR 
validation in an independent dataset (n = 13 neuroendocrine tumors), confirmed 
up-regulated expression of 87% of genes (13/15).
CONCLUSIONS: An integrated cellular transcriptomic analysis of small intestinal 
neuroendocrine tumors identified that they are regulated at a developmental 
level, have key activation of hypoxic pathways (a known regulator of malignant 
stem cell phenotypes) as well as activation of genes involved in apoptosis and 
proliferation. Further refinement of these analyses by RNAseq studies of 
large-scale databases will enable definition of individual master regulators and 
facilitate the development of novel tissue and blood-based tools to better 
understand diagnose and treat tumors.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-595
PMCID: PMC4124138
PMID: 25023465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]