1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2014 Mar;27(3):310-5. doi:
10.5713/ajas.2013.13469.

Expression Profiles of Cellular Retinol-binding Protein, Type II (CRBP II) in 
Erlang Mountainous Chickens.

Yin HD(1), Tian K(1), Li DY(1), Gilbert ER(1), Xiao LH(1), Chen SY(2), Wang 
Y(2), Liu YP(1), Zhao XL(1), Zhu Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA .
(2)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu Campus, Chengdu 611130, China .

Cellular retinol-binding protein II (CRBP II) belongs to the family of cellular 
retinol-binding proteins and plays a major role in absorption, transport, and 
metabolism of vitamin A. In addition, because vitamin A is correlated with 
reproductive performance, we measured CRBP II mRNA abundance in erlang 
mountainous chickens by real-time PCR using the relative quantification method. 
The expression of CRBP II showed a tissue-specific pattern and egg production 
rate-dependent changes. The expression was very high (p<0.05) in jejunum and 
liver, intermediate in kidney, ovary, and oviduct, and lowest (p<0.05) in heart, 
hypothalamus, and pituitary. In the hypothalamus, oviduct, ovary, and pituitary, 
CRBP II mRNA abundance were correlated to egg production rate, which increased 
from 12 wk to 32 wk, peaked at 32 wk relative to the other time points, and then 
decreased from 32 wk to 45 wk. In contrast, the expression of CRBP II mRNA in 
heart, jejunum, kidney, and liver was not different at any of the ages evaluated 
in this study. These data may help to understand the genetic basis of vitamin A 
metabolism, and suggest that CRBP II may be a candidate gene to affect egg 
production traits in chickens.

DOI: 10.5713/ajas.2013.13469
PMCID: PMC4093264
PMID: 25049956