1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 21;9(7):e102373. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102373. 
eCollection 2014.

Leptin increases TNF-α expression and production through phospholipase D1 in Raw 
264.7 cells.

Lee SM(1), Choi HJ(2), Oh CH(2), Oh JW(1), Han JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Biomedical Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

Epidemiological evidence suggests that obesity is associated with inflammation 
of the respiratory tract and the pathogenesis of asthma. The purpose of this 
study was to examine the role of phospholipase D1 (PLD1) in leptin-induced 
expression of the proinflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and 
to suggest a molecular link between obesity and respiratory tract inflammation. 
We investigated whether leptin, a typical adipocytokine, plays a role in the 
expression of TNF-α through increased PLD1 activity in Raw 264.7. Leptin 
enhanced the activity of PLD1 through activation of PLCγ and Src, while PLD1 
siRNA decreased the leptin-induced expression and production of TNF-α. 
Leptin-induced PLD activation was also inhibited by a PLCγ inhibitor (PAO) and 
Src kinase inhibitor (PP2), indicating that PLCγ and Src kinase are upstream 
activators of PLD1. Down-regulation of PLD1 also completely blocked activation 
of p70S6K, an activator of JNK. Leptin-induced expression of TNF-α was also 
prevented by inhibition of p70S6K and JNK. Taken together, these results 
indicate that PLD1 acts as an important regulator of leptin-induced expression 
of TNF-α by participating in the PLCγ/Src/PLD1/PA/p70S6K/JNK pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102373
PMCID: PMC4105621
PMID: 25047119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.