1. Breast J. 2014 Sep-Oct;20(5):534-6. doi: 10.1111/tbj.12308. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

The Brazilian founder mutation TP53 p.R337H is uncommon in Portuguese women 
diagnosed with breast cancer.

Giacomazzi J(1), Correia RL, Palmero EI, Gaspar JF, Almeida M, Portela C, Camey 
SA, Monteiro A, Pinheiro M, Peixoto A, Teixeira MR, Reis RM, Ashton-Prolla P.

Author information:
(1)Genomic Medicine Laboratory, Experimental Research Centre, Hospital de 
Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil; Genetics Department, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil; 
Hospital Tacchini, Bento Gonçalves, Brazil.

Since the first studies reporting the TP53 p.R337H mutation as founder mutation 
in Southern and Southeastern Brazil, there has been controversy on its origin. 
Preliminary analysis of a small subset of Brazilian mutation carriers revealed 
that the haplotype incided on a Caucasian background. The vast majority of 
carriers identified today reside in Brazil or, if identified in other countries, 
are Brazilian immigrants. To our knowledge, the only two exceptions of carriers 
without a recognizable link with Brazil are two European families, from Portugal 
and Germany. Haplotype analysis in the Portuguese family revealed the same 
haplotype identified in Brazilian individuals, but in the German family, a 
distinct haplotype was found. Knowing that a significant proportion of women 
with breast cancer (BC) in Southern Brazil are p.R337H carriers, we analyzed 
p.R337H in a Portuguese cohort of women diagnosed with this disease. Median age 
at diagnosis among the first 573 patients tested was 60 years and 100 (17.4%) 
patients had been diagnosed at or under the age of 45 years. Mutation screening 
failed to identify the mutation in the 573 patients tested. These results are in 
contrast with the mutation frequency observed in a study including 815 
BC-affected women from Brazil, in which carrier frequencies of 12.1 and 5.1% in 
pre- and postmenopausal women were observed, respectively. These findings 
suggest that the Brazilian founder mutation p.R337H, the most frequent germline 
TP53 mutation reported to date, is not a common germline alteration in 
Portuguese women diagnosed with BC.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/tbj.12308
PMID: 25052705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]