1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24749-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.583021. Epub 
2014 Jul 22.

Cysteines introduced into extracellular loops 1 and 4 of human P-glycoprotein 
that are close only in the open conformation spontaneously form a disulfide bond 
that inhibits drug efflux and ATPase activity.

Loo TW(1), Clarke DM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)From the Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada david.clarke@utoronto.ca.

P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is an ATP-binding cassette drug pump that protects us from 
toxic compounds and confers multidrug resistance. The protein is organized into 
two halves. The halves contain a transmembrane domain (TMD) with six 
transmembrane segments and a nucleotide-binding domain (NBD). The drug- and 
ATP-binding sites reside at the TMD1/TMD2 and NBD1/NBD2 interfaces, 
respectively. ATP-dependent drug efflux involves changes between the open 
inward-facing (NBDs apart, extracellular loops (ECLs) close together) and the 
closed outward-facing (NBDs close together, ECLs apart) conformations. It is 
controversial, however, whether the open conformation only exists transiently in 
intact cells because of the presence of high levels of ATP. To test for the 
presence of an open conformation in intact cells, reporter cysteines were placed 
in extracellular loops 1 (A80C, N half) and 4 (R741C, C half). The rationale was 
that cysteines A80C/R741C would only come close enough to form a disulfide bond 
in an open conformation (6.9 Å apart) because they are separated widely (30.4 Å 
apart) in the closed conformation. It was observed that the mutant A80C/R741C 
cross-linked spontaneously (>90%) when expressed in cells. In contrast to 
previous reports showing that trapping P-gp in a closed conformation highly 
activated ATPase activity, here we show that A80C/R741C cross-linking inhibited 
ATPase activity and drug efflux. Both activities were restored when the 
cross-linked mutant was treated with a thiol-reducing agent. The results show 
that an open conformation can be readily detected in cells and that 
cross-linking of cysteines placed in ECLs 1 and 4 inhibits activity.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.583021
PMCID: PMC4155644
PMID: 25053414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]