1. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 22;9(7):e102324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102324. 
eCollection 2014.

Four SNPs in the CHRNA3/5 alpha-neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
subunit locus are associated with COPD risk based on meta-analyses.

Cui K(1), Ge X(1), Ma H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Liaoning Medical University, Jinzhou, Liaoning, P.R. 
China.

BACKGROUND: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in an α-neuronal 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit (CHRNA3/5) were identified to be 
associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in a study based on 
a Norwegian population. However, results from subsequent studies have been 
controversial, particularly in studies recruiting Asians. In the present study, 
we conducted a comprehensive search and meta-analyses to identify susceptibility 
SNPs for COPD in the CHRNA3/5 locus.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted to find studies that 
have reported an association between SNPs in the CHRNA3/5 locus and COPD risk. 
Pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for each SNP were 
calculated with the major allele or genotype as the reference group. The 
influence of individual studies on pooled measures was assessed, in addition to 
publication bias.
RESULTS: A total of 12 articles with 14 eligible studies were included in this 
analysis. Association between 4 SNPs in the CHRNA3/5 locus and COPD was 
evaluated and included rs1051730, rs8034191, rs6495309, and rs16969968. 
Significant associations between the 4 SNPs and COPD were identified under 
allele (rs1051730: OR = 1.14, 95%CI = 1.10-1.18; rs8034191: OR = 1.29, 
95%CI = 1.18-1.41; rs6495309: OR = 1.26, 95%CI = 1.09-1.45; rs16969968: 
OR = 1.27, 95%CI = 1.17-1.39) and genotype models. Subgroup analysis conducted 
for rs1051730 showed a significant association between this SNP and COPD risk in 
non-Asians (OR = 1.14, 95%CI = 1.10-1.18), but not Asians (OR = 1.23, 
95%CI = 0.91-1.67). Rs1051730 and rs6495309 were also significantly associated 
with COPD after adjusting for multiple variables, including age and smoking 
status.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that 4 SNPs in the CHRNA3/5 locus are 
associated with COPD risk. Rs1051730 was particularly associated with COPD in 
non-Asians, but its role in Asians still needs to be verified. Additional 
studies will be necessary to assess the effect of rs6495309 on COPD. Although 
rs1051730 and rs6495309 were shown to be independent risk factors for COPD, 
validation studies should be performed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102324
PMCID: PMC4106784
PMID: 25051068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.