1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2014 Dec;16(12):1214-22. doi: 10.1111/dom.12360. Epub
2014  Aug 19.

Two novel glucagon receptor antagonists prove effective therapeutic agents in 
high-fat-fed and obese diabetic mice.

O'Harte FP(1), Franklin ZJ, Irwin N.

Author information:
(1)The Saad Centre for Pharmacy & Diabetes, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Ulster, Coleraine, UK.

AIMS: To examine the effect of two novel, enzymatically stable, glucagon 
receptor peptide antagonists, on metabolic control in two mouse models of 
obesity/diabetes.
METHOD: The effects of twice daily i.p. administration of 
desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)-glucagon or desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)Lys(12)FA-glucagon for 10 
days on metabolic control in high-fat-fed (HFF; 45% fat) and obese diabetic 
(ob/ob) mice were compared with saline-treated controls.
RESULTS: Neither analogue altered body weight or food intake in either model 
over 10 days; however, treatment with each peptide restored non-fasting blood 
glucose towards normal control values in HFF mice. Basal glucose was also 
reduced (p < 0.01) in desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)Lys(12)FA-glucagon treated ob/ob mice 
by day 10, coinciding with increases (p < 0.001) in circulating insulin. At the 
end of the treatment period, both analogues significantly (p < 0.05-0.01) 
improved oral and i.p. glucose tolerance (p < 0.05) and peripheral insulin 
sensitivity, increased pancreatic insulin and glucagon content (p < 0.05-0.01) 
and decreased (p < 0.05) cholesterol levels in HFF mice. Similarly beneficial 
metabolic effects on oral glucose tolerance (p < 0.01) and pancreatic insulin 
content (p < 0.05) were observed in ob/ob mice, especially after 
desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)Lys(12)FA-glucagon treatment. No significant differences in 
circulating triglycerides or aspects of indirect calorimetry were noted between 
peptide treatment groups and respective control HFF and ob/ob mice. Finally, 
glucagon-mediated elevations of glucose and insulin were significantly (p < 
0.05-0.01) annulled after 10 days of desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)-glucagon or 
desHis(1)Pro(4)Glu(9)Lys(12)FA-glucagon treatment in both animal models.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that peptide-based glucagon receptor antagonists 
can reverse aspects of genetically and dietary-induced obesity-related diabetes.

Â© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.12360
PMID: 25060150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]