1. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Sep;12(9):1205-15. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0124.
Epub  2014 Jul 24.

Targeting mTORC1-mediated metabolic addiction overcomes fludarabine resistance 
in malignant B cells.

Sharma A(1), Janocha AJ(2), Hill BT(3), Smith MR(3), Erzurum SC(2), Almasan 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio. Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental 
Sciences, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders, Taussig Cancer 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio. almasaa@ccf.org.

MTOR complex-1(mTORC1) activation occurs frequently in cancers, yet clinical 
efficacy of rapalogs is limited because of the associated activation of upstream 
survival pathways. An alternative approach is to inhibit downstream of mTORC1; 
therefore, acquired resistance to fludarabine (Flu), a purine analogue and 
antimetabolite chemotherapy, active agent for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) 
was investigated. Elevated phospho-p70S6K, also known as RPS6KB1 (ribosomal 
protein S6 kinase, 70kDa, polypeptide 1) (T389), an mTORC1 activation marker, 
predicted Flu resistance in a panel of B-cell lines, isogenic Flu-resistant 
(FluR) derivatives, and primary human CLL cells. Consistent with the anabolic 
role of mTORC1, FluR cells had higher rates of glycolysis and oxidative 
phosphorylation than Flu-sensitive (FluS) cells. Rapalogs (everolimus and 
rapamycin) induced moderate cell death in FluR and primary CLL cells, and 
everolimus significantly inhibited glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation in 
FluR cells. Strikingly, the higher oxidative phosphorylation in FluR cells was 
not coupled to higher ATP synthesis. Instead, it contributed primarily to an 
essential, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase catalyzed, step in de novo pyrimidine 
biosynthesis. mTORC1 promotes pyrimidine biosynthesis by p70S6 kinase-mediated 
phosphorylation of CAD (carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 2, aspartate 
transcarbamylase, and dihydroorotase; Ser1859) and favors S-phase cell-cycle 
progression. We found increased phospho-CAD (S1859) and higher S-phase 
population in FluR cells. Pharmacological inhibition of de novo pyrimidine 
biosynthesis using N-phosphonacetyl-l-aspartate and leflunomide, RNAi-mediated 
knockdown of p70S6K, and inhibition of mitochondrial respiration were 
selectively cytotoxic to FluR, but not FluS, cells. These results reveal a novel 
link between mTORC1-mediated metabolic reprogramming and Flu resistance 
identifying mitochondrial respiration and de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis as 
potential therapeutic targets.
IMPLICATIONS: This study provides the first evidence for mTORC1/p70S6K-dependent 
regulation of pyrimidine biosynthesis in a relevant disease setting.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0124
PMCID: PMC4163513
PMID: 25061101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed Note: Supplementary data for 
this article are available at Molecular Cancer Research Online 
(http://mcr.aacrjournals.org/).