1. Hum Mutat. 2014 Oct;35(10):1187-94. doi: 10.1002/humu.22626.

Genetic and clinical analysis of ABCA4-associated disease in African American 
patients.

Zernant J(1), Collison FT, Lee W, Fishman GA, Noupuu K, Yuan B, Cai C, Lupski 
JR, Yannuzzi LA, Tsang SH, Allikmets R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, New York.

Autosomal recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1) is caused by hundreds of mutations 
in the ABCA4 gene, which are often specific to racial and ethnic groups. Here, 
we investigated the ABCA4 variation and their phenotypic expression in a cohort 
of 44 patients of African American descent, a previously under-characterized 
racial group. Patients were screened for mutations in ABCA4 by next-generation 
sequencing and array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), followed by 
analyses for pathogenicity by in silico programs. Thorough ophthalmic 
examination was performed on all patients. At least two (expected) 
disease-causing alleles in the ABCA4 gene were identified in 27 (61.4%) 
patients, one allele in 11 (25%) patients, and no ABCA4 mutations were found in 
six (13.6%) patients. Altogether, 39 different disease-causing ABCA4 variants, 
including seven new, were identified on 65 (74%) chromosomes, most of which were 
unique for this racial group. The most frequent ABCA4 mutation in this cohort 
was c.6320G>A (p.(R2107H)), representing 19.3% of all disease-associated 
alleles. No large copy number variants were identified in any patient. Most 
patients reported later onset of symptoms. In summary, the ABCA4 mutation 
spectrum in patients of West African descent differs significantly from that in 
patients of European descent, resulting in a later onset and "milder" disease.

Â© 2014 The Authors. **Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22626
PMCID: PMC4283973
PMID: 25066811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]