1. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 30;4:5880. doi: 10.1038/srep05880.

Protective effect of Aframomum melegueta phenolics against CCl₄-induced rat 
hepatocytes damage; role of apoptosis and pro-inflammatory cytokines inhibition.

El-Halawany AM(1), El Dine RS(2), El Sayed NS(3), Hattori M(4).

Author information:
(1)1] Faculty of Pharmacy, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia 
[2] Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, 11562, 
Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, 11562, 
Cairo, Egypt.
(3)1] Department of Pharmacology &Toxicology, Faculty of pharmacy, Cairo 
University, 11562, Cairo, Egypt [2] Department of Pharmacology &Toxicology, 
Faculty of pharmacy &Biotechnology, German University in Cairo, 11835, Cairo, 
Egypt.
(4)Institute of Natural Medicine, University of Toyama; 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 
930-0194, Japan.

Aframomum melegueta is a commonly used African spice. Through a hepatoprotective 
bioassay-guided isolation, the chloroform fraction of A.melegueta seeds yielded 
one new diarylheptanoid named 3-(S)-acetyl-1-(4'-hydroxy-3', 5'-di 
methoxyphenyl)-7-(3″,4″, 5″-trihydroxyphenyl)heptane (1), and two new 
hydroxyphenylalkanones, [8]-dehydrogingerdione (2) and [6]-dehydroparadol (3), 
in addition to six known compounds (4-9). The hepatoprotective effect of A. 
melegueta methanol extract, sub-fractions and isolated compounds was 
investigated using carbon tetrachloride (CCl₄)-induced liver injury in a rat 
hepatocytes model. The methanol, chloroform extracts and compounds 1, 5, 8 and 9 
of A. melegueta significantly inhibited the elevated serum alanine 
aminotransferase (ALT), thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS), tumor 
necrosis factor (TNFα), interleukin-1beta (Il-1β), caspase3 and 9 and enhanced 
the reduced liver glutathione (GSH) level caused by CCl₄ intoxication. These 
results indicate that A.melegueta extracts, and isolated compounds play a 
protective role in CCl₄ induced acute liver injury which might be due to 
elevated antioxidative defense potentials, suppressed inflammatory responses and 
apoptosis of liver tissue.

DOI: 10.1038/srep05880
PMCID: PMC5376205
PMID: 25077538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.