1. Anesthesiology. 2014 Dec;121(6):1281-91. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000391.

Cyclosporine-inhibitable cerebral drug transport does not influence clinical 
methadone pharmacodynamics.

Meissner K(1), Blood J, Francis AM, Yermolenka V, Kharasch ED.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Anesthesiology, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany (K.M.); and Departments of Anesthesiology (K.M., J.B., 
A.M.F., V.Y., E.D.K.) and of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics (E.D.K.), 
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri.

Erratum in
    Anesthesiology. 2015 Oct;123(4):982. doi: 
10.1097/01.anes.0000470960.33159.09.

BACKGROUND: Interindividual variability and drug interaction studies suggest 
that blood-brain barrier drug transporters mediate human methadone brain 
biodistribution. In vitro and animal studies suggest that methadone is a 
substrate for the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein, and that 
P-glycoprotein-mediated transport influences brain access and pharmacologic 
effect. This investigation tested whether methadone is a transporter substrate 
in humans [corrected].
METHODS: Healthy volunteers received oral (N=16) or IV (N=12) methadone in 
different crossover protocols after nothing (control) or the validated 
P-glycoprotein inhibitor cyclosporine (4.5 mg/kg orally twice daily for 4 days, 
or 5 mg/kg IV over 2 h). Plasma and urine methadone and metabolite 
concentrations were measured by mass spectrometry. Methadone effects were 
measured by miosis and thermal analgesia (maximally tolerated temperature and 
verbal analog scale rating of discreet temperatures).
RESULTS: Cyclosporine marginally but significantly decreased methadone plasma 
concentrations and apparent oral clearance, but had no effect on methadone renal 
clearance or on hepatic N-demethylation. Cyclosporine had no effect on miosis or 
on R-methadone concentration-miosis relationships after either oral or IV 
methadone. Peak miosis was similar in controls and cyclosporine-treated subjects 
after oral methadone (1.4±0.4 and 1.3±0.5 mm/mg, respectively) and IV methadone 
(3.1±1.0 and 3.2±0.8 mm, respectively). Methadone increased maximally tolerated 
temperature, but analgesia testing was confounded by cyclosporine-related pain.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclosporine did not affect methadone pharmacodynamics. This result 
does not support a role for cyclosporine-inhibitable transporters mediating 
methadone brain access and biodistribution.

DOI: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000391
PMCID: PMC4562501
PMID: 25072223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]