1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 May;23(5):715-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.144. Epub 2014
Jul  30.

Identification of previously unrecognized FAP in children with Gardner fibroma.

Vieira J(1), Pinto C(1), Afonso M(2), do Bom Sucesso M(3), Lopes P(2), Pinheiro 
M(1), Veiga I(1), Henrique R(4), Teixeira MR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.
(4)1] Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal 
[2] Institute of Biomedical Sciences (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(5)1] Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal [2] 
Institute of Biomedical Sciences (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Fibromatous soft tissue lesions, namely desmoid-type fibromatosis and Gardner 
fibroma, may occur sporadically or as a result of inherited predisposition (as 
part of familial adenomatous polyposis, FAP). Whereas desmoid-type fibromatosis 
often present β-catenin overexpression (by activating CTNNB1 somatic variants or 
APC biallelic inactivation), the pathogenetic mechanisms in Gardner fibroma are 
unknown. We characterized in detail Gardner fibromas diagnosed in two infants to 
evaluate their role as sentinel lesions of previously unrecognized FAP. In the 
first infant we found a 5q deletion including APC in the tumor and the novel APC 
variant c.4687dup in constitutional DNA. In the second infant we found the 
c.5826_5829del and c.1678A>T APC variants in constitutional and tumor DNA, 
respectively. None of the constitutional APC variants occurred de novo and both 
tumors showed nuclear staining for β-catenin and no CTNNB1 variants. We present 
the first comprehensive characterization of the pathogenetic mechanisms of 
Gardner fibroma, which may be a sentinel lesion of previously unrecognized FAP 
families.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.144
PMCID: PMC4402623
PMID: 25074465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]