1. Mol Autism. 2014 Apr 25;5:30. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-30. eCollection 2014.

Transcriptional and functional complexity of Shank3 provides a molecular 
framework to understand the phenotypic heterogeneity of SHANK3 causing autism 
and Shank3 mutant mice.

Wang X(1), Xu Q(2), Bey AL(3), Lee Y(1), Jiang YH(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, 27710 Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, 27710 Durham, NC, USA ; Department of Child Health Care, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 201102 Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, 27710 Durham, 
NC, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University 
School of Medicine, 27710 Durham, NC, USA ; Department of Neurobiology, Duke 
University School of Medicine, 27710 Durham, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Considerable clinical heterogeneity has been well documented amongst 
individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, little is known about 
the biological mechanisms underlying phenotypic diversity. Genetic studies have 
established a strong causal relationship between ASD and molecular defects in 
the SHANK3 gene. Individuals with various defects of SHANK3 display considerable 
clinical heterogeneity. Different lines of Shank3 mutant mice with deletions of 
different portions of coding exons have been reported recently. Variable 
synaptic and behavioral phenotypes have been reported in these mice, which makes 
the interpretations for these data complicated without the full knowledge of the 
complexity of the Shank3 transcript structure.
METHODS: We systematically examined alternative splicing and isoform-specific 
expression of Shank3 across different brain regions and developmental stages by 
regular RT-PCR, quantitative real time RT-PCR (q-PCR), and western blot. With 
these techniques, we also investigated the effects of neuronal activity and 
epigenetic modulation on alternative splicing and isoform-specific expression of 
Shank3. We explored the localization and influence on dendritic spine 
development of different Shank3 isoforms in cultured hippocampal neurons by 
cellular imaging.
RESULTS: The Shank3 gene displayed an extensive array of mRNA and protein 
isoforms resulting from the combination of multiple intragenic promoters and 
extensive alternative splicing of coding exons in the mouse brain. The 
isoform-specific expression and alternative splicing of Shank3 were 
brain-region/cell-type specific, developmentally regulated, activity-dependent, 
and involved epigenetic regulation. Different subcellular distribution and 
differential effects on dendritic spine morphology were observed for different 
Shank3 isoforms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate a complex transcriptional regulation of Shank3 
in mouse brains. Our analysis of select Shank3 isoforms in cultured neurons 
suggests that different Shank3 isoforms have distinct functions. Therefore, the 
different types of SHANK3 mutations found in patients with ASD and different 
exonic deletions of Shank3 in mutant mice are predicted to disrupt selective 
isoforms and result in distinct dysfunctions at the synapse with possible 
differential effects on behavior. Our comprehensive data on Shank3 
transcriptional regulation thus provides an essential molecular framework to 
understand the phenotypic diversity in SHANK3 causing ASD and Shank3 mutant 
mice.

DOI: 10.1186/2040-2392-5-30
PMCID: PMC4113141
PMID: 25071925