1. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Nov;41(11):7331-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3619-2. Epub
2014  Aug 7.

Expression profiles and association analysis with growth traits of the MyoG and 
Myf5 genes in the Jinghai yellow chicken.

Genxi Z(1), Ying T, Tao Z, Jinyu W, Yongjuan W.

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Jiangsu 
Yangzhou, 225009, China, gxzhang@yzu.edu.cn.

In order to analyze the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the MyoG and Myf5 genes with chicken growth traits, PCR-SSCP approach was used 
to detect the (SNPs). The general linear model was used to analyze gene 
interaction and genetic effects between different genotypes and growth traits of 
the Jinghai yellow chicken. For the MyoG gene, three genotypes (AA, AB and BB) 
were detected in the Jinghai yellow chicken population. Gene sequencing revealed 
one mutation (T36C) in the genotype BB in comparison to the genotype AA. For the 
Myf5 gene, three genotypes (CC, CD and DD) were detected in the Jinghai yellow 
chicken population. Gene sequencing revealed one mutation (A1313G) in the 
genotype DD in comparison to the genotype CC. Gene interaction effect has 
significant influence on 6, 8-week-weight and 300-day-weight. The least square 
analysis showed that individuals with BB genotype of the MyoG gene had higher 
bodyweight at 2, 4, 10, 12, 14 and 16 weeks compared to individuals with AA and 
AB genotypes. Individuals with CD genotype of the Myf5 gene had higher birth 
weight than individuals with CC genotype (P < 0.05). The interactive genotype 
AB*DD performs well at 6, 8 weeks and 300 days bodyweight. The results suggested 
that SNPs of the MyoG and Myf5 genes had certain effects on growth traits of the 
Jinghai yellow chicken.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3619-2
PMID: 25098599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]