1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 6;9(8):e104533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104533. 
eCollection 2014.

A novel cysteine-sparing NOTCH3 mutation in a Chinese family with CADASIL.

Ge W(1), Kuang H(2), Wei B(2), Bo L(2), Xu Z(2), Xu X(3), Geng D(4), Sun M(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Fetology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou City, Jiangsu, China; Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Hospital of 
Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou City, Jiangsu, China; Department of Neurology, 
the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou City, Jiangsu, 
China.
(2)Institute for Fetology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou City, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou City, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, 
Xuzhou City, Jiangsu, China.

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an adult onset cerebral small vessel disorder 
caused by the mutations of the neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 3 (NOTCH3) 
gene. The extracellular part of NOTCH3 is composed of 34 epidermal growth 
factor-like (EGF-like) repeat domains. Each EGF-like domain is rich of cysteine 
and glycine to produce three loops that are essential for high-affinity binding 
to its ligand. Nearly all reported CADASIL-associated mutations result in gain 
or loss of a cysteine residue within the EGF-like domains. Only a few 
cysteine-sparing NOTCH3 mutations have been documented in the patients with 
CADASIL to date. Here, we reported a Chinese CADASIL family with a 
cysteine-sparing NOTCH3 mutation. In this family, affected patients had 
dizziness, memory loss, gait instability, or hemiplegia. Brain magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse leukoencephalopathy with confluent signal 
abnormalities in the periventricular white matter, basal ganglia, and centrum 
semiovale bilaterally. By screening the entire coding region of NOTCH3, a novel 
missense mutation p.G149V (c.446G>T) was found. This mutation was not detected 
in 400 normal controls. Considering the critical position of glycine within the 
C-loop of EGF-like domain and its high conservation through evolution, p.G149V 
mutation could be a potential pathogenic cause for CADASIL.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104533
PMCID: PMC4123979
PMID: 25098330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.