1. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 Aug 8;8:90. doi: 10.1186/s12918-014-0090-6.

A system based network approach to ethanol tolerance in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Kasavi C, Eraslan S, Arga KY, Oner ET, Kirdar B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey. 
kirdar@boun.edu.tr.

BACKGROUND: Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been widely used for bio-ethanol 
production and development of rational genetic engineering strategies leading 
both to the improvement of productivity and ethanol tolerance is very important 
for cost-effective bio-ethanol production. Studies on the identification of the 
genes that are up- or down-regulated in the presence of ethanol indicated that 
the genes may be involved to protect the cells against ethanol stress, but not 
necessarily required for ethanol tolerance.
RESULTS: In the present study, a novel network based approach was developed to 
identify candidate genes involved in ethanol tolerance. Protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network associated with ethanol tolerance (tETN) was 
reconstructed by integrating PPI data with Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Modular 
analysis of the constructed networks revealed genes with no previously reported 
experimental evidence related to ethanol tolerance and resulted in the 
identification of 17 genes with previously unknown biological functions. We have 
randomly selected four of these genes and deletion strains of two genes (YDR307W 
and YHL042W) were found to exhibit improved tolerance to ethanol when compared 
to wild type strain. The genome-wide transcriptomic response of yeast cells to 
the deletions of YDR307W and YHL042W in the absence of ethanol revealed that the 
deletion of YDR307W and YHL042W genes resulted in the transcriptional 
re-programming of the metabolism resulting from a mis-perception of the 
nutritional environment. Yeast cells perceived an excess amount of glucose and a 
deficiency of methionine or sulfur in the absence of YDR307W and YHL042W, 
respectively, possibly resulting from a defect in the nutritional sensing and 
signaling or transport mechanisms. Mutations leading to an increase in ribosome 
biogenesis were found to be important for the improvement of ethanol tolerance. 
Modulations of chronological life span were also identified to contribute to 
ethanol tolerance in yeast.
CONCLUSIONS: The system based network approach developed allows the 
identification of novel gene targets for improved ethanol tolerance and supports 
the highly complex nature of ethanol tolerance in yeast.

DOI: 10.1186/s12918-014-0090-6
PMCID: PMC4236716
PMID: 25103914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]