1. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Oct 1;25(19):3006-16. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-05-0965. Epub 
2014 Aug 7.

Actin cable distribution and dynamics arising from cross-linking, motor pulling, 
and filament turnover.

Tang H(1), Laporte D(2), Vavylonis D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015.
(2)Institut de Biochimie et Génétique Cellulaires, Université de Bordeaux, 33077 
Bordeaux, France.
(3)Department of Physics, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015 
vavylonis@lehigh.edu.

The growth of fission yeast relies on the polymerization of actin filaments 
nucleated by formin For3p, which localizes at tip cortical sites. These actin 
filaments bundle to form actin cables that span the cell and guide the movement 
of vesicles toward the cell tips. A big challenge is to develop a quantitative 
understanding of these cellular actin structures. We used computer simulations 
to study the spatial and dynamical properties of actin cables. We simulated 
individual actin filaments as semiflexible polymers in three dimensions composed 
of beads connected with springs. Polymerization out of For3p cortical sites, 
bundling by cross-linkers, pulling by type V myosin, and severing by cofilin are 
simulated as growth, cross-linking, pulling, and turnover of the semiflexible 
polymers. With the foregoing mechanisms, the model generates actin cable 
structures and dynamics similar to those observed in live-cell experiments. Our 
simulations reproduce the particular actin cable structures in myoVΔ cells and 
predict the effect of increased myosin V pulling. Increasing cross-linking 
parameters generates thicker actin cables. It also leads to antiparallel and 
parallel phases with straight or curved cables, consistent with observations of 
cells overexpressing α-actinin. Finally, the model predicts that clustering of 
formins at cell tips promotes actin cable formation.

© 2014 Tang et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is 
available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-05-0965
PMCID: PMC4230589
PMID: 25103242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]