1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;23(6):887-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.164. Epub 2014
Aug  13.

VPS35 and DNAJC13 disease-causing variants in essential tremor.

Rajput A(1), Ross JP(2), Bernales CQ(2), Rayaprolu S(3), Soto-Ortolaza AI(3), 
Ross OA(3), van Gerpen J(4), Uitti RJ(4), Wszolek ZK(4), Rajput AH(1), 
Vilariño-Güell C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, University of Saskatchewan and Saskatoon Health 
Region, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Exome-sequencing analyses have identified vacuolar protein sorting 35 homolog 
(VPS35) and DnaJ (Hsp40) homolog, subfamily C, member 13 (DNAJC13) harboring 
disease-causing variants for Parkinson disease (PD). Owing to the suggested 
clinical, pathological and genetic overlap between PD and essential tremor (ET) 
we assessed the presence of two VPS35 and DNAJC13 disease-causing variants in ET 
patients. TaqMan probes were used to genotype VPS35 c.1858G>A (p.(D620N)) 
(rs188286943) and DNAJC13 c.2564A>G (p.(N855S)) (rs387907571) in 571 ET patients 
of European descent, and microsatellite markers were used to define the disease 
haplotype in variant carriers. Genotyping of DNAJC13 identified two ET patients 
harboring the c.2564A>G (p.(N855S)) variant previously identified in PD 
patients. Both patients appear to share the disease haplotype previously 
reported. ET patients with the VPS35 c.1858G>A (p.(D620N)) variants were not 
observed. Although a genetic link between PD and ET has been suggested, DNAJC13 
c.2564A>G (p.(N855S)) represents the first disease-causing variant identified in 
both, and suggests the regulation of clathrin dynamics and endosomal trafficking 
in the pathophysiology of a subset of ET patients.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.164
PMCID: PMC4795043
PMID: 25118025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AR has received research support from the Regina 
Curling Classic, Greystone Classic for Parkinson's, Inc., the Dr Ali Rajput 
Endowment for Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders and the International 
Essential Tremor Foundation, and has participated in clinical trials funded by 
Teva (TVP-1012/501) and Merck Serono SA-Geneva (EMR 701165-024). Has also 
received honoraria from Teva and UCB Canada Inc. AHR receives research support 
from the Saskatchewan Parkinson's Disease Foundation, Curling Classic, and 
PrintWest Golf Classic, and has received a travel grant from Teva. ZKW is funded 
by NIH NS072187 and is the Editor in Chief of Parkinsonism and Related 
Disorders. OAR is a member of the editorial board of PLoS ONE and American 
Journal of Neurodegenerative Disease and Parkinsonism and Related Disorders, and 
he is funded by NIH grants NS078086 and NS072187. The remaining authors declare 
no conflict of interest.