1. Genome Biol. 2014 Aug 13;15(8):429. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0429-8.

Transcriptome sequencing reveals altered long intergenic non-coding RNAs in lung 
cancer.

White NM, Cabanski CR, Silva-Fisher JM, Dang HX, Govindan R, Maher CA.

BACKGROUND: Long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent an emerging and 
under-studied class of transcripts that play a significant role in human 
cancers. Due to the tissue- and cancer-specific expression patterns observed for 
many lncRNAs it is believed that they could serve as ideal diagnostic 
biomarkers. However, until each tumor type is examined more closely, many of 
these lncRNAs will remain elusive.
RESULTS: Here we characterize the lncRNA landscape in lung cancer using publicly 
available transcriptome sequencing data from a cohort of 567 adenocarcinoma and 
squamous cell carcinoma tumors. Through this compendium we identify over 3,000 
unannotated intergenic transcripts representing novel lncRNAs. Through 
comparison of both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinomas with matched 
controls we discover 111 differentially expressed lncRNAs, which we term lung 
cancer-associated lncRNAs (LCALs). A pan-cancer analysis of 324 additional tumor 
and adjacent normal pairs enable us to identify a subset of lncRNAs that display 
enriched expression specific to lung cancer as well as a subset that appear to 
be broadly deregulated across human cancers. Integration of exome sequencing 
data reveals that expression levels of many LCALs have significant associations 
with the mutational status of key oncogenes in lung cancer. Functional 
validation, using both knockdown and overexpression, shows that the most 
differentially expressed lncRNA, LCAL1, plays a role in cellular proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systematic characterization of publicly available transcriptome 
data provides the foundation for future efforts to understand the role of LCALs, 
develop novel biomarkers, and improve knowledge of lung tumor biology.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-014-0429-8
PMCID: PMC4156652
PMID: 25116943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]