1. Pain. 2014 Oct;155(10):2199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.08.003. Epub 2014
Aug  10.

Neuropathic pain in two-generation twins carrying the sodium channel Nav1.7 
functional variant R1150W.

Harrer JU(1), Uçeyler N(2), Doppler K(2), Fischer TZ(3), Dib-Hajj SD(3), Waxman 
SG(3), Sommer C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Caritas Medical Center, Saarbrücken, Germany; 
Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA; Center for Neuroscience and Regeneration Research, Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, West Haven, CT 06516, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. 
Electronic address: sommer@uni-wuerzburg.de.

We present clinical, neuropathological, and molecular genetic findings of a 
family with a new pain phenotype of the sodium channel gene SCN9A polymorphism 
R1150W. A 46-year-old woman presented with a 5-year history of episodic 
temperature- and exercise-dependent burning pain of the feet and lower legs 
associated with numbness of the distal upper and lower limbs. Her monozygotic 
twin sister and their mother and her twin presented similar symptoms. Clinical 
evaluation was normal except for a mild distal sensory deficit in fingers and 
feet. Electrophysiological testing was unremarkable, as were serum and 
cerebrospinal fluid laboratory findings. Skin biopsies of the distal lower limbs 
revealed an epidermal nerve fiber density at the lower limit of normal. 
Myelinated dermal nerve fibers showed elongated nodes of Ranvier, but normal 
distribution of nodal and paranodal proteins. Genetic testing for ion 
channel-associated pain disorders revealed an amino acid R1150W substitution of 
the Nav1.7 sodium channel. The combination of a Nav1.7 polymorphism with 
dysmyelinating features in small-caliber peripheral nerves has not been 
described before and may suggest an explanation for the clinical syndrome in our 
patients. Treatment with the sodium channel blocker lamotrigine provided some 
relief, consistent with a role of sodium channel dysfunction in the pain 
syndrome of this family.

Copyright © 2014 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.08.003
PMID: 25116815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]