1. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Oct;97(2):292-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.08.005. Epub 
2014 Aug 8.

Assessment of molecular testing in fine-needle aspiration biopsy samples: an 
experience in a Chinese population.

Liu S(1), Gao A(1), Zhang B(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Chen P(1), Ji M(1), Hou 
P(1), Shi B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University Health Science Center, Xi'an 710061, PR China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University Health Science Center, Xi'an 710061, PR China. Electronic address: 
shibingy@126.com.

Fine-needle aspiration biopsy remains the mainstay for preoperative examination 
of thyroid nodules; however, it does not provide a definite diagnosis in up to 
25% of nodules. Considerable studies have been performed to identify molecular 
markers to resolve this diagnostic dilemma. The aim of this study was to 
establish the distribution and frequency of common genetic alterations in a 
comprehensive set of benign and malignant thyroid nodules, and to determine the 
feasibility and role of testing for a panel of genetic alterations in improving 
the accuracy of cytology diagnosis in a Chinese population. This study was 
conducted in 314 thyroid nodules comprising 104 papillary thyroid carcinomas, 13 
suspicious nodules, 52 indeterminate nodules, and 145 benign nodules. Point 
mutations and RET/PTC rearrangements, were evaluated by pyrosequencing and 
TaqMan real-time PCR, respectively. After surgery, 115 nodules were confirmed as 
conventional papillary thyroid carcinoma and 102 (88.70%) of these nodules 
harbored either the BRAF(V600E) mutation (76.52%) or RET/PTC rearrangements 
(12.17%). RAS mutation was found in 1 (33.33%) follicular thyroid carcinoma, 1 
(14.29%) follicular thyroid adenoma and 4 (10%) goiter nodules. With cytology 
and molecular testing, the diagnostic accuracy was further increased to 98.82% 
in papillary thyroid carcinoma diagnosis, and was preoperatively increased to 
76.92% and 84.00%, respectively, in nodules with suspicious and indeterminate 
cytology. In conclusion, molecular testing of a panel of genetic alterations in 
fine-needle aspiration biopsy can be effectively performed in clinical practice. 
It enhances the accuracy of cytology and is of particular value for 
indeterminate nodules in the Chinese population.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.08.005
PMID: 25111330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]