1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Sep;42(15):10148-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku679. Epub
2014  Aug 11.

Hydration of protein-RNA recognition sites.

Barik A(1), Bahadur RP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur-721302, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur-721302, India r.bahadur@hijli.iitkgp.ernet.in.

We investigate the role of water molecules in 89 protein-RNA complexes taken 
from the Protein Data Bank. Those with tRNA and single-stranded RNA are less 
hydrated than with duplex or ribosomal proteins. Protein-RNA interfaces are 
hydrated less than protein-DNA interfaces, but more than protein-protein 
interfaces. Majority of the waters at protein-RNA interfaces makes multiple 
H-bonds; however, a fraction do not make any. Those making H-bonds have 
preferences for the polar groups of RNA than its partner protein. The spatial 
distribution of waters makes interfaces with ribosomal proteins and 
single-stranded RNA relatively 'dry' than interfaces with tRNA and duplex RNA. 
In contrast to protein-DNA interfaces, mainly due to the presence of the 2'OH, 
the ribose in protein-RNA interfaces is hydrated more than the phosphate or the 
bases. The minor groove in protein-RNA interfaces is hydrated more than the 
major groove, while in protein-DNA interfaces it is reverse. The strands make 
the highest number of water-mediated H-bonds per unit interface area followed by 
the helices and the non-regular structures. The preserved waters at protein-RNA 
interfaces make higher number of H-bonds than the other waters. Preserved waters 
contribute toward the affinity in protein-RNA recognition and should be 
carefully treated while engineering protein-RNA interfaces.

Â© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku679
PMCID: PMC4150782
PMID: 25114050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]