1. Front Microbiol. 2014 Jul 29;5:382. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00382. eCollection
 2014.

Identification of a cyclic-di-GMP-modulating response regulator that impacts 
biofilm formation in a model sulfate reducing bacterium.

Rajeev L(1), Luning EG(1), Altenburg S(2), Zane GM(3), Baidoo EE(1), Catena 
M(1), Keasling JD(4), Wall JD(3), Fields MW(5), Mukhopadhyay A(1).

Author information:
(1)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Center for Biofilm Engineering, Montana State University Bozeman, MT, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri Columbia, MO, USA.
(4)Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
Berkeley, CA, USA ; Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 
Department of Bioengineering, University of California Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Center for Biofilm Engineering, Montana State University Bozeman, MT, USA ; 
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University Bozeman, MT, 
USA.

We surveyed the eight putative cyclic-di-GMP-modulating response regulators 
(RRs) in Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough that are predicted to function via 
two-component signaling. Using purified proteins, we examined cyclic-di-GMP 
(c-di-GMP) production or turnover in vitro of all eight proteins. The two RRs 
containing only GGDEF domains (DVU2067, DVU0636) demonstrated c-di-GMP 
production activity in vitro. Of the remaining proteins, three RRs with HD-GYP 
domains (DVU0722, DVUA0086, and DVU2933) were confirmed to be Mn(2+)-dependent 
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) in vitro and converted c-di-GMP to its linear form, 
pGpG. DVU0408, containing both c-di-GMP production (GGDEF) and degradation 
domains (EAL), showed c-di-GMP turnover activity in vitro also with production 
of pGpG. No c-di-GMP related activity could be assigned to the RR DVU0330, 
containing a metal-dependent phosphohydrolase HD-OD domain, or to the HD-GYP 
domain RR, DVU1181. Studies included examining the impact of overexpressed 
cyclic-di-GMP-modulating RRs in the heterologous host E. coli and led to the 
identification of one RR, DVU0636, with increased cellulose production. 
Evaluation of a transposon mutant in DVU0636 indicated that the strain was 
impaired in biofilm formation and demonstrated an altered carbohydrate:protein 
ratio relative to the D. vulgaris wild type biofilms. However, grown in liquid 
lactate/sulfate medium, the DVU0636 transposon mutant showed no growth 
impairment relative to the wild-type strain. Among the eight candidates, only 
the transposon disruption mutant in the DVU2067 RR presented a growth defect in 
liquid culture. Our results indicate that, of the two diguanylate cyclases 
(DGCs) that function as part of two-component signaling, DVU0636 plays an 
important role in biofilm formation while the function of DVU2067 has pertinence 
in planktonic growth.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00382
PMCID: PMC4114195
PMID: 25120537