1. Res Dev Disabil. 2014 Nov;35(11):2976-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2014.07.031.
Epub  2014 Aug 12.

Recent insights into genotype-phenotype relationships in patients with Rett 
syndrome using a fine grain scale.

Fabio RA(1), Colombo B(2), Russo S(3), Cogliati F(3), Masciadri M(3), Foglia 
S(2), Antonietti A(2), Tavian D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Education and Cultural Studies, University 
of Messina, via Concezione 8, 98122 Messina, Italy. Electronic address: 
rafabio@unime.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Largo 
Gemelli 1, 20123 Milano, Italy.
(3)Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 
via Ariosto 13, 20145 Milano, Italy.
(4)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Largo 
Gemelli 1, 20123 Milano, Italy; Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology-CRIBENS, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Piazza 
Buonarroti 30, 20145 Milano, Italy.

Mutations in MECP2 gene cause Rett syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental disorder 
affecting around 1 in 10,000 female births. The clinical picture of RTT appears 
quite heterogeneous for each single feature. Mutations in MECP2 gene have been 
associated with the onset of RTT. The most known gene function consists of 
transcriptional repression of specific target genes, mainly by the binding of 
its methyl binding domain (MBD) to methylated CpG nucleotides and recruiting 
co-repressors and histone deacetylase binding to DNA by its transcription 
repressor domain (TRD). This study aimed at evaluating a cohort of 114 Rett 
syndrome (RTT) patients with a detailed scale measuring the different kinds of 
impairments produced by the syndrome. The sample included relatively large 
subsets of the most frequent mutations, so that genotype-phenotype correlations 
could be tested. Results revealed that frequent missense mutations showed a 
specific profile in different areas of impairment. The R306C mutation, 
considered as producing mild impairment, was associated to a moderate phenotype 
in which behavioural characteristics were mainly affected. A notable difference 
emerged by comparing mutations truncating the protein before and after the 
nuclear localization signal; such a difference concerned prevalently the 
motor-functional and autonomy skills of the patients, affecting the management 
of everyday activities.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ridd.2014.07.031
PMID: 25124696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]