1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 18;9(8):e105363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105363. 
eCollection 2014.

Expression of wheat high molecular weight glutenin subunit 1Bx is affected by 
large insertions and deletions located in the upstream flanking sequences.

Geng Y(1), Pang B(2), Hao C(3), Tang S(4), Zhang X(3), Li T(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancement, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China; College of Biological sciences, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Engineering and Technique Research Center of Hybrid Wheat, Beijing 
Academy of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancement, Ministry of 
Agriculture/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)College of Biological sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 
China.

To better understand the transcriptional regulation of high molecular weight 
glutenin subunit (HMW-GS) expression, we isolated four Glu-1Bx promoters from 
six wheat cultivars exhibiting diverse protein expression levels. The activities 
of the diverse Glu-1Bx promoters were tested and compared with Î²-glucuronidase 
(GUS) reporter fusions. Although all the full-length Glu-1Bx promoters showed 
endosperm-specific activities, the strongest GUS activity was observed with the 
1Bx7OE promoter in both transient expression assays and stable transgenic rice 
lines. A 43 bp insertion in the 1Bx7OE promoter, which is absent in the 1Bx7 
promoter, led to enhanced expression. Analysis of promoter deletion constructs 
confirmed that a 185 bp MITE (miniature inverted-repeat transposable element) in 
the 1Bx14 promoter had a weak positive effect on Glu-1Bx expression, and a 54 bp 
deletion in the 1Bx13 promoter reduced endosperm-specific activity. To 
investigate the effect of the 43 bp insertion in the 1Bx7OE promoter, a 
functional marker was developed to screen 505 Chinese varieties and 160 European 
varieties, and only 1Bx7-type varieties harboring the 43 bp insertion in their 
promoters showed similar overexpression patterns. Hence, the 1Bx7OE promoter 
should be important tool in crop genetic engineering as well as in molecular 
assisted breeding.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105363
PMCID: PMC4136844
PMID: 25133580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.