1. Arch Environ Occup Health. 2016;71(1):26-34. doi:
10.1080/19338244.2014.937381.  Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Heavy metals, organic solvents, and multiple sclerosis: An exploratory look at 
gene-environment interactions.

Napier MD(1), Poole C(1), Satten GA(2), Ashley-Koch A(3), Marrie RA(4), 
Williamson DM(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health , 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , 
USA.
(2)b Division of Reproductive Health , Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention , Atlanta , Georgia , USA.
(3)c Center for Human Disease Modeling , Duke University Medical Center , Durham 
, North Carolina , USA.
(4)d Departments of Internal Medicine and Community Health Sciences , University 
of Manitoba , Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada.

Exposure to heavy metals and organic solvents are potential etiologic factors 
for multiple sclerosis (MS), but their interaction with MS-associated genes is 
under-studied. The authors explored the relationship between environmental 
exposure to lead, mercury, and solvents and 58 single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in MS-associated genes. Data from a population-based case-control study 
of 217 prevalent MS cases and 496 age-, race-, gender-, and geographically 
matched controls were used to fit conditional logistic regression models of the 
association between the chemical, gene, and MS, adjusting for education and 
ancestry. MS cases were more likely than controls to report lead (odds ratio 
[OR] = 2.03; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.07, 3.86) and mercury exposure (OR 
= 2.06; 95% CI: 1.08, 3.91). Findings of potential gene-environment interactions 
between SNPs in TNF-α, TNF-β, TCA-β, VDR, MBP, and APOE, and lead, mercury, or 
solvents should be considered cautiously due to limited sample size.

DOI: 10.1080/19338244.2014.937381
PMCID: PMC4334728
PMID: 25137520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Declaration: Dr. Marrie 
receives research funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 
Public Health Agency of Canada, Manitoba Health Research Council, Health 
Sciences Centre Foundation, Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada, Multiple 
Sclerosis Scientific Foundation, Rx & D Health Research Foundation, and has 
conducted clinical trials funded by Sanofi-Aventis. I and Drs. Poole, Satten, 
Ashley-Koch, and Williamson have no conflicts of interest regarding the 
submitted manuscript.