1. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov;54(11):1264-74. doi: 10.1002/mc.22199. Epub 2014 Aug
17.

Genetic analysis of colon tumors induced by a dietary carcinogen PhIP in CYP1A 
humanized mice: Identification of mutation of β-catenin/Ctnnb1 as the driver 
gene for the carcinogenesis.

Wang H(1), Zhou H(2), Liu A(1), Guo X(1), Yang CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Susan L. Cullman Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Chemical 
Biology and Center for Cancer Prevention Research, Ernest Mario School of 
Pharmacy, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Saint Joseph, West Hartford, 
Connecticut.

Replacing mouse Cyp1a with human CYP1A enables the humanized CYP1A mice to mimic 
human metabolism of the dietary carcinogen, 
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), by N(2) -hydroxylation 
to a proximate carcinogen. Our previous study demonstrated that PhIP, combined 
with the dextrin sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis, induces colon 
carcinogenesis in hCYP1A mice. Here, we employed whole exome sequencing and 
found multiple gene mutations in PhIP/DSS-induced colon tumors. Mutations in the 
exon 3 of Ctnnb1/β-catenin, however, were the predominant events. We further 
sequenced the key fragments of Apc, Ctnnb1, and Kras, because mutations of these 
genes in the humans are commonly found as the drivers of colorectal cancer. 
Mutations on either codon 32 or 34 in the exon 3 of Ctnnb1 were found in 39 out 
of 42 tumors, but no mutation was found in either Apc or Kras. The sequence 
context of codons 32 and 34 suggests that PhIP targets +3G in a TGGA motif of 
Ctnnb1. Since mutations that activate Wnt signal is a major driving force for 
human colorectal cancers, we conclude that the mutated β-catenin is the driver 
in PhIP/DSS-induced colon carcinogenesis. This result suggests that the colon 
tumors in hCYP1A mice mimic human colorectal carcinogenesis not only in the 
dietary etiology involving PhIP, but also in the aberrant activation of the Wnt 
signaling pathway as the driving force.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mc.22199
PMCID: PMC4331268
PMID: 25131582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]