1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 18;9(8):e104650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104650. 
eCollection 2014.

A novel glycated hemoglobin A1c-lowering traditional Chinese medicinal formula, 
identified by translational medicine study.

Lo HY(1), Hsiang CY(2), Li TC(3), Li CC(4), Huang HC(5), Chen JC(6), Ho TY(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biostatistics, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Chinese Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chinese Medicine Resources, 
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Medicinal Botany and Healthcare, Da-Yeh University, Changhua, 
Taiwan.

Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder that has a significant impact on the 
health care system. The reduction of glycated hemoglobin A1c is highly 
associated with the improvements of glycemic control and diabetic complications. 
In this study, we identified a traditional Chinese medicinal formula with a 
HbA1c-lowering potential from clinical evidences. By surveying 9,973 diabetic 
patients enrolled in Taiwan Diabetic Care Management Program, we found that 
Chu-Yeh-Shih-Kao-Tang (CYSKT) significantly reduced HbA1c values in diabetic 
patients. CYSKT reduced the levels of HbA1c and fasting blood glucose, and 
stimulated the blood glucose clearance in type 2 diabetic mice. CYSKT affected 
the expressions of genes associated with insulin signaling pathway, increased 
the amount of phosphorylated insulin receptor in cells and tissues, and 
stimulated the translocation of glucose transporter 4. Moreover, CYSKT affected 
the expressions of genes related to diabetic complications, improved the levels 
of renal function indexes, and increased the survival rate of diabetic mice. In 
conclusion, this was a translational medicine study that applied a 
"bedside-to-bench" approach to identify a novel HbA1c-lowering formula. Our 
findings suggested that oral administration of CYSKT affected insulin signaling 
pathway, decreased HbA1c and blood glucose levels, and consequently reduced 
mortality rate in type 2 diabetic mice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104650
PMCID: PMC4136774
PMID: 25133699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.