1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Nov;99(11):E2429-36. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2281. 
Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Functional analysis of novel genetic variation in the thyroid hormone activating 
type 2 deiodinase.

Zevenbergen C(1), Klootwijk W, Peeters RP, Medici M, de Rijke YB, Huisman SA, 
Goeman H, Boot E, de Kuijper G, de Waal KH, Meima ME, Larsen PR, Visser TJ, 
Visser WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (C.Z., W.K., R.P.P., M.M., Y.B.d.R., M.E.M., 
T.J.V., W.E.V.), Rotterdam Thyroid Center (C.Z., W.K., R.P.P., M.M., M.E.M., 
T.J.V., W.E.V.), Department of Clinical Chemistry (Y.B.d.R.), Erasmus Medical 
Center, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Prinsenstichting 
(S.A.H.), Kwadijkerpark 8, 1444 JE Purmerend, The Netherlands; Ipse De Bruggen 
(H.G., E.B.), Spoorlaan 19, 2471 PB Zwammerdam, The Netherlands; Vanboeijenoord 
(G.d.K.), Industrieweg 14-16, 9400 RA Assen, The Netherlands; 's Heeren Loo 
Groot Schuilenburg (K.H.d.W.), Laan Van Groot Schuylenburg 310-320, 7325 BG 
Apeldoorn, The Netherlands; and Department of Internal Medicine (R.L.), Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

CONTEXT: Thyroid hormones (TH) are important for normal brain development and 
abnormal TH regulation in the brain results in neurocognitive impairments. The 
type 2 deiodinase (D2) is important for local TH control in the brain by 
generating the active hormone T3 from its precursor T4. Dysfunction of D2 likely 
results in a neurocognitive phenotype. No mutations in D2 have been reported 
yet.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to identify D2 mutations in patients 
with intellectual disability and to test their functional consequences.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: The patients were selected from the multicenter 
Thyroid Origin of Psychomotor Retardation study, which is a cohort of 946 
subjects with unexplained intellectual disability. Based on characteristic serum 
TH values, the coding region of the DIO2 gene was sequenced in 387 patients. 
Functional consequences were assessed by in vitro D2 assays or intact cell 
metabolism studies using cells transfected with wild-type or mutant D2.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis revealed two heterozygous mutations: c.11T>A (p.L4H) 
in three subjects and c.305C>T (p.T102I) in one subject. Sequence analysis of 
family members revealed several carriers, but no segregation was observed with 
thyroid parameters or neurocognitive phenotype. Extensive tests with different 
in vitro D2 assays did not show differences between wild-type and mutant D2.
CONCLUSION: This study describes the identification and functional consequences 
of novel genetic variation in TH activating enzyme D2. Family studies and 
functional tests suggest that these variants do not underlie the neurocognitive 
impairment. Altogether our data provide evidence of the existence of rare but 
apparently harmless genetic variants of D2.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-2281
PMID: 25140401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]