1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:379234. doi: 10.1155/2014/379234. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitor derived from cross-linked oyster 
protein.

Xie CL(1), Kim JS(1), Ha JM(2), Choung SY(3), Choi YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Seafood Science and Technology/Institute of Marine Industry, 
Gyeongsang National University, Gyeongnam-do 650-160, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, College of Medical and Life 
Science, Silla University, Busan 617-736, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Hygienic Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Following cross-linking by microbial transglutaminase, modified oyster proteins 
were hydrolyzed to improve inhibitory activity against angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity with the use of a single protease, or a 
combination of six proteases. The oyster hydrolysate with the lowest 50% ACE 
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 0.40 mg/mL was obtained by two-step 
hydrolysis of the cross-linked oyster protein using Protamex and Neutrase. Five 
ACE inhibitory peptides were purified from the oyster hydrolysate using a 
multistep chromatographic procedure comprised of ion-exchange, size exclusion, 
and reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Their sequences were identified as 
TAY, VK, KY, FYN, and YA, using automated Edman degradation and mass 
spectrometry. These peptides were synthesized, and their IC50 values were 
measured to be 16.7, 29.0, 51.5, 68.2, and 93.9 Î¼M, respectively. Toxicity of 
the peptides on the HepG2 cell line was not detected. The oyster hydrolysate 
also significantly decreased the systolic blood pressure of spontaneously 
hypertensive rats (SHR). The antihypertensive effect of the oyster hydrolysate 
on SHR was rapid and long-lasting, compared to commercially obtained sardine 
hydrolysate. These results suggest that the oyster hydrolysate could be a source 
of effective nutraceuticals against hypertension.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/379234
PMCID: PMC4130196
PMID: 25140307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]