1. Angiology. 2015 May;66(5):422-32. doi: 10.1177/0003319714546368. Epub 2014 Aug
 21.

Association between MTHFR C677T polymorphism and venous thromboembolism risk in 
the Chinese population: a meta-analysis of 24 case-controlled studies.

Zhang P(1), Gao X(1), Zhang Y(2), Hu Y(2), Ma H(1), Wang W(1), Wang H(1), Zhang 
J(1), Xu H(3), Lu Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of General Practice, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 
China.
(3)Department of Interventional Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical 
College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Public Health, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China 
l23zj@163.com.

The association between methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene 
polymorphisms and venous thromboembolism (VTE) risk in the Chinese population 
has been widely reported, but results were inconsistent and underpowered. To 
elucidate the variable results, a meta-analysis and systematic review were 
performed from all case-controlled studies relating MTHFR C677T polymorphism by 
pooling data on them. We estimated the pooled odds ratio with its 95% confidence 
intervals to assess this possible association. Finally, a total of 24 studies 
with 2339 cases and 4048 controls were included in the current meta-analysis. 
Significant association was found with VTE risk for all genetic models. Subgroup 
analyses by type of VTE further identified the above-mentioned association in 
deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism and splanchnic vein thrombosis. The 
findings from our meta-analysis support the associations of MTHFR C677T 
polymorphism with VTE risk in the Chinese population.

Â© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0003319714546368
PMID: 25149317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]