1. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;35(8):703-7. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2014.08.007.

[Correlation between point mutation in ABL kinase and clinical outcome of 
chronic myeloid leukemia patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao G(1), Xu N(1), Yin C(1), Zhou X(1), Xiao Y(1), Li L(1), Liao L(1), Cao R(1), 
Xu D(1), Meng F(1), Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the association of different types of ABL tyrosine point 
mutations and imatinib resistance to probe the relation between ABL tyrosine 
point mutations and the prognosis of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia 
(CML).
METHODS: Nested reverse transcriptasepolym erase chain reaction was performed on 
samples from 70 patients to amplify the ABL kinase domain. Then, the amplified 
product was purified and sequenced in both direction. The homologous analysis 
was performed in combination of clinical data.
RESULTS: The ABL domain point mutations were detected in 32 patients (45.7%) 
including 16 patients in chronic phase (CP), 6 patients in accelerated 
phase(AP)and 10 patients in blast phase (BP), which were detected as T315I, 
E255K, C475Y, Y253H, G321W, G250E, F317L, E258K, F359V, E459K and F311I, 
respectively. Sokal score with intermediate and high risk and Ph+ chromosome 
with complex karyotype were important risk factors for ABL domain point 
mutations. The 5-year overall survival (OS) was not significantly different 
between the patients with or without ABL domain point mutations (78.1% vs 84.2%, 
P=0.985), while the 5-year cumulative event-free survival (EFS) of two groups 
were 34.4% and 68.4% (P=0.034), respectively. The rate of complete cytogenetic 
response was higher in patients treated with allogenic hematopetic stem cell 
transplantation (allo-HSCT) compared with patients merely treated with 
second-generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors or chemotherapeutics (P=0.001).
CONCLUSION: Patients with ABL domain point mutations had poor efficacy and 
prognosis compared to those without ABL domain point mutations. Detection of ABL 
domain point mutations in CML-CP was helpful for the adjustment of therapeutic 
options and improvement of prognosis. And allo-HSCT was a more effective therapy 
for patients with advanced phase.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2014.08.007
PMID: 25152116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]