1. AIDS. 2014 Nov 13;28(17):2517-21. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000436.

Genetic variation in Trex1 affects HIV-1 disease progression.

Booiman T(1), Setiawan LC, Kootstra NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Sanquin Research, Landsteiner 
Laboratory and Center for Infection and Immunity (CINIMA) at the Academic 
Medical Center of the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Three prime repair exonuclease 1 (TREX1) plays a pivotal role in 
HIV-1 infection. In-vitro studies have shown that TREX1 degrades excess HIV-1 
DNA, thereby shielding HIV-1 from recognition by innate immune receptors and 
preventing a type 1 interferon response. To determine whether TREX1 plays a role 
in HIV-1 pathogenesis, we analyzed whether genetic variation in Trex1 is 
associated with the clinical course of HIV-1 infection.
DESIGN/METHODS: Two tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in Trex1 were 
genotyped in a cohort of 304 HIV-1-infected MSM and a cohort of 66 high-risk 
seronegative individuals. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression survival analyses were 
used to analyze the effect of the SNPs on HIV-1 disease progression. In-vitro 
HIV-1 infection assays and Trex1 mRNA analysis were performed in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) obtained from donors that were genotyped for the 
tag SNP in Trex1.
RESULTS: We observed that the minor allele of SNP rs3135941 in Trex1 is 
associated with faster HIV-1 disease progression. This association was 
independent of the CCR5-Î”32 genotype and human leukocyte antigen alleles that 
were previously found to be predictive of disease progression. In addition, we 
observed an increased HIV-1 replication in PBMC positive for the minor allele of 
SNP rs3135941.
CONCLUSION: Our data emphasize the important role of TREX1 in HIV-1 
pathogenesis. The association of SNP rs3135941 with accelerated disease 
progression that we observed might be explained by the increased HIV-1 
replication observed in PBMC positive for the minor allele of the SNP.

DOI: 10.1097/QAD.0000000000000436
PMID: 25162766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]