1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Nov 15;92(2):280-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.08.023.
Epub  2014 Aug 29.

Identification of transmembrane domain 1 & 2 residues that contribute to the 
formation of the ligand-binding pocket of the urotensin-II receptor.

Sainsily X(1), Cabana J(1), Holleran BJ(1), Escher E(1), Lavigne P(1), Leduc 
R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institut de Pharmacologie de Sherbrooke, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, 
Canada J1H5N4.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Institut de Pharmacologie de Sherbrooke, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, 
Canada J1H5N4. Electronic address: richard.leduc@usherbrooke.ca.

The vasoactive urotensin-II (UII), a cyclic undecapeptide widely distributed in 
cardiovascular, renal and endocrine systems, specifically binds the UII receptor 
(UT receptor), a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). The involvement of this 
receptor in numerous pathophysiological conditions including atherosclerosis, 
heart failure, hypertension, renal impairment and diabetes potentially makes it 
an interesting therapeutic target. To elucidate how UII binds the UT receptor 
through the identification of specific residues in transmembrane domains (TM) 
one (TM1) and two (TM2) that are involved in the formation of the receptor's 
binding pocket, we used the substituted-cysteine accessibility method (SCAM). 
Each residue of TM1 (V49((1.30)) to M76((1.57))) and TM2 (V88((2.41)) to 
H117((2.70))) was mutated, one by one, to a cysteine. The resulting mutants were 
then expressed in COS-7 cells and subsequently treated with the 
sulfhydryl-specific alkylating agent methanethiosulfonate-ethylammonium (MTSEA). 
MTSEA treatment resulted in a significant binding inhibition of (125)I-UII to 
mutant I54C((1.35)) in TM1 and mutants Y100C((2.53)), S103C((2.56)), 
F106C((2.59)), I107C((2.60)), T110C((2.63)) and Y111C((2.64)) in TM2. These 
results identify key structural residues in TM1 and TM2 that participate in the 
formation of the UT receptor binding pocket. Together with previous SCAM 
analysis of TM3, TM4, TM5, TM6 and TM7, these results have led us to identify 
residues within all 7 TMs that participate in UT's binding pocket and have 
enabled us to propose a model of this receptor's orthosteric binding site.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.08.023
PMID: 25175740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]