1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Oct;147(3):473-85. doi:
10.1007/s10549-014-3082-8.  Epub 2014 Sep 2.

AR collaborates with ERα in aromatase inhibitor-resistant breast cancer.

Rechoum Y(1), Rovito D, Iacopetta D, Barone I, Andò S, Weigel NL, O'Malley BW, 
Brown PH, Fuqua SA.

Author information:
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor 
Plaza, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) is an attractive target in breast cancer because of its 
frequent expression in all the molecular subtypes, especially in estrogen 
receptor (ER)-positive luminal breast cancers. We have previously shown a role 
for AR overexpression in tamoxifen resistance. We engineered ER-positive MCF-7 
cells to overexpress aromatase and AR (MCF-7 AR Arom cells) to explore the role 
of AR in aromatase inhibitor (AI) resistance. Androstendione (AD) was used as a 
substrate for aromatization to estrogen. The nonsteroidal AI anastrazole (Ana) 
inhibited AD-stimulated growth and ER transcriptional activity in MCF-7 Arom 
cells, but not in MCF-7 AR Arom cells. Enhanced activation of pIGF-1R and pAKT 
was found in AR-overexpressing cells, and their inhibitors restored sensitivity 
to Ana, suggesting that these pathways represent escape survival mechanisms. 
Sensitivity to Ana was restored with AR antagonists, or the antiestrogen 
fulvestrant. These results suggest that both AR and ERα must be blocked to 
restore sensitivity to hormonal therapies in AR-overexpressing ERα-positive 
breast cancers. AR contributed to ERα transcriptional activity in MCF-7 AR Arom 
cells, and AR and ERα co-localized in AD + Ana-treated cells, suggesting 
cooperation between the two receptors. AR-mediated resistance was associated 
with a failure to block ER transcriptional activity and enhanced up-regulation 
of AR and ER-responsive gene expression. Clinically, it may be necessary to 
block both AR and ERα in patients whose tumors express elevated levels of AR. In 
addition, inhibitors to the AKT/IGF-1R signaling pathways may provide 
alternative approaches to block escape pathways and restore hormone sensitivity 
in resistant breast tumors.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-014-3082-8
PMCID: PMC4337991
PMID: 25178514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.