1. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Sep;196(2):90-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.08.005. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Characterization of Leishmania major phosphatidylethanolamine methyltransferases 
LmjPEM1 and LmjPEM2 and their inhibition by choline analogs.

Bibis SS(1), Dahlstrom K(2), Zhu T(1), Zufferey R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, St John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway, 
Jamaica, NY 11439, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, St John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway, 
Jamaica, NY 11439, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Kansas State University, 
Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. Electronic address: zufferer@stjohns.edu.

Phosphatidylcholine (PC) is the most abundant phospholipid in the membranes of 
the human parasite Leishmania. It is synthesized via two metabolic routes, the 
de novo pathway that starts with the uptake of choline, and the threefold 
methylation of phosphatidylethanolamine. Choline was shown to be dispensable for 
Leishmania; thus, the methylation pathway likely represents the primary route 
for PC production. Here, we have identified and characterized two 
phosphatidylethanolamine methyltransferases, LmjPEM1 and LmjPEM2. Both enzymes 
are expressed in promastigotes as well as in the vertebrate form amastigotes, 
suggesting that these methyltransferases are important for the development of 
the parasite throughout its life cycle. These enzymes are maximally expressed 
during the log phase of growth which correlates with the demand of PC synthesis 
during cell multiplication. Immunofluorescence studies combined with cell 
fractionation have shown that both methyltransferases are localized at the 
endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Heterologous expression in yeast has 
demonstrated that LmjPEM1 and LmjPEM2 complement the choline auxotrophy 
phenotype of a yeast double null mutant lacking phosphatidylethanolamine 
methyltransferase activity. LmjPEM1 catalyzes the first, and to a lesser extent, 
the second methylation reaction. In contrast, LmjPEM2 has the capacity to add 
the second and third methyl group onto phosphatidylethanolamine to yield 
(lyso)PC; it can also add the first methyl group, albeit with very low 
efficiency. Finally, we have demonstrated using inhibition studies with choline 
analogs that miltefosine and octadecyltrimethylammonium bromide are potent 
inhibitors of this metabolic pathway.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.08.005
PMCID: PMC4252796
PMID: 25176160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]