1. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 1;193(7):3549-58. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401138. Epub 2014
 Aug 29.

CXCL1 contributes to host defense in polymicrobial sepsis via modulating T cell 
and neutrophil functions.

Jin L(1), Batra S(1), Douda DN(2), Palaniyar N(2), Jeyaseelan S(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Lung Biology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, Center 
for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, Louisiana State University School 
of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, LA 70803;
(2)Program in Physiology and Experimental Medicine, SickKids Research Institute, 
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; and.
(3)Laboratory of Lung Biology, Department of Pathobiological Sciences, Center 
for Experimental Infectious Disease Research, Louisiana State University School 
of Veterinary Medicine, Baton Rouge, LA 70803; Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Louisiana State University 
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112 jey@lsu.edu.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2022 Mar 15;208(6):1509. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2101213.

Severe bacterial sepsis leads to a proinflammatory condition that can manifest 
as septic shock, multiple organ failure, and death. Neutrophils are critical for 
the rapid elimination of bacteria; however, the role of neutrophil 
chemoattractant CXCL1 in bacterial clearance during sepsis remains elusive. To 
test the hypothesis that CXCL1 is critical to host defense during sepsis, we 
used CXCL1-deficient mice and bone marrow chimeras to demonstrate the importance 
of this molecule in sepsis. We demonstrate that CXCL1 plays a pivotal role in 
mediating host defense to polymicrobial sepsis after cecal ligation and puncture 
in gene-deficient mice. CXCL1 appears to be essential for restricting bacterial 
outgrowth and death in mice. CXCL1 derived from both hematopoietic and resident 
cells contributed to bacterial clearance. Moreover, CXCL1 is essential for 
neutrophil migration, expression of proinflammatory mediators, activation of 
NF-κB and MAPKs, and upregulation of adhesion molecule ICAM-1. rIL-17 rescued 
impaired host defenses in cxcl1(-/-) mice. CXCL1 is important for IL-17A 
production via Th17 differentiation. CXCL1 is essential for NADPH 
oxidase-mediated reactive oxygen species production and neutrophil extracellular 
trap formation. This study reveals a novel role for CXCL1 in neutrophil 
recruitment via modulating T cell function and neutrophil-related bactericidal 
functions. These studies suggest that modulation of CXCL1 levels in tissues and 
blood could reduce bacterial burden in sepsis.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401138
PMCID: PMC4170008
PMID: 25172493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]