1. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2014 Sep;15(9):830-7. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1400062.

A novel variant in TBX20 (p.D176N) identified by whole-exome sequencing in 
combination with a congenital heart disease related gene filter is associated 
with familial atrial septal defect.

Liu JJ(1), Fan LL, Chen JL, Tan ZP, Yang YF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha 410011, China; Department of Cell Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha 410013, China; Center of 
Clinical Gene Diagnosis and Therapy, the State Key Laboratory of Medical 
Genetics, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 
410011, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of birth defects, and its 
etiology is not completely understood. Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of the 
most common defects of CHD. Previous studies have demonstrated that mutations in 
the transcription factor T-box 20 (TBX20) contribute to congenital ASD. 
Whole-exome sequencing in combination with a CHD-related gene filter was used to 
detect a family of three generations with ASD. A novel TBX20 mutation, c.526G>A 
(p.D176N), was identified and co-segregated in all affected members in this 
family. This mutation was predicted to be deleterious by bioinformatics programs 
(SIFT, Polyphen2, and MutationTaster). This mutation was also not presented in 
the current Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Database (dbSNP) or National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project (ESP). In conclusion, 
our finding expands the spectrum of TBX20 mutations and provides additional 
support that TBX20 plays important roles in cardiac development. Our study also 
provided a new and cost-effective analysis strategy for the genetic study in 
small CHD pedigree.

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1400062
PMCID: PMC4162884
PMID: 25183037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethics guidelines: Ji-jia LIU, 
Liang-liang FAN, Jin-lan CHEN, Zhi-ping TAN, and Yi-feng YANG declare that they 
have no conflict of interest. All procedures followed were in accordance with 
the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation 
(institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as 
revised in 2008 (5). Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being 
included in the study. Additional informed consent was obtained from all 
patients for which identifying information is included in this article.