1. Redox Biol. 2014 Jul 27;2:936-44. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.07.005.
eCollection  2014.

Mitochondrial stress signaling in longevity: a new role for mitochondrial 
function in aging.

Hill S(1), Van Remmen H(2).

Author information:
(1)Free Radical Biology and Aging Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, 825 N.E. 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA ; Oklahoma City 
VA Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA ; Department of Cellular and 
Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 
7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA ; Barshop Institute for 
Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(2)Free Radical Biology and Aging Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, 825 N.E. 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA ; Oklahoma City 
VA Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Mitochondria are principal regulators of cellular function and metabolism 
through production of ATP for energy homeostasis, maintenance of calcium 
homeostasis, regulation of apoptosis and fatty acid oxidation to provide acetyl 
CoA for fueling the electron transport chain. In addition, mitochondria play a 
key role in cell signaling through production of reactive oxygen species that 
modulate redox signaling. Recent findings support an additional mechanism for 
control of cellular and tissue function by mitochondria through complex 
mitochondrial-nuclear communication mechanisms and potentially through 
extracellular release of mitochondrial components that can act as signaling 
molecules. The activation of stress responses including mitophagy, mitochondrial 
number, fission and fusion events, and the mitochondrial unfolded protein 
response (UPR(MT)) requires mitochondrial-nuclear communication for the 
transcriptional activation of nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial quality 
control and metabolism. The induction of these signaling pathways is a shared 
feature in long-lived organisms spanning from yeast to mice. As a result, the 
role of mitochondrial stress signaling in longevity has been expansively 
studied. Current and exciting studies provide evidence that mitochondria can 
also signal among tissues to up-regulate cytoprotective activities to promote 
healthy aging. Alternatively, mitochondria release signals to modulate innate 
immunity and systemic inflammatory responses and could consequently promote 
inflammation during aging. In this review, established and emerging models of 
mitochondrial stress response pathways and their potential role in modulating 
longevity are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.07.005
PMCID: PMC4143811
PMID: 25180170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]