1. BMC Infect Dis. 2014 Sep 3;14:478. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-478.

Characterization of extensively drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
isolates circulating in Siberia.

Dymova MA(1), Cherednichenko AG, Alkhovik OI, Khrapov EA, Petrenko TI, Filipenko 
ML.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine (ICBFM), Siberian 
Branch of The Russian Academy of Sciences (SB RAS), Novosibirsk, Russia. 
maya.a.rot@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The spread of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively 
drug-resistant (XDR) Mycobacterium tuberculosis compromises effective control of 
tuberculosis (TB) in Siberia. Early identification of drug-resistant isolates 
is, therefore, crucial for effective treatment of this disease. The aim of this 
study was to conduct drug susceptibility testing and identify mutations in drug 
resistance genes in clinical isolates of M. tuberculosis from some TB patients 
presenting for treatment in Siberia.
METHODS: Thirty randomly selected clinical isolates of M. tuberculosis were 
obtained from the Novosibirsk Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Russia. 
Isolates were screened for drug resistance and characterized by variable number 
of tandem repeats (VNTR)-typing using 15 standard and four additional loci. 
Deligotyping on multiple large sequences was performed using 10 loci.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine of the isolates were assigned XDR status. Twenty-eight 
isolates belonged to the M. tuberculosis Beijing family, from which 11 isolates 
were considered the M11 type (39%), two the M2 type (7%), and one the M33 type 
(3%). Seventeen isolates (60.7%) from this family exhibited unique genetic 
patterns. The remaining two isolates belonged to the Latino-American 
Mediterranean family. Gene sequences (rpoB, katG, rrs, rpsL, tlyA, gidB, gyrA, 
gyrB) were analyzed to identify mutations that confer resistance to rifampicin, 
isoniazid, amikacin, kanamycin, capreomycin, and ofloxacin. The most common 
mutations among the XDR isolates were S531L in RpoB, S315T in KatG, various 
codon 94 mutations in gyrA, A90V in GyrA, K43R in RpsL, and 1401 A â†’ G in rrs; 
these confer resistance to rifampicin, isoniazid, ofloxacin, streptomycin and 
kanamycin/capreomycin, respectively. There was high congruence between the two 
typing methods (VNTR typing and deligotyping) and RD105, RD149, RD152, RD181, 
and RD207 regions of difference were absent from the 28 Beijing family isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: Deligotyping can be used for rapid and reliable screening of M. 
tuberculosis isolates, followed by more in-depth genotyping. Identification of 
Beijing family isolates with extensive drug resistance confirms that such 
strains have epidemiological importance in Siberia. Rapid detection of mutations 
that lead to drug resistance should facilitate selection of effective drug 
therapies, and the development of early prevention strategies to combat this 
infection.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2334-14-478
PMCID: PMC4161839
PMID: 25186134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]