1. Int J Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;136(5):E262-71. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29195. Epub 2014 Sep
 19.

Germline polymorphisms and survival of lung adenocarcinoma patients: a 
genome-wide study in two European patient series.

Galvan A(1), Colombo F, Frullanti E, Dassano A, Noci S, Wang Y, Eisen T, 
Matakidou A, Tomasello L, Vezzalini M, Sorio C, Dugo M, Ambrogi F, Iacobucci I, 
Martinelli G, Incarbone M, Alloisio M, Nosotti M, Tosi D, Santambrogio L, Pelosi 
G, Pastorino U, Houlston RS, Dragani TA.

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.

In lung cancer, the survival of patients with the same clinical stage varies 
widely for unknown reasons. In this two-phase study, we examined the hypothesis 
that germline variations influence the survival of patients with lung 
adenocarcinoma. First, we analyzed existing genotype and clinical data from 289 
UK-resident patients with lung adenocarcinoma, identifying 86 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) that associated with survival (p < 0.01). We then genotyped 
these candidate SNPs in a validation series of 748 patients from Italy that 
resulted genetically compatible with the UK series based on principal component 
analysis. In a Cox proportional hazard model adjusted for age, sex and clinical 
stage, four SNPs were confirmed on the basis of their having a hazard ratio (HR) 
indicating the same direction of effect in the two series and p < 0.05. The 
strongest association was provided by rs2107561, an intronic SNP of PTPRG, 
protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, G; the C allele was associated with 
poorer survival in both patient series (pooled analysis loge HR = 0.31; 95% CI: 
0.15-0.46, p = 8.5 × 10(-5) ). PTPRG mRNA levels in 43 samples of lung 
adenocarcinoma were 40% of those observed in noninvolved lung tissue from the 
same patients. PTPRG overexpression significantly inhibited the clonogenicity of 
A549 lung carcinoma cells and the anchorage-independent growth of the NCI-H460 
large cell lung cancer line. These four germline variants represent promising 
candidates that, with further study, may help predict clinical outcome. In 
addition, the PTPRG locus may have a role in tumor progression.

© 2014 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29195
PMID: 25196286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]