1. J Nutr Sci. 2014 Jan 2;2:e44. doi: 10.1017/jns.2013.31. eCollection 2013.

Consumption of Bifidobacterium lactis Bi-07 by healthy elderly adults enhances 
phagocytic activity of monocytes and granulocytes.

Maneerat S(1), Lehtinen MJ(2), Childs CE(1), Forssten SD(2), Alhoniemi E(3), 
Tiphaine M(1), Yaqoob P(1), Ouwehand AC(2), Rastall RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences , University of Reading , Reading 
RG6 6AP , UK.
(2)Active Nutrition, DuPont Nutrition and Health, Danisco Sweeteners OY 
Sokeritehtaantie 20, 02460 Kantvik , Finland.
(3)Pharmatest Services Ltd , Itäinen Pitkäkatu 4 C, FI-20520 Finland.

Erratum in
    J Nutr Sci. 2014;3:e4.

Elderly adults have alterations in their gut microbiota and immune functions 
that are associated with higher susceptibility to infections and metabolic 
disorders. Probiotics and prebiotics, and their synbiotic combinations are food 
supplements that have been shown to improve both gut and immune function. The 
objective of this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over human 
clinical trial was to study immune function and the gut microbiota in healthy 
elderly adults. Volunteers (n 37) consumed prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharides 
(GOS; 8 g/d), probiotic Bifidobacterium lactis Bi-07 (Bi-07; 10(9) 
colony-forming units/d), their combination (Bi-07 + GOS) and maltodextrin 
control (8 g/d) in four 3-week periods separated by 4-week wash-out periods. 
Immune function was analysed by determining the phagocytic and oxidative burst 
activity of monocytes and granulocytes, whole-blood response to 
lipopolysaccharide, plasma chemokine concentrations and salivary IgA levels. Gut 
microbiota composition and faecal SCFA content were determined using 16S 
ribosomal RNA fluorescence in situ hybridisation and HPLC, respectively. Primary 
statistical analyses indicated the presence of carry-over effects and thus 
measurements from only the first supplementation period were considered valid. 
Subsequent statistical analysis showed that consumption of Bi-07 improved the 
phagocytic activity of monocytes (P < 0·001) and granulocytes (P = 0·02). Other 
parameters were unchanged. We have for the first time shown that the probiotic 
Bi-07 may provide health benefits to elderly individuals by improving the 
phagocytic activity of monocytes and granulocytes. The present results also 
suggest that in the elderly, the effects of some probiotics and prebiotics may 
last longer than in adults.

DOI: 10.1017/jns.2013.31
PMCID: PMC4153077
PMID: 25191600