1. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 8;9(9):e106794. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106794. 
eCollection 2014.

A Newfound association between MDC1 functional polymorphism and lung cancer risk 
in Chinese.

Wang B(1), Zhang L(1), Qiu F(1), Fang W(1), Deng J(2), Zhou Y(2), Lu J(1), Yang 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)The State Key Lab of Respiratory Disease, The Institute for Chemical 
Carcinogenesis, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Soochow University Laboratory of Cancer Molecular Genetics, Medical College 
of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Jan 30;10(1):e0117882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117882.

Mediator of DNA damage checkpoint protein 1 (MDC1) plays an early and core role 
in Double-Strand Break Repair (DDR) and ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) 
mediated response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs), and thus involves the 
pathogenesis of several DNA damage-related diseases such as cancer. We 
hypothesized that the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of MDC1 which have 
potencies on affecting MDC1 expression or function were associated with risk of 
lung cancer. In a two-stage case-control study, we tested the association 
between 5 putatively functional SNPs of MDC1 and lung cancer risk in a southern 
Chinese population, and validated the promising association in an eastern 
Chinese population. We found the SNP rs4713354A>C that is located in the 
5′-untranslated region of MDC1 was significantly associated with lung cancer 
risk in both populations (P = 0.001), with an odds ratio as 1.33(95% confidence 
interval = 1.14–1.55) for the rs4713354C (CA+CC) genotypes compared to the 
rs4713354AA genotype. The correct sixth sentence is: The gene-based analysis 
rested with these SNPs suggested the MDC1 as a susceptible gene for lung cancer 
(P = 0.057) [corrected]. Moreover, by querying the gene expression database, we 
further found that the rs4713354C genotypes confer a significantly lower mRNA 
expression of MDC1 than the rs4713354AA genotype in 260 cases of lymphoblastoid 
cells (P = 0.002). Our data suggested that the SNP rs4713354A>C of MDC1 may be a 
functional genetic biomarker for susceptibility to lung cancer in Chinese.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106794
PMCID: PMC4157800
PMID: 25198518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.