1. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 8;5:4692. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5692.

Loss of Wdfy3 in mice alters cerebral cortical neurogenesis reflecting aspects 
of the autism pathology.

Orosco LA(1), Ross AP(1), Cates SL(1), Scott SE(1), Wu D(2), Sohn J(3), Pleasure 
D(4), Pleasure SJ(5), Adamopoulos IE(2), Zarbalis KS(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
at Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, USA [2] Institute for Pediatric 
Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Northern California, 
2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 95817, USA.
(2)1] Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for 
Children, Northern California, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 
95817, USA [2] Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of California, Davis, California 
95616, USA.
(3)Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for 
Children, Northern California, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 
95817, USA.
(4)1] Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for 
Children, Northern California, 2425 Stockton Boulevard, Sacramento, California 
95817, USA [2] Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, University of California 
at Davis, Sacramento, California 95817, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Programs in Neuroscience, Developmental and Stem 
Cell Biology, UCSF Institute for Regeneration Medicine, University of California 
at San Francisco, Sandler Neurosciences Center, Box 3206, 675 Nelson Rising 
Lane, Room 214, San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are complex and heterogeneous developmental 
disabilities affecting an ever-increasing number of children worldwide. The 
diverse manifestations and complex, largely genetic aetiology of ASDs pose a 
major challenge to the identification of unifying neuropathological features. 
Here we describe the neurodevelopmental defects in mice that carry deleterious 
alleles of the Wdfy3 gene, recently recognized as causative in ASDs. Loss of 
Wdfy3 leads to a regionally enlarged cerebral cortex resembling early brain 
overgrowth described in many children on the autism spectrum. In addition, 
affected mouse mutants display migration defects of cortical projection neurons, 
a recognized cause of epilepsy, which is significantly comorbid with autism. Our 
analysis of affected mouse mutants defines an important role for Wdfy3 in 
regulating neural progenitor divisions and neural migration in the developing 
brain. Furthermore, Wdfy3 is essential for cerebral expansion and functional 
organization while its loss-of-function results in pathological changes 
characteristic of ASDs.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5692
PMCID: PMC4159772
PMID: 25198012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]