1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(17):11083-91. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku803. Epub 2014
Sep  8.

Multifaceted role of the Topo IIIα-RMI1-RMI2 complex and DNA2 in the 
BLM-dependent pathway of DNA break end resection.

Daley JM(1), Chiba T(1), Xue X(1), Niu H(1), Sung P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA patrick.sung@yale.edu.

BLM, a RecQ family DNA helicase mutated in Bloom's Syndrome, participates in 
homologous recombination at two stages: 5' DNA end resection and double Holliday 
junction dissolution. BLM exists in a complex with Topo IIIα, RMI1 and RMI2. 
Herein, we address the role of Topo IIIα and RMI1-RMI2 in resection using a 
reconstituted system with purified human proteins. We show that Topo IIIα 
stimulates DNA unwinding by BLM in a manner that is potentiated by RMI1-RMI2, 
and that the processivity of resection is reliant on the Topo IIIα-RMI1-RMI2 
complex. Topo IIIα localizes to the ends of double-strand breaks, thus 
implicating it in the recruitment of resection factors. While the 
single-stranded DNA binding protein RPA plays a major role in imposing the 5' to 
3' polarity of resection, Topo IIIα also makes a contribution in this regard. 
Moreover, we show that DNA2 stimulates the helicase activity of BLM. Our results 
thus uncover a multifaceted role of the Topo IIIα-RMI1-RMI2 ensemble and of DNA2 
in the DNA resection reaction.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku803
PMCID: PMC4176181
PMID: 25200081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]