1. Hum Mutat. 2014 Dec;35(12):1418-26. doi: 10.1002/humu.22693.

Mutation update: the spectra of nebulin variants and associated myopathies.

Lehtokari VL(1), Kiiski K, Sandaradura SA, Laporte J, Repo P, Frey JA, Donner K, 
Marttila M, Saunders C, Barth PG, den Dunnen JT, Beggs AH, Clarke NF, North KN, 
Laing NG, Romero NB, Winder TL, Pelin K, Wallgren-Pettersson C.

Author information:
(1)The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and the Department of Medical Genetics, 
Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

A mutation update on the nebulin gene (NEB) is necessary because of recent 
developments in analysis methodology, the identification of increasing numbers 
and novel types of variants, and a widening in the spectrum of clinical and 
histological phenotypes associated with this gigantic, 183 exons containing 
gene. Recessive pathogenic variants in NEB are the major cause of nemaline 
myopathy (NM), one of the most common congenital myopathies. Moreover, 
pathogenic NEB variants have been identified in core-rod myopathy and in distal 
myopathies. In this update, we present the disease-causing variants in NEB in 
159 families, 143 families with NM, and 16 families with NM-related myopathies. 
Eighty-eight families are presented here for the first time. We summarize 86 
previously published and 126 unpublished variants identified in NEB. 
Furthermore, we have analyzed the NEB variants deposited in the Exome Variant 
Server (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/), identifying that pathogenic variants 
are a minor fraction of all coding variants (∼7%). This indicates that nebulin 
tolerates substantial changes in its amino acid sequence, providing an 
explanation as to why variants in such a large gene result in relatively rare 
disorders. Lastly, we discuss the difficulties of drawing reliable 
genotype-phenotype correlations in NEB-associated disease.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22693
PMCID: PMC4295925
PMID: 25205138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]