1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Dec;41(12):8149-62. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3715-3. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Relationships of COX2 and MMP12 genetic polymorphisms with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease risk: a meta-analysis.

Yu XL(1), Zhang J, Zhao F, Pan XM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China 
Medical University, South Seven Road No. 102, Heping District, Shenyang, 110005, 
People's Republic of China, yuxiaoling1220@163.com.

Retraction in
    Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1491. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3909-3.

We performed the present meta-analysis in an attempt to confirm the correlation 
of genetic polymorphisms in the COX2 and MMP12 genes with the susceptibility to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We searched English database such 
as PubMed, CISCOM, CINAHL, Web of Science, Google Scholar and several Chinese 
database for meta-analysis. There were no specific language restrictions. Two 
investigators systematically extracted relevant data within those included 
studies. Crude ORs with its corresponding 95 % CI were calculated. STATA 12.0 
software was adopted for statistical analysis. The impact of COX2 and MMP12 
genetic polymorphisms on the pathogenesis of COPD was investigated in the 
current study with a total of 10 case-control studies, which includes 1,751 COPD 
patients and 2,472 healthy subjects. Four common polymorphisms, including 
rs689466 G > A and rs20417 G > C in the COX2 gene, rs652438 A > G and rs2276109 
A > G were evaluated in the MMP12 gene. Pooled OR of the present studies and 
results showed that the frequency of COX2 rs20417 polymorphism was prevalent in 
COPD patients than those of healthy subjects (C allele vs. G allele OR = 1.33, 
95 % CI 1.06-1.67, P = 0.014; GC + CC vs. GG OR = 1.86, 95 % CI 1.07-3.24, P = 
0.029; respectively). However, we found no significant correlation between COX2 
rs689466 polymorphism and the risk of COPD (all P > 0.05). Furthermore, our 
meta-analysis illustrated that individuals with MMP12 rs652438 polymorphism had 
significantly increased risk of developing COPD (G allele vs. A allele OR = 
1.62, 95 % CI 1.08-2.42, P = 0.020; AG + GG vs. AA OR = 2.14, 95 % CI 1.12-4.09, 
P = 0.021; respectively). Nevertheless, no positive relation was detected 
between MMP12 rs2276109 variant and the risk of COPD. Our meta-analysis 
indicates that COX2 and MMP12 genetic polymorphisms may be strongly implicated 
in the development of COPD, especially for the COX2 rs20417 and MMP12 rs652438 
polymorphisms. Thus, COX2 and MMP12 genetic polymorphisms could potentially be 
utilized as helpful biomarkers for early diagnosis of COPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-014-3715-3
PMID: 25209967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]