1. Neural Regen Res. 2013 Aug 5;8(22):2030-8. doi: 
10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.22.002.

Neuroprotective effects of rutaecarpine on cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury.

Yan C(1), Zhang J(1), Wang S(1), Xue G(1), Hou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou 075000, Hebei 
Province, China.

Rutaecarpine, an active component of the traditional Chinese medicine Tetradium 
ruticarpum, has been shown to improve myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury. 
Because both cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases are forms of ischemic 
vascular disease, they are closely related. We hypothesized that rutaecarpine 
also has neuroprotective effects on cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury. A 
cerebral ischemia reperfusion model was established after 84, 252 and 504 Î¼g/kg 
carpine were given to mice via intraperitoneal injection, daily for 7 days. 
Results of the step through test, 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride dyeing 
and oxidative stress indicators showed that rutaecarpine could improve learning 
and memory ability, neurological symptoms and reduce infarction volume and 
cerebral water content in mice with cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury. 
Rutaecarpine could significantly decrease the malondialdehyde content and 
increase the activities of superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase in 
mouse brain. Therefore, rutaecarpine could improve neurological function 
following injury induced by cerebral ischemia reperfusion, and the mechanism of 
this improvement may be associated with oxidative stress. These results verify 
that rutaecarpine has neuroprotective effects on cerebral ischemia reperfusion 
in mice.

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1673-5374.2013.22.002
PMCID: PMC4146067
PMID: 25206511

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None declared.