1. Abdom Imaging. 2015 Mar;40(3):578-86. doi: 10.1007/s00261-014-0246-2.

Comparison of calculated and acquired high b value diffusion-weighted imaging in 
prostate cancer.

Grant KB(1), Agarwal HK, Shih JH, Bernardo M, Pang Y, Daar D, Merino MJ, Wood 
BJ, Pinto PA, Choyke PL, Turkbey B.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Program, National Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH 10 Center Dr, 
MSC 1182, Bldg 10, Room B3B85, Bethesda, MD, 20892-1088, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine whether the performance of calculated high b value 
diffusion-weighted images (DWI) derived from regular lower b value DWI using 
exponential diffusion decay models (intravoxel incoherent motion = IVIM and 
diffusional kurtosis = DK) is comparable to acquired high b value DWI in 
prostate cancer detection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: One hundred six patients underwent diagnostic 
multiparametric prostate MRI at 3T using an endorectal coil. Five b value (b = 
0, 188, 375, 563, 750 s/mm(2)) DWI and high b value (b = 0, 1000 and 2000 
s/mm(2)) DWI were acquired. Calculated high b value (b = 1000 s/mm(2) and b = 
2000 s/mm(2)) DWI were derived from the DWI dataset using DK and IVIM models. 
Calculated and acquired high b value DWI images were compared for lesion 
visibility and image quality by two experienced radiologists (1 and 6 years of 
experience). GEE with Wald test was used to compare the image quality among the 
four calculated high b value DWI by comparing the proportion of lesions in each 
model which were comparable to the acquired images. This comparison was done for 
all lesions and by lesion location (PZ or CG; low apical/anterior or 
apical/mid/base)
RESULTS: More lesions were visible on acquired b = 2000 s/mm(2) compared to b = 
1000 s/mm(2) DWI. Calculated high b value DWI using the IVIM model had 
approximately the same number of lesions as acquired high b value DWI, whereas 
the DK model had fewer lesions than acquired images. The image quality of 
calculated high b value DWI was comparable to that of acquired images, and the 
highest quality images were obtained with b1000IVIM. The image quality of 
calculated b1000IVIM was the same as that of acquired DWI in apical/mid/base 
(98%) locations and comparable in low apical and anterior (95.4%) locations. The 
image quality of calculated b2000IVIM was inferior in both apical/mid/base 
(86.2%) locations and comparable in low apical and anterior (83.9%) locations.
CONCLUSION: Calculated high b value DWI obtained using IVIM model has same 
lesion visibility as that of acquired DWI. The image quality of calculated high 
b value DWI relative to corresponding acquired DWI decreases with increase in b 
value.

DOI: 10.1007/s00261-014-0246-2
PMCID: PMC5540661
PMID: 25223523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]