1. J Pharm Sci. 2014 Nov;103(11):3611-3620. doi: 10.1002/jps.24154. Epub 2014 Sep
 17.

An intravaginal ring for the sustained delivery of antibodies.

Gunawardana M(1), Baum MM(2), Smith TJ(1), Moss JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Oak Crest Institute of Science, Pasadena, 
California; Auritec Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Pasadena, California.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Oak Crest Institute of Science, Pasadena, 
California.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Oak Crest Institute of Science, Pasadena, 
California. Electronic address: j.moss@oak-crest.org.

Human monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) based on IgG and IgA have shown promise as 
topical microbicide candidates to protect women from HIV infection. Application 
of mAbs has been limited, however, by the inability of vaginal gels and 
conventional intravaginal ring (IVR) designs, the predominant vaginal product 
formulations, to effectively deliver biomolecules in a coitally independent 
fashion with retention of bioactivity. We have developed a novel pod-IVR 
platform that delivers ovine IgG (ov-IgG) as a model for IgG and IgA human mAbs. 
In vitro release of ov-IgG from the pod-IVRs was sustained for 14 days. Facile 
control of release rate was achieved by changing the size of delivery channels 
in the ring structure, and the feasibility of ov-IgG delivery in the range 
0.5-30 mg day(-1) from a 10-pod IVR was demonstrated. The activity of ov-IgG in 
pod-IVR formulations was maintained as confirmed by ELISA binding assay. 
Pod-IVRs delivering ov-IgG show promise for the effective sustained topical 
delivery of antibody-based microbicides. This significantly broadens the range 
of microbicides that can be delivered in a sustained fashion from IVRs and 
enables a new arsenal of topical biologic microbicide candidates beyond small 
molecule antiretrovirals.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the American Pharmacists Association.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.24154
PMCID: PMC4206599
PMID: 25231193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]