1. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis. 2014 Sep 1;6(1):e2014060. doi: 
10.4084/MJHID.2014.060. eCollection 2014.

Is hemoglobin e gene widely spread in the state of madhya pradesh in central 
India? Evidence from five typical families.

Balgir RS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Regional Medical Research Centre for Tribals 
(ICMR), Madhya Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Red cell inherited hemoglobin (Hb) anomalies are commonly 
encountered in the central region of India. These cause a public health concern 
due to high level of morbidity, mortality, and fetal loss in the backward, 
underprivileged, and vulnerable people.
PURPOSE: To report five typical families of Hb E disorders for the first time 
detected and identified from various districts of the state of Madhya Pradesh in 
central India.
METHODS: Out of a total of 447 couples/families referred from a tertiary 
hospital in central India for investigations of anemia/hemoglobinopathies during 
the period from March 2010 to February 2014, we came across five typical rare 
couples/families of Hb E disorders (1.1%) worthy of detailed investigations that 
we have reported here. Laboratory investigations were carried out following the 
standard procedures after cross checking for quality control from time to time.
RESULTS: For the first time, out of total 27 cases studied, we have encountered 
nine cases of heterozygous Hb E trait (33.3%), two members (7.4%) with Hb 
E-β-thalassemia (double heterozygosity), two cases (7.4%) of sickle cell-Hb E 
disease (double heterozygosity), two β-thalassemia traits (7.4%), three sickle 
cell traits (11.1%), 9 normal (33.3%), and none with homozygous Hb E disease. 
Cases of Hb E trait, Hb E-β-thalassemia, and sickle cell-E disease showed 
moderate to severe anemia, and target cells, and reduced values of red cell 
indices like red blood cell count, Hb level, hematocrit, mean cell volume, mean 
cell Hb and mean cell Hb cencentration, describing abnormal hematological 
profile and clinical manifestations before blood transfusion.
CONCLUSIONS: Double heterozygosity of β-thalassemia with Hb S and Hb E is a rare 
entity, but occurs with severe clinical manifestations, testifying either 
migrations and/or genetic admixture. Co-occurrence of Hb E/β-thalassemia in 
different districts indicates that these anomalies along with other 
hemoglobinopathies are wide spread in Madhya Pradesh and posing a major genetic 
burden on vulnerable people of central India.

DOI: 10.4084/MJHID.2014.060
PMCID: PMC4165497
PMID: 25237473