1. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Jan-Feb;50(1):1-17. doi: 
10.3109/10409238.2014.959889. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation at the yeast endoplasmic reticulum and 
nuclear envelope.

Zattas D(1), Hochstrasser M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University , New 
Haven, CT , USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the primary organelle in eukaryotic cells 
where membrane and secreted proteins are inserted into or across cell membranes. 
Its membrane bilayer and luminal compartments provide a favorable environment 
for the folding and assembly of thousands of newly synthesized proteins. 
However, protein folding is intrinsically error-prone, and various stress 
conditions can further increase levels of protein misfolding and damage, 
particularly in the ER, which can lead to cellular dysfunction and disease. The 
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is responsible for the selective destruction 
of a vast array of protein substrates, either for protein quality control or to 
allow rapid changes in the levels of specific regulatory proteins. In this 
review, we will focus on the components and mechanisms of ER-associated protein 
degradation (ERAD), an important branch of the UPS. ER membranes extend from 
subcortical regions of the cell to the nuclear envelope, with its continuous 
outer and inner membranes; the nuclear envelope is a specialized subdomain of 
the ER. ERAD presents additional challenges to the UPS beyond those faced with 
soluble substrates of the cytoplasm and nucleus. These include recognition of 
sugar modifications that occur in the ER, retrotranslocation of proteins across 
the membrane bilayer, and transfer of substrates from the ER extraction 
machinery to the proteasome. Here, we review characteristics of ERAD substrate 
degradation signals (degrons), mechanisms underlying substrate recognition and 
processing by the ERAD machinery, and ideas on the still unresolved problem of 
how substrate proteins are moved across and extracted from the ER membrane.

DOI: 10.3109/10409238.2014.959889
PMCID: PMC4359062
PMID: 25231236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest: None of the authors 
have a conflict of interest.