1. J Immunol. 2014 Nov 1;193(9):4322-4334. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400491. Epub
2014  Sep 17.

Different antigen-processing activities in dendritic cells, macrophages, and 
monocytes lead to uneven production of HIV epitopes and affect CTL recognition.

Dinter J(#)(1), Gourdain P(#)(1), Lai NY(#)(1), Duong E(1), Bracho-Sanchez E(1), 
Rucevic M(1), Liebesny PH(1), Xu Y(1), Shimada M(1), Ghebremichael M(1), 
Kavanagh DG(1), Le Gall S(1).

Author information:
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages (MPs), and monocytes are permissive to HIV. 
Whether they similarly process and present HIV epitopes to HIV-specific CD8 T 
cells is unknown despite the critical role of peptide processing and 
presentation for recognition and clearance of infected cells. Cytosolic 
peptidases degrade endogenous proteins originating from self or pathogens, 
exogenous Ags preprocessed in endolysosomes, thus shaping the peptidome 
available for endoplasmic reticulum translocation, trimming, and MHC-I 
presentation. In this study, we compared the capacity of DCs, MPs, and monocyte 
cytosolic extracts to produce epitope precursors and epitopes. We showed 
differences in the proteolytic activities and expression levels of cytosolic 
proteases between monocyte-derived DCs and MPs and upon maturation with LPS, 
R848, and CL097, with mature MPs having the highest activities. Using cytosol as 
a source of proteases to degrade epitope-containing HIV peptides, we showed by 
mass spectrometry that the degradation patterns of long peptides and the 
kinetics and amount of antigenic peptides produced differed among DCs, MPs, and 
monocytes. Additionally, variable intracellular stability of HIV peptides prior 
to loading onto MHC may accentuate the differences in epitope availability for 
presentation by MHC-I between these subsets. Differences in peptide degradation 
led to 2- to 25-fold differences in the CTL responses elicited by the 
degradation peptides generated in DCs, MPs, and monocytes. Differences in 
Ag-processing activities between these subsets might lead to variations in the 
timing and efficiency of recognition of HIV-infected cells by CTLs and 
contribute to the unequal capacity of HIV-specific CTLs to control viral load.

Copyright Â© 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400491
PMCID: PMC4201977
PMID: 25230751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]