1. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2014 Sep 21;11:139. doi: 10.1186/1743-0003-11-139.

An animal study to examine the effects of the bilateral, epidural cortical 
stimulation on the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Kim H, Kim HI, Kim YH, Kim SY, Shin YI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine & Institute of Medical Science, Pusan 
National University School of Medicine, Busan, South Korea. rmshin01@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: We examined the effects of the unilateral cortical stimulation on 
the survival of neurons showing degenerative changes and compared those in 
delaying the progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) between the 
unilateral cortical stimulation and the bilateral one in an animal experimental 
model using mice.
METHODS: We used 19 G93A transgenic mice and randomly divided into three groups: 
the control group (n=6) (the implantation of electrodes in the bilateral motor 
cortex without electrical stimulation), the unilateral stimulation group (n=7) 
(the implantation of electrodes in the unilateral motor cortex with a 24-hour 
cortical stimulation) and the bilateral stimulation group (n=6) (the 
implantation of electrodes in the bilateral motor cortex with a 24-hour cortical 
stimulation).
RESULTS: The mean survival period was significantly longer in the bilateral 
stimulation group as compared with the control group (124.33 ± 11.00 days vs. 
109.50 ± 10.41 days) (P<0.05). In addition, on postoperative weeks 11, 12, 13, 
14 and 15, the mean Rota-rod score was significantly higher in the unilateral 
stimulation group as compared with the control group (P<0.05). Furthermore, 
despite a lack of statistical significance, it was the lowest in the bilateral 
stimulation group on postoperative weeks 13, 14, 15 and 17. On postoperative 
weeks 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16, the mean score of paw-grip endurance was 
significantly higher in the unilateral stimulation group as compared with the 
control group (P<0.05). Furthermore, despite a lack of statistical significance, 
it was the lowest in the bilateral stimulation group on postoperative weeks 13, 
14, 15 and 17.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our results indicate that the bilateral epidural 
cortical stimulation might have a treatment effect in a murine model of ALS. But 
it is the limitation that we examined a small number of experimental animals. 
Further studies are therefore warranted to establish our results and to identify 
the optimal parameters of the epidural cortical stimulation in a larger number 
of experimental animals.

DOI: 10.1186/1743-0003-11-139
PMCID: PMC4179853
PMID: 25240501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]