1. Biochem J. 1989 Apr 15;259(2):421-6. doi: 10.1042/bj2590421.

Random mutagenesis of the gene for the beta-subunit of F1-ATPase from 
Escherichia coli.

Kironde FA(1), Parsonage D, Senior AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Rochester Medical Center, New York 
14642.

ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation in Escherichia coli occurs in 
catalytic sites on the beta-subunits of F1-ATPase. Random mutagenesis of the 
beta-subunit combined with phenotypic screening is potentially important for 
studies of the catalytic mechanism. However, when applied to haploid strains, 
this approach is hampered by a preponderance of mutants in which assembly of 
F1-ATPase in vivo is defective, precluding enzyme purification. Here we 
mutagenized plasmids carrying the uncD (beta-subunit) gene with hydroxylamine or 
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine and isolated, by phenotypic screening and 
complementation tests, six plasmids carrying mutant uncD alleles. When the 
mutant plasmids were used to transform a suitable uncD- strain, assembly of 
F1-ATPase in vivo occurred in each case. Moreover, in one case (beta 
Gly-223----Asp) F1-ATPase assembly proceeded although it had previously been 
reported that this mutation, when present on the chromosome of a haploid strain, 
prevented assembly of the enzyme in vivo. Therefore, this work demonstrates an 
improved approach for random mutagenesis of the F1-beta-subunit. Six new mutant 
uncD alleles were identified: beta Cys-137----Tyr; beta Gly-142----Asp; beta 
Gly-146----Ser; beta Gly-207----Asp; beta-Gly-223----Asp; and a double mutant 
beta Pro-403----Ser,Gly-415----Asp which we could not separate. The first five 
of these lie within or very close to the predicted catalytic nucleotide-binding 
domain of the beta-subunit. The double mutant lies outside this domain; we 
speculate that the region around residues beta 403-415 is part of an alpha-beta 
intersubunit contact surface. Membrane ATPase and ATP-driven proton pumping 
activities were impaired by all six mutations. Purified F1-ATPase was obtained 
from each mutant and shown to have impaired specific ATPase activity.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2590421
PMCID: PMC1138526
PMID: 2524189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]