1. Med Sci Monit. 2014 Sep 22;20:1691-9. doi: 10.12659/MSM.890137.

An overview of the effects of anti-IgE therapies.

Yalcin AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Genomics 
Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Omalizumab, a humanized mAb that binds to the CH3 domain near the binding site 
for the high-affinity type-I IgE Fc receptors of human IgE, can neutralize free 
IgE and inhibit the IgE allergic pathway without sensitizing mast cells and 
basophils. We found that omalizumab in patients with severe persistent asthma 
(SPA) was an effective therapy for asthma and the following co-morbid 
conditions: chronic urticaria (CU), bee venom allergy, latex allergy, atopic 
dermatitis, food allergy and Samter's syndrome. Information on the use of 
omalizumab in treatment of asthma and other allergic diseases has improved our 
understanding that treatment acts on many levels, including regulating levels of 
inflammatory proteins, including cytokines (copper-containing alpha- 
2-glycoprotein, total antioxidant capacity, MDA, NO, H2O2, CXCL8, IL-10, TGF-β, 
GMCSF, IL-17, IL-1β), MPV, Hs-CRP, eosinophil cationic peptide, vitamin-D 
(25(OH)D), homocysteine (Hcy), OX-2, d- dimer, albumin, and sApo-2L. The 
decrease in Hcy concentrations and increase in 25(OH)D also support the 
existence of a vascular endothelial protection mechanism. Mediators and cells 
classically involved in pro-coagulant and anticoagulant pathways together play a 
role in SPA and CU pathophysiology and omalizumab effect. The mechanism of 
action of omalizumab in the treatment of asthma is believed to be 
multifactorial, and includes effects mediated through altered production of 
redox metabolites, extrinsic coagulation pathway, oxidative markers-related mi 
RNA, TRAIL-related mi RNA, and regulation of production of known inflammatory 
proteins.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.890137
PMCID: PMC4181307
PMID: 25241913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]