1. J Exp Bot. 2014 Dec;65(22):6603-15. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru378. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Interaction between parental environment and genotype affects plant and seed 
performance in Arabidopsis.

He H(1), de Souza Vidigal D(1), Snoek LB(2), Schnabel S(3), Nijveen H(4), 
Hilhorst H(1), Bentsink L(5).

Author information:
(1)Wageningen Seed Lab, Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University, 
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Nematology, Wageningen University, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 
NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Biometris-Applied Statistics, Wageningen University and Research Centre, 
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands Centre for 
BioSystems Genomics, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Wageningen Seed Lab, Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University, 
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands Laboratory of 
Bioinformatics, Wageningen University, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Wageningen Seed Lab, Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University, 
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, NL-6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands Department of 
Molecular Plant Physiology, Utrecht University, NL-3584 CH Utrecht, The 
Netherlands leonie.bentsink@wur.nl.

Seed performance after dispersal is highly dependent on parental environmental 
cues, especially during seed formation and maturation. Here we examine which 
environmental factors are the most dominant in this respect and whether their 
effects are dependent on the genotypes under investigation. We studied the 
influence of light intensity, photoperiod, temperature, nitrate, and phosphate 
during seed development on five plant attributes and thirteen seed attributes, 
using 12 Arabidopsis genotypes that have been reported to be affected in seed 
traits. As expected, the various environments during seed development resulted 
in changed plant and/or seed performances. Comparative analysis clearly 
indicated that, overall, temperature plays the most dominant role in both plant 
and seed performance, whereas light has a prominent impact on plant traits. In 
comparison to temperature and light, nitrate mildly affected some of the plant 
and seed traits while phosphate had even less influence on those traits. 
Moreover, clear genotype-by-environment interactions were identified. This was 
shown by the fact that individual genotypes responded differentially to the 
environmental conditions. Low temperature significantly increased seed dormancy 
and decreased seed longevity of NILDOG1 and cyp707a1-1, whereas low light 
intensity increased seed dormancy and decreased seed longevity of NILDOG3 and 
NILDOG6. This also indicates that different genetic and molecular pathways are 
involved in the plant and seed responses. By identifying environmental 
conditions that affect the dormancy vs longevity correlation in the same way as 
previously identified naturally occurring loci, we have identified selective 
forces that probably shaped evolution for these important seed traits.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eru378
PMCID: PMC4246189
PMID: 25240065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]