1. Metabolites. 2014 Aug 25;4(3):722-39. doi: 10.3390/metabo4030722.

Novel strategy for non-targeted isotope-assisted metabolomics by means of 
metabolic turnover and multivariate analysis.

Nakayama Y(1), Tamada Y(2), Tsugawa H(3), Bamba T(4), Fukusaki E(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
yasumune_nakayama@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
yoshihiro-tamada@hakutsuru.co.jp.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
hiroshi.tsugawa@riken.jp.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
bamba@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka 
University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. 
fukusaki@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Isotope-labeling is a useful technique for understanding cellular metabolism. 
Recent advances in metabolomics have extended the capability of isotope-assisted 
studies to reveal global metabolism. For instance, isotope-assisted metabolomics 
technology has enabled the mapping of a global metabolic network, estimation of 
flux at branch points of metabolic pathways, and assignment of elemental 
formulas to unknown metabolites. Furthermore, some data processing tools have 
been developed to apply these techniques to a non-targeted approach, which plays 
an important role in revealing unknown or unexpected metabolism. However, data 
collection and integration strategies for non-targeted isotope-assisted 
metabolomics have not been established. Therefore, a systematic approach is 
proposed to elucidate metabolic dynamics without targeting pathways by means of 
time-resolved isotope tracking, i.e., "metabolic turnover analysis", as well as 
multivariate analysis. We applied this approach to study the metabolic dynamics 
in amino acid perturbation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In metabolic turnover 
analysis, 69 peaks including 35 unidentified peaks were investigated. 
Multivariate analysis of metabolic turnover successfully detected a pathway 
known to be inhibited by amino acid perturbation. In addition, our strategy 
enabled identification of unknown peaks putatively related to the perturbation.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo4030722
PMCID: PMC4192689
PMID: 25257997