1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Oct;81(10):946-61. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22414. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

Zebrafish vasa is required for germ-cell differentiation and maintenance.

Hartung O(1), Forbes MM, Marlow FL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Yeshiva University, Bronx, New York.

Erratum in
    Mol Reprod Dev. 2016 Dec;83(12):1128-1130. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22760.

Vasa is a universal marker of the germ line in animals, yet mutations disrupting 
vasa cause sexually dimorphic infertility, with impaired development of the 
ovary in some animals and the testis in others. The basis for this sexually 
dimorphic requirement for Vasa is not clear; in most animals examined, both the 
male and female gonad express vasa throughout the life of the germ line. Here we 
characterized a loss-of-function mutation disrupting zebrafish vasa. We show 
that maternally provided Vasa is stable through the first ten days of 
development in zebrafish, and thus likely fulfills any early roles for Vasa 
during germ-line specification, migration, survival, and maintenance. Although 
zygotic Vasa is not essential for the development of juvenile gonads, vasa 
mutants develop exclusively as sterile males. Furthermore, phenotypes of 
vasa;p53 compound mutants are indistinguishable from those of vasa mutants, 
therefore the failure of vasa mutants to differentiate as females and to support 
germ-cell development in the testis is not due to p53-mediated apoptosis. 
Instead, we found that failure to progress beyond the pachytene stage of meiosis 
causes the loss of germ-line stem cells, leaving empty somatic tubules. Our 
studies provide insight into the function of zebrafish vasa during female 
meiosis, differentiation, and maintenance of germ-line stem cells.

Â© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.22414
PMCID: PMC4198436
PMID: 25257909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors do not have any 
financial conflict of interest that might be construed to influence the results 
or interpretation of the manuscript.