1. J Neurol. 2014 Dec;261(12):2424-8. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7512-7. Epub 2014
Sep  30.

Recurrent rhabdomyolysis due to muscle β-enolase deficiency: very rare or 
underestimated?

Musumeci O(1), Brady S, Rodolico C, Ciranni A, Montagnese F, Aguennouz M, Kirk 
R, Allen E, Godfrey R, Romeo S, Murphy E, Rahman S, Quinlivan R, Toscano A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Messina, via Consolare Valeria, 
98125, Messina, Italy, om471@yahoo.com.

Muscle β-enolase deficiency is a very rare inherited metabolic myopathy caused 
by an enzymatic defect of distal glycolysis. So far, the condition has been 
described in only one patient with mutations in ENO3 in a compound heterozygous 
state who presented with exercise intolerance, post-exercise myalgia and mild 
hyperCKemia but no pigmenturia. We describe two men, one Italian and one 
Turkish, with consanguineous parents, who complained of several episodes of 
intense myalgia, cramps, generalized muscle tenderness and dark urine. No other 
family members reported similar symptoms. In both cases, there was a very mild 
rise in lactate during a forearm exercise test. Muscle biopsy showed minimal 
changes with no lipid or glycogen accumulation. Biochemical studies on muscle 
tissue demonstrated a marked reduction of muscle β-enolase activity (20 and 10% 
of residual activity, respectively). Molecular genetic analysis of ENO3 gene 
revealed two novel homozygous missense mutations, (p.Asn151Ser and p.Glu187Lys). 
Both mutations segregated as expected in the two families. Although quite rare, 
muscle β-enolase deficiency should be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of patients presenting with recurrent rhabdomyolysis. It may present also with a 
more severe phenotype than previously thought.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7512-7
PMID: 25267339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]