1. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 3;5:5104. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6104.

Visualizing the replication of respiratory syncytial virus in cells and in 
living mice.

Rameix-Welti MA(1), Le Goffic R(2), Hervé PL(2), Sourimant J(3), Rémot A(2), 
Riffault S(2), Yu Q(4), Galloux M(2), Gault E(5), Eléouët JF(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moleculaires (UR892), INRA, 
Jouy-en-Josas F78352, France [2] Physiopathologie et diagnostic des infections 
microbiennes, EA3647-EPIM, UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil-UVSQ, 2 
avenue de la Source de la Bièvre, 78180 Montigny-Le-Bretonneux, France [3] 
AP-HP, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Boulogne-Billancourt 
92100, France.
(2)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moleculaires (UR892), INRA, Jouy-en-Josas 
F78352, France.
(3)1] Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Moleculaires (UR892), INRA, 
Jouy-en-Josas F78352, France [2] Physiopathologie et diagnostic des infections 
microbiennes, EA3647-EPIM, UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil-UVSQ, 2 
avenue de la Source de la Bièvre, 78180 Montigny-Le-Bretonneux, France.
(4)Infection Innovative Medicines Unit, AstraZeneca R&D Boston, 35 Gatehouse 
Drive, Waltham, Massachusetts 02451, USA.
(5)1] Physiopathologie et diagnostic des infections microbiennes, EA3647-EPIM, 
UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil-UVSQ, 2 avenue de la Source de la 
Bièvre, 78180 Montigny-Le-Bretonneux, France [2] AP-HP, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, 
Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Boulogne-Billancourt 92100, France.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most important cause of severe 
lower-respiratory tract disease in calves and young children, yet no human 
vaccine nor efficient curative treatments are available. Here we describe a 
recombinant human RSV reverse genetics system in which the red fluorescent 
protein (mCherry) or the firefly luciferase (Luc) genes are inserted into the 
RSV genome. Expression of mCherry and Luc are correlated with infection rate, 
allowing the monitoring of RSV multiplication in cell culture. Replication of 
the Luc-encoding virus in living mice can be visualized by bioluminescent 
imaging, bioluminescence being detected in the snout and lungs of infected mice 
after nasal inoculation. We propose that these recombinant viruses are 
convenient and valuable tools for screening of compounds active against RSV, and 
can be used as an extremely sensitive readout for studying effects of antiviral 
therapeutics in living mice.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms6104
PMCID: PMC7091779
PMID: 25277263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.