1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e108962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108962. 
eCollection 2014.

Molecular characterization of three PRORP proteins in the moss Physcomitrella 
patens: nuclear PRORP protein is not essential for moss viability.

Sugita C(1), Komura Y(1), Tanaka K(1), Kometani K(1), Satoh H(2), Sugita M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Gene Research, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Science, Toho University, Funabashi, Japan.

RNase P is a ubiquitous endonuclease that removes the 5' leader sequence from 
pre-tRNAs in all organisms. In Arabidopsis thaliana, RNA-free proteinaceous 
RNase Ps (PRORPs) seem to be enzyme(s) for pre-tRNA 5'-end processing in 
organelles and the nucleus and are thought to have replaced the 
ribonucleoprotein RNase P variant. However, the evolution and function of plant 
PRORPs are not fully understood. Here, we identified and characterized three 
PRORP-like proteins, PpPPR_63, 67, and 104, in the basal land plant, the moss 
Physcomitrella patens. PpPPR_63 localizes to the nucleus, while PpPPR_67 and 
PpPPR_104 are found in both the mitochondria and chloroplasts. The three 
proteins displayed pre-tRNA 5'-end processing activity in vitro. Mutants with 
knockout (KO) of the PpPPR_63 gene displayed growth retardation of protonemal 
colonies, indicating that, unlike Arabidopsis nuclear RPORPs, the moss nuclear 
PpPPR_63 is not essential for viability. In the KO mutant, nuclear-encoded 
tRNAAsp (GUC) levels were slightly decreased, whereas most nuclear-encoded tRNA 
levels were not altered. This indicated that most of the cytosolic mature tRNAs 
were produced normally without proteinaceous RNase P-like PpPPR_63. Single 
PpPPR_67 or 104 gene KO mutants displayed different phenotypes of protonemal 
growth and chloroplast tRNA(Arg) (ACG) accumulation. However, the levels of all 
other tRNAs were not altered in the KO mutants. In addition, in vitro RNase P 
assays showed that PpPPR_67 and PpPPR_104 efficiently cleaved chloroplast 
pre-tRNA(Arg) (CCG) and pre-tRNA(Arg) (UCU) but they cleaved pre-tRNA(Arg) (ACG) 
with different efficiency. This suggests that the two proteins have overlapping 
function but their substrate specificity is not identical.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108962
PMCID: PMC4201334
PMID: 25272157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.