1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):12112-25. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku901. Epub 
2014 Oct 1.

Capping of vesicular stomatitis virus pre-mRNA is required for accurate 
selection of transcription stop-start sites and virus propagation.

Ogino T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA tomoaki.ogino@case.edu.

The multifunctional RNA-dependent RNA polymerase L protein of vesicular 
stomatitis virus catalyzes unconventional pre-mRNA capping via the covalent 
enzyme-pRNA intermediate formation, which requires the histidine-arginine (HR) 
motif in the polyribonucleotidyltransferase domain. Here, the effects of 
cap-defective mutations in the HR motif on transcription were analyzed using an 
in vitro reconstituted transcription system. The wild-type L protein synthesized 
the leader RNA from the 3'-end of the genome followed by 5'-capped and 
3'-polyadenylated mRNAs from internal genes by a stop-start transcription 
mechanism. Cap-defective mutants efficiently produced the leader RNA, but 
displayed aberrant stop-start transcription using cryptic termination and 
initiation signals within the first gene, resulting in sequential generation of 
∼40-nucleotide transcripts with 5'-ATP from a correct mRNA-start site followed 
by a 28-nucleotide transcript and long 3'-polyadenylated transcript initiated 
with non-canonical GTP from atypical start sites. Frequent transcription 
termination and re-initiation within the first gene significantly attenuated the 
production of downstream mRNAs. Consistent with the inability of these mutants 
in in vitro mRNA synthesis and capping, these mutations were lethal to virus 
replication in cultured cells. These findings indicate that viral mRNA capping 
is required for accurate stop-start transcription as well as mRNA stability and 
translation and, therefore, for virus replication in host cells.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gku901
PMCID: PMC4231761
PMID: 25274740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]