1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e108846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108846. 
eCollection 2014.

Mechanism of the exchange reaction in HRAS from multiscale modeling.

Kapoor A(1), Travesset A(1).

Author information:
(1)Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, United States of 
America.

HRAS regulates cell growth promoting signaling processes by cycling between 
active (GTP-bound) and inactive (GDP-bound) states. Understanding the transition 
mechanism is central for the design of small molecules to inhibit the formation 
of RAS-driven tumors. Using a multiscale approach involving coarse-grained (CG) 
simulations, all-atom classical molecular dynamics (CMD; total of 3.02 Âµs), and 
steered molecular dynamics (SMD) in combination with Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA), we identified the structural features that determine the 
nucleotide (GDP) exchange reaction. We show that weakening the coupling between 
the SwitchI (residues 25-40) and SwitchII (residues 59-75) accelerates the 
opening of SwitchI; however, an open conformation of SwitchI is unstable in the 
absence of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and rises up towards the 
bound nucleotide to close the nucleotide pocket. Both I21 and Y32, play a 
crucial role in SwitchI transition. We show that an open SwitchI conformation is 
not necessary for GDP destabilization but is required for GDP/Mg escape from the 
HRAS. Further, we present the first simulation study showing displacement of 
GDP/Mg away from the nucleotide pocket. Both SwitchI and SwitchII, delays the 
escape of displaced GDP/Mg in the absence of GEF. Based on these results, a 
model for the mechanism of GEF in accelerating the exchange process is 
hypothesized.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108846
PMCID: PMC4182752
PMID: 25272152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.