1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Sep 18;6:247. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00247. 
eCollection 2014.

Differential spatio-temporal regulation of MMPs in the 5xFAD mouse model of 
Alzheimer's disease: evidence for a pro-amyloidogenic role of MT1-MMP.

Py NA(1), Bonnet AE(1), Bernard A(1), Marchalant Y(1), Charrat E(1), Checler 
F(2), Khrestchatisky M(1), Baranger K(3), Rivera S(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN, UMR7259 Marseille, 
France.
(2)IPMC UMR 7275 CNRS-UNS, Labex DistAlz Valbonne, France.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN, UMR7259 Marseille, 
France ; Department of Neurology and Neuropsychology, APHM, CHU La Timone 
Marseille, France.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are pleiotropic endopeptidases involved in a 
variety of neurodegenerative/neuroinflammatory processes through their 
interactions with a large number of substrates. Among those, the amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) and the beta amyloid peptide (Aβ) are largely associated 
with the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, the regulation and 
potential contribution of MMPs to AD remains unclear. In this study, we 
investigated the evolution of the expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and membrane-type 
1-MMP (MT1-MMP) in the hippocampus at different stages of the pathology 
(asymptomatic, prodromal-like and symptomatic) in the 5xFAD transgenic mouse AD 
model. In parallel we also followed the expression of functionally associated 
factors. Overall, the expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, and MT1-MMP was upregulated 
concomitantly with the tissue inhibitor of MMPs-1 (TIMP-1) and several markers 
of inflammatory/glial response. The three MMPs exhibited age- and cell-dependent 
upregulation of their expression, with MMP-2 and MMP-9 being primarily located 
to astrocytes, and MT1-MMP to neurons. MMP-9 and MT1-MMP were also prominently 
present in amyloid plaques. The levels of active MT1-MMP were highly upregulated 
in membrane-enriched fractions of hippocampus at 6 months of age (symptomatic 
phase), when the levels of APP, its metabolites APP C-terminal fragments (CTFs), 
and Aβ trimers were the highest. Overexpression of MT1-MMP in HEK cells carrying 
the human APP Swedish mutation (HEKswe) strongly increased β-secretase derived 
C-terminal APP fragment (C99) and Aβ levels, whereas MMP-2 overexpression nearly 
abolished Aβ production without affecting C99. Our data consolidate the emerging 
idea of a regulatory interplay between MMPs and the APP/Aβ system, and 
demonstrate for the first time the pro-amyloidogenic features of MT1-MMP. 
Further investigation will be justified to evaluate this MMP as a novel 
potential therapeutic target in AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00247
PMCID: PMC4166961
PMID: 25278878