1. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Oct 4;14:372. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-372.

Dohaekseunggi-tang extract inhibits obesity, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension in 
high-fat diet-induced obese mice.

Sung YY, Kim DS, Choi G, Kim SH, Kim HK(1).

Author information:
(1)Herbal Medicine Resources Group, Herbal Medicine Research Division, Korea 
Institute of Oriental Medicine, 1672 Yuseong-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-811, 
Republic of Korea. hkkim@kiom.re.kr.

BACKGROUND: Dohaekseunggi-tang (DHSGT) is a traditional plant-based medicine 
prescribed to promote blood circulation and to treat obesity and hypertension. 
The present study aimed to identify potential anti-obesity activities of DHSGT 
extract.
METHODS: Anti-obesity, anti-hyperlipidemic, and anti-hypertensive effects of 
orally-administered DHSGT extract were evaluated in high-fat diet- (HFD)-induced 
obese mice. Serum biochemistry profiles and expression of diverse metabolic 
regulatory gene mRNAs in mouse visceral fat were assessed by RT-PCR. The effects 
of DHSGT on angiotensin-1 converting enzyme (ACE) and pancreatic lipase 
activities were determined using in vitro inhibition assays.
RESULTS: Oral DHSGT treatment reduced obese HFD C57BL/6 J mouse body weight, 
liver and adipose tissue mass, adipocyte size, and blood pressure versus 
untreated HFD mice. DHSGT also decreased serum total cholesterol, 
LDL-cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose, and leptin concentrations, and increased 
HDL-cholesterol and adiponectin levels in HFD mice. Furthermore, DHSGT markedly 
increased mRNA expression of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma, 
uncoupling protein-2, and adiponectin in visceral adipose tissue of HFD mice. In 
vitro tests revealed that DHSGT effectively inhibited porcine pancreatic lipase 
and ACE activities, with IC50 values of 7.58 mg/ml and 0.56 mg/ml, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These results validate traditional knowledge and suggest that DHSGT 
may be potentially useful for managing hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, 
hypertension, and obesity.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-372
PMCID: PMC4193160
PMID: 25280587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]