1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e110115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110115. 
eCollection 2014.

Suramin inhibits Hsp104 ATPase and disaggregase activity.

Torrente MP(1), Castellano LM(2), Shorter J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Pharmacology Graduate 
Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Hsp104 is a hexameric AAA+ protein that utilizes energy from ATP hydrolysis to 
dissolve disordered protein aggregates as well as amyloid fibers. Interestingly, 
Hsp104 orthologues are found in all kingdoms of life except animals. Thus, 
Hsp104 could represent an interesting drug target. Specific inhibition of Hsp104 
activity might antagonize non-metazoan parasites that depend on a potent heat 
shock response, while producing little or no side effects to the host. However, 
no small molecule inhibitors of Hsp104 are known except guanidinium chloride. 
Here, we screen over 16,000 small molecules and identify 16 novel inhibitors of 
Hsp104 ATPase activity. Excluding compounds that inhibited Hsp104 activity by 
non-specific colloidal effects, we defined Suramin as an inhibitor of Hsp104 
ATPase activity. Suramin is a polysulphonated naphthylurea and is used as an 
antiprotozoal drug for African Trypanosomiasis. Suramin also interfered with 
Hsp104 disaggregase, unfoldase, and translocase activities, and the inhibitory 
effect of Suramin was not rescued by Hsp70 and Hsp40. Suramin does not disrupt 
Hsp104 hexamers and does not effectively inhibit ClpB, the E. coli homolog of 
Hsp104, establishing yet another key difference between Hsp104 and ClpB 
behavior. Intriguingly, a potentiated Hsp104 variant, Hsp104A503V, is more 
sensitive to Suramin than wild-type Hsp104. By contrast, Hsp104 variants bearing 
inactivating sensor-1 mutations in nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) 1 or 2 are 
more resistant to Suramin. Thus, Suramin depends upon ATPase events at both NBDs 
to exert its maximal effect. Suramin could develop into an important mechanistic 
probe to study Hsp104 structure and function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110115
PMCID: PMC4192545
PMID: 25299406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.