1. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Mar;116(3):386-97. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24987.

DNA microarray and signal transduction analysis in pulmonary artery smooth 
muscle cells from heritable and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension 
subjects.

Yu J(1), Wilson J, Taylor L, Polgar P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, 02118.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by increased pulmonary 
vascular smooth muscle contraction and proliferation. Here, we analyze 
genome-wide mRNA expression in human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells 
(HPASMC) isolated from three control, three hereditary (HPAH), and three 
idiopathic PAH (IPAH) subjects using the Affymetrix Human Gene ST 1.0 chip. The 
microarray analysis reveals the expression of 537 genes in HPAH and 1024 genes 
in IPAH changed compared with control HPASMC. Among those genes, 227 genes show 
similar directionality of expression in both HPAH and IPAH HPASMC. Ingenuity™ 
Pathway Analysis (IPA) suggests that many of those genes are involved in 
cellular growth/proliferation and cell cycle regulation and that signaling 
pathways such as the mitotic activators, polo-like kinases, ATM signaling are 
activated under PAH conditions. Furthermore, the analysis demonstrates 
downregulated mRNA expression of certain vasoactive receptors such as bradykinin 
receptor B2 (BKB2R). Using real time PCR, we verified the downregulated BKB2R 
expression in the PAH cells. Bradykinin-stimulated calcium influx is also 
decreased in PAH PASMC. IPA also identified transcriptional factors such p53 and 
Rb as downregulated, and FoxM1 and Myc as upregulated in both HPAH and IPAH 
HPASMC. The decreased level of phospho-p53 in PAH cells was confirmed with a 
phospho-protein array; and we experimentally show a dysregulated proliferation 
of both HPAH and IPAH PASMC. Together, the microarray experiments and 
bioinformatics analysis highlight an aberrant proliferation and cell cycle 
regulation in HPASMC from PAH subjects. These newly identified pathways may 
provide new targets for the treatment of both hereditary and idiopathic PAH.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.24987
PMCID: PMC4391824
PMID: 25290246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]