1. Int J Endocrinol. 2014;2014:983016. doi: 10.1155/2014/983016. Epub 2014 Sep
21.

Genetic Variations in the Kir6.2 Subunit (KCNJ11) of Pancreatic ATP-Sensitive 
Potassium Channel Gene Are Associated with Insulin Response to Glucose Loading 
and Early Onset of Type 2 Diabetes in Childhood and Adolescence in Taiwan.

Jiang YD(1), Chuang LM(2), Pei D(3), Lee YJ(4), Wei JN(5), Sung FC(6), Chang 
TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 7 
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei 10002, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 7 
Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei 10002, Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Preventive 
Medicine, School of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10002, 
Taiwan.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Cardinal Tien Hospital, Xindian 23148, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Mackay General Hospital, Taipei 10449, Taiwan.
(5)Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 71710, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Environmental Health, College of Public Health, China Medical 
University, Taichung 40447, Taiwan.

To investigate the role of E23K polymorphism of the KCNJ11 gene on early onset 
of type 2 diabetes in school-aged children/adolescents in Taiwan, we recruited 
38 subjects with type 2 diabetes (ages 18.6 ± 6.6 years; body mass index 
percentiles 83.3 ± 15.4) and 69 normal controls (ages 17.3 ± 3.8 years; body 
mass index percentiles 56.7 ± 29.0) from a national surveillance for 
childhood/adolescent diabetes in Taiwan. We searched for the E23K polymorphism 
of the KCNJ11 gene. We found that type 2 diabetic subjects had higher carrier 
rate of E23K polymorphism of KCNJ11 gene than control subjects (P = 0.044). 
After adjusting for age, gender, body mass index percentiles, and fasting plasma 
insulin, the E23K polymorphism contributed to an increased risk for type 2 
diabetes (P = 0.047). K23-allele-containing genotypes conferring increased 
plasma insulin level during OGTT in normal subjects. However, the diabetic 
subjects with the K23-allele-containing genotypes had lower fasting plasma 
insulin levels after adjustment of age and BMI percentiles. In conclusion, the 
E23K variant of the KCNJ11 gene conferred higher susceptibility to type 2 
diabetes in children/adolescents. Furthermore, in normal glucose-tolerant 
children/adolescents, K23 allele carriers had a higher insulin response to oral 
glucose loading.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/983016
PMCID: PMC4189766
PMID: 25309595