1. Med Oncol. 2014 Nov;31(11):272. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0272-5. Epub 2014 Oct 
10.

Uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG) rs246079 G/A polymorphism is associated with 
decreased risk of esophageal cancer in a Chinese population.

Yin J(1), Sang Y, Zheng L, Wang L, Yuan L, Liu C, Wang X, Shi Y, Shao A, Ding G, 
Chen S, Tang W, Gu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu 
University, 8 Dianli Rd, Zhenjiang, 212000, China.

Esophageal cancer is the sixth leading cause of cancer-associated death 
worldwide. In addition to environmental risk factors, genetic factors might play 
an important role in esophageal cancer carcinogenesis. We conducted a 
hospital-based case-control study to evaluate the association between functional 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG) and the 
development of esophageal cancer. A total of 380 esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma (ESCC) cases and 380 controls were recruited for this study. The UNG 
rs3219218 A/G and UNG rs246079 G/A genotypes were determined using 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry 
(MALDI-TOF MS). When the UNG rs246079 GG homozygote genotype was used as the 
reference group, the GA genotype was associated with a significantly decreased 
risk for ESCC (GA vs. GG: adjusted OR 0.67, 95 % CI 0.49-0.91, P = 0.011); the 
AA genotype was not associated with the risk of ESCC. In stratification 
analyses, a significantly decreased risk of ESCC associated with the UNG 
rs246079 G/A polymorphism was evident among women, younger patients and 
never-smokers and never-drinkers. The UNG rs3219218 A/G polymorphism was not 
associated with the risk for ESCC. These findings indicated that UNG rs246079 
G/A might contribute to a decreased risk of ESCC in specific populations. 
Because of the limited sample size, further studies including a larger and more 
diverse population, as well as tissue-specific biological characterization, are 
required to confirm the current findings.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0272-5
PMID: 25301111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]