1. Med Oncol. 2014 Nov;31(11):279. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0279-y. Epub 2014 Oct 
11.

ABCB1 haplotypes but not individual SNPs predict for optimal response/failure in 
Egyptian patients with chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia receiving imatinib 
mesylate.

Ali MA(1), Elsalakawy WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Ain Shams University, 
Abbassia, Cairo, 11566, Egypt, mohd_ali2@sci.asu.edu.eg.

Imatinib mesylate (IM) has so far been the standard of care for treating chronic 
myeloid leukemia (CML), but the initial striking efficacy of this drug has been 
overshadowed by the development of clinical resistance, which may in part be 
caused by pharmacogenetic variability. The ATP-binding cassette, subfamily B, 
member 1 (ABCB1) gene codes for P-glycoprotein (P-gp), a membrane-bound efflux 
transporter known to affect the pharmacokinetics of many drugs. IM is a 
substrate of the P-gp-mediated efflux. ABCB1 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) have been reported as modulators of ABCB1-mediated transport, affecting 
IM's bioavailability and consequently the treatment outcome of IM therapy. We 
aimed to examine the association between ABCB1 SNPs and the likelihood of 
achieving optimal response in IM-treated CML patients. Three ABCB1 SNPs (C1236T, 
G2677T, and C3435T) were genotyped in 100 Egyptian patients with CML undergoing 
IM therapy using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay. The optimal response rate did not differ 
significantly between C1236T, G2677T, or C3435T genotypes (P > 0.05). Optimal 
response rate was significantly different among patients with the CGC, TTT, TGC, 
CGT, TGT, CTC, CTT, and TTC haplotypes (P = 0.023). The 1236T-2677G-3435T 
haplotype was significantly associated with lower probability of achieving 
optimal response (P = 0.001). ABCB1 SNPs haplotype analysis should be taken into 
account in an attempt to get clearer insights into who is likely to respond 
optimally to IM for identifying CML patients who may not respond optimally to 
standard-dose IM therapy and potentially need an individualized therapeutic 
approach.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-014-0279-y
PMID: 25301112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]