1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 10;9(10):e108891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108891. 
eCollection 2014.

Using multivariable Mendelian randomization to disentangle the causal effects of 
lipid fractions.

Burgess S(1), Freitag DF(1), Khan H(1), Gorman DN(1), Thompson SG(1).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Previous Mendelian randomization studies have suggested that, while 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) and triglycerides are causally 
implicated in coronary artery disease (CAD) risk, high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (HDL-c) may not be, with causal effect estimates compatible with the 
null.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The causal effects of these three lipid fractions can be 
better identified using the extended methods of 'multivariable Mendelian 
randomization'. We employ this approach using published data on 185 
lipid-related genetic variants and their associations with lipid fractions in 
188,578 participants, and with CAD risk in 22,233 cases and 64,762 controls. Our 
results suggest that HDL-c may be causally protective of CAD risk, independently 
of the effects of LDL-c and triglycerides. Estimated causal odds ratios per 
standard deviation increase, based on 162 variants not having pleiotropic 
associations with either blood pressure or body mass index, are 1.57 (95% 
credible interval 1.45 to 1.70) for LDL-c, 0.91 (0.83 to 0.99, p-value â€Š= 0.028) 
for HDL-c, and 1.29 (1.16 to 1.43) for triglycerides.
SIGNIFICANCE: Some interventions on HDL-c concentrations may influence risk of 
CAD, but to a lesser extent than interventions on LDL-c. A causal interpretation 
of these estimates relies on the assumption that the genetic variants do not 
have pleiotropic associations with risk factors on other pathways to CAD. If 
they do, a weaker conclusion is that genetic predictors of LDL-c, HDL-c and 
triglycerides each have independent associations with CAD risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108891
PMCID: PMC4193746
PMID: 25302496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.