1. Neurosignals. 2014;22(2):65-78. doi: 10.1159/000367896. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Targeting the Small- and Intermediate-Conductance Ca-Activated Potassium 
Channels: The Drug-Binding Pocket at the Channel/Calmodulin Interface.

Cui M(1), Qin G, Yu K, Bowers MS, Zhang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Virginia Commonwealth University 
School of Medicine, Richmond, Va., USA.

The small- and intermediate-conductance Ca(2+)-activated potassium (SK/IK) 
channels play important roles in the regulation of excitable cells in both the 
central nervous and cardiovascular systems. Evidence from animal models has 
implicated SK/IK channels in neurological conditions such as ataxia and alcohol 
use disorders. Further, genome-wide association studies have suggested that 
cardiovascular abnormalities such as arrhythmias and hypertension are associated 
with single nucleotide polymorphisms that occur within the genes encoding the 
SK/IK channels. The Ca(2+) sensitivity of the SK/IK channels stems from a 
constitutively bound Ca(2+)-binding protein: calmodulin. Small-molecule positive 
modulators of SK/IK channels have been developed over the past decade, and 
recent structural studies have revealed that the binding pocket of these 
positive modulators is located at the interface between the channel and 
calmodulin. SK/IK channel positive modulators can potentiate channel activity by 
enhancing the coupling between Ca(2+) sensing via calmodulin and mechanical 
opening of the channel. Here, we review binding pocket studies that have 
provided structural insight into the mechanism of action for SK/IK channel 
positive modulators. These studies lay the foundation for structure-based drug 
discovery efforts that can identify novel SK/IK channel positive modulators.

Â© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000367896
PMCID: PMC4390548
PMID: 25300231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]