1. J Mol Biol. 2014 Dec 12;426(24):3946-3959. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.10.008.
Epub  2014 Oct 12.

GEN1 from a thermophilic fungus is functionally closely similar to 
non-eukaryotic junction-resolving enzymes.

Freeman ADJ(1), Liu Y(1), Déclais AC(1), Gartner A(1), Lilley DMJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Nucleic Acid Structure Research Group, MSI/WTB Complex, 
The University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.
(2)Cancer Research UK Nucleic Acid Structure Research Group, MSI/WTB Complex, 
The University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. Electronic address: 
d.m.j.lilley@dundee.ac.uk.

Processing of Holliday junctions is essential in recombination. We have 
identified the gene for the junction-resolving enzyme GEN1 from the thermophilic 
fungus Chaetomium thermophilum and expressed the N-terminal 487-amino-acid 
section. The protein is a nuclease that is highly selective for four-way DNA 
junctions, cleaving 1nt 3' to the point of strand exchange on two strands 
symmetrically disposed about a diagonal axis. CtGEN1 binds to DNA junctions as a 
discrete homodimer with nanomolar affinity. Analysis of the kinetics of 
cruciform cleavage shows that cleavage of the second strand occurs an order of 
magnitude faster than the first cleavage so as to generate a productive 
resolution event. All these properties are closely similar to those described 
for bacterial, phage and mitochondrial junction-resolving enzymes. CtGEN1 is 
also similar in properties to the human enzyme but lacks the problems with 
aggregation that currently prevent detailed analysis of the latter protein. 
CtGEN1 is thus an excellent enzyme with which to engage in biophysical and 
structural analysis of eukaryotic GEN1.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.10.008
PMCID: PMC4270448
PMID: 25315822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]