1. Protein J. 2014 Dec;33(6):525-35. doi: 10.1007/s10930-014-9585-7.

A study of the influence of charged residues on β-hairpin formation by nuclear 
magnetic resonance and molecular dynamics.

Makowska J(1), Zmudzińska W, Uber D, Chmurzyński L.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdańsk, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308, Gdańsk, 
Poland, joanna.makowska@ug.edu.pl.

Chain reversals are often nucleation sites in protein folding. The β-hairpins of 
FBP28 WW domain and IgG are stable and have been proved to initiate the folding 
and are, therefore, suitable for studying the influence of charged residues on 
β-hairpin conformation. In this paper, we carried out NMR examination of the 
conformations in solution of two fragments from the FPB28 protein (PDB code: 
1E0L) (N-terminal part) namely KTADGKT-NH2 (1E0L 12-18, D7) and YKTADGKTY-NH2 
(1E0L 11-19, D9), one from the B3 domain of the protein G (PDB code: 1IGD), 
namely DDATKT-NH2 (1IGD 51-56) (Dag1), and three variants of Dag1 peptide: 
DVATKT-NH2 (Dag2), OVATKT-NH2 (Dag3) and KVATKT-NH2 (Dag4), respectively, in 
which the original charged residue were replaced with non-polar residues or 
modified charged residues. It was found that both the D7 and D9 peptides form a 
large fraction bent conformations. However, no hydrophobic contacts between the 
terminal Tyr residues of D9 occur, which suggests that the presence of a pair of 
like-charged residues stabilizes chain reversal. Conversely, only the Dag1 and 
Dag2 peptides exhibit some chain reversal; replacing the second aspartic-acid 
residue with a valine and the first one with a basic residue results in a nearly 
extended conformation. These results suggest that basic residues farther away in 
sequence can result in stabilization of chain reversal owing to screening of the 
non-polar core. Conversely, smaller distance in sequence prohibits this 
screening, while the presence oppositely-charged residues can stabilize a turn 
because of salt-bridge formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10930-014-9585-7
PMCID: PMC4239826
PMID: 25316116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]