1. Hepat Res Treat. 2014;2014:748935. doi: 10.1155/2014/748935. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Prediction of Sustained Virological Response to Telaprevir-Based Triple Therapy 
Using Viral Response within 2 Weeks.

Tamai H(1), Shimizu R(1), Shingaki N(1), Mori Y(1), Maeshima S(1), Nuta J(1), 
Maeda Y(1), Moribata K(1), Muraki Y(1), Deguchi H(1), Inoue I(1), Maekita T(1), 
Iguchi M(1), Kato J(1), Ichinose M(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 
Kimiidera, Wakayama, Wakayama Prefecture 641-0012, Japan.

The aim of the present study was to predict sustained virological response (SVR) 
to telaprevir with pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) and ribavirin using viral 
response within 2 weeks after therapy initiation. Thirty-six patients with 
genotype 1 hepatitis C virus (HCV) and high viral load were treated by 
telaprevir-based triple therapy. SVR was achieved in 72% (26/36) of patients. 
Significant differences between the SVR group and non-SVR group were noted 
regarding response to prior PEG-IFN plus ribavirin, interleukin (IL)28B 
polymorphism, amino acid substitution at core 70, cirrhosis, hyaluronic acid 
level, and HCV-RNA reduction within 2 weeks. Setting 4.56â€‰logIU/mL as the 
cut-off value for HCV-RNA reduction at 2 weeks, the sensitivity, specificity, 
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy for 
predicting SVR were 77%, 86%, 95%, 50%, and 79%, respectively, and for neither 
the IL28B minor allele nor core 70 mutant were 80%, 71%, 91%, 50%, and 78%, 
respectively. In conclusion, evaluation of viral reduction at 2 weeks or the 
combination of IL28B polymorphism and amino acid substitution at core 70 are 
useful for predicting SVR to telaprevir with PEG-IFN and ribavirin therapy.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/748935
PMCID: PMC4195394
PMID: 25328696