1. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jan;33(1):74-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3561. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Cyclooxygenase-2 genetic variants influence intratumoral infiltration of 
Foxp3-positive regulatory T cells in non-small cell lung cancer.

Yukawa T(1), Shimizu K(1), Maeda A(1), Yasuda K(1), Saisho S(1), Okita R(1), 
Nakata M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, 
Okayama 701-0192, Japan.

The immune microenvironment of primary tumors has been reported to be a 
prognostic factor. We previously reported that the tumor-infiltrating regulatory 
T cell (Treg) count was positively correlated with the intratumoral 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression level and was associated with a poor 
survival among patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recently, 
numerous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the COX-2 gene have been 
identified, and these SNPs may contribute to differential gene expression and 
enzyme activity levels. However, whether COX-2 genetic variants influence the 
functions of COX-2 in NSCLC remains unclear. Eighty NSCLC patients who underwent 
a complete resection at our institute were enrolled. We extracted DNA from the 
peripheral blood and identified five different COX-2 SNPs. The correlations 
between the COX-2 SNPs and the expression levels of COX-2, Tregs and Ki-67 were 
studied. The prognostic significance of the COX-2 SNPs was also evaluated. COX-2 
SNPs were not correlated with the expression of COX-2. However, for the COX-2 
-1195G/A polymorphism, the AA genotype group had a significantly higher Treg 
score. Furthermore, the AA group had a significantly higher Treg score 
regardless of the COX-2 expression level. The COX-2 -1195AA genotype group 
tended to have a shorter disease-free survival period than the GA/GG group. In 
conclusion, the COX-2 -1195G/A polymorphism influences the infiltration of Tregs 
into NSCLC, and the COX-2 SNP factor may be a prognostic factor reflecting Treg 
infiltration in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2014.3561
PMID: 25338928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]