1. Thrombosis. 2014;2014:182762. doi: 10.1155/2014/182762. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Study of associated genetic variants in Indian subjects reveals the basis of 
ethnicity related differences in susceptibility to venous thromboembolism.

Kumari B(1), Srivastava S(1), Chatterjee T(2), Vardhan R(1), Tyagi T(1), Gupta 
N(1), Sahu A(1), Chandra K(1), Ashraf MZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences, Timarpur, Delhi 110054, 
India.
(2)Army Hospital [R & R], Delhi Cantonment, New Delhi 110010, India.
(3)Genomics Division, Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences, Lucknow 
Road, Timarpur, Delhi 110054, India.

The genetic variants linked with the susceptibility of individuals to VTE are 
well known; however, the studies explaining the ethnicity based difference in 
susceptibility to VTE are limited. Present study assesses mutations in six 
candidate genes contributing to the etiology of VTE in Indian subjects. The 
study comprised 93 VTE patients and 102 healthy controls. A PCR-RFLP based 
analysis was performed for nine mutations in the following genes associated with 
VTE: favtor V Leiden (FVL), prothrombin, tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), 
fibrinogen-beta, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), and methylene 
tetrahydrofolatereductase (MTHFR). All the subjects were found to be monomorphic 
for FVL 1691G/A, prothrombin 20210G/A and TFPI -536C/T mutations. The mutation 
in the MTHFR gene (677C/T) was observed only in patients. Contrarily, higher 
frequency of mutation in the PAI-1 -844G/A and the fibrinogen-β -455G/A was 
observed in controls in comparison to the patients. This study suggests that the 
PAI-1 -844G/A and fibrinogen-β -455G/A could be protective variants against VTE 
in Indians. While MTHFR 677C/T mutation was found to be associated, in contrast 
to other populations, the established genetic variants FVL 1691G/A, prothrombin 
20210G/A, and TFPI -536C/T may not be associated with VTE in Indians thus 
revealing the basis of ethnicity related differences in susceptibility of 
Indians to VTE.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/182762
PMCID: PMC4198785
PMID: 25349733