1. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2015 Apr;32(2):119-23. doi: 10.1007/s10014-014-0204-2.
Epub  2014 Oct 28.

Central neurocytoma with ependymoma-like glial component.

Kawakami F(1), Nambu J, Hirose T, Sasayama T, Itoh T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kobe University Hospital, 7-5-2, Kusunoki 
cho, Chuou-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan, fkwkm@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.

We present the first case of central neurocytoma with a component suggesting 
ependymal-like differentiation as an unclassified glioneuronal tumor. The 
patient was a 26-year-old Japanese man with a brain tumor extending from the 
frontal wall of the bilateral lateral ventricles to the corpus callosum. 
Histologically, the tumor's neuronal component consisted of small bland looking 
cells with fine, delicate, neuropil-like processes forming a rosette structure; 
its glial component consisted of tumor cells with thick processes arranged 
around the thinly walled vessels, resulting in a perivascular pseudo-rosette 
formation and indicating ependymal-like differentiation. Immunohistochemically, 
the cytoplasm of the tumor cells with ependymal-like features was positive for 
glial fibrillary acidic protein and negative for synaptophysin, while the tumor 
component with neuronal features showed the opposite immunohistochemical 
staining pattern. Most of the tumor cells were positive for Olig2, but EMA, 
D2-40, CD99, p53, and mutant IDH-1 (R132H) were totally negative. Its Ki-67 
labeling index was less than 1Â %. Histologically, this tumor was diagnosed as a 
central neurocytoma with an ependymoma-like glial component, and its tumor grade 
was estimated at grade II. The tumor location, infiltrating the corpus callosum, 
and histology were distinctive and might represent a peculiar subtype of 
glioneuronal tumor.

DOI: 10.1007/s10014-014-0204-2
PMID: 25348672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]