1. Nat Protoc. 2014 Dec;9(12):2719-24. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2014.183. Epub 2014 Oct
 30.

Pancreatic cell tracing, lineage tagging and targeted genetic manipulations in 
multiple cell types using pancreatic ductal infusion of adeno-associated viral 
vectors and/or cell-tagging dyes.

Xiao X(1), Guo P(1), Prasadan K(1), Shiota C(1), Peirish L(1), Fischbach S(1), 
Song Z(1), Gaffar I(1), Wiersch J(1), El-Gohary Y(1), Husain SZ(2), Gittes 
GK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University 
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Genetic manipulations, with or without lineage tracing for specific pancreatic 
cell types, are very powerful tools for studying diabetes, pancreatitis and 
pancreatic cancer. Nevertheless, the use of Cre/loxP systems to conditionally 
activate or inactivate the expression of genes in a cell type- and/or 
temporal-specific manner is not applicable to cell tracing and/or gene 
manipulations in more than one lineage at a time. Here we report a technique 
that allows efficient delivery of dyes for cell tagging into the mouse pancreas 
through the duct system, and that also delivers viruses carrying transgenes or 
siRNA under a specific promoter. When this technique is applied in genetically 
modified mice, it enables the investigator to perform either double lineage 
tracing or cell lineage tracing combined with gene manipulation in a second 
lineage. The technique requires <40 min.

DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2014.183
PMCID: PMC4734891
PMID: 25356582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.