1. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Sep 15;7(9):2851-7. eCollection 2014.

Interleukin-6 genotypes and serum levels in Chinese Hui population.

Gao SP(1), Liang S(2), Pan M(3), Sun RL(1), Chen C(3), Luan H(1), Jiang MH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ningxia People's Hospital Yinchuan 750021, P. R. 
China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University 
Nantong 226001, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong 
226001, P. R. China.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a key pro-inflammatory cytokine involved in different 
physiologic and pathophysiologic processes, and circulating levels of IL-6 
differ greatly between individuals. The Chinese Hui is one of the largest ethnic 
minorities, little is known about the distribution of IL-6 genetic variations 
and their effects on serum levels in Hui population. The aim of the present 
study is to determine the prevalence of -174G/C (rs1800795), -597G/A 
(rs1800797), and -634C/G (rs1800796) polymorphisms in the IL-6 gene promoter 
region and their association with IL-6 serum levels in the Ningxia Hui 
population. A total of 96 Hui subjects, (57 men and 39 women; mean age 49.65 Â± 
19.73 years) unrelated nationality residents in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region 
were enrolled. Genotyping of the three polymorphisms were performed by 
polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP) combined with gel electrophoresis and then confirmed by direct 
sequencing. The -174G/C (97.92% GG, 2.08% GC, and 0% CC) and -597G/A (98.96% GG, 
1.04% GA, and 0% AA) polymorphisms were rare. The frequencies of -634C/G 
genotypes CC, CG, and GG were found to be 54.17%, 40.62%, and 5.21%, 
respectively in total studied subjects, the derived allele frequencies for the C 
and G alleles were 74.48% and 25.52%. Increased IL-6 levels were correlated with 
the IL-6 -634G allele carriers (CG+GG genotypes). The results suggest that IL-6 
-174G/C and -597G/A are rare but -634C/G is common in the Ningxia Hui 
population, and the -634G allele is associated with circulating levels of IL-6.

PMCID: PMC4211798
PMID: 25356148