1. Nutrients. 2014 Oct 28;6(11):4691-705. doi: 10.3390/nu6114691.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in children: focus on nutritional 
interventions.

Yang M(1), Gong S(2), Ye SQ(3), Lyman B(4), Geng L(5), Chen P(6), Li DY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510623, China. ymlyxw@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510623, China. sitangg@126.com.
(3)Division of Experimental and Translational Genetics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Children's Mercy Hospitals and Clinics, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
sqye@cmh.edu.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Children's Mercy Hospital, University of 
Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
blyman@cmh.edu.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510623, China. 
genglan_2001@hotmail.com.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510623, China. chenpei.y@163.com.

With increasing prevalence of childhood obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) has emerged as the most common cause of liver disease among 
children and adolescents in industrialized countries. It is generally recognized 
that both genetic and environmental risk factors contribute to the pathogenesis 
of NAFLD. Recently, there has been a growing body of evidence to implicate 
altered gut microbiota in the development of NAFLD through the gut-liver axis. 
The first line of prevention and treatment of NAFLD in children should be 
intensive lifestyle interventions such as changes in diet and physical activity. 
Recent advances have been focused on limitation of dietary fructose and 
supplementation of antioxidants, omega-3 fatty acids, and prebiotics/probiotics. 
Convincing evidences from both animal models and human studies have shown that 
reduction of dietary fructose and supplement of vitamin E, omega-3 fatty acids, 
and prebiotics/probiotics improve NAFLD.

DOI: 10.3390/nu6114691
PMCID: PMC4245557
PMID: 25353664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]