1. J Phys Chem B. 2015 Jan 22;119(3):1173-83. doi: 10.1021/jp506807y. Epub 2014
Nov  11.

Hydrogen-bonded water molecules in the M2 channel of the influenza A virus guide 
the binding preferences of ammonium-based inhibitors.

Gianti E(1), Carnevale V, DeGrado WF, Klein ML, Fiorin G.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Computational Molecular Science, Temple University , SERC 
Building, 1925 North 12th Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, United 
States.

The tetrameric M2 proton channel of influenza A virus is an integral membrane 
protein responsible for the acidification of the viral interior. Drugs such as 
amantadine target the transmembrane region of wild type M2 by acting as pore 
blockers. However, a number of mutations affecting this domain confer drug 
resistance, prompting the need for alternative inhibitors. The availability of 
high-resolution structures of drug-bound M2, paired with computational 
investigations, revealed that inhibitors can bind at different sites, and 
provided useful insights in understanding the principles governing proton 
conduction. Here, we investigated by computation the energetic and geometric 
factors determining the relative stability of pore blockers at individual sites 
of different M2 strains. We found that local free energy minima along the 
translocation pathway of positively charged chemical species correspond to 
experimentally determined binding sites of inhibitors. Then, by examining the 
structure of water clusters hydrating each site, as well as of those displaced 
by binding of hydrophobic scaffolds, we predicted the binding preferences of M2 
ligands. This information can be used to guide the identification of novel 
classes of inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/jp506807y
PMCID: PMC4386636
PMID: 25353315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.