1. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Sep;6(9):2543-56. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu196.

Intron evolution in Saccharomycetaceae.

Hooks KB, Delneri D, Griffiths-Jones S.

Introns in protein-coding genes are very rare in hemiascomycetous yeast genomes. 
It has been suggested that these species have experienced extensive intron loss 
during their evolution from the postulated intron-rich fungal ancestor. However, 
no intron-devoidy east species have been identified and some of the introns 
remaining within the genomes of intron-poor species, such as Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, appear to be beneficial during growth under stress conditions. In 
order to reveal the pattern of intron retention within intron-poor yeast species 
and better understand the mechanisms of intron evolution, we generated a 
comprehensive set of 250 orthologous introns in the 20 species that comprise the 
Saccharomycetaceae, by analyzing RNA deep-sequencing data and alignments of 
intron-containing genes. Analysis of these intron sets shows that intron loss is 
at least two orders of magnitude more frequent than intron gain. Fine mapping of 
intron positions shows that intron sliding is rare, and that introns are almost 
always removed without changing the primary sequence of the encoded protein. The 
latter finding is consistent with the prevailing view that homologous 
recombination between reverse-transcribed mature mRNAs and the corresponding 
genomic locus is the primary mechanism of intron loss. However, we also find 
evidence that loss of a small number of introns is mediated by micro-homology, 
and that the number of intron losses is diminished in yeast species that have 
lost the microhomology end joining and nonhomologous end joining machinery.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evu196
PMCID: PMC4202332
PMID: 25364803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]