1. PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov 6;10(11):e1004735. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004735. 
eCollection 2014 Nov.

Genome-wide associations between genetic and epigenetic variation influence mRNA 
expression and insulin secretion in human pancreatic islets.

Olsson AH(1), Volkov P(1), Bacos K(1), Dayeh T(1), Hall E(1), Nilsson EA(1), 
Ladenvall C(2), Rönn T(1), Ling C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Epigenetics and Diabetes, Lund University 
Diabetes Centre, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University 
Diabetes Centre, Clinical Research Centre, Malmö, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec;10(12):e1004886.

Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms may interact and together affect biological 
processes and disease development. However, most previous studies have 
investigated genetic and epigenetic mechanisms independently, and studies 
examining their interactions throughout the human genome are lacking. To 
identify genetic loci that interact with the epigenome, we performed the first 
genome-wide DNA methylation quantitative trait locus (mQTL) analysis in human 
pancreatic islets. We related 574,553 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
with genome-wide DNA methylation data of 468,787 CpG sites targeting 99% of 
RefSeq genes in islets from 89 donors. We identified 67,438 SNP-CpG pairs in 
cis, corresponding to 36,783 SNPs (6.4% of tested SNPs) and 11,735 CpG sites 
(2.5% of tested CpGs), and 2,562 significant SNP-CpG pairs in trans, 
corresponding to 1,465 SNPs (0.3% of tested SNPs) and 383 CpG sites (0.08% of 
tested CpGs), showing significant associations after correction for multiple 
testing. These include reported diabetes loci, e.g. ADCY5, KCNJ11, HLA-DQA1, 
INS, PDX1 and GRB10. CpGs of significant cis-mQTLs were overrepresented in the 
gene body and outside of CpG islands. Follow-up analyses further identified 
mQTLs associated with gene expression and insulin secretion in human islets. 
Causal inference test (CIT) identified SNP-CpG pairs where DNA methylation in 
human islets is the potential mediator of the genetic association with gene 
expression or insulin secretion. Functional analyses further demonstrated that 
identified candidate genes (GPX7, GSTT1 and SNX19) directly affect key 
biological processes such as proliferation and apoptosis in pancreatic β-cells. 
Finally, we found direct correlations between DNA methylation of 22,773 (4.9%) 
CpGs with mRNA expression of 4,876 genes, where 90% of the correlations were 
negative when CpGs were located in the region surrounding transcription start 
site. Our study demonstrates for the first time how genome-wide genetic and 
epigenetic variation interacts to influence gene expression, islet function and 
potential diabetes risk in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004735
PMCID: PMC4222689
PMID: 25375650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.