1. J Exp Bot. 2015 Jan;66(1):293-306. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru419. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

Genetic dissection of ozone tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.) by a genome-wide 
association study.

Ueda Y(1), Frimpong F(1), Qi Y(2), Matthus E(1), Wu L(1), Höller S(1), Kraska 
T(3), Frei M(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Crop Science and Resource Conservation (INRES), University of 
Bonn, Karlrobert-Kreiten Strasse 13, 53115 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics & Physiology of Jiangsu Province, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou 225009, PR China.
(3)Campus Klein-Altendorf, University of Bonn, Klein-Altendorf 2, 53359 
Rheinbach, Germany.
(4)Institute of Crop Science and Resource Conservation (INRES), University of 
Bonn, Karlrobert-Kreiten Strasse 13, 53115 Bonn, Germany mfrei@uni-bonn.de.

Tropospheric ozone causes various negative effects on plants and affects the 
yield and quality of agricultural crops. Here, we report a genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) in rice (Oryza sativa L.) to determine candidate loci 
associated with ozone tolerance. A diversity panel consisting of 328 accessions 
representing all subgroups of O. sativa was exposed to ozone stress at 60 nl 
l(-1) for 7h every day throughout the growth season, or to control conditions. 
Averaged over all genotypes, ozone significantly affected biomass-related traits 
(plant height -1.0%, shoot dry weight -15.9%, tiller number -8.3%, grain weight 
-9.3%, total panicle weight -19.7%, single panicle weight -5.5%) and 
biochemical/physiological traits (symptom formation, SPAD value -4.4%, foliar 
lignin content +3.4%). A wide range of genotypic variance in response to ozone 
stress were observed in all phenotypes. Association mapping based on more than 
30 000 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers yielded 16 significant 
markers throughout the genome by applying a significance threshold of P<0.0001. 
Furthermore, by determining linkage disequilibrium blocks associated with 
significant SNPs, we gained a total of 195 candidate genes for these traits. The 
following sequence analysis revealed a number of novel polymorphisms in two 
candidate genes for the formation of visible leaf symptoms, a RING and an EREBP 
gene, both of which are involved in cell death and stress defence reactions. 
This study demonstrated substantial natural variation of responses to ozone in 
rice and the possibility of using GWAS in elucidating the genetic factors 
underlying ozone tolerance.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eru419
PMCID: PMC4265164
PMID: 25371505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]