1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Mar;11(3):1827-32. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2894. Epub 2014 Nov
 7.

Mutation analysis of Leber congenital amaurosis‑associated genes in patients 
with retinitis pigmentosa.

Shen T(1), Guan L(2), Li S(1), Zhang J(2), Xiao X(2), Jiang H(2), Yang J(2), Guo 
X(1), Wang J(2), Zhang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun 
Yat‑sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China.
(2)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518083, P.R. China.

The genetic defects underlying approximately half of all retinitis pigmentosa 
(RP) cases are unknown. A number of genes responsible for Leber congenital 
amaurosis (LCA) may also cause RP when they are mutated. Our previous study 
revealed that variants in the most frequently mutated nine exons accounted for 
approximately half of the mutations detected in a cohort of patients with LCA. 
The aim of the present study was to detect mutations in LCA-associated genes in 
patients with RP using two different strategies. Sanger sequencing was used to 
screen mutations in the nine exons in 293 patients with RP and exome sequencing 
was used to detect variants in 12 LCA-associated genes in 157 of the 293 
patients with RP and then to validate the variants by Sanger sequencing. 
Potential pathogenic mutations were identified in four patients with early onset 
RP, including homozygous CRB1 mutations in two patients, compound heterozygous 
CRB1 mutations in one patient and compound heterozygous CEP290 mutations in one 
patient. The present study indicated that mutations in CEP290 may also be 
associated with RP but not with LCA. With the exception of CEP290, the remaining 
11 genes known to be associated with LCA but not with RP are unlikely to be a 
common cause of RP.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2894
PMID: 25377065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]