1. Hum Genet. 2015 Feb;134(2):147-58. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1503-8. Epub 2014
Nov  6.

Loss-of-function mutation in the X-linked TBX22 promoter disrupts an ETS-1 
binding site and leads to cleft palate.

Fu X(1), Cheng Y, Yuan J, Huang C, Cheng H, Zhou R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Center for Developmental Biology, College of Life 
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, People's Republic of China.

The cleft palate only (CPO) is a common congenital defect with complex etiology 
in humans. The molecular etiology of the CPO remains unknown. Here, we report a 
loss-of-function mutation in X-linked TBX22 gene (T-box 22) in a six-generation 
family of the CPO with obvious phenotypes of both cleft palate and hyper-nasal 
speech. We identify a functional -73G>A mutation in the promoter of TBX22, which 
is located at the core-binding site of transcription factor ETS-1 (v-ets avian 
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1). Phylogenetic analysis showed 
that the sequence around the -73G>A mutation site is specific in primates. The 
mutation was detected in all five affected male members cosegregating with the 
affected phenotype and heterozygote occurred only in some unaffected females of 
the family, suggesting an X-linked transmission of the mutation in the family. 
The -73G>A variant is a novel single nucleotide mutation. Cell co-transfections 
indicated that ETS-1 could activate the TBX22 promoter. Moreover, EMSA and ChIP 
assays demonstrated that the allele A disrupts the binding site of ETS-1, thus 
markedly decreases the activity of the TBX22 promoter, which is likely to lead 
to the birth defect of the CPO without ankyloglossia. These results suggest that 
a loss-of-function mutation in the X-linked TBX22 promoter may cause the cleft 
palate through disruption of TBX22-ETS-1 pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-014-1503-8
PMID: 25373698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]