1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2303-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.581892. Epub
2014  Nov 4.

Functional characterization of 5-oxoproline transport via SLC16A1/MCT1.

Sasaki S(1), Futagi Y(1), Kobayashi M(1), Ogura J(1), Iseki K(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutics and Therapeutics, Division of 
Pharmasciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, 
Kita-12-jo, Nishi-6-chome, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812 and.
(2)From the Laboratory of Clinical Pharmaceutics and Therapeutics, Division of 
Pharmasciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, 
Kita-12-jo, Nishi-6-chome, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812 and the Department of 
Pharmacy, Hokkaido University Hospital, Sapporo 060-8648, Japan 
ken-i@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a tripeptide that consists of 5-oxoproline, 
histidine, and proline. The peptide is rapidly metabolized by various enzymes. 
5-Oxoproline is produced by enzymatic hydrolysis in a variety of peptides. 
Previous studies showed that 5-oxoproline could become a possible biomarker for 
autism spectrum disorders. Here we demonstrate the involvement of SLC16A1 in the 
transport of 5-oxoproline. An SLC16A1 polymorphism (rs1049434) was recently 
identified. However, there is no information about the effect of the 
polymorphism on SLC16A1 function. In this study, the polymorphism caused an 
observable change in 5-oxoproline and lactate transport via SLC16A1. The 
Michaelis constant (Km) was increased in an SLC16A1 mutant compared with that in 
the wild type. In addition, the proton concentration required to produce 
half-maximal activation of transport activity (K0.5, H (+)) was increased in the 
SLC16A1 mutant compared with that in the wild type. Furthermore, we examined the 
transport of 5-oxoproline in T98G cells as an astrocyte cell model. Despite the 
fact that 5-oxoproline is an amino acid derivative, Na(+)-dependent and amino 
acid transport systems scarcely contributed to 5-oxoproline transport. Based on 
our findings, we conclude that H(+)-coupled 5-oxoproline transport is mediated 
solely by SLC16A1 in the cells.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.581892
PMCID: PMC4303682
PMID: 25371203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]