1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:637027. doi: 10.1155/2014/637027. Epub 2014
Oct  13.

Nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease: pathogenesis and therapeutics from a 
mitochondria-centric perspective.

Gusdon AM(1), Song KX(2), Qu S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai 10th People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, No. 301 Middle Yanchang Road, Shanghai 
200072, China ; Department of Neurology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai 10th People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, No. 301 Middle Yanchang Road, Shanghai 
200072, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai 10th People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, No. 301 Middle Yanchang Road, Shanghai 
200072, China ; Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) describes a spectrum of disorders 
characterized by the accumulation of triglycerides within the liver. The global 
prevalence of NAFLD has been increasing as the obesity epidemic shows no sign of 
relenting. Mitochondria play a central role in hepatic lipid metabolism and also 
are affected by upstream signaling pathways involved in hepatic metabolism. This 
review will focus on the role of mitochondria in the pathophysiology of NAFLD 
and touch on some of the therapeutic approaches targeting mitochondria as well 
as metabolically important signaling pathways. Mitochondria are able to adapt to 
lipid accumulation in hepatocytes by increasing rates of beta-oxidation; however 
increased substrate delivery to the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) 
leads to increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and eventually ETC 
dysfunction. Decreased ETC function combined with increased rates of fatty acid 
beta-oxidation leads to the accumulation of incomplete products of 
beta-oxidation, which combined with increased levels of ROS contribute to 
insulin resistance. Several related signaling pathways, nuclear receptors, and 
transcription factors also regulate hepatic lipid metabolism, many of which are 
redox sensitive and regulated by ROS.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/637027
PMCID: PMC4211163
PMID: 25371775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]