1. Nature. 2014 Dec 4;516(7529):51-5. doi: 10.1038/nature13976. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

β-catenin mediates stress resilience through Dicer1/microRNA regulation.

Dias C(1), Feng J(1), Sun H(1), Shao NY(1), Mazei-Robison MS(1), Damez-Werno 
D(1), Scobie K(1), Bagot R(1), LaBonté B(1), Ribeiro E(1), Liu X(1), Kennedy 
P(1), Vialou V(1), Ferguson D(1), Peña C(1), Calipari ES(1), Koo JW(1), Mouzon 
E(1), Ghose S(2), Tamminga C(2), Neve R(3), Shen L(1), Nestler EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas 
75390, USA.
(3)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2014 Dec 4;516(7529):45-6. doi: 10.1038/nature13942.

β-catenin is a multi-functional protein that has an important role in the mature 
central nervous system; its dysfunction has been implicated in several 
neuropsychiatric disorders, including depression. Here we show that in mice 
β-catenin mediates pro-resilient and anxiolytic effects in the nucleus 
accumbens, a key brain reward region, an effect mediated by D2-type medium spiny 
neurons. Using genome-wide β-catenin enrichment mapping, we identify 
Dicer1-important in small RNA (for example, microRNA) biogenesis--as a β-catenin 
target gene that mediates resilience. Small RNA profiling after excising 
β-catenin from nucleus accumbens in the context of chronic stress reveals 
β-catenin-dependent microRNA regulation associated with resilience. Together, 
these findings establish β-catenin as a critical regulator in the development of 
behavioural resilience, activating a network that includes Dicer1 and downstream 
microRNAs. We thus present a foundation for the development of novel therapeutic 
targets to promote stress resilience.

DOI: 10.1038/nature13976
PMCID: PMC4257892
PMID: 25383518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]