1. J Neurosci. 1989 Mar;9(3):851-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.09-03-00851.1989.

ARPP-21, a cyclic AMP-regulated phosphoprotein enriched in dopamine-innervated 
brain regions. I. Purification and characterization of the protein from bovine 
caudate nucleus.

Hemmings HC Jr(1), Greengard P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10021.

ARPP-21 (cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein, Mr = 21,000 as determined by SDS/PAGE) 
is a major cytosolic substrate for cAMP-stimulated protein phosphorylation in 
dopamine-innervated regions of rat CNS (Walaas et al., 1983c). This acidic 
phosphoprotein has now been identified in bovine caudate nucleus cytosol and 
purified to homogeneity from this source. The purification procedure involved 
diethylaminoethyl-cellulose chromatography, ammonium sulfate fractionation, 
phenyl-Sepharose CL-4B chromatography, and fast protein liquid chromatography 
using Mono Q anion-exchange resin. Two isoforms of ARPP-21 (ARPP-21A and 
ARPP-21B) were obtained, which were present in approximately equal amounts in 
the starting material. ARPP-21A was purified 2610-fold with a final yield of 20% 
and ARPP-21B was purified 2940-fold with a final yield of 21%. The purified 
preparations of both isoforms were judged to be homogenous by SDS/PAGE. ARPP-21A 
and ARPP-21B yielded identical 2-dimensional thin-layer tryptic phosphopeptide 
maps, identical amino acid compositions and closely related, but distinct, 
reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatograms of tryptic digests. The amino 
acid composition of ARPP-21 showed a high content of glutamic acid/glutamine, 
and no methionine, tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine, or histidine. ARPP-21 
was stable to heat denaturation and to 50% (vol/vol) ethanol treatment and was 
partially soluble at pH 2. The Mr determined for ARPP-21 by SDS/PAGE was 21,000. 
The Stokes radius of ARPP-21 was 26.3 A, and the sedimentation coefficient of 
ARPP-21 was 1.3 S; these values yield a calculated molecular mass of 13,700 Da 
and a frictional ratio of 1.7, indicative of an elongated tertiary structure. 
ARPP-21 was an excellent substrate for cAMP-dependent protein kinase and was 
either not phosphorylated or only poorly phosphorylated by cGMP-dependent 
protein kinase, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I, 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, casein kinase II, or protein 
kinase C. The purified catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase 
catalyzed the incorporation of 1.2 mol phosphate/mol purified ARPP-21. 
Phosphorylation occurred exclusively on seryl residues. Phospho-ARPP-21 was 
dephosphorylated effectively by protein phosphatase-1 or -2A, but not by protein 
phosphatase-2B or -2C. Rabbit polyclonal and mouse monoclonal antibodies were 
prepared to purified ARPP-21. These antibodies specifically immunoprecipitated 
ARPP-21, which was found to be highly enriched in the caudate nucleus and 
putamen of monkey brain.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.09-03-00851.1989
PMCID: PMC6569970
PMID: 2538584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]