1. Genes (Basel). 2014 Nov 11;5(4):1032-49. doi: 10.3390/genes5041032.

Three-Dimensional Mapping of mRNA Export through the Nuclear Pore Complex.

Schnell SJ(1), Ma J(2), Yang W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 
sj.schnell@temple.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 
jiong.ma@temple.edu.
(3)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. 
weidong.yang@temple.edu.

The locations of transcription and translation of mRNA in eukaryotic cells are 
spatially separated by the nuclear envelope (NE). Plenty of nuclear pore 
complexes (NPCs) embedded in the NE function as the major gateway for the export 
of transcribed mRNAs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Whereas the NPC, perhaps 
one of the largest protein complexes, provides a relatively large channel for 
macromolecules to selectively pass through it in inherently three-dimensional 
(3D) movements, this channel is nonetheless below the diffraction limit of 
conventional light microscopy. A full understanding of the mRNA export mechanism 
urgently requires real-time mapping of the 3D dynamics of mRNA in the NPC of 
live cells with innovative imaging techniques breaking the diffraction limit of 
conventional light microscopy. Recently, super-resolution fluorescence 
microscopy and single-particle tracking (SPT) techniques have been applied to 
the study of nuclear export of mRNA in live cells. In this review, we emphasize 
the necessity of 3D mapping techniques in the study of mRNA export, briefly 
summarize the feasibility of current 3D imaging approaches, and highlight the 
new features of mRNA nuclear export elucidated with a newly developed 3D imaging 
approach combining SPT-based super-resolution imaging and 2D-to-3D deconvolution 
algorithms.

DOI: 10.3390/genes5041032
PMCID: PMC4276925
PMID: 25393401