1. Apoptosis. 2015 Jan;20(1):92-109. doi: 10.1007/s10495-014-1058-0.

RIP1-dependent Bid cleavage mediates TNFα-induced but Caspase-3-independent cell 
death in L929 fibroblastoma cells.

Chen G(1), Cheng X, Zhao M, Lin S, Lu J, Kang J, Yu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Cognitive and Mental Health Research Center, #27 Taiping Road, Beijing, 100850, 
China.

L929 fibroblastoma cells (L929-A) and L929 fibrosarcoma cells (L929-N) are 
different cell lines that are commonly used to study the cytotoxicity of tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα). TNFα has been reported to induce necrosis in both 
of these cell lines. However, comparing the TNFα-induced cell death in these two 
cell lines, we found that, unlike the L929-N cells that show typical 
RIP3-dependent necrosis, TNFα-induced cell death in L929-A cells is pan-caspase 
inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (Z-VAD)-sensitive, which does not depend on RIP3. We also 
confirmed that the cell death signal in the L929-A cells was initiated through 
cytosol-preassembled ripoptosome and that the knockdown of either Caspase-8 or 
RIP1 protein blocked cell death. Compared with the L929-N cells, the L929-A cell 
line had lower levels of constitutive and inducible TNFα autocrine production, 
and the pan-caspase inhibitors Z-VAD or Q-VD did not kill the L929-A cells as 
they affect the L929-N cells. Moreover, the L929-A cells expressed less RIP3 
protein than the L929-N cells; therefore, TNFα failed to induce RIP3-dependent 
necroptosis. In addition, the ripoptosome-mediated cell death signal was 
transduced to the mitochondria through Caspase-8-mediated and RIP1 kinase 
activity-dependent Bid cleavage. The RIP1 kinase inhibitor Necrostatin-1 (Nec-1) 
or Caspase-8 knockdown completely blocked Bid cleavage, and the knockdown of Bid 
or Bax/Bak prevented TNFα-induced cell death in the L929-A cells. Although the 
activation of Bax/Bak decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential, the levels 
of mitochondrial intermembrane space proteins, including cytochrome-c (cyt-C) 
and Smac, declined, and western blotting and immunofluorescence staining 
analysis did not determine whether these proteins were redistributed to the 
cytosol. In addition, the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Tom20 was also 
reduced, indicating that the reduced mitochondria proteins may be induced by the 
reduced mitochondria numbers. No efficient cyt-C release was observed; 
therefore, the limited activation and cleavage of downstream caspases, including 
Caspase-9, Caspase-7, Caspase-6 and Caspase-3, was insufficient to kill the 
cells. The Caspase-9, Caspase-6 and Caspase-3/7 inhibitors or Caspase-9 and -3 
knockdown also failed to block cell death, and the overexpression of Bcl-2 also 
did not abrogate cell death. Moreover, the dead cells showed necrotic-like but 
not apoptotic characteristics under transmission electronmicroscopy, and these 
features were significantly different from mitochondrial apoptosis, indicating 
that the effector caspases were not the executioners of cell death. These new 
discoveries show that TNFα-induced cell death in L929-A cells is different than 
typical RIP3-dependent necrosis and Caspase-8/Caspase-3-mediated apoptosis. 
These results highlight that caution is necessary when using different L929 
cells as a model to investigate TNFα-induced cell death.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-014-1058-0
PMID: 25398540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]