1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 12;9(11):e110040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110040. 
eCollection 2014.

Neem leaf glycoprotein prophylaxis transduces immune dependent stop signal for 
tumor angiogenic switch within tumor microenvironment.

Banerjee S(1), Ghosh T(1), Barik S(1), Das A(1), Ghosh S(1), Bhuniya A(1), Bose 
A(1), Baral R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation and Immunodiagnostics, Chittaranjan National 
Cancer Institute (CNCI), Kolkata, India.

We have reported that prophylactic as well as therapeutic administration of neem 
leaf glycoprotein (NLGP) induces significant restriction of solid tumor growth 
in mice. Here, we investigate whether the effect of such pretreatment 
(25Âµg/mice; weekly, 4 times) benefits regulation of tumor angiogenesis, an 
obligate factor for tumor progression. We show that NLGP pretreatment results in 
vascular normalization in melanoma and carcinoma bearing mice along with 
downregulation of CD31, VEGF and VEGFR2. NLGP pretreatment facilitates profound 
infiltration of CD8+ T cells within tumor parenchyma, which subsequently 
regulates VEGF-VEGFR2 signaling in CD31+ vascular endothelial cells to prevent 
aberrant neovascularization. Pericyte stabilization, VEGF dependent inhibition 
of VEC proliferation and subsequent vascular normalization are also experienced. 
Studies in immune compromised mice confirmed that these vascular and 
intratumoral changes in angiogenic profile are dependent upon active adoptive 
immunity particularly those mediated by CD8+ T cells. Accumulated evidences 
suggest that NLGP regulated immunomodulation is active in tumor growth 
restriction and normalization of tumor angiogenesis as well, thereby, signifying 
its clinical translation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110040
PMCID: PMC4229107
PMID: 25391149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.