1. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Nov 13;10(10):e1004501. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004501. 
eCollection 2014 Oct.

Aminoterminal amphipathic α-helix AH1 of hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 
4B possesses a dual role in RNA replication and virus production.

Gouttenoire J(1), Montserret R(2), Paul D(3), Castillo R(1), Meister S(1), 
Bartenschlager R(3), Penin F(2), Moradpour D(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, Bases Moléculaires et 
Structurales des Systèmes Infectieux, UMR 5086, CNRS, Labex Ecofect, University 
of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University of 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Nonstructural protein 4B (NS4B) is a key organizer of hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
replication complex formation. In concert with other nonstructural proteins, it 
induces a specific membrane rearrangement, designated as membranous web, which 
serves as a scaffold for the HCV replicase. The N-terminal part of NS4B 
comprises a predicted and a structurally resolved amphipathic α-helix, 
designated as AH1 and AH2, respectively. Here, we report a detailed 
structure-function analysis of NS4B AH1. Circular dichroism and nuclear magnetic 
resonance structural analyses revealed that AH1 folds into an amphipathic 
α-helix extending from NS4B amino acid 4 to 32, with positively charged residues 
flanking the helix. These residues are conserved among hepaciviruses. 
Mutagenesis and selection of pseudorevertants revealed an important role of 
these residues in RNA replication by affecting the biogenesis of double-membrane 
vesicles making up the membranous web. Moreover, alanine substitution of 
conserved acidic residues on the hydrophilic side of the helix reduced 
infectivity without significantly affecting RNA replication, indicating that AH1 
is also involved in virus production. Selective membrane permeabilization and 
immunofluorescence microscopy analyses of a functional replicon harboring an 
epitope tag between NS4B AH1 and AH2 revealed a dual membrane topology of the 
N-terminal part of NS4B during HCV RNA replication. Luminal translocation was 
unaffected by the mutations introduced into AH1, but was abrogated by mutations 
introduced into AH2. In conclusion, our study reports the three-dimensional 
structure of AH1 from HCV NS4B, and highlights the importance of positively 
charged amino acid residues flanking this amphipathic α-helix in membranous web 
formation and RNA replication. In addition, we demonstrate that AH1 possesses a 
dual role in RNA replication and virus production, potentially governed by 
different topologies of the N-terminal part of NS4B.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004501
PMCID: PMC4231108
PMID: 25392992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.