1. BMC Med Genet. 2014 Nov 14;15:123. doi: 10.1186/s12881-014-0123-4.

The association of polymorphisms of TLR4 and CD14 genes with susceptibility to 
sepsis in a Chinese population.

Wang H(1), Wei Y(2), Zeng Y(3), Qin Y(4), Xiong B(5), Qin G(6), Li J(7), Hu 
D(8), Qiu X(9), Sooranna SR(10), Pinhu L(11).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
whycoolkl@163.com.
(2)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
wysh22@163.com.
(3)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
zengyirr@163.com.
(4)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
gxbsqyq@126.com.
(5)Intensive Care Unit, the People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region, 6 Taoyuan Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, PR China. icuxiong@sina.com.
(6)Intensive Care Unit, Minzu Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, 323 
Mingxiu East Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, PR China. icuqg@aliyun.com.
(7)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
ttgxlj@163.com.
(8)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
syhdh-007@163.com.
(9)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
qqshown@163.com.
(10)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Chelsea and 
Westminster Hospital, London, SW10 9NH, UK. s.sooranna@imperial.ac.uk.
(11)Intensive Care Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Youjiang Medical University 
for Nationalities, No.18 Zhongshan Road II, Baise, 533099, Guangxi, PR China. 
liaopinhu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Sepsis is now the leading cause of death in the non-cardiovascular 
intensive care unit (ICU). Recent research suggests that sepsis is likely to be 
due to an interaction between genetic and environmental factors. Genetic 
mutations of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and cluster of differentiation 14 
(CD14) genes are involved in the immune and (or) inflammatory response. These 
may contribute to the susceptibility to sepsis in patients. This study was 
designed to evaluate whether the TLR4 and cluster CD14 gene polymorphisms are 
associated with susceptibility to sepsis.
METHODS: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of TLR4 (rs10759932, 
rs11536889, rs7873784, rs12377632, rs1927907, rs1153879) and CD14 (rs2569190 and 
rs2563298) in patients with sepsis and control subjects in the Guangxi Province 
were analyzed by using the polymerase chain reaction-single base extension 
(PCR-SBE) and DNA sequencing methods.
RESULTS: The rs11536889 polymorphism in TLR4 and rs2563298 polymorphism in CD14 
were significantly associated with the risk of sepsis when compared to the 
control group. The frequencies of rs11536889 and rs2563298 polymorphisms in the 
group with sepsis were higher than that in the control group (OR = 1.430, 95% 
CI, 1.032-1.981, P<0.05; OR = 2.454, 95% CI, 1.458-4.130, P<0.05, respectively). 
Followed up haplotype analysis suggested that there were two haplotypes in which 
increased risk factors for sepsis were indicated.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs11536889 polymorphism in TLR4 and rs2563298 polymorphism in 
CD14, and two haplotypes were associated with increased susceptibility to 
sepsis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-014-0123-4
PMCID: PMC4411696
PMID: 25394369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]