1. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2015 Mar;34(3):527-35. doi: 10.1002/etc.2804. Epub 2015 
Jan 21.

Arachidonic acid enhances reproduction in Daphnia magna and mitigates changes in 
sex ratios induced by pyriproxyfen.

Ginjupalli GK(1), Gerard PD, Baldwin WS.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Toxicology Program, Clemson University, Clemson, South 
Carolina.

Arachidonic acid is 1 of only 2 unsaturated fatty acids retained in the ovaries 
of crustaceans and an inhibitor of HR97g, a nuclear receptor expressed in adult 
ovaries. The authors hypothesized that, as a key fatty acid, arachidonic acid 
may be associated with reproduction and potentially environmental sex 
determination in Daphnia. Reproduction assays with arachidonic acid indicate 
that it alters female:male sex ratios by increasing female production. This 
reproductive effect only occurred during a restricted Pseudokirchneriella 
subcapitata diet. Next, the authors tested whether enriching a poorer algal diet 
(Chlorella vulgaris) with arachidonic acid enhances overall reproduction and sex 
ratios. Arachidonic acid enrichment of a C. vulgaris diet also enhances 
fecundity at 1.0 µM and 4.0 µM by 30% to 40% in the presence and absence of 
pyriproxyfen. This indicates that arachidonic acid is crucial in reproduction 
regardless of environmental sex determination. Furthermore, the data indicate 
that P. subcapitata may provide a threshold concentration of arachidonic acid 
needed for reproduction. Diet-switch experiments from P. subcapitata to C. 
vulgaris mitigate some, but not all, of arachidonic acid's effects when compared 
with a C. vulgaris-only diet, suggesting that some arachidonic acid provided by 
P. subcapitata is retained. In summary, arachidonic acid supplementation 
increases reproduction and represses pyriproxyfen-induced environmental sex 
determination in D. magna in restricted diets. A diet rich in arachidonic acid 
may provide protection from some reproductive toxicants such as the juvenile 
hormone agonist pyriproxyfen. Environ Toxicol Chem 2015;34:527-535. © 2014 
SETAC.

© 2014 SETAC.

DOI: 10.1002/etc.2804
PMCID: PMC4928378
PMID: 25393616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to declare.