1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6898-905. eCollection 2014.

Associations between Cox-2 rs20417 and rs5275 polymorphisms and the risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta analysis.

Wu H(1), Wu X(2), Wan G(3), Zhang S(2).

Author information:
(1)Shihezi University School of Medicine Shihezi City, Xinjiang, China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of School 
Medicine, Shihezi University Shehezi City, Xinjiang, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Hubei University of 
Medicine Shiyan City, Hubei, China.

Genetic polymorphisms of cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) gene have been implicated in 
the susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the findings from 
published studies are conflicting and inconclusive. To obtain a more precise 
estimate of the association of Cox-2 polymorphisms with HCC risk, we performed a 
meta-analysis of eight eligible case-control studies identified through an 
extensive online database search of PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, Web of 
Science, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang and Chinese 
Biomedicine Database; after exclusion, 2324 cases and 2604 controls were 
included. The pooled odds ratios with corresponding 95% confidence intervals 
were calculated to assess associations, using fixed- or random-effect models. In 
addition, subgroup analysis by ethnicity and sensitivity analysis were 
performed. Our results showed that the Cox-2 rs20417 (-765 G/C) polymorphism was 
not associated with HCC risk in the studied genetic contrast modes (C vs. G, GC 
vs. GG, and CC + GC vs. GG). No significant association was found with ethnic 
groups examined (P > 0.05). Similarly, no significant association of the Cox-2 
rs5275 (+ 8473 T/C) polymorphism and HCC risk was found under any of the studied 
contrasts (C vs. T, TC vs. TT, CC vs. TT, CC + TC vs. TT, CC vs. TC + TT). The 
present meta-analysis, combining all currently available data, suggests no 
significant associations of either Cox-2 polymorphism with HCC risk. Further 
studies with a larger sample size are needed to determine the association in 
different ethnicities.

PMCID: PMC4230159
PMID: 25400773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]