1. Curr Opin Oncol. 2015 Jan;27(1):57-63. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000151.

Gain-of-function mutation of chromatin regulators as a tumorigenic mechanism and 
an opportunity for therapeutic intervention.

Shen C(1), Vakoc CR.

Author information:
(1)aCold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York bMolecular and 
Cellular Biology Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Somatic gain-of-function mutations that drive cancer 
pathogenesis are well established opportunities for therapeutic intervention, as 
demonstrated by the clinical efficacy of kinase inhibitors in kinase-mutant 
malignancies. Here, we discuss the recently discovered gain-of-function 
mutations in chromatin-regulatory machineries that promote the pathogenesis of 
cancer. The current understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms and the 
therapeutic potential for direct chemical inhibition will be reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Point mutations that increase the catalytic activity of EZH2 
and NSD2 histone methyltransferases are found in distinct subsets of B-cell 
neoplasms, which promote cell transformation by elevating the global level of 
H3K27 tri-methylation or H3K36 di-methylation, respectively. In addition, 
mutations in histone H3 have been identified in certain pediatric cancers which 
cause reprogramming of H3K27 and H3K36 methylation by interfering with the 
histone methyltransferase activity. Finally, chromosomal translocations 
involving chromatin regulator genes can lead to the formation of fusion 
oncoproteins that directly modify chromatin as their mechanism of action.
SUMMARY: Although relatively rare in aggregate, gain-of-function mutations in 
chromatin regulators represent compelling therapeutic targets in genetically 
defined subsets of cancer patients. However, a broader clinical impact for 
epigenetic therapies in oncology will require an increased understanding of how 
nonmutated chromatin regulators function as cancer-specific dependencies.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000151
PMCID: PMC4355016
PMID: 25402979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]