1. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Feb 20;10(2):510-6. doi: 10.1021/cb500683c. Epub 2014 Nov 
18.

Human phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase produces the oncometabolite 
D-2-hydroxyglutarate.

Fan J(1), Teng X, Liu L, Mattaini KR, Looper RE, Vander Heiden MG, Rabinowitz 
JD.

Author information:
(1)Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University , 
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, United States.

Human d-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), the first enzyme in the serine 
biosynthetic pathway, is genomically amplified in tumors including breast cancer 
and melanoma. In PHGDH-amplified cancer cells, knockdown of PHGDH is not fully 
rescued by exogenous serine, suggesting possible additional growth-promoting 
roles for the enzyme. Here we show that, in addition to catalyzing oxidation of 
3-phosphoglycerate, PHGDH catalyzes NADH-dependent reduction of α-ketoglutarate 
(AKG) to the oncometabolite d-2-hydroxyglutarate (d-2HG). Knockdown of PHGDH 
decreased cellular 2HG by approximately 50% in the PHGDH-amplified breast cancer 
cell lines MDA-MB-468 (normal concentration 93 μM) and BT-20 (normal 
concentration 35 μM) and overexpression of PHGDH increased cellular 2HG by over 
2-fold in non-PHGDH-amplified MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which normally 
display very low PHGDH expression. The reduced 2HG level in PHGDH knockdown cell 
lines can be rescued by PHGDH re-expression, but not by a catalytically inactive 
PHGDH mutant. The initial connection between cancer and d-2HG involved 
production of high levels of d-2HG by mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase. More 
recently, however, elevated d-2HG has been observed in breast cancer tumors 
without isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation. Our results suggest that PHGDH is one 
source of this d-2HG.

DOI: 10.1021/cb500683c
PMCID: PMC4340346
PMID: 25406093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]