1. RNA. 2015 Jan;21(1):124-34. doi: 10.1261/rna.047282.114. Epub 2014 Nov 19.

Interaction between the poly(A)-binding protein Pab1 and the eukaryotic release 
factor eRF3 regulates translation termination but not mRNA decay in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Roque S(1), Cerciat M(1), Gaugué I(1), Mora L(1), Floch AG(1), de Zamaroczy 
M(1), Heurgué-Hamard V(1), Kervestin S(2).

Author information:
(1)CNRS FRE3630 (affiliated with Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité), 
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris 75005, France.
(2)CNRS FRE3630 (affiliated with Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité), 
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Paris 75005, France Metabolism and 
function of RNA in the nucleus, Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS UMR 7592, 
Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris 75013, France 
kervestin.stephanie@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr stephanie.kervestin@gmail.com.

Eukaryotic release factor 3 (eRF3) is implicated in translation termination and 
also interacts with the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP, Pab1 in yeast), a major 
player in mRNA metabolism. Despite conservation of this interaction, its precise 
function remains elusive. First, we showed experimentally that yeast eRF3 does 
not contain any obvious consensus PAM2 (PABP-interacting motif 2). Thus, in 
yeast this association is different from the well described interaction between 
the metazoan factors. To gain insight into the exact function of this 
interaction, we then analyzed the phenotypes resulting from deleting the 
respective binding domains. Deletion of the Pab1 interaction domain on eRF3 did 
not affect general mRNA stability or nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway 
and induced a decrease in translational readthrough. Furthermore, combined 
deletions of the respective interacting domains on eRF3 and on Pab1 were viable, 
did not affect Pab1 function in mRNA stability and harbored an antisuppression 
phenotype. Our results show that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae the role of the 
Pab1 C-terminal domain in mRNA stability is independent of eRF3 and the 
association of these two factors negatively regulates translation termination.

© 2014 Roque et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.047282.114
PMCID: PMC4274632
PMID: 25411355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]