1. Biochemistry. 1989 Mar 7;28(5):2094-9. doi: 10.1021/bi00431a019.

Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase: identification of histidine-164 and 
histidine-166 as critical residues by site-directed mutagenesis.

Field TL(1), Reznikoff WS, Frey PA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, Graduate School, University of 
Wisconsin--Madison, Madison 53705.

Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase catalyzes the interconversion of 
UDP-glucose and galactose-1-P with UDP-galactose and glucose-1-P by a 
double-displacement mechanism involving the compulsory formation of a uridylyl 
enzyme intermediate. The uridylyl group is covalently bonded to the N3 position 
of a histidine residue in the uridylyl enzyme. The galT gene of Escherichia 
coli, which codes for the uridylyltransferase and is contained in a plasmid for 
transformation of E. coli, has been sequenced, and the positions of the 15 
histidine residues have been determined from the deduced amino acid sequence of 
this protein. Fifteen mutant genes, in each of which one of the 15 histidine 
codons has been changed to an asparagine codon, have been generated and used to 
transform the E. coli strain JM101. When extracts of the transformants were 
assayed for uridylyltransferase, 13 exhibited high levels of activity. Two of 
the extracts containing mutant uridylyltransferase exhibited less than control 
levels of activity. These mutant proteins, H164N and H166N, were overexpressed, 
isolated, and tested for their ability to form the compulsory uridylyl enzyme 
intermediate. Neither the H164N nor the H166N mutant proteins could form the 
intermediate. Thus, both His-164 and His-166 are critical for activity, and 
their proximity suggests that both are in the active site. One is the essential 
nucleophilic catalyst to which the uridylyl group is bonded in the intermediate, 
and the other serves an equally important, as yet unknown, function. The 
active-site sequence His(164)-Pro-His(166) is conserved in this enzyme from E. 
coli, humans, Saccharomyces, and Streptomyces.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00431a019
PMID: 2541773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]