1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 9;290(2):1186-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.595108. Epub
2014  Nov 25.

Evidence for an elevated aspartate pK(a) in the active site of human aromatase.

Di Nardo G(1), Breitner M(1), Bandino A(1), Ghosh D(2), Jennings GK(3), Hackett 
JC(4), Gilardi G(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of 
Torino, via Accademia Albertina 13, 10123 Torino, Italy.
(2)the Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, 
New York 13210, and.
(3)the Department of Physiology and Biophysics and the Massey Cancer Center, 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23219.
(4)the Department of Physiology and Biophysics and the Massey Cancer Center, 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23219 
jchackett@vcu.edu.
(5)From the Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of 
Torino, via Accademia Albertina 13, 10123 Torino, Italy, 
gianfranco.gilardi@unito.it.

Aromatase (CYP19A1), the enzyme that converts androgens to estrogens, is of 
significant mechanistic and therapeutic interest. Crystal structures and 
computational studies of this enzyme shed light on the critical role of Asp(309) 
in substrate binding and catalysis. These studies predicted an elevated pK(a) 
for Asp(309) and proposed that protonation of this residue was required for 
function. In this study, UV-visible absorption, circular dichroism, resonance 
Raman spectroscopy, and enzyme kinetics were used to study the impact of pH on 
aromatase structure and androstenedione binding. Spectroscopic studies 
demonstrate that androstenedione binding is pH-dependent, whereas, in contrast, 
the D309N mutant retains its ability to bind to androstenedione across the 
entire pH range studied. Neither pH nor mutation perturbed the secondary 
structure or heme environment. The origin of the observed pH dependence was 
further narrowed to the protonation equilibria of Asp(309) with a parallel set 
of spectroscopic studies using exemestane and anastrozole. Because exemestane 
interacts with Asp(309) based on its co-crystal structure with the enzyme, its 
binding is pH-dependent. Aromatase binding to anastrozole is pH-independent, 
consistent with the hypothesis that this ligand exploits a distinct set of 
interactions in the active site. In summary, we assign the apparent pK(a) of 8.2 
observed for androstenedione binding to the side chain of Asp(309). To our 
knowledge, this work represents the first experimental assignment of a pK(a) 
value to a residue in a cytochrome P450. This value is in agreement with 
theoretical calculations (7.7-8.1) despite the reliance of the computational 
methods on the conformational snapshots provided by crystal structures.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.595108
PMCID: PMC4294484
PMID: 25425647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]