1. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Apr;13(4):775-83. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0157.
Epub  2014 Nov 24.

Treatment Efficacy and Resistance Mechanisms Using the Second-Generation ALK 
Inhibitor AP26113 in Human NPM-ALK-Positive Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma.

Ceccon M(1), Mologni L(2), Giudici G(3), Piazza R(2), Pirola A(2), Fontana D(2), 
Gambacorti-Passerini C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Science, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. 
mceccon.manuscript@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Health Science, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
(3)Tettamanti Research Centre, Pediatric Clinic, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Monza, Italy.
(4)Department of Health Science, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy. 
Section of Haematology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Oct;13(10):1441. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0277.

ALK is a tyrosine kinase receptor involved in a broad range of solid and 
hematologic tumors. Among 70% to 80% of ALK(+) anaplastic large cell lymphomas 
(ALCL) are caused by the aberrant oncogenic fusion protein NPM-ALK. Crizotinib 
was the first clinically relevant ALK inhibitor, now approved for the treatment 
of late-stage and metastatic cases of lung cancer. However, patients frequently 
develop drug resistance to Crizotinib, mainly due to the appearance of point 
mutations located in the ALK kinase domain. Fortunately, other inhibitors are 
available and in clinical trial, suggesting the potential for second-line 
therapies to overcome Crizotinib resistance. This study focuses on the ongoing 
phase I/II trial small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) AP26113, by 
Ariad Pharmaceuticals, which targets both ALK and EGFR. Two NPM-ALK(+) human 
cell lines, KARPAS-299 and SUP-M2, were grown in the presence of increasing 
concentrations of AP26113, and eight lines were selected that demonstrated 
resistance. All lines show IC50 values higher (130 to 1,000-fold) than the 
parental line. Mechanistically, KARPAS-299 populations resistant to AP26113 show 
NPM-ALK overexpression, whereas SUP-M2-resistant cells harbor several point 
mutations spanning the entire ALK kinase domain. In particular, amino acid 
substitutions: L1196M, S1206C, the double F1174V+L1198F and L1122V+L1196M 
mutations were identified. The knowledge of the possible appearance of new 
clinically relevant mechanisms of drug resistance is a useful tool for the 
management of new TKI-resistant cases.
IMPLICATIONS: This work defines reliable ALCL model systems of AP26113 
resistance and provides a valuable tool in the management of all cases of 
relapse upon NPM-ALK-targeted therapy.

Â©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0157
PMID: 25421750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]