1. JAMA Pediatr. 2014 Dec;168(12):e142815. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.2815.
 Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Retinal vessel alterations and cerebral white matter microstructural damage in 
obese adolescents with metabolic syndrome.

Yau PL(1), Kim M(1), Tirsi A(1), Convit A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York2Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York3Department of Radiology, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York4Nathan Kline Institute for Psychi.

IMPORTANCE: Cerebral white matter (WM) damage has been reported in childhood 
obesity and in metabolic syndrome (MetS) but mechanisms remain unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To ascertain whether adolescents with MetS have retinal vessel 
alterations and if the anticipated reductions in retinal arteriolar diameter are 
associated with diminished cerebral WM microstructural integrity and to test a 
model for vascular etiology of the WM abnormalities.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cross-sectional study of the brain correlates 
of obesity and related metabolic disease in youths. This study was conducted at 
the Brain, Obesity, and Diabetes Laboratory, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York. Thirty-nine obese adolescents with MetS and 51 matched 
adolescents without MetS received comprehensive endocrine, neuropsychological, 
retinal vessel, and diffusion tensor imaging-based cerebral WM evaluations.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Retinal arteriolar diameter, cerebral WM 
microstructural integrity, waist circumference, and insulin resistance.
RESULTS: Obese adolescents with MetS had significant reductions in retinal 
arteriolar diameter relative to adolescents without MetS (mean [SD] central 
retinal arteriolar equivalent, 182.35 [16.10] vs. 198.62 [19.03] μm, 
respectively; P < .001). The greater the number of MetS criteria present, the 
greater the reduction was in retinal arteriolar diameter (β = -8.61; 
∆r2 = 0.335; ∆F1,83 = 70.79; P < .001). We found that abdominal obesity (waist 
circumference) was the strongest MetS component related to reductions in retinal 
arteriolar diameter (rp[85] = -0.661; P < .001), and importantly, for the first 
time to our knowledge, we demonstrated that its effect was partially mediated by 
comorbid insulin resistance (indirect effect = -0.1355 [95% CI, -0.2471 to 
-0.0593]; Z = -2.56; P = .01). Consistent with our prior report of nondiabetic 
adolescents with MetS, we also uncovered cerebral WM microstructural damage. 
These subtle WM changes were associated with reductions in retinal arteriolar 
diameter, a proxy for cerebral microvascular health (3150 voxels or 3.15 cm3; 
P < .001). Importantly, some of the WM regions showing lower microstructural 
integrity also demonstrated associations with retinal arteriolar diameter, 
suggesting that the observed WM pathology is likely vascular in nature.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: We document, for the first time to our knowledge, the 
associations between retinal vessel alterations and subclinical WM pathology 
among obese adolescents with MetS. This suggests that the subtle WM pathology in 
adolescents with MetS may have a vascular origin. Future work should include 
direct assessments of cerebral microvascular health.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.2815
PMCID: PMC4420159
PMID: 25436854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.