1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 1;9(12):e114124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114124. 
eCollection 2014.

A simple, rapid and sensitive FRET assay for botulinum neurotoxin serotype B 
detection.

Guo J(1), Xu C(2), Li X(2), Chen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs), the most potent naturally-occurring neurotoxins 
known to humans, comprise seven distinct serotypes (BoNT/A-G), each of which 
exhibits unique substrate specificity. Many methods have been developed for BoNT 
detection, in particular for BoNT/A, with various complexity and sensitivity, 
while substrate based FRET assay is considered as the most widely used approach 
due to its simplicity and sensitivity. In this study, we designed a 
vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2) based FRET assay based on the 
understanding of the VAMP2 and light chain/B (LC/B) interactions in our previous 
studies. The current design constituted the shortest peptide, VAMP2 (63-85), 
with FRET dyes (EDAN and Dabcyl) labelled at position 76 and 85, respectively, 
which showed minimal effect on VAMP2 substrate catalysis by LC/B and therefore 
enhanced the sensitivity of the assay. The FRET peptide, designated as FVP-B, 
was specific to LC/B, with a detection sensitivity as low as âˆ¼20 pM in 2 h. 
Importantly, FVP-B showed the potential to be scaled up and used in high 
throughput screening of LC/B inhibitor. The currently developed FRET assay is 
one of the most economic and rapid FRET assays for LC/B detection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114124
PMCID: PMC4250190
PMID: 25437190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.