1. Toxicon. 2015 Jan;93:24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.11.220. Epub 2014 Nov
6.

Natural mutations change the affinity of μ-theraphotoxin-Hhn2a to voltage-gated 
sodium channels.

Zhang F(1), Liu Y(2), Zhang C(1), Li J(1), Yang Z(1), Gong X(1), Gan Y(1), Chen 
P(1), Liu Z(3), Liang S(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, 
China.
(2)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan Institute of Science and 
Technology, Yueyang 414006, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, 
China. Electronic address: liuzh@hunnu.edu.cn.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, 
China. Electronic address: liangsp@hunnu.edu.cn.

μ-Theraphotoxin-Hhn2a (HNTX-III) isolated from the venom of the spider 
Ornithoctonus hainana is a selective antagonist of neuronal 
tetrodotoxin-sensitive (TTX-S) voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs). 
Intriguingly, previous transcriptomic study revealed HNTX-III family consists of 
more than 15 precursors, in which the 20(th) and 24(th) residues of the mature 
sequences are variable. Try20 and Ser24 of HNTX-III are mutated to His20 and 
Asn24 of other members, respectively. In addition, the alkaline residue His26 of 
the potent VGSC inhibitor HNTX-III is substituted by acidic residue Asp of the 
weak VGSC inhibitor HNTX-I. Therefore, four mutants of HNTX-III, HNTX-III-Y20H, 
-S24N, -H26D and -Y20H/24N, were synthesized to examine the effects of these 
natural mutations on the inhibitory activity of HNTX-III. They were subjected to 
an electrophysiological screening on five VGSC subtypes (Nav1.3-1.5, Nav1.7 and 
Nav1.8) expressed on HEK293 cells by whole-cell patch clamp. Like HNTX-III, all 
mutants only displayed inhibitory activity on Nav1.3 and Nav1.7 among the five 
subtypes, but the inhibitory potency was much lower than that of HNTX-III. 
Regarding Nav1.7, the IC50 values of HNTX-III-Y20H, -S24N, -H26D and -Y20H/S24N 
were increased by approximately 62-, 8.4-, 49- and 19.5-folds compared with that 
of HNTX-III, respectively. Similar data were obtained for Nav1.3. Our results 
provide new insights into the activity-related residues of HNTX-III at genic 
level. Furthermore, the reduced potency of the four mutants probably reflects 
natural selection might favor and reserve the most potent bioactivity of 
HNTX-III which is one of the most abundant fractions of the venom.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.11.220
PMID: 25447770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]