1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Dec 20;588(24):4672-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.10.039.
Epub  2014 Nov 11.

CaMKII isoforms differ in their specific requirements for regulation by nitric 
oxide.

Coultrap SJ(1), Zaegel V(2), Bayer KU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: 
steve.coultrap@ucdenver.edu.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address: 
ulli.bayer@ucdenver.edu.

The Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) mediates 
physiological and pathological functions by its Ca(2+)-independent autonomous 
activity. Two novel mechanisms for generating CaMKII autonomy include oxidation 
and S-nitrosylation, the latter requiring both Cys280 and Cys289 amino acid 
residues in the brain-specific isoform CaMKIIα. Even though the other CaMKII 
isoforms have a different amino acid in the position homologous to Cys280, we 
show here that nitric oxide (NO)-signaling generated autonomy also for the 
CaMKIIβ isoform. Furthermore, although oxidation of the Met280/281 residues is 
sufficient to generate autonomy for most CaMKII isoforms, oxidation-induced 
autonomy was also prevented by a Cys289-mutation in the CaMKIIα isoform. Thus, 
all CaMKII isoforms can be regulated by physiological NO-signaling, but CaMKIIα 
regulation by oxidation and S-nitrosylation is more stringent.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.10.039
PMCID: PMC4312479
PMID: 25447522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]