1. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care. 2014 Aug 8;2(1):e000016. doi: 
10.1136/bmjdrc-2014-000016. eCollection 2014.

Elevated 1 h postload plasma glucose levels identify adults with normal glucose 
tolerance but increased risk of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Sesti G(1), Hribal ML(1), Fiorentino TV(1), Sciacqua A(1), Perticone F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences , Viale Europa, University 
Magna-Græcia of Catanzaro , Catanzaro , Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the ability of the proposed diagnostic value of a 1-h 
OGTT glucose ≥155mg/dL to identify individuals with non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) diagnosed by ultrasonography in a cohort of adult white 
individuals.
DESIGN: The study group comprised 710 white individuals participating to the 
CATAnzaro MEtabolic RIsk factors (CATAMERI) Study, a cross-sectional study 
assessing cardio-metabolic risk factors in individuals carrying at least one 
risk factor including dysglycemia, overweight/obesity, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia. a 75 g oral Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) was performed with 
0, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min sampling for plasma glucose and insulin measurements. 
Cardio-metabolic risk factors including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) were 
assessed in the whole cohort.
RESULTS: Of the 710 participants examined, 295 had normal glucose tolerance 
(NGT) with 1-hour post-load plasma glucose <155 mg/dL (NGT 1h-low), 109 
individuals had NGT 1h-high, 104 had isolated impaired fasting glucose (IFG), 
and 202 had impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). As compared with NGT 1h-low, NGT 
1h-high and IGT subjects exhibited significantly higher body mass index (BMI), 
triglycerides, high sensitivity C reactive protein, ALT, GGT, and hepatic 
insulin resistance (IR), assessed by the liver IR index, as well as lower high 
density lipoprotein, and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) levels. In a 
logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, gender, and BMI, NGT 1h-high 
participants had a 1.5-fold increased risk of having NAFLD and an even increased 
risk was observed in subjects with IGT (1.8-fold), but not in the isolated IFG 
group (1.01-fold).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the value of a 1-hour OGTT glucose ≥155 
mg/dL may be helpful to identify a subset of NGT individuals at risk for NAFLD.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjdrc-2014-000016
PMCID: PMC4212569
PMID: 25452862