1. J Neurol. 2015 Feb;262(2):443-50. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7593-3. Epub 2014
Dec  2.

Characterization of sleep disorders in patients with E200K familial 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Cohen OS(1), Chapman J, Korczyn AD, Warman-Alaluf N, Orlev Y, Givaty G, Nitsan 
Z, Appel S, Rosenmann H, Kahana E, Shechter-Amir D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Sagol Neuroscience Center, Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Hashomer, 52621, Ramat Gan, Israel, oren.cohen@sheba.health.gov.il.

The largest cluster of E200K familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (fCJD) which 
occurs is in Jews of Libyan origin in Israel. Insomnia is a very common early 
complaint in those patients and may even be the presenting symptom. The aim of 
this study was to assess and characterize sleep pathology in E200K fCJD 
patients. To do so, sleep studies of 10 consecutive fCJD patients were compared 
with those of 39 age and gender-matched controls. All patients presented 
pathological sleep characterized by fragmentation of sleep, loss of sleep 
spindles and reduced REM sleep amount. Respiration was characterized by 
irregular rhythm, periodic breathing, apneas and hypopneas, either central or 
obstructive. EMG recordings revealed repeated movements in sleep, with loss of 
REM atonia. Comparing to controls, a significant decrease of total sleep time, 
sleep efficacy and slow-wave sleep as well as a significant increase in the 
number of awakenings, apnea-hypopnea index and mixed and central apneas were 
evident in CJD patients. Comparison of two sequential sleep studies in one 
patient revealed a 40 % reduction of the total sleep time, a 40 % reduction in 
sleep efficacy and a 40-fold increase of the number of arousals in the second 
study. A significant correlation was found between the disease severity, as 
reflected by the CJD Neurological Scale and Periodic leg movement index. These 
definite and characteristic sleep pathologies in patients with fCJD associated 
with the E200K mutation may serve as a new diagnostic tool in the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7593-3
PMID: 25451855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]