1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 May;41:71-8. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.11.005. Epub
 2014 Nov 24.

Cotranslational and posttranslocational N-glycosylation of proteins in the 
endoplasmic reticulum.

Shrimal S(1), Cherepanova NA(1), Gilmore R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, 01605, United States. Electronic 
address: reid.gilmore@umassmed.edu.

Asparagine linked glycosylation of proteins is an essential protein modification 
reaction in most eukaryotic organisms. N-linked oligosaccharides are important 
for protein folding and stability, biosynthetic quality control, intracellular 
traffic and the physiological function of many N-glycosylated proteins. In 
metazoan organisms, the oligosaccharyltransferase is composed of a catalytic 
subunit (STT3A or STT3B) and a set of accessory subunits. Duplication of the 
catalytic subunit gene allowed cells to evolve OST complexes that act 
sequentially to maximize the glycosylation efficiency of the large number of 
proteins that are glycosylated in metazoan organisms. We will summarize recent 
progress in understanding the mechanism of (a) cotranslational glycosylation by 
the translocation channel associated STT3A complex, (b) the role of the STT3B 
complex in mediating cotranslational or posttranslocational glycosylation of 
acceptor sites that have been skipped by the STT3A complex, and (c) the role of 
the oxidoreductase MagT1 in STT3B-dependent glycosylation of cysteine-proximal 
acceptor sites.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.11.005
PMCID: PMC4442082
PMID: 25460543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]