1. J Biomed Res. 2014 Nov;28(6):456-61. doi: 10.7555/JBR.28.20130126. Epub 2014
Aug  11.

Association of erythropoietin gene rs576236 polymorphism and risk of adrenal 
tumors in a Chinese population.

Zhang C(1), Li Z(2), Cao Q(1), Qin C(1), Cai H(1), Zhou H(1), Qian J(1), Tao 
L(1), Ju X(1), Yin C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Zhenjiang Second People's Hospital, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu 
212000, China.

Erythropoietin (EPO) is a circulating glycosylated protein hormone and has been 
implicated in the development and progression of non-hematopoietic tissue 
tumors. The objective of the present study was to determine if the EPO rs576236 
polymorphism was associated with the risk of adrenal tumors. We genotyped the 
EPO rs576236 polymorphism in a case-control study of 288 adrenal tumor patients 
and 456 cancer-free controls by using the TaqMan method, and assessed the 
association between the polymorphism and the adrenal tumor risk by logistic 
regression. Furthermore, 95% confidence interval (CI) was used to assess the 
genetic association between the polymorphism and the risk of adrenal tumor. 
Compared with the TT genotype, the TC genotype had a significantly increased 
risk of adrenal tumor [adjusted odds ratio (OR)  =  1.24, 95% CI  =  1.12-2.22]. 
Furthermore a significantly increased risk of adrenal tumor was found in the 
combined variant genotypes TC+CC compared with the TT genotype (adjusted OR  =  
1.17, 95% CI  =  1.12-2.21). Our present study suggests that the rs576236 
polymorphism of EPO confers susceptibility to adrenal tumor in the Chinese 
population.

DOI: 10.7555/JBR.28.20130126
PMCID: PMC4250524
PMID: 25469114

Conflict of interest statement: The authors reported no conflict of interests.