1. Cancer Med. 2015 Feb;4(2):201-11. doi: 10.1002/cam4.357. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Setting up a wide panel of patient-derived tumor xenografts of non-small cell 
lung cancer by improving the preanalytical steps.

Ilie M(1), Nunes M, Blot L, Hofman V, Long-Mira E, Butori C, Selva E, 
Merino-Trigo A, Vénissac N, Mouroux J, Vrignaud P, Hofman P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Louis Pasteur Hospital, 
Nice, France; IRCAN Team 3, Inserm U1081/UMR CNRS 7284, Faculty of Medicine of 
Nice, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France; Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Nice, France; Hospital Related Biobank 
BB-0033-00025, Louis Pasteur Hospital, Nice, France.

With the ongoing need to improve therapy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
there has been increasing interest in developing reliable preclinical models to 
test novel therapeutics. Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) are considered 
to be interesting candidates. However, the establishment of such model systems 
requires highly specialized research facilities and introduces logistic 
challenges. We aimed to establish an extensive well-characterized panel of NSCLC 
xenograft models in the context of a long-distance research network after 
careful control of the preanalytical steps. One hundred fresh surgically 
resected NSCLC specimens were shipped in survival medium at room temperature 
from a hospital-integrated biobank to animal facilities. Within 24 h 
post-surgery, tumor fragments were subcutaneously xenografted into 
immunodeficient mice. PDX characterization was performed by histopathological, 
immunohistochemical, aCGH and next-generation sequencing approaches. For this 
model system, the tumor take rate was 35%, with higher rates for squamous 
carcinoma (60%) than for adenocarcinoma (13%). Patients for whom PDX tumors were 
obtained had a significantly shorter disease-free survival (DFS) compared to 
patients for whom no PDX tumors (P = 0.039) were obtained. We established a 
large panel of PDX NSCLC models with a high frequency of mutations (29%) in 
EGFR, KRAS, NRAS, MEK1, BRAF, PTEN, and PI3KCA genes and with gene amplification 
(20%) of c-MET and FGFR1. This new patient-derived NSCLC xenograft collection, 
established regardless of the considerable time required and the distance 
between the clinic and the animal facilities, recapitulated the histopathology 
and molecular diversity of NSCLC and provides stable and reliable preclinical 
models for human lung cancer research.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.357
PMCID: PMC4329004
PMID: 25470237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]