1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 4;9(12):e114532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114532. 
eCollection 2014.

The predicted ABC transporter AbcEDCBA is required for type IV secretion system 
expression and lysosomal evasion by Brucella ovis.

Silva TM(1), Mol JP(1), Winter MG(2), Atluri V(2), Xavier MN(2), Pires SF(3), 
Paixão TA(4), Andrade HM(3), Santos RL(1), Tsolis RM(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Clínica e Cirurgia Veterinária, Escola de Veterinária da 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California 
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(3)Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas da 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Patologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas da 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Brucella ovis is a major cause of reproductive failure in rams and it is one of 
the few well-described Brucella species that is not zoonotic. Previous work 
showed that a B. ovis mutant lacking a species-specific ABC transporter (ΔabcBA) 
was attenuated in mice and was unable to survive in macrophages. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate the role of this ABC transporter during intracellular 
survival of B. ovis. In HeLa cells, B. ovis WT was able to survive and replicate 
at later time point (48 hpi), whereas an ΔabcBA mutant was attenuated at 24 hpi. 
The reduced survival of the ΔabcBA mutant was associated with a decreased 
ability to exclude the lysosomal marker LAMP1 from its vacuolar membrane, 
suggesting a failure to establish a replicative niche. The ΔabcBA mutant showed 
a reduced abundance of the Type IV secretion system (T4SS) proteins VirB8 and 
VirB11 in both rich and acid media, when compared to WT B. ovis. However, mRNA 
levels of virB1, virB8, hutC, and vjbR were similar in both strains. These 
results support the notion that the ABC transporter encoded by abcEDCBA or its 
transported substrate acts at a post-transcriptional level to promote the 
optimal expression of the B. ovis T4SS within infected host cells.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114532
PMCID: PMC4256435
PMID: 25474545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.