1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2014 Nov 10;6(9):74. doi: 10.1186/s13195-014-0074-1. 
eCollection 2014.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcranial direct current stimulation: 
treatments for cognitive and neuropsychiatric symptoms in the neurodegenerative 
dementias?

Elder GJ(1), Taylor JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 5PL, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Two methods of non-invasive brain stimulation, transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), 
have demonstrable positive effects on cognition and can ameliorate 
neuropsychiatric symptoms such as depression. Less is known about the efficacy 
of these approaches in common neurodegenerative diseases. In this review, we 
evaluate the effects of TMS and tDCS upon cognitive and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms in the major dementias, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular 
dementia (VaD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson's disease with 
dementia (PDD), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), as well as the potential 
pre-dementia states of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and Parkinson's disease 
(PD).
METHODS: PubMed (until 7 February 2014) and PsycINFO (from 1967 to January Week 
3 2014) databases were searched in a semi-systematic manner in order to identify 
relevant treatment studies. A total of 762 studies were identified and 32 
studies (18 in the dementias and 14 in PD populations) were included.
RESULTS: No studies were identified in patients with PDD, FTD or VaD. Of the 
dementias, 13 studies were conducted in patients with AD, one in DLB, and four 
in MCI. A total of 16 of the 18 studies showed improvements in at least one 
cognitive or neuropsychiatric outcome measure. Cognitive or neuropsychiatric 
improvements were observed in 12 of the 14 studies conducted in patients with 
PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Both TMS and tDCS may have potential as interventions for the 
treatment of symptoms associated with dementia and PD. These results are 
promising; however, available data were limited, particularly within VaD, PDD 
and FTD, and major challenges exist in order to maximise the efficacy and 
clinical utility of both techniques. In particular, stimulation parameters vary 
considerably between studies and are likely to subsequently impact upon 
treatment efficacy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-014-0074-1
PMCID: PMC4255638
PMID: 25478032