1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 8;9(12):e114651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114651. 
eCollection 2014.

Identification of the interactors of human nibrin (NBN) and of its 26 kDa and 70 
kDa fragments arising from the NBN 657del5 founder mutation.

Cilli D(1), Mirasole C(2), Pennisi R(1), Pallotta V(2), D'Alessandro A(2), 
Antoccia A(3), Zolla L(2), Ascenzi P(4), di Masi A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Science, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Ecological and Biological Sciences, University of Tuscia, 
Viterbo, Italy.
(3)Department of Science, Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy; Istituto Nazionale 
Biostrutture e Biosistemi - Consorzio Interuniversitario, Rome, Italy.
(4)Istituto Nazionale Biostrutture e Biosistemi - Consorzio Interuniversitario, 
Rome, Italy; Interdepartmental Laboratory for Electron Microscopy, Roma Tre 
University, Rome, Italy.

Nibrin (also named NBN or NBS1) is a component of the MRE11/RAD50/NBN complex, 
which is involved in early steps of DNA double strand breaks sensing and repair. 
Mutations within the NBN gene are responsible for the Nijmegen breakage syndrome 
(NBS). The 90% of NBS patients are homozygous for the 657del5 mutation, which 
determines the synthesis of two truncated proteins of 26 kDa (p26) and 70 kDa 
(p70). Here, HEK293 cells have been exploited to transiently express either the 
full-length NBN protein or the p26 or p70 fragments, followed by affinity 
chromatography enrichment of the eluates. The application of an unsupervised 
proteomics approach, based upon SDS-PAGE separation and shotgun digestion of 
protein bands followed by MS/MS protein identification, indicates the occurrence 
of previously unreported protein interacting partners of the full-length NBN 
protein and the p26 fragment containing the FHA/BRCT1 domains, especially after 
cell irradiation. In particular, results obtained shed light on new possible 
roles of NBN and of the p26 fragment in ROS scavenging, in the DNA damage 
response, and in protein folding and degradation. In particular, here we show 
that p26 interacts with PARP1 after irradiation, and this interaction exerts an 
inhibitory effect on PARP1 activity as measured by NAD+ levels. Furthermore, the 
p26-PARP1 interaction seems to be responsible for the persistence of ROS, and in 
turn of DSBs, at 24 h from IR. Since some of the newly identified interactors of 
the p26 and p70 fragments have not been found to interact with the full-length 
NBN, these interactions may somehow contribute to the key biological phenomena 
underpinning NBS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114651
PMCID: PMC4259352
PMID: 25485873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.