1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 6;290(6):3377-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.608471. Epub
2014  Dec 5.

Lysosomal two-pore channel subtype 2 (TPC2) regulates skeletal muscle autophagic 
signaling.

Lin PH(1), Duann P(2), Komazaki S(3), Park KH(2), Li H(2), Sun M(2), Sermersheim 
M(2), Gumpper K(2), Parrington J(4), Galione A(4), Evans AM(5), Zhu MX(6), Ma 
J(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The 
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, 
pei-hui.lin@osumc.edu.
(2)From the Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The 
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Saitama Medical University, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Centre for Integrative Physiology, College of Medicine and Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, Scotland, United Kingdom, 
and.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030.
(7)From the Department of Surgery, Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The 
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, 
jianjie.ma@osumc.edu.

Postnatal skeletal muscle mass is regulated by the balance between anabolic 
protein synthesis and catabolic protein degradation, and muscle atrophy occurs 
when protein homeostasis is disrupted. Autophagy has emerged as critical in 
clearing dysfunctional organelles and thus in regulating protein turnover. Here 
we show that endolysosomal two-pore channel subtype 2 (TPC2) contributes to 
autophagy signaling and protein homeostasis in skeletal muscle. Muscles derived 
from Tpcn2(-/-) mice exhibit an atrophic phenotype with exacerbated autophagy 
under starvation. Compared with wild types, animals lacking TPC2 demonstrated an 
enhanced autophagy flux characterized by increased accumulation of 
autophagosomes upon combined stress induction by starvation and colchicine 
treatment. In addition, deletion of TPC2 in muscle caused aberrant lysosomal pH 
homeostasis and reduced lysosomal protease activity. Association between 
mammalian target of rapamycin and TPC2 was detected in skeletal muscle, allowing 
for appropriate adjustments to cellular metabolic states and subsequent 
execution of autophagy. TPC2 therefore impacts mammalian target of rapamycin 
reactivation during the process of autophagy and contributes to maintenance of 
muscle homeostasis.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.608471
PMCID: PMC4319008
PMID: 25480788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]