1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 10;9(12):e114636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114636. 
eCollection 2014.

Group 1 Allergen Genes in Two Species of House Dust Mites, Dermatophagoides 
farinae and D. pteronyssinus (Acari: Pyroglyphidae): Direct Sequencing, 
Characterization and Polymorphism.

Shafique RH(1), Klimov PB(2), Inam M(3), Chaudhary FR(1), OConnor BM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University 
Rawalpindi, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Faculty of Biology, Tyumen State 
University, Tyumen, Russia.
(3)Physiology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of the Punjab, 
Lahore, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Group 1 allergens of Dermatophagoides farinae (Der f 1) and D. pteronyssinus 
(Der p 1) dominate overall allergic responses in house dust mite allergy 
patients. The need for accurate identification and characterization of 
representative variants of group 1 allergens in any given geographic locality 
has been emphasized for development of appropriate allergen extracts. Regional 
amino acid sequence polymorphism has been described but the extent of this 
polymorphism is not well understood. Such data are completely absent for the USA 
and many other countries. Most previous studies used cDNA libraries generated by 
reverse transcriptase (RT-PCR) and/or primers amplifying shorter fragments of 
this gene. Using novel species-specific primers and direct PCR, we document 
group 1 allergen gene sequence polymorphism in populations of D. farinae and D. 
pteronyssinus from the USA and Pakistan. We report two novel introns (nt pos 87 
and 291) in both species, and the absence of intron 3 in Der p 1. Thirteen 
silent and one novel non-synonymous mutation (Tryptophan W197 to Arginine R197) 
were detected in D. farinae. The potential medical significance of the latter 
mutation is discussed. Two haplotypes of the Der f 1 gene were identified, 
haplotype 1 (63%) was more frequent than haplotype 2 (18%). Polymorphism in Der 
f 1 displayed geographical localization, since both haplotypes were present in 
mite populations from Pakistan whereas haplotype 1 was observed only in the USA. 
In Der p 1, a silent mutation at nt (aa) position 1011(149) and four 
non-synonymous mutations at positions 589(50), 935(124), 971(136), 1268(215) 
were observed. These mutations were reported from many other geographic regions, 
suggesting that polymorphism in the Der p 1 gene is panmictic. The extent of 
polymorphism in both genes is substantially lower than that reported previously 
(0.10-0.16% vs 0.31-0.49%), indicating the need for careful evaluation of 
potential polymerase errors in studies utilizing RT-PCR.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114636
PMCID: PMC4262422
PMID: 25494056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.