1. J Virol Methods. 2015 Mar;213:75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2014.11.014. Epub
 2014 Dec 8.

Rapid and generic identification of influenza A and other respiratory viruses 
with mass spectrometry.

Majchrzykiewicz-Koehorst JA(1), Heikens E(2), Trip H(1), Hulst AG(1), de Jong 
AL(1), Viveen MC(2), Sedee NJ(1), van der Plas J(3), Coenjaerts FE(2), Paauw 
A(4).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research TNO, Department of 
CBRN Protection, Lange Kleiweg 137, 2288 GJ Rijswijk, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Expert Centre Force Health Protection, Health Care Division, Support Command, 
Ministry of Defence, Korte Molenweg 3, Building 37, 3941 PW Doorn, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research TNO, Department of 
CBRN Protection, Lange Kleiweg 137, 2288 GJ Rijswijk, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: armand.paauw@tno.nl.

The rapid identification of existing and emerging respiratory viruses is crucial 
in combating outbreaks and epidemics. Matrix-assisted laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) is a rapid 
and reliable identification method in bacterial diagnostics, but has not been 
used in virological diagnostics. Mass spectrometry systems have been 
investigated for the identification of respiratory viruses. However, sample 
preparation methods were laborious and time-consuming. In this study, a reliable 
and rapid sample preparation method was developed allowing identification of 
cultured respiratory viruses. Tenfold serial dilutions of ten cultures influenza 
A strains, mixed samples of influenza A virus with human metapneumovirus or 
respiratory syncytial virus, and reconstituted clinical samples were treated 
with the developed sample preparation method. Subsequently, peptides were 
subjected to MALDI-TOF MS and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS). The influenza A strains were identified to the subtype level within 
3h with MALDI-TOF MS and 6h with LC-MS/MS, excluding the culturing time. The 
sensitivity of LC-MS/MS was higher compared to MALDI-TOF MS. In addition, 
LC-MS/MS was able to discriminate between two viruses in mixed samples and was 
able to identify virus from reconstituted clinical samples. The development of 
an improved and rapid sample preparation method allowed generic and rapid 
identification of cultured respiratory viruses by mass spectrometry.

Copyright Â© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2014.11.014
PMCID: PMC7113647
PMID: 25500183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]