1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Feb;14(2):384-94. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0428.
Epub  2014 Dec 10.

The selective intravenous inhibitor of the MET tyrosine kinase SAR125844 
inhibits tumor growth in MET-amplified cancer.

Egile C(1), Kenigsberg M(1), Delaisi C(1), Bégassat F(1), Do-Vale V(1), 
Mestadier J(1), Bonche F(2), Bénard T(3), Nicolas JP(1), Valence S(1), Lefranc 
C(1), Francesconi E(1), Castell C(1), Lefebvre AM(4), Nemecek C(1), Calvet L(1), 
Goulaouic H(5).

Author information:
(1)Sanofi Oncology, Sanofi Research and Development, Vitry-sur-Seine, France.
(2)Disposition, Safety and Animal Research, Sanofi Research and Development, 
Vitry-sur-Seine, France.
(3)Lead Generation to Candidate Realization, Sanofi Research and Development, 
Vitry-sur-Seine, France.
(4)Biotherapeutics, Sanofi Research and Development, Vitry-sur-Seine, France.
(5)Sanofi Oncology, Sanofi Research and Development, Vitry-sur-Seine, France. 
helene.goulaouic@sanofi.com.

Activation of the MET/HGF pathway is common in human cancer and is thought to 
promote tumor initiation, metastasis, angiogenesis, and resistance to diverse 
therapies. We report here the pharmacologic characterization of the 
triazolopyridazine derivative SAR125844, a potent and highly selective inhibitor 
of the MET receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), for intravenous administration. 
SAR125844 displayed nanomolar activity against the wild-type kinase (IC50 value 
of 4.2 nmol/L) and the M1250T and Y1235D mutants. Broad biochemical profiling 
revealed that SAR125844 was highly selective for MET kinase. SAR125844 inhibits 
MET autophosphorylation in cell-based assays in the nanomolar range, and 
promotes low nanomolar proapoptotic and antiproliferative activities selectively 
in cell lines with MET gene amplification or pathway addiction. In two 
MET-amplified human gastric tumor xenograft models, SNU-5 and Hs 746T, 
intravenous treatment with SAR125844 leads to potent, dose- and time-dependent 
inhibition of the MET kinase and to significant impact on downstream PI3K/AKT 
and RAS/MAPK pathways. Long duration of MET kinase inhibition up to 7 days was 
achieved with a nanosuspension formulation of SAR125844. Daily or every-2-days 
intravenous treatment of SAR125844 promoted a dose-dependent tumor regression in 
MET-amplified human gastric cancer models at tolerated doses without 
treatment-related body weight loss. Our data demonstrated that SAR125844 is a 
potent and selective MET kinase inhibitor with a favorable preclinical toxicity 
profile, supporting its clinical development in patients with MET-amplified and 
MET pathway-addicted tumors.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0428
PMID: 25504634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]