1. Genet Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;37(4):625-30. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572014005000023. 
Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Lack of an association between SNPs within the cholinergic receptor genes and 
smoking behavior in a Czech post-MONICA study.

Hubacek JA(1), Lanska V(2), Adamkova V(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine , Institute for Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine , Prague , Czech Republic .
(2)Statistical Unit , Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine , Prague 
, Czech Republic .
(3)Department of Preventive Cardiology , Institute for Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine , Prague , Czech Republic .

Smoking has a significant heritable component of approximately 30-60%. Recent 
genome wide association studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) within the nicotinic cholinergic receptor subunits 3 (rs578776), 5 
(rs16969968) and β3 (rs6474412), which are associated with nicotine dependence 
in Western European populations. To analyze the association in a Czech 
population, we genotyped 1,191 males and 1,368 females (post-MONICA study). The 
WHO protocol was used to examine smoking status and the number of cigarettes 
smoked per day. There were 32.1% current and 27.6% past smokers among the males 
and 22.5% current and 13.8% past smokers among the females. We have not 
confirmed the original results: the SNPs rs16969968 (p = 0.07), rs578776 (p = 
0.16) and rs6474412 (p = 0.76) were not associated with smoking status 
(never-smokers vs. ever-smokers) in the entire population, if a codominant model 
of analysis was used. This result was valid for both the male and female 
subpopulations if analyzed separately and adjusted for age. Finally, in 
ever-smokers, the number of cigarettes smoked per day was also independent of 
different genotypes, regardless of which polymorphism (and gender) was analyzed 
(the lowest p value was 0.49). The association between the cholinergic 
receptors-nicotinic subunits (-3, -5 and -ß3), and smoking behavior may be 
population-dependent.

DOI: 10.1590/S1415-47572014005000023
PMCID: PMC4261961
PMID: 25505836