1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 15;9(12):e115138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115138. 
eCollection 2014.

Neuroinvasion of the highly pathogenic influenza virus H7N1 is caused by 
disruption of the blood brain barrier in an avian model.

Chaves AJ(1), Vergara-Alert J(1), Busquets N(1), Valle R(1), Rivas R(1), Ramis 
A(2), Darji A(3), Majó N(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Sanitat i 
Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centre de Recerca en Sanitat Animal (CReSA), UAB-IRTA, Campus de la 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Institut de Recerca i 
Tecnologia Agroalimentàries (IRTA), Barcelona, Spain.

Influenza A virus (IAV) causes central nervous system (CNS) lesions in avian and 
mammalian species, including humans. However, the mechanism used by IAV to 
invade the brain has not been determined. In the current work, we used chickens 
infected with a highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus as a model to 
elucidate the mechanism of entry of IAV into the brain. The permeability of the 
BBB was evaluated in fifteen-day-old H7N1-infected and non-infected chickens 
using three different methods: (i) detecting Evans blue (EB) extravasation into 
the brain, (ii) determining the leakage of the serum protein immunoglobulin Y 
(IgY) into the brain and (iii) assessing the stability of the tight-junction 
(TJ) proteins zonula occludens-1 and claudin-1 in the chicken brain at 6, 12, 
18, 24, 36 and 48 hours post-inoculation (hpi). The onset of the induced viremia 
was evaluated by quantitative real time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) at the same time 
points. Viral RNA was detected from 18 hpi onward in blood samples, whereas IAV 
antigen was detected at 24 hpi in brain tissue samples. EB and IgY extravasation 
and loss of integrity of the TJs associated with the presence of viral antigen 
was first observed at 36 and 48 hpi in the telencephalic pallium and cerebellum. 
Our data suggest that the mechanism of entry of the H7N1 HPAI into the brain 
includes infection of the endothelial cells at early stages (24 hpi) with 
subsequent disruption of the TJs of the BBB and leakage of virus and serum 
proteins into the adjacent neuroparenchyma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115138
PMCID: PMC4266681
PMID: 25506836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.