1. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2014 Jun;2(3):e00043. doi: 10.1002/prp2.43. Epub 2014 
Apr 7.

NL-103, a novel dual-targeted inhibitor of histone deacetylases and hedgehog 
pathway, effectively overcomes vismodegib resistance conferred by Smo mutations.

Zhao J(1), Quan H(1), Xie C(1), Lou L(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai, 
201203, China.

Misregulation of hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and medulloblastoma. Vismodegib, an orally 
bioavailable Hh signal pathway inhibitor targeting Smo, has been approved for 
the treatment of advanced BCC. However, acquired drug resistance to vismodegib 
induced by point mutation in Smo is emerging as a major problem to vismodegib 
treatment. In this study, we designed and synthesized a novel chimeric compound 
NL-103, which comprises structural elements of Hh pathway inhibitor vismodegib, 
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor vorinostat. NL-103 simultaneously and 
significantly inhibited both HDACs and Hh pathway. Importantly, NL-103, as well 
as vorinostat, effectively overcame vismodegib resistance induced by Smoothened 
point mutations. Moreover, NL-103 and vorinostat, but not vismodegib, 
significantly downregulated the expression of Gli2 which plays an important role 
in Hh pathway. These results indicate that HDAC inhibitory activity is essential 
for NL-103 to overcome vismodegib resistance and that dual inhibition of HDAC 
and Hh signaling pathway may be a rational strategy for overcoming vismodegib 
resistance. Our findings suggest that NL-103 may be a promising compound for 
clinical development as a more effective Hh pathway inhibitor.

DOI: 10.1002/prp2.43
PMCID: PMC4186412
PMID: 25505589