1. Malar Res Treat. 2014;2014:950424. doi: 10.1155/2014/950424. Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Role of Different Pfcrt and Pfmdr-1 Mutations in Conferring Resistance to 
Antimalaria Drugs in Plasmodium falciparum.

Ibraheem ZO(1), Abd Majid R(2), Noor SM(3), Sedik HM(4), Basir R(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Unit, Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600 Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.

Emergence of drugs resistant strains of Plasmodium falciparum has augmented the 
scourge of malaria in endemic areas. Antimalaria drugs act on different 
intracellular targets. The majority of them interfere with digestive vacuoles 
(DVs) while others affect other organelles, namely, apicoplast and mitochondria. 
Prevention of drug accumulation or access into the target site is one of the 
mechanisms that plasmodium adopts to develop resistance. Plasmodia are endowed 
with series of transporters that shuffle drugs away from the target site, 
namely, pfmdr (Plasmodium falciparum multidrug resistance transporter) and pfcrt 
(Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine resistance transporter) which exist in DV 
membrane and are considered as putative markers of CQ resistance. They are 
homologues to human P-glycoproteins (P-gh or multidrug resistance system) and 
members of drug metabolite transporter (DMT) family, respectively. The former 
mediates drifting of xenobiotics towards the DV while the latter chucks them 
outside. Resistance to drugs whose target site of action is intravacuolar 
develops when the transporters expel them outside the DVs and vice versa for 
those whose target is extravacuolar. In this review, we are going to summarize 
the possible pfcrt and pfmdr mutation and their role in changing plasmodium 
sensitivity to different anti-Plasmodium drugs.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/950424
PMCID: PMC4243603
PMID: 25506039