1. BMC Proc. 2014 Jun 17;8(Suppl 1 Genetic Analysis Workshop 18Vanessa
Olmo):S101.  doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-8-S1-S101. eCollection 2014.

Pathway-based analysis of rare and common variants to test for association with 
blood pressure.

Alsulami H(1), Liu X(2), Beyene J(3).

Author information:
(1)Statistics Department, King Abdulaziz University, Abdullah Sulayman, Jeddah 
22254, Saudi Arabia ; Mathematics and Statistics Department, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada ; Population Genomics Program, Department 
of Clinical Epidemiology & Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Population Genomics Program, Department of Clinical Epidemiology & 
Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Mathematics and Statistics Department, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada ; Population Genomics Program, Department of Clinical 
Epidemiology & Biostatistics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Our goal is to test the effect of both rare and common variants in a blood 
pressure study. We use a pathway-based approach, gene-set enrichment analysis, 
to search for related genes affecting 4 phenotypes: systolic blood pressure, 
diastolic blood pressure, the difference between each of them and mean arterial 
pressure, which is a weighted linear combination of systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure. Using the real Genetic Analysis Workshop 18 data, we consider both 
rare and common variants in our analysis and incorporate other covariates by 
using a recently proposed test statistic. Our study identified a commonly 
enriched gene set/pathway for the two derived phenotypes we analyzed: the 
difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure and mean arterial 
pressure, but none is identified with the individual blood pressure phenotypes. 
The gene CD47, in the enriched gene pathway/set, was reported in previous 
studies to be related to blood pressure. The findings are not surprising because 
the sample size we use in our analysis is small, and hence power to detect small 
but important effects is likely inadequate.

DOI: 10.1186/1753-6561-8-S1-S101
PMCID: PMC4143690
PMID: 25519355