1. J Magn Reson. 2015 Jan;250:71-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jmr.2014.09.026. Epub 2014
Oct  13.

Optimization of bicelle lipid composition and temperature for EPR spectroscopy 
of aligned membranes.

McCaffrey JE(1), James ZM(1), Thomas DD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: ddt@umn.edu.

We have optimized the magnetic alignment of phospholipid bilayered micelles 
(bicelles) for EPR spectroscopy, by varying lipid composition and temperature. 
Bicelles have been extensively used in NMR spectroscopy for several decades, in 
order to obtain aligned samples in a near-native membrane environment and take 
advantage of the intrinsic sensitivity of magnetic resonance to molecular 
orientation. Recently, bicelles have also seen increasing use in EPR, which 
offers superior sensitivity and orientational resolution. However, the low 
magnetic field strength (less than 1 T) of most conventional EPR spectrometers 
results in homogeneously oriented bicelles only at a temperature well above 
physiological. To optimize bicelle composition for magnetic alignment at reduced 
temperature, we prepared bicelles containing varying ratios of saturated (DMPC) 
and unsaturated (POPC) phospholipids, using EPR spectra of a spin-labeled fatty 
acid to assess alignment as a function of lipid composition and temperature. 
Spectral analysis showed that bicelles containing an equimolar mixture of DMPC 
and POPC homogeneously align at 298 K, 20 K lower than conventional DMPC-only 
bicelles. It is now possible to perform EPR studies of membrane protein 
structure and dynamics in well-aligned bicelles at physiological temperatures 
and below.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmr.2014.09.026
PMCID: PMC4286475
PMID: 25514061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]