1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2015;33(10):2094-103. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2014.999704. 
Epub 2015 Jan 23.

Mutations in exons 3 and 7 resulting in truncated expression of human ATP6V1B1 
gene showing structural variations contributing to poor substrate 
binding-causative reason for distal renal tubular acidosis with sensorineural 
deafness.

Kumar PS(1), Venkatesh K, Sowjenya G, Srikanth L, Sunitha MM, Prasad UV, Swarupa 
V, Yeswanth S, Naveen PS, Sridhar A, Kumar VS, Sarma PV.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biotechnology , Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical 
Sciences , Tirupati , AP 517507 , India.

Distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) is an autosomal recessive syndrome results 
defect in either proximal tubule bicarbonate reabsorption or in distal tubule 
H(+) secretion and is characterized by severe hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis 
in childhood. dRTA is associated with functional variations in the ATP6V1B1 gene 
encoding β1 subunit of H(+)-ATPase, key membrane transporters for net acid 
excretion of α-intercalated cells of medullary collecting ducts. In the present 
study, a 13-year-old male patient suffering with nephropathy and sensorineural 
deafness was reported in the Department of Nephrology. We predicted improper 
functioning of ATP6V1B1 gene could be the reason for diseased condition. 
Therefore, exons 3, 4, and 7 contributing active site of ATP6V1B1 gene was 
amplified and sequenced (Accession numbers: KF571726, KM222653). The obtained 
sequences were BLAST searched against the wild type ATP6V1B1 gene which showed 
novel mutations c.307 A > G, c.308 C > A, c.310 C > G, c.704 T > C, c.705 G > T, 
c.709 A > G, c.710 A > G, c.714 G > A, c.716 C > A, c.717delC, c.722 C > G, 
c.728insG, c.741insT, c.753G > C. These mutations resulted in the expression of 
truncated protein terminating at Lys 209. The mutated ATP6V1B1structure 
superimposed with wild type showed extensive variations with RMSD 1.336 Å and 
could not bind to substrate ADP leading to non-functional ATPase. These results 
conclusively explain these mutations in ATP6V1B1 gene resulted in structural 
changes causing accumulation of H(+) ions contributing to dRTA with 
sensorineural deafness.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2014.999704
PMID: 25517796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]