1. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):3101-7. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2946-1. Epub 2014 
Dec 16.

The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677 C>T polymorphism increases 
the risk of developing chronic myeloid leukemia-a case-control study.

Bănescu C(1), Iancu M, Trifa AP, Macarie I, Dima D, Dobreanu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tirgu 
Mures, Romania.

The methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677 C>T and 1298 A>C 
polymorphisms are associated with variations in folate levels, a phenomenon 
linked to the development of various malignancies. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the influence of the 677 C>T and 1298 A>C polymorphisms in the MTHFR 
gene on the risk of developing chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Our study 
included 151 patients with CML and 305 controls. The MTHFR 677 C>T and 1298 A>C 
polymorphisms were investigated by polymerase chain reaction restriction 
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and allele-specific PCR techniques. The 
CT and TT genotypes of the MTHFR 677 C>T polymorphism were associated with an 
increased risk of developing CML (odds ratio (OR) = 1.556, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 1.017-2.381, p value = 0.041, and OR = 1.897, 95% 
CI = 1.046-3.44, p value = 0.035, respectively). No association was observed 
between the prognostic factors (blasts, basophils, additional chromosomal 
abnormalities, EUTOS score, Sokal and Hasford risk groups) and the MTHFR 677 C>T 
and 1298 A>C variant genotypes in CML patients. Our study shows that the MTHFR 
677 C>T polymorphism is significantly associated with the risk of CML in 
Romanian patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-2946-1
PMID: 25510667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]