1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 30;290(5):2854-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597930. Epub
2014  Dec 19.

Functional characterization of CaVα2δ mutations associated with sudden cardiac 
death.

Bourdin B(1), Shakeri B(1), Tétreault MP(1), Sauvé R(1), Lesage S(2), Parent 
L(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Département de Physiologie, Montreal Heart Institute Research 
Centre, and.
(2)Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Centre de 
Recherche de l'Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Université de Montréal, Montréal, 
Québec H3C 3J7, Canada.
(3)From the Département de Physiologie, Montreal Heart Institute Research 
Centre, and lucie.parent@umontreal.ca.

L-type Ca(2+) channels play a critical role in cardiac rhythmicity. These ion 
channels are oligomeric complexes formed by the pore-forming CaVα1 with the 
auxiliary CaVβ and CaVα2δ subunits. CaVα2δ increases the peak current density 
and improves the voltage-dependent activation gating of CaV1.2 channels without 
increasing the surface expression of the CaVα1 subunit. The functional impact of 
genetic variants of CACNA2D1 (the gene encoding for CaVα2δ), associated with 
shorter repolarization QT intervals (the time interval between the Q and the T 
waves on the cardiac electrocardiogram), was investigated after recombinant 
expression of the full complement of L-type CaV1.2 subunits in human embryonic 
kidney 293 cells. By performing side-by-side high resolution flow cytometry 
assays and whole-cell patch clamp recordings, we revealed that the surface 
density of the CaVα2δ wild-type protein correlates with the peak current 
density. Furthermore, the cell surface density of CaVα2δ mutants S755T, Q917H, 
and S956T was not significantly different from the cell surface density of the 
CaVα2δ wild-type protein expressed under the same conditions. In contrast, the 
cell surface expression of CaVα2δ D550Y, CaVα2δ S709N, and the double mutant 
D550Y/Q917H was reduced, respectively, by ≈30-33% for the single mutants and by 
60% for the latter. The cell surface density of D550Y/Q917H was more 
significantly impaired than protein stability, suggesting that surface 
trafficking of CaVα2δ was disrupted by the double mutation. Co-expression with 
D550Y/Q917H significantly decreased CaV1.2 currents as compared with results 
obtained with CaVα2δ wild type. It is concluded that D550Y/Q917H reduced inward 
Ca(2+) currents through a defect in the cell surface trafficking of CaVα2δ. 
Altogether, our results provide novel insight in the molecular mechanism 
underlying the modulation of CaV1.2 currents by CaVα2δ.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597930
PMCID: PMC4317020
PMID: 25527503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]