1. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:347585. doi: 10.1155/2014/347585. Epub 2014 Nov
27.

Anabolic properties of high mobility group box protein-1 in human periodontal 
ligament cells in vitro.

Wolf M(1), Lossdörfer S(1), Römer P(2), Craveiro RB(3), Deschner J(4), Jäger 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Welschnonnenstraße 17, 53111 
Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, University of Regensburg, 
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Center for Pediatrics, 
University of Bonn Medical Center, Adenauerallee 119, 53113 Bonn, Germany.
(4)Experimental Dento-Maxillo-Facial Medicine, University of Bonn, 
Welschnonnenstraße 17, 53111 Bonn, Germany.

High mobility group box protein-1 (HMGB1) is mainly recognized as a 
chemoattractant for macrophages in the initial phase of host response to 
pathogenic stimuli. However, recent findings provide evidence for anabolic 
properties in terms of enhanced proliferation, migration, and support of wound 
healing capacity of mesenchymal cells suggesting a dual role of the cytokine in 
the regulation of immune response and subsequent regenerative processes. Here, 
we examined potential anabolic effects of HMGB1 on human periodontal ligament 
(PDL) cells in the regulation of periodontal remodelling, for example, during 
orthodontic tooth movement. Preconfluent human PDL cells (hPDL) were exposed to 
HMGB1 protein and the influence on proliferation, migration, osteogenic 
differentiation, and biomineralization was determined by MTS assay, real time 
PCR, immunofluorescence cytochemistry, ELISA, and von Kossa staining. HMGB1 
protein increased hPDL cell proliferation, migration, osteoblastic marker gene 
expression, and protein production as well as mineralized nodule formation 
significantly. The present findings support the dual character of HMGB1 with 
anabolic therapeutic potential that might support the reestablishment of the 
structural and functional integrity of the periodontium following periodontal 
trauma such as orthodontic tooth movement.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/347585
PMCID: PMC4265691
PMID: 25525297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]