1. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 23;9(12):e115747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115747. 
eCollection 2014.

Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations associated with Parkinson's disease: a 
meta-analysis in a Chinese population.

Chen J(1), Li W(2), Zhang T(2), Wang YJ(2), Jiang XJ(2), Xu ZQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
10 Changjiang Branch Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing, 400042, PR China; 
Department of Neurology, PLA 123 Hospital, 1052 Yanshan Road, Yuhui District, 
Bengbu, 233000, PR China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
10 Changjiang Branch Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing, 400042, PR China.

Mutations of glucocerebrosidase (GBA) confer susceptibility to Parkinson's 
disease in several ethnical populations, with a high incidence especially in the 
Ashkenazi Jewish population. Although there are several studies that have 
investigated a similar association in a Chinese population, small sample sizes 
and few positive outcomes have made it difficult to obtain conclusive results 
from these individual studies. Therefore, the present study used a meta-analysis 
approach, pooling the appropriate data from published studies to investigate the 
association of GBA mutations and Parkinson's disease in a Chinese population. 
Nine studies containing 6536 Chinese subjects (3438 cases and 3098 healthy 
controls) and examining the GBA mutations of L444P, N370S and several other 
mutations were included. Review Manager 5.2 software was applied to analyze the 
pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The results showed 
a significant association of Parkinson's disease risk with overall GBA mutations 
(OR = 6.34, 95% CI = 3.77-10.68, p<0.00001), and with the subgroup of L444P 
mutation (OR = 11.68, 95% CI = 5.23-26.06, p<0.00001). No such association was 
observed for the subgroup with N370S mutation or other mutations, in part 
because of the small sample size or rare events. Thus, for the rare occurrence 
of GBA mutations, studies with larger sample size are necessary to minimize the 
sampling error and to obtain convincing results.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115747
PMCID: PMC4275276
PMID: 25535748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.