1. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2014 Dec 15;6(1):139. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-6-139. 
eCollection 2014.

The relationship between glycemic variability and diabetic peripheral neuropathy 
in type 2 diabetes with well-controlled HbA1c.

Xu F(1), Zhao LH(1), Su JB(1), Chen T(2), Wang XQ(1), Chen JF(1), Wu G(1), Jin 
Y(1), Wang XH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong 
University, No. 6 North Hai-er-xiang Road, Nantong, 226001 China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong 
University, No. 6 North Hai-er-xiang Road, Nantong, 226001 China.

BACKGROUND: Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) is one of the most common 
microvascular complications of diabetes. Glycemic variability could be an 
independent risk factor for diabetes complications in addition to average 
glucose. Type 2 diabetes with well-controlled glycosylated hemoglobin A1c 
(HbA1c) may have different terms of glycemic variability and vascular 
complication consequences. The aim of the study is to investigate the 
relationship between glycemic variability and DPN in type 2 diabetes with 
well-controlled HbA1c (HbA1c < 7.0%).
METHODS: 45 type 2 diabetes with well-controlled HbA1c(HbA1c < 7.0%) and with 
DPN (DM/DPN group) were recruited in the study, and 45 type 2 diabetes with 
well-controlled HbA1c and without DPN (DM/-DPN group) were set as controls. The 
two groups were also matched for age and diabetic duration. Blood pressure, body 
mass index(BMI), insulin sensitivity index (Matsuda index, ISI), total 
cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), high density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDLC), and low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) were tested in the two 
groups. And all patients were monitored using the continuous glucose monitoring 
(CGM) system for consecutive 72 hours. The multiple parameters of glycemic 
variability included the standard deviation of blood glucose (SDBG), mean of 
daily differences (MODD) and mean amplitude of glycemic excursions (MAGE).
RESULTS: The DM/DPN group had a greater SDBG, MODD and MAGE, when compared to 
the DM/-DPN group (p < 0.05). BMI, TC, and LDLC of DM/DPN group were lower than 
those of DM/-DPN group (p < 0.05). The patients with hypoglycemia were 
comparable between the two groups (p > 0.05). Univariate analysis showed DPN was 
closely associated with BMI (OR 0.82, CI 0.72-0.94, p = 0.005), TC (OR 0.63, CI 
0.42-0.93, p = 0.02), LDLC (OR 0.4, CI 0.20-0.80, p = 0.009), SDBG (OR 2.95, CI 
1.55-5.61, p = 0.001), MODD (OR 4.38, CI 1.48-12.93, p = 0.008), MAGE (OR 2.18, 
CI 1.47-3.24, p < 0.001). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that 
MAGE (OR 2.05, CI 1.36-3.09, p = 0.001) and BMI (OR 0.85, CI 0.73-0.99, 
p = 0.033) were significantly correlating with DPN. Glycemic variability, 
evaluated by MAGE, was the most significantly independent risk factor for DPN.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a close relationship between glycemic variability 
evaluated by MAGE and DPN in type 2 diabetes with well-controlled HbA1c.

DOI: 10.1186/1758-5996-6-139
PMCID: PMC4272789
PMID: 25530811