1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 Jul;17(4):904-13. doi: 10.1111/plb.12296. Epub 2015 
Jan 16.

Overexpression of a NAC transcription factor delays leaf senescence and 
increases grain nitrogen concentration in wheat.

Zhao D(1)(2)(3), Derkx AP(2), Liu DC(1), Buchner P(2), Hawkesford MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi'ning, 
Qing'hai, China.
(2)Plant Biology and Crop Science Department, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, 
UK.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Increasing the duration of leaf photosynthesis during grain filling using 
slow-senescing functional stay-green phenotypes is a possible route for 
increasing grain yields in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). However, delayed 
senescence may negatively affect nutrient remobilisation and hence reduce grain 
protein concentrations and grain quality. A novel NAC1-type transcription factor 
(hereafter TaNAC-S) was identified in wheat, with gene expression located 
primarily in leaf/sheath tissues, which decreased during post-anthesis leaf 
senescence. Expression of TaNAC-S in the second leaf correlated with delayed 
senescence in two doubled-haploid lines of an Avalon × Cadenza population (lines 
112 and 181), which were distinct for leaf senescence. Transgenic wheat plants 
overexpressing TaNAC-S resulted in delayed leaf senescence (stay-green 
phenotype). Grain yield, aboveground biomass, harvest index and total grain N 
content were unaffected, but NAC over-expressing lines had higher grain N 
concentrations at similar grain yields compared to non-transgenic controls. 
These results indicate that TaNAC-S is a negative regulator of leaf senescence, 
and that delayed leaf senescence may lead not only to increased grain yields but 
also to increased grain protein concentrations.

© 2014 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the 
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/plb.12296
PMCID: PMC4949518
PMID: 25545326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]