1. J Mol Diagn. 2015 Mar;17(2):162-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.11.004. Epub
2014  Dec 31.

Next-generation sequencing of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes for the genetic 
diagnostics of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer.

Trujillano D(1), Weiss ME(2), Schneider J(2), Köster J(2), Papachristos EB(2), 
Saviouk V(2), Zakharkina T(2), Nahavandi N(2), Kovacevic L(2), Rolfs A(3).

Author information:
(1)Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. Electronic address: 
daniel.trujillano@centogene.com.
(2)Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany.
(3)Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany; Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for 
Neuroregeneration, Medical University Rostock, Rostock, Germany.

Genetic testing for hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer mostly relies on 
laborious molecular tools that use Sanger sequencing to scan for mutations in 
the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. We explored a more efficient genetic screening 
strategy based on next-generation sequencing of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 210 
hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer patients. We first validated this 
approach in a cohort of 115 samples with previously known BRCA1 and BRCA2 
mutations and polymorphisms. Genomic DNA was amplified using the Ion AmpliSeq 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 panel. The DNA Libraries were pooled, barcoded, and sequenced 
using an Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine sequencer. The combination of 
different robust bioinformatics tools allowed detection of all previously known 
pathogenic mutations and polymorphisms in the 115 samples, without detecting 
spurious pathogenic calls. We then used the same assay in a discovery cohort of 
95 uncharacterized hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer patients for BRCA1 
and BRCA2. In addition, we describe the allelic frequencies across 210 
hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer patients of 74 unique definitely and 
likely pathogenic and uncertain BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants, some of which have not 
been previously annotated in the public databases. Targeted next-generation 
sequencing is ready to substitute classic molecular methods to perform genetic 
testing on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and provides a greater opportunity for more 
comprehensive testing of at-risk patients.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the 
Association for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.11.004
PMID: 25556971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]