1. Neuroscience. 2015 Mar 12;288:112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.12.037. 
Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Recombinant T-cell receptor ligand RTL1000 limits inflammation and decreases 
infarct size after experimental ischemic stroke in middle-aged mice.

Zhu W(1), Dotson AL(2), Libal NL(1), Lapato AS(2), Bodhankar S(2), Offner H(3), 
Alkayed NJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 
97239, USA; Neuroimmunology Research, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Department of Neurology, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Neuroimmunology Research, 
Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology & Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; The Knight Cardiovascular 
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, 
USA. Electronic address: alkayedn@ohsu.edu.

We have previously demonstrated that recombinant T-cell receptor ligand 1000 
(RTL1000) reduces infarct size and improves long-term functional recovery after 
experimental stroke in young transgenic mice expressing human leukocyte antigen 
DR2 (DR2-Tg). In this study, we determined the effect of RTL1000 on infarct size 
in 12-month-old middle-aged DR2-Tg mice, and investigated its mechanism of 
action. Twelve-month-old male DR2-Tg mice underwent 60min of intraluminal 
reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Vehicle or RTL1000 was 
injected 4, 24, 48 and 72h after MCAO. Cortical, striatal and total hemispheric 
infarcts were measured 96h after stroke. Spleen and brain tissues were collected 
96h after stroke for immunological analysis. Our data showed that RTL1000 
significantly reduced infarct size 96h after MCAO in middle-aged male DR2-Tg 
mice. RTL1000 decreased the number of activated monocytes/microglia cells 
(CD11b(+)CD45(hi)) and CD3(+) T cells in the ischemic hemisphere. RTL1000 also 
reduced the percentage of total T cells and inflammatory neutrophils in the 
spleen. These findings suggest that RTL1000 protects against ischemic stroke in 
middle-aged male mice by limiting post-ischemic inflammation.

Copyright Â© 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.12.037
PMCID: PMC4323943
PMID: 25556831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict Of Interest Dr. Offner, Dr. Alkayed and 
OHSU have a significant financial interest in Artielle ImmunoTherapeutics, Inc., 
a company that may have a commercial interest in the results of this research 
and technology. This potential conflict of interest has been reviewed and 
managed by the OHSU and VAMC Conflict of Interest in Research Committees. Wenbin 
Zhu declares that he has no conflict of interest. Abby L. Dotson declares that 
she has no conflict of interest. Nicole L. Libal declares that she has no 
conflict of interest. Andrew S. Lapato declares that he has no conflict of 
interest. Sheetal Bodhankar declares that she has no conflict of interest.