1. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(7):3497-511. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03347-14. Epub 2015 Jan 7.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 employs the cellular dynein light chain 1 
protein for reverse transcription through interaction with its integrase 
protein.

Jayappa KD(1), Ao Z(1), Wang X(1), Mouland AJ(2), Shekhar S(3), Yang X(3), Yao 
X(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Human Retrovirology, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)HIV-1 RNA Trafficking Laboratory, Lady Davis Institute at the Jewish General 
Hospital and McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Canada.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Human Retrovirology, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada 
yao2@cc.umanitoba.ca.

In this study, we examined the requirement for host dynein adapter proteins such 
as dynein light chain 1 (DYNLL1), dynein light chain Tctex-type 1 (DYNLT1), and 
p150(Glued) in early steps of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) 
replication. We found that the knockdown (KD) of DYNLL1, but not DYNLT1 or 
p150(Glued), resulted in significantly lower levels of HIV-1 reverse 
transcription in cells. Following an attempt to determine how DYNLL1 could 
impact HIV-1 reverse transcription, we detected the DYNLL1 interaction with 
HIV-1 integrase (IN) but not with capsid (CA), matrix (MA), or reverse 
transcriptase (RT) protein. Furthermore, by mutational analysis of putative 
DYNLL1 interaction motifs in IN, we identified the motifs (52)GQVD and (250)VIQD 
in IN as essential for DYNLL1 interaction. The DYNLL1 interaction-defective IN 
mutant HIV-1 (HIV-1IN(Q53A/Q252A)) exhibited impaired reverse transcription. 
Through further investigations, we have also detected relatively smaller amounts 
of particulate CA in DYNLL1-KD cells or in infections with HIV-1IN(Q53A/Q252A) 
mutant virus. Overall, our study demonstrates the novel interaction between 
HIV-1 IN and cellular DYNLL1 proteins and suggests the requirement of this 
virus-cell interaction for proper uncoating and efficient reverse transcription 
of HIV-1.
IMPORTANCE: Host cellular DYNLL1, DYNLT1, and p150(Glued) proteins have been 
implicated in the replication of several viruses. However, their roles in HIV-1 
replication have not been investigated. For the first time, we demonstrated that 
during viral infection, HIV-1 IN interacts with DYNLL1, and their interaction 
was found to have a role in proper uncoating and efficient reverse transcription 
of HIV-1. Thus, interaction of IN and DYNLL1 may be a potential target for 
future anti-HIV therapy. Moreover, while our study has evaluated the involvement 
of IN in HIV-1 uncoating and reverse transcription, it also predicts a possible 
mechanism by which IN contributes to these early viral replication steps.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03347-14
PMCID: PMC4403391
PMID: 25568209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]