1. Zebrafish. 2015 Apr;12(2):127-36. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2014.1004. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Role of adenosine signaling on pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures in zebrafish.

Siebel AM(1), Menezes FP, Capiotti KM, Kist LW, da Costa Schaefer I, Frantz JZ, 
Bogo MR, Da Silva RS, Bonan CD.

Author information:
(1)1 Laboratório de Neuroquímica e Psicofarmacologia, Departamento de Biologia 
Celular e Molecular, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular, 
Faculdade de Biociências, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul 
, Porto Alegre, Brazil .

Adenosine is a well-known endogenous modulator of neuronal excitability with 
anticonvulsant properties. Thus, the modulation exerted by adenosine might be an 
effective tool to control seizures. In this study, we investigated the effects 
of drugs that are able to modulate adenosinergic signaling on pentylenetetrazole 
(PTZ)-induced seizures in adult zebrafish. The adenosine A1 receptor antagonist 
8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX) decreased the latency to the onset of 
the tonic-clonic seizure stage. The adenosine A1 receptor agonist 
cyclopentyladenosine (CPA) increased the latency to reach the tonic-clonic 
seizure stage. Both the adenosine A2A receptor agonist and antagonist, CGS 21680 
and ZM 241385, respectively, did not promote changes in seizure parameters. 
Pretreatment with the ecto-5'nucleotidase inhibitor adenosine 5'-(α,β-methylene) 
diphosphate (AMPCP) decreased the latency to the onset of the tonic-clonic 
seizure stage. However, when pretreated with the adenosine deaminase (ADA) 
inhibitor, erythro-9-(2-hydroxy-3-nonyl)-adenine (EHNA), or with the nucleoside 
transporter (NT) inhibitors, dipyridamole and S-(4-Nitrobenzyl)-6-thioinosine 
(NBTI), animals showed longer latency to reach the tonic-clonic seizure status. 
Finally, our molecular analysis of the c-fos gene expression corroborates these 
behavioral results. Our findings indicate that the activation of adenosine A1 
receptors is an important mechanism to control the development of seizures in 
zebrafish. Furthermore, the actions of ecto-5'-nucleotidase, ADA, and NTs are 
directly involved in the control of extracellular adenosine levels and have an 
important role in the development of seizure episodes in zebrafish.

DOI: 10.1089/zeb.2014.1004
PMCID: PMC4367497
PMID: 25560904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]