1. Genes Cancer. 2014 Nov;5(11-12):407-19. doi: 10.18632/genesandcancer.44.

DEPTOR is linked to a TORC1-p21 survival proliferation pathway in multiple 
myeloma cells.

Yang Y(1), Bardeleben C(1), Frost P(1), Hoang B(1), Shi Y(1), Finn R(2), Gera 
J(3), Lichtenstein A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology, Greater Los Angeles VA 
Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA ; UCLA School of Medicine, Greater Los 
Angeles VA Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)UCLA School of Medicine, Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare Center, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA ; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Greater Los Angeles VA 
Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Hematology-Oncology, Greater Los Angeles VA 
Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA ; UCLA School of Medicine, Greater Los 
Angeles VA Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA ; Jonsson Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

We investigated the mechanism by which gene silencing of the mTOR inhibitor, 
DEPTOR, induces cytoreductive effects on multiple myeloma (MM) cells. DEPTOR 
knockdown resulted in anti-MM effects in several MM cell lines. Using an 
inducible shRNA to silence DEPTOR, 8226 MM cells underwent TORC1 activation, 
downregulation of AKT/SGK activity, apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and senescence. 
These latter cytotoxic effects were prevented by TORC1 paralysis (Raptor 
knockdown) but not by over-expression of AKT activity. In addition, DEPTOR 
knockdown-induced MM death was not associated with activation of the unfolded 
protein response, suggesting that enhanced ER stress did not play a role. In 
contrast, DEPTOR knockdown in 8226 cells induced p21 expression, independent of 
p53, and p21 knockdown prevented all of the cytotoxic effects following DEPTOR 
silencing. DEPTOR silencing resulted in p21 upregulation in additional MM cell 
lines. Furthermore, DEPTOR silencing in a murine xenograft model resulted in 
anti-MM effects associated with p21 upregulation. DEPTOR knockdown also resulted 
in a decreased expression of p21-targeting miRNAs and transfection of miRNA 
mimics prevented p21 upregulation and apoptosis following DEPTOR silencing. Use 
of a shRNA-resistant DEPTOR construct ruled out off-target effects of the shRNA. 
These results indicate that DEPTOR regulates growth and survival of MM cells via 
a TORC1/p21 pathway and suggest an involvement of p21-targeted miRNAs.

DOI: 10.18632/genesandcancer.44
PMCID: PMC4279438
PMID: 25568666