1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Dec 12;8:430. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00430. 
eCollection 2014.

State-dependent μ-opioid modulation of social motivation.

Loseth GE(1), Ellingsen DM(2), Leknes S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oslo Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Gothenburg Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Oslo Oslo, Norway ; The Intervention 
Centre, Oslo University Hospital Oslo, Norway.

Social mammals engage in affiliative interactions both when seeking relief from 
negative affect and when searching for pleasure and joy. These two motivational 
states are both modulated by μ-opioid transmission. The μ-opioid receptor (MOR) 
system in the brain mediates pain relief and reward behaviors, and is implicated 
in social reward processing and affiliative bonding across mammalian species. 
However, pharmacological manipulation of the μ-opioid system has yielded 
opposite effects on rodents and primates: in rodents, social motivation is 
generally increased by MOR agonists and reduced by antagonists, whereas the 
opposite pattern has been shown in primates. Here, we address this paradox by 
taking into account differences in motivational state. We first review evidence 
for μ-opioid mediation of reward processing, emotion regulation, and affiliation 
in humans, non-human primates, rodents and other species. Based on the 
consistent cross-species similarities in opioid functioning, we propose a 
unified, state-dependent model for μ-opioid modulation of affiliation across the 
mammalian species. Finally, we show that this state-dependent model is supported 
by evidence from both rodent and primate studies, when species and age 
differences in social separation response are taken into account.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00430
PMCID: PMC4264475
PMID: 25565999