1. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3931-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-3036-0. Epub 2015 
Jan 13.

Genetic variations in monocarboxylate transporter genes as predictors of 
clinical outcomes in non-small cell lung cancer.

Guo X(1), Chen C, Liu B, Wu Y, Chen Y, Zhou X, Huang X, Li X, Yang H, Chen Z, 
Xing J.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Experimental Teaching Center of 
Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, 
Xi'an, 710032, China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is characterized by poor prognosis and only a 
few molecular markers may be potentially used to predict clinical outcomes. 
Previous studies have demonstrated that monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) play 
important roles in the development and progression of many cancers. The purpose 
of this study was to assess the effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of MCT genes on prognosis of NSCLC patients in Chinese Han population. 
Nine functional SNPs in MCT1, MCT2, and MCT4 genes were selected and genotyped 
using Sequenom iPLEX genotyping system in 500 Chinese NSCLC patients receiving 
surgery. Multivariate Cox proportional hazards model and Kaplan-Meier curve were 
used for the prognostic analysis. TT genotype of SNP rs1049434 (MCT1) was 
significantly associated with better overall survival (OS) (HR = 0.56, P = 
0.026) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) (HR = 0.57, P = 0.016) of NSCLC 
patients. TT genotype of another SNP rs995343 (MCT2) exhibited an association 
with worse RFS of NSCLC patients (HR = 1.46, P =â€‰ .039). Unfavorable genotypes 
of SNP rs1049434 and rs995343 showed a significant cumulative effect on OS and 
RFS of NSCLC patients. Moreover, we found that patients carrying AA+AT genotypes 
of rs1049434 showed significant OS and RFS benefits from adjuvant chemotherapy, 
but those with TT genotype did not. Our findings suggest that SNPs in MCT1 and 
MCT2 genes may affect clinical outcomes and can be used to predict the response 
to adjuvant chemotherapy in NSCLC patients who received surgical treatment once 
validated in future study.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-3036-0
PMID: 25578492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]