1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5826-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.598300. Epub
2015  Jan 9.

Cross-talk between two nucleotide-signaling pathways in Staphylococcus aureus.

Corrigan RM(1), Bowman L(1), Willis AR(1), Kaever V(2), Gründling A(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Section of Microbiology and Medical Research Council Centre for 
Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, 
United Kingdom and.
(2)the Research Core Unit Metabolomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 
D-306625, Germany.
(3)From the Section of Microbiology and Medical Research Council Centre for 
Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, 
United Kingdom and a.grundling@imperial.ac.uk.

Nucleotide-signaling pathways are found in all kingdoms of life and are utilized 
to coordinate a rapid response to external stimuli. The stringent response 
alarmones guanosine tetra- (ppGpp) and pentaphosphate (pppGpp) control a global 
response allowing cells to adapt to starvation conditions such as amino acid 
depletion. One more recently discovered signaling nucleotide is the secondary 
messenger cyclic diadenosine monophosphate (c-di-AMP). Here, we demonstrate that 
this signaling nucleotide is essential for the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, 
and its increased production during late growth phases indicates that c-di-AMP 
controls processes that are important for the survival of cells in stationary 
phase. By examining the transcriptional profile of cells with high levels of 
c-di-AMP, we reveal a significant overlap with a stringent response 
transcription signature. Examination of the intracellular nucleotide levels 
under stress conditions provides further evidence that high levels of c-di-AMP 
lead to an activation of the stringent response through a RelA/SpoT homologue 
(RSH) enzyme-dependent increase in the (p)ppGpp levels. This activation is shown 
to be indirect as c-di-AMP does not interact directly with the RSH protein. Our 
data extend this interconnection further by showing that the S. aureus c-di-AMP 
phosphodiesterase enzyme GdpP is inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by ppGpp, 
which itself is not a substrate for this enzyme. Altogether, these findings add 
a new layer of complexity to our understanding of nucleotide signaling in 
bacteria as they highlight intricate interconnections between different 
nucleotide-signaling networks.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.598300
PMCID: PMC4342491
PMID: 25575594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]