1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 May;72(9):1679-98. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1820-z.
Epub  2015 Jan 10.

New paradigms in the repair of oxidative damage in human genome: mechanisms 
ensuring repair of mutagenic base lesions during replication and involvement of 
accessory proteins.

Dutta A(1), Yang C, Sengupta S, Mitra S, Hegde ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

Oxidized bases in the mammalian genome, which are invariably mutagenic due to 
their mispairing property, are continuously induced by endogenous reactive 
oxygen species and more abundantly after oxidative stress. Unlike bulky base 
adducts induced by UV and other environmental mutagens in the genome that block 
replicative DNA polymerases, oxidatively damaged bases such as 5-hydroxyuracil, 
produced by oxidative deamination of cytosine in the template strand, do not 
block replicative polymerases and thus need to be repaired prior to replication 
to prevent mutation. Following up our earlier studies, which showed that the Nei 
endonuclease VIII like 1 (NEIL1) DNA glycosylase, one of the five base excision 
repair (BER)-initiating enzymes in mammalian cells, has enhanced expression 
during the S-phase and higher affinity for replication fork-mimicking 
single-stranded (ss) DNA substrates, we recently provided direct experimental 
evidence for NEIL1's role in replicating template strand repair. The key 
requirement for this event, which we named as the 'cow-catcher' mechanism of 
pre-replicative BER, is NEIL1's non-productive binding (substrate binding 
without product formation) to the lesion base in ss DNA template to stall DNA 
synthesis, causing fork regression. Repair of the lesion in reannealed duplex is 
then carried out by NEIL1 in association with the DNA replication proteins. 
NEIL1 (and other BER-initiating enzymes) also interact with several accessory 
and non-canonical proteins including the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein 
U and Y-box-binding protein 1 as well as high mobility group box 1 protein, 
whose precise roles in BER are still obscure. In this review, we have discussed 
the recent advances in our understanding of oxidative genome damage repair 
pathways with particular focus on the pre-replicative template strand repair and 
the role of scaffold factors like X-ray repairs cross-complementing protein 1 
and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and other accessory proteins guiding distinct 
BER sub-pathways.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-014-1820-z
PMCID: PMC4395533
PMID: 25575562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]