1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):334-42. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000804. Epub 2015 Jan 12.

DNA methylation of lipid-related genes affects blood lipid levels.

Pfeiffer L, Wahl S, Pilling LC, Reischl E, Sandling JK, Kunze S, Holdt LM, 
Kretschmer A, Schramm K, Adamski J, Klopp N, Illig T, Hedman ÅK, Roden M, 
Hernandez DG, Singleton AB, Thasler WE, Grallert H, Gieger C, Herder C, Teupser 
D, Meisinger C, Spector TD, Kronenberg F, Prokisch H, Melzer D, Peters A, 
Deloukas P, Ferrucci L, Waldenberger M.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic mechanisms might be involved in the regulation of 
interindividual lipid level variability and thus may contribute to the 
cardiovascular risk profile. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
association between genome-wide DNA methylation and blood lipid levels 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and total cholesterol. Observed DNA methylation changes were also 
further analyzed to examine their relationship with previous hospitalized 
myocardial infarction.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns were determined in 
whole blood samples of 1776 subjects of the Cooperative Health Research in the 
Region of Augsburg F4 cohort using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip 
(Illumina). Ten novel lipid-related CpG sites annotated to various genes 
including ABCG1, MIR33B/SREBF1, and TNIP1 were identified. CpG cg06500161, 
located in ABCG1, was associated in opposite directions with both high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (β coefficient=-0.049; P=8.26E-17) and triglyceride 
levels (β=0.070; P=1.21E-27). Eight associations were confirmed by replication 
in the Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augsburg F3 study (n=499) 
and in the Invecchiare in Chianti, Aging in the Chianti Area study (n=472). 
Associations between triglyceride levels and SREBF1 and ABCG1 were also found in 
adipose tissue of the Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource cohort (n=634). 
Expression analysis revealed an association between ABCG1 methylation and lipid 
levels that might be partly mediated by ABCG1 expression. DNA methylation of 
ABCG1 might also play a role in previous hospitalized myocardial infarction 
(odds ratio, 1.15; 95% confidence interval=1.06-1.25).
CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic modifications of the newly identified loci might 
regulate disturbed blood lipid levels and thus contribute to the development of 
complex lipid-related diseases.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000804
PMCID: PMC5012424
PMID: 25583993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]