1. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Mar 15;26(6):1044-57. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-10-1438. Epub 
2015 Jan 14.

Involvement of general control nonderepressible kinase 2 in cancer cell 
apoptosis by posttranslational mechanisms.

Wei C(1), Lin M(2), Jinjun B(3), Su F(2), Dan C(2), Yan C(4), Jie Y(2), Jin 
Z(2), Zi-Chun H(1), Wu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China State Key Lab of Natural Medicines, 
China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210017, China.
(2)State Key Lab of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences, 
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China.
(3)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Unit, Changhai Hospital, 
Affiliated Hospital of the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, 
China.
(4)Department of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing 210009, 
China.

General control nonderepressible kinase 2 (GCN2) is a promising target for 
cancer therapy. However, the role of GCN2 in cancer cell survival or death is 
elusive; further, small molecules targeting GCN2 signaling are not available. By 
using a GCN2 level-based drug screening assay, we found that GCN2 protein level 
critically determined the sensitivity of the cancer cells toward 
Na(+),K(+)-ATPase ligand-induced apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo, and this 
effect was largely dependent on C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) induction. 
Further analysis revealed that GCN2 is a short-lived protein. In A549 lung 
carcinoma cells, cellular β-arrestin1/2 associated with GCN2 and maintained the 
GCN2 protein level at a low level by recruiting the E3 ligase NEDD4L and 
facilitating consequent proteasomal degradation. However, Na(+),K(+)-ATPase 
ligand treatment triggered the phosphorylation of GCN2 at threonine 899, which 
increased the GCN2 protein level by disrupting the formation of 
GCN2-β-arrestin-NEDD4L ternary complex. The enhanced GCN2 level, in turn, 
aggravated Na(+),K(+)-ATPase ligand-induced cancer cell apoptosis. Our findings 
reveal that GCN2 can exert its proapoptotic function in cancer cell death by 
posttranslational mechanisms. Moreover, Na(+),K(+)-ATPase ligands emerge as the 
first identified small-molecule drugs that can trigger cancer cell death by 
modulating GCN2 signaling.

© 2015 Wei, Lin, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for 
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it 
is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-10-1438
PMCID: PMC4357505
PMID: 25589675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]