1. J Neurochem. 2015 May;133(4):582-9. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13024. Epub 2015 Mar 1.

Lipid peroxidation is essential for α-synuclein-induced cell death.

Angelova PR(1), Horrocks MH, Klenerman D, Gandhi S, Abramov AY, Shchepinov MS.

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.

Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disease and its 
pathogenesis is closely associated with oxidative stress. Deposition of 
aggregated α-synuclein (α-Syn) occurs in familial and sporadic forms of 
Parkinson's disease. Here, we studied the effect of oligomeric α-Syn on one of 
the major markers of oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, in primary 
co-cultures of neurons and astrocytes. We found that oligomeric but not 
monomeric α-Syn significantly increases the rate of production of reactive 
oxygen species, subsequently inducing lipid peroxidation in both neurons and 
astrocytes. Pre-incubation of cells with isotope-reinforced polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (D-PUFAs) completely prevented the effect of oligomeric α-Syn on 
lipid peroxidation. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation with D-PUFAs further 
protected cells from cell death induced by oligomeric α-Syn. Thus, lipid 
peroxidation induced by misfolding of α-Syn may play an important role in the 
cellular mechanism of neuronal cell loss in Parkinson's disease. We have found 
that aggregated α-synuclein-induced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
that subsequently stimulates lipid peroxidation and cell death in neurons and 
astrocytes. Specific inhibition of lipid peroxidation by incubation with 
reinforced polyunsaturated fatty acids (D-PUFAs) completely prevented the effect 
of α-synuclein on lipid peroxidation and cell death.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of The International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13024
PMCID: PMC4471127
PMID: 25580849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]