1. J Transl Med. 2015 Jan 16;13:13. doi: 10.1186/s12967-014-0377-9.

Milk consumption during pregnancy increases birth weight, a risk factor for the 
development of diseases of civilization.

Melnik BC(1), John SM(2), Schmitz G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Environmental Medicine and Health Theory, 
University of Osnabr端ck, Sedanstrasse 115, D-49090, Osnabr端ck, Germany. 
melnik@t-online.de.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Environmental Medicine and Health Theory, 
University of Osnabr端ck, Sedanstrasse 115, D-49090, Osnabr端ck, Germany. 
sjohn@uos.de.
(3)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Clinics 
of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. gerd.schmitz@klinik.uni-regensburg.de.

Antenatal dietary lifestyle intervention and nutrition during pregnancy and 
early postnatal life are important for appropriate lifelong metabolic 
programming. Epidemiological evidence underlines the crucial role of increased 
birth weight as a risk factor for the development of chronic diseases of 
civilization such as obesity, diabetes and cancer. Obstetricians and general 
practitioners usually recommend milk consumption during pregnancy as a nutrient 
enriched in valuable proteins and calcium for bone growth. However, milk is not 
just a simple nutrient, but has been recognized to function as an endocrine 
signaling system promoting anabolism and postnatal growth by activating the 
nutrient-sensitive kinase mTORC1. Moreover, pasteurized cow's milk transfers 
biologically active exosomal microRNAs into the systemic circulation of the milk 
consumer apparently affecting more than 11,000 human genes including the 
mTORC1-signaling pathway. This review provides literature evidence and evidence 
derived from translational research that milk consumption during pregnancy 
increases gestational, placental, fetal and birth weight. Increased birth weight 
is a risk factor for the development of diseases of civilization thus involving 
key disciplines of medicine. With regard to the presented evidence we suggest 
that dietary recommendations promoting milk consumption during pregnancy have to 
be re-evaluated.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-014-0377-9
PMCID: PMC4302093
PMID: 25592553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]