1. FEBS J. 2015 Mar;282(6):1031-42. doi: 10.1111/febs.13200. Epub 2015 Feb 6.

Structural and biochemical characterization of VIM-26 shows that Leu224 has 
implications for the substrate specificity of VIM metallo-β-lactamases.

Leiros HK(1), Edvardsen KS, Bjerga GE, Samuelsen Ø.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Structural Biology Centre, Department of Chemistry, UiT The Arctic 
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

During the last decades antimicrobial resistance has become a global health 
problem. Metallo-β-lactamases (MBLs) which are broad-spectrum β-lactamases that 
inactivate virtually all β-lactams including carbapenems, are contributing to 
this health problem. In this study a novel MBL variant, termed VIM-26, 
identified in a Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate was studied. VIM-26 belongs to the 
Verona integron-encoded metallo-β-lactamase (VIM) family of MBLs and is a 
His224Leu variant of the well-characterized VIM-1 variant. In this study, we 
report the kinetic parameters, minimum inhibitory concentrations and crystal 
structures of a recombinant VIM-26 protein, and compare them to previously 
published data on VIM-1, VIM-2 and VIM-7. The kinetic parameters and minimum 
inhibitory concentration determinations show that VIM-26, like VIM-7, has higher 
penicillinase activity but lower cephalosporinase activity than VIM-1 and VIM-2. 
The four determined VIM-26 crystal structures revealed mono- and di-zinc forms, 
where the Zn1 ion has distorted tetrahedral coordination geometry with an 
additional water molecule (W2) at a distance of 2.6-3.7 Å, which could be 
important during catalysis. The R2 drug binding site in VIM-26 is more open 
compared to VIM-2 and VIM-7 and neutrally charged due to Leu224 and Ser228. 
Thus, the VIM-26 drug binding properties are different from the VIM-2 
(Tyr224/Arg228) and VIM-7 (His224/Arg228) structures, indicating a role of these 
residues in the substrate specificity.

© 2015 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13200
PMID: 25601024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]