1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Jan 13;9:473-85. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S41349.
eCollection  2015.

Tacrolimus in preventing transplant rejection in Chinese patients--optimizing 
use.

Li CJ(1), Li L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Tacrolimus is a product of fermentation of Streptomyces, and belongs to the 
family of calcineurin inhibitors. It is a widely used immunosuppressive drug for 
preventing solid-organ transplant rejection. Compared to cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus has greater immunosuppressive potency and a lower incidence of side 
effects. It has been accepted as first-line treatment after liver and kidney 
transplantation. Tacrolimus has specific features in Chinese transplant 
patients; its in vivo pharmacokinetics, treatment regimen, dose and 
administration, and adverse-effect profile are influenced by multiple factors, 
such as genetics and the spectrum of primary diseases in the Chinese population. 
We reviewed the clinical experience of tacrolimus use in Chinese liver- and 
kidney-transplant patients, including the pharmacology of tacrolimus, the 
immunosuppressive effects of tacrolimus versus cyclosporine, effects of 
different factors on tacrolimus metabolism on Chinese patients, personalized 
medicine, clinical safety profile, and patient satisfaction and adherence. This 
article provides guidance for the rational and efficient use of tacrolimus in 
Chinese organ-transplant patients.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S41349
PMCID: PMC4298305
PMID: 25609922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]