1. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 22;10(1):e0115353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115353. 
eCollection 2015.

Epigenetic and genetic alterations affect the WWOX gene in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Ekizoglu S(1), Bulut P(1), Karaman E(2), Kilic E(2), Buyru N(1).

Author information:
(1)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Medical 
Biology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Istanbul, Turkey.

Different types of genetic and epigenetic changes are associated with HNSCC. The 
molecular mechanisms of HNSCC carcinogenesis are still undergoing intensive 
investigation. WWOX gene expression is altered in many cancers and in a recent 
work reduced WWOX expression has been associated with miR-134 expression in 
HNSCC. In this study we investigated the WWOX messenger RNA expression levels in 
association with the promoter methylation of the WWOX gene and miR-134 
expression levels in 80 HNSCC tumor and non-cancerous tissue samples. Our 
results show that WWOX expression is down-regulated especially in advanced-stage 
tumor samples or in tumors with SCC. This down-regulation was associated with 
methylation of the WWOX promoter region but not with miR-134 expression. There 
was an inverse correlation between the expression level and promoter 
methylation. We also analyzed whole exons and exon/intron boundries of the WWOX 
gene by direct sequencing. In our study group we observed 10 different 
alterations in the coding sequences and 18 different alterations in the 
non-coding sequences of the WWOX gene in HNSCC tumor samples. These results 
indicate that the WWOX gene can be functionally inactivated by promoter 
methylation, epigenetically or by mutations affecting the sequences coding for 
the enzymatic domain of the gene, functionally. We conclude that inactivation of 
WWOX gene contributes to the progression of HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115353
PMCID: PMC4303423
PMID: 25612104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.