1. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jun;36(6):4575-82. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3102-2. Epub 2015
 Jan 23.

Associations of polymorphisms in microRNAs with female breast cancer risk in 
Chinese population.

He B(1), Pan Y, Xu Y, Deng Q, Sun H, Gao T, Wang S.

Author information:
(1)Central Laboratory, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, 210006, China.

Polymorphisms in microRNA (miRNA) have been discussed to be associated with 
breast cancer risk; however, the conclusions were always inconsistent in 
different ethnicities. This case-control study enrolled 450 breast cancer cases, 
and 450 health controls was carried out to investigate the association between 
six polymorphisms in miRNAs and breast cancer risk. Sequenom MassARRAY was used 
to detect the polymorphisms in miRNAs, and the immunohistochemistry assay was 
applied to detect the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone 
receptor (PR) in cancer tissue. The data showed that the 3746444 GG was 
associated with increased breast cancer risk (adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 1.71, 
95 % confidence interval (CI) = 1.16-2.52) and that rs2292832 CC (adjusted 
OR = 0.54, 95 % CI = 0.34-0.85) was associated with decreased breast cancer 
risk. In addition, menopausal status subgroup analysis revealed that rs3746444 
GG (adjusted OR = 2.34, 95 % CI = 1.31-4.15) and GA/GG (adjusted OR = 1.60, 95 % 
CI = 1.08-2.37) genotypes were associated with increased breast cancer risk for 
the subgroup of women with premenopausal status, respectively. Moreover, 
rs2910164 GG (adjusted OR = 1.84, 95 % CI = 1.07-3.15) and CG/GG (adjusted 
OR = 1.47, 95 % CI = 1.01-2.15) genotypes were associated with increased breast 
cancer risk in the postmenopausal status subcohort, respectively. Furthermore, 
rs3746444 AG (adjusted OR = 1.61, 95 % CI = 1.06-2.45) and AG/GG (adjusted 
OR = 1.49, 95 % CI = 1.02-2.18) genotypes were observed to be associated with 
increased risk of lymph node involvement and breast cancer with negative PR 
expression, separately. In short, rs3746444 was associated with breast cancer 
risk, especially for women with premenopausal status, and rs2910164 CG and CG/GG 
genotypes were associated with breast cancer risk for the women with 
premenopausal status.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-3102-2
PMID: 25613069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]