1. J Gen Physiol. 2015 Feb;145(2):155-62. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201411268.

A surface plasmon resonance approach to monitor toxin interactions with an 
isolated voltage-gated sodium channel paddle motif.

Martin-Eauclaire MF(1), Ferracci G(1), Bosmans F(2), Bougis PE(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre de Recherche en 
Neurobiologie et Neurophysiologie de Marseillle, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7286, 
Plates-Formes de Recherche en Neurosciences-Centre d'Analyse Protéomique de 
Marseille, Aix Marseille Université, 13344 Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Physiology and Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, 
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 Department of 
Physiology and Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins 
University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 frankbosmans@jhmi.edu 
pierre-edouard.bougis@univ-amu.fr.
(3)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Centre de Recherche en 
Neurobiologie et Neurophysiologie de Marseillle, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7286, 
Plates-Formes de Recherche en Neurosciences-Centre d'Analyse Protéomique de 
Marseille, Aix Marseille Université, 13344 Marseille, France 
frankbosmans@jhmi.edu pierre-edouard.bougis@univ-amu.fr.

Animal toxins that inhibit voltage-gated sodium (Na(v)) channel fast 
inactivation can do so through an interaction with the S3b-S4 helix-turn-helix 
region, or paddle motif, located in the domain IV voltage sensor. Here, we used 
surface plasmon resonance (SPR), an optical approach that uses polarized light 
to measure the refractive index near a sensor surface to which a molecule of 
interest is attached, to analyze interactions between the isolated domain IV 
paddle and Na(v) channel-selective α-scorpion toxins. Our SPR analyses showed 
that the domain IV paddle can be removed from the Na(v) channel and immobilized 
on sensor chips, and suggest that the isolated motif remains susceptible to 
animal toxins that target the domain IV voltage sensor. As such, our results 
uncover the inherent pharmacological sensitivities of the isolated domain IV 
paddle motif, which may be exploited to develop a label-free SPR approach for 
discovering ligands that target this region.

© 2015 Martin-Eauclaire et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.201411268
PMCID: PMC4306711
PMID: 25624450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]