1. Gene. 2015 Apr 15;560(2):143-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.01.055. Epub 2015 Jan
 29.

System study of MPO promoter high-frequency polymorphic variants on 
transcription factor network.

Najafi M(1), Mohammadi P(2).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Biochemistry Department, Iran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: 
nbsmmsbn@iums.ac.ir.
(2)Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

The neutrophil myeloperoxidase (MPO) promotes the oxidative stress by the 
production of active chlorinated molecules. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the association between MPO promoter polymorphic variants (rs2243827 
and rs2333227) and, its serum level in patients with the stenosis of coronary 
arteries. Furthermore, a system approach was applied to create the MPO 
transcription factor network. A total of one hundred fifty six subjects 
(controls, stenosis<5%, n=71 and patients, stenosis>70%, n=85) undergoing 
coronary angiography were recruited. The polymorphic haplotypes and serum MPO 
level were identified using ARMS-PCR and ELISA techniques, respectively. The MPO 
transcription factor network was primarily created with PSICQUIC and ChIP data 
and, was improved with the predicted transcription factors. The regression 
analyses did not show an association between the serum MPO level and the extent 
of stenosis in coronary arteries. The network showed that the predicted 
transcription factors at the flanking regions of polymorphic variants are not 
directly interacted to MPO. In conclusion, the population and prediction studies 
showed no association between the serum MPO level, the promoter high-frequency 
polymorphic frequencies and the extent of stenosis in coronary arteries. A gene 
sub-cluster with MYB as central node was suggested to be involved with MPO on 
the transcription factor network.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.01.055
PMID: 25637720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]