1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 2;10(2):e0115475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115475. 
eCollection 2015.

Houttuynia cordata targets the beginning stage of herpes simplex virus 
infection.

Hung PY(1), Ho BC(2), Lee SY(1), Chang SY(3), Kao CL(3), Lee SS(4), Lee CN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan; NTU Center for 
Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei 100, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan; Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(4)School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 
100, Taiwan.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV), a common latent virus in humans, causes certain 
severe diseases. Extensive use of acyclovir (ACV) results in the development of 
drug-resistant HSV strains, hence, there is an urgent need to develop new drugs 
to treat HSV infection. Houttuynia cordata (H. cordata), a natural herbal 
medicine, has been reported to exhibit anti-HSV effects which is partly 
NF-κB-dependent. However, the molecular mechanisms by which H. cordata inhibits 
HSV infection are not elucidated thoroughly. Here, we report that H. cordata 
water extracts (HCWEs) inhibit the infection of HSV-1, HSV-2, and 
acyclovir-resistant HSV-1 mainly via blocking viral binding and penetration in 
the beginning of infection. HCWEs also suppress HSV replication. Furthermore, 
HCWEs attenuate the first-wave of NF-κB activation, which is essential for viral 
gene expressions. Further analysis of six compounds in HCWEs revealed that 
quercetin and isoquercitrin inhibit NF-κB activation and additionally, quercetin 
also has an inhibitory effect on viral entry. These results indicate that HCWEs 
can inhibit HSV infection through multiple mechanisms and could be a potential 
lead for development of new drugs for treating HSV.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115475
PMCID: PMC4314066
PMID: 25643242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.