1. Cytokine. 2015 Apr;72(2):154-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.12.021. Epub 2015 Jan
 31.

Common genetic variant on BMP4 contributes to colorectal adenoma and cancer: A 
meta-analysis based on 15 studies.

Zhou L(1), Xie J(1), Gu EL(1), Huang Y(1), Qu Y(1), Xu AP(1), Zhu Y(1), Wang 
H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jing'an District Centre Hospital of Shanghai 
(Huashan Hospital Fudan University Jing'an Branch), 200040, PR China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Jing'an District Centre Hospital of Shanghai 
(Huashan Hospital Fudan University Jing'an Branch), 200040, PR China. Electronic 
address: hong_wang001@126.com.

Epidemiological studies indicate a genetic contribution to colorectal cancer 
(CRC), but specific genetic variants remain unknown. Genome-wide association 
studies have identified rs4444235 at BMP4 as a new colorectal cancer (CRC) and 
colorectal adenoma (CRA) susceptibility locus in populations of European 
descent. After that, several validation studies have been conducted among 
various ethnic populations to investigate if the SNP was associated with 
CRC/CRA, but the results have been inconsistent. To investigate this 
inconsistency and derive a more precise estimation of the relationship, a 
meta-analysis involving 54,631 CRC cases, 3995 CRA cases and 88,098 controls 
from 15 studies was performed. Potential sources of heterogeneity including 
ethnicity, sample size, study design and endpoint were also assessed. Overall, 
the summary OR of CRC was 1.06 (95% CI: 1.04-1.08, P<10(-5)). In the subgroup 
analysis by ethnicity, significantly increased risks were found in East Asians 
(OR=1.07, 95% CI: 1.01-1.12, P=0.01) and Caucasians (OR=1.07, 95% CI: 1.05-1.10, 
P<10(-5)); while no significant associations were found among African Americans 
and other ethnic populations in all genetic models. In addition, significant 
associations were also detected for CRA with per-allele OR of 1.09 (95% CI: 
1.03-1.14, P=0.001). Our findings demonstrated that BMP4-rs4444235 is a risk 
factor associated with increased CRC and CRA susceptibility, but these 
associations vary in different ethnic populations.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.12.021
PMID: 25647270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]