1. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):5547-66. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2587.

Gain of function mutant p53 proteins cooperate with E2F4 to transcriptionally 
downregulate RAD17 and BRCA1 gene expression.

Valenti F(1), Ganci F(1), Fontemaggi G(1), Sacconi A(1), Strano S(2), Blandino 
G(1), Di Agostino S(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Oncogenomic Unit, Molecular Medicine Area, Regina Elena 
National Cancer Institute, Rome 00144, Italy.
(2)Molecular Chemoprevention Group, Molecular Medicine Area, Regina Elena 
National Cancer Institute, Rome 00144, Italy.

Genomic instability (IN) is a common feature of many human cancers. The TP53 
tumour suppressor gene is mutated in approximately half of human cancers. Here, 
we show that BRCA1 and RAD17 genes, whose derived proteins play a pivotal role 
in DNA damage repair, are transcriptional targets of gain-of-function mutant p53 
proteins. Indeed, high levels of mutp53 protein facilitate DNA damage 
accumulation and severely impair BRCA1 and RAD17 expression in proliferating 
cancer cells. The recruitment of mutp53/E2F4 complex onto specific regions of 
BRCA1 and RAD17 promoters leads to the inhibition of their expression. BRCA1 and 
RAD17 mRNA expression is reduced in HNSCC patients carrying TP53 mutations when 
compared to those bearing wt-p53 gene. Furthermore, the analysis of gene 
expression databases for breast cancer patients reveals that low expression of 
DNA repair genes correlates significantly with reduced relapse free survival of 
patients carrying TP53 gene mutations. Collectively, these findings highlight 
the direct involvement of transcriptionally active gain of function mutant p53 
proteins in genomic instability through the impairment of DNA repair mechanisms.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2587
PMCID: PMC4467386
PMID: 25650659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.