1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Feb;94(5):e479. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000479.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a negative risk factor for colorectal cancer 
prognosis.

You J(1), Huang S, Huang GQ, Zhu GQ, Ma RM, Liu WY, Shi KQ, Guo GL, Chen YP, 
Braddock M, Zheng MH.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Oncological Surgery (JY, R-MM,G-LG); Department of 
Infection and Liver Diseases, Liver Research Center, the First Affiliated 
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University (SH, G-QH, G-QZ, W-YL, K-QS, Y-PC, M-HZ); 
School of the First Clinical Medical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University (SH, 
G-QZ); Renji School of Wenzhou Medical University (G-QH); Department of 
Endocrinology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University 
(W-YL); Institute of Hepatology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China 
(K-QS, Y-PC, M-HZ); Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca R&D, Loughborough, 
United Kingdom (MB).

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is known to be associated with an 
increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the relationship between 
NAFLD and the prognosis of CRC remains unclear. The primary objective of this 
study was to evaluate the overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) 
rates in patients with CRC and the secondary objective was to compare 
clinicopathologic variables which were stratified by NAFLD. We performed a large 
cohort study of 1314 patients who were first diagnosed with CRC between January 
2006 and April 2011. Postoperative follow-up data were collected from 
out-patient medical records, telephone consultations, and social security death 
indices. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to calculate the cumulative survival 
rate. Clinicopathologic variables were analyzed by univariate analysis and 
multivariate analysis through a Cox proportional hazard regression model. The 
mean follow-up time was 52.7 ± 25.3 months. Upon baseline comparison, the NAFLD 
group had significantly higher values of body mass index, triglycerides, and 
uric acid and significantly lower values of high-density lipoprotein, compared 
with the non-NAFLD group (P < 0.05 for all). There were no significant 
differences between the 2 groups with regard to tumor location, TNM staging, 
tumor differentiation, carcinoembryonic antigen, and vascular invasion. The 
cumulative 1-, 3-, and 5-year OS rates were 96.1%, 85.2%, and 80.6%, 
respectively, in the NAFLD group, which were statistically significantly higher 
than the OS rates of 91.6%, 76.2%, and 67.8%, respectively, in the non-NAFLD 
group (P = 0.075, P = 0.002, P = 0.030, respectively). There was no difference 
in DFS rates between the CRC patients with and without NAFLD (P = 0.267). 
Multivariate analysis showed that the presence of NAFLD was an independent 
negative risk factor for OS after adjusting for clinicopathologic covariates 
(hazard ratio = 0.593; 95% confidence interval 0.442, 0.921; P = 0.020), but not 
for DFS (P = 0.270). NAFLD may play a protective role in OS for CRC patients. 
Further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of putative 
protective effects in CRC patients with NAFLD.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000479
PMCID: PMC4602729
PMID: 25654388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest.