1. J Neurosci Res. 2015 Jul;93(7):1101-8. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23548. Epub 2015 Feb
6.

Effects of γ-Aminobutyric acid transporter 1 inhibition by tiagabine on brain 
glutamate and γ-Aminobutyric acid metabolism in the anesthetized rat In vivo.

Patel AB(1)(2), de Graaf RA(1), Rothman DL(1), Behar KL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and the Magnetic Resonance Research 
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and the Magnetic Resonance Research Center, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.

γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) clearance from the extracellular space after release 
from neurons involves reuptake into terminals and astrocytes through GABA 
transporters (GATs). The relative flows through these two pathways for GABA 
released from neurons remains unclear. This study determines the effect of 
tiagabine, a selective inhibitor of neuronal GAT-1, on the rates of glutamate 
(Glu) and GABA metabolism and GABA resynthesis via the GABA-glutamine (Gln) 
cycle. Halothane-anesthetized rats were administered tiagabine (30 mg/kg, i.p.) 
and 45 min later received an intravenous infusion of either [1,6-(13)C2]glucose 
(in vivo) or [2-(13)C]acetate (ex vivo). Nontreated rats served as controls. 
Metabolites and (13)C enrichments were measured with (1)H-[(13)C]-nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy and referenced to their corresponding endpoint 
values measured in extracts from in situ frozen brain. Metabolic flux estimates 
of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons were determined by fitting a metabolic 
model to the (13)C turnover data measured in vivo during [1,6-(13)C2]glucose 
infusion. Tiagabine-treated rats were indistinguishable (P > 0.05) from controls 
in tissue amino acid levels and in (13)C enrichments from [2-(13)C]acetate. 
Tiagabine reduced average rates of glucose oxidation and neurotransmitter 
cycling in both glutamatergic neurons (↓18%, CMR(glc(ox)Glu): control, 0.27 ± 
0.05 vs. tiagabine, 0.22 ± 0.04 µmol/g/min; ↓11%, V(cyc(Glu-Gln)): control 0.23 
± 0.05 vs. tiagabine 0.21 ± 0.04 µmol/g/min and GABAergic neurons (↓18-25%, 
CMR(glc(ox)GABA): control 0.09 ± 0.02 vs. tiagabine 0.07 ± 0.03 µmol/g/min; 
V(cyc(GABA-Gln)): control 0.08 ± 0.02 vs. tiagabine 0.07 ± 0.03 µmol/g/min), but 
the changes in glutamatergic and GABAergic fluxes were not significant (P > 
0.10). The results suggest that any reduction in GABA metabolism by tiagabine 
might be an indirect response to reduced glutamatergic drive rather than direct 
compensatory effects.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23548
PMCID: PMC4441585
PMID: 25663257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest 
related to this work.