1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Sep;21(4):881-5. doi: 10.1007/s12253-015-9905-z. Epub 
2015 Feb 8.

Susceptibility to Colorectal Cancer and Two Genetic Polymorphisms of XRCC4.

Emami N(1), Saadat I, Omidvari S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, College of Sciences, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 71454, 
Iran.

The X-ray complementing group 4 (XRCC4, OMIM: 194363) plays a key role in 
non-homologous end-joining DNA repair pathway in mammalian cells. This pathway 
is believed to help maintain genomic stability. In the present study, it is 
hypothesized that genetic polymorphisms in the NHEJ repair XRCC4 gene may be 
associated with an increased risk in developing colorectal cancer (CRC). We 
genotyped two polymorphisms of XRCC4, G-1394T (rs6869366) and intron 3 
insertion/deletion (I/D; rs28360071) in 200 colorectal cancer patients as well 
as 256 healthy individuals, and evaluated their association with CRC. We found 
that in G-1394T polymorphism, neither the TG nor the GG genotypes (versus the TT 
genotype) were associated with the risk of developing CRC. The results of our 
study indicate that in comparison with the II genotype, ID and DD genotypes had 
no significant association with the risk of developing CRC. Subjects with TT 
genotype and positive family history in colorectal cancer were found to be at a 
much lower risk of developing CRC in comparison with the reference group (OR = 
0.31, 95%CI: 0.11-0.85, P =  .023). It should be noted that participants having 
at least one G allele (TG+GG genotypes) were at a significantly higher risk to 
develop the disease compared with the reference group (OR = 9.10, 95%CI: 
2.00-41.3, P = 0.004). In relation to I/D polymorphism, among participants, 
those with positive family history, either with ID (OR =  .78, 95%CI: 2.26-10.0, 
P < 0.001) or DD genotypes (OR = 5.73, 95%CI: 1.99-16.4, P = 0.001) had a 
significantly association with the disease. Among participants with a positive 
family history in CRC, the haplotype GD dramatically increased the risk of 
developing CRC (OR = 10.2, 95%CI: 2.28-46, P = 0.002). The results of this study 
indicate that G-1394T and I/D polymorphisms of XRCC4 among individuals with 
positive family history for colorectal cancer substantially increase the risk 
factor for developing colorectal cancers.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-015-9905-z
PMID: 25662981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]