1. Biol Open. 2015 Feb 6;4(3):267-75. doi: 10.1242/bio.201411114.

Rab40C is a novel Varp-binding protein that promotes proteasomal degradation of 
Varp in melanocytes.

Yatsu A(1), Shimada H(1), Ohbayashi N(2), Fukuda M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Trafficking Mechanisms, Department of Developmental 
Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 
Aobayama, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Membrane Trafficking Mechanisms, Department of Developmental 
Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 
Aobayama, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan nori@m.tohoku.ac.jp 
n.ohbayashi@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

Varp (VPS9-ankyrin repeat protein) was originally identified as an activator of 
small GTPase Rab21 through its VPS9 domain, but it has subsequently been shown 
to function as a Rab32/38 effector through its first ANKR1 domain. Although 
these functions of Varp are important for melanogenesis, Varp contains a second 
ANKR2 domain, whose function remained completely unknown. Here we identified 
Rab40C, an atypical Rab containing a SOCS box that recruits a ubiquitin ligase 
complex, as a novel ANKR2-binding protein and investigated its involvement in 
melanogenic enzyme trafficking in melanocytes. The results showed that 
overexpression of Rab40C in melanocytes caused a dramatic reduction in 
melanogenic enzyme Tyrp1 signals by promoting proteasomal degradation of Varp in 
a SOCS-box-dependent manner and that knockdown of Rab40C in melanocytes caused 
an increase in the amount of Varp. Intriguingly, Rab40C knockdown also caused a 
dramatic reduction in Tyrp1 signals, the same as Varp overexpression did. These 
findings indicated that Rab40C is a previously unexpected regulator of Tyrp1 
trafficking in melanocytes through controlling the proteasomal degradation of 
Varp.

Â© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.201411114
PMCID: PMC4359733
PMID: 25661869

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.