1. Biochemistry. 2015 Feb 24;54(7):1505-15. doi: 10.1021/bi501526s. Epub 2015 Feb
 11.

Mode of binding of the cyclic agonist peptide TC14012 to CXCR7: identification 
of receptor and compound determinants.

Montpas N(1), Cabana J, St-Onge G, Gravel S, Morin G, Kuroyanagi T, Lavigne P, 
Fujii N, Oishi S, Heveker N.

Author information:
(1)Research Centre, Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of Montreal , Montréal 
H3T 1C5, Canada.

The chemokine receptor CXCR7 is an atypical CXCL12 receptor that, as opposed to 
the classical CXCL12 receptor CXCR4, signals preferentially via the β-arrestin 
pathway and does not mediate chemotaxis. We previously reported that the cyclic 
peptide TC14012, a potent CXCR4 antagonist, also engaged CXCR7, albeit with 
lower potency. Surprisingly, the compound activated the CXCR7-arrestin pathway. 
The reason underlying the opposite effects of TC14012 on CXCR4 and CXCR7, and 
the mode of binding of TC14012 to CXCR7, remained unclear. The mode of binding 
of TC14012 to CXCR4 is known from cocrystallization of its analogue CVX15 with 
CXCR4. We here report the the mode of binding of TC14012 to CXCR7 by combining 
the use of compound analogues, receptor mutants, and molecular modeling. We find 
that the mode of binding of TC14012 to CXCR7 is indeed similar to that of CVX15 
to CXCR4, with compound positions Arg2 and Arg14 engaging CXCR7 key residues 
D179(4.60) (on the tip of transmembrane domain 4) and D275(6.58) (on the tip of 
transmembrane domain 6), respectively. Interestingly, the TC14012 parent 
compound T140 is not a CXCR7 agonist, because of conformational constraints in 
its pharmacophore, which in TC14012 are relieved through C-terminal amidation. 
However, an engineered salt bridge between the CXCR7 ECL2 substitution R197D and 
compound residue Arg1 permitted T140 agonism by repositioning the compound in 
the binding pocket. In conclusion, our results show that the opposite effect of 
TC14012 on CXCR4 and CXCR7 is not explained by different binding modes. Rather, 
engagement of the interface between transmembrane domains and extracellular 
loops readily triggers CXCR7, but not CXCR4, activation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi501526s
PMID: 25669416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]