1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Feb 27;43(4):2271-81. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv079. Epub
2015  Feb 6.

Complementation of aprataxin deficiency by base excision repair enzymes.

Çağlayan M(1), Horton JK(1), Prasad R(1), Wilson SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, 111 
T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Biology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, 111 
T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA 
wilson5@niehs.nih.gov.

Abortive ligation during base excision repair (BER) leads to blocked repair 
intermediates containing a 5'-adenylated-deoxyribose phosphate (5'-AMP-dRP) 
group. Aprataxin (APTX) is able to remove the AMP group allowing repair to 
proceed. Earlier results had indicated that purified DNA polymerase β (pol β) 
removes the entire 5'-AMP-dRP group through its lyase activity and flap 
endonuclease 1 (FEN1) excises the 5'-AMP-dRP group along with one or two 
nucleotides. Here, using cell extracts from APTX-deficient cell lines, human 
Ataxia with Oculomotor Apraxia Type 1 (AOA1) and DT40 chicken B cell, we found 
that pol β and FEN1 enzymatic activities were prominent and strong enough to 
complement APTX deficiency. In addition, pol β, APTX and FEN1 coordinate with 
each other in processing of the 5'-adenylated dRP-containing BER intermediate. 
Finally, other DNA polymerases and a repair factor with dRP lyase activity (pol 
λ, pol ι, pol θ and Ku70) were found to remove the 5'-adenylated-dRP group from 
the BER intermediate. However, the activities of these enzymes were weak 
compared with those of pol β and FEN1.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015. 
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public 
domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv079
PMCID: PMC4344515
PMID: 25662216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]