1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Apr;99(8):3715-28. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-014-6206-5. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Biosynthesis and genomic analysis of medium-chain hydrocarbon production by the 
endophytic fungal isolate Nigrograna mackinnonii E5202H.

Shaw JJ(1), Spakowicz DJ, Dalal RS, Davis JH, Lehr NA, Dunican BF, Orellana EA, 
Narv√°ez-Trujillo A, Strobel SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, 06511, USA.

An endophytic fungus was isolated that produces a series of volatile natural 
products, including terpenes and odd chain polyenes. Phylogenetic analysis of 
the isolate using five loci suggests that it is closely related to Nigrograna 
mackinnonii CBS 674.75. The main component of the polyene series was purified 
and identified as (3E,5E,7E)-nona-1,3,5,7-tetraene (NTE), a novel natural 
product. Non-oxygenated hydrocarbons of this chain length are uncommon and 
desirable as gasoline-surrogate biofuels. The biosynthetic pathway for NTE 
production was explored using metabolic labeling and gas chromatography time of 
flight mass spectometer (GCMS). Two-carbon incorporation (13)C acetate suggests 
that it is derived from a polyketide synthase (PKS) followed by decarboxylation. 
There are several known mechanisms for such decarboxylation, though none have 
been discovered in fungi. Towards identifying the PKS responsible for the 
production of NTE, the genome of N. mackinnonii E5202H (ATCC SD-6839) was 
sequenced and assembled. Of the 32 PKSs present in the genome, 17 are predicted 
to contain sufficient domains for the production of NTE. These results exemplify 
the capacity of endophytic fungi to produce novel natural products that may have 
many uses, such as biologically derived fuels and commodity chemicals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-014-6206-5
PMCID: PMC4667366
PMID: 25672844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]