1. Sci Signal. 2015 Feb 10;8(363):ra14. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005735.

Ski regulates Hippo and TAZ signaling to suppress breast cancer progression.

Rashidian J(1), Le Scolan E(1), Ji X(1), Zhu Q(1), Mulvihill MM(2), Nomura D(2), 
Luo K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(2)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. kluo@berkeley.edu.

Ski, the transforming protein of the avian Sloan-Kettering retrovirus, inhibits 
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)/Smad signaling and displays both 
pro-oncogenic and anti-oncogenic activities in human cancer. Inhibition of TGF-β 
signaling is likely responsible for the pro-oncogenic activity of Ski. We 
investigated the mechanism(s) underlying the tumor suppressor activity of Ski 
and found that Ski suppressed the activity of the Hippo signaling effectors TAZ 
and YAP to inhibit breast cancer progression. TAZ and YAP are transcriptional 
coactivators that can contribute to cancer by promoting proliferation, 
tumorigenesis, and cancer stem cell expansion. Hippo signaling activates the the 
Lats family of kinases, which phosphorylate TAZ and YAP, resulting in 
cytoplasmic retention and degradation and inhibition of their transcriptional 
activity. We showed that Ski interacted with multiple components of the Hippo 
pathway to facilitate activation of Lats2, resulting in increased 
phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of TAZ. Ski also promoted the 
degradation of a constitutively active TAZ mutant that is not phosphorylated by 
Lats, suggesting the existence of a Lats2-independent degradation pathway. 
Finally, we showed that Ski repressed the transcriptional activity of TAZ by 
binding to the TAZ partner TEAD and recruiting the transcriptional co-repressor 
NCoR1 to the TEAD-TAZ complex. Ski effectively reversed transformation and 
epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition in cultured breast cancer cells and 
metastasis in TAZ-expressing xenografted tumors. Thus, Ski inhibited the 
function of TAZ through multiple mechanisms in human cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.2005735
PMCID: PMC4457509
PMID: 25670202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.