1. Front Oncol. 2015 Jan 28;5:2. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00002. eCollection 2015.

The Potential of panHER Inhibition in Cancer.

Wang X(1), Batty KM(1), Crowe PJ(1), Goldstein D(2), Yang JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Nano-Oncology Group, Adult Cancer Program, Lowy Cancer Research 
Centre, Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales (UNSW) , 
Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Department of Surgery, Prince of Wales Clinical 
School, University of New South Wales (UNSW) , Sydney, NSW , Australia.
(2)Sarcoma Nano-Oncology Group, Adult Cancer Program, Lowy Cancer Research 
Centre, Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Wales (UNSW) , 
Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales 
Clinical School, University of New South Wales (UNSW) , Sydney, NSW , Australia.

PURPOSE: Hyper-activation of the HER (erbB) family receptors, HER 1-4, leads to 
up-regulation of the three vital signaling pathways: mitogen activated protein 
kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT, and Janus kinase/signal transducer and 
activator of transcription pathways. Blocking HER1/EGFR has a limited anticancer 
effect due to either secondary mutation e.g., T790M or by-pass signaling of 
other HER members. The emergence of an anti-panHER approach to blockade of these 
pathways as a cancer treatment may provide a solution to this resistance. This 
review aimed to provide an overview of the HER signaling pathways and their 
involvement in tumor progression and examine the current progress in panHER 
inhibition.
METHODS: Recent literature associated with HER signaling pathways and panHER 
inhibition was reviewed through PubMed and Medline database, followed by 
critical comparison and analysis.
RESULTS: Pre-clinical studies and clinical trials of panHER inhibitors show 
promising results, and the potential to improve patient outcomes in solid 
cancers.
CONCLUSION: â€‰The use of panHER inhibitors in cancers with HER-family 
hyper-activation, such as other epithelial cancers and sarcoma, is a new 
direction to research and has potential in clinical cancer therapy in the 
future.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00002
PMCID: PMC4309158
PMID: 25674538