1. J Adv Res. 2014 Sep;5(5):595-600. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2013.08.003. Epub 2013
Aug  22.

Pilot study on molecular quantitation and sequencing of endometrial cytokines 
gene expression and their effect on the outcome of in vitro fertilization (IVF) 
cycle.

Sabry D(1), Nouh O(2), Marzouk S(1), Hassouna A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Cairo University, Egypt.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, Egypt.

Human trophoblast invasion and differentiation are essential for successful 
pregnancy outcome. The molecular mechanisms, however, are poorly understood. 
Interleukin (IL)-11, a cytokine, regulates endometrial epithelial cell adhesion. 
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is one of the key cytokines in the embryo 
implantation regulation. The present study aimed to assess the levels of LIF, 
IL-11, and IL-11 α receptor gene expression in the endometrium of women 
undergoing IVF and correlate their levels with the IVF pregnancy outcome. Also, 
the study aimed to detect any mutation in these three genes among IVF pregnant 
and non-pregnant women versus control menstrual blood of fertile women. 
Endometrial tissue biopsies were taken from 15 women undergoing IVF on the day 
of oocyte retrieval. The quantitative expression of IL-11, IL-11Rα, and LIF 
genes was assessed by real-time PCR and PCR products were sequenced. Menstrual 
blood from 10 fertile women was used as control to compare the DNA sequence 
versus DNA sequence of the studied genes in endometrial biopsies. LH, FSH, and 
E2 were assessed for enrolled patients by ELISA. Endometrial thickness was also 
assessed by pelvic ultrasonography. No significant difference was detected 
between quantitative expression of the three studied genes and pregnancy IVF 
outcome. Although DNA sequence changes were found in IL-11 and LIF genes of 
women with negative pregnancy IVF outcome compared to women with positive 
pregnancy IVF outcome, no DNA sequence changes were detected for IL-11Rα. Other 
studied parameters (e.g., age, LH, FSH, E2, and endometrial thickness) showed no 
significant differences or correlation of quantitative expression of the three 
studied involved genes. Data suggested that there were no significant 
differences between quantitative expression of IL-11, IL-11Rα, and LIF genes and 
the IVF pregnancy outcome. The present study may reveal that changes in IL-11 
and LIF genes sequence may contribute in pregnancy IVF outcome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2013.08.003
PMCID: PMC4294313
PMID: 25685528