1. mBio. 2015 Feb 17;6(1):e02068-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02068-14.

E6^E7, a novel splice isoform protein of human papillomavirus 16, stabilizes 
viral E6 and E7 oncoproteins via HSP90 and GRP78.

Ajiro M(1), Zheng ZM(2).

Author information:
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology 
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
(2)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology 
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA zhengt@exchange.nih.gov.

Transcripts of human papillomavirus 16 (HPV16) E6 and E7 oncogenes undergo 
alternative RNA splicing to produce multiple splice isoforms. However, the 
importance of these splice isoforms is poorly understood. Here we report a 
critical role of E6^E7, a novel isoform containing the 41 N-terminal amino acid 
(aa) residues of E6 and the 38 C-terminal aa residues of E7, in the regulation 
of E6 and E7 stability. Through mass spectrometric analysis, we identified that 
HSP90 and GRP78, which are frequently upregulated in cervical cancer tissues, 
are two E6^E7-interacting proteins responsible for the stability and function of 
E6^E7, E6, and E7. Although GRP78 and HSP90 do not bind each other, GRP78, but 
not HSP90, interacts with E6 and E7. E6^E7 protein, in addition to self-binding, 
interacts with E6 and E7 in the presence of GRP78 and HSP90, leading to the 
stabilization of E6 and E7 by prolonging the half-life of each protein. Knocking 
down E6^E7 expression in HPV16-positive CaSki cells by a splice 
junction-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) destabilizes E6 and E7 and 
prevents cell growth. The same is true for the cells with a GRP78 knockdown or 
in the presence of an HSP90 inhibitor. Moreover, mapping and alignment analyses 
for splicing elements in 36 alpha-HPVs (α-HPVs) suggest the possible expression 
of E6^E7 mostly by other oncogenic or possibly oncogenic α-HPVs (HPV18, -30, 
-31, -39, -42, -45, -56, -59, -70, and -73). HPV18 E6^E7 is detectable in 
HPV18-positive HeLa cells and HPV18-infected raft tissues. All together, our 
data indicate that viral E6^E7 and cellular GRP78 or HSP90 might be novel 
targets for cervical cancer therapy.
IMPORTANCE: HPV16 is the most prevalent HPV genotype, being responsible for 60% 
of invasive cervical cancer cases worldwide. What makes HPV16 so potent in the 
development of cervical cancer remains a mystery. We discovered in this study 
that, besides producing two well-known oncoproteins, E6 and E7, seen in other 
high-risk HPVs, HPV16 produces E6^E7, a novel splice isoform of E6 and E7. 
E6^E7, in addition to self-interacting, binds cellular chaperone proteins, HSP90 
and GRP78, and viral E6 and E7 to increase the steady-state levels and 
half-lives of viral oncoproteins, leading to cell proliferation. The splicing 
cis elements in the regulation of HPV16 E6^E7 production are highly conserved in 
11 oncogenic or possibly oncogenic HPVs, and we confirmed the production of 
HPV18 E6^E7 in HPV18-infected cells. This study provides new insight into the 
mechanism of splicing, the interplay between different products of the 
polycistronic viral message, and the role of the host chaperones as they 
function.

Copyright © 2015 Ajiro and Zheng.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02068-14
PMCID: PMC4337564
PMID: 25691589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]