1. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 19;10(2):e0115994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115994. 
eCollection 2015.

A maternal high fat diet programmes endothelial function and cardiovascular 
status in adult male offspring independent of body weight, which is reversed by 
maternal conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) supplementation.

Gray C(1), Vickers MH(1), Segovia SA(1), Zhang XD(1), Reynolds CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Liggins Institute and Gravida: National Centre for Growth and Development, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0139567. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139567.

Maternal high fat intake during pregnancy and lactation can result in obesity 
and adverse cardio-metabolic status in offspring independent of postnatal diet. 
While it is clear that maternal high fat intake can cause hypertension in adult 
offspring, there is little evidence regarding the role of dietary interventions 
in terms of reversing these adverse effects. Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) is 
an omega 6 fatty acid with beneficial effects in obesity and metabolic status. 
However, the impact of CLA supplementation in the context of pregnancy disorders 
and high fat diet-induced developmental programming of offspring 
cardio-metabolic dysfunction has not been investigated. We have utilised a model 
of maternal overnutrition to examine the effects of CLA supplementation on 
programmed endothelial dysfunction during adulthood. Female Sprague-Dawley rats 
were fed either a purified control diet (CON) or purified control diet 
supplemented with 1% CLA (of total fat), a purified high fat (HF) diet (45%kcal 
from fat) and a purified HF diet supplemented with 1% CLA (of total fat) 
(HFCLA). All dams were fed ad libitum throughout pregnancy and lactation. 
Offspring were fed a standard chow diet from weaning (day 21) until the end of 
the study (day 150). Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured at day 85 and 
130 by tail cuff plethysmography. At day 150, offspring mesenteric vessels were 
mounted on a pressure myograph and vascular responses to agonist-induced 
constriction and endothelium-dependent vasodilators were investigated. SBP was 
increased at day 85 and 130 in HF and HFCLA adult male offspring compared to CON 
and CLA groups with no effect of CLA supplementation. An overall effect of a 
maternal HF diet was observed in adult male vessels with a reduced 
vasoconstrictor response to phenylephrine and blunted vasodilatory response to 
acetylcholine (ACh). Furthermore, HF and HFCLA offspring displayed a reduction 
in nitric oxide pathway function and an increased compensatory EDHF function 
when compared to CON and CLA groups. These data suggest that a maternal HF diet 
causes a developmental programming of endothelial dysfunction and hypertension 
in male offspring which can be partially improved by maternal CLA 
supplementation, independent of offspring body weight.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115994
PMCID: PMC4335063
PMID: 25695432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.