1. ASN Neuro. 2015 Feb 18;7(1):1759091415569910. doi: 10.1177/1759091415569910. 
Print 2015 Jan-Feb.

Control of human PLP1 expression through transcriptional regulatory elements and 
alternatively spliced exons in intron 1.

Hamdan H(1), Kockara NT(1), Jolly LA(1), Haun S(1), Wight PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA pwight@uams.edu.

Although the myelin proteolipid protein gene (PLP1) encodes the most abundant 
protein in central nervous system (CNS) myelin, not much is known about the 
mechanisms that govern expression of the human gene (hPLP1). Much more is known 
about the processes that regulate Plp1 gene expression in rodents. From studies 
with Plp1-lacZ transgenic mice, it was determined that the first intron of mouse 
Plp1 (mPlp1) is required to attain high levels of expression in brain, 
concurrent with the active myelination period. Other studies have suggested that 
within mPlp1 intron 1 (>8 kb) lie several regions with enhancer-like activity. 
To test whether these sequences (and possibly others) in hPLP1 intron 1 are 
functional, deletion-transfection analysis was performed with hPLP1-lacZ 
constructs that contain various portions of the intron, or lack it altogether. 
Results presented here demonstrate the importance of hPLP1 intron 1 in achieving 
maximal levels of expression in the immortalized oligodendroglial cell line, 
Oli-neu. Deletion analysis indicates that the intron contains multiple positive 
regulatory elements which are active in Oli-neu cells. Some of these elements 
appear to be functionally conserved between human and mouse, while others are 
not. Furthermore, our studies demonstrate that multiple splice variants can be 
formed due to inclusion of extra (supplementary) exons from what is classically 
thought of as hPLP1 intron 1. Thus, splicing of these novel exons (which are not 
recognized as such in mPlp1 due to lack of conserved splice sites) must utilize 
factors common to both human and mouse since Oli-neu cells are of mouse origin.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1759091415569910
PMCID: PMC4342368
PMID: 25694552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]