1. Gene Expr. 2015;16(3):137-44. doi: 10.3727/105221615X14181440065490.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in HIF-1α gene and residual ridge resorption 
(RRR) of mandible in Korean population.

Paek J(1), Oh Y, Kim J, Lee JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, Kyung Hee University Dental Hospital, Seoul, 
Korea.

Tooth extraction is a routine surgical procedure in dental treatment. As a wound 
healing process after tooth extraction, a saddle-shaped residual ridge forms due 
to bone formation in the extraction socket and localized bone resorption on the 
external surface of the jawbone. The residual ridge is subjected to continuous 
bone resorption with substantial differences among individuals. In some cases, 
it results in excessive bone atrophy, which complicates dental restorative 
treatment. This unique oral wound healing process may be influenced by factors 
that are specific to oral tissue. HIF expression is different in oral wound 
healing compared to that of skin wounds. The objective of this study was to 
examine a genetic association between SNP of the HIF-1α gene, which is known to 
have high genetic diversity, and the residual ridge resorption (RRR). Two 
hundred and two Korean subjects (70.80  ±  9.40 years) with partially or 
completely edentulous mandible were recruited, and edentulous mandibular bone 
height was measured following the protocol of the American College of 
Prosthodontists. The HIF-1α allele was directly sequenced in 24 subjects 
resulting in the variants over 5% frequency in 95% likelihood, whereas tag-SNPs 
were selected to perform analysis for the remaining population. Student's t-test 
and ANOVA were used for statistical analysis to examine the association between 
the SNPs and the RRR. Four novel variants were discovered, and a minor allele of 
rs11549467 was associated with the RRR of the subjects (p = 0.028). rs11549467 
increases HIF-1α transactivity, enhancing angiogenesis and increasing new vessel 
formation. Thus, rs11549467 may play an important role in the disturbed bone 
remodeling balance resulting in RRR. Results of this study may be useful in 
developing novel genetic diagnostic tests and identifying Koreans susceptible to 
developing excessive jawbone atrophy after dental extraction. Most importantly, 
early screening using genetic information will rescue susceptible patients from 
the vulnerable situation of excessive jawbone atrophy where no effective 
prosthetic treatment is available.

DOI: 10.3727/105221615X14181440065490
PMCID: PMC8750342
PMID: 25700369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]