1. Genomics Inform. 2014 Dec;12(4):283-8. doi: 10.5808/GI.2014.12.4.283. Epub
2014  Dec 31.

Elucidation of the Inhibitory Effect of Phytochemicals with Kir6.2 Wild-Type and 
Mutant Models Associated in Type-1 Diabetes through Molecular Docking Approach.

Jagadeb M(1), Konkimalla VB(2), Rath SN(1), Das RP(1).

Author information:
(1)BIF Centre, Department of Bioinformatics, Orissa University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Bhubaneswar 751003, India.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and 
Research, Bhubaneswar 751005, India.

Among all serious diseases globally, diabetes (type 1 and type 2) still poses a 
major challenge to the world population. Several target proteins have been 
identified, and the etiology causing diabetes has been reasonably well studied. 
But, there is still a gap in deciding on the choice of a drug, especially when 
the target is mutated. Mutations in the KCNJ11 gene, encoding the kir6.2 
channel, are reported to be associated with congenital hyperinsulinism, having a 
major impact in causing type 1 diabetes, and due to the lack of its 3D 
structure, an attempt has been made to predict the structure of kir6.2, applying 
fold recognition methods. The current work is intended to investigate the 
affinity of four phytochemicals namely, curcumin (Curcuma longa), genistein 
(Genista tinctoria), piperine (Piper nigrum), and pterostilbene (Vitis vinifera) 
in a normal as well as in a mutant kir6.2 model by adopting a molecular docking 
methodology. The phytochemicals were docked in both wild and mutated kir6.2 
models in two rounds: blind docking followed by ATP-binding pocket-specific 
docking. From the binding pockets, the common interacting amino acid residues 
participating strongly within the binding pocket were identified and compared. 
From the study, we conclude that these phytochemicals have strong affinity in 
both the normal and mutant kir6.2 model. This work would be helpful for further 
study of the phytochemicals above for the treatment of type 1 diabetes by 
targeting the kir6.2 channel.

DOI: 10.5808/GI.2014.12.4.283
PMCID: PMC4330267
PMID: 25705171