1. Recent Adv DNA Gene Seq. 2015;9(1):51-7. doi:
10.2174/2352092209666150223113334.

Schizophrenia-associated Risk and Protective Variants of c-Fos Encoding Gene.

Boyajyan A(1), Zakharyan R, Atshemyan S, Chavushyan A, Mkrtchyan G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Human Genomics and Immunomics, Department of Applied Molecular 
Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology NAS RA, Zip code: 0014, Yerevan, 
Republic of Armenia. aboyajyan@sci.am.

Defects in synaptic plasticity play a key role in pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia. Pathomechanisms responsible for synaptic plasticity alterations 
in schizophrenia are very complicated and not well defined. Transcription factor 
c-Fos plays an important role in regulation of synaptic plasticity. In the 
present study we evaluated the association of rs7101 and rs1063169 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of c-Fos encoding gene (FOS) with schizophrenia. 
A total of 604 DNA samples of schizophrenia-affected and healthy subjects of 
Armenian ancestry were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction with 
sequence-specific primers. Also, comparative determination of the blood levels 
of c-Fos protein in schizophrenia patients and controls was performed using the 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Potential interaction between protein level 
and genotypes as well as relationships between genotypes/protein level and 
clinical-demographic characteristics of schizophrenia patients were assessed. 
The results obtained demonstrated that mutant allele of FOS rs1063169 SNP is 
negatively associated with schizophrenia and may be nominated as a protective 
factor for this disorder. On the other hand, according to our results, the FOS 
rs7101T mutant allele is positively associated with schizophrenia and, 
therefore, may be considered as a risk factor for this disorder. In addition, 
decreased c-Fos plasma levels in schizophrenia patients compared to controls 
were found. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that FOS is among 
the candidate genes of schizophrenia and that changes in the expression of c-Fos 
protein may contribute to molecular pathomechanisms of schizophrenia-related 
alterations in synaptic plasticity.

DOI: 10.2174/2352092209666150223113334
PMID: 25706621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]