1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015 Sep;29(9):1786-90. doi: 10.1111/jdv.13024. 
Epub 2015 Feb 26.

TNF-alpha gene polymorphisms can help to predict response to etanercept in 
psoriatic patients.

De Simone C(1), Farina M(2), Maiorino A(1), Fanali C(2), Perino F(1), Flamini 
A(2), Caldarola G(1), Sgambato A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy.
(2)Institute of General Pathology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, 
Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors might have a role for lack of therapeutic response 
to anti-TNF-alpha agents, as previously suggested in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the role of the main TNF-alpha polymorphisms (-238G>A, 
-308G>A, -857C>T) in predicting the response to etanercept, an anti-TNF-alpha 
fusion protein.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from buccal epithelial cells in 
a series of 97 psoriatic patients who received etanercept for at least 3 months. 
Patients were classified as responders, if they achieved a PASI improvement ≥ 
75% after 12 weeks of etanercept treatment, and non-responders, if PASI 
improvement was <75%. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TNF-alpha gene 
(-238G>A, -308G>A, -857C>T) were genotyped by PCR restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (RFLP) assays.
RESULTS: We found that patients heterozygous (GA) for the -238G>A polymorphism 
were more likely not responsive to therapy compared to the GG genotype. In fact, 
the GA genotype was found in 5/59 (8.5%) responders and in 14/38 (36.8%) 
non-responders (P = 0.001). A significant relationship with therapy was also 
observed for the -308G>A polymorphisms. In fact, the GG, GA and AA genotypes 
were detected in 48 (81.4%), 9 (15.3%) and 2 (3.4%) of the 59 responders and in 
22 (57.9%), 11 (28.9%) and 5 (13.2%) of the 38 non-responder patients (P = 
0.03). No association with therapy was observed for the -857C>T polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: Our study supports the role of TNF-alpha polymorphisms in predicting 
the response to anti-TNF-alpha agents. In particular, we found that the presence 
of -238G>A and -308G>A polymorphisms is associated with poor response to a 
3-month therapy with etanercept. However, our data have yet to be validated in 
larger cohorts.

© 2015 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.13024
PMID: 25726968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]