1. Exp Anim. 2015;64(2):207-20. doi: 10.1538/expanim.14-0101. Epub 2015 Feb 10.

Development of a novel pink-eyed dilution mouse model showing progressive 
darkening of the eyes and coat hair with aging.

Ishikawa A(1), Sugiyama M, Hondo E, Kinoshita K, Yamagishi Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, 
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8601, Japan.

Oca2(p-cas) (oculocutaneous albinism II; pink-eyed dilution castaneus) is a coat 
color mutant gene on mouse chromosome 7 that arose spontaneously in wild Mus 
musculus castaneus mice. Mice homozygous for Oca2(p-cas) usually exhibit pink 
eyes and gray coat hair on the non-agouti genetic background, and this ordinary 
phenotype remains unchanged throughout life. During breeding of a mixed strain 
carrying this gene on the C57BL/6J background, we discovered a novel spontaneous 
mutation that causes darkening of the eyes and coat hair with aging. In this 
study, we developed a novel mouse model showing this unique phenotype. Gross 
observations revealed that the pink eyes and gray coat hair of the novel mutant 
young mice became progressively darker in color by approximately 3 months after 
birth. Light and transmission-electron microscopic observations revealed a 
marked increase in melanin pigmentation of coat hair shafts and choroid of the 
eye in the novel mice compared to that in the ordinary mice. Sequence analysis 
of Oca2(p-cas) revealed a 4.1-kb deletion involving exons 15 and 16 of its 
wild-type gene. However, there was no sequence difference between the two types 
of mutant mice. Mating experiments suggested that the novel mutant phenotype was 
not inherited in a simple fashion, due to incomplete penetrance. The novel 
spontaneous mutant mouse is the first example of progressive hair darkening 
animals and is an essential animal model for understanding of the regulation 
mechanisms of melanin biosynthesis with aging.

DOI: 10.1538/expanim.14-0101
PMCID: PMC4427736
PMID: 25739360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]