1. J Bone Miner Res. 2015 Sep;30(9):1726-37. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2495.

Reversible Deterioration in Hypophosphatasia Caused by Renal Failure With 
Bisphosphonate Treatment.

Cundy T(1), Michigami T(2), Tachikawa K(2), Dray M(3), Collins JF(4), Paschalis 
EP(5), Gamsjaeger S(5), Roschger A(5), Fratzl-Zelman N(5), Roschger P(5), 
Klaushofer K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of 
Auckland, Aukland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Bone and Mineral Research, Osaka Medical Center for Maternal 
and Child Health, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Middlemore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Renal Medicine, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and AUVA 
Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria.

Hypophosphatasia is an inborn error of metabolism caused by mutations in the 
ALPL gene. It is characterized by low serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity 
and defective mineralization of bone, but the phenotype varies greatly in 
severity depending on the degree of residual enzyme activity. We describe a man 
with compound heterozygous mutations in ALPL, but no previous bone disease, who 
suffered numerous disabling fractures after he developed progressive renal 
failure (for which he eventually needed dialysis treatment) and was prescribed 
alendronate treatment. A bone biopsy showed marked osteomalacia with low 
osteoblast numbers and greatly elevated pyrophosphate concentrations at 
mineralizing surfaces. In vitro testing showed that one mutation, T117H, 
produced an ALP protein with almost no enzyme activity; the second, G438S, 
produced a protein with normal activity, but its activity was inhibited by 
raising the media phosphate concentration, suggesting that phosphate retention 
(attributable to uremia) could have contributed to the phenotypic change, 
although a pathogenic effect of bisphosphonate treatment is also likely. 
Alendronate treatment was discontinued and, while a suitable kidney donor was 
sought, the patient was treated for 6 months with teriparatide, which 
significantly reduced the osteomalacia. Eighteen months after successful renal 
transplantation, the patient was free of symptoms and the scintigraphic bone 
lesions had resolved. A third bone biopsy showed marked hyperosteoidosis but 
with plentiful new bone formation and a normal bone formation rate. This case 
illustrates how pharmacological (bisphosphonate treatment) and physiologic 
(renal failure) changes in the "environment" can dramatically affect the 
phenotype of a genetic disorder.

Â© 2015 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2495
PMID: 25736332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]