1. Metab Eng. 2015 May;29:26-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.02.006. Epub 2015 Feb 
27.

Futile cycling increases sensitivity toward oxidative stress in Escherichia 
coli.

Adolfsen KJ(1), Brynildsen MP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08544, United States. Electronic address: adolfsen@princeton.edu.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08544, United States. Electronic address: mbrynild@princeton.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are toxic molecules utilized by the immune system 
to combat invading pathogens. Recent evidence suggests that inefficiencies in 
ATP production or usage can lead to increased endogenous ROS production and 
sensitivity to oxidative stress in bacteria. With this as inspiration, and 
knowledge that ATP is required for a number of DNA repair mechanisms, we 
hypothesized that futile cycling would be an effective way to increase 
sensitivity to oxidative stress. We developed a mixed integer linear 
optimization framework to identify experimentally-tractable futile cycles, and 
confirmed metabolic modeling predictions that futile cycling depresses growth 
rate, and increases both O2 consumption and ROS production per biomass 
generated. Further, intracellular ATP was decreased and sensitivity to oxidative 
stress increased in all actively cycling strains compared to their catalytically 
inactive controls. This research establishes a fundamental connection between 
ATP metabolism, endogenous ROS production, and tolerance toward oxidative stress 
in bacteria.

Copyright Â© 2015 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.02.006
PMCID: PMC4430396
PMID: 25732623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]