1. Gene. 2015 May 25;563(1):35-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.002. Epub 2015 Mar
 4.

Compound heterozygous protein C deficiency in a family with venous thrombosis: 
Identification and in vitro study of p.Asp297His and p.Val420Leu mutations.

Liu H(1), Wang HF(1), Tang L(2), Yang Y(1), Wang QY(1), Zeng W(1), Wu YY(1), 
Cheng ZP(1), Hu B(1), Guo T(1), Hu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Hematology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
China.
(2)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Hematology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
China. Electronic address: lancet.tang@qq.com.
(3)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Hematology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
China. Electronic address: dr_huyu@126.com.

Hereditary protein C deficiency (PCD) is an autosomal inherited disorder 
associated with high risk for venous thromboembolism (VTE). This study aimed to 
explore the functional consequences of two missense mutations, p.Asp297His and 
p.Val420Ile, responsible for type I/II PCD and recurrent deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) in a Chinese family. The plasma protein C activities (PC:A) of the proband 
and his sister were reduced to 4% and 5% of normal activity. However, protein C 
antigen (PC:Ag) concentrations were not equally decreased, with levels of 90.5% 
and 88.7%, respectively. Two missense mutations p.Asp297His and p.Val420Leu were 
identified in the protein C gene (PROC). The PC:A and PC:Ag levels in 
heterozygous state for p.Asp297His were 66% and 64.8%, whereas in heterozygous 
state for p.Val420Leu, these levels were 67% and 145%, respectively. Wild type 
(WT) and two mutant PROC cDNA expression plasmids were constructed and 
transfected into HEK 293T cells. Western blot analysis revealed that both 
p.Asp297His and p.Val420Leu showed a normal intracellular protein level. The 
extracellular protein level and specific activity of p.Asp297His were equally 
reduced to 37.7 ± 4.3% and 22.1 ± 2.5%, respectively. Mutant p.Val420Leu showed 
a relatively higher PC:Ag level and undetectable PC:A. Immunofluorescence 
staining revealed that WT and p.Val420Leu proteins were largely co-localized 
with both the protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) and cis-Golgi Marker (GM130), 
while the PC p.Asp297His mutant protein was mainly co-localized with PDI and 
much less co-localized with GM130. The thrombosis symptom in this family was 
associated with the two missense mutations in the PROC gene.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.03.002
PMID: 25748729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]