1. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Feb 18;6:31. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00031. eCollection 
2015.

Agricultural practices altered soybean seed protein, oil, fatty acids, sugars, 
and minerals in the Midsouth USA.

Bellaloui N(1), Bruns HA(2), Abbas HK(3), Mengistu A(4), Fisher DK(2), Reddy 
KN(2).

Author information:
(1)Crop Genetics Research Unit, Plant Physiology, United States Department of 
Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service Stoneville, MS, USA.
(2)Crop Production Systems Research Unit, Crop Production, United States 
Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service Stoneville, MS, USA.
(3)Biological Control of Pests Research Unit, Biological Control, United States 
Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service Stoneville, MS, USA.
(4)Crop Genetics Research Unit, Pathology, United States Department of 
Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service Jackson, TN, USA.

Information on the effects of management practices on soybean seed composition 
is scarce. Therefore, the objective of this research was to investigate the 
effects of planting date (PD) and seeding rate (SR) on seed composition 
(protein, oil, fatty acids, and sugars) and seed minerals (B, P, and Fe) in 
soybean grown in two row-types (RTs) on the Mississippi Delta region of the 
Midsouth USA. Two field experiments were conducted in 2009 and 2010 on Sharkey 
clay and Beulah fine sandy loam soil at Stoneville, MS, USA, under irrigated 
conditions. Soybean were grown in 102 cm single-rows and 25 cm twin-rows in 102 
cm centers at SRs of 20, 30, 40, and 50 seeds m(-2). The results showed that in 
May and June planting, protein, glucose, P, and B concentrations increased with 
increased SR, but at the highest SRs (40 and 50 seeds m(-2)), the concentrations 
remained constant or declined. Palmitic, stearic, and linoleic acid 
concentrations were the least responsive to SR increases. Early planting 
resulted in higher oil, oleic acid, sucrose, B, and P on both single and 
twin-rows. Late planting resulted in higher protein and linolenic acid, but 
lower oleic acid and oil concentrations. The changes in seed constituents could 
be due to changes in environmental factors (drought and temperature), and 
nutrient accumulation in seeds and leaves. The increase of stachyose sugar in 
2010 may be due to a drier year and high temperature in 2010 compared to 2009; 
suggesting the possible role of stachyose as an environmental stress compound. 
Our research demonstrated that PD, SR, and RT altered some seed constituents, 
but the level of alteration in each year dependent on environmental factors such 
as drought and temperature. This information benefits growers and breeders for 
considering agronomic practices to select for soybean seed nutritional qualities 
under drought and high heat conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00031
PMCID: PMC4332302
PMID: 25741347