1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2015 Apr;74(4):305-18. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000174.

Critical contribution of adenosine A2A receptors in bone marrow-derived cells to 
white matter lesions induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion.

Ran H(1), Duan W, Gong Z, Xu S, Zhu H, Hou X, Jiang L, He Q, Zheng J.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Xinqiao Hospital (HR, WD, ZG, XH, LJ, QH, 
JZ), and Department of Pathology, Southwest Hospital (SX), Third Military 
Medical University; and Medical Examination Center, Chinese People's Liberation 
Army 324 Hospital (HR), Chongqing, China; and Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee (HZ).

Adenosine A2A receptors (A2ARs) in distinct cellular types may exert different 
and even opposite effects on many neurologic disorders; A2ARs in bone 
marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) have been shown to play important roles in various 
brain injuries. We previously showed that global A2AR inactivation aggravates 
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion-induced white matter lesions (WMLs); however, the 
specific cell populations responsible for A2AR-mediated signaling remain 
unknown. In the present study, we developed chimeric mice in which A2ARs were 
either selectively inactivated or reconstituted in BMDCs by transplanting bone 
marrow from global A2AR gene knockout or wild-type mice into wild-type or gene 
knockout mice, respectively. Chimeric mice were subsequently subjected to 
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion by bilateral common carotid artery stenosis, and 
the effects of BMDC A2ARs on WMLs were evaluated. The selective inactivation of 
A2AR in BMDCs aggravated chronic cerebral hypoperfusion-induced WMLs, promoted 
microglial activation, and increased proinflammatory cytokine expression, 
whereas the selective reconstitution or activation of A2AR in BMDCs using the 
agonist CGS21680 produced the opposite effects. These results demonstrate that 
A2ARs in BMDCs are important modulators of WMLs induced by chronic cerebral 
hypoperfusion; this modulation might be associated with the regulation of 
inflammatory cytokine production.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0000000000000174
PMID: 25756592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]