1. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58(1):95-109. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.042. Epub
2015  Mar 5.

Assembly and specific recognition of k29- and k33-linked polyubiquitin.

Michel MA(1), Elliott PR(1), Swatek KN(1), Simicek M(1), Pruneda JN(1), Wagstaff 
JL(1), Freund SM(1), Komander D(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick 
Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(2)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick 
Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. Electronic address: dk@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.024.

Protein ubiquitination regulates many cellular processes via attachment of 
structurally and functionally distinct ubiquitin (Ub) chains. Several atypical 
chain types have remained poorly characterized because the enzymes mediating 
their assembly and receptors with specific binding properties have been elusive. 
We found that the human HECT E3 ligases UBE3C and AREL1 assemble K48/K29- and 
K11/K33-linked Ub chains, respectively, and can be used in combination with DUBs 
to generate K29- and K33-linked chains for biochemical and structural analyses. 
Solution studies indicate that both chains adopt open and dynamic conformations. 
We further show that the N-terminal Npl4-like zinc finger (NZF1) domain of the 
K29/K33-specific deubiquitinase TRABID specifically binds K29/K33-linked diUb, 
and a crystal structure of this complex explains TRABID specificity and suggests 
a model for chain binding by TRABID. Our work uncovers linkage-specific 
components in the Ub system for atypical K29- and K33-linked Ub chains, 
providing tools to further understand these unstudied posttranslational 
modifications.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.042
PMCID: PMC4386031
PMID: 25752577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]