1. Exp Anim. 2015;64(3):241-51. doi: 10.1538/expanim.14-0110. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Quantitative trait loci on chromosome 5 for susceptibility to frequency-specific 
effects on hearing in DBA/2J mice.

Suzuki S(1), Ishikawa M, Ueda T, Ohshiba Y, Miyasaka Y, Okumura K, Yokohama M, 
Taya C, Matsuoka K, Kikkawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Mammalian Genetics Project, Department of Genome Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Institute of Medical Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506, 
Japan.

The DBA/2J strain is a model for early-onset, progressive hearing loss in 
humans, as confirmed in the present study. DBA/2J mice showed progression of 
hearing loss to low-frequency sounds from ultrasonic-frequency sounds and 
profound hearing loss at all frequencies before 7 months of age. It is known 
that the early-onset hearing loss of DBA/2J mice is caused by affects in the ahl 
(Cdh23(ahl)) and ahl8 (Fscn2(ahl8)) alleles of the cadherin 23 and fascin 2 
genes, respectively. Although the strong contributions of the Fscn2(ahl8) allele 
were detected in hearing loss at 8- and 16-kHz stimuli with LOD scores of 5.02 
at 8 kHz and 8.84 at 16 kHz, hearing loss effects were also demonstrated for 
three new quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for the intervals of 50.3-54.5, 
64.6-119.9, and 119.9-137.0 Mb, respectively, on chromosome 5, with significant 
LOD scores of 2.80-3.91 for specific high-frequency hearing loss at 16 kHz by 
quantitative trait loci linkage mapping using a (DBA/2J × C57BL/6J) F1 × DBA/2J 
backcross mice. Moreover, we showed that the contribution of Fscn2(ahl8) to 
early-onset hearing loss with 32-kHz stimuli is extremely low and raised the 
possibility of effects from the Cdh23(ahl) allele and another dominant 
quantitative trait locus (loci) for hearing loss at this ultrasonic frequency. 
Therefore, our results suggested that frequency-specific QTLs control 
early-onset hearing loss in DBA/2J mice.

DOI: 10.1538/expanim.14-0110
PMCID: PMC4547997
PMID: 25765874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]