1. Mod Pathol. 2015 Jul;28(7):895-903. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.39. Epub 2015 
Mar 13.

Mutational dichotomy in desmoplastic malignant melanoma corroborated by 
multigene panel analysis.

Jahn SW(1), Kashofer K(1), Halbwedl I(1), Winter G(1), El-Shabrawi-Caelen L(2), 
Mentzel T(3), Hoefler G(1), Liegl-Atzwanger B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, 
Austria.
(3)Dermatopathologie Bodensee, Friedrichshafen, Germany.

Desmoplastic malignant melanoma is a distinct melanoma entity histologically 
subtyped into mixed and pure forms due to significantly reduced lymph node 
metastases in the pure form. Recent reports investigating common actionable 
driver mutations have demonstrated a lack of BRAF, NRAS, and KIT mutation in 
pure desmoplastic melanoma. In search for alternative driver mutations next 
generation amplicon sequencing for hotspot mutations in 50 genes cardinal to 
tumorigenesis was performed and in addition the RET G691S polymorphism was 
investigated. Data from 21 desmoplastic melanomas (12 pure and 9 mixed) were 
retrieved. Pure desmoplastic melanomas were either devoid of mutations (50%) or 
displayed mutations in tumor suppressor genes (TP53, CDKN2A, and SMAD4) 
singularly or in combination with the exception of a PIK3CA double-mutation 
lacking established biological relevance. Mixed desmoplastic melanomas on the 
contrary were frequently mutated (89%), and 67% exhibited activating mutations 
similar to common-type cutaneous malignant melanomas (BRAF, NRAS, FGFR2, and 
ERBB2). Separate analysis of morphologically heterogeneous tumor areas in four 
mixed desmoplastic malignant melanomas displayed no difference in mutation 
status and RET G691 status. GNAQ and GNA11, two oncogenes in BRAF and NRAS 
wild-type uveal melanomas, were not mutated in our cohort. The RET G691S 
polymorphism was found in 25% of pure and 38% of mixed desmoplastic melanomas. 
Apart from RET G691S our findings demonstrate absence of activating driver 
mutations in pure desmoplastic melanoma beyond previously investigated oncogenes 
(BRAF, NRAS, and KIT). The findings underline the therapeutic dichotomy of mixed 
versus pure desmoplastic melanoma with regard to activating mutations primarily 
of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.39
PMID: 25769001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]