1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 20;43(7):3826-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv156. Epub
2015  Mar 12.

The structure of human SFPQ reveals a coiled-coil mediated polymer essential for 
functional aggregation in gene regulation.

Lee M(1), Sadowska A(2), Bekere I(1), Ho D(1), Gully BS(1), Lu Y(3), Iyer KS(1), 
Trewhella J(3), Fox AH(4), Bond CS(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, 35 
Stirling Highway, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia.
(2)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, 35 
Stirling Highway, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia Harry Perkins 
Institute for Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands and Centre for 
Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western 
Australia 6009, Australia.
(3)School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, 
Australia.
(4)Harry Perkins Institute for Medical Research, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands 
and Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
Western Australia 6009, Australia Charles.Bond@uwa.edu.au 
Archa.Fox@perkins.uwa.edu.au.
(5)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, 35 
Stirling Highway, Crawley, Western Australia 6009, Australia 
Charles.Bond@uwa.edu.au Archa.Fox@perkins.uwa.edu.au.

SFPQ, (a.k.a. PSF), is a human tumor suppressor protein that regulates many 
important functions in the cell nucleus including coordination of long 
non-coding RNA molecules into nuclear bodies. Here we describe the first crystal 
structures of Splicing Factor Proline and Glutamine Rich (SFPQ), revealing 
structural similarity to the related PSPC1/NONO heterodimer and a strikingly 
extended structure (over 265 Å long) formed by an unusual anti-parallel 
coiled-coil that results in an infinite linear polymer of SFPQ dimers within the 
crystals. Small-angle X-ray scattering and transmission electron microscopy 
experiments show that polymerization is reversible in solution and can be 
templated by DNA. We demonstrate that the ability to polymerize is essential for 
the cellular functions of SFPQ: disruptive mutation of the coiled-coil 
interaction motif results in SFPQ mislocalization, reduced formation of nuclear 
bodies, abrogated molecular interactions and deficient transcriptional 
regulation. The coiled-coil interaction motif thus provides a molecular 
explanation for the functional aggregation of SFPQ that directs its role in 
regulating many aspects of cellular nucleic acid metabolism.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv156
PMCID: PMC4402515
PMID: 25765647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]