1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Sep;81:134-43. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.007. Epub 2015
Mar  12.

Neuroferritinopathy: From ferritin structure modification to pathogenetic 
mechanism.

Levi S(1), Rovida E(2).

Author information:
(1)University Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Division of Neuroscience, 20132 Milano, 
Italy; San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Division of Neuroscience, 20132 
Milano, Italy. Electronic address: levi.sonia@hsr.it.
(2)Institute for Genetic and Biomedical Research, National Research Council, Via 
Fantoli 16/15, 20138 Milan, Italy.

Neuroferritinopathy is a rare, late-onset, dominantly inherited movement 
disorder caused by mutations in L-ferritin gene. It is characterized by iron and 
ferritin aggregate accumulation in brain, normal or low serum ferritin levels 
and high variable clinical feature. To date, nine causative mutations have been 
identified and eight of them are frameshift mutations determined by 
nucleotide(s) insertion in the exon 4 of L-ferritin gene altering the structural 
conformation of the C-terminus of the L-ferritin subunit. Acting in a dominant 
negative manner, mutations are responsible for an impairment of the iron storage 
efficiency of ferritin molecule. Here, we review the main characteristics of 
neuroferritinopathy and present a computational analysis of some representative 
recently defined mutations with the purpose to gain new information about the 
pathogenetic mechanism of the disorder. This is particularly important as 
neuroferritinopathy can be considered an interesting model to study the 
relationship between iron, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration.

Copyright Â© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.007
PMCID: PMC4642653
PMID: 25772441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]