1. Eur J Epidemiol. 2015 Jul;30(7):543-52. doi: 10.1007/s10654-015-0011-z. Epub 
2015 Mar 15.

Using published data in Mendelian randomization: a blueprint for efficient 
identification of causal risk factors.

Burgess S(1), Scott RA, Timpson NJ, Davey Smith G, Thompson SG; EPIC- InterAct 
Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK, sb452@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

Finding individual-level data for adequately-powered Mendelian randomization 
analyses may be problematic. As publicly-available summarized data on genetic 
associations with disease outcomes from large consortia are becoming more 
abundant, use of published data is an attractive analysis strategy for obtaining 
precise estimates of the causal effects of risk factors on outcomes. We detail 
the necessary steps for conducting Mendelian randomization investigations using 
published data, and present novel statistical methods for combining data on the 
associations of multiple (correlated or uncorrelated) genetic variants with the 
risk factor and outcome into a single causal effect estimate. A two-sample 
analysis strategy may be employed, in which evidence on the gene-risk factor and 
gene-outcome associations are taken from different data sources. These 
approaches allow the efficient identification of risk factors that are suitable 
targets for clinical intervention from published data, although the ability to 
assess the assumptions necessary for causal inference is diminished. Methods and 
guidance are illustrated using the example of the causal effect of serum calcium 
levels on fasting glucose concentrations. The estimated causal effect of a 1 
standard deviation (0.13 mmol/L) increase in calcium levels on fasting glucose 
(mM) using a single lead variant from the CASR gene region is 0.044 (95 % 
credible interval -0.002, 0.100). In contrast, using our method to account for 
the correlation between variants, the corresponding estimate using 17 genetic 
variants is 0.022 (95 % credible interval 0.009, 0.035), a more clearly positive 
causal effect.

DOI: 10.1007/s10654-015-0011-z
PMCID: PMC4516908
PMID: 25773750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]