1. Klin Med (Mosk). 2014;92(7):49-53.

[Familial hypercholesterolemia due to a new mutation in the low density 
lipoprotein receptor gene].

[Article in Russian]

Korneva VA, Bogoslovskaia TIu, Kuznetsova TIu, Mandel'shtam MIu, Vasil'ev VB.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FHC) is a genetic disorder manifest as a rise in 
serum cholesterol level responsible for the development ofcardiovascular 
diseases.
AIM: To study genetic peculiarities of FHC in Kareliya.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 109 patients of the 196 ones with FHC (124 families) were 
subjected to genetic examination. Other parameters studied included the lipid 
spectrum, blood glucose level, ECG, 24 hr ECG monitoring, echocardiography, 
triplex scanning of brachiocephalic arteries and lower limb vessels, functional 
tests. Simon Broom criteria were used to diagnose FHC.
RESULTS: "Definitive" FHC was diagnosed in 136 (69.4%) patients, (probable) FHC 
in 30.6%. The total encoding region of the low density lipoprotein receptor gene 
was sequenced in 109 (55.6%) patients in parallel with the search for major 
mutations in the APOB and PCSK9 genes. A total of 13 mutations (p.G20R, c. 
192del110/ins8, c.195-196insT, p.S206R, c925- 931del17, p.S447C, p.13981, 
p.L426P, L511S, c.1686del18/insT, p.L646I, p.N640N, c.2191delG) were identified 
in low density lipoprotein receptor gene; seven of them are reported for the 
first time in the world. No major mutations in the APOB and PCSK9 genes were 
found. The new c.2191delG (p.(Val73 1Serfs*6)) mutation is characterized and its 
segregation with familial dyslipidemia is shown. The present case is 
characterized by the absence of clinical picture of coronary heart disease and 
the family history complicated by cerebral basin lesion. Phenotypic 
manifestations of atherosclerosis in FHC with gene mutations need further 
studies.

PMID: 25775905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]