1. Neuron. 2015 Mar 18;85(6):1162-76. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.064.

Immunotherapeutic approaches for Alzheimer's disease.

Wisniewski T(1), Goñi F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center for Cognitive Neurology, New York University 
School of Medicine, Alexandria ERSP, 450 East 29(th) Street, New York, NY 10016, 
USA; Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, Alexandria 
ERSP, 450 East 29(th) Street, New York, NY 10016, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
New York University School of Medicine, Alexandria ERSP, 450 East 29(th) Street, 
New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: thomas.wisniewski@nyumc.org.
(2)Department of Neurology, Center for Cognitive Neurology, New York University 
School of Medicine, Alexandria ERSP, 450 East 29(th) Street, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent form of dementia worldwide and is 
an emerging global epidemic. It is characterized by an imbalance between 
production and clearance of amyloid β (Aβ) and tau proteins. Oligomeric forms of 
Aβ and tau are believed to be the most toxic. Dramatic results from AD animal 
models showed great promise for active and passive immune therapies targeting 
Aβ. However, there is very limited evidence in human studies of the clinical 
benefits from these approaches. Immunotherapies targeting only tau pathology 
have had some success but are limited so far to mouse models. The majority of 
current methods is based on immunological targeting of a self-protein; hence, 
benefits need to be balanced against risks of stimulating excessive autoimmune 
toxic inflammation. For greater efficacy the next generation of vaccines needs 
to focus more on concurrently targeting all the intermediate toxic conformers of 
oligomeric Aβ and tau species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.064
PMCID: PMC4366618
PMID: 25789753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]