1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 17;10(3):e0121468. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121468. 
eCollection 2015.

A CRE/AP-1-like motif is essential for induced syncytin-2 expression and fusion 
in human trophoblast-like model.

Toufaily C(1), Lokossou AG(1), Vargas A(1), Rassart É(1), Barbeau B(1).

Author information:
(1)Département des Sciences Biologiques and Centre de recherche BioMed, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

Syncytin-2 is encoded by the envelope gene of Endogenous Retrovirus-FRD 
(ERVFRD-1) and plays a critical role in fusion of placental trophoblasts leading 
to the formation of the multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast. Its expression is 
consequently regulated in a strict manner. In the present study, we have 
identified a forskolin-responsive region located between positions -300 to -150 
in the Syncytin-2 promoter region. This 150 bp region in the context of a 
minimal promoter mediated an 80-fold induction of promoter activity following 
forskolin stimulation. EMSA analyses with competition experiments with nuclear 
extracts from forskolin-stimulated BeWo cells demonstrated that the -211 to -177 
region specifically bound two forskolin-induced complexes, one of them 
containing a CRE/AP-1-like motif. Site-directed mutagenesis of the CRE/AP-1 
binding site in the context of the Syncytin-2 promoter or a heterologous 
promoter showed that this motif was mostly essential for forskolin-induced 
promoter activity. Transfection experiments with dominant negative mutants and 
constitutively activated CREB expression vectors in addition to Chromatin 
Immunoprecipitation suggested that a CREB family member, CREB2 was binding and 
acting through the CRE/AP-1 motif. We further demonstrated the binding of JunD 
to this same motif. Similar to forskolin and soluble cAMP, CREB2 and JunD 
overexpression induced Syncytin-2 promoter activity in a CRE/AP-1-dependent 
manner and Syncytin-2 expression. In addition, BeWo cell fusion was induced by 
both CREB2 and JunD overexpression, while being repressed following silencing of 
either gene. These results thereby demonstrate that induced expression of 
Syncytin-2 is highly dependent on the interaction of bZIP-containing 
transcription factors to a CRE/AP-1 motif and that this element is important for 
the regulation of Syncytin-2 expression, which results in the formation of the 
peripheral syncytiotrophoblast layer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121468
PMCID: PMC4364025
PMID: 25781974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.