1. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6570-83. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3262.

Pyruvate kinase M2 prevents apoptosis via modulating Bim stability and 
associates with poor outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hu W(1)(2), Lu SX(1)(2), Li M(1)(2), Zhang C(1)(2), Liu LL(1)(2), Fu J(1)(2), 
Jin JT(1)(2), Luo RZ(1)(2), Zhang CZ(1)(2), Yun JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in 
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 
510060, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 
510060, China.

Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) contributes to the Warburg effect, a hallmark of 
cancer. We showed that PKM2 levels were correlated with overall survival (hazard 
ration = 1.675, 95% confidence interval: 1.389-2.019, P < 0.001) and 
disease-free survival (hazard ration = 1.573, 95% confidence interval: 
1.214-2.038, P < 0.001) in a cohort of 490 patients with HCC. The correlations 
were further validated in an independent cohort of 148 HCC patients. 
Multivariate analyses revealed that PKM2 was an independent indicator of poor 
outcome in HCC. The knockdown of PKM2 in HCC cells inhibited cell proliferation 
and induced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Bim siRNA markedly abolished the 
PKM2-depletion-induced apoptosis. PKM2 depletion decreased the degradation of 
Bim. In clinical samples, PKM2 expression was reversely correlated with Bim 
expression. Combination of PKM2 and Bim levels had the best prognostic 
significance. We suggest that PKM2 serves as a promising biomarker for poor 
prognosis of patients with HCC and its knockdown induces HCC apoptosis by 
stabilizing Bim.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3262
PMCID: PMC4466635
PMID: 25788265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflicts of 
interest were disclosed.