1. Stand Genomic Sci. 2014 Dec 8;9:16. doi: 10.1186/1944-3277-9-16. eCollection 
2014.

Complete genome sequence of Ornithobacterium rhinotracheale strain ORT-UMN 88.

Zehr ES(1), Bayles DO(2), Boatwright WD(1), Tabatabai LB(3), Register KB(1).

Author information:
(1)Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Research Unit, U. S. Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, National Animal Disease Center, 
Ames, IA, USA.
(2)Infectious Bacterial Diseases Research Unit, U. S. Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Research Service, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, USA.
(3)Ruminant Diseases and Immunology Research Unit, U. S. Department of 
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, National Animal Disease Center, 
Ames, IA, USA ; Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Molecular Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.

Ornithobacterium rhinotracheale strain ORT-UMN 88 is a Gram-negative, 
pleomorphic, rod-shaped bacterium and an etiologic agent of pneumonia and 
airsacculitis in poultry. It is a member of the family Flavobacteriaceae of the 
phylum Bacteroidetes. O. rhinotracheale strain ORT-UMN 88 was isolated from the 
pneumonic lung of a turkey in 1995. It was the isolate first used to 
experimentally reproduce disease in turkeys and has since been the focus of 
investigations characterizing potential virulence factors of the bacterium. The 
genome of O. rhinotracheale strain ORT-UMN 88 consists of a circular chromosome 
of 2,397,867Â bp with a total of 2300 protein-coding genes, nine RNA genes, and 
one noncoding RNA gene. A companion paper in this issue of SIGS reports the 
non-contiguous finished genome sequence of an additional strain of O. 
rhinotracheale, isolated in 2006.

DOI: 10.1186/1944-3277-9-16
PMCID: PMC4334632
PMID: 25780507