1. Chronobiol Int. 2015 Jun;32(5):591-5. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1014096. Epub
 2015 Mar 23.

Differences in planning performance, a neurocognitive endophenotype, are 
associated with a functional variant in PER3 gene.

González-Giraldo Y(1), González-Reyes RE, Mueller ST, Piper BJ, Adan A, Forero 
DA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of NeuroPsychiatric Genetics, Biomedical Sciences Research Group, 
School of Medicine, Universidad Antonio Nariño , Bogotá , Colombia .

Performance alterations in executive function have been studied as potential 
endophenotypes for several neuropsychiatric diseases. Planning is an important 
component of executive function and has been shown to be affected in diseases 
such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, schizophrenia, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and Parkinson's disease. Several genes related to 
dopaminergic systems, such as COMT, have been explored as candidates for 
influencing planning performance. The circadian clock gene PERIOD3 (PER3) has 
been shown to be associated with several complex behaviors in humans and could 
be involved in different signaling mechanisms. In this study, we evaluated the 
possible association between a functional polymorphism in the PER3 gene 
(PER3-VNTR, rs57875989) and performance in a commonly used test of planning 
(Tower of London, TOL) in 229 healthy subjects from Bogotá, Colombia. PER3-VNTR 
genotyping was carried out with conventional PCR and all participants completed 
the TOL test using the computerized Psychology Experiment Building Language 
(PEBL) battery. A linear regression model was used for the analysis of 
association with the SNPStats program. We found that 4/4 genotype carriers 
showed a better performance and made fewer moves, in comparison to 4/5 and 5/5 
genotype carriers (p = 0.003). These results appear to be independent from 
effects of this polymorphism on self-reported average hours of sleep during work 
days in our sample. This is the first evidence of an association between 
PER3-VNTR and planning performance in a sample of healthy subjects and our 
results are consistent from previous findings for alterations in other cognitive 
domains. Future studies examining additional genes could lead to the 
identification of novel molecular underpinnings of planning in healthy subjects 
and in patients with neuropsychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1014096
PMID: 25798540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]