1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0119649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119649. 
eCollection 2015.

Association between GWAS-identified genetic variations and disease prognosis for 
patients with colorectal cancer.

Kang BW(1), Jeon HS(2), Chae YS(1), Lee SJ(1), Park JY(3), Choi JE(4), Park 
JS(5), Choi GS(5), Kim JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology/Hematology, Kyungpook National University Medical 
Center, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular diagnostics and Imaging research institute, Kyungpook 
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell biology, Kyungpook National University 
School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea; Department of Internal Medicine, 
Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Cell biology, Kyungpook National University 
School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(5)Colorectal Cancer Center, Kyungpook National University Medical Center, 
Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have already identified at least 22 
common susceptibility loci associated with an increased risk of colorectal 
cancer (CRC). This study examined the relationship between these single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the clinical outcomes of patients with 
colorectal cancer. Seven hundred seventy-six patients with surgically resected 
colorectal adenocarcinoma were enrolled in the present study. Twenty-two of the 
GWAS-identified SNPs were genotyped using a Sequenom MassARRAY. Among the 22 
SNPs, two (rs1321311G>T in CDKN1A and rs10411210C>T in RHPN2) were significantly 
associated with the survival outcomes of CRC in a multivariate survival 
analysis. In a recessive model, the rs1321311 TT genotype (vs. GG + GT) and 
rs10411210 TT genotype (vs. CC + CT) were associated with a worse prognosis for 
disease-free survival (adjusted HR = 1.90; 95% confidence interval = 1.00-3.60; 
P = 0.050, adjusted HR = 1.94; 95% confidence interval = 1.05-3.57; P = 0.034, 
respectively) and overall survival (adjusted HR = 2.05; 95% confidence interval 
= 1.00-4.20; P = 0.049, adjusted HR = 2.06; 95% confidence interval = 1.05-4.05; 
P = 0.036, respectively). None of the other SNPs was significantly associated 
with any clinicopathologic features or survival. The present results suggest 
that the genetic variants of the CDKN1A (rs1321311) and RHPN2 (rs10411210) genes 
can be used as prognostic biomarkers for patients with surgically resected 
colorectal cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119649
PMCID: PMC4370892
PMID: 25799222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.