1. Semin Nephrol. 2015 Jan;35(1):2-11. doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.01.002.

Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury.

Alobaidi R(1), Basu RK(2), Goldstein SL(3), Bagshaw SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Center for Acute Care Nephrology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital and Medical 
Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(3)Center for Acute Care Nephrology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital and Medical 
Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio. 
Electronic address: stuart.goldstein@cchmc.org.
(4)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is an epidemic problem. Sepsis has long been 
recognized as a foremost precipitant of AKI. Sepsis-associated AKI (SA-AKI) 
portends a high burden of morbidity and mortality in both children and adults 
with critical illness. Although our understanding of its pathophysiology is 
incomplete, SA-AKI likely represents a distinct subset of AKI contributed to by 
a unique constellation of hemodynamic, inflammatory, and immune mechanisms. 
SA-AKI poses significant clinical challenges for clinicians. To date, no 
singular effective therapy has been developed to alter the natural history of 
SA-AKI. Rather, current strategies to alleviate poor outcomes focus on clinical 
risk identification, early detection of injury, modifying clinician behavior to 
avoid harm, early appropriate antimicrobial therapy, and surveillance among 
survivors for the longer-term sequelae of kidney damage. Recent evidence has 
confirmed that patients no longer die with AKI, but from AKI. To improve the 
care and outcomes for sufferers of SA-AKI, clinicians need a robust appreciation 
for its epidemiology and current best-evidence strategies for prevention and 
treatment.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.01.002
PMCID: PMC4507081
PMID: 25795495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: none.