1. Doc Ophthalmol. 2015 Aug;131(1):63-70. doi: 10.1007/s10633-015-9496-8. Epub
2015  Mar 22.

Rapid resolution of retinoschisis with acetazolamide.

Zhang L(1), Reyes R, Lee W, Chen CL, Chan L, Sujirakul T, Chang S, Tsang SH.

Author information:
(1)Barbara and Donald Jonas Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

PURPOSE: To report the results of an acetazolamide (Diamox(®)) treatment regimen 
in a genetically confirmed case of X-linked juvenile retinoschisis (XLRS).
METHODS: A patient with XLRS was prescribed acetazolamide (Diamox(®)) at a dose 
of 500 mg/day, then discontinued the treatment due to non-compliance for 4 days, 
and finally resumed the course of treatment. Best-corrected visual acuity, 
retinal structure, and function were monitored with autofluorescence, spectral 
domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), adaptive optics scanning laser 
ophthalmoscopy (AOSLO), and full-field electroretinogram (ERG). Full-field ERG 
was performed using DTL recording electrodes and Ganzfeld stimulation according 
to ISCEV standards.
RESULTS: Serial monitoring of the cysts by SD-OCT revealed a strong association 
between the effects of acetazolamide administration and the size of the schisis. 
A reduction in foveal cyst size was significant in as rapid as 6 days after 
acetazolamide initiation. AOSLO data revealed that the resolution of cone cell 
images improves as the foveal schisis decreases in size.
CONCLUSIONS: Efficacy of acetazolamide in patients with XLRS can be apparent in 
as rapid as a week of therapy. AOSLO can be a good method to evaluate the cone 
cells after acetazolamide treatment in the early stages of XLRS.

DOI: 10.1007/s10633-015-9496-8
PMCID: PMC4504776
PMID: 25796216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work