1. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 25;10(3):e0121494. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121494. 
eCollection 2015.

Crystal structures of the kinase domain of the sulfate-activating complex in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Poyraz Ö(1), Brunner K(1), Lohkamp B(1), Axelsson H(2), Hammarström LG(2), 
Schnell R(1), Schneider G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Chemical Biology Consortium Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory Stockholm, 
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0127016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127016.

In Mycobacterium tuberculosis the sulfate activating complex provides a key 
branching point in sulfate assimilation. The complex consists of two polypeptide 
chains, CysD and CysN. CysD is an ATP sulfurylase that, with the energy provided 
by the GTPase activity of CysN, forms adenosine-5'-phosphosulfate (APS) which 
can then enter the reductive branch of sulfate assimilation leading to the 
biosynthesis of cysteine. The CysN polypeptide chain also contains an APS kinase 
domain (CysC) that phosphorylates APS leading to 
3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate, the sulfate donor in the synthesis of 
sulfolipids. We have determined the crystal structures of CysC from M. 
tuberculosis as a binary complex with ADP, and as ternary complexes with ADP and 
APS and the ATP mimic AMP-PNP and APS, respectively, to resolutions of 1.5 Å, 
2.1 Å and 1.7 Å, respectively. CysC shows the typical APS kinase fold, and the 
structures provide comprehensive views of the catalytic machinery, conserved in 
this enzyme family. Comparison to the structure of the human homolog show highly 
conserved APS and ATP binding sites, questioning the feasibility of the design 
of specific inhibitors of mycobacterial CysC. Residue Cys556 is part of the 
flexible lid region that closes off the active site upon substrate binding. 
Mutational analysis revealed this residue as one of the determinants controlling 
lid closure and hence binding of the nucleotide substrate.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121494
PMCID: PMC4373884
PMID: 25807013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.