1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:714580. doi: 10.1155/2015/714580. Epub 2015 Mar 1.

Ascorbic acid, ultraviolet C rays, and glucose but not hyperthermia are 
elicitors of human β-defensin 1 mRNA in normal keratinocytes.

Cruz Díaz LA(1), Flores Miramontes MG(1), Chávez Hurtado P(1), Allen K(2), 
Gonzalez Ávila M(3), Prado Montes de Oca E(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Biosecurity Area, Pharmaceutical and Medical 
Biotechnology Unit (UBMF), Research Center in Technology and Design Assistance 
of Jalisco State (CIATEJ, AC), National Council of Science and Technology 
(CONACYT), Guadalajara, JAL, Mexico.
(2)In silico Laboratory, UBMF, CIATEJ AC, CONACYT, Guadalajara, JAL, Mexico ; 
Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK.
(3)Human Digestive Tract Simulator, UBMF, CIATEJ, AC, CONACYT, Guadalajara, JAL, 
Mexico.
(4)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Biosecurity Area, Pharmaceutical and Medical 
Biotechnology Unit (UBMF), Research Center in Technology and Design Assistance 
of Jalisco State (CIATEJ, AC), National Council of Science and Technology 
(CONACYT), Guadalajara, JAL, Mexico ; In silico Laboratory, UBMF, CIATEJ AC, 
CONACYT, Guadalajara, JAL, Mexico.

Hosts' innate defense systems are upregulated by antimicrobial peptide elicitors 
(APEs). Our aim was to investigate the effects of hyperthermia, ultraviolet A 
rays (UVA), and ultraviolet C rays (UVC) as well as glucose and ascorbic acid 
(AA) on the regulation of human β-defensin 1 (DEFB1), cathelicidin (CAMP), and 
interferon-γ (IFNG) genes in normal human keratinocytes (NHK). The indirect in 
vitro antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Listeria 
monocytogenes of these potential APEs was tested. We found that AA is a more 
potent APE for DEFB1 than glucose in NHK. Glucose but not AA is an APE for CAMP. 
Mild hypo- (35°C) and hyperthermia (39°C) are not APEs in NHK. AA-dependent 
DEFB1 upregulation below 20 mM predicts in vitro antimicrobial activity as well 
as glucose- and AA-dependent CAMP and IFNG upregulation. UVC upregulates CAMP 
and DEFB1 genes but UVA only upregulates the DEFB1 gene. UVC is a previously 
unrecognized APE in human cells. Our results suggest that glucose upregulates 
CAMP in an IFN-γ-independent manner. AA is an elicitor of innate immunity that 
will challenge the current concept of late activation of adaptive immunity of 
this vitamin. These results could be useful in designing new potential drugs and 
devices to combat skin infections.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/714580
PMCID: PMC4359827
PMID: 25815330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]