1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jun 23;43(11):e75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv213. Epub 2015 
Mar 26.

Intramolecular circularization increases efficiency of RNA sequencing and 
enables CLIP-Seq of nuclear RNA from human cells.

Chu Y(1), Wang T(2), Dodd D(1), Xie Y(3), Janowski BA(1), Corey DR(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, 
TX 75390-9041, USA.
(2)Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Department of Clinical Science, 6001 
Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA.
(3)Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Department of Clinical Science, 6001 
Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA Simmons Cancer Center, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA.
(4)Departments of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas, 
TX 75390-9041, USA david.corey@utsouthwestern.edu.

RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) is a powerful tool for analyzing the identity of 
cellular RNAs but is often limited by the amount of material available for 
analysis. In spite of extensive efforts employing existing protocols, we 
observed that it was not possible to obtain useful sequencing libraries from 
nuclear RNA derived from cultured human cells after crosslinking and 
immunoprecipitation (CLIP). Here, we report a method for obtaining 
strand-specific small RNA libraries for RNA sequencing that requires picograms 
of RNA. We employ an intramolecular circularization step that increases the 
efficiency of library preparation and avoids the need for intermolecular 
ligations of adaptor sequences. Other key features include random priming for 
full-length cDNA synthesis and gel-free library purification. Using our method, 
we generated CLIP-Seq libraries from nuclear RNA that had been UV-crosslinked 
and immunoprecipitated with anti-Argonaute 2 (Ago2) antibody. Computational 
protocols were developed to enable analysis of raw sequencing data and we 
observe substantial differences between recognition by Ago2 of RNA species in 
the nucleus relative to the cytoplasm. This RNA self-circularization approach to 
RNA sequencing (RC-Seq) allows data to be obtained using small amounts of input 
RNA that cannot be sequenced by standard methods.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv213
PMCID: PMC4477644
PMID: 25813040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]