1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2015 Jun 15;23(12):2828-38. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.027. 
Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Rational design of allosteric-inhibition sites in classical protein tyrosine 
phosphatases.

Chio CM(1), Yu X(1), Bishop AC(2).

Author information:
(1)Amherst College, Department of Chemistry, Amherst, MA 01002, United States.
(2)Amherst College, Department of Chemistry, Amherst, MA 01002, United States. 
Electronic address: acbishop@amherst.edu.

Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), which catalyze the dephosphorylation of 
phosphotyrosine in protein substrates, are critical regulators of metazoan cell 
signaling and have emerged as potential drug targets for a range of human 
diseases. Strategies for chemically targeting the function of individual PTPs 
selectively could serve to elucidate the signaling roles of these enzymes and 
would potentially expedite validation of the therapeutic promise of PTP 
inhibitors. Here we report a novel strategy for the design of non-natural 
allosteric-inhibition sites in PTPs; these sites, which can be introduced into 
target PTPs through protein engineering, serve to sensitize target PTPs to 
potent and selective inhibition by a biarsenical small molecule. Building on the 
recent discovery of a naturally occurring cryptic allosteric site in wild-type 
Src-homology-2 domain containing PTP (Shp2) that can be targeted by biarsenical 
compounds, we hypothesized that Shp2's unusual sensitivity to biarsenicals could 
be strengthened through rational design and that the Shp2-specific site could 
serve as a blueprint for the introduction of non-natural inhibitor sensitivity 
in other PTPs. Indeed, we show here that the strategic introduction of a 
cysteine residue at a position removed from the Shp2 active site can serve to 
increase the potency and selectivity of the interaction between Shp2's 
allosteric site and the biarsenical inhibitor. Moreover, we find that 
'Shp2-like' allosteric sites can be installed de novo in PTP enzymes that do not 
possess naturally occurring sensitivity to biarsenical compounds. Using 
primary-sequence alignments to guide our enzyme engineering, we have 
successfully introduced allosteric-inhibition sites in four classical 
PTPs-PTP1B, PTPH-1, FAP-1, and HePTP-from four different PTP subfamilies, 
suggesting that our sensitization approach can likely be applied widely across 
the classical PTP family to generate biarsenical-responsive PTPs.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2015.03.027
PMCID: PMC4451255
PMID: 25828055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]