1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 31;11(3):e1004776. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004776. 
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Impact of Leishmania infection on host macrophage nuclear physiology and 
nucleopore complex integrity.

Isnard A(1), Christian JG(1), Kodiha M(2), Stochaj U(2), McMaster WR(3), Olivier 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Microbiology & Immunology, The Research Institute 
of the McGill University Health Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.

The protease GP63 is an important virulence factor of Leishmania parasites. We 
previously showed that GP63 reaches the perinuclear area of host macrophages and 
that it directly modifies nuclear translocation of the transcription factors 
NF-κB and AP-1. Here we describe for the first time, using molecular biology and 
in-depth proteomic analyses, that GP63 alters the host macrophage nuclear 
envelope, and impacts on nuclear processes. Our results suggest that GP63 does 
not appear to use a classical nuclear localization signal common between 
Leishmania species for import, but degrades nucleoporins, and is responsible for 
nuclear transport alterations. In the nucleoplasm, GP63 activity accounts for 
the degradation and mislocalization of proteins involved amongst others in gene 
expression and in translation. Collectively, our data indicates that Leishmania 
infection strongly affects nuclear physiology, suggesting that targeting of 
nuclear physiology may be a strategy beneficial for virulent Leishmania 
parasites.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004776
PMCID: PMC4380401
PMID: 25826301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.