1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Apr;94(13):e568. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000568.

Genetic association between PER3 genetic polymorphisms and cancer 
susceptibility: a meta-analysis.

Geng P(1), Ou J, Li J, Wang N, Xie G, Sa R, Liu C, Xiang L, Liang H.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest 
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

The genes along the circadian pathways control and modulate circadian rhythms 
essential for the maintenance of physiological homeostasis through 
self-sustained transcription-translation feedback loops. PER3 (period 3) is a 
circadian pathway gene and its variants (rs1012477, 4/5-repeat) have frequently 
been associated with human cancer. The mixed findings, however, make the role of 
the 2 variants in cancer susceptibility elusive. We aimed in this article to 
clarify the association of PER3 variants with cancer. We collected genetic data 
from 8 studies, providing 6149 individuals for rs1012477 and 5241 individuals 
for 4/5-repeat. Based on the genotype and allele frequency, we chose the 
fixed-effects model to estimate risk of cancer. Overall analysis did not suggest 
a global role of rs1012477 in cancer susceptibility. For PER3 4/5-repeat 
variant, we found a moderate increase in risk of cancer among individuals with 
the 5-allele compared to individuals with the 4-allele, although this 
association was not statistically significant (homozygous model: odds ratio [OR] 
1.17, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.81-1.67; recessive model: OR 1.17, 95% CI 
0.82-1.67). No substantial heterogeneity was revealed in this analysis. Our 
meta-analysis provides no evidence supporting a global association of PER3 
genetic variants with the incidence of cancer.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000568
PMCID: PMC4554033
PMID: 25837749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.