1. Can J Anaesth. 2015 Jul;62(7):785-97. doi: 10.1007/s12630-015-0376-1. Epub
2015  Apr 7.

Celecoxib pharmacogenetics and pediatric adenotonsillectomy: a double-blinded 
randomized controlled study.

Murto K(1), Lamontagne C, McFaul C, MacCormick J, Ramakko KA, Aglipay M, Rosen 
D, Vaillancourt R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO), 
University of Ottawa, 401 Smyth Rd., Ottawa, ON, K1H 8L1, Canada, 
Kmurto@cheo.on.ca.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric adenotonsillectomy (A&T) is associated with prolonged pain 
and functional limitation. Celecoxib is an effective analgesic in adult surgery 
patients; however, its analgesic efficacy on pain and functional recovery in 
pediatric A&T patients is unknown.
METHODS: During 2009-2012, children (age 2-18 yr) scheduled for elective A&T 
were enrolled in a single-centre double-blind randomized controlled trial. Study 
participants received either oral placebo or celecoxib 6 mg·kg(-1) 
preoperatively, followed by 3 mg·kg(-1) twice daily for five doses. The primary 
outcome was the mean "worst 24-hr pain" scores during postoperative days (PODs) 
0-2 on a 100-mm visual analogue scale (VAS). Secondary outcomes for PODs 0-7 
included co-analgesic consumption, adverse events, and functional recovery. The 
impact of the CYP2C9*3 allele - associated with reduced celecoxib hepatic 
metabolism - on recovery was considered.
RESULTS: Of the 282 children enrolled, 195 (celecoxib = 101, placebo = 94) were 
included in the primary outcome analysis. While on treatment, children receiving 
celecoxib experienced a modest reduction in the average pain experienced over 
PODs 0-2 (7 mm on a VAS; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.3 to 14; P = 0.04) and 
a "clinically significant" reduction (≥ 10 mm on a VAS; P ≤ 0.01) on PODs 0 and 
1. During PODs 0-2, the mean acetaminophen consumption was lower in the 
celecoxib group vs the placebo group (78 mg·kg(-1); 95% CI: 68 to 89 vs 
97 mg·kg(-1); 95% CI: 85 to 109, respectively; P = 0.03). No differences in 
adverse events, functional recovery, or satisfaction were observed by POD 7. The 
CYP2C9*3 allele was associated with less pain and improved functional recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: A three-day course of oral celecoxib reduces early pain and 
co-analgesic consumption; however, an increase in dose, dose frequency, and 
duration of dose may be required for sustained pain relief in the pediatric 
setting. The CYP2C9*3 allele may influence recovery. This trial was registered 
at: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00849966.

CONTEXTE: L’adéno-amygdalectomie (AA) est associée à des douleurs et des limites 
fonctionnelles prolongées. Le célécoxib est un agent analgésique efficace chez 
les patients chirurgicaux adultes; toutefois, son efficacité analgésique pour le 
contrôle de la douleur et la récupération fonctionnelle chez les patients 
pédiatriques subissant une AA est inconnue.
MÉTHODE: Entre 2009 et 2012, des enfants (âgés de 2 à 18 ans) devant subir une 
AA non urgente ont été recrutés pour participer à une étude randomisée contrôlée 
à double insu réalisée dans un seul centre. Les participants à l’étude ont reçu 
soit un placebo oral, soit 6 mg·kg−1 de célécoxib avant l’opération, suivi par 
cinq doses de 3 mg·kg−1 deux fois par jour. Le critère d’évaluation principal 
était les scores moyens de « pire douleur durant 24 h » pendant les jours 
postopératoires (JPO) 0-2 sur une échelle visuelle analogique (EVA) de 100 mm. 
Les critères secondaires pour les JPO 0-7 comprenaient la consommation d’autres 
analgésiques, les effets secondaires néfastes et la récupération fonctionnelle. 
L’impact de l’allèle CYP2C9*3 – associé à un métabolisme hépatique réduit du 
célécoxib – lors du rétablissement a été pris en compte.
RÉSULTATS: Parmi les 282 enfants recrutés, 195 (célécoxib = 101, placebo = 94) 
ont été inclus dans l’analyse du critère d’évaluation principal. Pendant le 
traitement, les enfants recevant du célécoxib ont fait état d’une réduction 
modeste de la douleur moyenne ressentie au cours des JPO 0-2 (7 mm sur une EVA; 
intervalle de confiance [IC] 95 %: 0,3 à 14; P = 0,04) et d’une 
réduction « significative d’un point de vue clinique » (≥ 10 mm sur une EVA; 
P ≤ 0,01) au JPO 0 et 1. Au cours des JPO 0-2, la consommation moyenne 
d’acétaminophène était moindre dans le groupe célécoxib que dans le groupe 
placebo (78 mg·kg−1; IC 95 %: 68 à 89 vs 97 mg·kg−1; IC 95 %: 85 à 109, 
respectivement; P = 0,03). Aucune différence n’a été observée en matière 
d’effets secondaires néfastes, de récupération fonctionnelle ou de satisfaction 
jusqu’au jour 7. L’allèle CYP2C9*3 a été associé à une réduction de la douleur 
ainsi qu’à une récupération fonctionnelle améliorée.
CONCLUSION: Un traitement de trois jours avec du célécoxib par voie orale réduit 
la douleur précoce et la consommation d’autres agents analgésiques; toutefois, 
une augmentation de la dose, de la fréquence de dosage et de la durée de dosage 
pourrait être nécessaire pour un soulagement continu de la douleur dans un 
contexte pédiatrique. L’allèle CYP2C9*3 pourrait avoir un impact sur la 
récupération. Cette étude a été enregistrée au: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00849966.
ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL: The online version of this article 
(doi:10.1007/s12630-015-0376-1) contains supplementary material, which is 
available to authorized users.

DOI: 10.1007/s12630-015-0376-1
PMCID: PMC4457100
PMID: 25846344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]