1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0122931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122931. 
eCollection 2015.

Probing ADAMTS13 substrate specificity using phage display.

Desch KC(1), Kretz C(2), Yee A(2), Gildersleeve R(2), Metzger K(2), Agrawal 
N(2), Cheng J(2), Ginsburg D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.
(2)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of 
America; Department of Internal Medicine and Human Genetics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Von Willebrand factor (VWF) is a large, multimeric protein that regulates 
hemostasis by tethering platelets to the subendothelial matrix at sites of 
vascular damage. The procoagulant activity of plasma VWF correlates with the 
length of VWF multimers, which is proteolytically controlled by the 
metalloprotease ADAMTS13. To probe ADAMTS13 substrate specificity, we created 
phage display libraries containing randomly mutated residues of a minimal 
ADAMTS13 substrate fragment of VWF, termed VWF73. The libraries were screened 
for phage particles displaying VWF73 mutant peptides that were resistant to 
proteolysis by ADAMTS13. These peptides exhibited the greatest mutation 
frequency near the ADAMTS13 scissile residues. Kinetic assays using mutant and 
wild-type substrates demonstrated excellent agreement between rates of cleavage 
for mutant phage particles and the corresponding mutant peptides. Cleavage 
resistance of selected mutations was tested in vivo using hydrodynamic injection 
of corresponding full-length expression plasmids into VWF-deficient mice. These 
studies confirmed the resistance to cleavage resulting from select amino acid 
substitutions and uncovered evidence of alternate cleavage sites and recognition 
by other proteases in the circulation of ADAMTS13 deficient mice. Taken 
together, these studies demonstrate the key role of specific amino acids 
residues including P3-P2' and P11', for substrate specificity and emphasize the 
importance in flowing blood of other ADAMTS13-VWF exosite interactions outside 
of VWF73.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122931
PMCID: PMC4388381
PMID: 25849793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.