1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0124582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124582. 
eCollection 2015.

Role of ALADIN in human adrenocortical cells for oxidative stress response and 
steroidogenesis.

J체hlen R(1), Idkowiak J(2), Taylor AE(2), Kind B(1), Arlt W(2), Huebner A(1), 
Koehler K(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik f체r Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Medizinische Fakult채t 
Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universit채t Dresden, Germany.
(2)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, School of Clinical & 
Experimental Medicine, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Triple A syndrome is caused by mutations in AAAS encoding the protein ALADIN. We 
investigated the role of ALADIN in the human adrenocortical cell line NCI-H295R1 
by either over-expression or down-regulation of ALADIN. Our findings indicate 
that AAAS knock-down induces a down-regulation of genes coding for type II 
microsomal cytochrome P450 hydroxylases CYP17A1 and CYP21A2 and their electron 
donor enzyme cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase, thereby decreasing biosynthesis of 
precursor metabolites required for glucocorticoid and androgen production. 
Furthermore we demonstrate that ALADIN deficiency leads to increased 
susceptibility to oxidative stress and alteration in redox homeostasis after 
paraquat treatment. Finally, we show significantly impaired nuclear import of 
DNA ligase 1, aprataxin and ferritin heavy chain 1 in ALADIN knock-down cells. 
We conclude that down-regulating ALADIN results in decreased oxidative stress 
response leading to alteration in steroidogenesis, highlighting our knock-down 
cell model as an important in-vitro tool for studying the adrenal phenotype in 
triple A syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124582
PMCID: PMC4395102
PMID: 25867024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.