1. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Apr 15;5(6):1301-11. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.017285.

Mutations that Separate the Functions of the Proofreading Subunit of the 
Escherichia coli Replicase.

Whatley Z(1), Kreuzer KN(2).

Author information:
(1)University Program in Genetics and Genomics, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27705.
(2)University Program in Genetics and Genomics, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27705 Department of Biochemistry, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina 27710 kenneth.kreuzer@duke.edu.

The dnaQ gene of Escherichia coli encodes the ε subunit of DNA polymerase III, 
which provides the 3' → 5' exonuclease proofreading activity of the replicative 
polymerase. Prior studies have shown that loss of ε leads to high mutation 
frequency, partially constitutive SOS, and poor growth. In addition, a previous 
study from our laboratory identified dnaQ knockout mutants in a screen for 
mutants specifically defective in the SOS response after quinolone (nalidixic 
acid) treatment. To explain these results, we propose a model whereby, in 
addition to proofreading, ε plays a distinct role in replisome disassembly 
and/or processing of stalled replication forks. To explore this model, we 
generated a pentapeptide insertion mutant library of the dnaQ gene, along with 
site-directed mutants, and screened for separation of function mutants. We 
report the identification of separation of function mutants from this screen, 
showing that proofreading function can be uncoupled from SOS phenotypes 
(partially constitutive SOS and the nalidixic acid SOS defect). Surprisingly, 
the two SOS phenotypes also appear to be separable from each other. These 
findings support the hypothesis that ε has additional roles aside from 
proofreading. Identification of these mutants, especially those with normal 
proofreading but SOS phenotype(s), also facilitates the study of the role of ε 
in SOS processes without the confounding results of high mutator activity 
associated with dnaQ knockout mutants.

Copyright © 2015 Whatley and Kreuzer.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.115.017285
PMCID: PMC4478557
PMID: 25878065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]