1. FASEB J. 2015 Aug;29(8):3193-205. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-269217. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Transgene silencing of the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome mutation results 
in a reversible bone phenotype, whereas resveratrol treatment does not show 
overall beneficial effects.

Strandgren C(1), Nasser HA(1), McKenna T(1), Koskela A(1), Tuukkanen J(1), 
Ohlsson C(1), Rozell B(1), Eriksson M(2).

Author information:
(1)*Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine, and 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden; 
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; 
Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; and Department of 
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)*Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine, and 
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden; 
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; 
Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; and Department of 
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark maria.eriksson.2@ki.se.

Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a rare premature aging disorder 
that is most commonly caused by a de novo point mutation in exon 11 of the LMNA 
gene, c.1824C>T, which results in an increased production of a truncated form of 
lamin A known as progerin. In this study, we used a mouse model to study the 
possibility of recovering from HGPS bone disease upon silencing of the HGPS 
mutation, and the potential benefits from treatment with resveratrol. We show 
that complete silencing of the transgenic expression of progerin normalized bone 
morphology and mineralization already after 7 weeks. The improvements included 
lower frequencies of rib fractures and callus formation, an increased number of 
osteocytes in remodeled bone, and normalized dentinogenesis. The beneficial 
effects from resveratrol treatment were less significant and to a large extent 
similar to mice treated with sucrose alone. However, the reversal of the dental 
phenotype of overgrown and laterally displaced lower incisors in HGPS mice could 
be attributed to resveratrol. Our results indicate that the HGPS bone defects 
were reversible upon suppressed transgenic expression and suggest that 
treatments targeting aberrant progerin splicing give hope to patients who are 
affected by HGPS.

Â© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.14-269217
PMID: 25877214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]