1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 16;10(4):e0119068. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119068. 
eCollection 2015.

Herbal supplement extends life span under some environmental conditions and 
boosts stress resistance.

Villeponteau B(1), Matsagas K(1), Nobles AC(2), Rizza C(1), Horwitz M(1), 
Benford G(3), Mockett RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Genescient Inc., Fountain Valley, California, United States of America.
(2)University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, United States of America.
(3)Genescient Inc., Fountain Valley, California, United States of America; 
University of California, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Genetic studies indicate that aging is modulated by a great number of genetic 
pathways. We have used Drosophila longevity and stress assays to test a 
multipath intervention strategy. To carry out this strategy, we supplemented the 
flies with herbal extracts (SC100) that are predicted to modulate the expression 
of many genes involved in aging and stress resistance, such as mTOR, NOS, 
NF-KappaB, and VEGF. When flies were housed in large cages with SC100 added, 
daily mortality rates of both male and female flies were greatly diminished in 
mid to late life. Surprisingly, SC100 also stabilized midlife mortality rate 
increases so as to extend the maximum life span substantially beyond the limits 
previously reported for D. melanogaster. Under these conditions, SC100 also 
promoted robust resistance to partial starvation stress and to heat stress. 
Fertility was the same initially in both treated and control flies, but it 
became significantly higher in treated flies at older ages as the fertility of 
control flies declined. Mean and maximum life spans of flies in vials at the 
same test site were also extended by SC100, but the life spans were short in 
absolute terms. In contrast, at an independent test site where stress was 
minimized, the flies exhibited much longer mean life spans, but the survival 
curves became highly rectangular and the effects of SC100 on both mean and 
maximum life spans declined greatly or were abolished. The data indicate that 
SC100 is a novel herbal mix with striking effects on enhancing Drosophila stress 
resistance and life span in some environments, while minimizing mid to late life 
mortality rates. They also show that the environment and other factors can have 
transformative effects on both the length and distribution of survivorship, and 
on the ability of SC100 to extend the life span.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119068
PMCID: PMC4400117
PMID: 25879540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interests. This study was funded in part by Genescient Corporation. 
The authors recommended and received approval for publication from the 
Genescient Board of Directors. Gregory Benford is on the Board. B. Villeponteau 
received personal income for consulting, and has been granted stock options from 
Genescient Corporation; he is also an inventor on a patent filing which 
Genescient has licensed (Pending Patent #14521877). K. Matsagas received 
compensation from, and has equity in, Genescient Corporation. C. Rizza has 
equity in Genescient Corporation; she is also an inventor on a patent filing 
which Genescient has licensed (Pending Patent #14521877). M. Horwitz has equity 
in Genescient Corporation. G. Benford has equity in Genescient Corporation and 
serves on the Board of Directors of Genescient Corporation. L.D. Mueller 
received personal income for consulting from, and has equity in Genescient 
Corporation. A. Nobles and R. Mockett have no competing interests. The SC100 
formulation described herein provides the essential herbal components for 
several nutritional supplements (e.g. Stem Cell 100) that are currently 
commercially available and may eventually provide financial benefits to 
Genescient and its employees and shareholders. There are no further patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the 
authorsâ€™ adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, 
as detailed online in the guide for authors.