1. Sci Rep. 2015 Apr 15;5:9511. doi: 10.1038/srep09511.

Copy number variants and genetic polymorphisms in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc, Foxp3 and 
susceptibility to Behcet's disease and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome.

Liao D(1), Hou S(1), Zhang J(1), Fang J(1), Liu Y(1), Bai L(1), Cao Q(1), 
Kijlstra A(2), Yang P(1).

Author information:
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key 
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, China.
(2)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

This study aimed to investigate the role of genetic variants including single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and copy number variants (CNVs) of TBX21, GATA3, 
Rorc and Foxp3 genes in Behcet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) 
syndrome in a Chinese Han population. Genotyping of 25 SNPs was performed by 
iPLEX system (Sequenom) or polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). TaqMan real time PCR was used to assess CNVs. The 
expression of Rorc and Foxp3 were examined by real-time PCR and cytokine 
production was measured by ELISA. High Rorc CNV was associated with the 
susceptibility to BD (P = 8.99 × 10(-8), OR = 3.0), and low Foxp3 CNV 
predisposed to BD in female patients (P = 1.92 × 10(-5), OR = 3.1). CNVs for the 
investigated genes were not altered in VKH syndrome. Further functional studies 
demonstrated that the relative mRNA expression levels of Rorc were increased in 
individuals with high Rorc copy number, but not for Foxp3. Increased production 
of IL-1β and IL-6 was found in individuals carrying a high CNV of Rorc. Our 
study showed that high CNVs of Rorc and low CNVs of Foxp3 confer risk for BD but 
not for VKH syndrome. The tested 25 SNPs in TBX21, GATA3, Rorc and Foxp3 did not 
associate with BD and VKH syndrome.

DOI: 10.1038/srep09511
PMCID: PMC4397537
PMID: 25873156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]