1. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jun;35(6):1545-53. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2178. Epub 2015 
Apr 9.

GATA4 transgenic mice as an in vivo model of congenital heart disease.

Han H(1), Chen Y(1), Liu G(1), Han Z(1), Zhao Z(1), Tang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Peking University People's Hospital, 
Beijing 100044, P.R. China.

Our previous study indicated that 8 patients from a family with a history of 
congenital heart disease had simple atrial septal defect (ASD) and carried the 
same mutation at codon 310 in the GATA4 gene. In the present study, to identify 
the functional defects caused by this mutation in an in vivo model, the 
transgene DNA constructs were microinjected into mice to generate a transgenic 
mouse model. The mice were genotyped using PCR and DNA sequencing. Protein 
expression was measured by western blot analysis. qPCR was used to determine the 
copy number of the transgenes. The heart tissue was fixed and sectioned by 
conventional procedures. The Vevo 2000 system was used to perform 
echocardiography on the mice. The expression of GATA4 target genes was measured 
using the real-time PCR system. The incidence of ASD in the heterozygous 
transgenic mice was found to be greater than that in the wild-type control mice 
(P<0.05). In addition, the expression of α-myosin heavy chain (α-MHC) in the 
heart tissues from the homozygous mice was lower than that in the heart tissues 
from their wild-type littermates (P<0.05). In conclusion, these results suggest 
that the introduction of GATA4 M310V negatively affects the normal expression of 
α-MHC. In accordance with previous findings on GATA4 mutation screening and in 
vitro experiments, this study confirms that GATA4 M310V mutation may lead to the 
development of the congenital heart defect, ASD.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2178
PMCID: PMC4432925
PMID: 25873328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]