1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Apr 13;11(4):e1004162. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004162.  eCollection 2015 Apr.

Twisting right to left: A…A mismatch in a CAG trinucleotide repeat overexpansion 
provokes left-handed Z-DNA conformation.

Khan N(1), Kolimi N(1), Rathinavelan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Telangana State, India.

Conformational polymorphism of DNA is a major causative factor behind several 
incurable trinucleotide repeat expansion disorders that arise from overexpansion 
of trinucleotide repeats located in coding/non-coding regions of specific genes. 
Hairpin DNA structures that are formed due to overexpansion of CAG repeat lead 
to Huntington's disorder and spinocerebellar ataxias. Nonetheless, DNA hairpin 
stem structure that generally embraces B-form with canonical base pairs is 
poorly understood in the context of periodic noncanonical A…A mismatch as found 
in CAG repeat overexpansion. Molecular dynamics simulations on DNA hairpin stems 
containing A…A mismatches in a CAG repeat overexpansion show that A…A dictates 
local Z-form irrespective of starting glycosyl conformation, in sharp contrast 
to canonical DNA duplex. Transition from B-to-Z is due to the mechanistic effect 
that originates from its pronounced nonisostericity with flanking canonical base 
pairs facilitated by base extrusion, backbone and/or base flipping. Based on 
these structural insights we envisage that such an unusual DNA structure of the 
CAG hairpin stem may have a role in disease pathogenesis. As this is the first 
study that delineates the influence of a single A…A mismatch in reversing DNA 
helicity, it would further have an impact on understanding DNA mismatch repair.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004162
PMCID: PMC4395422
PMID: 25876062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.