1. Metallomics. 2015 Sep;7(9):1319-30. doi: 10.1039/c5mt00066a.

The large intracellular loop of hZIP4 is an intrinsically disordered zinc 
binding domain.

Bafaro EM(1), Antala S, Nguyen TV, Dzul SP, Doyon B, Stemmler TL, Dempski RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
100 Institute Road, Worcester, MA 01609, USA. rdempski@wpi.edu.

The human (h) ZIP4 transporter is a plasma membrane protein which functions to 
increase the cytosolic concentration of zinc. hZIP4 transports zinc into 
intestinal cells and therefore has a central role in the absorption of dietary 
zinc. hZIP4 has eight transmembrane domains and encodes a large intracellular 
loop between transmembrane domains III and IV, M3M4. Previously, it has been 
postulated that this domain regulates hZIP4 levels in the plasma membrane in a 
zinc-dependent manner. The objective of this research was to examine the zinc 
binding properties of the large intracellular loop of hZIP4. Therefore, we have 
recombinantly expressed and purified M3M4 and showed that this domain binds two 
zinc ions. Using a combination of site-directed mutagenesis, metal binding 
affinity assays, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy, we demonstrated that the two 
Zn(2+) ions bind sequentially, with the first Zn(2+) binding to a CysHis3 site 
with a nanomolar binding affinity, and the second Zn(2+) binding to a His4 site 
with a weaker affinity. Circular dichroism spectroscopy revealed that the M3M4 
domain is intrinsically disordered, with only a small structural change induced 
upon Zn(2+) coordination. Our data supports a model in which the intracellular 
M3M4 domain senses high cytosolic Zn(2+) concentrations and regulates the plasma 
membrane levels of the hZIP4 transporter in response to Zn(2+) binding.

DOI: 10.1039/c5mt00066a
PMCID: PMC4558264
PMID: 25882556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]