1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0123966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123966. 
eCollection 2015.

RNA sequencing reveals a slow to fast muscle fiber type transition after 
olanzapine infusion in rats.

Lynch CJ(1), Xu Y(1), Hajnal A(2), Salzberg AC(3), Kawasawa YI(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, College of Medicine, Penn 
State University, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, College of Medicine, Penn State 
University, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America.
(3)Department of Public Health Sciences, College of Medicine, Penn State 
University, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Penn State University, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America; Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Penn State University, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America; The Institute for 
Personalized Medicine, College of Medicine, Penn State University, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, 17033, United States of America.

Second generation antipsychotics (SGAs), like olanzapine, exhibit acute 
metabolic side effects leading to metabolic inflexibility, hyperglycemia, 
adiposity and diabetes. Understanding how SGAs affect the skeletal muscle 
transcriptome could elucidate approaches for mitigating these side effects. Male 
Sprague-Dawley rats were infused intravenously with vehicle or olanzapine for 
24h using a dose leading to a mild hyperglycemia. RNA-Seq was performed on 
gastrocnemius muscle, followed by alignment of the data with the Rat Genome 
Assembly 5.0. Olanzapine altered expression of 1347 out of 26407 genes. Genes 
encoding skeletal muscle fiber-type specific sarcomeric, ion channel, 
glycolytic, O2- and Ca2+-handling, TCA cycle, vascularization and lipid 
oxidation proteins and pathways, along with NADH shuttles and LDH isoforms were 
affected. Bioinformatics analyses indicate that olanzapine decreased the 
expression of slower and more oxidative fiber type genes (e.g., type 1), while 
up regulating those for the most glycolytic and least metabolically flexible, 
fast twitch fiber type, IIb. Protein turnover genes, necessary to bring about 
transition, were also up regulated. Potential upstream regulators were also 
identified. Olanzapine appears to be rapidly affecting the muscle transcriptome 
to bring about a change to a fast-glycolytic fiber type. Such fiber types are 
more susceptible than slow muscle to atrophy, and such transitions are observed 
in chronic metabolic diseases. Thus these effects could contribute to the 
altered body composition and metabolic disease olanzapine causes. A potential 
interventional strategy is implicated because aerobic exercise, in contrast to 
resistance exercise, can oppose such slow to fast fiber transitions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123966
PMCID: PMC4404103
PMID: 25893406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.