1. Circ Res. 2015 Apr 24;116(9):1561-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303565.

Modulating the vascular response to limb ischemia: angiogenic and cell 
therapies.

Cooke JP(1), Losordo DW(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Houston Methodist Research 
Institute, TX (J.P.C.); and NeoStem Inc, New York, NY (D.W.L.). 
jpcooke@houstonmethodist.org dlosordo@neostem.com.

The age-adjusted prevalence of peripheral arterial disease in the US population 
has been estimated to approach 12%. The clinical consequences of occlusive 
peripheral arterial disease include pain on walking (claudication), pain at 
rest, and loss of tissue integrity in the distal limbs; the latter may 
ultimately lead to amputation of a portion of the lower extremity. Surgical 
bypass techniques and percutaneous catheter-based interventions may successfully 
reperfuse the limbs of certain patients with peripheral arterial disease. In 
many patients, however, the anatomic extent and distribution of arterial 
occlusion is too severe to permit relief of pain and healing of ischemic ulcers. 
No effective medical therapy is available for the treatment of such patients, 
for many of whom amputation represents the only hope for alleviation of 
symptoms. The ultimate failure of medical treatment and procedural 
revascularization in significant numbers of patients has led to attempts to 
develop alternative therapies for ischemic disease. These strategies include 
administration of angiogenic cytokines, either as recombinant protein or as gene 
therapy, and more recently, to investigations of stem/progenitor cell therapy. 
The purpose of this review is to provide an outline of the preclinical basis for 
angiogenic and stem cell therapies, review the clinical research that has been 
done, summarize the lessons learned, identify gaps in knowledge, and suggest a 
course toward successfully addressing an unmet medical need in a large and 
growing patient population.

Â© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.303565
PMCID: PMC4869986
PMID: 25908729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]