1. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 May 20;137(19):6232-44. doi: 10.1021/ja5132648. Epub 2015 
May 5.

A generalizable platform for interrogating target- and signal-specific 
consequences of electrophilic modifications in redox-dependent cell signaling.

Lin HY(1), Haegele JA(1), Disare MT(1), Lin Q(2), Aye Y(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)†Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
New York 14853, United States.
(2)§Proteomics/Mass Spectrometry Facility, Center for Functional Genomics, 
University of Albany, Rensselaer, New York 12144, United States.
(3)‡Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New 
York 10065, United States.

Despite the known propensity of small-molecule electrophiles to react with 
numerous cysteine-active proteins, biological actions of individual signal 
inducers have emerged to be chemotype-specific. To pinpoint and quantify the 
impacts of modifying one target out of the whole proteome, we develop a 
target-protein-personalized "electrophile toolbox" with which specific 
intracellular targets can be selectively modified at a precise time by specific 
reactive signals. This general methodology, T-REX (targetable reactive 
electrophiles and oxidants), is established by (1) constructing a platform that 
can deliver a range of electronic and sterically different bioactive 
lipid-derived signaling electrophiles to specific proteins in cells; (2) probing 
the kinetics of targeted delivery concept, which revealed that targeting 
efficiency in cells is largely driven by initial on-rate of alkylation; and (3) 
evaluating the consequences of protein-target- and 
small-molecule-signal-specific modifications on the strength of downstream 
signaling. These data show that T-REX allows quantitative interrogations into 
the extent to which the Nrf2 transcription factor-dependent antioxidant response 
element (ARE) signaling is activated by selective electrophilic modifications on 
Keap1 protein, one of several redox-sensitive regulators of the Nrf2-ARE axis. 
The results document Keap1 as a promiscuous electrophile-responsive sensor able 
to respond with similar efficiencies to discrete electrophilic signals, 
promoting comparable strength of Nrf2-ARE induction. T-REX is also able to 
elicit cell activation in cases in which whole-cell electrophile flooding fails 
to stimulate ARE induction prior to causing cytotoxicity. The platform presents 
a previously unavailable opportunity to elucidate the functional consequences of 
small-molecule-signal- and protein-target-specific electrophilic modifications 
in an otherwise unaffected cellular background.

DOI: 10.1021/ja5132648
PMCID: PMC4528680
PMID: 25909755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]