1. J Patient Cent Res Rev. 2014 Spring;1(2):85-92. doi: 10.17294/2330-0698.1017.

Circulating Tumor Cells in Metastatic Breast Cancer: A Prognostic and Predictive 
Marker.

Moussavi-Harami SF(1), Wisinski KB(2), Beebe DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI ; 
Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
(2)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI ; 
University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, WI.

The role of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) as a marker for disease progression 
in metastatic cancer is controversial. The current review will serve to 
summarize the evidence on CTCs as a marker of disease progression in patients 
with metastatic breast cancer. The immunohistochemistry(IHC)-based CellSearchÂ® 
is the only FDA-approved isolation technique for quantifying CTCs in patients 
with metastatic breast cancer. We searched PubMed and Web of Knowledge for 
clinical studies that assessed the prognostic and predictive value of CTCs using 
IHC-based isolation. The patient outcomes reported include median and 
Cox-proportional hazard ratios for overall-survival (OS) and 
progression-free-survival (PFS). All studies reported shorter OS for 
CTC-positive patients versus CTC-negative. A subset of the selected trials 
reported significant lower median PFS for CTC-positive patients. The reported 
trials support the utility of CTC enumeration for patient prognosis. But further 
studies are required to determine the utility of CTC enumeration for guiding 
patient therapy. There are three clinical trials ongoing to test this 
hypothesis. These studies, and others, will further establish the role of CTCs 
in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.17294/2330-0698.1017
PMCID: PMC4405902
PMID: 25914894

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: David J. Beebe, PhD has an 
ownership interest in BellBrook Labs, LLC.