1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 28;10(4):e0125245. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125245. 
eCollection 2015.

Multilocus Sequence Typing of Pathogenic Candida albicans Isolates Collected 
from a Teaching Hospital in Shanghai, China: A Molecular Epidemiology Study.

Wu K(1), Luo T(2), Li L(3), Zhang Q(3), Zhu J(3), Gao Q(2), Chen M(4), Zhu M(3).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Medical Mycology, Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory 
of Medical Molecular Virology, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and Institute 
of Medical Microbiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, People's Republic 
of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Institutes of Biomedical 
Sciences and Institute of Medical Microbiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200032, People's Republic of China.
(3)The Center for Medical Mycology, Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, People's Republic of China.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Mycology, Department of 
Dermatology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, 200003, People's Republic of China.

Molecular typing of Candida albicans is important for studying the population 
structure and epidemiology of this opportunistic yeast, such as population 
dynamics, nosocomial infections, multiple infections and microevolution. The 
genetic diversity of C. albicans has been rarely studied in China. In the 
present study, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) was used to characterize the 
genetic diversity and population structure of 62 C. albicans isolates collected 
from 40 patients from Huashan Hospital in Shanghai, China. A total of 50 diploid 
sequence types (DSTs) were identified in the 62 C. albicans isolates, with 41 
newly identified DSTs. Based on cluster analysis, the 62 isolates were 
classified into nine existing clades and two new clades (namely clades New 1 and 
New 2). The majority of the isolates were clustered into three clades, clade 6 
(37.5%), clade 1 (15.0%) and clade 17 (15.0%). Isolates of clade New 2 were 
specifically identified in East Asia. We identified three cases of potential 
nosocomial transmission based on association analysis between patients' clinical 
data and the genotypes of corresponding isolates. Finally, by analyzing the 
genotypes of serial isolates we further demonstrated that the microevolution of 
C. albicans was due to loss of heterozygosity. Our study represents the first 
molecular typing of C. albicans in eastern China, and we confirmed that MLST is 
a useful tool for studying the epidemiology and evolution of C. albicans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125245
PMCID: PMC4412568
PMID: 25919124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.