1. Cell Commun Signal. 2015 Apr 29;13:25. doi: 10.1186/s12964-015-0103-0.

Homoharringtonine, a clinically approved anti-leukemia drug, sensitizes tumor 
cells for TRAIL-induced necroptosis.

Philipp S(1), Sosna J(2), Plenge J(3), Kalthoff H(4), Adam D(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Immunologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany. 
philipp@immunologie.uni-kiel.de.
(2)Institut für Immunologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany. 
sosna.immunologie@uksh-kiel.de.
(3)Institut für Immunologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany. 
johannes.plenge@gmx.de.
(4)Institut für Experimentelle Tumorforschung, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, 
Kiel, Germany. hkalthoff@email.uni-kiel.de.
(5)Institut für Immunologie, Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel, Germany. 
dadam@email.uni-kiel.de.

BACKGROUND: One hallmark of cancer cells is their ability to evade physiologic 
signals causing regulated cell death (RCD). Correspondingly, TRAIL-based 
therapies to eliminate human cancer cells via enforced induction of apoptosis 
have been established and represent a promising approach in anti-cancer 
research. However, due to frequently appearing intrinsic or acquired resistances 
of tumor cells against apoptosis, TRAIL-based apoptotic strategies for the 
treatment of cancer patients have shown limited efficacy. As a potential 
alternative, regulated necrosis (and necroptosis triggered e.g. by TRAIL 
receptors 1/2) has recently gained considerable attention. Regulated necrosis 
represents a mode of RCD molecularly distinct from apoptosis whose potential in 
anti-cancer therapy is almost uncharacterized. Since in most cancer cells 
survival pathways counteract the effects of TRAIL-induced RCD, sensitizers such 
as cycloheximide (CHX) are frequently added in cell culture to overcome this 
problem. Unfortunately, those sensitizers are cytotoxic and therefore not 
suitable for the treatment of cancer patients. Here, we have alternatively 
employed homoharringtonine (HHT), a plant alkaloid which was recently approved 
by the U. S. Food and Drug Administration to treat patients with chronic myeloid 
lymphoma.
RESULTS: We show that HHT is an efficient sensitizer for TRAIL-induced 
necroptosis in multiple human cancer cell lines. In addition, HHT-enhanced 
TRAIL-mediated necroptosis occurs via the same signaling pathways (involving 
RIPK1/RIPK3/MLKL) as CHX-enhanced necroptosis. Importantly, consecutive 
treatment schedules of necroptosis and apoptosis in either combination revealed 
remarkable additive effects not reached by repetitive apoptotic treatments 
alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrate that HHT can replace harmful 
substances such as CHX to sensitize human cancer cells to TRAIL-induced 
necroptosis. Thus, HHT represents a promising enhancer in TRAIL-based 
necroptotic anti-cancer therapies also in patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-015-0103-0
PMCID: PMC4411737
PMID: 25925126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]