1. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13006-18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3514.

PKM2 promotes glucose metabolism and cell growth in gliomas through a mechanism 
involving a let-7a/c-Myc/hnRNPA1 feedback loop.

Luan W(1), Wang Y(1), Chen X(1), Shi Y(1), Wang J(1), Zhang J(1), Qian J(2), Li 
R(1), Tao T(1), Wei W(1), Hu Q(1), Liu N(1), You Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, People's Hospital of Xuancheng City, Anhui, 
China.

Tumor cells metabolize more glucose to lactate in aerobic or hypoxic conditions 
than non-tumor cells. Pyruvate kinase isoenzyme type M2 (PKM2) is crucial for 
tumor cell aerobic glycolysis. We established a role for 
let-7a/c-Myc/hnRNPA1/PKM2 signaling in glioma cell glucose metabolism. PKM2 
depletion via siRNA inhibits cell proliferation and aerobic glycolysis in glioma 
cells. C-Myc promotes up-regulation of hnRNPA1 expression, hnRNPA1 binding to 
PKM pre-mRNA, and the subsequent formation of PKM2. This pathway is 
downregulated by the microRNA let-7a, which functionally targets c-Myc, whereas 
hnRNPA1 blocks the biogenesis of let-7a to counteract its ability to 
downregulate the c-Myc/hnRNPA1/PKM2 signaling pathway. The down-regulation of 
c-Myc/ hnRNPA1/PKM2 by let-7a is verified using a glioma xenograft model. These 
results suggest that let-7a, c-Myc and hnRNPA1 from a feedback loop, thereby 
regulating PKM2 expression to modulate glucose metabolism of glioma cells. These 
findings elucidate a new pathway mediating aerobic glycolysis in gliomas and 
provide an attractive potential target for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3514
PMCID: PMC4536995
PMID: 25948776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.