1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 26;290(26):15921-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.653691. Epub 
2015 May 6.

Roles of Residues Arg-61 and Gln-38 of Human DNA Polymerase η in Bypass of 
Deoxyguanosine and 7,8-Dihydro-8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine.

Su Y(1), Patra A(1), Harp JM(1), Egli M(1), Guengerich FP(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Center in Molecular Toxicology, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Center in Molecular Toxicology, 
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146 
f.guengerich@vanderbilt.edu.

Like the other Y-family DNA polymerases, human DNA polymerase η (hpol η) has 
relatively low fidelity and is able to tolerate damage during DNA synthesis, 
including 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxoG), one of the most abundant 
DNA lesions in the genome. Crystal structures show that Arg-61 and Gln-38 are 
located near the active site and may play important roles in the fidelity and 
efficiency of hpol η. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to replace these side 
chains either alone or together, and the wild type or mutant proteins were 
purified and tested by replicating DNA past deoxyguanosine (G) or 8-oxoG. The 
catalytic activity of hpol η was dramatically disrupted by the R61M and 
Q38A/R61A mutations, as opposed to the R61A and Q38A single mutants. Crystal 
structures of hpol η mutant ternary complexes reveal that polarized water 
molecules can mimic and partially compensate for the missing side chains of 
Arg-61 and Gln-38 in the Q38A/R61A mutant. The combined data indicate that the 
positioning and positive charge of Arg-61 synergistically contribute to the 
nucleotidyl transfer reaction, with additional influence exerted by Gln-38. In 
addition, gel filtration chromatography separated multimeric and monomeric forms 
of wild type and mutant hpol η, indicating the possibility that hpol η forms 
multimers in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.653691
PMCID: PMC4481197
PMID: 25947374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]