1. N Engl J Med. 1989 Dec 21;321(25):1689-95. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198912213212501.

Oncogenic point mutations in the human retinoblastoma gene: their application to 
genetic counseling.

Yandell DW(1), Campbell TA, Dayton SH, Petersen R, Walton D, Little JB, 
McConkie-Rosell A, Buckley EG, Dryja TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1990 May 10;322(19):1397-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199005103221917.

Mutations of the retinoblastoma gene, most of which cannot be detected by 
conventional Southern blotting, are known to cause both the nonhereditary and 
hereditary forms of retinoblastoma and have been implicated in the development 
of other cancers. Nonhereditary retinoblastoma is caused by a somatic mutation. 
Hereditary retinoblastoma is caused by a germ-cell mutation, most often a new 
one, and thus there is usually no family history of the disease. Unlike patients 
with the nonhereditary disease, those with the hereditary form are at risk for 
additional retinoblastomas, and their progeny are at risk for the tumors. We 
used a sensitive technique of primer-directed enzymatic amplification, followed 
by DNA sequence analysis, to identify mutations as small as a single nucleotide 
change in tumors from seven patients with simplex retinoblastoma (with no family 
history of the disease). In four patients the mutation involved only the tumor 
cells, and in three it involved normal somatic cells as well as tumor cells but 
was not found in either parent; thus, these mutations appeared to be new, 
germ-cell mutations. In addition, we found point mutations in cells from a 
bladder carcinoma, a small-cell carcinoma of the lung, and another 
retinoblastoma. We conclude that the technique that we have described can 
distinguish hereditary from nonhereditary retinoblastoma and that it is useful 
in risk estimation and genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM198912213212501
PMID: 2594029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]