1. PLoS One. 2015 May 6;10(5):e0126082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126082. 
eCollection 2015.

Drug repositioning for diabetes based on 'omics' data mining.

Zhang M(1), Luo H(2), Xi Z(1), Rogaeva E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, Tanz Centre for Research in 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, 60 Leonard Street, Toronto, 
Ontario, M5T 2S8, Canada.
(2)University of Arkansas at Little Rock/University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences Bioinformatics Graduate Program, 2801 S. University Ave., Little Rock, 
AR, 72204, United States of America.

Drug repositioning has shorter developmental time, lower cost and less safety 
risk than traditional drug development process. The current study aims to 
repurpose marketed drugs and clinical candidates for new indications in diabetes 
treatment by mining clinical 'omics' data. We analyzed data from genome wide 
association studies (GWAS), proteomics and metabolomics studies and revealed a 
total of 992 proteins as potential anti-diabetic targets in human. Information 
on the drugs that target these 992 proteins was retrieved from the Therapeutic 
Target Database (TTD) and 108 of these proteins are drug targets with drug 
projects information. Research and preclinical drug targets were excluded and 35 
of the 108 proteins were selected as druggable proteins. Among them, five 
proteins were known targets for treating diabetes. Based on the pathogenesis 
knowledge gathered from the OMIM and PubMed databases, 12 protein targets of 58 
drugs were found to have a new indication for treating diabetes. CMap 
(connectivity map) was used to compare the gene expression patterns of cells 
treated by these 58 drugs and that of cells treated by known anti-diabetic drugs 
or diabetes risk causing compounds. As a result, 9 drugs were found to have the 
potential to treat diabetes. Among the 9 drugs, 4 drugs (diflunisal, nabumetone, 
niflumic acid and valdecoxib) targeting COX2 (prostaglandin G/H synthase 2) were 
repurposed for treating type 1 diabetes, and 2 drugs (phenoxybenzamine and 
idazoxan) targeting ADRA2A (Alpha-2A adrenergic receptor) had a new indication 
for treating type 2 diabetes. These findings indicated that 'omics' data mining 
based drug repositioning is a potentially powerful tool to discover novel 
anti-diabetic indications from marketed drugs and clinical candidates. 
Furthermore, the results of our study could be related to other disorders, such 
as Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126082
PMCID: PMC4422696
PMID: 25946000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Ming Zhang and Zhengrui Xi 
have one patent pending related to this research. The patent id and title are 
2014104214974, and A Method of Drug Repositioning Using Omics Data. This 
invention was disclosed on December 17th, 2014. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.