1. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0125575. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125575. 
eCollection 2015.

Identification of CD4-Binding Site Dependent Plasma Neutralizing Antibodies in 
an HIV-1 Infected Indian Individual.

Khan L(1), Makhdoomi MA(1), Kumar S(1), Nair A(1), Andrabi R(1), Clark BE(2), 
Auyeung K(2), Bhattacharya J(3), Vajpayee M(4), Wig N(5), Pantophlet R(2), 
Luthra K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(3)HIV Vaccine Translational Research Laboratory, THSTI-IAVI HIV Vaccine Design 
Program, Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, Gurgaon, 
Haryana, India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(5)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Dissecting antibody specificities in the plasma of HIV-1 infected individuals 
that develop broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) is likely to provide useful 
information for refining target epitopes for vaccine design. Several studies 
have reported CD4-binding site (CD4bs) antibodies as neutralization determinants 
in the plasma of subtype B-infected individuals; however there is little 
information on the prevalence of CD4bs specificities in HIV-infected individuals 
in India. Here, we report on the presence of CD4bs antibodies and their 
contribution to virus neutralization in the plasma from a cohort of HIV-1 
infected Indian individuals. Plasma from 11 of the 140 HIV-1 infected 
individuals (7.9%) studied here exhibited cross-neutralization activity against 
a panel of subtype B and C viruses. Analyses of these 11 plasma samples for the 
presence of CD4bs antibodies using two CD4bs-selective probes (antigenically 
resurfaced HXB2gp120 core protein RSC3 and hyperglycosylated JRFLgp120 mutant 
ΔN2mCHO) revealed that five (AIIMS 617, 619, 627, 642, 660) contained 
RSC3-reactive plasma antibodies and only one (AIIMS 660) contained 
ΔN2mCHO-reactive antibodies. Plasma antibody depletion and competition 
experiments confirmed that the neutralizing activity in the AIIMS 660 plasma was 
dependent on CD4bs antibodies. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
study to report specifically on the presence of CD4bs antibodies in the plasma 
of a cohort of HIV-1 infected Indian donors. The identification of CD4bs 
dependent neutralizing antibodies in an HIV-1 infected Indian donor is a salient 
finding of this study and is supportive of ongoing efforts to induce similar 
antibodies by immunization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125575
PMCID: PMC4427266
PMID: 25962059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.