1. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Apr 10;14(2):3121-8. doi: 10.4238/2015.April.10.22.

Association between the CYP11B2 gene -344T>C polymorphism and coronary artery 
disease: a meta-analysis.

Liu Y(1), Liu HL(2), Han W(1), Yu SJ(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, The General Hospital of the Chinese Armed Police 
Forces, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, The General Hospital of the Chinese Armed Police 
Forces, Beijing, China liuhuiliang00@126.com.

Numerous studies have evaluated the association between the CYP11B2 gene -344T>C 
polymorphism and coronary artery disease (CAD) risk. However, the specific 
association is still controversial. To address this issue, PubMed, EMBASE, and 
China National Knowledge Infrastructure databases were searched for eligible 
articles that reported on the relationship between the CYP11B2 gene -344T>C 
polymorphism and CAD, and were published before April 2014. Data from five 
separate studies with 3687 subjects were analyzed by meta-analysis. No 
significant variation in CAD risk was detected by any of the genetic models in 
the overall study population. Taking into account the effect of ethnicity, 
further stratified analyses demonstrated significant association in both 
Caucasian (TT vs TC: OR = 0.80, 95%CI = 0.64-1.00) and Asian populations (TT vs 
TC: OR = 1.25, 95%CI = 1.01-1.54; dominant model: OR = 0.80, 95%CI = 0.66-0.98). 
The pooled ORs were not substantially altered after the exclusion of one study 
in the control group that deviated from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, highlighting 
the reliability of our meta-analysis results. In conclusion, this meta-analysis 
suggested that the -344T>C polymorphism in the CYP11B2 gene might be associated 
with susceptibility to CAD in Caucasians and Asians.

DOI: 10.4238/2015.April.10.22
PMID: 25966076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]