1. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16321-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3872.

Inhibition of TRPM7 by carvacrol suppresses glioblastoma cell proliferation, 
migration and invasion.

Chen WL(1)(2), Barszczyk A(2), Turlova E(1)(2), Deurloo M(2), Liu B(1)(2), Yang 
BB(3), Rutka JT(1), Feng ZP(2), Sun HS(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Institute of Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

Glioblastomas are progressive brain tumors with devastating proliferative and 
invasive characteristics. Ion channels are the second largest target class for 
drug development. In this study, we investigated the effects of the TRPM7 
inhibitor carvacrol on the viability, resistance to apoptosis, migration, and 
invasiveness of the human U87 glioblastoma cell line.The expression levels of 
TRPM7 mRNA and protein in U87 cells were detected by RT-PCR, western blotting 
and immunofluorescence. TRPM7 currents were recorded using whole-cell 
patch-clamp techniques. An MTT assay was used to assess cell viability and 
proliferation. Wound healing and transwell experiments were used to evaluate 
cell migration and invasion. Protein levels of p-Akt/t-Akt, p-ERK1/2/t-ERK1/2, 
cleaved caspase-3, MMP-2 and phosphorylated cofilin were also detected.TRPM7 
mRNA and protein expression in U87 cells is higher than in normal human 
astrocytes. Whole-cell patch-clamp recording showed that carvacrol blocks 
recombinant TRPM7 current in HEK293 cells and endogenous TRPM7-like current in 
U87 cells. Carvacrol treatment reduced the viability, migration and invasion of 
U87 cells. Carvacrol also decreased MMP-2 protein expression and promoted the 
phosphorylation of cofilin. Furthermore, carvacrol inhibited the Ras/MEK/MAPK 
and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.Therefore, carvacrol may have therapeutic 
potential for the treatment of glioblastomas through its inhibition of TRPM7 
channels.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3872
PMCID: PMC4599272
PMID: 25965832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.