1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2015 Apr 18;71(Pt 5):o319-20. doi: 
10.1107/S205698901500732X. eCollection 2015 May 1.

Crystal structure of tetra-ethyl-ammonium chloride 
3,4,5,6-tetra-fluoro-1,2-di-iodo-benzene.

Viger-Gravel J(1), Korobkov I(1), Bryce DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Ottawa, D'Iorio Hall, 10 Marie Curie 
Private, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 6N5, Canada.

Equimolar qu-anti-ties of tetra-ethyl-ammonium chloride (Et4NCl) and 
3,4,5,6-tetra-fluoro-1,2-di-iodo-benzene (o-DITFB or o-C6F4I2) have been 
co-crystallized in a solution of di-chloro-methane yielding a pure 
halogen-bonded compound, 3,4,5,6-tetra-fluoro-1,2-di-iodo-benzene-tetra-ethyl 
ammonium chloride (2/1), Et4N(+)·Cl(-)·2C6F4I2, in the form of translucent 
needles. [(Et4NCl)(o-C6F4I2)2] packs in the C2/c space group. The asymmetric 
unit includes one mol-ecule of DITFB, one Et4N(+) cation located on a twofold 
rotation axis, and one chloride anion also located on a twofold rotation 
symmetry axis. This compound has an inter-esting halogen-bonding environment 
surrounding the halide. Here, the chloride anion acts as a tetra-dentate halogen 
bond acceptor and forms a distorted square-pyramidal geometry, with I⋯Cl(-)⋯I 
angles of 80.891 (6) and 78.811 (11)°, where two crystallographically distinct 
iodine atoms form halogen bonds with the chloride anion. Resulting from that 
square-pyramidal geometry are short contacts between some of the adjacent F 
atoms. Along the b axis, the halogen-bonding inter-action results in a polymeric 
network, producing a sheet in which the two closest chloride ions are 
7.8931 (6) Å apart. The Et4N(+) cation alternates in columns with the halide 
ion. The expected short contacts (shorter than the sum of their van der Waals 
radii) are observed for the halogen bonds [3.2191 (2) and 3.2968 (2) Å], as well 
as almost linear angles [170.953 (6) and 173.529 (6)°].

DOI: 10.1107/S205698901500732X
PMCID: PMC4420113
PMID: 25995926