1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 22;34(1):55. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0173-2.

Quantitative detection of DNMT3A R882H mutation in acute myeloid leukemia.

Berenstein R(1), Blau IW(2), Suckert N(3), Baldus C(4), Pezzutto A(5), Dörken 
B(6), Blau O(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
rimma.berenstein@charite.de.
(2)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
igor.blau@charite.de.
(3)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
n.suckert@t-online.de.
(4)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
claudia.baldus@charite.de.
(5)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
antonio.pezzutto@charite.de.
(6)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
bernd.doerken@charite.de.
(7)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Tumorimmunology, Charité University 
School of Medicine, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany. 
olga.blau@charite.de.

BACKGROUND: DNMT3A mutations represent one of the most frequent gene alterations 
detectable in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with normal karyotype. Although 
various recurrent somatic mutations of DNMT3A have been described, the most 
common mutation is located at R882 in the methyltransferase domain of the gene. 
Because of their prognostic significance and high stability during disease 
evolution, DNMT3A mutations might represent highly informative biomarkers for 
prognosis and outcome of disease.
METHODS: We describe an allele-specific PCR with a Blocking reagent for the 
quantitative detection of DNMT3A R882H mutation providing the possibility to 
analyze the quantitative amount of mutation during the course of disease. Next, 
we analyzed 62 follow-up samples from 6 AML patients after therapy and 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT).
RESULTS: We developed an ASB-PCR assay for quantitative analysis of R882H DNMT3A 
mutation. After optimization of blocker concentration, a R882H-positive plasmid 
was constructed to enhance the accuracy of the sensitivity of quantitative 
detection. The assay displayed a high efficiency and sensitivity up to 10(-3). 
The reproducibility of assay analyzed using follow-up samples showed the 
standard deviation less than 3.1 %. This assay displayed a complete concordance 
with sequencing and endonuclease restriction analysis. We have found persistence 
of DNMT3A R882H mutations in complete remission (CR) after standard 
cytoreduction therapy that could be indicating presence of DNMT3A mutation in 
early pre-leukemic stem cells that resist chemotherapy. The loss of correlation 
between NPM1 and DNMT3A in CR could be associated with evolution of pre-leukemic 
and leukemic clones. In patients with CR with complete donor chimerism after 
alloSCT, we have found no DNMT3A R882H. In relapsed patients, all samples showed 
an increasing of both NPM1 and DNMT3A mutated alleles. This suggests at least in 
part the presence of NPM1 and DNMT3A mutations in the same cell clone.
CONCLUSION: We developed a rapid and reliable method for quantitative detection 
of DNMT3A R882H mutations in AML patients. Quantitative detection of DNMT3A 
R882H mutations at different time points of AML disease enables screening of 
follow-up samples. This could provide additional information about the role of 
DNMT3A mutations in development and progression of AML.

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-015-0173-2
PMCID: PMC4443651
PMID: 25994761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]