1. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 May 2;8:999-1007. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S64664. eCollection
 2015.

Personalized treatment strategies for non-small-cell lung cancer in Chinese 
patients: the role of crizotinib.

Niu FY(1), Wu YL(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of 
China ; Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement is an oncogene targeted with 
approved drugs second to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in lung cancer. 
Crizotinib was developed and introduced into clinical practice rapidly and 
successfully after the discovery of ALK rearrangement in non-small-cell lung 
cancer. Chinese and other Asian patients treated with crizotinib seem to have 
lower toxicity and higher efficacy compared with other ethnicities. Crizotinib 
showed potent antitumor activity and manageable toxicity in 
mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-Met)/ROS1-positive non-small-cell 
lung cancer patients, but prospective clinical trials are still needed to 
confirm its efficacy and safety. Crizotinib appears to be effective against 
tumors originating from various organs that harbor ALK abnormalities. In the 
near future, we would classify the tumors by their genetic information beyond 
organs, such as ALKoma, EGFRoma, and RAFoma, and a single compound could be used 
for many different types of cancer in different organs. The major challenge of 
the widespread use of crizotinib in clinical practice is establishing convenient 
diagnostic techniques for the detection of ALK/c-Met/ROS1. In the present study, 
we reviewed the application of crizotinib in Chinese patients.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S64664
PMCID: PMC4427450
PMID: 25999733