1. Molecules. 2015 May 18;20(5):8928-40. doi: 10.3390/molecules20058928.

Absorption and Metabolism Characteristics of Triptolide as Determined by a 
Sensitive and Reliable LC-MS/MS Method.

Gong X(1), Chen Y(2), Wu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiatin Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, China. gongxiaomei1981@163.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University, 168 Changhai Road, Shanghai 200433, China. medchenyan@126.com.
(3)Institute of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1# Weigang, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, 
China. wuyi2001cn@163.com.

In this research, a sensitive and reliable LC-MS/MS method was developed and 
applied to determine the concentration of triptolide in rat plasma, microsomes, 
and cell incubation media. The absolute oral bioavailability of triptolide is 
63.9% at a dose of 1 mg·kg-1. In vitro, the bidirectional transport of 
triptolide across Caco-2 cells was studied. A markedly higher transport of 
triptolide across Caco-2 cells was observed in the basolateral-to-apical 
direction and was abrogated in the presence of the P-gp inhibitor, verapamil. 
The result indicated that P-gp might be involved in the absorption of triptolide 
in intestinal. The metabolic stability was also investigated using human liver 
microsome incubation systems in vitro. In HLMs, incubations with an initial 
triptolide concentration of 1 μM resulted in an 82.4% loss of substrate over 60 
min, and the t1/2 was 38 min, which indicated that triptolide was easily 
metabolized in human liver microsomes. In conclusion, the absolute oral 
bioavailability of triptolide in plasma, transport across Caco-2 cell 
monolayers, and metabolic stability in human liver microsomes were 
systematically investigated by using a sensitive and reliable LC-MS/MS method.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules20058928
PMCID: PMC6272403
PMID: 25993421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.