1. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jul;36(1):113-22. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2222. Epub 2015
May  25.

Transforming growth factor-β1 induces EMT by the transactivation of epidermal 
growth factor signaling through HA/CD44 in lung and breast cancer cells.

Li L(1), Qi L(1), Liang Z(2), Song W(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Sun B(1), Zhang 
B(2), Cao W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and 
Hospital, Tianjin 300060, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Breast Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and 
Hospital, Tianjin 300060, P.R. China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process closely related to tumor 
development, is regulated by a variety of signaling pathways and growth factors, 
such as transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) and epidermal growth factor 
(EGF). Hyaluronan (HA) has been shown to induce EMT through either TGF-β1 or EGF 
signaling and to be a regulator of the crosstalk between these two pathways in 
fibroblasts. In this study, in order to clarify whether HA has the same effect 
in tumor cells, we utilized the lung cancer cell line, A549, and the breast 
cancer cell line, MCF-7, and found that the effects of stimulation with TGF-β1 
were more potent than those of EGF in regulating the expression of 
EMT-associated proteins and in enhancing cell migration and invasion. In 
addition, we observed that TGF-β1 activated EGF receptor (EGFR) and its 
downstream AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways. 
Furthermore, we found that TGF-β1 upregulated the expression of hyaluronan 
synthases (HAS1, HAS2 and HAS3) and promoted the expression of CD44, a cell 
surface receptor for HA, which interacts with EGFR, resulting in the activation 
of the downstream AKT and ERK pathways. Conversely, treatment with 
4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU; an inhibitor of HAS) prior to stimulation with 
TGF-β1, inhibited the expression of CD44 and EGFR, abolished the interaction 
between CD44 and EGFR. Furthermore, the use of shRNA targeting CD44 impaired the 
expression of EGFR, deactivated the AKT and ERK pathways, reversed EMT and 
decreased the migration and invasion ability of cells. In conclusion, our data 
demonstrate that TGF-β1 induces EMT by the transactivation of EGF signaling 
through HA/CD44 in lung and breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2222
PMCID: PMC4494581
PMID: 26005723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]