1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 26;16(6):11849-63. doi: 10.3390/ijms160611849.

Are MTHFR C677T and MTRR A66G Polymorphisms Associated with Overweight/Obesity 
Risk? From a Case-Control to a Meta-Analysis of 30,327 Subjects.

Fan SJ(1), Yang BY(2), Zhi XY(3), He M(4), Wang D(5), Wang YX(6), Wang YN(6), 
Wei J(7), Zheng QM(8), Sun GF(9).

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. fanfan0721ykl@163.com.
(2)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. boyiyangcmu@163.com.
(3)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. zhixy90smile@126.com.
(4)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. hemiao.cmu@gmail.com.
(5)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. 472594283@163.com.
(6)Division of Molecular Preventive Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Targeted 
Therapy and Molecular Medicine, Shanghai 200433, China. 
wangyanxun@genechina.com.
(7)Brain Disease Center, Tianjin Dagang Oil Field General Hospital, Tianjin 
300280, China. weijiantianjin@163.com.
(8)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. 
qmzheng@mail.cmu.edu.cn.
(9)Research Center of Environment and Non-Communicable Disease, School of Public 
Health, China Medical University, Shenyang 110013, China. sungf@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Several studies have examined the associations of methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase (MTHFR) C677T and methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) A66G 
polymorphisms with being overweight/obesity. However, the results are still 
controversial. We therefore conducted a case-control study (517 cases and 741 
controls) in a Chinese Han population and then performed a meta-analysis by 
combining previous studies (5431 cases and 24,896 controls). In our case-control 
study, the MTHFR C677T polymorphism was not significantly associated with being 
overweight/obesity when examining homozygous codominant, heterozygous 
codominant, dominant, recessive and allelic genetic models. The following 
meta-analysis confirmed our case-control results. Heterogeneity was minimal in 
the overall analysis, and sensitivity analyses and publication bias tests 
indicated that the meta-analytic results were reliable. Similarly, both the 
case-control study and meta-analysis found no significant association between 
the MTRR A66G polymorphism and being overweight/obesity. However, sensitivity 
analyses showed that the associations between the MTRR A66G polymorphism and 
being overweight/obesity became significant in the dominant, heterozygous 
codominant and allelic models after excluding our case-control study. The 
results from our case-control study and meta-analysis suggest that both of the 
two polymorphisms are not associated with being overweight/obesity. Further 
large-scale population-based studies, especially for the MTRR A66G polymorphism, 
are still needed to confirm or refute our findings.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms160611849
PMCID: PMC4490418
PMID: 26016497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]