1. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0127629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127629. 
eCollection 2015.

The effect of recombinant erythropoietin on plasma brain derived neurotrophic 
factor levels in patients with affective disorders: a randomised controlled 
study.

Vinberg M(1), Miskowiak K(1), Hoejman P(2), Pedersen M(2), Kessing LV(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychiatric Centre Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, University Hospital of 
Copenhagen Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism and Centre of Physical Activity 
Research, Rigshospitalet, 7641, Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

The study aims to investigate the effect of repeated infusions of recombinant 
erythropoietin (EPO) on plasma brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) levels 
in patients with affective disorders. In total, 83 patients were recruited: 40 
currently depressed patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD) (Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale-17 items (HDRS-17) score >17) (study 1) and 43 patients 
with bipolar disorder (BD) in partial remission (HDRS-17 and Young Mania Rating 
Scale (YMRS) ≤ 14) (study 2). In both studies, patients were randomised to 
receive eight weekly EPO (Eprex; 40,000 IU) or saline (0.9% NaCl) infusions in a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel--group design. Plasma BDNF levels 
were measured at baseline and at weeks 5, 9 and at follow up, week 14. In 
contrast with our hypothesis, EPO down regulated plasma BDNF levels in patients 
with TRD (mean reduction at week 9 (95% CI): EPO 10.94 ng/l (4.51-21.41 ng/l); 
mean increase at week 9: Saline 0.52 ng/l, p=0.04 (-5.88-4.48 ng/l) p=0.04, 
partial ŋ2=0.12). No significant effects were found on BDNF levels in partially 
remitted patients with BD (p=0.35). The present effects of EPO on BDNF levels in 
patients with TRD point to a role of neurotrophic factors in the potential 
effects of EPO seen in TRD and BD. The neurobiological mechanisms underlying 
these effects and the interaction between EPO and peripheral levels on BDNF need 
to be further elucidated in human studies including a broad range of biomarkers.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00916552.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127629
PMCID: PMC4444304
PMID: 26011424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: MV has been a consultant 
for Eli Lilly, Lundbeck; Servier and Astra Zeneca. LVK has within the last 3 
years been a consultant for Lundbeck, AstraZeneca and Servier. KWM has received 
consultancy fees from Lundbeck. All other authors report no financial interests 
or other potential conflicts of interest. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.