1. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0128075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128075. 
eCollection 2015.

Structural-Functional Analysis Reveals a Specific Domain Organization in Family 
GH20 Hexosaminidases.

Val-Cid C(1), Biarnés X(1), Faijes M(1), Planas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Institut Químic de Sarrià, Universitat Ramon 
Llull, Barcelona, Spain.

Hexosaminidases are involved in important biological processes catalyzing the 
hydrolysis of N-acetyl-hexosaminyl residues in glycosaminoglycans and 
glycoconjugates. The GH20 enzymes present diverse domain organizations for which 
we propose two minimal model architectures: Model A containing at least a 
non-catalytic GH20b domain and the catalytic one (GH20) always accompanied with 
an extra α-helix (GH20b-GH20-α), and Model B with only the catalytic GH20 
domain. The large Bifidobacterium bifidum lacto-N-biosidase was used as a model 
protein to evaluate the minimal functional unit due to its interest and 
structural complexity. By expressing different truncated forms of this enzyme, 
we show that Model A architectures cannot be reduced to Model B. In particular, 
there are two structural requirements general to GH20 enzymes with Model A 
architecture. First, the non-catalytic domain GH20b at the N-terminus of the 
catalytic GH20 domain is required for expression and seems to stabilize it. 
Second, the substrate-binding cavity at the GH20 domain always involves a remote 
element provided by a long loop from the catalytic domain itself or, when this 
loop is short, by an element from another domain of the multidomain structure or 
from the dimeric partner. Particularly, the lacto-N-biosidase requires GH20b and 
the lectin-like domain at the N- and C-termini of the catalytic GH20 domain to 
be fully soluble and functional. The lectin domain provides this remote element 
to the active site. We demonstrate restoration of activity of the inactive 
GH20b-GH20-α construct (model A architecture) by a complementation assay with 
the lectin-like domain. The engineering of minimal functional units of 
multidomain GH20 enzymes must consider these structural requirements.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128075
PMCID: PMC4449183
PMID: 26024355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.