1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2014 Aug;3(8):e58. doi: 10.1038/emi.2014.61. Epub 2014 
Aug 13.

Aspartate decarboxylase (PanD) as a new target of pyrazinamide in Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis.

Shi W(1), Chen J(2), Feng J(1), Cui P(2), Zhang S(1), Weng X(2), Zhang W(2), 
Zhang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University , 
Shanghai 200040, China.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore, MD 21205, USA ; Department 
of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University , Shanghai 200040, 
China.

Pyrazinamide (PZA) is a frontline anti-tuberculosis drug that plays a crucial 
role in the treatment of both drug-susceptible and multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis (MDR-TB). PZA is a prodrug that is converted to its active form, 
pyrazinoic acid (POA), by a nicotinamidase/pyrazinamidase encoded by the pncA 
gene, the mutation of which is the major cause of PZA resistance. Although RpsA 
(ribosomal protein S1, involved in trans-translation) has recently been shown to 
be a target of POA/PZA, whole-genome sequencing has identified mutations in the 
panD gene encoding aspartate decarboxylase in PZA-resistant strains lacking pncA 
and rpsA mutations. To gain more insight into a possible new target of PZA, we 
isolated 30 POA-resistant mutants lacking mutations in pncA and rpsA from M. 
tuberculosis in vitro, and whole-genome sequencing of 3 mutants identified 
various mutations in the panD gene. Additionally, sequencing analysis revealed 
that the remaining 27 POA-resistant mutants all harbored panD mutations 
affecting the C-terminus of the PanD protein, with PanD M117I being the most 
frequent mutation (24/30, 80%). Conditional overexpression of panD from M. 
tuberculosis, M. smegmatis or E. coli, or of M. tuberculosis mutant PanD M117I, 
all conferred resistance to POA and PZA in M. tuberculosis. Î²-alanine and 
pantothenate, which are downstream products of PanD, were found to antagonize 
the antituberculosis activity of POA. In addition, the activity of the M. 
tuberculosis PanD enzyme was inhibited by POA at therapeutically relevant 
concentrations in a concentration-dependent manner but was not inhibited by the 
prodrug PZA or the control compound nicotinamide. These findings suggest that 
PanD represents a new target of PZA/POA. These results have implications for a 
better understanding of this peculiar persister drug and for the design of new 
drugs targeting M. tuberculosis persisters for improved treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/emi.2014.61
PMCID: PMC4150287
PMID: 26038753