1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 1;5:10760. doi: 10.1038/srep10760.

Unraveling the molecular architecture of a G protein-coupled 
receptor/β-arrestin/Erk module complex.

Bourquard T(1), Landomiel F(2), Reiter E(2), Crépieux P(2), Ritchie DW(3), Azé 
J(4), Poupon A(2).

Author information:
(1)1] BIOS group, INRA, UMR85, Unité Physiologie de la Reproduction et des 
Comportements, F-37380 Nouzilly, France; CNRS, UMR7247, F-37380 Nouzilly, 
France; Université François Rabelais, 37041 Tours, France; IFCE, Nouzilly, 
F-37380 France [2] INRIA Nancy, 615 Rue du Jardin Botanique, Villers-lès-Nancy, 
54600 France.
(2)BIOS group, INRA, UMR85, Unité Physiologie de la Reproduction et des 
Comportements, F-37380 Nouzilly, France; CNRS, UMR7247, F-37380 Nouzilly, 
France; Université François Rabelais, 37041 Tours, France; IFCE, Nouzilly, 
F-37380 France.
(3)INRIA Nancy, 615 Rue du Jardin Botanique, Villers-lès-Nancy, 54600 France.
(4)Bioinformatics group - AMIB INRIA - Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique, 
Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, 91405 France.

β-arrestins serve as signaling scaffolds downstream of G protein-coupled 
receptors, and thus play a crucial role in a plethora of cellular processes. 
Although it is largely accepted that the ability of β-arrestins to interact 
simultaneously with many protein partners is key in G protein-independent 
signaling of GPCRs, only the precise knowledge of these multimeric arrangements 
will allow a full understanding of the dynamics of these interactions and their 
functional consequences. However, current experimental procedures for the 
determination of the three-dimensional structures of protein-protein complexes 
are not well adapted to analyze these short-lived, multi-component assemblies. 
We propose a model of the receptor/β-arrestin/Erk1 signaling module, which is 
consistent with most of the available experimental data. Moreover, for the 
β-arrestin/Raf1 and the β-arrestin/ERK interactions, we have used the model to 
design interfering peptides and shown that they compete with both partners, 
hereby demonstrating the validity of the predicted interaction regions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep10760
PMCID: PMC4649906
PMID: 26030356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]