1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0128157. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128157. 
eCollection 2015.

Ultrastructural Study on the Antibacterial Activity of Artonin E versus 
Streptomycin against Staphylococcus aureus Strains.

Zajmi A(1), Mohd Hashim N(2), Noordin MI(3), Khalifa SA(4), Ramli F(3), Mohd Ali 
H(5), El-Seedi HR(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and 
Life Sciences, Management and Science University, 40100 Shah Alam, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Center for Natural Products and Drug Discovery (CENAR), 
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Experimental Hematology, Karolinska University Hospital, SE-141 
86 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)Division of Pharmacognosy, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala 
University, Box 574, SE-75 123, Uppsala, Sweden.

Staphylococci are facultative anaerobes, perfectly spherical un-encapsulated 
cocci, with a diameter not exceeding 1 micrometer in diameter. Staphylococcus 
aureus are generally harmless and remain confined to the skin unless they burrow 
deep into the body, causing life-threatening infections in bones, joints, 
bloodstream, heart valves and lungs. Among the 20 medically important 
staphylococci species, Staphylococcus aureus is one of the emerging human 
pathogens. Streptomycin had its highest potency against Staphylococcus 
infections despite the likelihood of getting a resistant type of staphylococcus 
strains. Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) is the persister type of 
Staphylococcus aureus and was evolved after decades of antibiotic misuse. 
Inadequate penetration of the antibiotic is one of the principal factors related 
to success/failure of the therapy. The active drug needs to reach the bacteria 
at concentrations necessary to kill or suppress the pathogen's growth. In turn 
the effectiveness of the treatment relied on the physical properties of 
Staphylococcus aureus. Thus understanding the cell integrity, shape and 
roughness is crucial to the overall influence of the therapeutic agent on S. 
aureus of different origins. Hence our experiments were designed to clarify 
ultrastructural changes of S. aureus treated with streptomycin (synthetic 
compound) in comparison to artonin E (natural compound). In addition to the 
standard in vitro microbial techniques, we used transmission electron microscopy 
to study the disrupted cell architecture under antibacterial regimen and we 
correlate this with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to compare results of 
both techniques.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128157
PMCID: PMC4451005
PMID: 26030925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.