1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 3;10(6):e0128313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128313. 
eCollection 2015.

Allopregnanolone preclinical acute pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies 
to predict tolerability and efficacy for Alzheimer's disease.

Irwin RW(1), Solinsky CM(2), Loya CM(3), Salituro FG(3), Rodgers KE(4), Bauer 
G(5), Rogawski MA(6), Brinton RD(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Science, School of Pharmacy, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(2)Clinical and Experimental Therapeutics Program, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)Sage Therapeutics, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Titus Family Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Economics & 
Policy, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California 
Davis, Sacramento, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of California Davis, 
Sacramento, California, United States of America.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Science, School of Pharmacy, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America; Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United states of 
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0132210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132210.

To develop allopregnanolone as a therapeutic for Alzheimer's disease, we 
investigated multiple formulations and routes of administration in 
translationally relevant animal models of both sexes. Subcutaneous, topical 
(transdermal and intranasal), intramuscular, and intravenous allopregnanolone 
were bolus-administered. Pharmacokinetic analyses of intravenous 
allopregnanolone in rabbit and mouse indicated that peak plasma and brain levels 
(3-fold brain/plasma ratios) at 5min were sufficient to activate 
neuroregenerative responses at sub-sedative doses. Slow-release subcutaneous 
suspension of allopregnanolone displayed 5-fold brain/plasma ratio at Cmax at 
30min. At therapeutic doses by either subcutaneous or intravenous routes, 
allopregnanolone mouse plasma levels ranged between 34-51ng/ml by 30min, 
comparable to published endogenous human level in the third trimester of 
pregnancy. Exposure to subcutaneous, topical, intramuscular, and intravenous 
allopregnanolone, at safe and tolerable doses, increased hippocampal markers of 
neurogenesis including BrdU and PCNA in young 3xTgAD and aged wildtype mice. 
Intravenous allopregnanolone transiently and robustly phosphorylated CREB within 
5min and increased levels of neuronal differentiation transcription factor 
NeuroD within 4h. Neurogenic efficacy was achieved with allopregnanolone brain 
exposure of 300-500hr*ng/g. Formulations were tested to determine the no 
observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) and maximally tolerated doses (MTD) in 
male and female rats by sedation behavior time course. Sex differences were 
apparent, males exhibited â‰¥40% more sedation time compared to females. 
Allopregnanolone formulated in sulfobutyl-ether-beta-cyclodextrin at optimized 
complexation ratio maximized allopregnanolone delivery and neurogenic efficacy. 
To establish the NOAEL and MTD for Allo-induced sedation using a once-per-week 
intravenous regenerative treatment regimen: In female rats the NOAEL was 
0.5mg/kg and MTD 2mg/kg. The predicted MTD in human female is 0.37mg/kg. In male 
rats the NOAEL and MTD were less than those determined for female. Outcomes of 
these PK/PD studies predict a safe and efficacious dose range for initial 
clinical trials of allopregnanolone for Alzheimer's disease. These findings have 
translational relevance to multiple neurodegenerative conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128313
PMCID: PMC4454520
PMID: 26039057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: There are patents and 
products in development. Patents pending on allopregnanolone as a therapeutic 
for mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, and other CNS disorders. The 
authors report the filing of the following patents relevant to this research: 1) 
AGENTS, COMPOSITIONS AND METHODS FOR ENHANCING NEUROLOGICAL FUNCTION 
(Application number: 12/701,309, Publication number: US 2010/0204192 A1, and 
Filing date: Feb 5, 2010). 2) ALLOPREGNANOLONE IN A METHOD FOR ENHANCING 
NEUROLOGICAL FUNCTION (Application number: 12/526,604, Publication number: US 
2010/0105646 A1, Filing date: Jun 11, 2008, and patent #8,969,329 issued March 
03, 2015). CML and FGS are employees of Sage Therapeutics. However, they had no 
role in the analyses or collecting of data. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.