1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 17;290(29):17999-18008. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.636712.
Epub  2015 Jun 8.

Phosphorylation-dependent Regulation of Connecdenn/DENND1 Guanine Nucleotide 
Exchange Factors.

Kulasekaran G(1), Nossova N(1), Marat AL(1), Lund I(1), Cremer C(1), Ioannou 
MS(1), McPherson PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada. Electronic address: 
peter.mcpherson@mcgill.ca.

Connecdenn 1/2 are DENN (differentially expressed in normal and neoplastic 
cells) domain-bearing proteins that function as GEFs (guanine nucleotide 
exchange factors) for the small GTPase Rab35. Disruption of connecdenn/Rab35 
function leads to defects in the recycling of multiple cargo proteins from 
endosomes with altered cell function, yet the regulation of connecdenn GEF 
activity is unexplored. We now demonstrate that connecdenn 1/2 are autoinhibited 
such that the purified, full-length proteins have significantly less Rab35 
binding and GEF activity than the isolated DENN domain. Both proteins are 
phosphorylated with prominent phosphorylation sites between residues 500 and 600 
of connecdenn 1. A large scale proteomics screen revealed that connecdenn 1 is 
phosphorylated at residues Ser-536 and Ser-538 in an Akt-dependent manner in 
response to insulin stimulation of adipocytes. Interestingly, we find that an 
Akt inhibitor reduces connecdenn 1 interaction with Rab35 after insulin 
treatment of adipocytes. Remarkably, a peptide flanking Ser-536/Ser-538 binds 
the DENN domain of connecdenn 1, whereas a phosphomimetic peptide does not. 
Moreover, connecdenn 1 interacts with 14-3-3 proteins, and this interaction is 
also disrupted by Akt inhibition and by mutation of Ser-536/Ser-538. We propose 
that Akt phosphorylation of connecdenn 1 downstream of insulin activation 
regulates connecdenn 1 function through an intramolecular interaction.

Â© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.636712
PMCID: PMC4505046
PMID: 26055712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]