1. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2015 Jun;16(6):549-59. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1400339.

Heat stress inhibits proliferation, promotes growth, and induces apoptosis in 
cultured Lantang swine skeletal muscle satellite cells.

Gao CQ(1), Zhao YL, Li HC, Sui WG, Yan HC, Wang XQ.

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University / National 
Engineering Research Center for Breeding Swine Industry / Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding, Guangzhou 510642, 
China; Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute, Wexner Medical Center at the Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Proliferation suppression and apoptosis are the prominent characteristics 
induced by heat stress (HS) in cells, whereas the effects of HS on cell growth 
(mass accumulation) are unknown. In this study, Lantang swine (an indigenous 
breed of China) skeletal muscle satellite cells (SCs) were pre-cultured at 37 °C 
for 24 h. The HS group was subjected to HS at 41 °C, while the control group was 
maintained at 37 °C. Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) expression and SC size are 
significantly increased (P<0.05) by HS, but cell proliferation is suppressed 
(P<0.05) and apoptosis is induced (P<0.05). HS led to a lower percentage of SCs 
in the G0/G1 phase (P<0.05) together with a higher percentage of SCs in the S 
phase (P<0.05). However, the percentage of SCs in the G2/M phase was decreased 
(P<0.05) at 48 h but then increased (P<0.05) at 72 h with HS. In addition, the 
phosphorylation ratios of protein kinase b (Akt), ribosomal protein S6 kinase 
(S6K), and ribosomal protein S6 were increased (P<0.05) by HS. Nevertheless, the 
phosphorylation ratios of the 4E binding protein 1 and the eukaryotic initiation 
factor-4E were indistinguishable (P>0.05) from those of the control group. The 
phosphorylation ratio of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) (Ser(2448)) 
increased (P<0.05) within 48 h, and apparent differences were abrogated at 72 h 
(P>0.05). Moreover, cleaved caspase-3 expression was increased at 72 h (P<0.05). 
These findings indicate that HS induces apoptosis and disrupts cell cycle 
distribution to decrease the number of cells. Additionally, HS can promote SC 
growth via an activated Akt/mTOR/S6K signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1400339
PMCID: PMC4471607
PMID: 26055917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethics guidelines: Chun-qi GAO, 
Yin-ling ZHAO, Hai-chang LI, Wei-guo SUI, Hui-chao YAN, and Xiu-qi WANG declare 
that they have no conflict of interest. All institutional and national 
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed.