1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Oct;72(19):3637-52. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1946-7.
Epub  2015 Jun 12.

Airway hydration and COPD.

Ghosh A(1), Boucher RC(1), Tarran R(2).

Author information:
(1)Cystic Fibrosis Center/Marsico Lung Institute and the Department of Cell 
Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina, 7102 Marsico Hall, 
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599-7248, USA.
(2)Cystic Fibrosis Center/Marsico Lung Institute and the Department of Cell 
Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina, 7102 Marsico Hall, 
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599-7248, USA. robert_tarran@med.unc.edu.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the prevalent causes of 
worldwide mortality and encompasses two major clinical phenotypes, i.e., chronic 
bronchitis (CB) and emphysema. The most common cause of COPD is chronic tobacco 
inhalation. Research focused on the chronic bronchitic phenotype of COPD has 
identified several pathological processes that drive disease initiation and 
progression. For example, the lung's mucociliary clearance (MCC) system performs 
the critical task of clearing inhaled pathogens and toxic materials from the 
lung. MCC efficiency is dependent on: (1) the ability of apical plasma membrane 
ion channels such as the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) and the epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC) to maintain airway hydration; (2) 
ciliary beating; and (3) appropriate rates of mucin secretion. Each of these 
components is impaired in CB and likely contributes to the mucus 
stasis/accumulation seen in CB patients. This review highlights the cellular 
components responsible for maintaining MCC and how this process is disrupted 
following tobacco exposure and with CB. We shall also discuss existing 
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of chronic bronchitis and how 
components of the MCC can be used as biomarkers for the evaluation of tobacco or 
tobacco-like-product exposure.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-015-1946-7
PMCID: PMC4567929
PMID: 26068443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A Ghosh has no conflict to declare, R. Tarran is 
a founder of Spyryx Biosciences and R.C. Boucher is a founder of Parion 
Sciences.