1. Stroke. 2015 Jul;46(7):1956-1965. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.008939. Epub 2015
 Jun 11.

Inhibition of WNK3 Kinase Signaling Reduces Brain Damage and Accelerates 
Neurological Recovery After Stroke.

Begum G(#)(1), Yuan H(#)(1), Kahle KT(#)(1), Li L(1), Wang S(1), Shi Y(1), 
Shmukler BE(1), Yang SS(1), Lin SH(1), Alper SL(1), Sun D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, (G.B., 
H.Y., L.L., S.W., Y.S., D.S.); Department of Neurosurgery, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (K.T.K.); Manton Center for 
Orphan Diseases, Harvard Medical School, MA (K.T.K.); Renal Division and 
Vascular Biology Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Department of 
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA (B.E.S., S.L.A); Division of 
Nephrology, Dept. of Medicine, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan (SS.Y., SH.L); Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Health 
Care System, Geriatric Research, Educational and Clinical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 
(D.S).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: WNK kinases, including WNK3, and the associated 
downstream Ste20/SPS1-related proline-alanine-rich protein kinase (SPAK) and 
oxidative stress responsive 1 (OSR1) kinases, comprise an important signaling 
cascade that regulates the cation-chloride cotransporters. Ischemia-induced 
stimulation of the bumetanide-sensitive Na(+)-K(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter (NKCC1) 
plays an important role in the pathophysiology of experimental stroke, but the 
mechanism of its regulation in this context is unknown. Here, we investigated 
the WNK3-SPAK/OSR1 pathway as a regulator of NKCC1 stimulation and their 
collective role in ischemic brain damage.
METHOD: Wild-type WNK3 and WNK3 knockout mice were subjected to ischemic stroke 
via transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Infarct volume, brain edema, 
blood brain barrier damage, white matter demyelination, and neurological 
deficits were assessed. Total and phosphorylated forms of WNK3 and SPAK/OSR1 
were assayed by immunoblotting and immunostaining. In vitro ischemia studies in 
cultured neurons and immature oligodendrocytes were conducted using the 
oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation method.
RESULTS: WNK3 knockout mice exhibited significantly decreased infarct volume and 
axonal demyelination, less cerebral edema, and accelerated neurobehavioral 
recovery compared with WNK3 wild-type mice subjected to middle cerebral artery 
occlusion. The neuroprotective phenotypes conferred by WNK3 knockout were 
associated with a decrease in stimulatory hyperphosphorylations of the SPAK/OSR1 
catalytic T-loop and of NKCC1 stimulatory sites Thr(203)/Thr(207)/Thr(212), as 
well as with decreased cell surface expression of NKCC1. Genetic inhibition of 
WNK3 or small interfering RNA knockdown of SPAK/OSR1 increased the tolerance of 
cultured primary neurons and oligodendrocytes to in vitro ischemia.
CONCLUSIONS: These data identify a novel role for the WNK3-SPAK/OSR1-NKCC1 
signaling pathway in ischemic neuroglial injury and suggest the WNK3-SPAK/OSR1 
kinase pathway as a therapeutic target for neuroprotection after ischemic 
stroke.

Â© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.008939
PMCID: PMC4643659
PMID: 26069258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]