1. Trends Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;25(9):533-44. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2015.05.004. Epub 
2015 Jun 11.

Beclin orthologs: integrative hubs of cell signaling, membrane trafficking, and 
physiology.

Levine B(1), Liu R(2), Dong X(3), Zhong Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of 
Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: 
beth.levine@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.
(3)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Center for Autophagy Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. Electronic address: qing.zhong@utsouthwestern.edu.

The Beclin family, including yeast Atg6 (autophagy related gene 6), its 
orthologs in higher eukaryotic species, and the more recently characterized 
mammalian-specific Beclin 2, are essential molecules in autophagy and other 
membrane-trafficking events. Extensive studies of Beclin orthologs have provided 
considerable insights into the regulation of autophagy, the diverse roles of 
autophagy in physiology and disease, and potential new strategies to modulate 
autophagy in a variety of clinical diseases. In this review we discuss the 
functions of Beclin orthologs, the regulation of such functions by diverse 
cellular signaling pathways, and the effects of such regulation on downstream 
cellular processes including tumor suppression and metabolism. These findings 
suggest that Beclin orthologs serve as crucial molecules that integrate diverse 
environmental signals with membrane trafficking events to ensure optimal 
responses of the cell to stressful stimuli.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tcb.2015.05.004
PMCID: PMC4554927
PMID: 26071895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]