1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 30;112(26):8064-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1502454112. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Dysplastic spondylolysis is caused by mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia 
sulfate transporter gene.

Cai T(1), Yang L(2), Cai W(3), Guo S(4), Yu P(4), Li J(4), Hu X(2), Yan M(2), 
Shao Q(4), Jin Y(5), Sun ZS(6), Luo ZJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, 
China; tcai@mail.nih.gov zjluo@fmmu.edu.cn.
(2)Institute of Orthopaedics, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710000, China;
(3)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100000, China;
(4)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, 
China;
(5)School of Stomatology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710000, 
China.
(6)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, 
China; Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100000, China;
(7)Institute of Orthopaedics, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710000, China; tcai@mail.nih.gov zjluo@fmmu.edu.cn.

Spondylolysis is a fracture in part of the vertebra with a reported prevalence 
of about 3-6% in the general population. Genetic etiology of this disorder 
remains unknown. The present study was aimed at identifying genomic mutations in 
patients with dysplastic spondylolysis as well as the potential pathogenesis of 
the abnormalities. Whole-exome sequencing and functional analysis were performed 
for patients with spondylolysis. We identified a novel heterozygous mutation 
(c.2286A > T; p.D673V) in the sulfate transporter gene SLC26A2 in five affected 
subjects of a Chinese family. Two additional mutations (e.g., c.1922A > G; 
p.H641R and g.18654T > C in the intron 1) in the gene were identified by 
screening a cohort of 30 unrelated patients with the disease. In situ 
hybridization analysis showed that SLC26A2 is abundantly expressed in the 
lumbosacral spine of the mouse embryo at day 14.5. Sulfate uptake activities in 
CHO cells transfected with mutant SLC26A2 were dramatically reduced compared 
with the wild type, confirming the pathogenicity of the two missense mutations. 
Further analysis of the gene-disease network revealed a convergent pathogenic 
network for the development of lumbosacral spine. To our knowledge, our findings 
provide the first identification of autosomal dominant SLC26A2 mutations in 
patients with dysplastic spondylolysis, suggesting a new clinical entity in the 
pathogenesis of chondrodysplasia involving lumbosacral spine. The analysis of 
the gene-disease network may shed new light on the study of patients with 
dysplastic spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis as well as high-risk individuals 
who are asymptomatic.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1502454112
PMCID: PMC4491795
PMID: 26077908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.