1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129729. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129729. 
eCollection 2015.

Recombinant Encephalomyocarditis Viruses Elicit Neutralizing Antibodies against 
PRRSV and CSFV in Mice.

Zhu S(1), Guo X(1), Keyes LR(2), Yang H(1), Ge X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis of Ministry of 
Agriculture, College of Veterinary Medicine and State Key Laboratory of 
Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) is capable of infecting a wide range of 
species and the infection can cause myocarditis and reproductive failure in pigs 
as well as febrile illness in human beings. In this study, we introduced the 
entire ORF5 of the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) 
or the neutralization epitope regions in the E2 gene of the classical swine 
fever virus (CSFV), into the genome of a stably attenuated EMCV strain, T1100I. 
The resultant viable recombinant viruses, CvBJC3m/I-Î”GP5 and CvBJC3m/I-E2, 
respectively expressed partial PRRSV envelope protein GP5 or CSFV neutralization 
epitope A1A2 along with EMCV proteins. These heterologous proteins fused to the 
N-terminal of the nonstructural leader protein could be recognized by anti-GP5 
or anti-E2 antibody. We also tested the immunogenicity of these fusion proteins 
by immunizing BALB/c mice with the recombinant viruses. The immunized animals 
elicited neutralizing antibodies against PRRSV and CSFV. Our results suggest 
that EMCV can be engineered as an expression vector and serve as a tool in the 
development of novel live vaccines in various animal species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129729
PMCID: PMC4468123
PMID: 26076449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.