1. J Phys Chem B. 2015 Oct 29;119(43):13777-84. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b04067.
Epub  2015 Jun 30.

Direct Measurement of the Radical Translocation Distance in the Class I 
Ribonucleotide Reductase from Chlamydia trachomatis.

Livada J(1), Martinie RJ(1), Dassama LM(1), Krebs C(1), Bollinger JM Jr(1), 
Silakov A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of †Chemistry and ‡Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The 
Pennsylvania State University , University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, United 
States.

Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) catalyze conversion of ribonucleotides to 
deoxyribonucleotides in all organisms via a free-radical mechanism that is 
essentially conserved. In class I RNRs, the reaction is initiated and terminated 
by radical translocation (RT) between the α and β subunits. In the class Ic RNR 
from Chlamydia trachomatis (Ct RNR), the initiating event converts the active S 
= 1 Mn(IV)/Fe(III) cofactor to the S = 1/2 Mn(III)/Fe(III) "RT-product" form in 
the β subunit and generates a cysteinyl radical in the α active site. The 
radical can be trapped via the well-described decomposition reaction of the 
mechanism-based inactivator, 2'-azido-2'-deoxyuridine-5'-diphosphate, resulting 
in the generation of a long-lived, nitrogen-centered radical (N(•)) in α. In 
this work, we have determined the distance between the Mn(III)/Fe(III) cofactor 
in β and N(•) in α to be 43 ± 1 Å by using double electron-electron resonance 
experiments. This study provides the first structural data on the Ct RNR 
holoenzyme complex and the first direct experimental measurement of the 
inter-subunit RT distance in any class I RNR.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.5b04067
PMCID: PMC5840866
PMID: 26087051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]