1. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2015 Dec;26(8):874-81. doi: 
10.1097/MBC.0000000000000308.

Influence of P2Y12 polymorphisms on platelet activity but not ex-vivo 
antiplatelet effect of ticagrelor in healthy Chinese male subjects.

Li MP(1), Tang J, Wen ZP, Zhang YJ, Zhang W, Zhou HH, Zhang ZL, Chen XP.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University bInstitute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University; Hunan 
Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, Changsha cCooperative Innovation Center for 
Molecular Target New Drug Study, University of South China, Hengyang dDepartment 
of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. 
China.

Activation of platelet implicated a series of signal conduction including 
outside-in and inside-out related receptor-mediated signaling pathways. 
Ticagrelor is the first reversible P2Y12 receptor antagonist that exhibits rapid 
antiplatelet effect. Given that platelet aggregation varies among individuals, 
genetic polymorphisms in P2Y12 and subsequent signal molecular such as the 
G-protein beta 3 subunit (GNB3) are supposed to influence the antiplatelet 
effect of ticagrelor. The aim of this study was to determine whether genetic 
polymorphisms in P2Y12 and GNB3 genes influence ex-vivo antiplatelet activity of 
ticagrelor in healthy Chinese subjects. A total of 196 healthy Chinese male 
individuals were recruited. ADP-induced platelet aggregation was determined by 
using light transmittance aggregometry at baseline and after incubation of the 
platelet-rich plasma with 15 and 50 μmol/l ticagrelor, respectively. Nine 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in P2Y12 and the GNB3 rs5443 polymorphism 
were genotyped by PCR-direct sequencing. P2Y12 haplotypes were inferred. 
Baseline platelet aggregation was increased in carriers of the common alleles of 
P2Y12 SNPs (rs1907637, rs2046934, and rs6809699) and rs6787801 TC heterozygotes 
(P < 0.05 for all). Results of the haplotype analyses were consistent with those 
of the single SNPs. Ticagrelor at both concentrations of 15 and 50 μmol/l 
decreased ADP-induced platelet aggregation significantly (P < 0.05, 
respectively). Neither single SNPs nor haplotypes of P2Y12 affected 
ticagrelor-induced ex-vivo inhibition of platelet aggregation. P2Y12 and GNB3 
polymorphisms have no effect on the ex-vivo antiplatelet activity of ticagrelor 
in healthy Chinese male subjects.

DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000308
PMID: 26083990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]