1. Chem Biol. 2015 Jun 18;22(6):776-84. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.05.008.

Growth Factor Identity Is Encoded by Discrete Coiled-Coil Rotamers in the EGFR 
Juxtamembrane Region.

Doerner A(1), Scheck R(1), Schepartz A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, 225 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 
06520-8107, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, 225 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 
06520-8107, USA; Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8103, USA. Electronic address: 
alanna.schepartz@yale.edu.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2015 Jun 18;22(6):687-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.06.001.

Binding of transforming growth factor α (TGF-α) to the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) extracellular domain is encoded through the formation of a 
unique antiparallel coiled coil within the juxtamembrane segment. This new 
coiled coil is an "inside-out" version of the coiled coil formed in the presence 
of epidermal growth factor (EGF). A third, intermediary coiled-coil interface is 
formed in the juxtamembrane region when EGFR is stimulated with betacellulin. 
The seven growth factors that activate EGFR in mammalian systems (EGF, TGF-α, 
epigen, epiregulin, betacellulin, heparin-binding EGF, and amphiregulin) fall 
into distinct categories in which the structure of the coiled coil induced 
within the juxtamembrane region correlates with cell state. The observation that 
coiled-coil state tracks with the downstream signaling profiles for each ligand 
provides evidence for growth factor functional selectivity by EGFR. Encoding 
growth factor identity in alternative coiled-coil rotamers provides a simple and 
elegant method for communicating chemical information across the plasma 
membrane.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.05.008
PMCID: PMC4487654
PMID: 26091170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]