1. Int J Oncol. 2015 Aug;47(2):465-72. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3054. Epub 2015 Jun 
18.

Epigenetic regulation of embryonic stem cell marker miR302C in human 
chondrosarcoma as determinant of antiproliferative activity of proline-rich 
polypeptide 1.

Galoian K(1), Qureshi A(1), D'Ippolito G(1), Schiller PC(1), Molinari M(1), 
Johnstone AL(2), Brothers SP(2), Paz AC(3), Temple HT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Center for Therapeutic Innovation, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.

Metastatic chondrosarcoma of mesenchymal origin is the second most common bone 
malignancy and does not respond either to chemotherapy or radiation; therefore, 
the search for new therapies is relevant and urgent. We described recently that 
tumor growth inhibiting cytostatic proline-rich polypeptide 1, (PRP-1) 
significantly upregulated tumor suppressor miRNAs, downregulated onco-miRNAs in 
human chondrosarcoma JJ012 cell line, compared to chondrocytes culture. In this 
study we hypothesized the existence and regulation of a functional marker in 
cancer stem cells, correlated to peptides antiproliferative activity. 
Experimental results indicated that among significantly downregulated miRNA 
after PRP-1treatment was miRNAs 302c*. This miRNA is a part of the cluster 
miR302â€‘367, which is stemness regulator in human embryonic stem cells and in 
certain tumors, but is not expressed in adult hMSCs and normal tissues. PRP-1 
had strong inhibitory effect on viability of chondrosarcoma and multilineage 
induced multipotent adult cells (embryonic primitive cell type). Unlike 
chondrosarcoma, in glioblastoma, PRP-1 does not have any inhibitory activity on 
cell proliferation, because in glioblastoma miR-302-367 cluster plays an 
opposite role, its expression is sufficient to suppress the stemness inducing 
properties. The observed correlation between the antiproliferative activity of 
PRP-1 and its action on downregulation of miR302c explains the peptides opposite 
effects on the upregulation of proliferation of adult mesenchymal stem cells, 
and the inhibition of the proliferation of human bone giant-cell tumor stromal 
cells, reported earlier. PRP-1 substantially downregulated the miR302c targets, 
the stemness markers Nanog, c-Myc and polycomb protein Bmi-1. miR302c expression 
is induced by JMJD2-mediated H3K9me2 demethylase activity in its promoter 
region. JMJD2 was reported to be a positive regulator for Nanog. Our 
experimental results proved that PRP-1 strongly inhibited H3K9 activity 
comprised of a pool of JMJD1 and JMJD2. We conclude that inhibition of H3K9 
activity by PRP-1 leads to downregulation of miR302c and its targets, defining 
the PRP-1 antiproliferative role.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3054
PMCID: PMC4501658
PMID: 26094604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]