1. Int J Bipolar Disord. 2014 Dec;2(1):29. doi: 10.1186/2194-7511-2-4. Epub 2014 
Mar 31.

Immunological and neurotrophic markers of risk status and illness development in 
high-risk youth: understanding the neurobiological underpinnings of bipolar 
disorder.

Duffy A(1), Horrocks J, Doucette S, Keown-Stoneman C, Grof P, Andreazza A, Young 
LT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Hotchkiss Brain Institute (HBI), University of 
Calgary, TRW Building, 3280 Hospital Drive, NW, Room 4D6, Calgary, AB, T2N 4Z6, 
Canada, acduffy@ucalgary.ca.

Bipolar disorder is a highly heritable illness that onsets in adolescence and 
young adulthood. We examined gene expression (mRNA) and protein levels of 
candidate immune and neurotrophic markers in well-characterized offspring of 
bipolar parents in order to identify reliable indicators of illness risk status 
and the early clinical stages of illness development. We measured mRNA 
expression and protein levels in candidate immune (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-10, IFN-δ) 
and neurotrophic (brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)) markers from plasma. 
High-risk offspring were identified from families in which one parent had 
confirmed bipolar disorder. Control offspring were identified from families in 
which neither parent met lifetime criteria for a major psychiatric disorder. All 
parental Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition 
(DSM-IV) diagnoses were based on Schedule for Affective Disorders - Lifetime 
Version (SADS-L) interviews and blind consensus review. As part of an ongoing 
study, all offspring were prospectively assessed using KSADS-PL format 
interviews and diagnoses confirmed on blind consensus review. High-risk 
offspring had significantly increased IL-6 (p = 0.050) and BDNF (p = 0.006) 
protein levels compared to controls. Those high-risk offspring in earlier 
compared to later clinical stages of illness development had higher IL-6 
(p = 0.050) and BDNF (p = 0.045) protein levels. After adjustments, only 
differences in BDNF protein levels remained significant. There was a moderating 
effect of the BDNF genotype on both gene expression and protein levels in 
high-risk compared to control offspring. The BDNF genotype also moderated the 
association between clinical stage and gene expression levels in high-risk 
offspring. These findings provide support for detectable differences in 
candidate immune and neurotrophic markers in individuals at high risk of 
developing bipolar disorder and for detectable changes over the clinical stages 
of illness development. These associations appear to be moderated by genetic 
variants.

DOI: 10.1186/2194-7511-2-4
PMCID: PMC4447739
PMID: 26092400