1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):4238-4242. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3957. Epub 2015
Jun  18.

Alendronate, a double-edged sword acting in the mevalonate pathway.

Tricarico PM(1), Girardelli M(2), Kleiner G(2), Knowles A(2), Valencic E(2), 
Crovella S(1), Marcuzzi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Science, University of Trieste, 
Trieste I‑34127, Italy.
(2)Department of Advanced Diagnostic and Clinical Trials, Institute for Maternal 
and Child Health, IRCCS 'Burlo Garofolo', Trieste I‑34137, Italy.

Aminobisphosphonate aledronate is a compound commonly used clinically for the 
treatment of osteoporosis and other bone diseases, as a result of it preventing 
bone resorption. However, in previous years it has also been used to obtain 
cellular and animal models of a rare genetic disorder termed Mevalonate Kinase 
Deficiency (MKD). MKD is caused by mutations affecting the mevalonate kinase 
enzyme, in the cholesterol pathway and alendronate can be used to biochemically 
mimic the genetic defect as it inhibits farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase in the 
same pathway. Despite evidence in favor of the inhibition exerted on the 
mevalonate pathway, there is at least one clinical case of MKD in which 
alendronate improved not only skeletal and bone fractures, as expected, but also 
MKD clinical features. Based on this finding, the present study assessed the 
anti‑inflammatory properties of this aminobisphosphonate in vitro. No 
anti‑inflammatory effects of alendronate were observed in the in vitro 
experiments. Since MKD lacks specific treatments, these results may assist 
scientists and physicians in making the decision as to the most suitable choice 
of therapeutic compounds for this neglected disease.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3957
PMCID: PMC4526081
PMID: 26096667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]