1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 25;5:11585. doi: 10.1038/srep11585.

Phosphorylation of Beet black scorch virus coat protein by PKA is required for 
assembly and stability of virus particles.

Zhao X(1), Wang X(1), Dong K(1), Zhang Y(1), Hu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Chen Y(2), 
Wang X(1), Han C(1), Yu J(1), Li D(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agro-Biotechnology and Ministry of Agriculture Key 
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China 
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of 
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

Plant virus coat proteins (CPs) play a fundamental role in protection of genomic 
RNAs, virion assembly, and viral movement. Although phosphorylation of several 
CPs during virus infection have been reported, little information is available 
about CP phosphorylation of the spherical RNA plant viruses. Here, we 
demonstrate that the CP of Beet black scorch virus (BBSV), a member of the genus 
Necrovirus, can be phosphorylated at threonine-41 (T41) by cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase (PKA)-like kinase in vivo and in vitro. Mutant viruses containing 
a T41A non-phosphorylatable alanine substitution, and a T41E glutamic acid 
substitution to mimic threonine phosphorylation were able to replicate but were 
unable to move systemically in Nicotiana benthamiana. Interestingly, the T41A 
and T41E mutants generated unstable 17 nm virus-like particles that failed to 
package viral genomic (g) RNA, compared with wild-type BBSV with 30 nm virions 
during viral infection in N. benthamiana. Further analyses showed that the T41 
mutations had little effect on the gRNA-binding activity of the CP. Therefore, 
we propose a model whereby CP phosphorylation plays an essential role in 
long-distance movement of BBSV that involves formation of stable virions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11585
PMCID: PMC4479801
PMID: 26108567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.