1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):7044-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv639. Epub 
2015 Jun 24.

Evidence that avian reovirus σNS is an RNA chaperone: implications for genome 
segment assortment.

Borodavka A(1), Ault J(2), Stockley PG(2), Tuma R(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology & Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK 
A.Borodavka@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology & Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
(3)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology & Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK R.Tuma@leeds.ac.uk.

Reoviruses are important human, animal and plant pathogens having 10-12 segments 
of double-stranded genomic RNA. The mechanisms controlling the assortment and 
packaging of genomic segments in these viruses, remain poorly understood. 
RNA-protein and RNA-RNA interactions between viral genomic segment precursors 
have been implicated in the process. While non-structural viral RNA-binding 
proteins, such as avian reovirus σNS, are essential for virus replication, the 
mechanism by which they assist packaging is unclear. Here we demonstrate that 
σNS assembles into stable elongated hexamers in vitro, which bind 
single-stranded nucleic acids with high affinity, but little sequence 
specificity. Using ensemble and single molecule fluorescence spectroscopy, we 
show that σNS also binds to a partially double-stranded RNA, resulting in 
gradual helix unwinding. The hexamer can bind multiple RNA molecules and 
exhibits strand-annealing activity, thus mediating conversion of metastable, 
intramolecular stem-loops into more stable heteroduplexes. We demonstrate that 
the ARV σNS acts as an RNA chaperone facilitating specific RNA-RNA interactions 
between genomic precursors during segment assortment and packaging.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv639
PMCID: PMC4538827
PMID: 26109354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]