1. Neurotoxicology. 2015 Jul;49:158-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.06.006. Epub
2015  Jun 26.

Cumulative lead exposure is associated with reduced olfactory recognition 
performance in elderly men: The Normative Aging Study.

Grashow R(1), Sparrow D(2), Hu H(3), Weisskopf MG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: r.grashow@neu.edu.
(2)VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston University Schools of Public Health and 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Medicine, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Olfactory dysfunction has been identified as an early warning sign 
for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, dementia and more. A few 
occupational and environmental exposures have also been associated with reduced 
olfactory function, although the effects of long term environmental exposure to 
lead on olfactory dysfunction have not been explored. Here we performed 
olfactory recognition testing in elderly men in a community-dwelling cohort and 
examined the association with cumulative lead exposure, as assessed by lead in 
tibial and patellar bone.
METHODS: Olfactory recognition was measured in 165 men from the Normative Aging 
Study (NAS) who had previously taken part in bone lead measurements using 
K-X-ray fluorescence (KXRF). Olfactory recognition was measured using the 
University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT). Associations 
between olfactory recognition, global cognition and cumulative lead exposure 
were estimated using linear regression, with additional adjustment for age, 
smoking, and functional polymorphism status for hemochromatosis (HFE), 
transferrin (TfC2), glutathione-s-transferase Pi1 (GSTP1) and apolipoprotein E 
(APOE) genotypes. Sensitivity analyses explored olfactory recognition in men 
with high global cognitive function as measured using the Mini-Mental Status 
Exam (MMSE).
RESULTS: The average age of the NAS participants at the time of olfactory 
recognition testing was 80.3 (standard deviation or SD=5.7) years. Mean tibia 
lead was 16.3 (SD=12.0) μg/g bone, mean patella lead was 22.4 (SD=14.4)μg/g 
bone, and mean UPSIT score was 26.9 out of 40 (SD=7.0). Consistent with previous 
findings, age at olfaction testing was negatively associated with UPSIT score. 
Tibia (but not patella) bone lead was negatively associated with olfaction 
recognition (per 15 μg/g tibia lead: β=-1.57; 95% CI: -2.93, -0.22; p=0.02) in 
models adjusted for smoking and age. Additional adjustment for education did not 
significantly change results. Of all the genes explored, only the presence of 
one or more HFE variant alleles was significantly associated with olfaction 
recognition (HFE β=2.26; 95% CI: 0.09, 4.43; p=0.04). In a model containing the 
HFE term and a lead term, the tibia lead parameter estimate dropped by 21% (per 
15 μg/g tibia lead: β=-1.25; 95% CI: -2.64, 0.14; p=0.08) while the HFE term 
dropped 15% (β=1.91; 95% CI: -0.28, 4.10; p=0.09). None of the other gene terms 
were associated with olfactory recognition in this cohort, nor were any 
gene-lead interaction terms significant. Additional sensitivity analysis in men 
with MMSE scores of 25 or higher (n=149) showed a similar but slightly 
attenuated association between lead and olfactory recognition (per 15 μg/g tibia 
lead β=-1.39; 95% CI: -3.00, 0.22; p=0.09).
CONCLUSION: Cumulative exposure to lead is associated with reduced olfactory 
recognition in a cohort of elderly men. The association was similar but not 
significant in men with better cognitive function as measured by the MMSE. Iron 
metabolism gene status may also affect olfactory function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.06.006
PMCID: PMC4523435
PMID: 26121922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.