1. J Dermatol. 2015 Dec;42(12):1149-52. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.13005. Epub 2015
Jun  29.

Genomic diagnosis by whole genome sequencing in a Korean family with atypical 
progeroid syndrome.

Lee S(1), Park SM(2), Kim HJ(2), Kim JW(2), Yu DS(2), Lee YB(2).

Author information:
(1)Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Clinical genomic diagnosis is unfamiliar to many dermatologists. Limited 
knowledge of bioinformatics has limited the use of the next generation 
sequencing method in dermatological clinics. We evaluated the usefulness of 
whole genome sequencing as a diagnostic approach to inherited dermatological 
disease. Here, we present our experience with two female siblings with atypical 
familial generalized lipodystrophy with diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia. 
Whole genome sequencing was performed to diagnose the inherited disease. We 
compared control genomic databases using the Exome Aggregation Consortium, and 
filtered false-positive calls with the segmental duplication, non-flagged single 
nucleotide variants and COSMIC mutation databases, and applied the prediction 
tools of SIFT and PolyPhen2. The two siblings who presented with generalized 
lipodystrophy were diagnosed with an atypical progeroid syndrome with a p.D136H 
mutation in the LMNA gene (NM_005572). We diagnosed a familial atypical 
progeroid syndrome using whole genome sequencing. In this paper, we present our 
experience with whole genome sequencing and demonstrate that it can provide 
useful information for clinical genomic diagnosis of inherited diseases with 
atypical clinical features, such as atypical progeroid syndrome.

Â© 2015 Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.13005
PMID: 26122271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]