1. EBioMedicine. 2014 Dec 17;2(2):147-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2014.12.005. 
eCollection 2015.

Measurements of Functional Responses in Human Primary Lung Cells as a Basis for 
Personalized Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis.

Awatade NT(1), Uliyakina I(1), Farinha CM(1), Clarke LA(1), Mendes K(1), Solé 
A(2), Pastor J(3), Ramos MM(1), Amaral MD(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, BioFIG-Center for Biodiversity, 
Functional and Integrative Genomics, Campo Grande, C8 bdg, 1749-016 Lisboa, 
Portugal.
(2)Adult Cystic Fibrosis Unit, University Hospital la Fe, Boulevar Sur, 46026 
Valencia, Spain.
(3)Thoracic Surgery Service, University Hospital la Fe, Av. Campanar 21, 46009 
Valencia, Spain.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2015 Jan 27;2(2):100-1. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.01.013.

BACKGROUND: The best investigational drug to treat cystic fibrosis (CF) patients 
with the most common CF-causing mutation (F508del) is VX-809 (lumacaftor) which 
recently succeeded in Phase III clinical trial in combination with ivacaftor. 
This corrector rescues F508del-CFTR from its abnormal intracellular localization 
to the cell surface, a traffic defect shared by all Class II CFTR mutants. Our 
goal here is to test the efficacy of lumacaftor in other Class II mutants in 
primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells derived from CF patients.
METHODS: The effect of lumacaftor was investigated in primary HBE cells from 
non-CF and CF patients with F508del/F508del, A561E/A561E, N1303K/G542X, 
F508del/G542X and F508del/Y1092X genotypes by measurements of Forskolin plus 
Genistein-inducible equivalent short-circuit current (Ieq-SC-Fsk + Gen) in 
perfused open-circuit Ussing chambers. Efficacy of corrector C18 was also 
assessed on A561E/A561E and F508del/F508del cells.
RESULTS: Our data indicate that A561E (when present in both alleles) responds 
positively to lumacaftor treatment at equivalent efficacy of F508del in primary 
HBE cells. Similarly, lumacaftor has a positive impact on Y1092X, but not on 
N1303K. Our data also show that cells with only one copy of F508del-CFTR respond 
less to VX-809. Moreover, there is great variability in lumacaftor responses 
among F508del-homozygous cells from different donors. Compound C18 failed to 
rescue A561E-CFTR but not in F508del-CFTR, thus plausibly it has a different 
mechanism of action distinct from lumacaftor.
CONCLUSIONS: CF patients with A561E (and likely also those with Y1029X) can 
potentially benefit from lumacaftor. Moreover, the methodology used here 
exemplifies how ex vivo approaches may apply personalized therapies to CF and 
possibly other respiratory diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2014.12.005
PMCID: PMC4484512
PMID: 26137539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]