1. Oncol Rep. 2015 Sep;34(3):1279-88. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4083. Epub 2015 Jun
25.

RITA enhances irradiation-induced apoptosis in p53-defective cervical cancer 
cells via upregulation of IRE1α/XBP1 signaling.

Zhu H(1), Abulimiti M(1), Liu H(1), Su XJ(1), Liu CH(1), Pei HP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan 410008, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

Radiation therapy is the most widely used treatment for patients with cervical 
cancer. Recent studies have shown that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces 
apoptosis and sensitizes tumor cells to radiotherapy, which reportedly induces 
ER stress in cells. Classical key tumor suppressor p53 is involved in the 
response to a variety of cellular stresses, including those incurred by ionizing 
irradiation. A recent study demonstrated that small-molecule RITA (reactivation 
of p53 and induction of tumor cell apoptosis) increased the radiosensitivity of 
tumor cells expressing mutant p53 (mtp53). In the present study, we explored the 
effects and the underlying mechanisms of RITA in regards to the radiosensitivity 
and ER stress in mtp53-expressing human cervix cancer cells. Treatment with 1 µM 
of RITA for 24 h before irradiation markedly decreased survival and increased 
apoptosis in C-33A and HT-3 cells; the effects were not significantly altered by 
knockdown of p53. In the irradiated C-33A and HT-3 cells, RITA significantly 
increased the expression of IRE1α, the spliced XBP1 mRNA level, as well as 
apoptosis; the effects were abolished by knockdown of IRE1α. Transcriptional 
pulse-chase assays revealed that RITA significantly increased the stability of 
IRE1α mRNA in the irradiated C-33A and HT-3 cells. In contrast, the same RITA 
treatment did not show any significant effect on sham-irradiated cells. In 
conclusion, the present study provides initial evidence that RITA upregulates 
the expression level of IRE1α by increasing the stability of IRE1α mRNA in 
irradiated mtp53-expressing cervical cancer cells; the effect leads to enhanced 
IRE1α/XBP1 ER stress signaling and increased apoptosis in the cells. The present 
study offers novel insight into the pharmacological potential of RITA in the 
radiotherapy for cervical cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4083
PMID: 26134873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]