1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2015 Jun 30;8:94. doi: 10.1186/s13068-015-0277-0. 
eCollection 2015.

Construction of a self-cloning system in the unicellular green alga 
Pseudochoricystis ellipsoidea.

Kasai Y(1), Oshima K(1), Ikeda F(1), Abe J(1), Yoshimitsu Y(2), Harayama S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Chuo 
University, Kasuga 1-13-27, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Chuo 
University, Kasuga 1-13-27, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan ; Research 
Laboratories, Denso Corporation, Nisshin, Aichi 470-0111 Japan.

BACKGROUND: Microalgae have received considerable interest as a source of 
biofuel production. The unicellular green alga Pseudochoricystis ellipsoidea 
(non-validated scientific name) strain Obi appears to be suitable for 
large-scale cultivation in outdoor open ponds for biodiesel production because 
it accumulates lipids to more than 30 % of dry cell weight under 
nitrogen-depleted conditions. It also grows rapidly under acidic conditions at 
which most protozoan grazers of microalgae may not be tolerant. The lipid 
productivity of this alga could be improved using genetic engineering 
techniques; however, genetically modified organisms are the subject of 
regulation by specific laws. Therefore, the aim of this study was to develop a 
self-cloning-based positive selection system for the breeding of P. ellipsoidea.
RESULTS: In this study, uracil auxotrophic mutants were isolated after the 
mutagenesis of P. ellipsoidea using either ultraviolet light or a transcription 
activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) system. The cDNA of the uridine 
monophosphate synthase gene (PeUMPS) of P. ellipsoidea was cloned downstream of 
the promoter of either a beta-tubulin gene (PeTUBULIN1) or the gene for the 
small subunit of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (PeRBCS) to 
construct the pUT1 or pUT2 plasmid, respectively. These constructs were 
introduced into uracil auxotroph strains, and genetically complementary 
transformants were isolated successfully on minimal agar plates. Use of Noble 
agar as the solidifying agent was essential to avoid the development of 
false-positive colonies. It took more than 6 weeks for the formation of colonies 
of pUT1 transformants, whereas pUT2 transformants formed colonies in 2 weeks. 
Real-time PCR revealed that there were more PeUMPS transcripts in pUT2 
transformants than in pUT1 transformants. Uracil synthesis (Ura(+)) 
transformants were also obtained using a gene cassette consisting solely of 
PeUMPS flanked by the PeRBCS promoter and terminator.
CONCLUSIONS: A self-cloning-based positive selection system for the genetic 
transformation of P. ellipsoidea was developed. Self-cloned P. ellipsoidea 
strains will require less-stringent containment measures for large-scale outdoor 
cultivation.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-015-0277-0
PMCID: PMC4489027
PMID: 26140053