1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;27(5):500-4. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000204.

Neutrophils in pediatric autoimmune disease.

Huttenlocher A(1), Smith JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, 
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: As first immune responders, neutrophils are essential 
mediators of host defense, and also contribute to chronic pathologic 
inflammation at the crossroads of innate and adaptive immunity. In this review, 
we will highlight the current understanding of the role of neutrophils in 
pediatric rheumatology, with a focus on juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and 
lupus.
RECENT FINDINGS: In inflamed tissues, neutrophils extrude neutrophil 
extracellular traps containing autoantigen that potentially drives lupus and 
rheumatoid factor-positive JIA. However, the contribution of neutrophil 
extracellular traps to pathogenesis remains an area of intense investigation. In 
JIA joints, neutrophils are activated to such an extent that associated 
circulating levels of S100A proteins may serve as biomarkers, correlating with 
disease activity, predicting response to treatment and heralding flares. Beyond 
the effects of 'normal' activation, neutrophils in JIA and lupus display 
dysregulation in gene expression, subset activation, and apoptosis.
SUMMARY: The role of neutrophils in pediatric rheumatology is an understudied 
area, but garnering increasing attention. Although clearly implicated in JIA and 
lupus, the specific contributions of neutrophils to pathogenesis and the use of 
neutrophil activity surrogates as biomarkers require further study. 
Clarification of these outstanding issues will have implications for diagnosis 
and treatment of pediatric rheumatologic conditions.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000204
PMCID: PMC6402821
PMID: 26147757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]