1. J Neurochem. 2015 Nov;135(3):466-78. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13233. Epub 2015 Sep 2.

Resveratrol prevents cadmium activation of Erk1/2 and JNK pathways from neuronal 
cell death via protein phosphatases 2A and 5.

Liu C(1), Zhang R(1), Sun C(1), Zhang H(1), Xu C(1), Liu W(1), Gao W(1), Huang 
S(2)(3), Chen L(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology, Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life Sciences, 
Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University 
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.
(3)Feist-Weiller Cancer Center, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, USA.

Cadmium (Cd), a toxic environmental contaminant, induces neurodegenerative 
disorders. Resveratrol, a natural product, has been found to exert 
neuroprotective effects. However, little is known regarding the effect of 
resveratrol on Cd-evoked neurotoxicity. Here, we show that resveratrol 
effectively reversed Cd-elicited cell viability reduction, morphological change, 
nuclear fragmentation and condensation, as well as activation of caspase-3 in 
neuronal cells, implying neuroprotection against Cd-poisoning by resveratrol. 
Further research revealed that both c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (Erk1/2) were involved in the 
inhibitory effect of resveratrol on Cd-induced cell death, as selective 
inhibitors of Erk1/2 (U0126) and JNK (SP600125), or over-expression of dominant 
negative mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MKK1) or dominant negative 
c-Jun potentiated resveratrol's prevention of Cd-induced phosphorylation of JNK 
and Erk1/2, as well as cell death in neuronal cells. Interestingly, resveratrol 
potently rescued the cells from Cd-induced suppression of protein phosphatases 
2A (PP2A) and 5 (PP5) activity. Over-expression of PP2A or PP5 strengthened the 
inhibitory effects of resveratrol on Cd-induced activation of Erk1/2 and/or JNK, 
as well as cell death. The results indicate that resveratrol prevents Cd-induced 
activation of Erk1/2 and JNK pathways and neuronal cell death in part via 
activating PP2A and PP5. Our findings strongly support the notion that 
resveratrol may serve as a potential therapeutic agent in the prevention of 
Cd-induced neurodegenerative diseases.

Â© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.13233
PMCID: PMC9178502
PMID: 26146868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]