1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 3;16(7):15057-85. doi: 10.3390/ijms160715057.

Intracellular Protein Shuttling: A Mechanism Relevant for Myelin Repair in 
Multiple Sclerosis?

Göttle P(1), Küry P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225 
Düsseldorf, Germany. Peter.Goettle@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf, 40225 
Düsseldorf, Germany. kuery@uni-duesseldorf.de.

A prominent feature of demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) is 
the degeneration and loss of previously established functional myelin sheaths, 
which results in impaired signal propagation and axonal damage. However, at 
least in early disease stages, partial replacement of lost oligodendrocytes and 
thus remyelination occur as a result of resident oligodendroglial precursor cell 
(OPC) activation. These cells represent a widespread cell population within the 
adult central nervous system (CNS) that can differentiate into functional 
myelinating glial cells to restore axonal functions. Nevertheless, the 
spontaneous remyelination capacity in the adult CNS is inefficient because OPCs 
often fail to generate new oligodendrocytes due to the lack of stimulatory cues 
and the presence of inhibitory factors. Recent studies have provided evidence 
that regulated intracellular protein shuttling is functionally involved in 
oligodendroglial differentiation and remyelination activities. In this review we 
shed light on the role of the subcellular localization of 
differentiation-associated factors within oligodendroglial cells and show that 
regulation of intracellular localization of regulatory factors represents a 
crucial process to modulate oligodendroglial maturation and myelin repair in the 
CNS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms160715057
PMCID: PMC4519887
PMID: 26151843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]