1. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23582-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4361.

Long non-coding RNA UCA1 induces non-T790M acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs by 
activating the AKT/mTOR pathway in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer.

Cheng N(1), Cai W(1), Ren S(1), Li X(2), Wang Q(1), Pan H(1), Zhao M(1), Li 
J(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhao C(2), Chen X(1), Fei K(3), Zhou C(1), Hirsch FR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, P. R. 
China.
(2)Department of Lung Cancer and Immunology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, P. R. 
China.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University, Tongji University Medical School Cancer Institute, Shanghai, P. R. 
China.
(4)Department of Medical and Pathology, University of Colorado Cancer Center, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.

The aim of this study was to explore the role of long non-coding RNA UCA1 
(urothelial cancer-associated 1) in acquired resistance to epidermal growth 
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) in EGFR-mutant non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In our study, UCA1 expression was significantly 
increased in lung cancer cells and patients with acquired resistance to 
EGFR-TKIs. Over-expression of UCA1 was significantly associated with a shorter 
progression-free survival (PFS) [13.0 vs. 8.5 months, P < 0.01] in tumors with 
respond to EGFR-TKIs. The significant relationship was not observed in patients 
with T790M mutation (10.5 vs. 12.0 months, P = 0.778), but in patients with 
non-T790M (19.0 vs. 9.0 months, P = 0.023). UCA1 knockdown restored gefitinib 
sensitivity in acquired resistant cells with non-T790M and inhibited the 
activation of the AKT/mTOR pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). 
The mTOR inhibitor was effective in UCA1-expressing cell PC9/R. Inhibiting mTOR 
could change the expression of UCA1, although there was no significant 
difference. In conclusion, the influence of over-expression of UCA1 on PFS for 
patients with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs was from the subgroup with 
non-T790M mutation. UCA1 may induce non-T790M acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs 
by activating the AKT/mTOR pathway and EMT.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4361
PMCID: PMC4695138
PMID: 26160838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.