1. Neurotherapeutics. 2015 Oct;12(4):874-86. doi: 10.1007/s13311-015-0368-4.

Effect of Readthrough Treatment in Fibroblasts of Patients Affected by Lysosomal 
Diseases Caused by Premature Termination Codons.

Matalonga L(1), Arias Á(1), Tort F(1), Ferrer-Cortés X(1), Garcia-Villoria J(1), 
Coll MJ(1), Gort L(1), Ribes A(2).

Author information:
(1)Secció d'Errors Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquímica i 
Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBER de Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Secció d'Errors Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquímica i 
Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBER de Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. aribes@clinic.ub.es.

Aminoglycoside antibiotics, such as gentamicin, may induce premature termination 
codon (PTC) readthrough and elude the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay mechanism. 
Because PTCs are frequently involved in lysosomal diseases, readthrough 
compounds may be useful as potential therapeutic agents. The aim of our study 
was to identify patients responsive to gentamicin treatment in order to be used 
as positive controls to further screen for other PTC readthrough compounds. With 
this aim, fibroblasts from 11 patients affected by 6 different lysosomal 
diseases carrying PTCs were treated with gentamicin. Treatment response was 
evaluated by measuring enzymatic activity, abnormal metabolite accumulation, 
mRNA expression, protein localization, and cell viability. The potential effect 
of readthrough was also analyzed by in silico predictions. Results showed that 
fibroblasts from 5/11 patients exhibited an up to 3-fold increase of enzymatic 
activity after gentamicin treatment. Accordingly, cell lines tested showed 
enhanced well-localized protein and/or increased mRNA expression levels and/or 
reduced metabolite accumulation. Interestingly, these cell lines also showed 
increased enzymatic activity after PTC124 treatment, which is a PTC 
readthrough-promoting compound. In conclusion, our results provide a 
proof-of-concept that PTCs can be effectively suppressed by readthrough drugs, 
with different efficiencies depending on the genetic context. The screening of 
new compounds with readthrough activity is a strategy that can be used to 
develop efficient therapies for diseases caused by PTC mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-015-0368-4
PMCID: PMC4604176
PMID: 26169295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]