1. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;29(9):1375-84. doi: 10.1210/ME.2015-1127. Epub 2015
Jul  14.

Research Resource: Correlating Human Cytochrome P450 21A2 Crystal Structure and 
Phenotypes of Mutations in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia.

Pallan PS(1), Lei L(1), Wang C(1), Waterman MR(1), Guengerich FP(1), Egli M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146.

Cytochrome P450 21A2 is a key player in steroid 21-hydroxylation and converts 
progesterone to 11-deoxycorticosterone and 17Î±-hydroxy progesterone to 
11-deoxycortisol. More than 100 mutations in P450 21A2 have been established in 
patients thus far; these account for the vast majority of occurrences of 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), which is among the most common heritable 
metabolic diseases in humans. CAH phenotypes range from the most severe, 
salt-wasting (SW), to the simple virilizing (SV), and nonclassical (NC) CAH 
forms. We recently determined the crystal structure of human P450 21A2 in 
complex with progesterone. To gain more insight into the structural and 
stability changes underlying the phenotypes of individual mutations, we analyzed 
24 SW, SV, and NC mutants in the context of the crystal structure of the human 
enzyme. Our analysis reveals clear differences in the localization of SW, SV, 
and NC mutations, with many of the first type mapping to the active site and 
near the heme and/or substrate and mostly resulting in complete loss of enzyme 
activity. Conversely, NC mutations are often found near the periphery and close 
to the surface of the protein, and mutant enzymes retain partial activity. The 
main conclusion from the mutation-structure-activity study is that the severity 
of the CAH clinical manifestations can be directly correlated with the degree of 
mutation-induced damage in terms of protein fold stability and active site 
changes in the structural model. Thus, the NC phenotype is typically associated 
with mutations that have a compensatory effect, ie, H-bonding replacing 
hydrophobic interactions and vice versa.

DOI: 10.1210/ME.2015-1127
PMCID: PMC4552440
PMID: 26172259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]