1. Cytokine. 2015 Oct;75(2):280-90. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.05.005. Epub 2015
Jul  17.

IL-1 family members in the pathogenesis and treatment of metabolic disease: 
Focus on adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance.

Ballak DB(1), Stienstra R(2), Tack CJ(3), Dinarello CA(4), van Diepen JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Department of Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado 
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA; Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Denver, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address: duby.ballak@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Department of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, 
USA.

Obesity is characterized by a chronic, low-grade inflammation that contributes 
to the development of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Cytokines and 
chemokines produced by immunocompetent cells influence local as well as systemic 
inflammation and are therefore critical contributors to the pathogenesis of type 
2 diabetes. Hence, cytokines that modulate inflammatory responses are emerging 
as potential targets for intervention and treatment of the metabolic 
consequences of obesity. The interleukin-1 (IL-1) family of cytokines and 
receptors are key mediators of innate inflammatory responses and exhibit both 
pro- and anti-inflammatory functions. During the last decades, mechanistic 
insights into how the IL-1 family affects the initiation and progression of 
obesity-induced insulin resistance have increased significantly. Here, we review 
the current knowledge and understanding, with emphasis on the therapeutic 
potential of individual members of the IL-1 family of cytokines for improving 
insulin sensitivity in patients with diabetes.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.05.005
PMCID: PMC4553099
PMID: 26194067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]