1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 22;10(7):e0132117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132117. 
eCollection 2015.

Increased Dietary Intake of Saturated Fatty Acid Heptadecanoic Acid (C17:0) 
Associated with Decreasing Ferritin and Alleviated Metabolic Syndrome in 
Dolphins.

Venn-Watson SK(1), Parry C(1), Baird M(1), Stevenson S(1), Carlin K(1), Daniels 
R(1), Smith CR(1), Jones R(2), Wells RS(3), Ridgway S(1), Jensen ED(4).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine and Research Program, National Marine Mammal 
Foundation, San Diego, California, United States of America.
(2)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Chicago Zoological Society c/o Mote Marine Laboratory, Sarasota, Florida, 
United States of America.
(4)U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program, San Diego, California, United States of 
America.

Similar to humans, bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) can develop 
metabolic syndrome and associated high ferritin. While fish and fish-based fatty 
acids may protect against metabolic syndrome in humans, findings have been 
inconsistent. To assess potential protective factors against metabolic syndrome 
related to fish diets, fatty acids were compared between two dolphin populations 
with higher (n = 30, Group A) and lower (n = 19, Group B) mean insulin (11 ± 12 
and 2 ± 5 μIU/ml, respectively; P < 0.0001) and their dietary fish. In addition 
to higher insulin, triglycerides, and ferritin, Group A had lower percent serum 
heptadecanoic acid (C17:0) compared to Group B (0.3 ± 0.1 and 1.3 ± 0.4%, 
respectively; P < 0.0001). Using multivariate stepwise regression, higher 
percent serum C17:0, a saturated fat found in dairy fat, rye, and some fish, was 
an independent predictor of lower insulin in dolphins. Capelin, a common dietary 
fish for Group A, had no detectable C17:0, while pinfish and mullet, common in 
Group B's diet, had C17:0 (41 and 67 mg/100g, respectively). When a modified 
diet adding 25% pinfish and/or mullet was fed to six Group A dolphins over 24 
weeks (increasing the average daily dietary C17:0 intake from 400 to 1700 mg), 
C17:0 serum levels increased, high ferritin decreased, and blood-based metabolic 
syndrome indices normalized toward reference levels. These effects were not 
found in four reference dolphins. Further, higher total serum C17:0 was an 
independent and linear predictor of lower ferritin in dolphins in Group B 
dolphins. Among off the shelf dairy products tested, butter had the highest 
C17:0 (423mg/100g); nonfat dairy products had no detectable C17:0. We 
hypothesize that humans' movement away from diets with potentially beneficial 
saturated fatty acid C17:0, including whole fat dairy products, could be a 
contributor to widespread low C17:0 levels, higher ferritin, and metabolic 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132117
PMCID: PMC4511797
PMID: 26200116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Scientific findings from 
this study are part of a pending United States Utility Patent (Serial 
No.14/591,660), ‘Use of heptadecanoic acid (C17:0) to detect risk of and treat 
hyperferritinemia and metabolic syndrome,’ filed by the United States Navy. As a 
result of the reported discovery and pending patent, a small business owned by 
the lead author (SVW), Epitracker, LLC, has acquired a license to practice this 
discovery. The pending patent and license are a result of this study’s 
discovery. The study design, data analysis and interpretation, and a draft 
manuscript were completed before the patent application and license. The authors 
ensure that the stated potential competing interests did not interfere with this 
study’s original design or outcome and that this does not alter the authors’ 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. To ensure 
transparency, raw data from the original laboratory results and details of the 
study design have been provided to DRYAD (doi:10.5061/dryad.jm57v).