1. Leukemia. 2016 Jan;30(1):200-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.200. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Runx1 repression by histone deacetylation is critical for Setbp1-induced mouse 
myeloid leukemia development.

Vishwakarma BA(1), Nguyen N(1), Makishima H(2), Hosono N(2), Gudmundsson KO(1), 
Negi V(1), Oakley K(1), Han Y(1), Przychodzen B(2), Maciejewski JP(2), Du Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Abnormal activation of SETBP1 through overexpression or missense mutations is 
highly recurrent in various myeloid malignancies; however, it is unclear whether 
such activation alone is able to induce leukemia development. Here we show that 
Setbp1 overexpression in mouse bone marrow progenitors through retroviral 
transduction is capable of initiating leukemia development in irradiated 
recipient mice. Before leukemic transformation, Setbp1 overexpression 
significantly enhances the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and 
expands granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMPs). Interestingly, Setbp1 
overexpression also causes transcriptional repression of critical hematopoiesis 
regulator gene Runx1 and this effect is crucial for Setbp1-induced 
transformation. Runx1 repression is induced by Setbp1-mediated recruitment of a 
nucleosome remodeling deacetylase (NuRD) complex to Runx1 promoters and can be 
reversed by treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors Entinostat and 
Vorinostat. Moreover, treatment with these inhibitors caused efficient 
differentiation of Setbp1 activation-induced leukemia cells in vitro, and 
significantly extended the survival of mice transplanted with such leukemias, 
suggesting that HDAC inhibition could be an effective strategy for treating 
myeloid malignancies with SETBP1 activation.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2015.200
PMCID: PMC4703539
PMID: 26205084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.