1. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Sep;58(9):466-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.07.002. Epub 
2015 Jul 21.

Screening for GFAP rearrangements in a cohort of Alexander disease and 
undetermined leukoencephalopathy patients.

Ferreira MC(1), Dorboz I(2), Rodriguez D(3), Boespflug Tanguy O(4).

Author information:
(1)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Biochemistry Department, 
Clermont-Ferrand, France; GReD, UMR INSERM 931, CNRS 6247, Faculty of Medicine, 
Clermont-Ferrand, France. Electronic address: ferreira.marieceleste@gmail.com.
(2)Inserm U1141, Paris Diderot University - Sorbonne Paris Cité, DHU PROTECT, 
Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France.
(3)Inserm U1141, Paris Diderot University - Sorbonne Paris Cité, DHU PROTECT, 
Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France; Reference Center for Rare Neurogenetic 
Diseases, Department of Neuropediatrics, Trousseau Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(4)Inserm U1141, Paris Diderot University - Sorbonne Paris Cité, DHU PROTECT, 
Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France; Reference Center for Leukodystrophies, 
Department of Neuropediatrics and Metabolic Diseases, Robert Debré Hospital, 
AP-HP, Paris, France.

Alexander disease (AxD), a fatal degenerative leukoencephalopathy, is caused by 
de novo heterozygous missense mutations in the Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein 
(GFAP) gene. The pathological hallmark of the disease is the presence of 
Rosenthal fibers, cytoplasmic inclusions in astrocytes, composed mainly of GFAP, 
αB-crystallin and HSP27. To date, several patients with a typical presentation 
of the disease or displaying characteristic Rosenthal fibers in brain material 
have been reported with no GFAP mutation. Recently, several studies have 
demonstrated a correlation between Rosenthal fiber formation and wild-type GFAP 
overexpression, despite the absence of mutations. We tested the hypothesis that 
a GFAP gene rearrangement could modulate AxD severity or promote GFAP 
overexpression and aggregation, resulting in leukoencephalopathy. A QMPSF assay 
was validated for 11 exonic fragments: 3 in control genes (CFTR, DSCR1, F9) and 
8 corresponding to GFAP exons. A total of 97 patients suspected of AxD were 
analyzed: 28 with a GFAP mutation; 69 with clinical and magnetic resonance 
imaging criteria compatible with the disease. Neither duplications nor deletions 
of GFAP were found, suggesting that GFAP coding-region rearrangements may not be 
involved in AxD or Alexander-related leukoencephalopathies. In addition, 80 
patients with undetermined leukodystrophies, and negative for PLP1, GJA12, Sox10 
and MCT8 mutations and PLP1 and Lamin B1 rearrangements, were tested. These 
patients were also negative for GFAP rearrangements. Other hypotheses should be 
investigated for a molecular diagnosis in patients with undetermined 
leukoencephalopathy: mutations in GFAP isoforms, splicing sites or regulatory 
regions, or defaults in genes encoding molecular partners of GFAP.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.07.002
PMID: 26208460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]