1. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2016 Mar;17(3):177-80. doi: 
10.2459/JCM.0000000000000302.

Atrial fibrillation and NPPA gene p.S64R mutation: are cardiologists helpless 
spectators of healthy mutation carriers?

Disertori M(1), Mas√® M, Narula N, Mazzola S, dal Piaz EC, Quintarelli S, 
Cristoforetti A, Marini M, Ravelli F, Arbustini E.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Cardiology, Santa Chiara HospitalbHealthcare Research and 
Innovation Program. PAT-FBKcDepartment of Physics, University of Trento, Povo, 
TrentodCentre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, IRCCS Foundation, 
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, ItalyeMayo Clinic, 200 1st St Sw, Rochester, MN 
55905-0001, USA.

AIMS: Heterozygous p.(Ser64Arg) mutation in the natriuretic peptide precursor A 
gene has been associated with atrial fibrillation in the presence of common 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs10033464 and rs2200733; 4q25) that would act 
as modifiers.
METHODS: We screened natriuretic peptide precursor A gene in 583 individuals and 
identified three unrelated carriers of the p.(Ser64Arg) mutation (0.5%).
RESULTS: Only one of the three mutation carriers had episodes of atrial 
fibrillation. Cascade screening of the three families identified seven 
additional mutation carriers, none showing atrial fibrillation. The patients 
with atrial fibrillation also carried the rs2200733, which was however found in 
four additional nonatrial fibrillation family members and carriers of the 
p.(Ser64Arg). The prevalence of atrial fibrillation in p.(Ser64Arg) carriers was 
10% and in those combining the mutation with the risk single nucleotide 
polymorphisms was 20%. In the unique mutated patient with atrial fibrillation, 
the arrhythmias was refractory to both pharmacological and ablation treatment, 
during 16 years of follow-up; his electrophysiological phenotype was 
characterized by short atrial cycle lengths with a median value of 131 ms that 
suggests shortening of atrial action potential.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of p.(Ser64Arg) mutation is low in the general 
population as is the prevalence of atrial fibrillation in mutation carriers 
(1/10). Atrial fibrillation in the affected mutated patient was lone at onset 
and progressively evolved with peculiar electrophysiological patterns.

DOI: 10.2459/JCM.0000000000000302
PMID: 26200358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]