1. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Sep;99:351-61. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.018. Epub 2015 
Jul 23.

Chemerin: A comprehensive review elucidating the need for cardiovascular 
research.

Ferland DJ(1), Watts SW(2).

Author information:
(1)Michigan State University, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, B445 
Life Sciences, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. Electronic address: 
dfer513@gmail.com.
(2)Michigan State University, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, B445 
Life Sciences, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. Electronic address: wattss@msu.edu.

When chemerin was discovered in 1997, it was relegated to being a protein 
associated with the normal skin function contrasting the setting of psoriasis. 
However, with the discovery of multiple receptors for the chemerin protein and a 
vast collection of associations with various pathologies, chemerin has global 
influence capable of regulating chemotactic, adipokine, autocrine/paracrine, 
adipogenic, angiogenic, and reproductive functions. These individual abilities 
of chemerin are important for understanding its basic pharmacology and 
physiology, but application of these principles to human pathology relies on the 
ability of scientists and physicians to view this protein from a much wider, 
all-encompassing angle. A global participant in the action of chemerin is the 
cardiovascular system (CVS). Although the CVS may not have as many direct 
interactions (e.g. smooth muscle in endothelium) with chemerin as it does 
indirect (e.g. chemerin activation in the lumen by proteases), our basic 
understanding of the CVS and its relation to chemerin is necessary to form a 
proper grasp of its individual actions and make the applications to pathology. 
This review provides a fundamental, yet comprehensive review of chemerin that 
inherently identifies the CVS as a necessary link between chemerin and its 
associated pathologies, but also calls for basic cardiovascular research as the 
solution to this chasm between knowledge and application.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.07.018
PMCID: PMC4859430
PMID: 26211950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]