1. Folia Biol (Praha). 2015;61(3):91-6. doi: 10.14712/fb2015061030091.

Preparing Triple-Compound Heterozygous Control Material for Molecular 
Diagnostics of TPMT Allelic Variants.

Beránek M(1), Drastíková M(1), Bureš J(2), Palička V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Faculty of Medicine in 
Hradec Králové, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Hradec 
Králové, Czech Republic.
(2)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové, 
Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Hradec Králové, Czech 
Republic.

The aim of the study is to present a novel approach for preparing 
triple-compound heterozygous reference material (TCH-RM) for thiopurine 
S-methyltransferase (TPMT) genotyping by using the gene synthesis technology. 
The polynucleotide chain we prepared consisted of three wild-type and three 
mutant segments corresponding to the TPMT 238G>C, 460G>A, and 719A>G polymorphic 
sites. TCH-RM characteristics were assessed via four methods: reverse 
hybridization, real-time PCR with hydrolysis probes, real-time PCR followed by 
subsequent melting temperature analysis, and DNA sequencing. Consequently, we 
investigated the TPMT genotype of 371 patients suffering from autoimmune 
diseases requiring immunosuppressive therapy with thiopurine drugs, mostly 
inflammatory bowel disease. All methods confirmed the triple heterozygous 
character and commutability of TCH-RM. In evaluating its stability we obtained 
very comparable data before and after six months of storage at -80 °C. The 
determined genotypes were as follows: 352 wild-type subjects (94.8%), 17 TPMT*3A 
heterozygotes (460G>A and 719A>G, 4.6%), one patient heterozygous for the TPMT*2 
allele (238G>C, 0.3%), and one TPMT*3C heterozygote (719A>G, 0.3%). The 
frequencies of TPMT*1, *3A, *3C, and *2 in the patients were 97.5%, 2.3%, 0.1%, 
and 0.1 %, respectively. Assembling segments of synthetic DNA into long 
polynucleotide chains is a universal way of obtaining compound heterozygous 
material for performing any simultaneous analysis of polymorphic sites in the 
human genome. The batches are manufactured with a perfect concentration match of 
wildtype and mutant fragments, and can be made in large quantities for most 
diagnostic techniques.

DOI: 10.14712/fb2015061030091
PMID: 26213853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]