1. Gastroenterology. 2015 Nov;149(6):1519-29. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.012. 
Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Deficiency in lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 3 reduces plasma levels of 
lipids by reducing lipid absorption in mice.

Li Z(1), Jiang H(2), Ding T(3), Lou C(4), Bui HH(5), Kuo MS(5), Jiang XC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, New York; Molecular and Cellular Cardiology Program, VA New 
York Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, New York.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, New York.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, New York; School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, China.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, New York; Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center, Foshan, 
China.
(5)Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Company, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, New York; Molecular and Cellular Cardiology Program, VA New 
York Harbor Healthcare System, Brooklyn, New York; School of Pharmacy, Fudan 
University, China. Electronic address: xjiang@downstate.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Phosphatidylcholines (PCs) are structural and functional 
constituents of cell membranes. The activity of acyltransferase 
(lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase [LPCAT]) is required for addition of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids to the sn-2 position of PCs and is therefore 
required to maintain cell membrane structure and function. LPCAT3 is the most 
abundant isoform of LPCAT in the small intestine and liver, which are important 
sites of plasma lipoprotein metabolism. We investigated the effects of Lpcat3 
disruption on lipid metabolism in mice.
METHODS: We disrupted the gene Lpcat3 in C57BL/6J mice to create LPCAT3 knockout 
(KO) mice. Livers and small intestinal tissues were collected from LPCAT3 KO and 
C57BL/6J parental strain (controls), and levels of LPCAT messenger RNAs and 
protein were measured. Levels of lipids and lipoproteins were measured in plasma 
samples. We isolated enterocytes from mice and measured levels of RNAs and 
proteins involved in lipid uptake by real-time polymerase chain reaction and 
immunoblot assays, respectively. We assessed lipid absorption and PC subspecies 
in the enterocyte plasma membrane using liquid chromatography with tandem mass 
spectometry.
RESULTS: LPCAT3 KO mice survived only 3 weeks after birth. Oil Red O staining 
showed that the control but not LPCAT3 KO mice accumulated lipids in the small 
intestine; levels of Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) and fatty acid transporter 
protein 4 (FATP4), which regulate lipid uptake, were greatly reduced in the 
small intestines of LPCAT3 KO mice. Oral administration of PC and olive oil 
allowed the LPCAT3 KO mice to survive with the same body weights as controls, 
but the KO mice had shorter and wider small-intestinal villi and longer and 
bigger small intestines. Plasma membranes of enterocytes from LPCAT3 KO mice 
also had significant reductions in the composition of polyunsaturated PCs and 
reduced levels of NPC1L1, CD36, and FATP4 proteins. These reductions were 
associated with reduced intestinal uptake of lipid by the small intestine and 
reduced plasma levels of cholesterol, phospholipid, and triglyceride.
CONCLUSIONS: LPCAT3 KO mice have longer and larger small intestines than control 
mice, with shorter wide villi, reduced lipid absorption, and lower levels 
NPC1L1, CD36, and FATP4 proteins. Inhibition of LPCAT3 in the small intestine 
could be developed as an approach to treat hyperlipidemia.

Copyright Â© 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.012
PMCID: PMC4628552
PMID: 26226572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None