1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:414681. doi: 10.1155/2015/414681. Epub 2015 Jul 8.

Diversity and Global Distribution of IncL/M Plasmids Enabling Horizontal 
Dissemination of β-Lactam Resistance Genes among the Enterobacteriaceae.

Adamczuk M(1), Zaleski P(2), Dziewit L(1), Wolinowska R(3), Nieckarz M(1), 
Wawrzyniak P(4), Kieryl P(2), Plucienniczak A(2), Bartosik D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacterial Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology and Antibiotics, Staroscinska 5, 02-516 Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
Oczki 3, 02-007 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Bacterial Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Biology, University of Warsaw, Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland ; Institute 
of Biotechnology and Antibiotics, Staroscinska 5, 02-516 Warsaw, Poland.

Antibiotic resistance determinants are frequently associated with plasmids and 
other mobile genetic elements, which simplifies their horizontal transmission. 
Several groups of plasmids (including replicons of the IncL/M incompatibility 
group) were found to play an important role in the dissemination of resistance 
genes encoding β-lactamases. The IncL/M plasmids are large, broad host range, 
and self-transmissible replicons. We have identified and characterized two novel 
members of this group: pARM26 (isolated from bacteria inhabiting activated 
sludge from a wastewater treatment plant) and pIGT15 (originating from a 
clinical strain of Escherichia coli). This instigated a detailed comparative 
analysis of all available sequences of IncL/M plasmids encoding β-lactamases. 
The core genome of these plasmids is comprised of 20 genes with conserved 
synteny. Phylogenetic analyses of these core genes allowed clustering of the 
plasmids into four separate groups, which reflect their antibiotic resistance 
profiles. Examination of the biogeography of the IncL/M plasmids revealed that 
they are most frequently found in bacteria of the family Enterobacteriaceae 
originating from the Mediterranean region and Western Europe and that they are 
able to persist in various ecological niches even in the absence of direct 
antibiotic selection pressure.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/414681
PMCID: PMC4510254
PMID: 26236726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]