1. J Clin Med. 2014 Sep 5;3(3):997-1017. doi: 10.3390/jcm3030997.

Potential and Challenges of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells in Liver Diseases 
Treatment.

Yu Y(1)(2), Wang X(3)(4), Nyberg SL(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Living Donor Liver Transplantation, Ministry of Public 
Health, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. yuyue@njmu.edu.cn.
(2)Liver Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. yuyue@njmu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Living Donor Liver Transplantation, Ministry of Public 
Health, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. wangxh@njmu.edu.cn.
(4)Liver Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. wangxh@njmu.edu.cn.
(5)Division of Experimental Surgery, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN 55905, USA. nyberg.scott@mayo.edu.

Tens of millions of patients are affected by liver disease worldwide. Many of 
these patients can benefit from cell therapy involving living metabolically 
active cells, either by treatment of their liver disease, or by prevention of 
their disease phenotype. Cell therapies, including hepatocyte transplantation 
and bioartificial liver (BAL) devices, have been proposed as therapeutic 
alternatives to the shortage of transplantable livers. Both BAL and hepatocyte 
transplantation are cellular therapies that avoid use of a whole liver. 
Hepatocytes are also widely used in drug screening and liver disease modelling. 
However, the demand for human hepatocytes, heavily outweighs their availability 
by conventional means. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) technology brings 
together the potential benefits of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (i.e., 
self-renewal, pluripotency) and addresses the major ethical and scientific 
concerns of ESCs: embryo destruction and immune-incompatibility. It has been 
shown that hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs) can be generated from iPSCs. 
Furthermore, human iPSCs (hiPSCs) can provide an unlimited source of human 
hepatocytes and hold great promise for applications in regenerative medicine, 
drug screening and liver diseases modelling. Despite steady progress, there are 
still several major obstacles that need to be overcome before iPSCs will reach 
the bedside. This review will focus on the current state of efforts to derive 
hiPSCs for potential use in modelling and treatment of liver disease.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm3030997
PMCID: PMC4449640
PMID: 26237490