1. Microb Cell Fact. 2015 Aug 7;14:113. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0304-7.

An artificial neural network for membrane-bound catechol-O-methyltransferase 
biosynthesis with Pichia pastoris methanol-induced cultures.

Pedro AQ(1), Martins LM(2), Dias JM(3), Bonifácio MJ(4), Queiroz JA(5), 
Passarinha LA(6).

Author information:
(1)CICS-UBI, Centro de Investigação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira 
Interior, Avenida Infante D. Henrique, 6201-001, Covilhã, Portugal. 
apedro@fcsaude.ubi.pt.
(2)CICS-UBI, Centro de Investigação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira 
Interior, Avenida Infante D. Henrique, 6201-001, Covilhã, Portugal. 
lmcmartins1@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge System Biology Centre, University of 
Cambridge, Sanger Building, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1GA, UK. 
jml96@cam.ac.uk.
(4)Departamento de Investigação e Desenvolvimento, Bial, 4745-457, São Mamede do 
Coronado, Portugal. mjoao.bonifacio@bial.com.
(5)CICS-UBI, Centro de Investigação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira 
Interior, Avenida Infante D. Henrique, 6201-001, Covilhã, Portugal. 
jqueiroz@ubi.pt.
(6)CICS-UBI, Centro de Investigação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira 
Interior, Avenida Infante D. Henrique, 6201-001, Covilhã, Portugal. 
lpassarinha@fcsaude.ubi.pt.

BACKGROUND: Membrane proteins are important drug targets in many human diseases 
and gathering structural information regarding these proteins encourages the 
pharmaceutical industry to develop new molecules using structure-based drug 
design studies. Specifically, membrane-bound catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(MBCOMT) is an integral membrane protein that catalyzes the methylation of 
catechol substrates and has been linked to several diseases such as Parkinson's 
disease and Schizophrenia. Thereby, improvements in the clinical outcome of the 
therapy to these diseases may come from structure-based drug design where 
reaching MBCOMT samples in milligram quantities are crucial for acquiring 
structural information regarding this target protein. Therefore, the main aim of 
this work was to optimize the temperature, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) 
concentration and the methanol flow-rate for the biosynthesis of recombinant 
MBCOMT by Pichia pastoris bioreactor methanol-induced cultures using artificial 
neural networks (ANN).
RESULTS: The optimization trials intended to evaluate MBCOMT expression by P. 
pastoris bioreactor cultures led to the development of a first standard strategy 
for MBCOMT bioreactor biosynthesis with a batch growth on glycerol until the 
dissolved oxygen spike, 3 h of glycerol feeding and 12 h of methanol induction. 
The ANN modeling of the aforementioned fermentation parameters predicted a 
maximum MBCOMT specific activity of 384.8 nmol/h/mg of protein at 30°C, 2.9 
mL/L/H methanol constant flow-rate and with the addition of 6% (v/v) DMSO with 
almost 90% of healthy cells at the end of the induction phase. These results 
allowed an improvement of MBCOMT specific activity of 6.4-fold in comparison to 
that from the small-scale biosynthesis in baffled shake-flasks.
CONCLUSIONS: The ANN model was able to describe the effects of temperature, DMSO 
concentration and methanol flow-rate on MBCOMT specific activity, as shown by 
the good fitness between predicted and observed values. This experimental 
procedure highlights the potential role of chemical chaperones such as DMSO in 
improving yields of recombinant membrane proteins with a different topology than 
G-coupled receptors. Finally, the proposed ANN shows that the manipulation of 
classic fermentation parameters coupled with the addition of specific molecules 
can open and reinforce new perspectives in the optimization of P. pastoris 
bioprocesses for membrane proteins biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-015-0304-7
PMCID: PMC4527236
PMID: 26246150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]