1. J Bacteriol. 2015 Oct;197(20):3255-64. doi: 10.1128/JB.00547-15. Epub 2015 Aug
 3.

Reversal of the Drug Binding Pocket Defects of the AcrB Multidrug Efflux Pump 
Protein of Escherichia coli.

Soparkar K(1), Kinana AD(2), Weeks JW(3), Morrison KD(4), Nikaido H(2), Misra 
R(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA 
CoValence Laboratories, Chandler, Arizona, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, USA.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA 
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma, USA.
(4)School of Earth & Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
Arizona, USA.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA 
rajeev.misra@asu.edu.

The AcrB protein of Escherichia coli, together with TolC and AcrA, forms a 
contiguous envelope conduit for the capture and extrusion of diverse antibiotics 
and cellular metabolites. In this study, we sought to expand our knowledge of 
AcrB by conducting genetic and functional analyses. We began with an AcrB mutant 
bearing an F610A substitution in the drug binding pocket and obtained 
second-site substitutions that overcame the antibiotic hypersusceptibility 
phenotype conferred by the F610A mutation. Five of the seven unique single amino 
acid substitutions--Y49S, V127A, V127G, D153E, and G288C--mapped in the 
periplasmic porter domain of AcrB, with the D153E and G288C mutations mapping 
near and at the distal drug binding pocket, respectively. The other two 
substitutions--F453C and L486W--were mapped to transmembrane (TM) helices 5 and 
6, respectively. The nitrocefin efflux kinetics data suggested that all 
periplasmic suppressors significantly restored nitrocefin binding affinity 
impaired by the F610A mutation. Surprisingly, despite increasing MICs of tested 
antibiotics and the efflux of N-phenyl-1-naphthylamine, the TM suppressors did 
not improve the nitrocefin efflux kinetics. These data suggest that the 
periplasmic substitutions act by influencing drug binding affinities for the 
distal binding pocket, whereas the TM substitutions may indirectly affect the 
conformational dynamics of the drug binding domain.
IMPORTANCE: The AcrB protein and its homologues confer multidrug resistance in 
many important human bacterial pathogens. A greater understanding of how these 
efflux pump proteins function will lead to the development of effective 
inhibitors against them. The research presented in this paper investigates drug 
binding pocket mutants of AcrB through the isolation and characterization of 
intragenic suppressor mutations that overcome the drug susceptibility phenotype 
of mutations affecting the drug binding pocket. The data reveal a remarkable 
structure-function plasticity of the AcrB protein pertaining to its drug efflux 
activity.

Copyright Â© 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00547-15
PMCID: PMC4573724
PMID: 26240069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]