1. Cancer Sci. 2015 Oct;106(10):1394-401. doi: 10.1111/cas.12763. Epub 2015 Sep
25.

Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 regulates angiogenesis in a transforming 
growth factor β-dependent manner in human osteosarcoma.

Jiang X(1), Shan J(1), Dai N(1), Zhong Z(1), Qing Y(1), Yang Y(1), Zhang S(1), 
Li C(1), Sui J(1), Ren T(1), Li M(1), Wang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Center, Daping Hospital and Research Institute of Surgery, Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Angiogenesis plays an important role in tumor growth and metastasis and has been 
reported to be inversely correlated with overall survival of osteosarcoma 
patients. It has been shown that apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1), a 
dually functional protein possessing both base excision repair and redox 
activities, is involved in tumor angiogenesis, although these mechanisms are not 
fully understood. Our previous study showed that the expression of transforming 
growth factor β (TGFβ) was significantly reduced in APE1-deficient osteosarcoma 
cells. Transforming growth factor β promotes cancer metastasis through various 
mechanisms including immunosuppression, angiogenesis, and invasion. In the 
current study, we initially revealed that APE1, TGFβ, and microvessel density 
(MVD) have pairwise correlation in osteosarcoma tissue samples, whereas TGFβ, 
tumor size, and MVD were inversely related to the prognosis of the cohort. We 
found that knocking down APE1 in osteosarcoma cells resulted in TGFβ 
downregulation. In addition, APE1-siRNA led to suppression of angiogenesis in 
vitro based on HUVECs in Transwell and Matrigel tube formation assays. Reduced 
secretory protein level of TGFβ of culture medium also resulted in decreased 
phosphorylation of Smad3 of HUVECs. In a mouse xenograft model, siRNA-mediated 
silencing of APE1 downregulated TGFβ expression, tumor size, and MVD. 
Collectively, the current evidence indicates that APE1 regulates angiogenesis in 
osteosarcoma by controlling the TGFβ pathway, suggesting a novel target for 
anti-angiogenesis therapy in human osteosarcoma.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12763
PMCID: PMC4638009
PMID: 26250694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]