1. Mol Microbiol. 2015 Dec;98(5):831-46. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13160. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Expression of the Helicobacter pylori virulence factor vacuolating cytotoxin A 
(vacA) is influenced by a potential stem-loop structure in the 5' untranslated 
region of the transcript.

Amilon KR(1), Letley DP(1), Winter JA(1), Robinson K(1), Atherton JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Nottingham Digestive Diseases Biomedical Research Unit, School of Medicine, 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

The vacuolating cytotoxin, VacA, is an important virulence factor secreted by 
the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori. Certain vacA genotypes are strongly 
associated with disease risk, but the association is not absolute. The factors 
determining vacA gene expression are not fully understood, and the mechanisms of 
its regulation are elusive. We have identified a potential mRNA stem-loop 
forming structure in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the vacA transcript. 
Using site-directed mutagenesis, we found that disruption of the stem-loop 
structure reduced steady-state mRNA levels between two- and sixfold (P = 0.0005) 
and decreased mRNA half-life compared with wild type (P = 0.03). This led to a 
marked reduction in VacA protein levels and overall toxin activity. 
Additionally, during stressful environmental conditions of acid pH or high 
environmental salt concentrations, when general transcription of vacA was 
decreased or increased respectively, the stabilising effects of the stem-loop 
were even more pronounced. Our results suggest that the stem-loop structure in 
the vacA 5' UTR is an important determinant of vacA expression through 
stabilisation of the vacA mRNA transcript and that the stabilising effect is of 
particular importance during conditions of environmental stress.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Molecular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13160
PMCID: PMC4843948
PMID: 26259667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]