1. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 12;10(8):e0132005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132005. 
eCollection 2015.

Conflict bear translocation: investigating population genetics and fate of bear 
translocation in Dachigam National Park, Jammu and Kashmir, India.

Mukesh(1), Sharma LK(2), Charoo SA(3), Sathyakumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun, 248 001, Uttarakhand, 
India.
(2)Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun, 248 001, Uttarakhand, 
India; Directorate of Extension, Indian Council of Forestry Research and 
Education, New Forest, Dehradun, -248006, Uttarakhand, India.
(3)Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun, 248 001, Uttarakhand, 
India; Department of Wildlife Protection, Forest Complex, Srinagar, 190 008, 
Jammu and Kashmir, India.

The Asiatic black bear population in Dachigam landscape, Jammu and Kashmir is 
well recognized as one of the highest density bear populations in India. 
Increasing incidences of bear-human interactions and the resultant retaliatory 
killings by locals have become a serious threat to the survivorship of black 
bears in the Dachigam landscape. The Department of Wildlife Protection in Jammu 
and Kashmir has been translocating bears involved in conflicts, henceforth 
'conflict bears' from different sites in Dachigam landscape to Dachigam National 
Park as a flagship activity to mitigate conflicts. We undertook this study to 
investigate the population genetics and the fate of bear translocation in 
Dachigam National Park. We identified 109 unique genotypes in an area of ca. 650 
km2 and observed bear population under panmixia that showed sound genetic 
variability. Molecular tracking of translocated bears revealed that mostly bears 
(7 out of 11 bears) returned to their capture sites, possibly due to homing 
instincts or habituation to the high quality food available in agricultural 
croplands and orchards, while only four bears remained in Dachigam National Park 
after translocation. Results indicated that translocation success was most 
likely to be season dependent as bears translocated during spring and late 
autumn returned to their capture sites, perhaps due to the scarcity of food 
inside Dachigam National Park while bears translocated in summer remained in 
Dachigam National Park due to availability of surplus food resources. Thus, the 
current management practices of translocating conflict bears, without taking 
into account spatio-temporal variability of food resources in Dachigam landscape 
seemed to be ineffective in mitigating conflicts on a long-term basis. However, 
the study highlighted the importance of molecular tracking of bears to 
understand their movement patterns and socio-biology in tough terrains like 
Dachigam landscape.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132005
PMCID: PMC4534036
PMID: 26267280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.