1. Acta Neuropathol. 2015 Oct;130(4):445-68. doi: 10.1007/s00401-015-1466-4. Epub
 2015 Aug 12.

Inflammatory neuropathies: pathology, molecular markers and targets for specific 
therapeutic intervention.

Ubogu EE(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Immunopathology Research Laboratory, Division of Neuromuscular 
Disease, Department of Neurology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 
7th Avenue South, Sparks Center 200, Birmingham, AL, 35294-0017, USA. 
ubogu@uab.edu.

Inflammatory neuropathies encompass groups of heterogeneous disorders 
characterized by pathogenic immune-mediated hematogenous leukocyte infiltration 
of peripheral nerves, nerve roots or both, with resultant demyelination or 
axonal degeneration or both. Inflammatory neuropathies may be divided into three 
major disease categories: Guillain-Barr√© syndrome (particularly the acute 
inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy variant), chronic inflammatory 
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy and nonsystemic vasculitic neuropathy (or 
peripheral nerve vasculitis). Despite major advances in molecular biology, 
pathology and genetics, the pathogenesis of these disorders remains elusive. 
There is insufficient knowledge on the mechanisms of hematogenous leukocyte 
trafficking into the peripheral nervous system to guide the development of 
specific molecular therapies for immune-mediated inflammatory neuropathies 
compared to disorders such as psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid 
arthritis or multiple sclerosis. The recent isolation and characterization of 
human endoneurial endothelial cells that form the blood-nerve barrier provides 
an opportunity to elucidate leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions critical to 
the pathogenesis of inflammatory neuropathies at the interface between the 
systemic circulation and peripheral nerve endoneurium. This review discusses our 
current knowledge of the classic pathological features of inflammatory 
neuropathies, attempts at molecular classification and genetic determinants, the 
utilization of in vitro and in vivo animal models to determine pathogenic 
mechanisms at the interface between the systemic circulation and the peripheral 
nervous system relevant to these disorders and prospects for future potential 
molecular pathology biomarkers and targets for specific therapeutic 
intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-015-1466-4
PMCID: PMC4575885
PMID: 26264608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]