1. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Aug 7;21(29):8935-42. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i29.8935.

Interferon-λ polymorphisms and response to pegylated interferon in Iranian 
hepatitis C patients.

Haj-Sheykholeslami A(1), Keshvari M(1), Sharafi H(1), Pouryasin A(1), Hemmati 
K(1), Mohammadzadehparjikolaei F(1).

Author information:
(1)Arghavan Haj-sheykholeslami, Khalil Hemmati, Fatemeh 
Mohammadzadehparjikolaei, The Liver, Pancreatic, and Biliary Diseases Research 
Center, Digestive Diseases Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran 14117-13135, Iran.

AIM: To evaluate the efficacy of pegylated interferon in Iranian chronic 
hepatitis C patients in relation to interferon-λ (IFNL) polymorphisms.
METHODS: This study enrolled patients with chronic hepatitis C referred to the 
Tehran Blood Transfusion Hepatitis Clinic in 2011. Patients were included in the 
study if they had no concomitant hepatic illness, were negative for human 
immunodeficiency virus antibodies, and had no prior history of treatment with 
any type of pegylated interferon. Patients were treated with 180 μg pegylated 
interferon alpha-2a (Pegaferon(®)) weekly and 800-1200 mg ribavirin daily for 24 
or 48 wk depending on weight and hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype. Blood samples 
were collected from patients to obtain DNA for determination of IFNL rs12979860 
and rs8099917 polymorphisms. The virologic response in patients was then 
evaluated and compared between the different IFNL genotypes.
RESULTS: A total of 152 patients with a mean age of 41.9 ± 10.0 years were 
included in the study, of which 141/152 were men (92.8%). The most frequent HCV 
genotype was type-1, infecting 93/152 (61.2%) patients. Sustained virologic 
response (SVR) was achieved in 81.9% of patients with HCV genotype-1 and 91.1% 
of patients with HCV genotype-3. Treatment success was achieved in 91.2% (52/57) 
of patients with the IFNL rs12979860 CC genotype and 82.1% (78/95) in those with 
other genotypes. Similar treatment response rates were also observed in patients 
with rs8099917 TT (39/45; 86.7%) and non-TT (61/68; 89.7%) genotypes. Univariate 
analyses identified the following factors which influenced treatment response 
for inclusion in a multivariate analysis: age, HCV RNA level, stage of liver 
fibrosis, rs12979860 CC genotype, and aspartate transaminase level. A logistic 
regression analysis revealed that only the rs12979860 CC genotype was 
significantly associated with achievement of SVR (OR = 6.2; 95%CI: 1.2-31.9; P = 
0.03).
CONCLUSION: The rs12979860 CC genotype was associated with SVR in patients 
receiving pegylated interferon plus ribavirin, however, the SVR rate in other 
rs12979860 genotypes was also relatively high.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i29.8935
PMCID: PMC4528037
PMID: 26269684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]