1. BMC Struct Biol. 2015 Aug 12;15:14. doi: 10.1186/s12900-015-0041-5.

New insights into the molecular mechanism of the Rab GTPase Sec4p activation.

Rinaldi FC(1), Packer M(2), Collins R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. 
fcr23@cornell.edu.
(2)Honors Program in Undergraduate Studies, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
14853, USA. michaelpacker@fas.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. 
ruth.collins@cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: Sec4p is a small monomeric Ras-related GTP-binding protein (23Â kDa) 
that regulates polarized exocytosis in S. cerevisiae. In this study we examine 
the structural effects of a conserved serine residue in the P-loop corresponding 
to G12 in Ras.
RESULTS: We show that the Sec4p residue serine 29 forms a hydrogen bond with the 
nucleotide. Mutations of this residue have a different impact than equivalent 
mutations in Ras and can form stable associations with the exchange factor 
allowing us to elucidate the structure of a complex of Sec4p bound to the 
exchange factor Sec2p representing an early stage of the exchange reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our structural investigation of the Sec4p-Sec2p complex reveals the 
role of the Sec2p coiled-coil domain in facilitating the fast kinetics of the 
exchange reaction. For Ras-family GTPases, single point mutations that impact 
the signaling state of the molecule have been well described however less 
structural information is available for equivalent mutations in the case of Rab 
proteins. Understanding the structural properties of mutants such as the one 
described here, provides useful insights into unique aspects of Rab GTPase 
function.

DOI: 10.1186/s12900-015-0041-5
PMCID: PMC4531439
PMID: 26263895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]