1. J Exp Bot. 2015 Nov;66(21):6927-43. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv397. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

Hormone-mediated growth dynamics of the barley pericarp as revealed by magnetic 
resonance imaging and transcript profiling.

Pielot R(1), Kohl S(1), Manz B(2), Rutten T(1), Weier D(1), Tarkowská D(3), 
Rolčík J(3), Strnad M(3), Volke F(2), Weber H(4), Weschke W(4).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz-Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, D-06466 
Gatersleben, Germany.
(2)Fraunhofer Institut für Biomedizinische Technik (IBMT) Simulation, 
Visualization & Magnetic Resonance, Ensheimer Str. 48, D-66386 St. Ingbert, 
Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Centre of the Region Haná for 
Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Institute of Experimental Botany 
ASCR and Palacký University, Šlechtitelů 11, CZ-78371, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(4)Leibniz-Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung, D-06466 
Gatersleben, Germany weber@ipk-gatersleben.de.

The shape of the maternal pericarp affects cereal grain mass and yield. Pericarp 
growth was analysed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), revealing topological 
maps of mobile water in developing pericarp of barley (Hordeum vulgare) and 
displaying tissue regions actively elongating in specific temporal-spatial 
patterns. Correlation analysis of MRI signals and growth rates reveals that 
growth in length is mediated by dorsal and also lateral rather than ventral 
regions. Growth in thickness is related to ventral regions. Switching from 
dorsal to ventral growth is associated with differential expression of axial 
regulators of the HD-ZipIII and Kanadi/Ettin types, and NPH3 photoreceptors, 
suggesting light-mediated auxin re-distribution. Auxin increases with the 
highest levels in the basal pericarp at 6 days after fertilization (DAF), 
together with transcriptionally up-regulated auxin transport and signalling. 
Gibberellin biosynthesis is transcriptionally up-regulated only later, and 
levels of bioactive gibberellins increase from 7 to 13 DAF, with higher levels 
in ventral than dorsal regions. Differential gene expression related to cell 
expansion indicates genes related to apoplast acidification, wall relaxation, 
sugar cleavage, water transport, and cell wall biosynthesis. Candidate genes 
potentially involved in pericarp extension are distinguished by their temporal 
expression, representing potential isoforms responsible for dorsal-mediated 
early growth in length or ventral-mediated late growth in thickness.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erv397
PMCID: PMC4623697
PMID: 26276866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]