1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 30;43(19):9276-90. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv817. Epub 
2015 Aug 14.

Mapping the interactions of the single-stranded DNA binding protein of 
bacteriophage T4 (gp32) with DNA lattices at single nucleotide resolution: gp32 
monomer binding.

Jose D(1), Weitzel SE(1), Baase WA(1), von Hippel PH(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1229, USA.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1229, USA petevh@molbio.uoregon.edu.

Comment in
    10.1093/nar/gkv818.

Combining biophysical measurements on T4 bacteriophage replication complexes 
with detailed structural information can illuminate the molecular mechanisms of 
these 'macromolecular machines'. Here we use the low energy circular dichroism 
(CD) and fluorescent properties of site-specifically introduced base analogues 
to map and quantify the equilibrium binding interactions of short (8 nts) ssDNA 
oligomers with gp32 monomers at single nucleotide resolution. We show that 
single gp32 molecules interact most directly and specifically near the 3'-end of 
these ssDNA oligomers, thus defining the polarity of gp32 binding with respect 
to the ssDNA lattice, and that only 2-3 nts are directly involved in this tight 
binding interaction. The loss of exciton coupling in the CD spectra of dimer 
2-AP (2-aminopurine) probes at various positions in the ssDNA constructs, 
together with increases in fluorescence intensity, suggest that gp32 binding 
directly extends the sugar-phosphate backbone of this ssDNA oligomer, 
particularly at the 3'-end and facilitates base unstacking along the entire 
8-mer lattice. These results provide a model (and 'DNA map') for the isolated 
gp32 binding to ssDNA targets, which serves as the nucleation step for the 
cooperative binding that occurs at transiently exposed ssDNA sequences within 
the functioning T4 DNA replication complex.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv817
PMCID: PMC4627070
PMID: 26275775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]