1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Aug 3;9:278. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00278. 
eCollection 2015.

Elusive roles for reactive astrocytes in neurodegenerative diseases.

Ben Haim L(1), Carrillo-de Sauvage MA(1), Ceyzériat K(1), Escartin C(1).

Author information:
(1)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives, Département 
des Sciences du Vivant, Institut d'Imagerie Biomédicale, MIRCen 
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France ; Neurodegenerative Diseases Laboratory, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université Paris-Sud, UMR 9199 
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

Astrocytes play crucial roles in the brain and are involved in the 
neuroinflammatory response. They become reactive in response to virtually all 
pathological situations in the brain such as axotomy, ischemia, infection, and 
neurodegenerative diseases (ND). Astrocyte reactivity was originally 
characterized by morphological changes (hypertrophy, remodeling of processes) 
and the overexpression of the intermediate filament glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP). However, it is unclear how the normal supportive functions of 
astrocytes are altered by their reactive state. In ND, in which neuronal 
dysfunction and astrocyte reactivity take place over several years or decades, 
the issue is even more complex and highly debated, with several conflicting 
reports published recently. In this review, we discuss studies addressing the 
contribution of reactive astrocytes to ND. We describe the molecular triggers 
leading to astrocyte reactivity during ND, examine how some key astrocyte 
functions may be enhanced or altered during the disease process, and discuss how 
astrocyte reactivity may globally affect ND progression. Finally we will 
consider the anticipated developments in this important field. With this review, 
we aim to show that the detailed study of reactive astrocytes may open new 
perspectives for ND.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00278
PMCID: PMC4522610
PMID: 26283915