1. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2015 Aug 19;7(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s13195-015-0139-9.

Immune phenotypes of microglia in human neurodegenerative disease: challenges to 
detecting microglial polarization in human brains.

Walker DG(1), Lue LF(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroinflammation, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ, 85351, USA. douglas.walker@bannerhealth.com.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroinflammation, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ, 85351, USA. lihfen.lue@bannerhealth.com.

Inflammatory responses in the brain, which can be demonstrated by changes in 
properties of microglia, the brain-resident macrophages, are a common feature of 
human neurodegenerative diseases. Different monocyte/macrophage phenotypes have 
been defined by changes in expression of cytokines, receptors and other markers 
as a response to different classes of stimuli. Monocytes, macrophages and 
microglia can have a range of phenotypes with associated properties depending on 
their microenvironment. Macrophage/microglia polarization states have been 
defined as classical activation (M1), alternative activation (M2a), type II 
alternative activation (M2b) or acquired deactivation (M2c). Available markers 
for identifying microglial phenotypes in human brains are still limited; those 
available provide incomplete information on the functions or polarization states 
of microglia observed in tissues from diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis. The most widely used marker to 
describe activated microglia in human brains, particularly diseased brains, has 
been HLA-DR, the major histocompatibility complex II protein. HLA-DR-positive 
microglia can have a wide range of activation morphologies that are affected not 
only by disease pathology, but also by their differentiation states and brain 
regions. Two other widely used markers to identify microglia in human brains are 
ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule-1 and CD68. Although their expression 
changes in diseased brains, these markers do not show specificity for different 
phenotypes. Over the years there have been studies with additional markers that 
attempt to further define microglial properties, particularly in Alzheimer's 
disease brains. Most studies have employed immunohistochemical techniques to 
identify microglia in tissue sections, but recent advances in this field have 
allowed gene expression profiling of microglia upon immediate isolation from 
brains. We will review which markers might better define different activation 
phenotypes of microglia in human brains and whether they fit into current 
microglial polarization schemes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13195-015-0139-9
PMCID: PMC4543480
PMID: 26286145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]