1. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Nov;19(11):2664-78. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12658. Epub 2015
Aug  20.

Comparative two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of the salivary 
proteome of children with autism spectrum disorder.

Ngounou Wetie AG(1), Wormwood KL(1), Charette L(2)(3), Ryan JP(3), Woods 
AG(1)(2), Darie CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry & Proteomics Group, Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular 
Science, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, USA.
(2)SUNY Plattsburgh Neuropsychology Clinic and Psychoeducation Services, 
Plattsburgh, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, SUNY Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh, NY, USA.

In the last decades, prevalence of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has been on 
the rise. However, clear aetiology is still elusive and improvements in early 
diagnosis are needed. To uncover possible biomarkers present in ASD, we used 
two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and nanoliquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS), to compare salivary 
proteome profiling of children with ASD and controls. A total of 889 spots were 
compared and only those spots with a fold change ≥1.7 and a P-value <0.05 or a 
fold change of ≥3.0 between ASD cases and controls were analysed by 
nanoLC-MS/MS. Alpha-amylase, CREB-binding protein, p532, Transferrin, Zn alpha2 
glycoprotein, Zymogen granule protein 16, cystatin D and plasminogen were 
down-regulated in ASD. Increased expression of proto-oncogene Frequently 
rearranged in advanced T-cell lymphomas 1 (FRAT1), Kinesin family member 14, 
Integrin alpha6 subunit, growth hormone regulated TBC protein 1, parotid 
secretory protein, Prolactin-inducible protein precursor, Mucin-16, Ca binding 
protein migration inhibitory factor-related protein 14 (MRP14) was observed in 
individuals with ASD. Many of the identified proteins have previously been 
linked to ASD or were proposed as risk factors of ASD at the genetic level. Some 
others are involved in pathological pathways implicated in ASD causality such as 
oxidative stress, lipid and cholesterol metabolism, immune system disturbances 
and inflammation. These data could contribute to protein signatures for ASD 
presence, risk and subtypes, and advance understanding of ASD cause as well as 
provide novel treatment targets for ASD.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12658
PMCID: PMC4627571
PMID: 26290361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]