1. Mutat Res. 2015 Oct;780:71-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 Aug
 13.

DNA sequence context greatly affects the accuracy of bypass across an 
ultraviolet light 6-4 photoproduct in mammalian cells.

Shriber P(1), Leitner-Dagan Y(1), Geacintov N(2), Paz-Elizur T(3), Livneh Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
76100, Israel.
(2)Chemistry Department, New York University, NY 10003-5180, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
76100, Israel. Electronic address: tamar.paz-elizur@weizmann.ac.il.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
76100, Israel. Electronic address: zvi.livneh@weizmann.ac.il.

Translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) is a DNA damage tolerance mechanism carried out 
by low-fidelity DNA polymerases that bypass DNA lesions, which overcomes 
replication stalling. Despite the miscoding nature of most common DNA lesions, 
several of them are bypassed in mammalian cells in a relatively accurate manner, 
which plays a key role maintaining a low mutation load. Whereas it is generally 
agreed that TLS across the major UV and sunlight induced DNA lesion, the 
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD), is accurate, there were conflicting reports 
on whether the same is true for the thymine-thymine pyrimidine-pyrimidone(6-4) 
ultraviolet light photoproduct (TT6-4PP), which represents the second most 
common class of UV lesions. Using a TLS assay system based on gapped plasmids 
carrying site-specific TT6-4PP lesions in defined sequence contexts we show that 
the DNA sequence context markedly affected both the extent and accuracy of TLS. 
The sequence exhibiting higher TLS exhibited also higher error-frequency, caused 
primarily by semi-targeted mutations, at the nearest nucleotides flanking the 
lesion. Our results resolve the discrepancy reported on TLS across TT6-4PP, and 
suggest that TLS is more accurate in human cells than in mouse cells.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2015.08.002
PMCID: PMC4871125
PMID: 26302378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.