1. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 24;5:13154. doi: 10.1038/srep13154.

Use of double-stranded DNA mini-circles to characterize the covalent 
topoisomerase-DNA complex.

Millet A(1), Strauss F(1), Delagoutte E(1).

Author information:
(1)Structure et Instabilité des Génomes, Sorbonne Universités, Muséum national 
d'Histoire naturelle, Inserm U 1154, CNRS UMR 7196; CP26, 57 rue Cuvier 75005 
Paris, France.

The enzymatic DNA relaxation requires the DNA to be transiently nicked and 
rejoined, the covalent topoisomerase-DNA complex being a key intermediate of the 
nicking-joining reaction. Practically, this reaction is most often characterized 
by oligonucleotides. However, the incision-religation of an oligonucleotide does 
not fully recapitulate the incision-religation occuring during relaxation and 
the preferred substrate for such reaction characterization is supercoiled DNA. 
We therefore developed a method that used radiolabeled supercoiled DNA 
mini-circles to characterize the covalent enzyme-DNA complex formed during a 
relaxation reaction. Resolution of the relaxation products under different 
conditions permitted to quantify the proportion of covalent complex formed 
during the relaxation catalyzed by two topoisomerase models, the Escherichia 
coli topoisomerase I and the calf thymus topoisomerase I. As expected, the 
covalent complex formed with the calf thymus topoisomerase I was significantly 
enriched by camptothecin, a widely-used inhibitor of this topoisomerase, and a 
salt jump permitted the multiple topoisomerases trapped per mini-circle to 
complete the reaction cycle. The identified positions of the 
camptothecin-induced incision sites were shown to be independent of the linking 
number and the substrate circular nature Overall, our results demonstrate that 
supercoiled mini-circles constitute a powerful and polyvalent substrate to 
characterize the mechanism of action of novel topoisomerases and inhibitors, 
including the incision-religation reaction.

DOI: 10.1038/srep13154
PMCID: PMC4547392
PMID: 26300432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]