1. One Health. 2015 Dec 1;1:1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2015.03.001.

One health, multiple challenges: The inter-species transmission of influenza A 
virus.

Short KR(1), Richard M(2), Verhagen JH(2), van Riel D(2), Schrauwen EJ(2), van 
den Brand JM(2), Mänz B(2), Bodewes R(2), Herfst S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Centre, the Netherlands ; School 
of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Centre, the Netherlands.

Influenza A viruses are amongst the most challenging viruses that threaten both 
human and animal health. Influenza A viruses are unique in many ways. Firstly, 
they are unique in the diversity of host species that they infect. This includes 
waterfowl (the original reservoir), terrestrial and aquatic poultry, swine, 
humans, horses, dog, cats, whales, seals and several other mammalian species. 
Secondly, they are unique in their capacity to evolve and adapt, following 
crossing the species barrier, in order to replicate and spread to other 
individuals within the new species. Finally, they are unique in the frequency of 
inter-species transmission events that occur. Indeed, the consequences of novel 
influenza virus strain in an immunologically naïve population can be 
devastating. The problems that influenza A viruses present for human and animal 
health are numerous. For example, influenza A viruses in humans represent a 
major economic and disease burden, whilst the poultry industry has suffered 
colossal damage due to repeated outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza 
viruses. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of influenza A 
viruses by shedding light on interspecies virus transmission and summarising the 
current knowledge regarding how influenza viruses can adapt to a new host.

DOI: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2015.03.001
PMCID: PMC4542011
PMID: 26309905