1. Nat Commun. 2015 Aug 27;6:8100. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9100.

PAQR3 modulates cholesterol homeostasis by anchoring Scap/SREBP complex to the 
Golgi apparatus.

Xu D(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Jiang W(2), Pan Y(1), Song BL(3), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional 
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 20031, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, the Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Cholesterol biosynthesis is regulated by transcription factors SREBPs and their 
escort protein Scap. On sterol depletion, Scap/SREBP complex is transported from 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi apparatus where SREBP is activated. 
Under cholesterol sufficient condition, Insigs act as anchor proteins to retain 
Scap/SREBP in the ER. However, the anchor protein of Scap/SREBP in the Golgi is 
unknown. Here we report that a Golgi-localized membrane protein progestin and 
adipoQ receptors 3 (PAQR3) interacts with Scap and SREBP and tethers them to the 
Golgi. PAQR3 promotes Scap/SREBP complex formation, potentiates SREBP processing 
and enhances lipid synthesis. The mutually exclusive interaction between Scap 
and PAQR3 or Insig-1 is regulated by cholesterol level. PAQR3 knockdown in liver 
blunts SREBP pathway and decreases hepatic cholesterol content. Disrupting the 
interaction of PAQR3 with Scap/SREBP by a synthetic peptide inhibits SREBP 
processing and activation. Thus, PAQR3 regulates cholesterol homeostasis by 
anchoring Scap/SREBP to the Golgi and disruption of such function reduces 
cholesterol biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9100
PMCID: PMC4560833
PMID: 26311497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]