1. Cancer Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1621-32. doi: 10.1002/cam4.506. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Advances in molecular-based personalized non-small-cell lung cancer therapy: 
targeting epidermal growth factor receptor and mechanisms of resistance.

Jotte RM(1), Spigel DR(2).

Author information:
(1)Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Lone Tree, Colorado.
(2)Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville, Tennessee.

Molecularly targeted therapies, directed against the features of a given tumor, 
have allowed for a personalized approach to the treatment of advanced 
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The reversible epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) gefitinib and erlotinib had 
undergone turbulent clinical development until it was discovered that these 
agents have preferential activity in patients with NSCLC harboring activating 
EGFR mutations. Since then, a number of phase 3 clinical trials have 
collectively shown that EGFR-TKI monotherapy is more effective than combination 
chemotherapy as first-line therapy for EGFR mutation-positive advanced NSCLC. 
The next generation of EGFR-directed agents for EGFR mutation-positive advanced 
NSCLC is irreversible TKIs against EGFR and other ErbB family members, including 
afatinib, which was recently approved, and dacomitinib, which is currently being 
tested in phase 3 trials. As research efforts continue to explore the various 
proposed mechanisms of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy, agents that 
target signaling pathways downstream of EGFR are being studied in combination 
with EGFR TKIs in molecularly selected advanced NSCLC. Overall, the results of 
numerous ongoing phase 3 trials involving the EGFR TKIs will be instrumental in 
determining whether further gains in personalized therapy for advanced NSCLC are 
attainable with newer agents and combinations. This article reviews key clinical 
trial data for personalized NSCLC therapy with agents that target the EGFR and 
related pathways, specifically based on molecular characteristics of individual 
tumors, and mechanisms of resistance.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.506
PMCID: PMC4673988
PMID: 26310719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]