1. Neuroscience. 2015 Oct 29;307:117-27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.08.052.
 Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Dynamic changes in extracellular release of GABA and glutamate in the lateral 
septum during social play behavior in juvenile rats: Implications for 
sex-specific regulation of social play behavior.

Bredewold R(1), Schiavo JK(2), van der Hart M(3), Verreij M(2), Veenema AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology of Social Behavior Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Boston 
College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA. Electronic address: remco.bredewold@bc.edu.
(2)Neurobiology of Social Behavior Laboratory, Department of Psychology, Boston 
College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA.
(3)BrainsOnline, South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Social play is a motivated and rewarding behavior that is displayed by nearly 
all mammals and peaks in the juvenile period. Moreover, social play is essential 
for the development of social skills and is impaired in social disorders like 
autism. We recently showed that the lateral septum (LS) is involved in the 
regulation of social play behavior in juvenile male and female rats. The LS is 
largely modulated by GABA and glutamate neurotransmission, but their role in 
social play behavior is unknown. Here, we determined whether social play 
behavior is associated with changes in the extracellular release of GABA and 
glutamate in the LS and to what extent such changes modulate social play 
behavior in male and female juvenile rats. Using intracerebral microdialysis in 
freely behaving rats, we found no sex difference in extracellular GABA 
concentrations, but extracellular glutamate concentrations are higher in males 
than in females under baseline conditions and during social play. This resulted 
in a higher glutamate/GABA concentration ratio in males vs. females and thus, an 
excitatory predominance in the LS of males. Furthermore, social play behavior in 
both sexes is associated with significant increases in extracellular release of 
GABA and glutamate in the LS. Pharmacological blockade of GABA-A receptors in 
the LS with bicuculline (100 ng/0.5 μl, 250 ng/0.5 μl) dose-dependently 
decreased the duration of social play behavior in both sexes. In contrast, 
pharmacological blockade of ionotropic glutamate receptors (NMDA and 
AMPA/kainate receptors) in the LS with AP-5+CNQX (2mM+0.4mM/0.5 μl, 30 
mM+3mM/0.5 μl) dose-dependently decreased the duration of social play behavior 
in females, but did not alter social play behavior in males. Together, these 
data suggest a role for GABA neurotransmission in the LS in the regulation of 
juvenile social play behavior in both sexes, while glutamate neurotransmission 
in the LS is involved in the sex-specific regulation of juvenile social play 
behavior.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.08.052
PMCID: PMC4591248
PMID: 26318330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]