1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2015 Oct;21(10):1294-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.08.018. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

The emerging role of SMPD1 mutations in Parkinson's disease: Implications for 
future studies.

Gan-Or Z(1), Orr-Urtreger A(2), Alcalay RN(3), Bressman S(4), Giladi N(5), 
Rouleau GA(6).

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; The Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; The Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: ziv.gan-or@mail.mcgill.ca.
(2)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel; The 
Genetic Institute, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Department of Neurology and Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)The Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai Beth Israel Medical Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(5)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel; The 
Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(6)Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; The Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; The Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2015 Oct;21(10):1296-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.08.019.

Comment on
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2015 Sep;21(9):1067-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.06.016.

Recently, an additional study confirmed the association between SMPD1 mutations 
and Parkinson's disease (PD). While the first study on SMPD1 and PD suggested 
that only one SMPD1 mutations is responsible for the association to PD, the 
recent study argued that all SMPD1 mutations may be associated with an increased 
risk for PD. Since SMPD1 mutations are being routinely screened in some 
populations with high carrier frequencies, and since it will be further screened 
in additional PD populations, it is important to better define the association 
between SMPD1 and PD. We reanalyzed the data from the recent and previous 
papers, and we show that the association between SMPD1 and PD is indeed not 
driven by only one mutation, but it is also not driven by all SMPD1 mutations. 
In the Ashkenazi-Jewish population, the p.fs330P (OR = 3.03, p = 0.0026) and 
p.L302P (OR = 9.62, p < 0.0001) are associated with PD, and the p.R496L mutation 
is not (OR = 0.84, p = 0.71), and similar observation was noted in the Chinese 
population. Thus, we conclude that similar to the GBA gene where different 
mutations have differential effects, SMPD1 mutations also have a differential 
effects on the risk for PD. Future studies should therefore examine the 
association by mutation and not by accumulative risk of all mutations.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.08.018
PMID: 26320887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]