1. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):35542-55. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4689.

Adaptive responses of androgen receptor signaling in castration-resistant 
prostate cancer.

Perner S(1), Cronauer MV(2), Schrader AJ(3), Klocker H(4), Culig Z(5), Baniahmad 
A(6).

Author information:
(1)Section for Prostate Cancer Research, Institute of Pathology, Center for 
Integrated Oncology Cologne/Bonn, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Department of Urology, Muenster University Medical Center, MÃ¼nster, Germany.
(4)Division of Experimental Urology, Department of Urology, Medical University 
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Department of Urology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.

Prostate Cancer (PCa) is an important age-related disease being the most common 
cancer malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in men in 
Western countries. Initially, PCa progression is androgen receptor (AR)- and 
androgen-dependent. Eventually advanced PCa reaches the stage of 
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer (CRPC), but remains dependent on AR, which 
indicates the importance of AR activity also for CRPC. Here, we discuss various 
pathways that influence the AR activity in CRPC, which indicates an adaptation 
of the AR signaling in PCa to overcome the treatment of PCa. The adaptation 
pathways include interferences of the normal regulation of the AR protein level, 
the expression of AR variants, the crosstalk of the AR with cytokine tyrosine 
kinases, the Src-Akt-, the MAPK-signaling pathways and AR corepressors. 
Furthermore, we summarize the current treatment options with regard to the 
underlying molecular basis of the common adaptation processes of AR signaling 
that may arise after the treatment with AR antagonists, androgen deprivation 
therapy (ADT) as well as for CRPC, and point towards novel therapeutic 
strategies. The understanding of individualized adaptation processes in PCa will 
lead to individualized treatment options in the future.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.4689
PMCID: PMC4742123
PMID: 26325261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors served as 
advisors for Astellas Pharma GmbH.