1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2016 Feb;115(2):67-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jfma.2015.08.004.
Epub  2015 Aug 31.

A systematic review of familial Alzheimer's disease: Differences in presentation 
of clinical features among three mutated genes and potential ethnic differences.

Shea YF(1), Chu LW(2), Chan AO(3), Ha J(4), Li Y(5), Song YQ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. 
Electronic address: syf321@ha.org.hk.
(2)Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Network, Strategic Research Theme on Aging, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region.
(3)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Pathology and Clinical 
Biochemistry, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region.
(4)Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
(5)Center for Transport Phenomena, Energy Research Institute of Shandong Academy 
of Sciences, Jinan, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

There are great diversities of clinical phenotypes among the various familial 
Alzheimer's disease (FAD) families. We aimed to systematically review all the 
previously reported cases of FAD and to perform comparisons between Asian and 
white patients. In this regard, we collected individual-level data from 658 
pedigrees. We found that patients with presenilin 1 (PSEN1) mutations had the 
earliest age of onset (AOO; 43.3 ± 8.6 years, p < 0.001) and were more commonly 
affected by seizures, spastic paraparesis, myoclonus, and cerebellar signs 
(p < 0.001, p < 0.001, p = 0.003, and p = 0.002, respectively). Patients with 
PSEN2 mutations have a delayed AOO with longest disease duration and presented 
more frequently with disorientation (p = 0.03). Patients with amyloid precursor 
protein (APP) mutations presented more frequently with aggression (p = 0.02) and 
those with APP duplication presented more frequently with apraxia (p = 0.03). 
PSEN1 mutations before codon 200 had an earlier AOO than those having mutations 
after codon 200 (41.4 ± 8.0 years vs. 44.7 ± 8.7 years, p < 0.001). Because 
42.9% of the mutations reported are novel, the mutation spectrum and clinical 
features in Asian FAD families could be different from that of whites. Asian 
patients with PSEN1 mutations presented more frequently with disorientation 
(p = 0.02) and personality change (p = 0.01) but less frequently with atypical 
clinical features. Asian patients with APP mutations presented less frequently 
with aphasia (p = 0.02). Thus, clinical features could be modified by underlying 
mutations, and Asian FAD patients may have different clinical features when 
compared with whites.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2015.08.004
PMID: 26337232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]