1. Pain. 2016 Jan;157(1):147-158. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000342.

GluN2B N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and excitatory amino acid transporter 3 are 
upregulated in primary sensory neurons after 7 days of morphine administration 
in rats: implication for opiate-induced hyperalgesia.

Gong K(1), Bhargava A, Jasmin L.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery and Obstetric and Gynecology 
and the Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The contribution of the peripheral nervous system to opiate-induced hyperalgesia 
(OIH) is not well understood. In this study, we determined the changes in 
excitability of primary sensory neurons after sustained morphine administration 
for 7 days. Changes in the expression of glutamate receptors and glutamate 
transporters after morphine administration were ascertained in dorsal root 
ganglions. Patch clamp recordings from intact dorsal root ganglions (ex vivo 
preparation) of morphine-treated rats showed increased excitability of small 
diameter (≤30 μm) neurons with respect to rheobase and membrane threshold, 
whereas the excitability of large diameter (>30 μm) neurons remained unchanged. 
Small diameter neurons also displayed increased responses to glutamate, which 
were mediated mainly by GluN2B containing N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, 
and to a lesser degree by the neuronal excitatory amino acid transporter 
3/excitatory amino acid carrier 1. Coadministration in vivo of the GluN2B 
selective antagonist Ro 25-6981 with morphine for 7 days prevented the 
appearance of OIH and increased morphine-induced analgesia. Administration of 
morphine for 7 days led to an increased expression of GluN2B and excitatory 
amino acid transporter 3/excitatory amino acid carrier 1, but not of the 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate, kainate, or group I 
metabotropic glutamate receptors, or of the vesicular glutamate transporter 2. 
These results suggest that peripheral glutamatergic neurotransmission 
contributes to OIH and that GluN2B subunit of NMDA receptors in the periphery 
may be a target for therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000342
PMCID: PMC4957526
PMID: 26335908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors 
report no conflict of interest.