1. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:150673. doi: 10.1155/2015/150673. Epub 2015 Aug
6.

Lack of Association between Polymorphisms of the TLR4 Gene and Infection with 
the Hepatitis B and C Viruses.

Pires-Neto Ode S(1), de Sá KS(1), Santana BB(1), Gomes ST(1), Amoras Eda S(1), 
Conde SR(2), Demachki S(2), Azevedo VN(1), Martins-Feitosa RN(1), Ishak Mde 
O(1), Ishak R(1), Vallinoto AC(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Virologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal do Pará, Guamá, 66075-110 Belém, PA, Brazil.
(2)Faculdade de Medicina, Instituto de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal 
do Pará, Umarizal, 66050-060 Belém, PA, Brazil.

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) plays a crucial role in the early recognition of 
pathogenic microorganisms and provides an ideal model to investigate the 
consequences of genetic variation and susceptibility to diseases. The present 
study investigated the occurrence of the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
rs4986790 (A>G) and rs4986791 (C>T) in the TLR4 gene in chronic carriers of the 
hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) viruses. A total of 420 blood samples were 
collected (HBV, 49; HCV, 72; and controls, 299) at the liver disease outpatient 
clinic of Hospital da Fundação Santa Casa de Misericórdia do Pará (FSCMPA). 
Genomic DNA extracted from leukocytes was subjected to real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR) analysis to identify the genetic profile of the 
participants. No significant differences were found in the allele and genotype 
frequencies between the infected participants and controls. No significant 
associations were found between the investigated polymorphisms and inflammatory 
activity, fibrosis, and the presence of cirrhosis; the same results were 
obtained in the haplotype analysis. The results showed a lack of association 
between the rs4986790 and rs4986791 SNPs and susceptibility to infection with 
HBV and HCV, as well as clinical and laboratory information of the patients.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/150673
PMCID: PMC4544445
PMID: 26347404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]