1. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 15;406(2):212-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.018. Epub
2015  Sep 6.

Dynamic regulation of basement membrane protein levels promotes egg chamber 
elongation in Drosophila.

Isabella AJ(1), Horne-Badovinac S(2).

Author information:
(1)Committee on Development, Regeneration and Stem Cell Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)Committee on Development, Regeneration and Stem Cell Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA; Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell 
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: 
shorne@uchicago.edu.

Basement membranes (BMs) are sheet-like extracellular matrices that provide 
essential support to epithelial tissues. Recent evidence suggests that regulated 
changes in BM architecture can direct tissue morphogenesis, but the mechanisms 
by which cells remodel BMs are largely unknown. The Drosophila egg chamber is an 
organ-like structure that transforms from a spherical to an ellipsoidal shape as 
it matures. This elongation coincides with a stage-specific increase in Type IV 
Collagen (Col IV) levels in the BM surrounding the egg chamber; however, the 
mechanisms and morphogenetic relevance of this remodeling event have not been 
established. Here, we identify the Collagen-binding protein SPARC as a negative 
regulator of egg chamber elongation, and show that SPARC down-regulation is 
necessary for the increase in Col IV levels to occur. We find that SPARC 
interacts with Col IV prior to secretion and propose that, through this 
interaction, SPARC blocks the incorporation of newly synthesized Col IV into the 
BM. We additionally observe a decrease in Perlecan levels during elongation, and 
show that Perlecan is a negative regulator of this process. These data provide 
mechanistic insight into SPARC's conserved role in matrix dynamics and 
demonstrate that regulated changes in BM composition influence organ 
morphogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.018
PMCID: PMC4639450
PMID: 26348027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.