1. Viruses. 2015 Aug 28;7(9):4854-72. doi: 10.3390/v7092849.

Viral Mimicry to Usurp Ubiquitin and SUMO Host Pathways.

Wimmer P(1), Schreiner S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharma Germany, Roonstrasse 25, 90429 Nürnberg, Germany. 
wimmerpeter@gmx.de.
(2)Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München, Trogerstrasse 30, 
81675 München, Germany. sabrina.schreiner@tum.de.
(3)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, 85764 
Neuherberg/München, Germany. sabrina.schreiner@tum.de.

Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of proteins include enzymatic changes by 
covalent addition of cellular regulatory determinants such as ubiquitin (Ub) and 
small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) moieties. These modifications are widely 
used by eukaryotic cells to control the functional repertoire of proteins. Over 
the last decade, it became apparent that the repertoire of ubiquitiylation and 
SUMOylation regulating various biological functions is not restricted to 
eukaryotic cells, but is also a feature of human virus families, used to 
extensively exploit complex host-cell networks and homeostasis. Intriguingly, 
besides binding to host SUMO/Ub control proteins and interfering with the 
respective enzymatic cascade, many viral proteins mimic key regulatory factors 
to usurp this host machinery and promote efficient viral outcomes. Advanced 
detection methods and functional studies of ubiquitiylation and SUMOylation 
during virus-host interplay have revealed that human viruses have evolved a 
large arsenal of strategies to exploit these specific PTM processes. In this 
review, we highlight the known viral analogs orchestrating ubiquitin and SUMO 
conjugation events to subvert and utilize basic enzymatic pathways.

DOI: 10.3390/v7092849
PMCID: PMC4584293
PMID: 26343706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]