1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 14;10(9):e0137087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137087. 
eCollection 2015.

A Genome-Wide mRNA Screen and Functional Analysis Reveal FOXO3 as a Candidate 
Gene for Chicken Growth.

Chen B(1), Xu J(1), He X(1), Xu H(1), Li G(1), Du H(2), Nie Q(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal 
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong, 
China; Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular 
Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Guangzhou, 510642, Guangdong, China.
(2)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.

Chicken growth performance provides direct economic benefits to the poultry 
industry. However, the underlying genetic mechanisms are unclear. The objective 
of this study was to identify candidate genes associated with chicken growth and 
investigate their potential mechanisms. We used RNA-Seq to study the breast 
muscle transcriptome in high and low tails of Recessive White Rock (WRRh, WRRl) 
and Xinghua chickens (XHh, XHl). A total of 60, 23, 153 and 359 differentially 
expressed genes were detected in WRRh vs. WRRl, XHh vs. XHl, WRRh vs. XHh and 
WRRl vs. XHl, respectively. GO, KEGG pathway and gene network analyses showed 
that CEBPB, FBXO32, FOXO3 and MYOD1 played key roles in growth. The functions of 
FBXO32 and FOXO3 were validated. FBXO32 was predominantly expressed in leg 
muscle, heart and breast muscle. After decreased FBXO32 expression, 
growth-related genes such as PDK4, IGF2R and IGF2BP3 were significantly 
down-regulated (P < 0.05). FBXO32 was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with 
carcass and meat quality traits, but not growth traits. FOXO3 was predominantly 
expressed in breast and leg muscle. In both of these tissues, the FOXO3 mRNA 
level in XH was significantly higher than that in WRR chickens with normal body 
weight (P < 0.05). In DF-1 cells, siRNA knockdown of FOXO3 significantly (P < 
0.01) inhibited the MYOD expression and significantly up-regulated (P < 0.01 or 
P < 0.05) the expression of growth-related genes including CEBPB, FBXO32, GH, 
GHR, IGF1R, IGF2R, IGF2BP1, IGF2BP3, INSR, PDK1 and PDK4. Moreover, 18 SNPs were 
identified in FOXO3. G66716193A was significantly (P < 0.05) associated with 
growth traits. The sites C66716002T, C66716195T and A66716179G were 
significantly (P < 0.05) associated with growth or carcass traits. These results 
demonstrated that FOXO3 is a candidate gene influencing chicken growth. Our 
observations provide new clues to understand the molecular basis of chicken 
growth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137087
PMCID: PMC4569328
PMID: 26366565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.