1. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33769-80. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5615.

Pyrvinium selectively targets blast phase-chronic myeloid leukemia through 
inhibition of mitochondrial respiration.

Xiang W(1), Cheong JK(2), Ang SH(2), Teo B(1), Xu P(2), Asari K(1), Sun WT(2), 
Than H(1), Bunte RM(3), Virshup DM(2)(4), Chuah C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(2)Program in Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 
Singapore.
(3)Office of Research, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
USA.

The use of BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) has led to excellent 
clinical responses in patients with chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia 
(CML). However these inhibitors have been less effective as single agents in the 
terminal blast phase (BP). We show that pyrvinium, a FDA-approved anthelminthic 
drug, selectively targets BP-CML CD34+ progenitor cells. Pyrvinium is effective 
in inducing apoptosis, inhibiting colony formation and self-renewal capacity of 
CD34+ cells from TKI-resistant BP-CML patients, while cord blood CD34+ are 
largely unaffected. The effects of pyrvinium are further enhanced upon 
combination with dasatinib, a second generation BCR-ABL1 TKI. In a CML xenograft 
model pyrvinium significantly inhibits tumor growth as a single agent, with 
complete inhibition in combination with dasatinib. While pyrvinium has been 
shown to inhibit the Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway via activation of casein 
kinase 1α , we find its activity in CML is not dependent on this pathway. 
Instead, we show that pyrvinium localizes to mitochondria and induces apoptosis 
by inhibiting mitochondrial respiration. Our study suggests that pyrvinium is a 
useful addition to the treatment armamentarium for BP-CML and that targeting 
mitochondrial respiration may be a potential therapeutic strategy in aggressive 
leukemia.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.5615
PMCID: PMC4741801
PMID: 26378050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST C.C. has received 
honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Novartis Oncology. All other authors 
declare no competing financial interests.