1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 May;24(5):774-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.199. Epub 2015
Sep  16.

The C175R mutation alters nuclear localization and transcriptional activity of 
the nephronophthisis NPHP7 gene product.

Ramachandran H(1), Yakulov TA(1), Engel C(1), Müller B(1), Walz G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Freiburg University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Biological Signaling Studies (BIOSS), Albertstraße 19, Freiburg, 
Germany.

Nephronophthisis (NPH) is a rare autosomal ciliopathy, but the leading cause for 
hereditary end-stage renal disease in children. Most NPH family members form 
large protein networks, which appear to participate in structural elements of 
the cilium and/or function to restrict access of molecules to the ciliary 
compartment. The zinc-finger protein GLIS2/NPHP7 represents an exception as it 
has been implicated in transcriptional regulation; only two families with 
GLIS2/NPHP7 mutations and typical NPH manifestations have been identified so 
far. We describe here that the recently identified GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R) point 
mutation abolished the nuclear localization of GLIS2/NPHP7. Forced nuclear 
import did not rescue the transcriptional defects of GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R), 
indicating additional defects as DNA-binding protein. We further observed that 
wild type, but not GLIS2/NPHP7(C175R), prevented the cyst formation caused by 
depletion of nphp7 in zebrafish embryos. Taken together, our findings indicate 
that the C175R mutation affects both localization and function of GLIS2/NPHP7, 
supporting a role of this mutation in NPH, but questioning the direct 
involvement of GLIS2/NPHP7 in ciliary functions.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.199
PMCID: PMC4930099
PMID: 26374130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]