1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(37):e1250. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001250.

Genetic Association Between Angiotensinogen Polymorphisms and Lung Cancer Risk.

Wang H(1), Zhang K, Qin H, Yang L, Zhang L, Cao Y.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Lung Cancer, 307 Hospital of PLA, Affiliated Hospital 
of Academy of Military Medical Sciences, FengTai Area, Beijing, China.

Earlier published studies investigating the association between polymorphisms in 
the angiotensinogen gene and lung cancer risk showed no consistent results. In 
this study, we have summarized all currently available data to examine the 
correlation by meta-analysis. Case-control studies addressing the association 
being examined were identified through Embase, the Cochrane Library, ISI Web of 
Science (Web of Knowledge), Google Scholar, PubMed, and CNKI databases. Risk of 
lung cancer (odds ratio [OR] and 95% confidence interval [CI]) was estimated 
with the fixed or the random effects model assuming homozygous, allele, 
heterozygous, dominant, and recessive models for all angiotensinogen 
polymorphisms. We identified a total of 10 articles in this meta-analysis, 
including 7 for Leu84Phe, 4 for Ile143Val, and 3 for Leu53Leu. In the 
meta-analysis of Leu84Phe polymorphism, the homozygous model provided an OR of 
1.44 (Phe/Phe vs Ile/Ile: OR = 1.44, 95% CI = 1.04-1.99, P values for 
heterogeneity test (Q-test) [P(Het)] = 0.382). The significantly increased risk 
was similarly indicated in the recessive model (Phe/Phe vs Phe/Ile + Ile/Ile: 
OR = 1.41, 95% CI = 1.02-1.95, P(Het) = 0.381). We also observed a positive 
association in the Caucasian subgroup. The heterozygous model and the dominant 
model tested for the Ile143Val polymorphism showed a marginally increased risk 
(Ile/Val vs Ile/Ile: OR = 1.16, 95% CI = 1.00-1.36, P(Het) = 0.323; 
Val/Val + Ile/Val vs Ile/Ile: OR = 1.15, 95% CI = 0.99-1.34, P(Het) = 0.253). 
These data suggest that Leu84Phe and Ile143Val polymorphisms in the 
angiotensinogen gene may be useful biomarkers for lung cancer in some specific 
populations.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001250
PMCID: PMC4635787
PMID: 26376373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.