1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2015 Sep 4;10:1809-17. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S91576. eCollection 2015.

Association between vitamin D receptor polymorphisms and osteoporosis in 
patients with COPD.

Kim SW(1), Lee JM(1), Ha JH(1), Kang HH(1), Rhee CK(1), Kim JW(1), Moon HS(1), 
Baek KH(2), Lee SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonology, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, St 
Paul's Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Patients with COPD are at an increased risk of osteoporosis. 
Although many studies have addressed the relationship between the vitamin D 
receptor (VDR) polymorphisms and bone health, this relationship has not been 
fully investigated in patients with COPD. In this study, we investigated the 
association of VDR polymorphisms with bone mineral density (BMD) and other 
clinical parameters in patients with COPD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In total, 200 patients with COPD were included in this 
study. The VDR polymorphisms rs1544410 (A/G-BsmI), rs7975232 (A/C-ApaI), 
rs731236 (C/T-TaqI), and rs10735810 (C/T-FokI) were determined by Sanger 
sequencing using blood DNA samples. BMD of the lumbar vertebra and the femoral 
neck was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. Other clinical parameters 
were also evaluated. Haplotype and multivariate analyses were also performed.
RESULTS: Sex, body mass index, steroid use, percentage of forced expiratory 
volume in 1 second (FEV1), alkaline phosphatase, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
significantly influenced the risk of osteoporosis. Patients with osteoporosis 
were more likely to carry the rs7975232 C allele compared to normal patients 
with BMD. Haplotypes GCT and GAT were related to osteoporosis. Patients without 
the haplotype GAT allele showed a significantly lower T-score at the femoral 
neck and an increased risk of osteoporosis (odds ratio [OR]= 2.78, 95% 
confidence interval [CI]= 1.20-6.48, P=0.018) compared with carriers in the 
dominant model.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variations in VDR are significantly associated with 
osteoporosis among patients with COPD. Further studies are required to confirm 
the role of the VDR polymorphisms in osteoporosis among patients with COPD.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S91576
PMCID: PMC4567171
PMID: 26379431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]