1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015 Sep 1;7:171. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00171. 
eCollection 2015.

Phenotypic Heterogeneity of Monogenic Frontotemporal Dementia.

Benussi A(1), Padovani A(1), Borroni B(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ageing Brain and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Neurology Unit, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia , 
Brescia , Italy.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a genetically and pathologically heterogeneous 
disorder characterized by personality changes, language impairment, and deficits 
of executive functions associated with frontal and temporal lobe degeneration. 
Different phenotypes have been defined on the basis of presenting clinical 
symptoms, i.e., the behavioral variant of FTD, the agrammatic variant of primary 
progressive aphasia, and the semantic variant of PPA. Some patients have an 
associated movement disorder, either parkinsonism, as in progressive 
supranuclear palsy and corticobasal syndrome, or motor neuron disease (FTD-MND). 
A family history of dementia is found in 40% of cases of FTD and about 10% have 
a clear autosomal-dominant inheritance. Genetic studies have identified several 
genes associated with monogenic FTD: microtubule-associated protein tau, 
progranulin, TAR DNA-binding protein 43, valosin-containing protein, charged 
multivesicular body protein 2B, fused in sarcoma, and the hexanucleotide repeat 
expansion in intron 1 of the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72. Patients often 
present with an extensive phenotypic variability, even among different members 
of the same kindred carrying an identical disease mutation. The objective of the 
present work is to review and evaluate available literature data in order to 
highlight recent advances in clinical, biological, and neuroimaging features of 
monogenic frontotemporal lobar degeneration and try to identify different 
mechanisms underlying the extreme phenotypic heterogeneity that characterizes 
this disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00171
PMCID: PMC4555036
PMID: 26388768