1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 18;10(9):e0137346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137346. 
eCollection 2015.

Smooth and Rough Biotypes of Arcanobacterium haemolyticum Can Be Genetically 
Distinguished at the Arcanolysin Locus.

Ruther HS(1), Phillips K(2), Ross D(3), Crawford A(2), Weidner MP(2), Sammra 
O(4), Lämmler C(4), McGee DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.
(2)Southwood High School, Shreveport, Louisiana, United States of America.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Centenary College of Louisiana, Shreveport, 
Louisiana, United States of America.
(4)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie,Justus-Liebig-Universität, Gießen, 
Germany.

Arcanobacterium haemolyticum is a Gram-positive, β-hemolytic emerging human 
pathogen that is classified into smooth or rough biotypes. This bacterial 
species is also a rare pathogen of animals. Smooth biotypes possess smooth 
colony edges, are moderate to strong in β-hemolysis, and predominately cause 
wound infections. In contrast, rough biotypes possess rough and irregular colony 
edges, have weak to no β-hemolytic activity, and predominately cause 
pharyngitis. Using horse erythrocytes we confirmed that smooth isolates are 
generally more hemolytic than rough isolates. A hemolysin from A. haemolyticum, 
arcanolysin (aln/ALN), was recently discovered and is a member of the 
cholesterol-dependent cytolysin (CDC) family. PCR amplification of aln from all 
36 smooth A. haemolyticum isolates yielded the expected 2.0 kb product. While 21 
rough isolates yielded the 2.0 kb product, 16 isolates had a 3.2 kb product. The 
extra 1.2 kb segment was 99% identical to IS911 (insertion sequence) from 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae. PCR amplification and sequence analysis of the 
upstream region of aln revealed ~40 nucleotide polymorphisms among 73 clinical 
isolates from Finland, Denmark, Germany and United States (Nebraska). 
Remarkably, multi-sequence alignments of the aln upstream region demonstrated 
that ~90% of the isolates phylogenetically clustered as either smooths or 
roughs. Differential restriction enzyme analysis of the aln upstream region also 
demonstrated that the aln upstream region of most (~75%) smooth isolates was 
cleaved with ClaI while this region in most (~86%) rough isolates was cleaved 
with XcmI. We conclude that the aln upstream region can be used to genetically 
distinguish between smooth and rough biotypes of this important emerging 
pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137346
PMCID: PMC4575042
PMID: 26382754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.