1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 22;10(9):e0138189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138189. 
eCollection 2015.

Osteocytes, not Osteoblasts or Lining Cells, are the Main Source of the RANKL 
Required for Osteoclast Formation in Remodeling Bone.

Xiong J(1), Piemontese M(1), Onal M(1), Campbell J(1), Goellner JJ(1), Dusevich 
V(2), Bonewald L(2), Manolagas SC(1), O'Brien CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Diseases, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, United States of America; The 
Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, Arkansas, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Oral Biology, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of 
Dentistry, Kansas City, Missouri, United States of America.

The cytokine receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), 
encoded by the Tnfsf11 gene, is essential for osteoclastogenesis and previous 
studies have shown that deletion of the Tnfsf11 gene using a Dmp1-Cre transgene 
reduces osteoclast formation in cancellous bone by more than 70%. However, the 
Dmp1-Cre transgene used in those studies leads to recombination in osteocytes, 
osteoblasts, and lining cells making it unclear whether one or more of these 
cell types produce the RANKL required for osteoclast formation in cancellous 
bone. Because osteoblasts, osteocytes, and lining cells have distinct locations 
and functions, distinguishing which of these cell types are sources of RANKL is 
essential for understanding the orchestration of bone remodeling. To distinguish 
between these possibilities, we have now created transgenic mice expressing the 
Cre recombinase under the control of regulatory elements of the Sost gene, which 
is expressed in osteocytes but not osteoblasts or lining cells in murine bone. 
Activity of the Sost-Cre transgene in osteocytes, but not osteoblast or lining 
cells, was confirmed by crossing Sost-Cre transgenic mice with tdTomato and R26R 
Cre-reporter mice, which express tdTomato fluorescent protein or LacZ, 
respectively, only in cells expressing the Cre recombinase or their descendants. 
Deletion of the Tnfsf11 gene in Sost-Cre mice led to a threefold decrease in 
osteoclast number in cancellous bone and increased cancellous bone mass, 
mimicking the skeletal phenotype of mice in which the Tnfsf11 gene was deleted 
using the Dmp1-Cre transgene. These results demonstrate that osteocytes, not 
osteoblasts or lining cells, are the main source of the RANKL required for 
osteoclast formation in remodeling cancellous bone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138189
PMCID: PMC4578942
PMID: 26393791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interests: SCM has the following associations with Radius Health: 
member of the scientific advisory board and stock holder. CAO has the following 
association with Radius Health: stock holder. There are no patents, products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authorsâ€™ 
adherence to all of PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.