1. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 23;5:14261. doi: 10.1038/srep14261.

Conotoxin αD-GeXXA utilizes a novel strategy to antagonize nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors.

Xu S(1), Zhang T(2), Kompella SN(3), Yan M(1), Lu A(1), Wang Y(1), Shao X(1), 
Chi C(1)(2), Adams DJ(3), Ding J(2), Wang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 
200092, China.
(2)National Center for Protein Science Shanghai and State Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, CAS, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, 
China.
(3)Health Innovations Research Institute, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3083, 
Australia.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) play essential roles in transmitting 
acetylcholine-mediated neural signals across synapses and neuromuscular 
junctions, and are also closely linked to various diseases and clinical 
conditions. Therefore, novel nAChR-specific compounds have great potential for 
both neuroscience research and clinical applications. Conotoxins, the peptide 
neurotoxins produced by cone snails, are a rich reservoir of novel ligands that 
target receptors, ion channels and transporters in the nervous system. From the 
venom of Conus generalis, we identified a novel dimeric nAChR-inhibiting 
αD-conotoxin GeXXA. By solving the crystal structure and performing 
structure-guided dissection of this toxin, we demonstrated that the monomeric 
C-terminal domain of αD-GeXXA, GeXXA-CTD, retains inhibitory activity against 
the α9α10 nAChR subtype. Furthermore, we identified that His7 of the rat α10 
nAChR subunit determines the species preference of αD-GeXXA, and is probably 
part of the binding site of this toxin. These results together suggest that 
αD-GeXXA cooperatively binds to two inter-subunit interfaces on the top surface 
of nAChR, thus allosterically disturbing the opening of the receptor. The novel 
antagonistic mechanism of αD-GeXXA via a new binding site on nAChRs provides a 
valuable basis for the rational design of new nAChR-targeting compounds.

DOI: 10.1038/srep14261
PMCID: PMC4585798
PMID: 26395518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]