1. Biochem Genet. 2016 Feb;54(1):41-9. doi: 10.1007/s10528-015-9698-5. Epub 2015 
Sep 25.

Relevance of GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 Gene Polymorphism to Breast Cancer 
Susceptibility in Mizoram Population, Northeast India.

Kimi L(1), Ghatak S(1), Yadav RP(1), Chhuani L(2), Lallawmzuali D(3), Pautu 
JL(3), Kumar NS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram, 796004, 
India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram, 796004, India.
(3)Mizoram State Cancer Institute, Zemabawk, Aizawl, Mizoram, 796017, India.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram, 796004, 
India. nskmzu@gmail.com.

The enzymes encoded by glutathione S-transferase mu 1 (GSTM1) and theta 1 
(GSTT1) genes are involved in the metabolism of wide range of carcinogens that 
are ubiquitous in the environment. Homozygous deletions of the GSTM1 and GSTT1 
genes are commonly found and result in lack of enzyme activity. This study was 
undertaken to evaluate the association between GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 gene 
polymorphism and breast cancer risk in Mizoram population. Odd ratio (OR) and 
95% confidence interval (CI) from conditional logistic regression model were 
used to estimate the association between genetic polymorphism and breast cancer 
risk. The GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes were associated with an increased risk 
of breast cancer [OR = 10.80 (95% CI 1.16-100.43)]. The risk of breast cancer 
associated with the GSTT1 null genotype was observed to be low among 
postmenopausal women. When considered together, GSTM1 and GSTT1 genotypes were 
found to be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. The relationship 
between GSTM1 and GSTT1 gene deletions and breast cancer risk was substantially 
altered by consumption of Smoked Meat/Vegetable. In the present study, 
GSTP1Ile105Val (rs1695) polymorphism was related to breast cancer susceptibility 
or phenotype. Our data provides evidence for substantially increased risk of 
breast cancer associated with GSTM1 and/or GSTT1 homozygous gene deletions in 
Mizoram population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-015-9698-5
PMID: 26407578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]