1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(38):e1588. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001588.

The Role of TP53 Gene Codon 72 Polymorphism in Leukemia: A PRISMA-Compliant 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Ruan XL(1), Li S, Meng XY, Geng P, Gao QP, Ao XB.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Hematology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, People's Republic of China (X-LR, QPG, X-BA); Center for Evidence-Based 
and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
Province 430022, China (SL, X-YM, PG); and Center for Evidence-Based and 
Translational Medicine, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, China 
(SL, X-YM, PG).

The purpose of this meta-analysis was aimed to evaluate the association of tumor 
protein p53 (TP53) gene codon 72 polymorphism with leukemia susceptibility. We 
searched PubMed to identify relevant studies, and 16 case-control studies from 
14 published articles were identified as eligible studies, including 2062 
leukemia patients and 5826 controls. After extracting data, odds ratio (OR) with 
the corresponding 95% confidence interval (95%CI) was applied to assess the 
association between TP53 codon 72 polymorphism and leukemia susceptibility. The 
meta-analysis was performed with the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software, 
version 2.2. Overall, no significant association between TP53 codon 72 
polymorphism and leukemia susceptibility was found in this meta-analysis (Pro vs 
Arg: OR = 1.05, 95%CI = 0.90-1.21; Pro/Pro vs Arg/Arg: OR = 1.13, 
95%CI = 0.84-1.52; Arg/Pro vs Arg/Arg: OR = 0.94, 95%CI = 0.76-1.15; 
[Pro/Pro + Arg/Pro] vs Arg/Arg: OR = 0.99, 95%CI = 0.80-1.21; Pro/Pro vs 
[Arg/Arg + Arg/Pro]: OR = 1.19, 95%CI = 0.93-1.51). Similar results were also 
found in subgroup analysis by ethnicity, source of controls, and types of 
leukemia (either acute myeloid leukemia or acute lymphocytic leukemia). Our 
meta-analysis demonstrates that TP53 codon 72 polymorphism may not be a risk 
factor for acute leukemia; however, due to the limitations of this study, it 
should be verified in future studies.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001588
PMCID: PMC4635761
PMID: 26402821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.