1. JIMD Rep. 2016;27:39-45. doi: 10.1007/8904_2015_481. Epub 2015 Sep 27.

Hyperprolinemia in Type 2 Glutaric Aciduria and MADD-Like Profiles.

Pontoizeau C(1)(2), Habarou F(3)(4)(5), Brassier A(3), Veauville-Merllié A(6), 
Grisel C(3), Arnoux JB(3), Vianey-Saban C(6), Barouki R(3)(4)(5), 
Chadefaux-Vekemans B(3)(4)(5), Acquaviva C(6), de Lonlay P(3), Ottolenghi 
C(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, University of 
Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France. clement.pontoizeau@aphp.fr.
(2)Service de Biochimie Métabolomique et Protéomique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, 
France. clement.pontoizeau@aphp.fr.
(3)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, University of 
Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(4)Service de Biochimie Métabolomique et Protéomique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015, Paris, 
France.
(5)INSERM UMR-S 1124, University of Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, 
France.
(6)Service Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme et Dépistage Néonatal, Centre de 
Biologie et Pathologie Est, CHU Lyon, Bron, France.

Classical neonatal-onset glutaric aciduria type 2 (MAD deficiency) is a severe 
disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation associated with poor survival. 
Secondary dysfunction of acyl-CoA dehydrogenases may result from deficiency for 
riboflavin transporters, leading to severe disorders that, nevertheless, are 
treatable by riboflavin supplementation. In the last 10 years, we identified 
nine newborns with biochemical features consistent with MAD deficiency, only 
four of whom survived past the neonatal period. A likely iatrogenic cause of 
riboflavin deficiency was found in two premature newborns having parenteral 
nutrition, one of whom recovered upon multivitamin supplementation, whereas the 
other died before diagnosis. Four other patients had demonstrated mutations 
involving ETF or ETF-DH flavoproteins, whereas the remaining three patients 
presumably had secondary deficiencies of unknown mechanism. Interestingly, six 
newborns among the seven tested for plasma amino acids had pronounced 
hyperprolinemia. In one case, because the initial diagnostic workup did not 
include organic acids and acylcarnitine profiling, clinical presentation and 
hyperprolinemia suggested the diagnosis. Analysis of our full cohort of >50,000 
samples from >30,000 patients suggests that the proline/alanine ratio may be a 
good marker of MAD deficiency and could contribute to a more effective 
management of the treatable forms.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2015_481
PMCID: PMC4864717
PMID: 26409463