1. Oncogene. 2016 Jun 2;35(22):2893-901. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.350. Epub 2015 Sep
 28.

CPEB1 mediates epithelial-to-mesenchyme transition and breast cancer metastasis.

Nagaoka K(1), Fujii K(1), Zhang H(1), Usuda K(1), Watanabe G(1), Ivshina M(2), 
Richter JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.

In mouse mammary epithelial cells, cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding 
protein 1 (CPEB1) mediates the apical localization of ZO-1 mRNA, which encodes a 
critical tight junction component. In mice lacking CPEB1 and in cultured cells 
from which CPEB has been depleted, randomly distributed ZO-1 mRNA leads to the 
loss of cell polarity. We have investigated whether this diminution of polarity 
results in an epithelial-to-mesenchyme (EMT) transition and possible increased 
metastatic potential. Here, we show that CPEB1-depleted mammary epithelial cells 
alter their gene expression profile in a manner consistent with an EMT and also 
become motile, which are made particularly robust when cells are treated with 
transforming growth factor-Î², an enhancer of EMT. CPEB1-depleted mammary cells 
become metastatic to the lung following injection into mouse fat pads while 
ectopically expressed CPEB1 prevents metastasis. Surprisingly, CPEB1 depletion 
causes some EMT/metastasis-related mRNAs to have shorter poly(A) tails while 
other mRNAs to have longer poly(A) tails. Matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) 
mRNA, which encodes a metastasis-promoting factor, undergoes poly(A) lengthening 
and enhanced translation upon CPEB reduction. Moreover, in human breast cancer 
cells that become progressively more metastatic, CPEB1 is reduced while MMP9 
becomes more abundant. These data suggest that at least in part, CPEB1 
regulation of MMP9 mRNA expression mediates metastasis of breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2015.350
PMCID: PMC4809797
PMID: 26411364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]