1. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jan;99(2):291-306. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13231. Epub 2015 Oct
30.

FlhG employs diverse intrinsic domains and influences FlhF GTPase activity to 
numerically regulate polar flagellar biogenesis in Campylobacter jejuni.

Gulbronson CJ(1), Ribardo DA(1), Balaban M(1), Knauer C(2), Bange G(2), 
Hendrixson DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(2)LOEWE Center for Synthetic Microbiology (Synmikro) and Department of 
Chemistry, Philipps University Marburg, 35403, Marburg, Germany.

Flagellation in polar flagellates is one of the rare biosynthetic processes 
known to be numerically regulated in bacteria. Polar flagellates must spatially 
and numerically regulate flagellar biogenesis to create flagellation patterns 
for each species that are ideal for motility. FlhG ATPases numerically regulate 
polar flagellar biogenesis, yet FlhG orthologs are diverse in motif composition. 
We discovered that Campylobacter jejuni FlhG is at the center of a multipartite 
mechanism that likely influences a flagellar biosynthetic step to control 
flagellar number for amphitrichous flagellation, rather than suppressing 
activators of flagellar gene transcription as in Vibrio and Pseudomonas species. 
Unlike other FlhG orthologs, the FlhG ATPase domain was not required to regulate 
flagellar number in C. jejuni. Instead, two regions of C. jejuni FlhG that are 
absent or significantly altered in FlhG orthologs are involved in numerical 
regulation of flagellar biogenesis. Additionally, we found that C. jejuni FlhG 
influences FlhF GTPase activity, which may mechanistically contribute to 
flagellar number regulation. Our work suggests that FlhG ATPases divergently 
evolved in each polarly flagellated species to employ different intrinsic 
domains and extrinsic effectors to ultimately mediate a common output - precise 
numerical control of polar flagellar biogenesis required to create 
species-specific flagellation patterns optimal for motility.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13231
PMCID: PMC4821507
PMID: 26411371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]