1. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Sep 30;15:194. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0533-2.

A Chlamydia trachomatis strain with a chemically generated amino acid 
substitution (P370L) in the cthtrA gene shows reduced elementary body 
production.

Marsh JW(1), Wee BA(2), Tyndall JD(3), Lott WB(4), Bastidas RJ(5), Caldwell 
HD(6), Valdivia RH(7), Kari L(8), Huston WM(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI), Queensland University 
of Technology (QUT), 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, QLD, 4059, Australia. 
james.marsh@qut.edu.au.
(2)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI), Queensland University 
of Technology (QUT), 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, QLD, 4059, Australia. 
bryan.wee@qut.edu.au.
(3)National School of Pharmacy, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin, 9054, 
New Zealand. joel.tyndall@otago.ac.nz.
(4)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI), Queensland University 
of Technology (QUT), 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, QLD, 4059, Australia. 
b.lott@qut.edu.au.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for Microbial 
Pathogenesis, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA. 
robert.bastidas@duke.edu.
(6)Laboratory of Intracellular Parasites, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, 59840, USA. 
hcaldwell@niaid.nih.gov.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for Microbial 
Pathogenesis, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA. 
raphael.valdivia@duke.edu.
(8)Laboratory of Intracellular Parasites, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, 59840, USA. 
karil@niaid.nih.gov.
(9)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation (IHBI), Queensland University 
of Technology (QUT), 60 Musk Avenue, Kelvin Grove, QLD, 4059, Australia. 
w.huston@qut.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Chlamydia (C.) trachomatis is the most prevalent bacterial sexually 
transmitted infection worldwide and the leading cause of preventable blindness. 
Genetic approaches to investigate C. trachomatis have been only recently 
developed due to the organism's intracellular developmental cycle. HtrA is a 
critical stress response serine protease and chaperone for many bacteria and in 
C. trachomatis has been previously shown to be important for heat stress and the 
replicative phase of development using a chemical inhibitor of the CtHtrA 
activity. In this study, chemically-induced SNVs in the cthtrA gene that 
resulted in amino acid substitutions (A240V, G475E, and P370L) were identified 
and characterized.
METHODS: SNVs were initially biochemically characterized in vitro using 
recombinant protein techniques to confirm a functional impact on proteolysis. 
The C. trachomatis strains containing the SNVs with marked reductions in 
proteolysis were investigated in cell culture to identify phenotypes that could 
be linked to CtHtrA function.
RESULTS: The strain harboring the SNV with the most marked impact on proteolysis 
(cthtrA P370L) was detected to have a significant reduction in the production of 
infectious elementary bodies.
CONCLUSIONS: This provides genetic evidence that CtHtrA is critical for the C. 
trachomatis developmental cycle.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0533-2
PMCID: PMC4590699
PMID: 26424482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]