1. Chem Sci. 2015 Jul 1;6(7):3994-4008. doi: 10.1039/C5SC00929D. Epub 2015 Apr
23.

Cobalt-Catalysed Asymmetric Hydrovinylation of 1,3-Dienes.

Timsina YN, Sharma RK, RajanBabu TV.

In the presence of bidentate 1,n-bis-diphenylphosphinoalkane-CoCl2 complexes 
{Cl2Co[P~P]} and Me3Al or methylaluminoxane, acyclic (E)-1,3-dienes react with 
ethylene (1 atmosphere) to give excellent yields of hydrovinylation products. 
The regioselectivity (1,4- or 1,2-addition) and the alkene configuration (E- or 
Z-) of the resulting product depend on the nature of the ligand and temperature 
at which the reaction is carried out. Cobalt(II)-complexes of 
1,1-diphenylphosphinomethane and similar ligands with narrow bite angles give 
mostly 1,2-addition, retaining the E-geometry of the original diene. Complexes 
of most other ligands at low temperature (-40 °C) give almost exclusively a 
single branched product, (Z)-3-alkylhexa-1,4-diene, which arises from a 
1,4-hydrovinylation reaction. A minor product is the linear adduct, a 
5-alkyl-hexa-1,4-diene, also arising from a 1,4-addition of ethylene. As the 
temperature is increased, a higher proportion of the major 1,4-adduct appears as 
the (E)-isomer. The unexpectedly high selectivity seen in the Co-catalysed 
reaction as compared to the corresponding Ni-catalysed reaction can be 
rationalized by invoking the intermediacy of an η4-[(diene)[P~P]CoH]+-complex 
and its subsequent reactions. The enhanced reactivity of terminal E-1,3-dienes 
over the corresponding Z-dienes can also be explained on the basis of the ease 
of formation of this η4-complex in the former case. The lack of reactivity of 
the X2Co(dppb) (X = Cl, Br) complexes in the presence of Zn/ZnI2 makes the 
Me3Al-mediated reaction different from the previously reported hydroalkenylation 
of dienes. Electron-rich phospholanes, bis-oxazolines and N-heterocyclic 
carbenes appear to be poor ligands for the Co(II)-catalysed hydrovinylation of 
1,3-dienes. An extensive survey of chiral ligands reveals that complexes of 
DIOP, BDDP and Josiphos ligands are quite effective for these reactions even at 
-45 °C and enantioselectivities in the range of 90-99 % ee can be realized for a 
variety of 1,3-dienes. Cobalt(II)-complex of an electron-deficient Josiphos 
ligand is especially active, requiring only <1 mol% catalyst to effect the 
reactions.

DOI: 10.1039/C5SC00929D
PMCID: PMC4587399
PMID: 26430505