1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 6;467(1):1-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.144. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

Intracellular Ca(2+) oscillations generated via the extracellular Ca(2+)-sensing 
receptor (CaSR) in response to extracellular Ca(2+) or L-phenylalanine: Impact 
of the highly conservative mutation Ser170Thr.

Young SH(1), Rey O(2), Rozengurt E(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, CURE: Digestive 
Diseases Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine and Molecular Biology 
Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Genetics and Metabolism, Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Cientificas y Tecnicas, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, CURE: Digestive 
Diseases Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine and Molecular Biology 
Institute, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; 
Veterans Affairs West Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: erozengurt@mednet.ucla.edu.

The extracellular Ca(2+)-sensing receptor (CaSR) is an allosteric protein that 
responds to changes in the extracellular concentration of Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)]e) and 
aromatic amino acids with the production of different patterns of oscillations 
in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)]i). An increase in [Ca(2+)]e 
stimulates sinusoidal oscillations in [Ca(2+)]i whereas aromatic amino 
acid-induced CaR activation in the presence of a threshold [Ca(2+)]e promotes 
transient oscillations in [Ca(2+)]i. Here, we examined spontaneous and 
ligand-evoked [Ca(2+)]i oscillations in single HEK-293 cells transfected with 
the wild type CaSR or with a mutant CaSR in which Ser170 was converted to Thr 
(CaSRS170T). Our analysis demonstrates that cells expressing CaSRS170T display 
[Ca(2+)]i oscillations in the presence of low concentrations of extracellular 
Ca(2+) and respond to L-Phe with robust transient [Ca(2+)]i oscillations. Our 
results indicate that the S170T mutation induces a marked increase in CaSR 
sensitivity to [Ca(2+)]e and imply that the allosteric regulation of the CaSR by 
aromatic amino acids is not only mediated by an heterotropic positive effect on 
Ca(2+) binding cooperativity but, as biased agonists, aromatic amino acids 
stabilize a CaSR conformation that couples to a different signaling pathway 
leading to transient [Ca(2+)]i oscillations.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.144
PMCID: PMC4613767
PMID: 26431875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]