1. Ideggyogy Sz. 2015 Mar 30;68(3-4):113-20.

LACK OF ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN CLU AND PICALM GENE POLYMORPHISMS AND ALZHEIMER'S 
DISEASE IN A TURKISH POPULATION.

Sen A, Arslan M, Erdal ME, Ay OI, Yilmaz SG, Kurt E, Arpaci B.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To investigate the association between the rs11136000 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the clusterin (CLU) gene, the rs541458 
and rs3851179 SNPs of the phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein 
(PICALM) gene and Alzheimer's disease (AD) in a Turkish population, and to 
determine whether there are any relationships between the CLU and the PICALM 
genotypes and behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) in the 
Turkish population.
METHODS: One-hundred and twelve AD patients and 106 controls were included in 
this study. BPSD were evaluated by the Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer's 
Disease Rating Scale (BEHAVE-AD). SNPs in the CLU and the PICALM gene were 
genotyped by Real-Time PCR. Genotype distributions were assessed for the groups 
of patients and controls, for the patient groups with and without each BPSD, and 
"No BPSD" and "BPSD".
RESULTS: The CLU and the PICALM genotypes were similar in the AD and control 
subjects, and the groups with and without each BPSD. There were also no 
significant differences between the "No BPSD" and the "BPSD" groups for the 
PICALM genotypes, but even without a statistical significance, it is notable 
that none of the "No BPSD" patients had genotype pattern CLU-rs11136000-TT, and 
the female subjects with genotype pattern CLU-rs11136000-TT had higher mean 
score of BEHAVE-AD.
CONCLUSION: This study claims that investigated SNPs are not genetic risk 
factors for AD in a Turkish population. In addition, the rs541458 and rs3851179 
of PICALM SNPs are not related to development of BPSD, but the rs11136000 of CLU 
SNP might be related to development of BPSD in AD female Turkish subpopulation.

PMID: 26434199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]