1. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 5;5:14368. doi: 10.1038/srep14368.

Lysine Methyltransferase SETD7 (SET7/9) Regulates ROS Signaling through 
mitochondria and NFE2L2/ARE pathway.

He S(1), Owen DR(2), Jelinsky SA(1), Lin LL(1).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit, Pfizer Research, Cambridge, MA 
02139.
(2)Worldwide Medicinal Chemistry, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, 
Cambridge, MA 02139.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis requires stringent regulation. ROS 
imbalance, especially ROS accumulation, has profound implications in various 
disease pathogenesis. Lysine methylation of histone and non-histone proteins has 
been implicated in various cellular responses. The main objective of this study 
is to investigate the role of SET domain containing lysine methyltransferase 
SETD7 (SET7/9) in the regulation of ROS-mediated signaling. Here we report that 
inhibition of SETD7 with siRNA or a SETD7 small molecule inhibitor in both 
macrophages and a human bronchial epithelial cell line (Beas-2B) were able to 
counter NF-Ä¸B-induced oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. 
Meanwhile, inhibition of SETD7 elevates mitochondria antioxidant functions via 
negative regulation of PPARGC1A and NFE2L2. Using a co-expression system and 
purified proteins, we detected direct interaction between SETD7 and NFE2L2. 
These results indicate that lysine methylation by SETD7 is important for the 
fine-tuning of ROS signaling through its regulation on pro-inflammatory 
responses, mitochondrial function and the NFE2L2/ARE pathway. Up-regulation of 
multiple antioxidant genes and improved ROS clearance by inhibition of SETD7 
suggests the potential benefit of targeting SETD7 in treating ROS-associated 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/srep14368
PMCID: PMC4593030
PMID: 26435321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]