1. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 5;5:14693. doi: 10.1038/srep14693.

Plasma membrane restricted RhoGEF activity is sufficient for RhoA-mediated actin 
polymerization.

van Unen J(1), Reinhard NR(1), Yin T(2), Wu YI(2), Postma M(1), Gadella TW(1), 
Goedhart J(1).

Author information:
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Section of Molecular Cytology, van 
Leeuwenhoek Centre for Advanced Microscopy, University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 
94215, NL-1090 GE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Center for Cell Analysis and Modeling, University of Connecticut Health 
Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06032-6406.

The small GTPase RhoA is involved in cell morphology and migration. RhoA 
activity is tightly regulated in time and space and depends on guanine exchange 
factors (GEFs). However, the kinetics and subcellular localization of GEF 
activity towards RhoA are poorly defined. To study the mechanism underlying the 
spatiotemporal control of RhoA activity by GEFs, we performed single cell 
imaging with an improved FRET sensor reporting on the nucleotide loading state 
of RhoA. By employing the FRET sensor we show that a plasma membrane located 
RhoGEF, p63RhoGEF, can rapidly activate RhoA through endogenous GPCRs and that 
localized RhoA activity at the cell periphery correlates with actin 
polymerization. Moreover, synthetic recruitment of the catalytic domain derived 
from p63RhoGEF to the plasma membrane, but not to the Golgi apparatus, is 
sufficient to activate RhoA. The synthetic system enables local activation of 
endogenous RhoA and effectively induces actin polymerization and changes in 
cellular morphology. Together, our data demonstrate that GEF activity at the 
plasma membrane is sufficient for actin polymerization via local RhoA signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/srep14693
PMCID: PMC4592971
PMID: 26435194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]