1. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2016;39(3):279-83. doi: 10.3109/01480545.2015.1092043. Epub
 2015 Oct 7.

Methylation of inorganic arsenic by murine fetal tissue explants.

Broka D(1), Ditzel E(1), Quach S(1), Camenisch TD(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology , Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Bio5 Institute, and Southwest Environmental Health Sciences Center, University 
of Arizona , Tucson , AZ , USA.

Although it is generally believed that the developing fetus is principally 
exposed to inorganic arsenic and the methylated metabolites from the maternal 
metabolism of arsenic, little is known about whether the developing embryo can 
autonomously metabolize arsenic. This study investigates inorganic arsenic 
methylation by murine embryonic organ cultures of the heart, lung, and liver. 
mRNA for AS3mt, the gene responsible for methylation of arsenic, was detected in 
all embryonic tissue types studied. In addition, methylated arsenic metabolites 
were generated by all three tissue types. The fetal liver explants yielded the 
most methylated arsenic metabolites (∼7% of total arsenic/48 h incubation) while 
the heart, and lung preparations produced slightly greater than 2% methylated 
metabolites. With all tissues the methylation proceeded mostly to the 
dimethylated arsenic species. This has profound implications for understanding 
arsenic-induced fetal toxicity, particularly if the methylated metabolites are 
produced autonomously by embryonic tissues.

DOI: 10.3109/01480545.2015.1092043
PMCID: PMC5344026
PMID: 26446802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest This manuscript is an 
original work that has not been previously published and has not been submitted 
elsewhere for consideration. The authors on this manuscript do not have any 
competing interests related to this work and have all read the manuscript, agree 
the work is ready for submission, and accept responsibility for the manuscript’s 
contents. This work was supported by ES006694, ES04940 and training grant 
ES007091.