1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 6;10(10):e0139958. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139958. 
eCollection 2015.

Assessing Antigenic Drift of Seasonal Influenza A(H3N2) and A(H1N1)pdm09 
Viruses.

Tewawong N(1), Prachayangprecha S(1), Vichiwattana P(1), Korkong S(1), Klinfueng 
S(1), Vongpunsawad S(1), Thongmee T(1), Theamboonlers A(1), Poovorawan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Under selective pressure from the host immune system, antigenic epitopes of 
influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) have continually evolved to escape antibody 
recognition, termed antigenic drift. We analyzed the genomes of influenza 
A(H3N2) and A(H1N1)pdm09 virus strains circulating in Thailand between 2010 and 
2014 and assessed how well the yearly vaccine strains recommended for the 
southern hemisphere matched them. We amplified and sequenced the HA gene of 120 
A(H3N2) and 81 A(H1N1)pdm09 influenza virus samples obtained from respiratory 
specimens and calculated the perfect-match vaccine efficacy using the pepitope 
model, which quantitated the antigenic drift in the dominant epitope of HA. 
Phylogenetic analysis of the A(H3N2) HA1 genes classified most strains into 
genetic clades 1, 3A, 3B, and 3C. The A(H3N2) strains from the 2013 and 2014 
seasons showed very low to moderate vaccine efficacy and demonstrated antigenic 
drift from epitopes C and A to epitope B. Meanwhile, most A(H1N1)pdm09 strains 
from the 2012-2014 seasons belonged to genetic clades 6A, 6B, and 6C and 
displayed the dominant epitope mutations at epitopes B and E. Finally, the 
vaccine efficacy for A(H1N1)pdm09 (79.6-93.4%) was generally higher than that of 
A(H3N2). These findings further confirmed the accelerating antigenic drift of 
the circulating influenza A(H3N2) in recent years.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139958
PMCID: PMC4594909
PMID: 26440103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors received 
funding from commercial sources, Siam Cement Group and MK Restaurant Company 
Limited. However, this does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials. The authors also declare that no 
competing interests exist.