1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 7;10(10):e0140086. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140086. 
eCollection 2015.

Immunization against Rumen Methanogenesis by Vaccination with a New Recombinant 
Protein.

Zhang L(1), Huang X(1), Xue B(1), Peng Q(1), Wang Z(1), Yan T(2), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of animal nutrition, Sichuan Agricultural University, Yaan, 
Sichuan, China.
(2)Agri-Food and Biosciences Institute, Hillsborough, United Kingdom.

Vaccination through recombinant proteins against rumen methanogenesis provides a 
mitigation approach to reduce enteric methane (CH4) emissions in ruminants. The 
objective of present study was to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of a new vaccine 
candidate protein (EhaF) on methanogenesis and microbial population in the rumen 
of goats. We amplified the gene mru 1407 encoding protein EhaF using fresh rumen 
fluid samples of mature goats and successfully expressed recombinant protein 
(EhaF) in Escherichia coli Rosetta. This product was evaluated using 12 mature 
goats with half for control and other half injected with 400ug/goat the purified 
recombinant protein in day 1 and two subsequent booster immunizations in day 35 
and 49. All measurements were undertaken from 63 to 68 days after the initial 
vaccination, with CH4 emissions determined using respiration calorimeter 
chambers. The results showed that the vaccination caused intensive immune 
responses in serum and saliva, although it had no significant effect on total 
enteric CH4 emissions and methanogen population in the rumen, when compared with 
the control goats. However, the vaccination altered the composition of rumen 
bacteria, especially the abundance of main phylum Firmicutes and genus 
Prevotella. The results indicate that protein EhaF might not be an effective 
vaccine to reduce enteric CH4 emissions but our vaccine have potential to 
influence the rumen ecosystem of goats.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140086
PMCID: PMC4596829
PMID: 26445479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.