1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 6;10(10):e0139858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139858. 
eCollection 2015.

Regulation of Connective Tissue Growth Factor and Cardiac Fibrosis by an 
SRF/MicroRNA-133a Axis.

Angelini A(1), Li Z(1), Mericskay M(1), Decaux JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology of Adaptation and Ageing, Institut de Biologie Paris Seine (IBPS), 
DHU FAST Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, Paris, France; CNRS, 
UMR8256, Paris, France; INSERM, U1164, Paris, France.

Myocardial fibrosis contributes to the remodeling of heart and the loss of 
cardiac function leading to heart failure. SRF is a transcription factor 
implicated in the regulation of a large variety of genes involved in cardiac 
structure and function. To investigate the impact of an SRF overexpression in 
heart, we developed a new cardiac-specific and tamoxifen-inducible SRF 
overexpression mouse model by the Cre/loxP strategy. Here, we report that a high 
level overexpression of SRF leads to severe modifications of cardiac 
cytoarchitecture affecting the balance between cardiomyocytes and cardiac 
fibroblasts and also a profound alteration of cardiac gene expression program. 
The drastic development of fibrosis was characterized by intense sirius red 
staining and associated with an increased expression of genes encoding 
extracellular matrix proteins such as fibronectin, procollagen type 1α1 and type 
3α1 and especially connective tissue growth factor (CTGF). Furthermore miR-133a, 
one of the most predominant cardiac miRNAs, is strongly downregulated when SRF 
is overexpressed. By comparison a low level overexpression of SRF has minor 
impact on these different processes. Investigation with miR-133a, antimiR-133a 
and AdSRF-VP16 experiments in H9c2 cardiac cells demonstrated that: 1)-miR-133a 
acts as a repressor of SRF and CTGF expression; 2)-a simultaneous overexpression 
of SRF by AdSRF-VP16 and inhibition of miR-133a by a specific antimiR increase 
CTGF expression; 3)-miR-133a overexpression can block the upregulation of CTGF 
induced by AdSRF-VP16. Taken together, these findings reveal a key role of the 
SRF/CTGF/miR-133a axis in the regulation of cardiac fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139858
PMCID: PMC4595333
PMID: 26440278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.