1. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Feb;81(2):327-40. doi: 10.1111/bcp.12800. Epub 2015 
Dec 25.

Genetic markers in CYP2C19 and CYP2B6 for prediction of cyclophosphamide's 
4-hydroxylation, efficacy and side effects in Chinese patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus.

Shu W(1)(2), Guan S(3), Yang X(4), Liang L(4), Li J(1), Chen Z(1), Zhang Y(1), 
Chen L(1), Wang X(1), Huang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510006.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Cancer Center of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, 510182.
(3)School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, South China University of Technology, 
Guangzhou, 510006.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China.

AIMS: The aim of the study was to investigate the combined impact of genetic 
polymorphisms in key pharmacokinetic genes on plasma concentrations and clinical 
outcomes of cyclophosphamide (CPA) in Chinese patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: One hundred and eighty nine Chinese SLE patients treated with CPA 
induction therapy (200 mg, every other day) were recruited and adverse reactions 
were recorded. After 4 weeks induction therapy, 128 lupus nephritis (LN) 
patients continued to CPA maintenance therapy (200-600 mg week(-1)) for 6 
months, and their clinical outcomes were recorded. Blood samples were collected 
for CYP2C19, CYP2B6, GST and PXR polymorphism analysis, as well as CPA and its 
active metabolite (4-hydroxycyclophosphamide (4-OH-CPA)) plasma concentration 
determination.
RESULTS: Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that CYP2B6 -750 T > C (P 
< 0.001), -2320 T > C (P < 0.001), 15582C > T (P = 0.017), CYP2C19*2 (P < 0.001) 
and PXR 66034 T > C (P = 0.028) accounted for 47% of the variation in 4-OH-CPA 
plasma concentration. Among these variants, CYP2B6 -750 T > C and CYP2C19*2 were 
selected as the combination genetic marker because these two SNPs contributed 
the most to the inter-individual variability in 4-OH-CPA concentration, 
accounting for 23.6% and 21.5% of the variation, respectively. Extensive 
metabolizers (EMs) (CYP2B6 -750TT, CYP2C19*1*1) had significantly higher median 
4-OH-CPA plasma concentrations (34.8, 11.0 and 6.6 ng ml(-1) for EMs, 
intermediate metabolizers (IMs) and poor metabolizers (PMs), P < 0.0001), higher 
risks of leukocytopenia (OR = 7.538, 95% CI 2.951, 19.256, P < 0.0001) and 
gastrointestinal toxicity (OR = 7.579, 95% CI 2.934, 19.578, P < 0.0001), as 
well as shorter median time to achieve complete remission (13.2, 18.3 and 23.3 
weeks for EMs, IMs and PMs, respectively, P = 0.026) in LN patients than PMs 
(CYP2B6 -750CC, CYP2C19*2*2) and IMs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings have indicated that genetic markers of drug 
metabolizing enzymes could predict the 4-hydroxylation, adverse reactions and 
clinical efficacy of CPA. This is a necessary first step towards building 
clinical tools that will help assess clinical benefit and risk before undergoing 
CPA treatment in Chinese SLE patients.

Â© 2015 The British Pharmacological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/bcp.12800
PMCID: PMC4833150
PMID: 26456622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]