1. Exp Hematol. 2016 Jan;44(1):24-9.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.09.006. Epub 
2015 Oct 13.

JAK2(V617I) results in cytokine hypersensitivity without causing an overt 
myeloproliferative disorder in a mouse transduction-transplantation model.

Brooks SA(1), Luty SB(2), Lai HY(1), Morse SJ(1), Nguyen TK(1), Royer LR(2), 
Agarwal A(2), Druker BJ(2), Fleischman AG(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(2)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA. Electronic address: agf@uci.edu.

A germline JAK2(V617I) point mutation results in hereditary thrombocytosis and 
shares some phenotypic features with myeloproliferative neoplasm, a hematologic 
malignancy associated with a somatically acquired JAK2(V617F) mutation. We 
established a mouse transduction-transplantation model of JAK2(V617I) that 
recapitulated the phenotype of humans with germline JAK2(V617I). We directly 
compared the phenotypes of JAK2(V617I) and JAK2(V617F) mice. The JAK2(V617I) 
mice had increased marrow cellularity with expanded myeloid progenitor and 
megakaryocyte populations, but this phenotype was less severe than that of 
JAK2(V617F) mice. JAK2(V617I) resulted in cytokine hyperresponsiveness without 
constitutive activation in the absence of ligand, whereas JAK2(V617F) resulted 
in constitutive activation. This may explain why JAK2(V617I) produces a mild 
myeloproliferative phenotype in the mouse model, as well as in humans with 
germline JAK2(V617I) mutations.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.09.006
PMCID: PMC5685804
PMID: 26458983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]