1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 15;10(10):e0140824. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140824. 
eCollection 2015.

Dengue-3 Virus Entry into Vero Cells: Role of Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis in 
the Outcome of Infection.

Piccini LE(1), Castilla V(2), Damonte EB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Virología, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina; IQUIBICEN, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas 
(CONICET), Ciudad Universitaria, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Virología, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

The endocytic uptake and intracellular trafficking for penetration of DENV-3 
strain H-87 into Vero cells was analyzed by using several biochemical inhibitors 
and dominant negative mutants of cellular proteins. The results presented show 
that the infective entry of DENV-3 into Vero cells occurs through a 
non-classical endocytosis pathway dependent on low pH and dynamin, but 
non-mediated by clathrin. After uptake, DENV-3 transits through early endosomes 
to reach Rab 7-regulated late endosomes, and according with the half-time for 
ammonium chloride resistance viral nucleocapsid is released into the cytosol 
approximately at 12 min post-infection. Furthermore, the influence of the 
clathrin pathway in DENV-3 infective entry in other mammalian cell lines of 
human origin, such as A549, HepG2 and U937 cells, was evaluated demonstrating 
that variable entry pathways are employed depending on the host cell. Results 
show for the first time the simultaneous coexistence of infective and non 
-infective routes for DENV entry into the host cell, depending on the usage of 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140824
PMCID: PMC4607419
PMID: 26469784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.