1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 14;10(10):e0139971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139971. 
eCollection 2015.

Inhibition of Receptor Dimerization as a Novel Negative Feedback Mechanism of 
EGFR Signaling.

Kluba M(1), Engelborghs Y(1), Hofkens J(2), Mizuno H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular Network Dynamics, Biochemistry, Molecular and 
Structural Biology Section, Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 
200G box 2403, 3001, Heverlee, Belgium.
(2)Molecular Imaging and Photonics, Department of Chemistry, KU Leuven, 
Celestijnenlaan 200F, 3001, Heverlee, Belgium.

Dimerization of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is crucial for 
initiating signal transduction. We employed raster image correlation 
spectroscopy to continuously monitor the EGFR monomer-dimer equilibrium in 
living cells. EGFR dimer formation upon addition of EGF showed oscillatory 
behavior with a periodicity of about 2.5 min, suggesting the presence of a 
negative feedback loop to monomerize the receptor. We demonstrated that 
monomerization of EGFR relies on phospholipase CÎ³, protein kinase C, and protein 
kinase D (PKD), while being independent of Ca2+ signaling and endocytosis. 
Phosphorylation of the juxtamembrane threonine residues of EGFR (T654/T669) by 
PKD was identified as the factor that shifts the monomer-dimer equilibrium of 
ligand bound EGFR towards the monomeric state. The dimerization state of the 
receptor correlated with the activity of an extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase, downstream of the EGFR. Based on these observations, we propose a novel, 
negative feedback mechanism that regulates EGFR signaling via receptor 
monomerization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139971
PMCID: PMC4605717
PMID: 26465157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.