1. Chemistry. 2015 Nov 23;21(48):17324-35. doi: 10.1002/chem.201503136. Epub 2015
 Oct 14.

Effects of Coke Deposits on the Catalytic Performance of Large Zeolite H-ZSM-5 
Crystals during Alcohol-to-Hydrocarbon Reactions as Investigated by a 
Combination of Optical Spectroscopy and Microscopy.

Nordvang EC(1), Borodina E(2), Ruiz-Martínez J(2), Fehrmann R(1), Weckhuysen 
BM(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Catalysis and Sustainable Chemistry, DTU Chemistry, B. 207, 
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby (Denmark).
(2)Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis Group, Debye Institute for Nanomaterials 
Science, Utrecht University, Sorbonnelaan 16, 3584 CA Utrecht (The Netherlands).
(3)Inorganic Chemistry and Catalysis Group, Debye Institute for Nanomaterials 
Science, Utrecht University, Sorbonnelaan 16, 3584 CA Utrecht (The Netherlands). 
b.m.weckhuysen@uu.nl.

The catalytic activity of large zeolite H-ZSM-5 crystals in methanol (MTO) and 
ethanol-to-olefins (ETO) conversions was investigated and, using operando UV/Vis 
measurements, the catalytic activity and deactivation was correlated with the 
formation of coke. These findings were related to in situ single crystal UV/Vis 
and confocal fluorescence micro-spectroscopy, allowing the observation of the 
spatiotemporal formation of intermediates and coke species during the MTO and 
ETO conversions. It was observed that rapid deactivation at elevated 
temperatures was due to the fast formation of aromatics at the periphery of the 
H-ZSM-5 crystals, which are transformed into more poly-aromatic coke species at 
the external surface, preventing the diffusion of reactants and products into 
and out of the H-ZSM-5 crystal. Furthermore, we were able to correlate the 
operando UV/Vis spectroscopy results observed during catalytic testing with the 
single crystal in situ results.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. This is an 
open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
Non-Commercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for 
commercial purposes.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.201503136
PMCID: PMC4676928
PMID: 26463581