1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):7367-73. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4411. Epub 2015 Oct
 1.

MicroRNA‑361‑5p suppresses cancer progression by targeting signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 6 in non‑small cell lung cancer.

Ma Y(1), Bao C(2), Kong R(1), Xing X(3), Zhang Y(4), Li S(1), Zhang W(1), Jiang 
J(1), Zhang J(1), Qiao Z(1), Zhang D(1), Ma Z(1), Sun L(1), Zhou B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical 
School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The 174th Hospital of The 
Chinese People's Liberation Army, The Affiliated Chenggong Hospital of Xiamen 
University, Xiamen, Fujian 710049, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Health Care for Cadres, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical 
School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Oncology, The 174th Hospital of The Chinese People's Liberation 
Army, The Affiliated Chenggong Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 
710049, P.R. China.

The incidence of non‑small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has significantly increased 
in China, while the prognosis of affected patients is poor. The pathogenesis of 
NSCLC is thought to be regulated by microRNAs (miRs). The present study used a 
miR array in order to determine the expression of miR‑361‑5p, which was 
significantly lower in NSCLC tissues compared with that in adjacent tissues, 
indicating a crucial role of miR‑361‑5p during the progression of NSCLC. 
Furthermore, the effects of transfection-induced upregulation of miR‑361‑5p on 
the NSCLC cell line H23 were assessed. Overexpression of miR‑361‑5p inhibited 
the proliferation and colony formation ability of H23 cells. In addition, 
apoptosis of H23 cells was induced by upregulation of miR‑361‑5p. Furthermore, 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) was confirmed as a 
direct target of miR‑361‑5p by a dual‑luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, 
inhibition of STAT6 by small interfering RNA or miR‑361‑5p also decreased the 
expression of B-cell lymphoma extra large (Bcl-xL). In vivo, miR‑361‑5p 
significantly reduced tumor growth in a nude mouse xenograft model, and 
suppressed STAT6 and Bcl-xL expression. In conclusion, the present study 
indicated that miR‑361‑5p may represent a novel molecular tool for therapeutic 
and diagnostic strategies in NSCLC.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4411
PMCID: PMC4626161
PMID: 26461141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]