1. PLoS Genet. 2015 Oct 16;11(10):e1005593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005593. 
eCollection 2015 Oct.

A Phenomic Scan of the Norfolk Island Genetic Isolate Identifies a Major 
Pleiotropic Effect Locus Associated with Metabolic and Renal Disorder Markers.

Benton MC(1), Lea RA(1), Macartney-Coxson D(2), Hanna M(1), Eccles DA(1), 
Carless MA(3), Chambers GK(4), Bellis C(3), Goring HH(3), Curran JE(3), Harper 
JL(5), Gibson G(6), Blangero J(3), Griffiths LR(1).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Institute of Biomedical Health and Innovation, 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(2)Biomarkers Group, Kenepuru Science Centre, Institute of Environmental Science 
and Research, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas, United States of 
America.
(4)School of Biological Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 
New Zealand.
(5)Malaghan Institute of Medical Research, Wellington, New Zealand.
(6)School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, United 
States of America.

Multiphenotype genome-wide association studies (GWAS) may reveal pleiotropic 
genes, which would remain undetected using single phenotype analyses. Analysis 
of large pedigrees offers the added advantage of more accurately assessing trait 
heritability, which can help prioritise genetically influenced phenotypes for 
GWAS analysis. In this study we performed a principal component analysis (PCA), 
heritability (h2) estimation and pedigree-based GWAS of 37 cardiovascular 
disease -related phenotypes in 330 related individuals forming a large pedigree 
from the Norfolk Island genetic isolate. PCA revealed 13 components explaining 
>75% of the total variance. Nine components yielded statistically significant h2 
values ranging from 0.22 to 0.54 (P<0.05). The most heritable component was 
loaded with 7 phenotypic measures reflecting metabolic and renal dysfunction. A 
GWAS of this composite phenotype revealed statistically significant associations 
for 3 adjacent SNPs on chromosome 1p22.2 (P<1x10-8). These SNPs form a 42kb 
haplotype block and explain 11% of the genetic variance for this renal function 
phenotype. Replication analysis of the tagging SNP (rs1396315) in an independent 
US cohort supports the association (P = 0.000011). Blood transcript analysis 
showed 35 genes were associated with rs1396315 (P<0.05). Gene set enrichment 
analysis of these genes revealed the most enriched pathway was purine metabolism 
(P = 0.0015). Overall, our findings provide convincing evidence for a major 
pleiotropic effect locus on chromosome 1p22.2 influencing risk of renal 
dysfunction via purine metabolism pathways in the Norfolk Island population. 
Further studies are now warranted to interrogate the functional relevance of 
this locus in terms of renal pathology and cardiovascular disease risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005593
PMCID: PMC4608754
PMID: 26474483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.