1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Nov;66:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.10.003.
Epub  2015 Oct 21.

Probing the chemical mechanism and critical regulatory amino acid residues of 
Drosophila melanogaster arylalkylamine N-acyltransferase like 2.

Dempsey DR(1), Carpenter AM(1), Ospina SR(1), Merkler DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33620, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, 33620, USA. 
Electronic address: merkler@usf.edu.

Arylalkylamine N-acyltransferase like 2 (AANATL2) catalyzes the formation of 
N-acylarylalkylamides from the corresponding acyl-CoA and arylalkylamine. The 
N-acylation of biogenic amines in Drosophila melanogaster is a critical step for 
the inactivation of neurotransmitters, cuticle sclerotization, and melatonin 
biosynthesis. In addition, D. melanogaster has been used as a model system to 
evaluate the biosynthesis of fatty acid amides: a family of potent cell 
signaling lipids. We have previously showed that AANATL2 catalyzes the formation 
of N-acylarylakylamides, including long-chain N-acylserotonins and 
N-acyldopamines. Herein, we define the kinetic mechanism for AANATL2 as an 
ordered sequential mechanism with acetyl-CoA binding first followed by tyramine 
to generate the ternary complex prior to catalysis. Bell shaped kcat,app - 
acetyl-CoA and (kcat/Km)app - acetyl-CoA pH-rate profiles identified two 
apparent pKa,app values of ∼7.4 and ∼8.9 that are critical to catalysis, 
suggesting the AANATL2-catalyzed formation of N-acetyltyramine occurs through an 
acid/base chemical mechanism. Site-directed mutagenesis of a conserved glutamate 
that corresponds to the catalytic base for other D. melanogaster AANATL enzymes 
did not produce a substantial depression in the kcat,app value nor did it 
abolish the pKa,app value attributed to the general base in catalysis (pKa 
∼7.4). These data suggest that AANATL2 catalyzes the formation of 
N-acylarylalkylamides using either different catalytic residues or a different 
chemical mechanism relative to other D. melanogaster AANATL enzymes. In 
addition, we constructed other site-directed mutants of AANATL2 to help define 
the role of targeted amino acids in substrate binding and/or enzyme catalysis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2015.10.003
PMCID: PMC4663176
PMID: 26476413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]