1. Gut Liver. 2016 May 23;10(3):446-55. doi: 10.5009/gnl15162.

Association of IL28B Genotypes and Baseline Serum Interferon-γ-Inducible- 
Protein-10 Levels with Treatment Response in Hepatitis C Virus Patients in 
China.

Zhang R(1), Shao C(1), Huo N(1), Li M(1), Xu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Several studies have demonstrated that serum 
interferon-γ-inducible-protein-10 (IP-10) levels at baseline and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near the IL28B gene were associated with viral 
response and treatment outcomes. Our purpose was to assess the combination of 
pretreatment IP-10 levels with IL28B SNPs as predictors of treatment response to 
pegylated interferon α-2a plus ribavirin in patients infected with genotype 1 
hepatitis C virus in China.
METHODS: Seventy-two patients with chronic hepatitis C without 
fibrosis/cirrhosis were enrolled in the study. The virologic parameters and 
baseline serum IP-10 levels were determined. IL-28B genotypes were determined by 
sequencing.
RESULTS: In this cohort, serum baseline IP-10 levels lower than 426.7 pg/mL 
could predict rapid virological response/ sustained virological response (SVR). 
Patients carrying favorable IL28B SNP genotypes had higher SVRs than did those 
carrying unfavorable variants (IL28B rs12979860, p=0.002; IL28B rs8099917, 
p=0.020). Combining both baseline IP- 10 and IL28B SNPs could improve the 
prediction of SVR in favorable allele carriers of IL28B, rs12979860 CC and 
rs8099917 TT. Serum baseline IP-10 levels and IL28B genotypes were independent 
predictors of SVR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that the combination of baseline serum IP-10 levels 
and the determination of IL28B SNPs increase the predictability of SVR rates in 
this cohort. (Gut Liver 2016;10446-455).

DOI: 10.5009/gnl15162
PMCID: PMC4849699
PMID: 26470765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]