1. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:834805. doi: 10.1155/2015/834805. Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Gene Expression-Genotype Analysis Implicates GSDMA, GSDMB, and LRRC3C as 
Contributors to Inflammatory Bowel Disease Susceptibility.

Söderman J(1), Berglind L(1), Almer S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Diagnostics, Ryhov County Hospital, 55185 Jönköping, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medicine, Solna, Karolinska Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden 
; Centre for Digestive Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 17176 
Stockholm, Sweden.

To investigate the biological foundation of the inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD), ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, susceptibility locus rs2872507, 
we have investigated the expression of 13 genes using ileal and colonic biopsies 
from patients with IBD (inflamed and noninflamed mucosa) or from individuals 
without IBD (noninflamed mucosa). The susceptibility allele was consistently 
associated with reduced expression of GSDMB (P = 4.1 × 10(-3)-7.2 × 10(-10)). 
The susceptibility allele was also associated with the increased expression of 
GSDMA (P = 1.6 × 10(-4)) and LRRC3C (P = 7.8 × 10(-6)) in colon tissue from 
individuals without IBD and with the reduced expression of PGAP3 (IBD; P = 2.0 × 
10(-3)) and ZPBP2 (Crohn's disease; P = 7.7 × 10(-4)) in noninflamed ileum. 
Inflammation resulted in the reduced colonic expression of ERBB2, GRB7, MIEN1, 
and PGAP3 (P = 1.0 × 10(-4)-1.0 × 10(-9)) and the increased colonic expression 
of IKZF3 and CSF3 (P = 2.4 × 10(-7)-3.5 × 10(-8)). Based on our results and 
published findings on GSDMA, GSDMB, LRRC3C, and related proteins, we propose 
that this locus in part affects IBD susceptibility via effects on apoptosis and 
cell proliferation and believe this hypothesis warrants further experimental 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/834805
PMCID: PMC4592899
PMID: 26484354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]