1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 23;10(10):e0140076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140076. 
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of Dnmt1 Binding and DNA Methylation on Nucleosomes and 
Nucleosomal Arrays.

Schrader A(1), Gross T(1), Thalhammer V(1), LÃ¤ngst G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry III, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

The packaging of DNA into nucleosomes and the organisation into higher order 
structures of chromatin limits the access of sequence specific DNA binding 
factors to DNA. In cells, DNA methylation is preferentially occuring in the 
linker region of nucleosomes, suggesting a structural impact of chromatin on DNA 
methylation. These observations raise the question whether DNA 
methyltransferases are capable to recognize the nucleosomal substrates and to 
modify the packaged DNA. Here, we performed a detailed analysis of nucleosome 
binding and nucleosomal DNA methylation by the maintenance DNA methyltransferase 
Dnmt1. Our binding studies show that Dnmt1 has a DNA length sensing activity, 
binding cooperatively to DNA, and requiring a minimal DNA length of 20 bp. Dnmt1 
needs linker DNA to bind to nucleosomes and most efficiently recognizes 
nucleosomes with symmetric DNA linkers. Footprinting experiments reveal that 
Dnmt1 binds to both DNA linkers exiting the nucleosome core. The binding pattern 
correlates with the efficient methylation of DNA linkers. However, the enzyme 
lacks the ability to methylate nucleosomal CpG sites on mononucleosomes and 
nucleosomal arrays, unless chromatin remodeling enzymes create a dynamic 
chromatin state. In addition, our results show that Dnmt1 functionally interacts 
with specific chromatin remodeling enzymes to enable complete methylation of 
hemi-methylated DNA in chromatin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140076
PMCID: PMC4619679
PMID: 26496704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.