1. Redox Biol. 2015 Dec;6:552-564. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2015.09.040. Epub 2015
Oct  9.

Critical role of c-jun N-terminal protein kinase in promoting mitochondrial 
dysfunction and acute liver injury.

Jang S(1), Yu LR(2), Abdelmegeed MA(3), Gao Y(4), Banerjee A(5), Song BJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20892-9410, USA. Electronic address: 
sehwan.jang@upr.edu.
(2)Biomarkers and Alternative Models Branch, Division of Systems Biology, 
National Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. Electronic address: Lirong.Yu@fda.hhs.gov.
(3)Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20892-9410, USA. Electronic address: 
abdelmegeedm@mail.nih.gov.
(4)Biomarkers and Alternative Models Branch, Division of Systems Biology, 
National Center for Toxicological Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. Electronic address: yuangao2000@gmail.com.
(5)Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20892-9410, USA. Electronic address: 
atrayee.liver@gmail.com.
(6)Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20892-9410, USA. Electronic address: 
bj.song@nih.gov.

The mechanism by which c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) promotes tissue 
injury is poorly understood. Thus we aimed at studying the roles of JNK and its 
phospho-target proteins in mouse models of acute liver injury. Young male mice 
were exposed to a single dose of CCl4 (50mg/kg, IP) and euthanized at different 
time points. Liver histology, blood alanine aminotransferase, and other enzyme 
activities were measured in CCl4-exposed mice without or with the 
highly-specific JNK inhibitors. Phosphoproteins were purified from control or 
CCl4-exposed mice and analyzed by differential mass-spectrometry followed by 
further characterizations of immunoprecipitation and activity measurements. JNK 
was activated within 1h while liver damage was maximal at 24h post-CCl4 
injection. Markedly increased phosphorylation of many mitochondrial proteins was 
observed between 1 and 8h following CCl4 exposure. Pretreatment with the 
selective JNK inhibitor SU3327 or the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant 
mito-TEMPO markedly reduced the levels of p-JNK, mitochondrial phosphoproteins 
and liver damage in CCl4-exposed mice. Differential proteomic analysis 
identified many phosphorylated mitochondrial proteins involved in anti-oxidant 
defense, electron transfer, energy supply, fatty acid oxidation, etc. Aldehyde 
dehydrogenase, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, and Î±-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase 
were phosphorylated in CCl4-exposed mice but dephosphorylated after SU3327 
pretreatment. Consistently, the suppressed activities of these enzymes were 
restored by SU3327 pretreatment in CCl4-exposed mice. These data provide a novel 
mechanism by which JNK, rapidly activated by CCl4, promotes mitochondrial 
dysfunction and acute hepatotoxicity through robust phosphorylation of numerous 
mitochondrial proteins.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2015.09.040
PMCID: PMC4625008
PMID: 26491845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]