1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Oct;94(42):e1860. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001860.

Genetic Polymorphisms of Functional Candidate Genes and Recurrent Acute Otitis 
Media With or Without Tympanic Membrane Perforation.

Esposito S(1), Marchisio P, Orenti A, Spena S, Bianchini S, Nazzari E, Rosazza 
C, Zampiero A, Biganzoli E, Principi N.

Author information:
(1)From the Pediatric High Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology 
and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' 
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy (SE, PM, SS, SB, EN, CR, AZ, 
NP); and Unit of Medical Statistics, Biometry and Bioinformatics "G.A. 
Maccacaro", Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy 
(AO, EB).

Evaluation of the genetic contribution to the development of recurrent acute 
otitis media (rAOM) remains challenging. This study aimed to evaluate the 
potential association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in selected 
genes and rAOM and to analyze whether genetic variations might predispose to the 
development of complicated recurrent cases, such as those with tympanic membrane 
perforation (TMP).A total of 33 candidate genes and 47 SNPs were genotyped in 
200 children with rAOM (116 with a history of TMP) and in 200 healthy 
controls.INFγ rs 12369470CT was significantly less common in the children with 
rAOM than in healthy controls (odds ratio [OR] 0.5, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
0.25-1, P = 0.04). Although not significant, interleukin (IL)-1β rs 1143627G and 
toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 rs2737191AG were less frequently detected in the 
children with rAOM than in controls. The opposite was true for IL-8 rs2227306CT, 
which was found more frequently in the children with rAOM than in healthy 
controls. The IL-10 rs1800896TC SNP and the IL-1α rs6746923A and AG SNPs were 
significantly more and less common, respectively, among children without a 
history of TMP than among those who suffered from this complication (OR 2.17, 
95% CI 1.09-4.41, P = 0.02, and OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.21-0.84, P = 0.01).This study 
is the first report suggesting an association between variants in genes encoding 
for factors of innate or adaptive immunity and the occurrence of rAOM with or 
without TMP, which confirms the role of genetics in conditioning susceptibility 
to AOM.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001860
PMCID: PMC4620788
PMID: 26496338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.