1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 23;10(10):e0141270. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141270. 
eCollection 2015.

Membrane Cholesterol Modulates LOX-1 Shedding in Endothelial Cells.

Gioia M(1), Vindigni G(2), Testa B(2), Raniolo S(2), Fasciglione GF(1), Coletta 
M(1), Biocca S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of 
Rome "Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1, 00133, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Via 
Montpellier 1, 00133, Rome, Italy.

The lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1) is a 
scavenger receptor responsible for ox-LDL recognition, binding and 
internalization, which is up-regulated during atherogenesis. Its activation 
triggers endothelium dysfunction and induces inflammation. A soluble form of 
LOX-1 has been identified in the human blood and its presence considered a 
biomarker of cardiovascular diseases. We recently showed that 
cholesterol-lowering drugs inhibit ox-LDL binding and internalization, rescuing 
the ox-LDL induced apoptotic phenotype in primary endothelial cells. Here we 
have investigated the molecular bases of human LOX-1 shedding by 
metalloproteinases and the role of cell membrane cholesterol on the regulation 
of this event by modulating its level with MÎ²CD and statins. We report that 
membrane cholesterol affects the release of different forms of LOX-1 in cells 
transiently and stably expressing human LOX-1 and in a human endothelial cell 
line (EA.hy926). In particular, our data show that i) cholesterol depletion 
triggers the release of LOX-1 in exosomes as a full-length transmembrane isoform 
and as a truncated ectodomain soluble fragment (sLOX-1); ii) endothelial cells 
secrete a soluble metalloproteinase which induces LOX-1 ectodomain shedding and 
iii) long term statins treatment enhances sLOX-1 proteolytic shedding.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141270
PMCID: PMC4619672
PMID: 26495844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.