1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016 Apr 29;19(5):pyv117. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyv117.  Print 2016 May.

Prenatal and Early Postnatal Exposure to Cigarette Smoke Decreases BDNF/TrkB 
Signaling and Increases Abnormal Behaviors Later in Life.

Xiao L(1), Kish VL(1), Benders KM(1), Wu ZX(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences 
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV zwu@hsc.wvu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cigarette smoke exposure during prenatal and early postnatal periods 
increases the incidence of a variety of abnormal behaviors later in life. The 
purpose of this study was to identify the possible critical period of 
susceptibility to cigarette smoke exposure and evaluate the possibe effects of 
cigarette smoke during early life on brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor/neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor B signaling in the brain.
METHODS: Three different age of imprinting control region mice were exposed to 
cigarette smoke or filtered air for 10 consecutive days beginning on either 
gestational day 7 by maternal exposure, or postnatal days 2 or 21 by direct 
inhalation. A series of behavioral profiles and neurotrophins in brain were 
measured 24 hours after mice received acute restraint stress for 1 hour on 
postnatal day 59.
RESULTS: Cigarette smoke exposure in gestational day 7 and postnatal day 2 
produced depression-like behaviors as evidenced by significantly increased 
immobility in both tail suspension and forced-swim test. Increased entry 
latencies, but not ambulation in the open field test, were also observed in the 
gestational day 7 and postnatal day 2 cigarette smoke exposure groups. Genetic 
analysis showed that gestational day 7 cigarette smoke exposure significantly 
altered mRNA level of brain-derived neurotrophic factor/tyrosine kinase receptor 
B in the hippocampus. However, behavioral profiles and brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor/tyrosine kinase receptor B signaling were not significantly 
changed in PND21 cigarette smoke exposure group compared with FA group.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a critical period of susceptibility to 
cigarette smoke exposure exists in the prenatal and early postnatal period, 
which results a downregulation in brain-derived neurotrophic factor/tyrosine 
kinase receptor B signaling in the hippocampus and enhances depression-like 
behaviors later in life.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyv117
PMCID: PMC4886663
PMID: 26503133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]