1. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Oct 6;6:220. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00220. eCollection 
2015.

Non-clinical development of CER-001.

Barbaras R(1).

Author information:
(1)Cerenis Therapeutics , Labege, France.

Cardiovascular disease remains the most pressing healthcare issue for the 
developed world and is becoming so for developing countries. There are no 
currently approved therapies that can rapidly reduce the burden of unstable, 
inflamed plaque in the overall coronary vascular bed. High-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) has multiple actions that could lead to plaque stabilization, such as 
rapid removal of large quantities of cholesterol from the vasculature through 
the process of reverse lipid transport, improvement in endothelial function, 
protection against oxidative damage, and reduction in inflammation. Short-term 
infusion of HDL-mimetics in animal models as well as in humans has shown 
promising effects on the plaque size and morphology. Cerenis Therapeutics has 
developed CER-001, a negatively charged lipoprotein complex consisting of 
phospholipid and recombinant human apoA-I that mimics the structure and function 
of natural HDL. Three clinical trials using CER-001 infusions have demonstrated 
improvements in the carotid wall thickness of patients with familial 
hypercholesterolaemia and in patients with hypo-alphalipoproteinaemia, as well 
as an impact on coronary plaque burden measured by intravascular ultrasonography 
at the lowest tested dose (3 mg/kg) in post-ACS patients. Here, we reviewed the 
non-clinical data leading to the demonstration that CER-001 is a full HDL 
mimetic.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00220
PMCID: PMC4594020
PMID: 26500552