1. Toxins (Basel). 2015 Oct 15;7(10):4143-56. doi: 10.3390/toxins7104143.

The Inhibitory Effect of Botulinum Toxin Type A on Rat Pyloric Smooth Muscle 
Contractile Response to Substance P In Vitro.

Shao YF(1), Xie JF(2), Ren YX(3), Wang C(4), Kong XP(5)(6), Zong XJ(7), Fan 
LL(8), Hou YP(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
shaoyf@lzu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
xiejfan@163.com.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
renyx@lzu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
wangc2012@lzu.cn.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
kongxp530@163.com.
(6)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, Hunan Normal University, 371 
Tongzipo Road, Changsha 410013, China. kongxp530@163.com.
(7)Department of Functional Examination, the 2nd Hospital of Gansu Province, 
Lanzhou 730000, China. zxj0547@163.com.
(8)Experimental Center of Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. fanll@lzu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Key Laboratory 
of Preclinical Study for New Drugs of Gansu Province, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Lanzhou University, 199 Donggang Xi Road, Lanzhou 730000, China. 
houyiping@lzu.edu.cn.

A decrease in pyloric myoelectrical activity and pyloric substance P (SP) 
content following intrasphincteric injection of botulinum toxin type A (BTX-A) 
in free move rats have been demonstrated in our previous studies. The aim of the 
present study was to investigate the inhibitory effect of BTX-A on rat pyloric 
muscle contractile response to SP in vitro and the distributions of SP and 
neurokinin 1 receptor (NK1R) immunoreactive (IR) cells and fibers within 
pylorus. After treatment with atropine, BTX-A (10 U/mL), similar to [D-Arg¹, 
D-Phe⁵, D-Trp(7,9), Leu(11)]-SP (APTL-SP, 1 μmol/L) which is an NK1R antagonist, 
decreased electric field stimulation (EFS)-induced contractile tension and 
frequency, whereas, subsequent administration of APTL-SP did not act on 
contractility. Incubation with BTX-A at 4 and 10 U/mL for 4 h respectively 
decreased SP (1 μmol/L)-induced contractions by 26.64% ± 5.12% and 74.92% ± 
3.62%. SP-IR fibers and NK1R-IR cells both located within pylorus including 
mucosa and circular muscle layer. However, fewer SP-fibers were observed in 
pylorus treated with BTX-A (10 U/mL). In conclusion, BTX-A inhibits SP release 
from enteric terminals in pylorus and EFS-induced contractile responses when 
muscarinic cholinergic receptors are blocked by atropine. In addition, BTX-A 
concentration- and time-dependently directly inhibits SP-induced pyloric smooth 
muscle contractility.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins7104143
PMCID: PMC4626726
PMID: 26501321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]