1. PeerJ. 2015 Oct 20;3:e1304. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1304. eCollection 2015.

Interaction of Wnt pathway related variants with type 2 diabetes in a Chinese 
Han population.

Zhou JB(1), Yang JK(2), Zhang BH(3), Lu J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical 
University , Beijing , China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical 
University , Beijing , China ; Beijing Key Laboratory of Diabetes Research and 
Care, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University , Beijing , China.
(3)Hospital of Tsinghua University , Beijing , China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Diabetes Research and Care, Beijing Tongren 
Hospital, Capital Medical University , Beijing , China.

Aims. Epistasis from gene set based on the function-related genes may confer to 
the susceptibility of type 2 diabetes (T2D). The Wnt pathway has been reported 
to play an important role in the pathogenesis of T2D. Here we applied tag SNPs 
to explore the association between epistasis among genes from Wnt and T2D in the 
Han Chinese population. Methods. Variants of fourteen genes selected from Wnt 
pathways were performed to analyze epistasis. Gene-gene interactions in 
case-control samples were identified by generalized multifactor dimensionality 
reduction (GMDR) method. We performed a case-controlled association analysis on 
a total of 1,026 individual with T2D and 1,157 controls via tag SNPs in Wnt 
pathway. Results. In single-locus analysis, SNPs in four genes were 
significantly associated with T2D adjusted for multiple testing (rs7903146(C) in 
TCF7L2, p = 3.21∗10(-3), OR = 1.39, 95% CI [1.31-1.47], rs12904944(G) in SMAD3, 
p = 2.51∗10(-3), OR = 1.39, 95% CI [1.31-1.47], rs2273368(C) in WNT2B, p = 
4.46∗10(-3), OR = 1.23, 95% CI [1.11-1.32], rs6902123(C) in PPARD, p = 
1.14∗10(-2), OR = 1.40, 95% CI [1.32-1.48]). The haplotype TGC constructed by 
TCF7L2 (rs7903146), DKK1 (rs2241529) and BTRC (rs4436485) showed a significant 
association with T2D (OR = 0.750, 95% CI [0.579-0.972], P = 0.03). For epistasis 
analysis, the optimized combination was the two locus model of WNT2B rs2273368 
and TCF7L2rs7903146, which had the maximum cross-validation consistency. This 
was 9 out of 10 for the sign test at 0.0107 level. The best combination 
increased the risk of T2D by 1.47 times (95% CI [1.13-1.91], p = 0.0039). 
Conclusions. Epistasis between TCF7L2 and WNT2B is associated with the 
susceptibility of T2D in a Han Chinese population. Our results were compatible 
with the idea of the complex nature of T2D that would have been missed using 
conventional tools.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1304
PMCID: PMC4621788
PMID: 26509107

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.