1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2015 Sep-Oct;49(5):707-15. doi: 10.7868/S0026898415050134.

[Kisspeptin and leptin in the regulation of fertility].

[Article in Russian]

Pankov YA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Research Center, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, 
Moscow, 115778, Russia.
(2)pankov.yuriy@endocrincentr.ru.

Kisspeptin (KISS1) and its receptor (KISS1R) are important regulators of the 
reproductive function, along with gonadoliberin (GnRH), gonadotropins 
(luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)), and sex 
steroid hormones. Mutations of their genes alter sexual maturation. The p.P74S, 
p.H90D, and p.P110T missense mutations of KISS1 are associated with central 
precocious puberty (CPP); and the p.G35S, p.C53R, and p.F117L mutations, with 
delayed puberty and isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). The p.P196H 
and p.R386P mutations of KISS1R are also associated with CPP. However, a greater 
number of KISS1R mutations are associated with IHH, as is the case with p.L102P, 
p.L148S, p.E232Q, p.R297L, p.Y313H, pX399R, and more complex mutations, such as 
the 155-bp deletion that removes the acceptor splice site of intron 4 and part 
of exon 5, a deletion of the GCA triplet in position-2 ...-4 of intron 2, and an 
ACCGGCT insertion in the same site. The heterozygous compound mutations 
p.C223R/p.R297L and p.R331X/X399R and the 1-bp insertion 1001_1002insC of KISS1R 
are similarly associated with IHH. Leptin-dependent activation of KISS1 in 
hypothalamic neurons was observed in mice and sheep, being especially evident 
after puberty. Leptin exerts a permissive effect in regulating fertility and 
facilitate the induction of puberty by hypothalamic KISS1 and GnRH and pituitary 
LH and FSH, which support the reproductive function during further life.

DOI: 10.7868/S0026898415050134
PMID: 26510589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]