1. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 30;5:15946. doi: 10.1038/srep15946.

CFTR-regulated MAPK/NF-κB signaling in pulmonary inflammation in thermal 
inhalation injury.

Dong ZW(1), Chen J(1), Ruan YC(2), Zhou T(1), Chen Y(1), Chen Y(1), Tsang LL(2), 
Chan HC(2), Peng YZ(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Chongqing Key 
Laboratory for Proteomics Disease, Institute of Burn Research, Southwest 
Hospital, the Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Epithelial Cell Biology Research Center, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People's 
Republic of China.

The mechanism underlying pulmonary inflammation in thermal inhalation injury 
remains elusive. Cystic fibrosis, also hallmarked with pulmonary inflammation, 
is caused by mutations in CFTR, the expression of which is 
temperature-sensitive. We investigated whether CFTR is involved in heat-induced 
pulmonary inflammation. We applied heat-treatment in 16HBE14o- cells with CFTR 
knockdown or overexpression and heat-inhalation in rats in vivo. Heat-treatment 
caused significant reduction in CFTR and, reciprocally, increase in COX-2 at 
early stages both in vitro and in vivo. Activation of ERK/JNK, NF-κB and 
COX-2/PGE2 were detected in heat-treated cells, which were mimicked by 
knockdown, and reversed by overexpression of CFTR or VX-809, a reported CFTR 
mutation corrector. JNK/ERK inhibition reversed heat-/CFTR-knockdown-induced 
NF-κB activation, whereas NF-κB inhibitor showed no effect on JNK/ERK. IL-8 was 
augmented by heat-treatment or CFTR-knockdown, which was abolished by inhibition 
of NF-κB, JNK/ERK or COX-2. Moreover, in vitro or in vivo treatment with 
curcumin, a natural phenolic compound, significantly enhanced CFTR expression 
and reversed the heat-induced increases in COX-2/PGE2/IL-8, neutrophil 
infiltration and tissue damage in the airway. These results have revealed a 
CFTR-regulated MAPK/NF-κB pathway leading to COX-2/PGE2/IL-8 activation in 
thermal inhalation injury, and demonstrated therapeutic potential of curcumin 
for alleviating heat-induced pulmonary inflammation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep15946
PMCID: PMC4626762
PMID: 26515683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]