1. J Physiol. 2016 Feb 1;594(3):567-93. doi: 10.1113/JP271282. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

In silico prediction of drug therapy in catecholaminergic polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia.

Yang PC(1), Moreno JD(2), Miyake CY(3), Vaughn-Behrens SB(1), Jeng MT(1), Grandi 
E(1), Wehrens XH(3)(4), Noskov SY(5), Clancy CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, 
Davis, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 
Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Molecular Physiology & 
Biophysics, Department of Medicine, Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of 
Medicine, and the Cardiovascular Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Centre for Molecular Simulation, Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty 
of Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2016 Nov 1;594(21):6431-6432. doi: 10.1113/JP272497.
    J Physiol. 2016 Nov 1;594(21):6433-6435. doi: 10.1113/JP273143.

The mechanism of therapeutic efficacy of flecainide for catecholaminergic 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is unclear. Model predictions suggest 
that Na(+) channel effects are insufficient to explain flecainide efficacy in 
CPVT. This study represents a first step toward predicting therapeutic 
mechanisms of drug efficacy in the setting of CPVT and then using these 
mechanisms to guide modelling and simulation to predict alternative drug 
therapies. Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an 
inherited arrhythmia syndrome characterized by fatal ventricular arrhythmias in 
structurally normal hearts during β-adrenergic stimulation. Current treatment 
strategies include β-blockade, flecainide and ICD implementation--none of which 
is fully effective and each comes with associated risk. Recently, flecainide has 
gained considerable interest in CPVT treatment, but its mechanism of action for 
therapeutic efficacy is unclear. In this study, we performed in silico 
mutagenesis to construct a CPVT model and then used a computational modelling 
and simulation approach to make predictions of drug mechanisms and efficacy in 
the setting of CPVT. Experiments were carried out to validate model results. Our 
simulations revealed that Na(+) channel effects are insufficient to explain 
flecainide efficacy in CPVT. The pure Na(+) channel blocker lidocaine and the 
antianginal ranolazine were additionally tested and also found to be 
ineffective. When we tested lower dose combination therapy with flecainide, 
β-blockade and CaMKII inhibition, our model predicted superior therapeutic 
efficacy than with flecainide monotherapy. Simulations indicate a 
polytherapeutic approach may mitigate side-effects and proarrhythmic potential 
plaguing CPVT pharmacological management today. Importantly, our prediction of a 
novel polytherapy for CPVT was confirmed experimentally. Our simulations suggest 
that flecainide therapeutic efficacy in CPVT is unlikely to derive from primary 
interactions with the Na(+) channel, and benefit may be gained from an 
alternative multi-drug regimen.

© 2015 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd 
on behalf of The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP271282
PMCID: PMC4784170
PMID: 26515697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]