1. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 4;6:8760. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9760.

Multifocal clonal evolution characterized using circulating tumour DNA in a case 
of metastatic breast cancer.

Murtaza M(1)(2)(3)(4), Dawson SJ(1)(5)(6), Pogrebniak K(1)(2), Rueda OM(1)(2), 
Provenzano E(5)(7), Grant J(7), Chin SF(1)(2), Tsui DWY(1), Marass F(1)(2), Gale 
D(1), Ali HR(1)(2)(5)(7), Shah P(3), Contente-Cuomo T(3), Farahani H(8), 
Shumansky K(8), Kingsbury Z(9), Humphray S(9), Bentley D(9), Shah SP(8), Wallis 
M(5)(10), Rosenfeld N(1)(2), Caldas C(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB2 0RE, UK.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(3)Center for Noninvasive Diagnostics, Translational Genomics Research 
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized Medicine, Scottsdale, Arizona 85259, 
USA.
(5)Cambridge Breast Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University Hospital 
National Health Service Foundation Trust and National Institute for Health 
Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, and the Cambridge Experimental 
Cancer Medicine Centre, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(6)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia.
(7)Department of Histopathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(8)BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z 1L3.
(9)Illumina, Inc., Chesterford Research Park, Little Chesterford CB10 1XL, UK.
(10)Department of Radiology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.

Circulating tumour DNA analysis can be used to track tumour burden and analyse 
cancer genomes non-invasively but the extent to which it represents metastatic 
heterogeneity is unknown. Here we follow a patient with metastatic ER-positive 
and HER2-positive breast cancer receiving two lines of targeted therapy over 3 
years. We characterize genomic architecture and infer clonal evolution in eight 
tumour biopsies and nine plasma samples collected over 1,193 days of clinical 
follow-up using exome and targeted amplicon sequencing. Mutation levels in the 
plasma samples reflect the clonal hierarchy inferred from sequencing of tumour 
biopsies. Serial changes in circulating levels of sub-clonal private mutations 
correlate with different treatment responses between metastatic sites. This 
comparison of biopsy and plasma samples in a single patient with metastatic 
breast cancer shows that circulating tumour DNA can allow real-time sampling of 
multifocal clonal evolution.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms9760
PMCID: PMC4659935
PMID: 26530965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.R., M.M., F.M., D.G., D.T. and C.C. are 
co-inventors or contributors on a patent â€˜A method for detecting a genetic 
variant', GB patent application no. GB1512626.1 and International patent 
application no. PCT/GB2015/052086, and may benefit from commercialization of 
technologies discussed in the manuscript. N.R. and D.G. are co-founders of 
Inivata, a cancer genomics company focused on ctDNA analysis. D.T. is a 
consultant for Inivata. Z.K., S.H. and D.B. are full-time employees of Illumina, 
Inc., providers of the sequencing technology used in this study. The remaining 
authors declare no competing financial interests.