1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2016 Jan;31(1):1-7. doi:
10.1097/YIC.0000000000000101.

The impact of serotonin receptor 1A and 2A gene polymorphisms and interactions 
on suicide attempt and suicide risk in depressed patients with insufficient 
response to treatment--a European multicentre study.

Höfer P(1), Schosser A, Calati R, Serretti A, Massat I, Kocabas NA, 
Konstantinidis A, Mendlewicz J, Souery D, Zohar J, Juven-Wetzler A, Montgomery 
S, Kasper S.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of 
Psychiatry, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland bDepartment of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna cZentrum für Seelische Gesundheit 
Leopoldau, BBRZ-Med, Vienna dZentrum für Seelische Gesundheit Muldenstrasse, 
BBRZ-Med, Linz, Austria eINSERM U1061, University of Montpellier, FondaMental 
Foundation, Montpellier, France fDepartment of Biomedical and NeuroMotor 
Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy gLaboratory of Experimental 
Neurology, National Fund of Scientific Research, Université Libre de Bruxelles 
hUniversité Libre de Bruxelles iLaboratoire de Psychologie Medicale, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles and Psy Pluriel, Centre Europe en de Psychologie Medicale, 
Bruxelles, Belgium jDepartment of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Gazi, Etiler Ankara, Turkey kChaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 
lImperial College, School of Medicine, University of London, UK.

So far, associations between serotonergic neurotransmission pathways and 
suicidality have been reported. The aim of our study was to investigate the role 
of genetic polymorphisms and gene-gene interactions of the 5-HTR1A and the 
5-HTR2A gene on suicide risk and/or a personal history of suicide attempts. A 
total of 374 major depressive disorder patients, adequately treated with 
antidepressants for at least 4 weeks, were collected in the context of a 
European multicentre study on treatment-resistant depression. We assessed 
suicidality using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview and the 
Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D). Treatment response was defined as 
HAM-D ≤ 17 and remission as HAM-D ≤ 7 after 4 weeks of adequate antidepressant 
treatment. The 5-HTR1A rs6295 (C-1019G) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and 
the 5-HTR2A rs7997012, rs6313, rs643627 and rs17288723 SNPs were selected for 
genotyping. Using logistic regression analyses, no association (P<0.05) could be 
found between any SNP and neither suicide risk nor personal history of suicide 
attempts. Interactions between 5HTR1A rs6295 and 5HTR2A rs6313 in suicide risk, 
and 5HTR1A rs6295 and 5HTR2A rs643627 in a personal history of suicide attempts 
have been reported (P=0.027 and 0.036, respectively); however, the results did 
not survive multiple testing correction. In conclusion, our study shows no 
association between 5HTR1A or 5HTR2A gene polymorphisms and both current suicide 
risk and personal history of suicide attempts. In addition, epistatic effects of 
5HTR1A and 5HTR2A genes on suicidal behaviour were not significant, although 
sample size limitations do not allow definitive conclusions.

DOI: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000101
PMID: 26544898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]