1. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2015;11(12):1839-47. doi: 
10.1517/17425255.2016.1108406. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Dead enzymes in the aldehyde dehydrogenase gene family: role in drug metabolism 
and toxicology.

Jackson BC(1), Thompson DC(2), Charkoftaki G(3), Vasiliou V(3).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , University of Colorado Skaggs 
School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado , Aurora 
, CO 80045 , USA.
(2)b Department of Clinical Pharmacy , University of Colorado Skaggs School of 
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado , Aurora , CO 80045 
, USA.
(3)c Department of Environmental Health Sciences , Yale School of Public Health 
, 60 College St, New Haven , CT 06250 , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Dead enzymes are gene products (proteins) that lack key residues 
required for catalytic activity. In the pre-genome era, dead enzymes were 
thought to occur only rarely. However, they now have been shown to represent 
upwards of 10% of the total enzyme population in many families. The aldehyde 
dehydrogenase (ALDH) gene family encodes proteins that, depending on the 
isozyme, may be either catalytically-active or -inactive. Importantly, several 
ALDHs exhibit biological activities independent of their catalytic activity. For 
many of these, the physiological and pathophysiological functions remain to be 
established.
AREAS COVERED: This article reviews the non-enzymatic functions of the ALDH 
superfamily. In addition, a search for additional non-catalytic ALDH records is 
undertaken. Our computational analyses reveal that there are currently 182 
protein records (divided into 19 groups) that meet the criteria for dead 
enzymes.
EXPERT OPINION: Dead enzymes have the potential to exert biological actions 
through protein-protein interaction and allosteric modulation of the activity of 
an active enzyme. In addition, a dead enzyme may also influence availability of 
substrate for other active enzymes by sequestering substrate, and/or anchoring 
the substrate to a particular subcellular space. A large number of putatively 
non-catalytic ALDH proteins exist that warrant further study.

DOI: 10.1517/17425255.2016.1108406
PMCID: PMC4937717
PMID: 26558415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 9. Declaration of Interest The authors were 
supported by in part by NIH grants AA022057, AA021724 and EY017963 (V Vasiliou). 
Fellowship assistance for BC Jackson (F31 AA020728) is acknowledged. The authors 
have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those 
disclosed.