1. AoB Plants. 2015 Nov 10;7:plv128. doi: 10.1093/aobpla/plv128.

Trade-off between competition and facilitation defines gap colonization in 
mountains.

Lembrechts JJ(1), Milbau A(2), Nijs I(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence of Plant and Vegetation Ecology, Department of Biology, 
University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium 
jonas.lembrechts@uantwerpen.be.
(2)Climate Impacts Research Centre, Department of Ecology and Environmental 
Science, Ume√• University, SE-981 07 Abisko, Sweden Research Institute for Nature 
and Forest INBO, Department of Biodiversity and Natural Environment, 
Kliniekstraat 25, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Centre of Excellence of Plant and Vegetation Ecology, Department of Biology, 
University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium.

Recent experimental observations show that gap colonization in small-stature 
(e.g. grassland and dwarf shrubs) vegetation strongly depends on the abiotic 
conditions within them. At the same time, within-gap variation in biotic 
interactions such as competition and facilitation, caused by distance to the gap 
edge, would affect colonizer performance, but a theoretical framework to explore 
such patterns is missing. Here, we model how competition, facilitation and 
environmental conditions together determine the small-scale patterns of gap 
colonization along a cold gradient in mountains, by simulating colonizer 
survival in gaps of various sizes. Our model adds another dimension to the known 
effects of biotic interactions along a stress gradient by focussing on the 
trade-off between competition and facilitation in the within-gap environment. We 
show that this trade-off defines a peak in colonizer survival at a specific 
distance from the gap edge, which progressively shifts closer to the edge as the 
environment gets colder, ultimately leaving a large fraction of gaps unsuitable 
for colonization in facilitation-dominated systems. This is reinforced when 
vegetation size and temperature amelioration are manipulated simultaneously with 
temperature in order to simulate an elevational gradient more realistically. 
Interestingly, all other conditions being equal, the magnitude of the realized 
survival peak was always lower in large than in small gaps, making large gaps 
harder to colonize. The model is relevant to predict effects of non-native plant 
invasions and climate warming on colonization processes in mountains.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company.

DOI: 10.1093/aobpla/plv128
PMCID: PMC4683995
PMID: 26558706