1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2016 Jan 1;310(1):H39-48. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00490.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Endothelial PPAR-γ provides vascular protection from IL-1β-induced oxidative 
stress.

Mukohda M(1), Stump M(1), Ketsawatsomkron P(1), Hu C(1), Quelle FW(1), Sigmund 
CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Hypertension Research, Roy J. and 
Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Hypertension Research, Roy J. and 
Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 
curt-sigmund@uiowa.edu.

Loss of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ function in the 
vascular endothelium enhances atherosclerosis and NF-κB target gene expression 
in high-fat diet-fed apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. The mechanisms by which 
endothelial PPAR-γ regulates inflammatory responses and protects against 
atherosclerosis remain unclear. To assess functional interactions between PPAR-γ 
and inflammation, we used a model of IL-1β-induced aortic dysfunction in 
transgenic mice with endothelium-specific overexpression of either wild-type 
(E-WT) or dominant negative PPAR-γ (E-V290M). IL-1β dose dependently decreased 
IκB-α, increased phospho-p65, and increased luciferase activity in the aorta of 
NF-κB-LUC transgenic mice. IL-1β also dose dependently reduced 
endothelial-dependent relaxation by ACh. The loss of ACh responsiveness was 
partially improved by pretreatment of the vessels with the PPAR-γ agonist 
rosiglitazone or in E-WT. Conversely, IL-1β-induced endothelial dysfunction was 
worsened in the aorta from E-V290M mice. Although IL-1β increased the expression 
of NF-κB target genes, NF-κB p65 inhibitor did not alleviate endothelial 
dysfunction induced by IL-1β. Tempol, a SOD mimetic, partially restored ACh 
responsiveness in the IL-1β-treated aorta. Notably, tempol only modestly 
improved protection in the E-WT aorta but had an increased protective effect in 
the E-V290M aorta compared with the aorta from nontransgenic mice, suggesting 
that PPAR-γ-mediated protection involves antioxidant effects. IL-1β increased 
ROS and decreased the phospho-endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(Ser(1177))-to-endothelial nitric oxide synthase ratio in the nontransgenic 
aorta. These effects were completely abolished in the aorta with endothelial 
overexpression of WT PPAR-γ but were worsened in the aorta with E-V290M even in 
the absence of IL-1β. We conclude that PPAR-γ protects against IL-1β-mediated 
endothelial dysfunction through a reduction of oxidative stress responses but 
not by blunting IL-1β-mediated NF-κB activity.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00490.2015
PMCID: PMC4796462
PMID: 26566726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]