1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;29(3):327-32. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2015-0289.

Direct sequencing of FAH gene in Pakistani tyrosinemia type 1 families reveals a 
novel mutation.

Ijaz S, Zahoor MY, Imran M, Afzal S, Bhinder MA, Ullah I, Cheema HA, Ramzan K, 
Shehzad W.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) is a rare inborn error of 
tyrosine catabolism with a worldwide prevalence of one out of 100,000 live 
births. HT1 is clinically characterized by hepatic and renal dysfunction 
resulting from the deficiency of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) enzyme, 
caused by recessive mutations in the FAH gene. We present here the first report 
on identification of FAH mutations in HT1 patients from Pakistan with a novel 
one.
METHODS: Three Pakistani families, each having one child affected with HT1, were 
enrolled over a period of 1.5 years. Two of the affected children had died as 
they were presented late with acute form. All regions of the FAH gene spanning 
exons and splicing sites were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
mutation analysis was carried out by direct sequencing. Results of sequencing 
were confirmed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis.
RESULTS: Three different FAH mutations, one in each family, were found to 
co-segregate with the disease phenotype. Two of these FAH mutations have been 
known (c.192G>T and c.1062+5G>A [IVS12+5G>A]), while c.67T>C (p.Ser23Pro) was a 
novel mutation. The novel variant was not detected in any of 120 chromosomes 
from normal ethnically matched individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Most of the HT1 patients die before they present to hospitals in 
Pakistan, as is indicated by enrollment of only three families in 1.5 years. 
Most of those with late clinical presentation do not survive due to delayed 
diagnosis followed by untimely treatment. This tragic condition advocates the 
establishment of expanded newborn screening program for HT1 within Pakistan.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2015-0289
PMID: 26565546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]