1. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 16;10(11):e0142128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142128. 
eCollection 2015.

Interaction of Arabidopsis Trihelix-Domain Transcription Factors VFP3 and VFP5 
with Agrobacterium Virulence Protein VirF.

Garc√≠a-Cano E(1), Magori S(1), Sun Q(2), Ding Z(2), Lazarowitz SG(3), Citovsky 
V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York, 
Stony Brook, New York, United States of America.
(2)Computational Biology Service Unit, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 
United States of America.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, New York, United States of America.

Agrobacterium is a natural genetic engineer of plants that exports several 
virulence proteins into host cells in order to take advantage of the cell 
machinery to facilitate transformation and support bacterial growth. One of 
these effectors is the F-box protein VirF, which presumably uses the host 
ubiquitin/proteasome system (UPS) to uncoat the packaging proteins from the 
invading bacterial T-DNA. By analogy to several other bacterial effectors, VirF 
most likely has several functions in the host cell and, therefore, several 
interacting partners among host proteins. Here we identify one such interactor, 
an Arabidopsis trihelix-domain transcription factor VFP3, and further show that 
its very close homolog VFP5 also interacted with VirF. Interestingly, 
interactions of VirF with either VFP3 or VFP5 did not activate the host UPS, 
suggesting that VirF might play other UPS-independent roles in bacterial 
infection. To better understand the potential scope of VFP3 function, we used 
RNAi to reduce expression of the VFP3 gene. Transcriptome profiling of these 
VFP3-silenced plants using high-throughput cDNA sequencing (RNA-seq) revealed 
that VFP3 substantially affected plant gene expression; specifically, 1,118 
genes representing approximately 5% of all expressed genes were significantly 
either up- or down-regulated in the VFP3 RNAi line compared to wild-type Col-0 
plants. Among the 507 up-regulated genes were genes implicated in the regulation 
of transcription, protein degradation, calcium signaling, and hormone 
metabolism, whereas the 611 down-regulated genes included those involved in 
redox regulation, light reactions of photosynthesis, and metabolism of lipids, 
amino acids, and cell wall. Overall, this pattern of changes in gene expression 
is characteristic of plants under stress. Thus, VFP3 likely plays an important 
role in controlling plant homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142128
PMCID: PMC4646629
PMID: 26571494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.