1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2015 Oct 29;8:64. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2015.00064.
eCollection  2015.

Selective potentiation of alpha 1 glycine receptors by ginkgolic acid.

Maleeva G(1), Buldakova S(2), Bregestovski P(2).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Université, INS UMR_S 1106 Marseille, France ; INSERM, UMR_S 
1106 Marseille, France ; Department of Cytology, Bogomoletz Institute of 
Physiology Kyiv, Ukraine.
(2)Aix Marseille Université, INS UMR_S 1106 Marseille, France ; INSERM, UMR_S 
1106 Marseille, France.

Glycine receptors (GlyRs) belong to the superfamily of pentameric cys-loop 
receptor-operated channels and are involved in numerous physiological functions, 
including movement, vision, and pain. In search for compounds performing 
subunit-specific modulation of GlyRs we studied action of ginkgolic acid, an 
abundant Ginkgo biloba product. Using patch-clamp recordings, we analyzed the 
effects of ginkgolic acid in concentrations from 30 nM to 25 μM on α1-α3 and 
α1/β, α2/β configurations of GlyR and on GABAARs expressed in cultured CHO-K1 
cells and mouse neuroblastoma (N2a) cells. Ginkgolic acid caused an increase in 
the amplitude of currents mediated by homomeric α1 and heteromeric α1/β GlyRs 
and provoked a left-shift of the concentration-dependent curves for glycine. 
Even at high concentrations (10-25 μM) ginkgolic acid was not able to augment 
ionic currents mediated by α2, α2/β, and α3 GlyRs, or by GABAAR consisting of 
α1/β2/γ2 subunits. Mutation of three residues (T59A/A261G/A303S) in the α2 GlyR 
subunit to the corresponding ones from the α1 converted the action of ginkgolic 
acid to potentiation with a distinct decrease in EC50 for glycine, suggesting an 
important role for these residues in modulation by ginkgolic acid. Our results 
suggest that ginkgolic acid is a novel selective enhancer of α1 GlyRs.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2015.00064
PMCID: PMC4624854
PMID: 26578878