1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2015;2015:138039. doi: 10.1155/2015/138039. Epub 2015 Oct
 26.

Pharmacology and Phytochemistry of Oleo-Gum Resin of Commiphora wightii 
(Guggulu).

Sarup P(1), Bala S(1), Kamboj S(1).

Author information:
(1)MM College of Pharmacy, Maharishi Markandeshwar University, Mullana, Ambala, 
Haryana 132 037, India.

Guggulu is an oleo-gum resin which exudes out as a result of injury from the 
bark of Commiphora wightii (Arnott) Bhandari [syn.  Commiphora mukul (Hook. Ex 
Stocks) Engl; Balsamodendron mukul (Hook. Ex Stocks); Family, Burseraceae]. It 
has been used in the Ayurveda since time immemorial for the treatment of variety 
of disorders such as inflammation, gout, rheumatism, obesity, and disorders of 
lipids metabolism. It is a mixture of phytoconstituents like volatile oil which 
contains terpenoidal constituents such as monoterpenoids, sesquiterpenoids, 
diterpenoids, and triterpenoids; steroids; flavonoids; guggultetrols; lignans; 
sugars; and amino acids. This review is an effort to compile all the information 
available on all of its chemical constituents which are responsible for its 
therapeutic potential. The wild occurrence of this species is restricted mainly 
to the dry regions of Rajasthan and Gujarat States of India, and the bordering 
regions of Pakistan. Oleo-gum resin, guggulu, tapped from the stems of this 
species, is consumed in high volumes by the Indian herbal industries. There has 
been a decline in its wild population over the last several decades, as a result 
of habitat loss and degradation, coupled with unregulated harvesting and tapping 
of oleo-gum resin. This species is consequently assessed as Critically 
Endangered and enlisted in the IUCN red list of threatened species.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/138039
PMCID: PMC4637499
PMID: 26587309