1. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 20;11(11):e1005274. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005274. 
eCollection 2015 Nov.

Hsp70 Isoforms Are Essential for the Formation of Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated 
Herpesvirus Replication and Transcription Compartments.

Baquero-PÃ©rez B(1), Whitehouse A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Astbury Centre for Structural 
Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is an oncogenic herpesvirus 
associated with various AIDS-related malignancies. Like other herpesviruses, 
multiple processes required for KSHV lytic replication, including viral 
transcription, viral DNA synthesis and capsid assembly occur in virus-induced 
intranuclear structures, termed replication and transcription compartments 
(RTCs). Here we utilised a novel methodology, combining subcellular 
fractionation and quantitative proteomics, to identify cellular proteins which 
are recruited to KSHV-induced RTCs and thus play a key role in KSHV lytic 
replication. We show that several isoforms of the HSP70 chaperone family, Hsc70 
and iHsp70, are redistributed from the cytoplasm into the nucleus coinciding 
with the initial formation of KSHV-induced RTCs. We demonstrate that nuclear 
chaperone foci are dynamic, initially forming adjacent to newly formed KSHV 
RTCs, however during later time points the chaperones move within KSHV RTCs and 
completely co-localise with actively replicating viral DNA. The functional 
significance of Hsp70 isoforms recruitment into KSHV RTCs was also examined 
using the specific Hsp70 isoform small molecule inhibitor, VER-155008. 
Intriguingly, results highlight an essential role of Hsp70 isoforms in the KSHV 
replication cycle independent of protein stability and maturation. Notably, 
inhibition of Hsp70 isoforms precluded KSHV RTC formation and RNA polymerase II 
(RNAPII) relocalisation to the viral genome leading to the abolishment of global 
KSHV transcription and subsequent viral protein synthesis and DNA replication. 
These new findings have revealed novel mechanisms that regulate KSHV lytic 
replication and highlight the potential of HSP70 inhibitors as novel antiviral 
agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005274
PMCID: PMC4654589
PMID: 26587836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.