1. Bull Cancer. 2015 Dec;102(12):967-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2015.09.013. Epub 
2015 Nov 12.

[Genetic polymorphism of cytochrome P450 2E1 and the risk of nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma].

[Article in French]

Ben Chaaben A(1), Abaza H(2), Douik H(2), Chaouch L(3), Ayari F(2), Ouni N(2), 
Mamoghli T(2), Ben Guezella D(2), Mejri R(2), Harzallah L(2), Guemira F(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut Salah Azaiz, laboratoire de biologie Clinique, Tunis, Tunisie. 
Electronic address: arijnour_06@yahoo.fr.
(2)Institut Salah Azaiz, laboratoire de biologie Clinique, Tunis, Tunisie.
(3)Institut Pasteur de Tunis, laboratoire d'hématologie moléculaire et 
cellulaire, Tunis, Tunisie.

Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is a detoxifying enzyme that belongs to the phase I 
metabolism of xenobiotics. This enzyme is encoded by a highly polymorphic gene 
whose common polymorphism corresponds to the substitution of cytosine (C) and 
thymine (T) at position -1019 (rs2031920). This polymorphism has been identified 
in several cancers including nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC). The study involved 124 
patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma, compared with 166 healthy controls. The 
presence or absence of the polymorphism is determined by PCR-RFLP. The frequency 
comparison between the two groups is determined by the χ(2) test. The analysis 
of our results showed a significant difference between the two groups regarding 
the mutant genotype (C2/C2) (5% vs. 0.5%, P=0.04) and has a risk factor for NPC 
in Tunisia (OR=8.39; CI 95% [0.99-388.1]). Also, the C2 allele was significantly 
associated with the group of patients than the control group (6% vs. 2%, 
P=0.016) and increased three times the risk of NPC in Tunisia (OR=2.99, CI 95% 
[1.12-8.79]). Our results confirm the results reported in other populations and 
emphasize the importance of the involvement of this gene in the development of 
detoxification of the NPC, which seems more and more strongly associated with 
environmental factors.

Copyright © 2015 Société Française du Cancer. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2015.09.013
PMID: 26582733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]