1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Feb;170A(2):344-354. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37435. Epub
2015  Nov 21.

Atypical phenotypes associated with pathogenic CHD7 variants and a proposal for 
broadening CHARGE syndrome clinical diagnostic criteria.

Hale CL(1), Niederriter AN(2), Green GE(3), Martin DM(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

CHARGE syndrome (Coloboma of the eye, Heart defects, Atresia of the choanae, 
Retardation of growth and/or development, Genital and/or urinary anomalies, and 
Ear malformations, including deafness and vestibular disorders) is a genetic 
condition characterized by a specific and recognizable pattern of features. 
Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding 
protein 7 (CHD7) are the major cause of CHARGE syndrome, and have been 
identified in 70-90% of individuals fulfilling clinical diagnostic criteria. 
Since 2004, when CHD7 was discovered as the causative gene for CHARGE syndrome, 
the phenotypic spectrum associated with pathogenic CHD7 variants has expanded. 
Predicted pathogenic CHD7 variants have been identified in individuals with 
isolated features of CHARGE including autism and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Here, we present genotype and phenotype data from a cohort of 28 patients who 
were considered for a diagnosis of CHARGE syndrome, including one patient with 
atypical presentations and a pathogenic CHD7 variant. We also summarize 
published literature on pathogenic CHD7 variant positive individuals who have 
atypical clinical presentations. Lastly, we propose a revision to current 
clinical diagnostic criteria, including broadening of the major features 
associated with CHARGE syndrome and addition of pathogenic CHD7 variant status 
as a major criterion.

Â© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37435
PMCID: PMC5102387
PMID: 26590800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]