1. J Strength Cond Res. 2015 Dec;29(12):3494-505. doi: 
10.1519/JSC.0000000000000994.

Variants of the Solute Carrier SLC16A1 Gene (MCT1) Associated With Metabolic 
Responses During a Long-Graded Test in Road Cyclists.

González-Haro C(1), Soria M, Vicente J, Fanlo AJ, Sinués B, Escanero JF.

Author information:
(1)Department Pharmacology and Physiology, School of Medicine, University of 
Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

Variants of the solute carrier SLC16A1 gene have been associated with 
alterations in MCT1 expression, because of a lactate (La) transport deficiency 
across the cell membrane and a blood La accumulation. The aim of this study was 
to associate the allelic and genotypic frequencies of 1470T>A, 2917(1414) C>T, 
and IVS3-17A>C variants relative to the blood La kinetics and metabolic 
responses to a progressive effort until exhaustion. Twenty-five well-trained 
road cyclists performed a long-graded laboratory test: 10 minutes at 2.0 W·kg, 
first step at 2.5 W·kg with increments of 0.5 W·kg every 10 minutes until 
exhaustion. Blood La, nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAS), and glucose levels were 
measured; fat and carbohydrate oxidation rates were estimated through 
stoichiometric equations. Three variants of SLC16A1 gene were determined for 
each subject, which were divided in two groups: wt (wild type)/mt (mutated type) 
and mt/mt genotype group versus wt/wt genotype group. Metabolic responses were 
compared between both groups with an unpaired Student's t-test; Friedman and 
Wilcoxon tests were performed for nonparametric data. The statistical 
significance was set at p ≤ 0.05. For 1470TA polymorphism, no significant blood 
La differences were found between groups. 2197(1414)C>T allele carriers and 
IVS3-17A>C carriers showed significantly higher blood La levels, lower blood 
NEFAS, and glucose levels at submaximal intensities. These findings open a new 
perspective to investigate SLC16A1 variants (1470TA and IVS3-17A>C) on La 
deficiency transport and its regulation/interaction with other metabolic 
pathways. Future studies would be needed to clarify whether 1470T>A, 
2917(1414)C>T, and IVS3-17A>C allelic/genotypic distribution benefit performance 
in endurance athletes.

DOI: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000000994
PMID: 26595136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]