1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2016 Mar;98(3):226-34. doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-0086-2. Epub
 2015 Nov 21.

A Cross-Sectional Study of the Association of VDR Gene, Calcium Intake, and Heel 
Ultrasound Measures in Early Adulthood.

Correa-Rodríguez M(1), Schmidt Rio-Valle J(2), González-Jiménez E(2), 
Rueda-Medina B(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Granada, Av. Ilustración S/N, 
18007, Granada, Spain. macoro@ugr.es.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Granada, Av. Ilustración S/N, 
18007, Granada, Spain.

The acquisition of a high adult peak bone mass (PBM) is considered an important 
determinant of osteoporotic risk later in life. Genetic and environmental 
factors determine optimal PBM acquisition in early adulthood. The aim of this 
study was to test the association of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms 
and dietary calcium intake with the bone mass of young adults. The study 
population comprised a total of 305 individuals (mean age 20.41; SD 2.36) whose 
bone mass was assessed through heel ultrasound [quantitative ultrasound 
measurements (QUS)] measurements (BUA, dB/MHz). The FokI G/A, rs9729 G/T, and 
TaqI G/A polymorphisms were selected as genetic markers of VDR. A significant 
difference in BUA values was observed according to gender (females 82.96; SD 
15.89 vs. males 97.72; SD 16.50; p < 0.00001). The mean dietary calcium intake 
of the study group (827.84 mg/day; SD 347.04) was lower than the dietary 
reference intake for young adults (1000 mg/day) and had no association with BUA. 
None of the three VDR polymorphisms tested showed an association with BUA. 
Similarly, the analysis of VDR 3' haplotypes, estimated using rs9729 and Taq1 as 
tag SNPs, did not reveal any significant association with QUS traits. Our 
results confirm the existence of different heel QUS for women and men, as well 
as a tendency towards low calcium consumption by young adults, and they also 
suggest that the VDR gene does not play a major role in the genetic 
determination of QUS parameter in early adulthood.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-015-0086-2
PMID: 26590811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]