1. J Hematop. 2015 Sep;8(3):143-157. doi: 10.1007/s12308-015-0256-1. Epub 2015
Aug  2.

Myeloproliferative Neoplasms in Children.

Hofmann I(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood 
Disorders Center Boston, Boston, MA, United States.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are a group of clonal hematopoietic stem cell 
disorders characterized by aberrant proliferation of one or more myeloid 
lineages often with increased immature cells in the peripheral blood. The three 
classical BCR-ABL-negative MPNs are: 1) polycythemia vera (PV), 2) essential 
thrombocythemia (ET), and 3) primary myelofibrosis (PMF), which are typically 
disorders of older adults and are exceedingly rare in children. The diagnostic 
criteria for MPNs remain largely defined by clinical, laboratory and 
histopathology assessments in adults, but they have been applied to the 
pediatric population. The discovery of the JAK2 V617F mutation, and more 
recently, MPL and CALR mutations, are major landmarks in the understanding of 
MPNs. Nevertheless, they rarely occur in children, posing a significant 
diagnostic challenge given the lack of an objective, clonal marker. Therefore, 
in pediatric patients, the diagnosis must rely heavily on clinical and 
laboratory factors, and exclusion of secondary disorders to make an accurate 
diagnosis of MPN. This review focuses on the clinical presentation, diagnostic 
work up, differential diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of the classical 
BCR-ABL-negative MPNs (PV, ET and PMF) in children and highlights key 
differences to the adult diseases. Particular attention will be given to 
pediatric PMF, as it is the only disorder of this group that is observed in 
infants and young children, and in many ways appears to be a unique entity 
compared to adult PMF.

DOI: 10.1007/s12308-015-0256-1
PMCID: PMC4655194
PMID: 26609329

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Author IH declares that 
she has no conflict of interest.