1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 25;5:17192. doi: 10.1038/srep17192.

Astaxanthin prevents and reverses diet-induced insulin resistance and 
steatohepatitis in mice: A comparison with vitamin E.

Ni Y(1)(2), Nagashimada M(1), Zhuge F(1), Zhan L(1), Nagata N(1), Tsutsui A(3), 
Nakanuma Y(3), Kaneko S(2), Ota T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Metabolism and Nutrition, Brain/Liver Interface Medicine 
Research Center, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.
(2)Department of Disease Control and Homeostasis, Kanazawa University Graduate 
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Comment in
    Int J Mol Sci. 2017 May 05;18(5):E994. doi: 10.3390/ijms18050994.

Hepatic insulin resistance and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) could be 
caused by excessive hepatic lipid accumulation and peroxidation. Vitamin E has 
become a standard treatment for NASH. However, astaxanthin, an antioxidant 
carotenoid, inhibits lipid peroxidation more potently than vitamin E. Here, we 
compared the effects of astaxanthin and vitamin E in NASH. We first demonstrated 
that astaxanthin ameliorated hepatic steatosis in both genetically (ob/ob) and 
high-fat-diet-induced obese mice. In a lipotoxic model of NASH: mice fed a 
high-cholesterol and high-fat diet, astaxanthin alleviated excessive hepatic 
lipid accumulation and peroxidation, increased the proportion of M1-type 
macrophages/Kupffer cells, and activated stellate cells to improve hepatic 
inflammation and fibrosis. Moreover, astaxanthin caused an M2-dominant shift in 
macrophages/Kupffer cells and a subsequent reduction in CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell 
recruitment in the liver, which contributed to improved insulin resistance and 
hepatic inflammation. Importantly, astaxanthin reversed insulin resistance, as 
well as hepatic inflammation and fibrosis, in pre-existing NASH. Overall, 
astaxanthin was more effective at both preventing and treating NASH compared 
with vitamin E in mice. Furthermore, astaxanthin improved hepatic steatosis and 
tended to ameliorate the progression of NASH in biopsy-proven human subjects. 
These results suggest that astaxanthin might be a novel and promising treatment 
for NASH.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17192
PMCID: PMC4658633
PMID: 26603489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.