1. Cancer Immunol Res. 2016 Feb;4(2):101-12. doi:
10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0070-T.  Epub 2015 Nov 24.

MIF Is Necessary for Late-Stage Melanoma Patient MDSC Immune Suppression and 
Differentiation.

Yaddanapudi K(1), Rendon BE(2), Lamont G(2), Kim EJ(2), Al Rayyan N(2), Richie 
J(2), Albeituni S(3), Waigel S(2), Wise A(3), Mitchell RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Targets Program, JG Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, Kentucky. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. Department of Medicine, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. robert.mitchell@louisville.edu 
kavitha.yaddanapudi@louisville.edu.
(2)Molecular Targets Program, JG Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, Kentucky.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, Kentucky.

Highly aggressive cancers "entrain" innate and adaptive immune cells to suppress 
antitumor lymphocyte responses. Circulating myeloid-derived suppressor cells 
(MDSC) constitute the bulk of monocytic immunosuppressive activity in late-stage 
melanoma patients. Previous studies revealed that monocyte-derived macrophage 
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) is necessary for the immunosuppressive 
function of tumor-associated macrophages and MDSCs in mouse models of melanoma. 
In the current study, we sought to determine whether MIF contributes to human 
melanoma MDSC induction and T-cell immunosuppression using melanoma 
patient-derived MDSCs and an ex vivo coculture model of human melanoma-induced 
MDSC. We now report that circulating MDSCs isolated from late-stage melanoma 
patients are reliant upon MIF for suppression of antigen-independent T-cell 
activation and that MIF is necessary for maximal reactive oxygen species 
generation in these cells. Moreover, inhibition of MIF results in a functional 
reversion from immunosuppressive MDSC to an immunostimulatory dendritic cell 
(DC)-like phenotype that is at least partly due to reductions in MDSC 
prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)). These findings indicate that monocyte-derived MIF 
is centrally involved in human monocytic MDSC induction/immunosuppressive 
function and that therapeutic targeting of MIF may provide a novel means of 
inducing antitumor DC responses in late-stage melanoma patients.

Â©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0070-T
PMCID: PMC4740231
PMID: 26603621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]