1. Curr Opin Immunol. 2015 Dec;37:46-53. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.10.001.

BCR and co-receptor crosstalk facilitate the positive selection of self-reactive 
transitional B cells.

Metzler G(1), Kolhatkar NS(1), Rawlings DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, United States; Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA, 
United States.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA, United States; Department of Immunology, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States; Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, United States. Electronic address: 
drawling@u.washington.edu.

The establishment of a diverse B cell repertoire requires fine-tuning of antigen 
receptor selection during development in order to permit sufficient diversity 
while reducing the potential for autoimmunity. In this review, we highlight 
recent studies demonstrating the central role of the B cell antigen receptor 
(BCR), in coordination with other key pro-survival signals mediated by CD40, 
BAFF-R, TACI and/or TLRs, in regulating both negative and positive selection of 
autoreactive B cells. In particular, we show how altered antigen or 
co-stimulatory signaling can facilitate positive selection of transitional B 
cells with self-reactive BCRs, ultimately leading to their entry into the 
mature, naive B cell compartment. We propose a model wherein altered receptor 
signals (due to inherited genetic changes) leads: first, to enhanced positive 
selection of autoreactive cells into the naïve B cell repertoire; subsequently, 
to an increased probability of pathogenic germinal center responses in 
individuals with a broad range of autoimmune disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.10.001
PMCID: PMC4679457
PMID: 26605835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]