1. Dev Cell. 2015 Nov 23;35(4):444-57. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.10.023.

Network Analysis Identifies Mitochondrial Regulation of Epidermal 
Differentiation by MPZL3 and FDXR.

Bhaduri A(1), Ungewickell A(2), Boxer LD(3), Lopez-Pajares V(1), Zarnegar BJ(1), 
Khavari PA(4).

Author information:
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(2)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Division of Hematology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.
(3)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.
(4)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System, Palo 
Alto, CA 94304, USA. Electronic address: khavari@stanford.edu.

Current gene expression network approaches commonly focus on transcription 
factors (TFs), biasing network-based discovery efforts away from potentially 
important non-TF proteins. We developed proximity analysis, a network 
reconstruction method that uses topological constraints of scale-free, 
small-world biological networks to reconstruct relationships in eukaryotic 
systems, independent of subcellular localization. Proximity analysis identified 
MPZL3 as a highly connected hub that is strongly induced during epidermal 
differentiation. MPZL3 was essential for normal differentiation, acting 
downstream of p63, ZNF750, KLF4, and RCOR1, each of which bound near the MPZL3 
gene and controlled its expression. MPZL3 protein localized to mitochondria, 
where it interacted with FDXR, which was itself also found to be essential for 
differentiation. Together, MPZL3 and FDXR increased reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) to drive epidermal differentiation. ROS-induced differentiation is 
dependent upon promotion of FDXR enzymatic activity by MPZL3. ROS induction by 
the MPZL3 and FDXR mitochondrial proteins is therefore essential for epidermal 
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.10.023
PMCID: PMC4845910
PMID: 26609959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]