1. Sci Adv. 2015 Oct 9;1(9):e1500639. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500639. eCollection
2015  Oct.

Optogenetic pacing in Drosophila melanogaster.

Alex A(1), Li A(2), Tanzi RE(2), Zhou C(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, 
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA. ; Center for Photonics and Nanoelectronics, Lehigh 
University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA.
(2)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, 
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA. ; Center for Photonics and Nanoelectronics, Lehigh 
University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA. ; Bioengineering Program, Lehigh 
University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA.

Electrical stimulation is currently the gold standard for cardiac pacing. 
However, it is invasive and nonspecific for cardiac tissues. We recently 
developed a noninvasive cardiac pacing technique using optogenetic tools, which 
are widely used in neuroscience. Optogenetic pacing of the heart provides high 
spatial and temporal precisions, is specific for cardiac tissues, avoids 
artifacts associated with electrical stimulation, and therefore promises to be a 
powerful tool in basic cardiac research. We demonstrated optogenetic control of 
heart rhythm in a well-established model organism, Drosophila melanogaster. We 
developed transgenic flies expressing a light-gated cation channel, 
channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), specifically in their hearts and demonstrated 
successful optogenetic pacing of ChR2-expressing Drosophila at different 
developmental stages, including the larva, pupa, and adult stages. A high-speed 
and ultrahigh-resolution optical coherence microscopy imaging system that is 
capable of providing images at a rate of 130 frames/s with axial and transverse 
resolutions of 1.5 and 3.9 Î¼m, respectively, was used to noninvasively monitor 
Drosophila cardiac function and its response to pacing stimulation. The 
development of a noninvasive integrated optical pacing and imaging system 
provides a novel platform for performing research studies in developmental 
cardiology.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1500639
PMCID: PMC4646813
PMID: 26601299