1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2009 Nov 10;5(11):3105-13. doi: 10.1021/ct9001575. Epub 
2009 Oct 9.

An Improved Reaction Coordinate for Nucleic Acid Base Flipping Studies.

Song K(1), Campbell AJ(1), Bergonzo C(1), de Los Santos C(1), Grollman AP(1), 
Simmerling C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Department of Pharmacological Sciences, and Center 
for Structural Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 
11794-3400.

Base flipping is a common strategy utilized by many enzymes to gain access to 
the functional groups of nucleic acid bases in duplex DNA which are otherwise 
protected by the DNA backbone and hydrogen bonding with their partner bases. 
Several X-ray crystallography studies have revealed flipped conformations of 
nucleotides bound to enzymes. However, little is known about the base-flipping 
process itself, even less about the role of the enzymes. Computational studies 
have used umbrella sampling to elicit the free energy profile of the 
base-flipping process using a pseudodihedral angle to represent the reaction 
coordinate. In this study, we have used an unrestrained trajectory in which a 
flipped base spontaneously reinserted into the helix in order to evaluate and 
improve the previously defined pseudodihedral angle. Our modified pseudodihedral 
angles use a new atom selection to improve the numerical stability of the 
restraints and also provide better correlation to the extent of flipping 
observed in simulations. Furthermore, on the basis of the comparison of 
potential of mean force (PMF) generated using different reaction coordinates, we 
observed that the shape of a flipping PMF profile is strongly dependent on the 
definition of the reaction coordinate, even for the same data set.

DOI: 10.1021/ct9001575
PMCID: PMC5442445
PMID: 26609990