1. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:738020. doi: 10.1155/2015/738020. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

EPIPOX: Immunoinformatic Characterization of the Shared T-Cell Epitome between 
Variola Virus and Related Pathogenic Orthopoxviruses.

Molero-Abraham M(1), Glutting JP(1), Flower DR(2), Lafuente EM(1), Reche PA(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Unit of Immunology, Complutense University of Madrid, 
Pza. Ram√≥n y Cajal, s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(2)School of Life and Health Sciences, University of Aston, Aston Triangle, 
Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.

Concerns that variola viruses might be used as bioweapons have renewed the 
interest in developing new and safer smallpox vaccines. Variola virus genomes 
are now widely available, allowing computational characterization of the entire 
T-cell epitome and the use of such information to develop safe and yet effective 
vaccines. To this end, we identified 124 proteins shared between various species 
of pathogenic orthopoxviruses including variola minor and major, monkeypox, 
cowpox, and vaccinia viruses, and we targeted them for T-cell epitope 
prediction. We recognized 8,106, and 8,483 unique class I and class II 
MHC-restricted T-cell epitopes that are shared by all mentioned orthopoxviruses. 
Subsequently, we developed an immunological resource, EPIPOX, upon the predicted 
T-cell epitome. EPIPOX is freely available online and it has been designed to 
facilitate reverse vaccinology. Thus, EPIPOX includes key epitope-focused 
protein annotations: time point expression, presence of leader and transmembrane 
signals, and known location on outer membrane structures of the infective 
viruses. These features can be used to select specific T-cell epitopes suitable 
for experimental validation restricted by single MHC alleles, as combinations 
thereof, or by MHC supertypes.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/738020
PMCID: PMC4641182
PMID: 26605344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]