1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Nov 24;16(11):27796-815. doi: 10.3390/ijms161126068.

Molecular, Cellular and Functional Effects of Radiation-Induced Brain Injury: A 
Review.

Balentova S(1), Adamkov M(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Histology and Embryology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, 
Comenius University in Bratislava, Mala Hora 4, Martin 03601, Slovakia. 
balentova@jfmed.uniba.sk.
(2)Institute of Histology and Embryology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, 
Comenius University in Bratislava, Mala Hora 4, Martin 03601, Slovakia. 
adamkov@jfmed.uniba.sk.

Radiation therapy is the most effective non-surgical treatment of primary brain 
tumors and metastases. Preclinical studies have provided valuable insights into 
pathogenesis of radiation-induced injury to the central nervous system. 
Radiation-induced brain injury can damage neuronal, glial and vascular 
compartments of the brain and may lead to molecular, cellular and functional 
changes. Given its central role in memory and adult neurogenesis, the majority 
of studies have focused on the hippocampus. These findings suggested that 
hippocampal avoidance in cranial radiotherapy prevents radiation-induced 
cognitive impairment of patients. However, multiple rodent studies have shown 
that this problem is more complex. As the radiation-induced cognitive impairment 
reflects hippocampal and non-hippocampal compartments, it is of critical 
importance to investigate molecular, cellular and functional modifications in 
various brain regions as well as their integration at clinically relevant doses 
and schedules. We here provide a literature overview, including our previously 
published results, in order to support the translation of preclinical findings 
to clinical practice, and improve the physical and mental status of patients 
with brain tumors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms161126068
PMCID: PMC4661926
PMID: 26610477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]