1. Curr Genet. 2016 May;62(2):301-7. doi: 10.1007/s00294-015-0544-4. Epub 2015
Nov  28.

Responses to phosphate deprivation in yeast cells.

Yadav KK(1)(2), Singh N(1)(2), Rajasekharan R(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Lipidomic Centre, Department of Lipid Science, CSIR-Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore, Karnataka, 570020, India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-CFTRI, Mysore, 
India.
(3)Lipidomic Centre, Department of Lipid Science, CSIR-Central Food 
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore, Karnataka, 570020, India. 
ram@cftri.com.
(4)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-CFTRI, Mysore, 
India. ram@cftri.com.

Inorganic phosphate is an essential nutrient because it is required for the 
biosynthesis of nucleotides, phospholipids and metabolites in energy metabolism. 
During phosphate starvation, phosphatases play a major role in phosphate 
acquisition by hydrolyzing phosphorylated macromolecules. In Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, PHM8 (YER037W), a lysophosphatidic acid phosphatase, plays an 
important role in phosphate acquisition by hydrolyzing lysophosphatidic acid and 
nucleotide monophosphate that results in accumulation of triacylglycerol and 
nucleotides under phosphate limiting conditions. Under phosphate limiting 
conditions, it is transcriptionally regulated by Pho4p, a phosphate-responsive 
transcription factor. In this review, we focus on triacylglycerol metabolism in 
transcription factors deletion mutants involved in phosphate metabolism and 
propose a link between phosphate and triacylglycerol metabolism. Deletion of 
these transcription factors results in an increase in triacylglycerol level. 
Based on these observations, we suggest that PHM8 is responsible for the 
increase in triacylglycerol in phosphate metabolising gene deletion mutants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-015-0544-4
PMID: 26615590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]