1. Oncol Lett. 2015 Oct;10(4):2055-2062. doi: 10.3892/ol.2015.3551. Epub 2015 Jul
 30.

microRNA-32 induces radioresistance by targeting DAB2IP and regulating autophagy 
in prostate cancer cells.

Liao H(1), Xiao Y(2), Hu Y(3), Xiao Y(1), Yin Z(1), Liu L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Loudi Central Hospital of Hunan, Loudi, Hunan 417000, 
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Loudi Central Hospital of Hunan, Loudi, Hunan 
417000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya 
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. 
China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Loudi Central Hospital of Hunan, Loudi, Hunan 417000, 
P.R. China.

The aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs/miRs) has been found in numerous 
cancer types. miR-32 is an oncomiR in prostate cancer (PCa), however, the 
mechanisms by which miR-32 functions as a regulator of radiotherapy response and 
resistance in PCa are largely unknown. In the present study, it was found that 
DAB2 interacting protein (DAB2IP), the miR-32-dependent tumor-suppressor gene, 
was downregulated and induced autophagy and inhibited radiotherapy-induced 
apoptosis in PCa cells. miR-32 expression was upregulated or overexpressed in 
PCa, and miR-32 inhibited DAB2IP expression through a direct binding site within 
the DAB2IP 3' untranslated region. miR-32 mimics enhanced tumor cell survival 
and decreased radiosensitivity in the PCa cells, which were reversed by miR-32 
inhibitor. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that overexpressed miR-32, 
consistent with the DAB2IP-knockdown results, reduced ionizing radiation 
(IR)-induced cell apoptosis, which was restored by 4 nM brefeldin A treatment. 
More significantly, the overexpression of miR-32 and the knockdown of DAB2IP 
enhanced autophagy in the IR-treated PCa cells. miR-32 regulated the expression 
of autophagy-related proteins, such as DAB2IP, Beclin 1 and Light chain 3Î² I/II, 
as well as phosphorylation of S6 kinase and mammalian target of rapamycin. In 
conclusion, these data provide novel insights into the mechanisms governing the 
regulation of DAB2IP expression by miR-32 and their possible contribution to 
autophagy and radioresistance in PCa.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3551
PMCID: PMC4579868
PMID: 26622795