1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 1;5:17288. doi: 10.1038/srep17288.

Selective targeting of nuclear receptor FXR by avermectin analogues with 
therapeutic effects on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Jin L(1)(1), Wang R(1), Zhu Y(1), Zheng W(1), Han Y(1), Guo F(1), Ye FB(1), Li 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell 
Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Fujian 361005, 
China.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become a predictive factor of 
death from many diseases. Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is an ideal target for 
NAFLD drug development due to its crucial roles in lipid metabolism. The aim of 
this work is to examine the molecular mechanisms and functional roles of FXR 
modulation by avermectin analogues in regulating metabolic syndromes like NAFLD. 
We found that among avermectin analogues studied, the analogues that can bind 
and activate FXR are effective in regulating metabolic parameters tested, 
including reducing hepatic lipid accumulation, lowering serum cholesterol and 
glucose levels, and improving insulin sensitivity, in a FXR dependent manner. 
Mechanistically, the avermectin analogues that interact with FXR exhibited 
features as partial agonists, with distinctive properties in modulating 
coregulator recruitment. Structural features critical for avermectin analogues 
to selectively bind to FXR were also revealed. This study indicated that in 
addition to antiparasitic activity, avermectin analogues are promising drug 
candidates to treat metabolism syndrome including NAFLD by directly targeting 
FXR. Additionally, the structural features that discriminate the selective 
binding of FXR by avermectin analogues may provide a unique safe approach to 
design drugs targeting FXR signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17288
PMCID: PMC4664883
PMID: 26620317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]