1. Mol Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep;3(5):1073-1079. doi: 10.3892/mco.2015.580. Epub 2015 
Jun 11.

Mutational analysis of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor tyrosine kinase 
domain in non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Gately K(1), Forde L(1), Gray S(1), Morris D(2), Corvin A(3), Tewari P(4), 
O'Byrne K(5).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Oncology Research Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity 
College Dublin, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.
(2)Neuropsychiatric Genetics Research Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
Trinity College Dublin, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.
(3)Discipline of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Republic 
of Ireland.
(4)Molecular Pathology Research Group, Trinity College, Coombe Womens and 
Infants University Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.
(5)Thoracic Oncology Research Group, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity 
College Dublin, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Republic of Ireland ; Medical 
Oncology, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Queensland University of Technology, 
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

The insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) pathway plays an important 
role in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and also provides 
a mechanism of resistance to targeted therapies. IGF1R is therefore an ideal 
therapeutic target and several inhibitors have entered clinical trials. However, 
thus far the response to these inhibitors has been poor, highlighting the 
importance of predictive biomarkers to identify patient cohorts who will benefit 
from these targeted agents. It is well-documented that mutations and/or 
deletions in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase (TK) 
domain predict sensitivity of NSCLC patients to EGFR TK inhibitors. 
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IGF pathway have been associated 
with disease, including breast and prostate cancer. The aim of the present study 
was to elucidate whether the IGF1R TK domain harbours SNPs, somatic mutations or 
deletions in NSCLC patients and correlates the mutation status to patient 
clinicopathological data and prognosis. Initially 100 NSCLC patients were 
screened for mutations/deletions in the IGF1R TK domain (exons 16-21) by 
sequencing analysis. Following the identification of SNP rs2229765, a further 98 
NSCLC patients and 866 healthy disease-free control patients were genotyped 
using an SNP assay. The synonymous SNP (rs2229765) was the only aberrant base 
change identified in the IGF1R TK domain of 100 NSCLC patients initially 
analysed. SNP rs2229765 was detected in exon 16 and was found to have no 
significant association between IGF1R expression and survival. The GA genotype 
was identified in 53.5 and 49.4% of NSCLC patients and control individuals, 
respectively. No significant difference was found in the genotype (P=0.5487) or 
allele (P=0.9082) frequencies between the case and control group. The present 
findings indicate that in contrast to the EGFR TK domain, the IGF1R TK domain is 
not frequently mutated in NSCLC patients. The synonymous SNP (rs2229765) had no 
significant association between IGF1R expression and survival in the cohort of 
NSCLC patients.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2015.580
PMCID: PMC4534863
PMID: 26623053