1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Nov;94(47):e2160. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002160.

High Blood Pressure and All-Cause and Cardiovascular Disease Mortalities in 
Community-Dwelling Older Adults.

Wu CY(1), Hu HY, Chou YJ, Huang N, Chou YC, Li CP.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital (C-YW); 
Institute of Public Health and Department of Public Health, National Yang Ming 
University (C-YW, H-YH, Y-JC, Y-CC); Department of Dermatology, Taipei City 
Hospital, Heping Fuyou Branch (C-YW); Department of Education and Research, 
Taipei City Hospital (H-YH, NH, Y-CC); Institute of Hospital and Health Care 
Administration, National Yang-Ming University (NH); Division of Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital (C-PL); 
and National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan (C-PL).

Although hypertension is common among older adults, the optimal blood pressure 
(BP) for survival in older adults remains unclear. We attempt to use a large 
cohort to assess the relationship between BP and mortality and to gain insight 
into what level of BP is required for optimal survival in older adults.A total 
of 77,389 community-dwelling adults, aged ≥65 years, were followed between 2006 
and 2010. Mortality was determined using matching cohort identifications with 
national death files. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to 
evaluate the relationship of BP with all-cause, cardiovascular disease (CVD), 
and expanded-CVD mortalities.The mortality risks of the stage 2-3 hypertension 
group were substantial (all-cause mortality: hazard ratio [HR]: 1.23; 95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 1.10-1.37; CVDs mortality: HR: 1.31; 95% CI: 
1.05-1.64; expanded-CVDs mortality: HR: 1.40; 95% CI: 1.15-1.71). The 
cardiovascular and expanded-cardiovascular mortality risks were lowest when 
systolic blood pressures were 120 to 129 mm Hg, and increased significantly when 
systolic blood pressures (SBPs) were ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BPs were ≥90 mm Hg. 
A J-curve phenomenon for SBP on CVD and expanded-CVD mortality was observed. The 
impacts of stage 2-3 hypertension on mortality risks were significantly 
increased among women. The mortality risks of hypertension were not attenuated 
with older age.This study provides insight for identifying the optimal BP for 
survival in older adults, and extends the knowledge of the impacts of 
hypertension on mortality risks among women and the older adults.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002160
PMCID: PMC5059018
PMID: 26632749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.