1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2016 Feb;389(2):233-41. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-015-1190-6. Epub 2015 Dec 5.

Effects of the adenosinergic system on the expression and acquisition of 
sensitization to conditioned place preference in morphine-conditioned rats.

Listos J(1), Talarek S(2), Listos P(3), Orzelska J(2), Łupina M(2), Fidecka 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics, Medical University of 
Lublin, Chodźki 4a St., 20-093, Lublin, Poland. a.listos@umlub.pl.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics, Medical University of 
Lublin, Chodźki 4a St., 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathological Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Life Sciences, Głęboka 30 St., 20-612, Lublin, Poland.

In the presented study, we attempt to investigate if the sensitization to 
conditioned place preference (CPP) induced by low doses of morphine was 
developed in rats which have been previously conditioned with morphine. The 
experiments were performed in the CPP test. Firstly, it has been demonstrated 
that administration of ineffective dose of morphine on the 9th day induces the 
increase in time spent of rats at a morphine-paired compartment, confirming that 
sensitization to CPP has been developed in these animals. Secondly, it has been 
shown that stimulation of A1 receptor significantly inhibits the expression of 
morphine-induced of sensitization, and blockade of these receptors produces the 
opposite effect. Finally, it has been indicated that both stimulation and 
blockade of A1 and/or A2A receptors inhibit the acquisition of sensitization to 
CPP. The obtained results have strongly supported the significance of 
adenosinergic system in both expression and acquisition of studied 
sensitization. These results seem to be important for the identification of 
connections in the central nervous system which can help finding new strategies 
to attenuate rewarding action of morphine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-015-1190-6
PMCID: PMC4715847
PMID: 26638209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]