1. Br J Radiol. 2016;89(1058):20150332. doi: 10.1259/bjr.20150332. Epub 2015 Dec 
14.

Variations in CT determination of target volume with active breath co-ordinate 
in radiotherapy for post-operative gastric cancer.

Li GC(1)(2), Zhang Z(1)(2), Ma XJ(1)(2), Yu XL(1)(2), Hu WG(1)(2), Wang 
JZ(1)(2), Li QW(1)(2), Liang LP(1)(2), Shen LJ(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Fan 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)2 Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate interobserver and inter-CT variations in using the 
active breath co-ordinate technique in the determination of clinical tumour 
volume (CTV) and normal organs in post-operative gastric cancer radiotherapy.
METHODS: Ten gastric cancer patients were enrolled in our study, and four 
radiation oncologists independently determined the CTVs and organs at risk based 
on the CT simulation data. To determine interobserver and inter-CT variation, we 
evaluated the maximum dimensions, derived volume and distance between the 
centres of mass (CMs) of the CTVs. We assessed the reliability in CTV 
determination among the observers by conformity index (CI).
RESULTS: The average volumes ± standard deviation (cm(3)) of the CTV, liver, 
left kidney and right kidney were 674 ± 138 (range, 332-969), 1000 ± 138 (range, 
714-1320), 149 ± 13 (range, 104-183) and 141 ± 21 (range, 110-186) cm(3), 
respectively. The average inter-CT distances between the CMs of the CTV, liver, 
left kidney and right kidney were 0.40, 0.56, 0.65 and 0.6 cm, respectively; the 
interobserver values were 0.98, 0.53, 0.16 and 0.15 cm, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In the volume size of CTV for post-operative gastric cancer, there 
were significant variations among multiple observers, whereas there was no 
variation between different CTs. The slices in which variations more likely 
occur were the slices of the lower verge of the hilum of the spleen and porta 
hepatis, then the paraoesophageal lymph nodes region and abdominal aorta, and 
the inferior vena cava, and the variation in the craniocaudal orientation from 
the interobserver was more predominant than that from inter-CT.
ADVANCES IN KNOWLEDGE: First, this is the first study to evaluate the 
interobserver and inter-CT variations in the determination of the CTV and normal 
organs in gastric cancer with the use of the active breath co-ordinate 
technique. Second, we analysed the region where variations most likely occur. 
Third, we investigated the influence of interobserver variation on the dose 
distribution.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20150332
PMCID: PMC4985190
PMID: 26654032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]