1. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Feb;38:214.e1-214.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.026. Epub 2015 Oct 31.

Comparative blood transcriptome analysis in idiopathic and LRRK2 
G2019S-associated Parkinson's disease.

Infante J(1), Prieto C(2), Sierra M(3), Sánchez-Juan P(3), González-Aramburu 
I(3), Sánchez-Quintana C(4), Berciano J(3), Combarros O(3), Sainz J(5).

Author information:
(1)Service of Neurology, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red 
de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jinfante@humv.es.
(2)Bioinformatics Service, NUCLEUS, University of Salamanca (USAL), Salamanca, 
Spain.
(3)Service of Neurology, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain; Centro de Investigación en Red 
de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Service of Neurology, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IDIVAL), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain.
(5)Institute of Biomedicine and Biotechnology of Cantabria (IBBTEC), Spanish 
National Research Council (CSIC), Santander, Spain.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) carrying the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 
gene provide an opportunity of studying in a homogeneous setting the molecular 
pathways involved in the pathogenesis of common idiopathic forms of PD. However, 
whether common mechanisms are involved in both conditions in not known. Here, we 
compared genome-wide gene expression (RNA sequencing) in peripheral blood 
between PD patients carrying the G2019S mutation of the LRRK2 gene and 
idiopathic PD cases, to deepen in the understanding of this topic. In addition, 
we compared the blood transcriptome between 2 cohorts of carriers of the G2019S 
mutation (symptomatic and asymptomatic) and 2 cohorts of noncarriers 
(symptomatic and asymptomatic) for detecting transcriptomic changes attributable 
to the presence of the G2019S mutation. We searched for gene enrichment in 
Reactome or Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways. We found that 
despite some overlap, peripheral blood transcriptome differs widely between 
idiopathic and LRRK2 G2019S-associated PD, with only 4 deregulated pathways 
shared by both conditions (complement and coagulation cascades, cell adhesion 
molecules, hematopoietic cell lineage, and extracellular matrix organization). 
Changes in the blood transcriptome observed in asymptomatic carriers of the 
mutation included 6 genes known to be associated with PD in genome-wide 
association studies and also pathways related with immunity. Our findings 
emphasize the notion that PD is likely a pathogenically heterogeneous condition 
and suggest the existence of specific mechanisms involved in LRRK2-associated 
PD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.10.026
PMID: 26675812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]