1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1862(2):252-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.12.005. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Mitochondrial ClpP activity is required for cisplatin resistance in human cells.

Zhang Y(1), Maurizi MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Electronic address: 
mmaurizi@helix.nih.gov.

In human cells ClpP and ClpX are imported into the mitochondrial matrix, where 
they interact to form the ATP-dependent protease ClpXP and play a role in the 
mitochondrial unfolded protein response. We find that reducing the levels of 
mitochondrial ClpP or ClpX renders human cancer cells more sensitive to 
cisplatin, a widely used anti-cancer drug. Conversely, overexpression of HClpP 
desensitizes cells to cisplatin. Overexpression of inactive HClpP-S97A had no 
effect. Cisplatin resistance correlated with decreased cellular accumulation of 
cisplatin and decreased levels of diguanosine-cisplatin adducts in both 
mitochondrial and genomic DNA. In contrast, higher levels of cisplatin-DNA 
adducts were found in cells in which HClpP had been depleted. Changes in the 
levels of ClpP had no effect on the levels of CTR1, a copper transporter that 
contributes to cisplatin uptake. However, the levels of ATP7A and ATP7B, copper 
efflux pumps that help eliminate cisplatin from cells, were increased when HClpP 
was overexpressed. HClpP levels were elevated in cervical carcinoma cells 
(KB-CP20) and hepatoma cells (BEL-7404-CP20) independently selected for 
cisplatin resistance. The data indicate that robust HClpXP activity positively 
affects the ability of cells to efflux cisplatin and suggest that targeting 
HClpP or HClpX would offer a novel mechanism for sensitizing cancer cells to 
cisplatin.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.12.005
PMCID: PMC4788106
PMID: 26675528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]