1. Cell Rep. 2015 Dec 15;13(10):2107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.11.010. Epub 
2015 Dec 7.

Direct In Vivo Manipulation and Imaging of Calcium Transients in Neutrophils 
Identify a Critical Role for Leading-Edge Calcium Flux.

Beerman RW(1), Matty MA(2), Au GG(1), Looger LL(3), Choudhury KR(4), Keller 
PJ(3), Tobin DM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA; University Program in Genetics and Genomics, Duke University, 
Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA 20147, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA; Department of Immunology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 
Electronic address: david.tobin@duke.edu.

Comment in
    Zebrafish. 2016 Aug;13(4):374-5. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2016.29004.mat.

Calcium signaling has long been associated with key events of immunity, 
including chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and activation. However, imaging and 
manipulation of calcium flux in motile immune cells in live animals remain 
challenging. Using light-sheet microscopy for in vivo calcium imaging in 
zebrafish, we observe characteristic patterns of calcium flux triggered by 
distinct events, including phagocytosis of pathogenic bacteria and migration of 
neutrophils toward inflammatory stimuli. In contrast to findings from ex vivo 
studies, we observe enriched calcium influx at the leading edge of migrating 
neutrophils. To directly manipulate calcium dynamics in vivo, we have developed 
transgenic lines with cell-specific expression of the mammalian TRPV1 channel, 
enabling ligand-gated, reversible, and spatiotemporal control of calcium influx. 
We find that controlled calcium influx can function to help define the 
neutrophil's leading edge. Cell-specific TRPV1 expression may have broad utility 
for precise control of calcium dynamics in other immune cell types and 
organisms.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.11.010
PMCID: PMC4684902
PMID: 26673320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]