1. Clin Genet. 2016 May;89(5):597-602. doi: 10.1111/cge.12718. Epub 2016 Mar 23.

Association analysis between HFM1 variation and primary ovarian insufficiency in 
Chinese women.

Pu D(1), Wang C(1), Cao J(1), Shen Y(2), Jiang H(3), Liu J(1), Wu BL(2)(4), 
Zhang W(2)(3), Wu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University / 
Jiangsu Province Hospital / Jiangsu Women and Children Health Hospital, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Reproductive Medicine Center, the 105th hospital of PLA, Hefei, China.
(4)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Department of Pathology and 
Institute of Biomedical Science, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.

HFM1 is a meiosis-specific gene and expressed in germ-line tissues. More 
recently, evidence has indicated that variations in HFM1 gene could be causative 
for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI), also known as premature ovarian 
failure. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between HFM1 
gene variants and sporadic POI in Chinese women. A total of 138 POI patients and 
316 healthy controls (matched for ethnic background, sex, and age of the 
patients) were recruited in this study. We screened the entire HFM1 coding 
region by direct sequencing in all subjects and identified six variants of HFM1 
gene in POI group, namely c.148G>A/p.Glu50Lys, c.1241A>C/p.His414Pro, 
c.2325C>A/p.Phe775Leu, c.3367T>C/p.Ser1123Pro, c.3580C>T/p.Arg1194Cys, and 
c.1686-1G>C. The variation rate of HFM1 in POI group is significantly higher 
than control group (p < 0.01). The p.His414Pro and p.Arg1194Cys were predicted 
to be probably damaging to the HFM1 protein function, while p.Glu50Lys, 
p.Phe775Leu and p.Ser1123Pro mutants might not have any deleterious effect on 
the structure or function of the protein by online predictors. Taken together, 
our data suggested that HFM1 gene might be associated with primary ovarian 
insufficiency in Chinese population.

Â© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12718
PMID: 26679638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]