1. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 17;5:18375. doi: 10.1038/srep18375.

Identification of potential mitochondrial CLPXP protease interactors and 
substrates suggests its central role in energy metabolism.

Fischer F(1), Langer JD(2), Osiewacz HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Faculty for Biosciences &Cluster of 
Excellence 'Macromolecular Complexes' Frankfurt, Institute for Molecular 
Biosciences, Max-von-Laue-Str. 9, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Membrane Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 
Max-von-Laue-Str. 3, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.

Maintenance of mitochondria is achieved by several mechanisms, including the 
regulation of mitochondrial proteostasis. The matrix protease CLPXP, involved in 
protein quality control, has been implicated in ageing and disease. However, 
particularly due to the lack of knowledge of CLPXP's substrate spectrum, only 
little is known about the pathways and mechanisms controlled by this protease. 
Here we report the first comprehensive identification of potential mitochondrial 
CLPXP in vivo interaction partners and substrates using a combination of tandem 
affinity purification and differential proteomics. This analysis reveals that 
CLPXP in the fungal ageing model Podospora anserina is mainly associated with 
metabolic pathways in mitochondria, e.g. components of the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex and the tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as subunits of 
electron transport chain complex I. These data suggest a possible function of 
mitochondrial CLPXP in the control and/or maintenance of energy metabolism. 
Since bioenergetic alterations are a common feature of neurodegenerative 
diseases, cancer, and ageing, our data comprise an important resource for 
specific studies addressing the role of CLPXP in these adverse processes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18375
PMCID: PMC4683621
PMID: 26679294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]