1. Cancer Sci. 2016 Mar;107(3):207-16. doi: 10.1111/cas.12866. Epub 2016 Feb 13.

Invariant NKT cells are resistant to circulating CD15+ myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells in patients with head and neck cancer.

Horinaka A(1)(2), Sakurai D(1), Ihara F(1), Makita Y(1), Kunii N(1), Motohashi 
S(3), Nakayama T(2), Okamoto Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Medical Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chiba, Japan.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are a heterogeneous population of 
immature and progenitor myeloid cells with an immunosuppressive role in various 
types of cancer, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). 
However, the effect on the host immune system, especially on invariant NKT 
(iNKT) cells with potent anti-tumor activity, remains unclear. In this study, we 
investigated the effects of circulating MDSC subsets on the peripheral 
lymphocytes of patients with head and neck tumors. A significant accumulation of 
CD15+ granulocytic MDSC (G-MDSC) and CD14+ monocytic MDSC (M-MDSC) was 
demonstrated in HNSCC patients. The percentage of G-MDSC showed an inverse 
correlation with the percentage of T cells in the peripheral blood. The 
increased G-MDSC was significantly associated with advanced clinical stage and 
poor prognosis of HNSCC patients. The proliferation and viability of T cells 
were suppressed by CD15+ cells, and the suppression was reversed by adding the 
hydrogen peroxide scavenger catalase. However, iNKT cell activation upon 
α-galactosylceramide (αGalCer) stimulation was not affected by the presence or 
absence of CD15+ G-MDSC. These results indicate that increased G-MDSC negatively 
affects peripheral T cell immunity, but not iNKT cells, in HNSCC patients, and 
that T cells are more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide produced by G-MDSC than 
iNKT cells. Cancer immunotherapy designed to enhance the antitumor activity of 
iNKT cells by stimulation with αGalCer may remain effective in the presence of 
G-MDSC.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.12866
PMCID: PMC4814259
PMID: 26679292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]