1. Structure. 2016 Jan 5;24(1):57-69. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.10.018. Epub 2015
Dec  3.

Parallel Evolution of Chemokine Binding by Structurally Related Herpesvirus 
Decoy Receptors.

Lubman OY(1), Fremont DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biophysics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; 
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: fremont@wustl.edu.

A wide variety of pathogens targets chemokine signaling networks in order to 
disrupt host immune surveillance and defense. Here, we report a structural and 
mutational analysis of rodent herpesvirus Peru encoded R17, a potent chemokine 
inhibitor that sequesters CC and C chemokines with high affinity. R17 consists 
of a pair of β-sandwich domains linked together by a bridging sheet, which form 
an acidic binding cleft for the chemokine CCL3 on the opposite face of a basic 
surface cluster that binds glycosaminoglycans. R17 promiscuously engages 
chemokines primarily through the same N-loop determinants used for host receptor 
recognition while residues located in the chemokine 40s loop drive kinetically 
stable complex formation. The core fold adopted by R17 is unexpectedly similar 
to that of the M3 chemokine decoy receptor encoded by MHV-68, although, 
strikingly, neither the location of ligand engagement nor the stoichiometry of 
binding is conserved, suggesting that their functions evolved independently.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2015.10.018
PMCID: PMC7039123
PMID: 26671708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]