1. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Feb 1;27(3):549-71. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-11-0754. Epub
2015  Dec 17.

An ensemble of specifically targeted proteins stabilizes cortical microtubules 
in the human parasite Toxoplasma gondii.

Liu J(1), He Y(1), Benmerzouga I(2), Sullivan WJ Jr(2), Morrissette NS(3), 
Murray JM(1), Hu K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697.
(4)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405 
kehu@indiana.edu.

Although all microtubules within a single cell are polymerized from virtually 
identical subunits, different microtubule populations carry out specialized and 
diverse functions, including directional transport, force generation, and 
cellular morphogenesis. Functional differentiation requires specific targeting 
of associated proteins to subsets or even subregions of these polymers. The 
cytoskeleton of Toxoplasma gondii, an important human parasite, contains at 
least five distinct tubulin-based structures. In this work, we define the 
differential localization of proteins along the cortical microtubules of T. 
gondii, established during daughter biogenesis and regulated by protein 
expression and exchange. These proteins distinguish cortical from mitotic 
spindle microtubules, even though the assembly of these subsets is 
contemporaneous during cell division. Finally, proteins associated with cortical 
microtubules collectively protect the stability of the polymers with a 
remarkable degree of functional redundancy.

© 2016 Liu, He, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for 
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it 
is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E15-11-0754
PMCID: PMC4751604
PMID: 26680740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]