1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):3934-46. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6598.

Targeting a novel domain in podoplanin for inhibiting platelet-mediated tumor 
metastasis.

Sekiguchi T(1)(2), Takemoto A(1), Takagi S(1), Takatori K(1)(2), Sato S(1), 
Takami M(1), Fujita N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Chemotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese 
Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

Podoplanin/Aggrus is a sialoglycoprotein expressed in various cancers. We 
previously identified podoplanin as a key factor in tumor-induced platelet 
aggregation. Podoplanin-mediated platelet aggregation enhances tumor growth and 
metastasis by secreting growth factors and by forming tumor emboli in the 
microvasculature. Thus, precise analysis of the mechanisms of 
podoplanin-mediated platelet aggregation is critical for developing anti-tumor 
therapies. Here we report the discovery of a novel platelet aggregation-inducing 
domain, PLAG4 (81-EDLPT-85). PLAG4 has high homology to the previously reported 
PLAG3 and contributes to the binding of its platelet receptor CLEC-2. Mutant 
analyses indicated that PLAG4 exhibits a predominant platelet-aggregating 
function relative to PLAG3 and that conserved Glu81/Asp82/Thr85 residues in 
PLAG4 are indispensable for CLEC-2 binding. By establishing 
anti-PLAG4-neutralizing monoclonal antibodies, we confirmed its role in CLEC-2 
binding, platelet aggregation, and tumor emboli formation. Our results suggest 
the requirement of simultaneous inhibition of PLAG3/4 for complete suppression 
of podoplanin-mediated tumor growth and metastasis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6598
PMCID: PMC4826181
PMID: 26684030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest.