1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Mar 1;25(5):853-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv611. Epub 2015 Dec
 17.

HSAN1 mutations in serine palmitoyltransferase reveal a close 
structure-function-phenotype relationship.

Bode H(1), Bourquin F(2), Suriyanarayanan S(3), Wei Y(4), Alecu I(1), Othman 
A(3), Von Eckardstein A(5), Hornemann T(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich, Center for 
Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich, Competence 
Center for Personalized Medicine (CC-PM), Molecular Translation and Biomedicine 
(MTB), and.
(4)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich.
(5)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich, Center for 
Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 
Competence Center for Personalized Medicine (CC-PM), Molecular Translation and 
Biomedicine (MTB), and.
(6)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich, Center for 
Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 
Competence Center for Personalized Medicine (CC-PM), Molecular Translation and 
Biomedicine (MTB), and thorsten.hornemann@usz.ch.

Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type 1 (HSAN1) is a rare autosomal 
dominant inherited peripheral neuropathy caused by mutations in the SPTLC1 and 
SPTLC2 subunits of serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT). The mutations induce a 
permanent shift in the substrate preference from L-serine to L-alanine, which 
results in the pathological formation of atypical and neurotoxic 
1-deoxy-sphingolipids (1-deoxySL). Here we compared the enzymatic properties of 
11 SPTLC1 and six SPTLC2 mutants using a uniform isotope labelling approach. In 
total, eight SPT mutants (STPLC1p.C133W, p.C133Y, p.S331F, p.S331Y and 
SPTLC2p.A182P, p.G382V, p.S384F, p.I504F) were associated with increased 
1-deoxySL synthesis. Despite earlier reports, canonical activity with l-serine 
was not reduced in any of the investigated SPT mutants. Three variants 
(SPTLC1p.S331F/Y and SPTLC2p.I505Y) showed an increased canonical activity and 
increased formation of C20 sphingoid bases. These three mutations are associated 
with an exceptionally severe HSAN1 phenotype, and increased C20 sphingosine 
levels were also confirmed in plasma of patients. A principal component analysis 
of the analysed sphingoid bases clustered the mutations into three separate 
entities. Each cluster was related to a distinct clinical outcome (no, mild and 
severe HSAN1 phenotype). A homology model based on the protein structure of the 
prokaryotic SPT recapitulated the same grouping on a structural level. Mutations 
associated with the mild form clustered around the active site, whereas 
mutations associated with the severe form were located on the surface of the 
protein. In conclusion, we showed that HSAN1 mutations in SPT have distinct 
biochemical properties, which allowed for the prediction of the clinical 
symptoms on the basis of the plasma sphingoid base profile.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv611
PMID: 26681808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]