1. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2015 Dec;22(4):295-301. doi: 10.1016/j.spen.2015.10.005.
 Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Current Therapeutic Options in Sturge-Weber Syndrome.

Comi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD; 
Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: comi@kennedykrieger.org.

Sturge-Weber syndrome is a vascular malformation syndrome consisting of a facial 
port-wine birthmark associated with malformed leptomeningeal blood vessels and a 
choroid "angioma" of the eye. It is a rare neurocutaneous disorder that occurs 
sporadically, is not inherited, and is caused by a somatic mosaic mutation in 
GNAQ. In patients with Sturge-Weber syndrome, brain involvement typically 
presents in infancy with seizures, strokes, and stroke-like episodes, and a 
range of neurologic impairments. Standard treatment includes laser therapy for 
the birthmark, control of glaucoma through eyedrops or surgery, and the use of 
anticonvulsants. Increasingly low-dose aspirin is offered. Treatment with 
propranolol has been tried generally without the dramatic results seen in 
hemangiomas. Treatment with an anticonvulsant or low-dose aspirin or both before 
the onset of seizures is an option. Surgical resection may be offered to those 
whose seizures are medically refractory. Endocrine, medical rehabilitation and 
cognitive comorbidities are important to manage. In the future, new therapeutic 
options are likely to be offered stemming from preclinical studies and small 
pilot clinical trials currently ongoing. Discovery of the causative somatic 
mosaic mutation suggests new insights into the pathophysiology of this vascular 
malformation disorder, and potential novel treatment strategies for future 
study. The mutation results in constitutive overactivation of the 
Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK and the HIPPO-YAP pathways and inhibitors of these pathways may 
in the future prove useful in the treatment of Sturge-Weber syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.spen.2015.10.005
PMCID: PMC4943027
PMID: 26706016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]