1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 29;44(4):1691-702. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1376. Epub 
2015 Dec 23.

PARP-2 domain requirements for DNA damage-dependent activation and localization 
to sites of DNA damage.

Riccio AA(1), Cingolani G(1), Pascal JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer 
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sidney Kimmel Cancer 
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA 
john.pascal@jefferson.edu.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-2 (PARP-2) is one of three human PARP enzymes that 
are potently activated during the cellular DNA damage response (DDR). DDR-PARPs 
detect DNA strand breaks, leading to a dramatic increase in their catalytic 
production of the posttranslational modification poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) to 
facilitate repair. There are limited biochemical and structural insights into 
the functional domains of PARP-2, which has restricted our understanding of how 
PARP-2 is specialized toward specific repair pathways. PARP-2 has a modular 
architecture composed of a C-terminal catalytic domain (CAT), a central 
Trp-Gly-Arg (WGR) domain and an N-terminal region (NTR). Although the NTR is 
generally considered the key DNA-binding domain of PARP-2, we report here that 
all three domains of PARP-2 collectively contribute to interaction with DNA 
damage. Biophysical, structural and biochemical analyses indicate that the NTR 
is natively disordered, and is only required for activation on specific types of 
DNA damage. Interestingly, the NTR is not essential for PARP-2 localization to 
sites of DNA damage. Rather, the WGR and CAT domains function together to 
recruit PARP-2 to sites of DNA breaks. Our study differentiates the functions of 
PARP-2 domains from those of PARP-1, the other major DDR-PARP, and highlights 
the specialization of the multi-domain architectures of DDR-PARPs.

Â© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkv1376
PMCID: PMC4770219
PMID: 26704974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]