1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 30;10(12):e0146035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146035. 
eCollection 2015.

A Single Amino Acid Deletion (ΔF1502) in the S6 Segment of CaV2.1 Domain III 
Associated with Congenital Ataxia Increases Channel Activity and Promotes Ca2+ 
Influx.

Bahamonde MI(1), Serra SA(1), Drechsel O(2)(3), Rahman R(2)(3), Marcé-Grau A(4), 
Prieto M(1), Ossowski S(2)(3), Macaya A(4), Fernández-Fernández JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratori de Fisiologia Molecular i Canalopaties, Departament de Ciències 
Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Genomic and Epigenomic Variation in Disease Group, Centre for Genomic 
Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the CACNA1A gene, encoding the pore-forming CaV2.1 (P/Q-type) 
channel α1A subunit, result in heterogeneous human neurological disorders, 
including familial and sporadic hemiplegic migraine along with episodic and 
progressive forms of ataxia. Hemiplegic Migraine (HM) mutations induce 
gain-of-channel function, mainly by shifting channel activation to lower 
voltages, whereas ataxia mutations mostly produce loss-of-channel function. 
However, some HM-linked gain-of-function mutations are also associated to 
congenital ataxia and/or cerebellar atrophy, including the deletion of a highly 
conserved phenylalanine located at the S6 pore region of α1A domain III 
(ΔF1502). Functional studies of ΔF1502 CaV2.1 channels, expressed in Xenopus 
oocytes, using the non-physiological Ba2+ as the charge carrier have only 
revealed discrete alterations in channel function of unclear pathophysiological 
relevance. Here, we report a second case of congenital ataxia linked to the 
ΔF1502 α1A mutation, detected by whole-exome sequencing, and analyze its 
functional consequences on CaV2.1 human channels heterologously expressed in 
mammalian tsA-201 HEK cells, using the physiological permeant ion Ca2+. ΔF1502 
strongly decreases the voltage threshold for channel activation (by ~ 21 mV), 
allowing significantly higher Ca2+ current densities in a range of depolarized 
voltages with physiological relevance in neurons, even though maximal Ca2+ 
current density through ΔF1502 CaV2.1 channels is 60% lower than through 
wild-type channels. ΔF1502 accelerates activation kinetics and slows 
deactivation kinetics of CaV2.1 within a wide range of voltage depolarization. 
ΔF1502 also slowed CaV2.1 inactivation kinetic and shifted the inactivation 
curve to hyperpolarized potentials (by ~ 28 mV). ΔF1502 effects on CaV2.1 
activation and deactivation properties seem to be of high physiological 
relevance. Thus, ΔF1502 strongly promotes Ca2+ influx in response to either 
single or trains of action potential-like waveforms of different durations. Our 
observations support a causative role of gain-of-function CaV2.1 mutations in 
congenital ataxia, a neurodevelopmental disorder at the severe-most end of 
CACNA1A-associated phenotypic spectrum.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146035
PMCID: PMC4696675
PMID: 26716990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.