1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 5;6:18748. doi: 10.1038/srep18748.

Missense mutation in DISC1 C-terminal coiled-coil has GSK3β signaling and 
sex-dependent behavioral effects in mice.

Dachtler J(1), Elliott C(2), Rodgers RJ(3), Baillie GS(2), Clapcote SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
(3)Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a risk factor for schizophrenia and 
affective disorders. The full-length DISC1 protein consists of an N-terminal 
'head' domain and a C-terminal tail domain that contains several predicted 
coiled-coils, structural motifs involved in protein-protein interactions. To 
probe the in vivo effects of missense mutation of DISC1's C-terminal tail, we 
tested mice carrying mutation D453G within a predicted α-helical coiled-coil 
region. We report that, relative to wild-type littermates, female DISC1(D453G) 
mice exhibited novelty-induced hyperlocomotion, an anxiogenic profile in the 
elevated plus-maze and open field tests, and reduced social exploration of 
unfamiliar mice. Male DISC1(D453G) mice displayed a deficit in passive 
avoidance, while neither males nor females exhibited any impairment in startle 
reactivity or prepulse inhibition. Whole brain homogenates showed normal levels 
of DISC1 protein, but decreased binding of DISC1 to GSK3β, decreased 
phospho-inhibition of GSK3β at serine 9, and decreased levels of β-catenin in 
DISC1(D453G) mice of either sex. Interrupted GSK3β signaling may thus be part of 
the mechanism underlying the behavioral phenotype associated with D453G, in 
common with the previously described N-terminal domain mutations Q31L and L100P 
in mice, and the schizophrenia risk-conferring variant R264Q in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18748
PMCID: PMC4700527
PMID: 26728762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]