1. Biochemistry. 2016 Jan 19;55(2):277-86. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01003. Epub
 2016 Jan 5.

Substrate Promotes Productive Gas Binding in the α-Ketoglutarate-Dependent 
Oxygenase FIH.

Taabazuing CY(1), Fermann J(1), Garman S(2), Knapp MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts , Amherst, Massachusetts 
01003, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts 
, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, United States.

The Fe(2+)/α-ketoglutarate (αKG)-dependent oxygenases use molecular oxygen to 
conduct a wide variety of reactions with important biological implications, such 
as DNA base excision repair, histone demethylation, and the cellular hypoxia 
response. These enzymes follow a sequential mechanism in which O2 binds and 
reacts after the primary substrate binds, making those structural factors that 
promote productive O2 binding central to their chemistry. A large challenge in 
this field is to identify strategies that engender productive turnover. Factor 
inhibiting HIF (FIH) is a Fe(2+)/αKG-dependent oxygenase that forms part of the 
O2 sensing machinery in human cells by hydroxylating the C-terminal 
transactivation domain (CTAD) found within the HIF-1α protein. The structure of 
FIH was determined with the O2 analogue NO bound to Fe, offering the first 
direct insight into the gas binding geometry in this enzyme. Through a 
combination of density functional theory calculations, {FeNO}(7) electron 
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and ultraviolet-visible absorption 
spectroscopy, we demonstrate that CTAD binding stimulates O2 reactivity by 
altering the orientation of the bound gas molecule. Although unliganded FIH 
binds NO with moderate affinity, the bound gas can adopt either of two 
orientations with similar stability; upon CTAD binding, NO adopts a single 
preferred orientation that is appropriate for supporting oxidative 
decarboxylation. Combined with other studies of related enzymes, our data 
suggest that substrate-induced reorientation of bound O2 is the mechanism 
utilized by the αKG oxygenases to tightly couple O2 activation to substrate 
hydroxylation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01003
PMCID: PMC4793777
PMID: 26727884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]