1. Ophthalmic Res. 2016;55(3):135-44. doi: 10.1159/000442257. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Association of Two Polymorphisms, rs1061170 and rs1410996, in Complement Factor 
H with Age-Related Macular Degeneration in an Asian Population: A Meta-Analysis.

Wu M(1), Guo Y, Ma Y, Zheng Z, Wang Q, Zhou X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: With the increasing number of studies indicating that two 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs1061170 and rs1410996, in complement 
factor H (CFH) might be associated with the susceptibility to age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD), the exact association still remains uncertain. Thus, 
we conducted a meta-analysis to systematically summarize and clarify the 
association between the two SNPs and the AMD risk particularly in an Asian 
population.
METHODS: A systematic search of studies on the association of two SNPs with the 
susceptibility to AMD was conducted in PubMed, Embase and Web of Science. 
Summary odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of allele contrast 
and genotype contrast were estimated using the random or fixed effects model. 
The Q statistic test was used to identify heterogeneity, and the funnel plot was 
adopted to evaluate publication bias. A total of 19 case-control studies on 
rs1061170 and 8 studies on rs1410996 were included.
RESULTS: Clearly a significantly increased trend of AMD was observed with the 
rs1061170 (T vs. C: OR = 1.91, 95% CI = 1.71-2.13, pH = 0.029; TC vs. CC: OR = 
2.11, 95% CI = 1.30-3.42, pH = 0.792; TT vs. CC: OR = 3.90, 95% CI = 2.45-6.22, 
pH = 0.774). Similarly, the rs1410996 polymorphism also showed a rising AMD 
tendency (T vs. C: OR = 1.48, 95% CI = 1.17-1.87, pH < 0.001; TC vs. CC: OR = 
1.52, 95% CI = 1.13-2.04, pH = 0.002; TT vs. CC: OR = 2.10, 95% CI = 1.27-3.49, 
pH < 0.001). What is more, subgroup analysis revealed that both polymorphisms 
indicated a high risk of nAMD (neovascular AMD) in Asian populations.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that CFH rs1061170 and rs1410996 
polymorphisms were associated with AMD risk, both of which demonstrated a higher 
susceptibility to AMD, especially to nAMD. However, the results of rs1410996 
should be interpreted with caution due to the limited sample and heterogeneity. 
Large-scale and well-designed studies are needed to validate our findings.

Â© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000442257
PMID: 26727378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]