1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):13495-9. eCollection 2015.

Genetic association of cyclooxygenase-2 gene polymorphisms with Parkinson's 
disease susceptibility in Chinese Han population.

Dai Y(1), Wu Y(2), Li Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, 117 Hospital of PLA Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Gerontology, 117 Hospital of PLA Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore the genetic association of 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) gene promoter region polymorphisms with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) susceptibility in Chinese Han population.
METHODS: The genotyping of COX2 gene polymorphisms was conducted by polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in 122 
patients with PD and 120 healthy persons. The association strength of gene 
polymorphism with disease was measured by odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence 
interval (95% CI) calculated using Ï‡(2) test which also evaluated the 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) of gene polymorphism in controls. The linkage 
disequilibrium and haplotype were also analyzed as evidence in the analysis of 
association.
RESULTS: On condition that the genotypes distributions of COX2 -1290A>G, 
-1195G>A, -765G>C in the control group all conformed to HWE, however, only the 
homozygous genotype AA of -1195G>A polymorphism showed an association with PD 
(OR=0.432, 95% CI=0.196-0.950). In addition, in haplotype analysis, G-A-C 
haplotype frequency in cases was significantly lower than the controls, compared 
with the common haplotype A-G-G (P=0.031, OR=0.375, 95% CI=0.149-0.940).
CONCLUSIONS: COX2 -1195G>A polymorphism might play a protective role in the 
onset of PD and G-A-C haplotype in this three promoter region polymorphisms also 
showed a negative association.

PMCID: PMC4680508
PMID: 26722563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]