1. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2015;15 Suppl 5(Suppl 5):S2. doi: 
10.1186/1472-6947-15-S5-S2. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Privacy-preserving GWAS analysis on federated genomic datasets.

Constable SD, Tang Y, Wang S, Jiang X, Chapin S.

BACKGROUND: The biomedical community benefits from the increasing availability 
of genomic data to support meaningful scientific research, e.g., Genome-Wide 
Association Studies (GWAS). However, high quality GWAS usually requires a large 
amount of samples, which can grow beyond the capability of a single institution. 
Federated genomic data analysis holds the promise of enabling cross-institution 
collaboration for effective GWAS, but it raises concerns about patient privacy 
and medical information confidentiality (as data are being exchanged across 
institutional boundaries), which becomes an inhibiting factor for the practical 
use.
METHODS: We present a privacy-preserving GWAS framework on federated genomic 
datasets. Our method is to layer the GWAS computations on top of secure 
multi-party computation (MPC) systems. This approach allows two parties in a 
distributed system to mutually perform secure GWAS computations, but without 
exposing their private data outside.
RESULTS: We demonstrate our technique by implementing a framework for minor 
allele frequency counting and Ï‡2 statistics calculation, one of typical 
computations used in GWAS. For efficient prototyping, we use a state-of-the-art 
MPC framework, i.e., Portable Circuit Format (PCF) 1. Our experimental results 
show promise in realizing both efficient and secure cross-institution GWAS 
computations.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-15-S5-S2
PMCID: PMC4699163
PMID: 26733045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]