1. Xenobiotica. 2016 Sep;46(9):841-9. doi: 10.3109/00498254.2015.1130881. Epub
2016  Jan 8.

Mixed effects of OATP1B1, BCRP and NTCP polymorphisms on the population 
pharmacokinetics of pravastatin in healthy volunteers.

Lu XF(1), Zhou Y(2), Bi KS(1), Chen XH(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis , School of Pharmacy, Shenyang 
Pharmaceutical University , Shenyang , China and.
(2)b Department of Measurement and Control , School of Physics, Liaoning 
University , Shenyang , China.

1. Pravastatin is a 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase 
inhibitor used for the treatment of hyperlipidaemia. This study aims to 
investigate the effects of genetic polymorphisms in OATP1B1, BCRP and NTCP on 
pravastatin population pharmacokinetics in healthy Chinese volunteers using a 
non-linear mixed-effect modelling (NONMEM) approach. A two-compartment model 
with a first-order absorption and elimination described plasma pravastatin 
concentrations well. 2. Genetic polymorphisms of rs4149056 (OATP1B1) and 
rs2306283 (OATP1B1) were found to be associated with a significant (p < 0.01) 
decrease in the apparent clearance from the central compartment (CL/F), while 
rs2296651 (NTCP) increased CL/F to a significant degree (p < 0.01). The 
combination of these three polymorphisms reduced the inter-individual 
variability of CL/F by 78.8%. 3. There was minimal effect of rs2231137 (BCRP) 
and rs2231142 (BCRP) on pravastatin pharmacokinetics (0.01 < p < 0.05), whereas 
rs11045819 (OATP1B1), rs1061018 (BCRP) and rs61745930 (NTCP) genotypes do not 
appear to be associated with pravastatin pharmacokinetics based on the 
population model (p > 0.05). 4. The current data suggest that the combination of 
rs4149056, rs2306283 and rs2296651 polymorphisms is an important determinant of 
pravastatin pharmacokinetics.

DOI: 10.3109/00498254.2015.1130881
PMID: 26744986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]