1. Nutrients. 2016 Jan 4;8(1):14. doi: 10.3390/nu8010014.

Rise in DPA Following SDA-Rich Dietary Echium Oil Less Effective in Affording 
Anti-Arrhythmic Actions Compared to High DHA Levels Achieved with Fish Oil in 
Sprague-Dawley Rats.

Abeywardena MY(1), Adams M(2), Dallimore J(3), Kitessa SM(4).

Author information:
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Food 
&amp; Nutrition, Kintore Ave, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia. 
mahinda.abeywardena@csiro.au.
(2)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Food 
&amp; Nutrition, Kintore Ave, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia. 
Michael.Adams@csiro.au.
(3)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Food 
&amp; Nutrition, Kintore Ave, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia. 
Julie.Dallimore@csiro.au.
(4)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Food 
&amp; Nutrition, Kintore Ave, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia. 
Soressa.Kitessa@csiro.au.

Stearidonic acid (SDA; C18:4n-3) has been suggested as an alternative to fish 
oil (FO) for delivering health benefits of C ≥ 20 long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (LC n-3 PUFA). Echium oil (EO) represents a non-genetically-modified 
source of SDA available commercially. This study compared EO and FO in relation 
to alterations in plasma and tissue fatty acids, and for their ability to afford 
protection against ischemia-induced cardiac arrhythmia and ventricular 
fibrillation (VF). Rats were fed (12 weeks) diets supplemented with either EO or 
FO at three dose levels (1, 3 and 5% w/w; n = 18 per group). EO failed to 
influence C22:6n-3 (DHA) but increased C22:5n-3 (DPA) in tissues 
dose-dependently, especially in heart tissue. Conversely, DHA in hearts of FO 
rats showed dose-related elevation; 14.8%-24.1% of total fatty acids. Kidney 
showed resistance for incorporation of LC n-3 PUFA. Overall, FO provided greater 
cardioprotection than EO. At the highest dose level, FO rats displayed lower (p 
< 0.05) episodes of VF% (29% vs. 73%) and duration (22.7 ± 12.0 vs. 75.8 ± 17.1 
s) than the EO group but at 3% EO was comparable to FO. We conclude that there 
is no endogenous conversion of SDA to DHA, and that DPA may be associated with 
limited cardiac benefit.

DOI: 10.3390/nu8010014
PMCID: PMC4728628
PMID: 26742064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]