1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 11;11(1):e0146959. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146959. 
eCollection 2016.

Molecular and Functional Characterization of a Polygalacturonase-Inhibiting 
Protein from Cynanchum komarovii That Confers Fungal Resistance in Arabidopsis.

Liu N(1), Ma X(1), Zhou S(1), Wang P(1), Sun Y(1), Li X(1), Hou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Science, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China.

Compliance with ethical standards: This study did not involve human participants 
and animals, and the plant of interest is not an endangered species. 
Polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs) are leucine-rich repeat proteins 
that plants produce against polygalacturonase, a key virulence agent in 
pathogens. In this paper, we cloned and purified CkPGIP1, a gene product from 
Cynanchum komarovii that effectively inhibits polygalacturonases from Botrytis 
cinerea and Rhizoctonia solani. We found the expression of CkPGIP1 to be induced 
in response to salicylic acid, wounding, and infection with B. cinerea and R. 
solani. In addition, transgenic overexpression in Arabidopsis enhanced 
resistance against B. cinerea. Furthermore, CkPGIP1 obtained from transgenic 
Arabidopsis inhibited the activity of B. cinerea and R. solani 
polygalacturonases by 62.7-66.4% and 56.5-60.2%, respectively. Docking studies 
indicated that the protein interacts strongly with the B1-sheet at the 
N-terminus of the B. cinerea polygalacturonase, and with the C-terminus of the 
polygalacturonase from R. solani. This study highlights the significance of 
CkPGIP1 in plant disease resistance, and its possible application to manage 
fungal pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146959
PMCID: PMC4709088
PMID: 26752638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.