1. Am J Ther. 2017 May;24(3):e308-e316. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000000437.

Adiponectin Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms and Serum Levels Are Relevant to 
Prognosis of Patients With Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhages.

Shi JK(1), Yuan XC, Sun J, Liu DH.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Critical Care Medicine, Jining No.1 People's Hospital, Jining, 
China; 2Department of Neurology, the Third People's Hospital of Liaocheng, 
Liaocheng, China; 3Library of Jining No.1 People's Hospital, Jining, China; and 
4Department of Emergency, Jining No.1 People's Hospital, Jining, China.

To investigate the association of adiponectin gene polymorphisms and its levels 
with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhages (aSAHs) prognosis. This case-control 
study enrolled 138 patients with aSAH and 102 healthy controls as case group and 
control group, respectively. Prognosis of case group was evaluated using Glasgow 
Outcome Scale. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism was used to examine the genotypes of 45T>G and -11377C>G. 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to detect adiponectin levels. 
Logistic regression analysis was applied to assess the association of 
adiponectin gene polymorphism with aSAH prognosis. Case group had increased GG 
genotype and G allele genotype frequencies of 45T>G and -11377C>G compared with 
control group (all P < 0.01). In case group, TT genotype had the highest 
adiponectin level compared with both TG and GC genotypes (both P < 0.05). As for 
-11377C>G, GG genotype had the lowest adiponectin levels, followed by CG 
genotype and CC genotype in both groups (P < 0.05). In general, case group had 
decreased adiponectin levels compared with control group (P < 0.05). Univariate 
analysis showed that hypertension, Hunt-Hess grade, aneurysm size, aneurysms 
multiplicity and -11377C>G were associated with aSAH prognosis, while 
multivariate logistic regression analysis confirmed that hypertension, Hunt-Hess 
grade, residual flow in aneurysms and aneurysm size were independent risk 
factors for aSAH prognosis. Decreased adiponectin levels may be a pathological 
index for aSAH, which may be explain by the G allele of -11377C>G in 
adiponectin. Moreover, hypertension, Hunt-Hess grade, residual flow in aneurysms 
and aneurysm size may be independent risk factors for aSAH prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0000000000000437
PMID: 26760913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]