1. J Exp Bot. 2016 Mar;67(5):1577-88. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv554. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Brevis plant1, a putative inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, is required for 
internode elongation in maize.

Avila LM(1), Cerrudo D(1), Swanton C(1), Lukens L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, 
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.
(2)Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, 
Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada llukens@uoguelph.ca.

In maize (Zea mays L.), as in other grass species, stem elongation occurs during 
growth and most noticeably upon the transition to flowering. Genes that reduce 
stem elongation have been important to reduce stem breakage, or lodging. Stem 
elongation has been mediated by dwarf and brachytic/brevis plant mutants that 
affect giberellic acid and auxin pathways, respectively. Maize brevis plant1 
(bv1) mutants, first identified over 80 years ago, strongly resemble brachytic2 
mutants that have shortened internodes, short internode cells, and are deficient 
in auxin transport. Here, we characterized two novel bv1 maize mutants. We found 
that an inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase orthologue of the rice gene dwarf50 
was the molecular basis for the bv1 phenotype, implicating auxin-mediated 
inositol polyphosphate and/or phosphoinositide signalling in stem elongation. We 
suggest that auxin-mediated internode elongation involves processes that also 
contribute to stem gravitropism. Genes misregulated in bv1 mutants included 
genes important for cell wall synthesis, transmembrane transport, and 
cytoskeletal function. Mutant and wild-type plants were indistinguishable early 
in development, responded similarly to changes in light quality, had unaltered 
flowering times, and had normal flower development. These attributes suggest 
that breeding could utilize bv1 alleles to increase crop grain yields.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erv554
PMCID: PMC4762392
PMID: 26767748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]