1. Cell. 2016 Jan 14;164(1-2):208-218. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.038.

Prefrontal Parvalbumin Neurons in Control of Attention.

Kim H(1), Ährlund-Richter S(1), Wang X(1), Deisseroth K(2), Carlén M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, W080 Clark Center, 318 Campus Drive West, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Bioengineering, W080 
Clark Center, 318 Campus Drive West, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, W080 Clark Center, 318 
Campus Drive West, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, 171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: marie.carlen@ki.se.

While signatures of attention have been extensively studied in sensory systems, 
the neural sources and computations responsible for top-down control of 
attention are largely unknown. Using chronic recordings in mice, we found that 
fast-spiking parvalbumin (FS-PV) interneurons in medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) 
uniformly show increased and sustained firing during goal-driven attentional 
processing, correlating to the level of attention. Elevated activity of FS-PV 
neurons on the timescale of seconds predicted successful execution of behavior. 
Successful allocation of attention was characterized by strong synchronization 
of FS-PV neurons, increased gamma oscillations, and phase locking of pyramidal 
firing. Phase-locked pyramidal neurons showed gamma-phase-dependent rate 
modulation during successful attentional processing. Optogenetic silencing of 
FS-PV neurons deteriorated attentional processing, while optogenetic 
synchronization of FS-PV neurons at gamma frequencies had pro-cognitive effects 
and improved goal-directed behavior. FS-PV neurons thus act as a functional unit 
coordinating the activity in the local mPFC circuit during goal-driven 
attentional processing.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.038
PMCID: PMC4715187
PMID: 26771492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]