1. Adv Nutr. 2016 Jan 15;7(1):25-43. doi: 10.3945/an.115.008631. Print 2016 Jan.

Essential Nutrient Interactions: Does Low or Suboptimal Magnesium Status 
Interact with Vitamin D and/or Calcium Status?

Rosanoff A(1), Dai Q(2), Shapses SA(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Magnesium Education and Research, Pahoa, HI; arosanoff@gmail.com.
(2)Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN; and.
(3)Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ.

Although much is known about magnesium, its interactions with calcium and 
vitamin D are less well studied. Magnesium intake is low in populations who 
consume modern processed-food diets. Low magnesium intake is associated with 
chronic diseases of global concern [e.g., cardiovascular disease (CVD), type 2 
diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and skeletal disorders], as is low vitamin D 
status. No simple, reliable biomarker for whole-body magnesium status is 
currently available, which makes clinical assessment and interpretation of human 
magnesium research difficult. Between 1977 and 2012, US calcium intakes 
increased at a rate 2-2.5 times that of magnesium intakes, resulting in a 
dietary calcium to magnesium intake ratio of >3.0. Calcium to magnesium ratios 
<1.7 and >2.8 can be detrimental, and optimal ratios may be ∼2.0. Background 
calcium to magnesium ratios can affect studies of either mineral alone. For 
example, US studies (background Ca:Mg >3.0) showed benefits of high dietary or 
supplemental magnesium for CVD, whereas similar Chinese studies (background 
Ca:Mg <1.7) showed increased risks of CVD. Oral vitamin D is widely recommended 
in US age-sex groups with low dietary magnesium. Magnesium is a cofactor for 
vitamin D biosynthesis, transport, and activation; and vitamin D and magnesium 
studies both showed associations with several of the same chronic diseases. 
Research on possible magnesium and vitamin D interactions in these human 
diseases is currently rare. Increasing calcium to magnesium intake ratios, 
coupled with calcium and vitamin D supplementation coincident with suboptimal 
magnesium intakes, may have unknown health implications. Interactions of low 
magnesium status with calcium and vitamin D, especially during supplementation, 
require further study.

© 2016 American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.3945/an.115.008631
PMCID: PMC4717874
PMID: 26773013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author disclosures: A Rosanoff, Q Dai, and SA 
Shapses, no conflicts of interest.