1. Transl Res. 2016 May;171:29-37.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.12.011. Epub 2015 
Dec 22.

A germline predictive signature of response to platinum chemotherapy in 
esophageal cancer.

Rumiato E(1), Boldrin E(1), Malacrida S(2), Battaglia G(3), Bocus P(3), Castoro 
C(4), Cagol M(4), Chiarion-Sileni V(5), Ruol A(6), Amadori A(7), Saggioro D(8).

Author information:
(1)Immunology and Molecular Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, 
Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Endoscopy Unit, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(4)Oncological Surgery, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(5)Medical Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, Padova, Italy.
(6)Department of Surgical Sciences, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of 
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(7)Immunology and Molecular Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, 
Padova, Italy; Department of Surgical Sciences, Oncology and Gastroenterology, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(8)Immunology and Molecular Oncology, Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV-IRCCS, 
Padova, Italy. Electronic address: d.saggioro@unipd.it.

Platinum-based neoadjuvant therapy is the standard treatment for esophageal 
cancer (EC). At present, no reliable response markers exist, and patient 
therapeutic outcome is variable and very often unpredictable. The aim of this 
study was to understand the contribution of host constitutive DNA polymorphisms 
in discriminating between responder and nonresponder patients. DNA collected 
from 120 EC patients treated with platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy was 
analyzed using drug metabolism enzymes and transporters (DMET) array platform 
that interrogates polymorphisms in 225 genes of drug metabolism and disposition. 
Four gene variants of DNA repair machinery, 2 in ERCC1 (rs11615; rs3212986), and 
2 in XPD (rs1799793; rs13181) were also studied. Association analysis was 
performed with pTest software and corrected by permutation test. Predictive 
models of response were created using the receiver-operating characteristics 
curve approach and adjusted by the bootstrap procedure. Sixteen single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the DMET array resulted significantly 
associated with either good or poor response; no association was found for the 4 
variants mapping in DNA repair genes. The predictive power of 5 DMET SNPs 
mapping in ABCC2, ABCC3, CYP2A6, PPARG, and SLC7A8 genes was greater than that 
of clinical factors alone (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.74 vs 0.62). 
Interestingly, their combination with the clinical variables significantly 
increased the predictivity of the model (AUC = 0.78 vs 0.62, P = 0.0016). In 
conclusion, we identified a genetic signature of response to platinum-based 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in EC patients. Our results also disclose the potential 
benefit of combining genetic and clinical variables for personalized EC 
management.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.12.011
PMID: 26772957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]