1. J Mol Biol. 2016 Feb 13;428(3):579-589. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2016.01.003. Epub 
2016 Jan 14.

Allosteric Communication across STAT3 Domains Associated with STAT3 Function and 
Disease-Causing Mutation.

Namanja AT(1), Wang J(1), Buettner R(1), Colson L(1), Chen Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. Electronic address: ychen@coh.org.

STAT3 is a member of STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) 
transcription activators. Aberration in STAT3 activity due to constitutive 
activation or mutations leads to diseases such as cancer and 
hyper-immunoglobulin E syndrome (HIES). STAT3 contains several structured 
domains including the Src homology 2 domain (SH2), linker domain (LD), 
DNA-binding domain (DBD) and the coiled-coil domain. Here we report the 
discovery of inter-domain allosteric communications in STAT3 from studies using 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and other methods. We found that pTyr-peptide 
interactions with SH2 cause structural and dynamics changes in LD and DBD. The 
inter-domain allosteric effect is likely mediated by the flexibility in the 
hydrophobic core. In addition, a mutation in LD found in HIES (I568F) induces 
NMR chemical shift perturbation in SH2, DBD and the coiled-coil domain, 
suggesting conformational changes in these domains. Consistent with 
conformational changes in SH2, the I568F mutant reduces SH2's binding affinity 
to a pTyr-containing peptide. This study provides an example of 
dynamics-dependent allosteric effects, and due to the structural conservation of 
the STAT family of proteins, the inter-domain allosteric communication observed 
in STAT3 likely occurs in other STATs.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2016.01.003
PMCID: PMC4767637
PMID: 26774853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]