1. PeerJ. 2016 Jan 4;4:e1543. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1543. eCollection 2016.

Disruption of de novo purine biosynthesis in Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1 leads 
to reduced biofilm formation and a reduction in cell size of surface-attached 
but not planktonic cells.

Yoshioka S(1), Newell PD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Coordination-Complex Molecular Science, Institute for 
Molecular Science, National Institutes of Natural Sciences , Okazaki, Aichi , 
Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Oswego State University of New York , 
Oswego, NY , USA.

Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1 is one of the model organisms for biofilm 
research. Our previous transposon mutagenesis study suggested a requirement for 
the de novo purine nucleotide biosynthesis pathway for biofilm formation by this 
organism. This study was performed to verify that observation and investigate 
the basis for the defects in biofilm formation shown by purine biosynthesis 
mutants. Constructing deletion mutations in 8 genes in this pathway, we found 
that they all showed reductions in biofilm formation that could be partly or 
completely restored by nucleotide supplementation or genetic complementation. We 
demonstrated that, despite a reduction in biofilm formation, more viable mutant 
cells were recovered from the surface-attached population than from the 
planktonic phase under conditions of purine deprivation. Analyses using scanning 
electron microscopy revealed that the surface-attached mutant cells were 25 âˆ¼ 
30% shorter in length than WT, which partly explains the reduced biomass in the 
mutant biofilms. The laser diffraction particle analyses confirmed this finding, 
and further indicated that the WT biofilm cells were smaller than their 
planktonic counterparts. The defects in biofilm formation and reductions in cell 
size shown by the mutants were fully recovered upon adenine or hypoxanthine 
supplementation, indicating that the purine shortages caused reductions in cell 
size. Our results are consistent with surface attachment serving as a survival 
strategy during nutrient deprivation, and indicate that changes in the cell size 
may be a natural response of P. fluorescens to growth on a surface. Finally, 
cell sizes in WT biofilms became slightly smaller in the presence of exogenous 
adenine than in its absence. Our findings suggest that purine nucleotides or 
related metabolites may influence the regulation of cell size in this bacterium.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.1543
PMCID: PMC4715448
PMID: 26788425

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.