1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):7354-66. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6931.

Comparison of liver oncogenic potential among human RAS isoforms.

Chung SI(1), Moon H(1), Ju HL(2), Kim DY(1), Cho KJ(1), Ribback S(3), Dombrowski 
F(3), Calvisi DF(3), Ro SW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(2)Liver Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

Mutation in one of three RAS genes (i.e., HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS) leading to 
constitutive activation of RAS signaling pathways is considered a key oncogenic 
event in human carcinogenesis. Whether activated RAS isoforms possess different 
oncogenic potentials remains an unresolved question. Here, we compared oncogenic 
properties among RAS isoforms using liver-specific transgenesis in mice. 
Hydrodynamic transfection was performed using transposons expressing short 
hairpin RNA downregulating p53 and an activated RAS isoform, and livers were 
harvested at 23 days after gene delivery. No differences were found in the 
hepatocarcinogenic potential among RAS isoforms, as determined by both gross 
examination of livers and liver weight per body weight ratio (LW/BW) of mice 
expressing HRASQ61L, KRAS4BG12V and NRASQ61K. However, the tumorigenic potential 
differed significantly between KRAS splicing variants. The LW/BW ratio in 
KRAS4AG12V mice was significantly lower than in KRAS4BG12V mice (p < 0.001), and 
KRAS4AG12V mice lived significantly longer than KRRAS4BG12V mice (p < 0.0001). 
Notably, tumors from KRAS4AG12V mice displayed higher expression of the p16INK4A 
tumor suppressor when compared with KRAS4BG12V tumors. Forced overexpression of 
p16INK4A significantly reduced tumor growth in KRAS4BG12V mice, suggesting that 
upregulation of p16INK4A by KRAS4AG12V presumably delays tumor development 
driven by the latter oncogene.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6931
PMCID: PMC4872791
PMID: 26799184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.