1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 18;291(12):6386-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.696088. Epub 
2016 Jan 21.

A Systematic Investigation of Structure/Function Requirements for the 
Apolipoprotein A-I/Lecithin Cholesterol Acyltransferase Interaction Loop of 
High-density Lipoprotein.

Gu X(1), Wu Z(1), Huang Y(1), Wagner MA(1), Baleanu-Gogonea C(1), Mehl RA(2), 
Buffa JA(1), DiDonato AJ(1), Hazen LB(1), Fox PL(1), Gogonea V(3), Parks JS(4), 
DiDonato JA(1), Hazen SL(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research 
Institute, and.
(2)the Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, 
Corvallis, Oregon 97331, and.
(3)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research 
Institute, and the Department of Chemistry, Cleveland State University, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44115.
(4)the Sections on Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake 
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157.
(5)From the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research 
Institute, and the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, hazens@ccf.org.

The interaction of lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) with 
apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) plays a critical role in high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) maturation. We previously identified a highly solvent-exposed apoA-I loop 
domain (Leu(159)-Leu(170)) in nascent HDL, the so-called "solar flare" (SF) 
region, and proposed that it serves as an LCAT docking site (Wu, Z., Wagner, M. 
A., Zheng, L., Parks, J. S., Shy, J. M., 3rd, Smith, J. D., Gogonea, V., and 
Hazen, S. L. (2007) Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 861-868). The stability and role 
of the SF domain of apoA-I in supporting HDL binding and activation of LCAT are 
debated. Here we show by site-directed mutagenesis that multiple residues within 
the SF region (Pro(165), Tyr(166), Ser(167), and Asp(168)) of apoA-I are 
critical for both LCAT binding to HDL and LCAT catalytic efficiency. The 
critical role for possible hydrogen bond interaction at apoA-I Tyr(166) was 
further supported using reconstituted HDL generated from apoA-I mutants 
(Tyr(166) → Glu or Asn), which showed preservation in both LCAT binding affinity 
and catalytic efficiency. Moreover, the in vivo functional significance of 
NO2-Tyr(166)-apoA-I, a specific post-translational modification on apoA-I that 
is abundant within human atherosclerotic plaque, was further investigated by 
using the recombinant protein generated from E. coli containing a mutated 
orthogonal tRNA synthetase/tRNACUA pair enabling site-specific insertion of the 
unnatural amino acid into apoA-I. NO2-Tyr(166)-apoA-I, after subcutaneous 
injection into hLCAT(Tg/Tg), apoA-I(-/-) mice, showed impaired LCAT activation 
in vivo, with significant reduction in HDL cholesteryl ester formation. The 
present results thus identify multiple structural features within the 
solvent-exposed SF region of apoA-I of nascent HDL essential for optimal LCAT 
binding and catalytic efficiency.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.696088
PMCID: PMC4813583
PMID: 26797122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]