1. Case Rep Genet. 2015;2015:532090. doi: 10.1155/2015/532090. Epub 2015 Dec 22.

Intermediate MCAD Deficiency Associated with a Novel Mutation of the ACADM Gene: 
c.1052C>T.

Drendel HM(1), Pike JE(1), Schumacher K(1), Ouyang K(1), Wang J(2), Stuy M(1), 
Dlouhy S(1), Bai S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diagnostic Genomics, Department of Medical and Molecular 
Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 975 West Walnut Street, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder that leads to a defect in fatty acid oxidation. ACADM is the only 
candidate gene causing MCAD deficiency. A single nucleotide change, c.985A>G, 
occurring at exon 11 of the ACADM gene, is the most prevalent mutation. In this 
study, we report a Caucasian family with multiple MCADD individuals. DNA 
sequence analysis of the ACADM gene performed in this family revealed that two 
family members showing mild MCADD symptoms share the same novel change in exon 
11, c.1052C>T, resulting in a threonine-to-isoleucine change. The replacement is 
a nonconservative amino acid change that occurs in the C-terminal all-alpha 
domain of the MCAD protein. Here we report the finding of a novel missense 
mutation, c.1052C>T (p.Thr326Ile), in the ACADM gene. To our knowledge, 
c.1052C>T has not been previously reported in the literature or in any of the 
current databases we utilize. We hypothesize that this particular mutation in 
combination with p.Lys304Glu results in an intermediate clinical phenotype of 
MCADD.

DOI: 10.1155/2015/532090
PMCID: PMC4700157
PMID: 26798524