1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):8067-77. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6932.

Fractionation of a tumor-initiating UV dose introduces DNA damage-retaining 
cells in hairless mouse skin and renders subsequent TPA-promoted tumors 
non-regressing.

van de Glind G(1), Rebel H(1), van Kempen M(1), Tensen K(1), de Gruijl F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, LUMC, Leiden, 2333RC, The Netherlands.

Sunburns and especially sub-sunburn chronic UV exposure are associated with 
increased risk of squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). Here we focus on a possible 
difference in tumor initiation from a single severe-sunburn dose (on day 1, 21 
hairless mice) and from an equal dose fractionated into very low sub-sunburn 
doses not causing any (growth-promoting) epidermal hyperplasia (40 days daily 
exposure, n=20). From day 47 all mice received 
12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) applications (2x/wk) for 20 weeks to 
promote tumor development within the lifetime of the animals. After the 
sub-sunburn regimen sparse DNA damage-retaining basal cells (quiescent stem 
cells, QSCs) remained in the non-hyperplastic epidermis. These cells were forced 
to divide by TPA. After discontinuation of TPA tumors regressed and disappeared 
in the 'sunburn group' but persisted and grew in the 'sub-sunburn group' (0.06 
vs 2.50 SCCs and precursors â‰¥4 mm/mouse after 280 days, p=0.03). As the tumors 
carried no mutations in p53, H/K/N-Ras and Notch1/2, these 'usual suspects' were 
not involved in the UV-driven tumor initiation. Although we could not 
selectively eliminate QSCs (unknown phenotype) to establish causality, our data 
suggest that forcing specifically DNA damage-retaining QSCs to divide--with high 
mutagenic risk--gives rise to persisting (mainly 'in situ') skin carcinomas.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6932
PMCID: PMC4884976
PMID: 26797757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.