1. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147638. 
eCollection 2016.

FRIZZLED7 Is Required for Tumor Initiation and Metastatic Growth of Melanoma 
Cells.

Tiwary S(1), Xu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, New York,14642, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2017 Oct 26;12(10):e0187388. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187388.

Metastases are thought to arise from cancer stem cells and their tumor 
initiating abilities are required for the establishment of metastases. 
Nevertheless, in metastatic melanoma, the nature of cancer stem cells is under 
debate and their contribution to metastasis formation remains unknown. Using an 
experimental metastasis model, we discovered that high levels of the WNT 
receptor, FZD7, correlated with enhanced metastatic potentials of melanoma cell 
lines. Knocking down of FZD7 in a panel of four melanoma cell lines led to a 
significant reduction in lung metastases in animal models, arguing that FZD7 
plays a causal role during metastasis formation. Notably, limiting dilution 
analyses revealed that FZD7 is essential for the tumor initiation of melanoma 
cells and FZD7 knockdown impeded the early expansion of metastatic melanoma 
cells shortly after seeding, in accordance with the view that tumor initiating 
ability of cancer cells is required for metastasis formation. FZD7 activated JNK 
in melanoma cell lines in vitro and the expression of a dominant negative JNK 
suppressed metastasis formation in vivo, suggesting that FZD7 may promote 
metastatic growth of melanoma cells via activation of JNK. Taken together, our 
findings uncovered a signaling pathway that regulates the tumor initiation of 
melanoma cells and contributes to metastasis formation in melanoma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147638
PMCID: PMC4726610
PMID: 26808375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.