1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2016;2016:150104. doi:
10.1530/EDM-15-0104.  Epub 2016 Jan 7.

Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 due to novel variants of SCNN1B gene.

Nobel YR(1), Lodish MB(2), Raygada M(2), Rivero JD(3), Faucz FR(2), Abraham 
SB(2), Lyssikatos C(2), Belyavskaya E(2), Stratakis CA(2), Zilbermint M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center , New York, New 
York, 10032 , USA.
(2)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Program on Developmental Endocrinology 
and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, BG 10-CRC, Room 
1-3216, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814 , USA.
(3)Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health , 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room 12N-226, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892 , 
USA.
(4)Section on Endocrinology and Genetics, Program on Developmental Endocrinology 
and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, BG 10-CRC, Room 
1-3216, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814, USA; Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and 
Metabolism, Baltimore, Maryland, 21287, USA; Suburban Hospital, Bethesda, 
Maryland, 20814, USA.

Autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) is a rare disorder 
characterized by sodium wasting, failure to thrive, hyperkalemia, hypovolemia 
and metabolic acidosis. It is due to mutations in the amiloride-sensitive 
epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) and is characterized by diminished response to 
aldosterone. Patients may present with life-threatening hyperkalemia, which must 
be recognized and appropriately treated. A 32-year-old female was referred to 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) for evaluation of hyperkalemia and 
muscle pain. Her condition started in the second week of life, when she was 
brought to an outside hospital lethargic and unresponsive. At that time, she was 
hypovolemic, hyperkalemic and acidotic, and was eventually treated with sodium 
bicarbonate and potassium chelation. At the time of the presentation to the NIH, 
her laboratory evaluation revealed serum potassium 5.1 mmol/l (reference range: 
3.4-5.1 mmol/l), aldosterone 2800 ng/dl (reference range: ≤21 ng/dl) and plasma 
renin activity 90 ng/ml/h (reference range: 0.6-4.3 ng/ml per h). Diagnosis of 
PHA1 was suspected. Sequencing of the SCNN1B gene, which codes for ENaC, 
revealed that the patient is a compound heterozygote for two novel variants 
(c.1288delC and c.1466+1 G>A), confirming the suspected diagnosis of PHA1. In 
conclusion, we report a patient with novel variants of the SCNN1B gene causing 
PHA1 with persistent, symptomatic hyperkalemia.
LEARNING POINTS: PHA1 is a rare genetic condition, causing functional 
abnormalities of the amiloride-sensitive ENaC.PHA1 was caused by previously 
unreported SCNN1B gene mutations (c.1288delC and c.1466+1 G>A).Early recognition 
of this condition and adherence to symptomatic therapy is important, as the 
electrolyte abnormalities found may lead to severe dehydration, cardiac 
arrhythmias and even death.High doses of sodium polystyrene sulfonate, sodium 
chloride and sodium bicarbonate are required for symptomatic treatment.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-15-0104
PMCID: PMC4722246
PMID: 26807262