1. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Apr;26(4):1349-64. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhv330. Epub 2016
Jan  24.

β-Adrenergic Control of Hippocampal Function: Subserving the Choreography of 
Synaptic Information Storage and Memory.

Hagena H(1), Hansen N(1), Manahan-Vaughan D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University Bochum, 
Bochum, Germany.

Noradrenaline (NA) is a key neuromodulator for the regulation of behavioral 
state and cognition. It supports learning by increasing arousal and vigilance, 
whereby new experiences are "earmarked" for encoding. Within the hippocampus, 
experience-dependent information storage occurs by means of synaptic plasticity. 
Furthermore, novel spatial, contextual, or associative learning drives changes 
in synaptic strength, reflected by the strengthening of long-term potentiation 
(LTP) or long-term depression (LTD). NA acting on β-adrenergic receptors (β-AR) 
is a key determinant as to whether new experiences result in persistent 
hippocampal synaptic plasticity. This can even dictate the direction of change 
of synaptic strength.The different hippocampal subfields play different roles in 
encoding components of a spatial representation through LTP and LTD. Strikingly, 
the sensitivity of synaptic plasticity in these subfields to β-adrenergic 
control is very distinct (dentate gyrus > CA3 > CA1). Moreover, NA released from 
the locus coeruleus that acts on β-AR leads to hippocampal LTD and an 
enhancement of LTD-related memory processing. We propose that NA acting on 
hippocampal β-AR, that is graded according to the novelty or saliency of the 
experience, determines the content and persistency of synaptic information 
storage in the hippocampal subfields and therefore of spatial memories.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhv330
PMCID: PMC4785955
PMID: 26804338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]