1. J Hepatol. 2016 May;64(5):1190-1193. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.017. Epub
2016  Jan 23.

Single-gene association between GATA-2 and autoimmune hepatitis: A novel genetic 
insight highlighting immunologic pathways to disease.

Webb G(1), Chen YY(1), Li KK(1), Neil D(2), Oo YH(1), Richter A(3), Bigley V(4), 
Collin M(4), Adams DH(1), Hirschfield GM(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham and NIHR Birmingham Liver 
Biomedical Research Unit, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Immunology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(5)Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham and NIHR Birmingham Liver 
Biomedical Research Unit, Birmingham, UK. Electronic address: 
g.hirschfield@bham.ac.uk.

Background & Aims Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), an immune-mediated liver disease, 
originates as a consequence of interacting genetic and environmental risk 
factors. Treatment remains non-specific and prone to side effects. Deficiencies 
in regulatory T cell (Treg) function are hypothesized to contribute to the 
pathogenesis of AIH. Methods We describe an adult patient who presented with AIH 
in the context of monocytopenia. The patient was characterized by GATA2 gene 
sequencing, flow cytometry of peripheral blood for leucocyte subsets, ELISA for 
serum Flt-3 ligand, and immunohistochemistry of liver biopsy tissue. Results 
Sequencing confirmed a GATA2 mutation. Peripheral Treg were absent in the 
context of a preserved total T cell count. Immunostaining for the Treg 
transcription factor FOXP3 was reduced in liver tissue as compared to a control 
AIH specimen. There were marked deficiencies in multiple antigen-presenting cell 
subsets and Flt-3 ligand was elevated. These findings are consistent with 
previous reports of GATA2 dysfunction. Conclusions The association of a GATA2 
mutation with AIH is previously unrecognized. GATA2 encodes a hematopoietic cell 
transcription factor, and mutations may manifest as monocytopenia, dendritic and 
B cell deficiencies, myelodysplasia, and immunodeficiency. Tregs may be depleted 
as in this case. Our findings provide support for the role of Tregs in AIH, 
complement reports of other deficiencies in T cell regulation causing AIH-like 
syndromes, and support the rationale of attempting to modulate the Treg axis for 
the therapeutic benefit of AIH patients.

Copyright Â© 2016 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhep.2016.01.017
PMCID: PMC4824751
PMID: 26812071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]