1. Transl Androl Urol. 2015 Aug;4(4):455-63. doi: 
10.3978/j.issn.2223-4683.2015.04.12.

Inflammation in prostate cancer progression and therapeutic targeting.

Stark T(1), Livas L(1), Kyprianou N(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Urology, 2 Department of Molecular Biochemistry, 3 Department 
of Pathology, 4 The Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky College of 
Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Chronic inflammation contributes to the onset and progression of human cancer, 
via modifications in the tumor microenvironment by remodeling the extracellular 
matrix (ECM) and initiating epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT). At the 
biological level, chronically inflamed cells release cytokines that are 
functionally dictating a constitutively active stroma, promoting tumor growth 
and metastasis. In prostate cancer, inflammation correlates with increased 
development of "risk factor" lesions or proliferative inflammatory atrophy 
(PIA). Chronic inflammation in benign prostate biopsy specimens can be 
associated with high-grade prostate tumors in adjacent areas. In this article, 
we discuss the current understanding of the incidence of inflammation in 
prostate cancer progression and the significance of the process in therapeutic 
targeting of specific inflammatory signaling pathways and critical effectors 
during tumor progression. Further understanding of the process of chronic 
inflammation in prostate tumor progression to metastasis will enable development 
and optimization of novel therapeutic modalities for the treatment of high-risk 
patients with advanced disease.

DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2223-4683.2015.04.12
PMCID: PMC4708587
PMID: 26816843

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.