1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Nov 1;8(11):15065-71. eCollection 2015.

Prognostic value of ERCC1 and ERCC2 gene polymorphisms in patients with gastric 
cancer receiving platinum-based chemotherapy.

Mo J(1), Luo M(1), Cui J(1), Zhou S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, No. 303 Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army 
Nanning, China.
(2)Department of Chemotherapy, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University Nanning, China.

We conducted a prospective study to analyze whether ERCC1 rs11615 and rs3212986 
and ERCC2 rs13181 and rs1799793 gene polymorphisms could serve as potential 
biomarkers for the prognosis of gastric cancer. A total of 228 patients with 
pathologically proven gastric cancer and receiving platinum-based chemotherapy 
were recruited from our hospital between October 2009 and October 2011. The 
ERCC1 rs11615 and rs3212986 and ERCC2 rs13181 and rs1799793 polymorphisms were 
genotyped using the polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay. Conditional logistic regression analysis revealed 
that patients carrying the CA and AA genotypes of ERCC1 rs3212986 polymorphism 
showed a poorer response to chemotherapy compared to the CC genotype (CA vs. CC: 
OR = 0.28, 95% CI = 0.06-0.98, P = 0.04; AA vs. CC: OR = 0.49, 95% CI = 
0.06-0.98, P = 0.01). Moreover, the CA+AA genotype of ERCC1 rs3212986 
polymorphism showed a significantly poorer response to chemotherapy (CA+AA vs. 
CC: OR = 0.49, 95% CI = 0.27-0.90). Patients with the AA genotype of ERCC1 
rs3212986 polymorphism had a longer overall survival time when compared with the 
CC genotype (34.91 months vs. 51.19 months, log-rank P = 0.003). The AA genotype 
of ERCC1 rs3212986 polymorphism in gastric cancer patients was correlated with a 
higher risk of death from varying causes by the Cox proportional hazards model, 
compared to the CC genotype (HR = 6.19, 95% CI = 1.42-30.60). In conclusion, the 
ERCC1 rs3212986 polymorphism was found to influence the response to chemotherapy 
and overall survival of gastric cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4713631
PMID: 26823845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]