1. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016 Feb 1;45:8. doi: 10.1186/s40463-016-0119-5.

Cochlear implant and congenital cholesteatoma.

Mierzwinski J(1), Fishman AJ(2), Grochowski T(3), Drewa S(4), Drela M(5), 
Winiarski P(6), Bielecki I(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Bydgoszcz, Chodkiewicza 44, 85-667, Bydgoszcz, Poland. jmierzw@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Bydgoszcz, Chodkiewicza 44, 85-667, Bydgoszcz, Poland. ajfishman@mac.com.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Bydgoszcz, Chodkiewicza 44, 85-667, Bydgoszcz, Poland. 
tomek.grochowski.q45@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Bydgoszcz, Chodkiewicza 44, 85-667, Bydgoszcz, Poland. sylwiadrewa@o2.pl.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Audiology and Phoniatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Bydgoszcz, Chodkiewicza 44, 85-667, Bydgoszcz, Poland. maria.drela@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital of 
Bydgoszcz, Ujejskiego 52, 85-168, Bydgoszcz, Poland. piotrwiniarski26@wp.pl.
(7)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, University Children's Hospital of 
Katowice, ul Medyk√≥w 16, 40-752, Katowice, Poland. irekbess@o2.pl.

BACKGROUND: The occurence of cholesteatoma and cochlear implant is rare. 
Secondary cholesteatomas may develop as a result of cochlear implant surgery. 
Primarily acquired cholesteatoma is not typically associated with congenital 
sensorineural hearing loss or cochlear implant in children. The occurrence of 
congenital cholesteatoma during cochlear implant surgery has never been reported 
before, partly because all patients are preoperatively submitted to imaging 
studies which can theoretically exclude the disease.
CASE PRESENTATION: We have reported a rare case of congenital cholesteatoma, 
found during sequential second side cochlear implantation in a 3-year-old child. 
The child underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) at 12 months of age, before the first cochlear implant surgery, 
which excluded middle ear pathology. The mass was removed as an intact pearl, 
without visible or microscopic violation of the cholesteatoma capsule. All the 
areas where middle ear structures were touching the cholesteatoma were vaporized 
with a laser and the cochlear implant was inserted uneventfully. Further 
follow-up excluded residual disease.
CONCLUSION: We believe that primary, single stage placement of a cochlear 
implant (CI) with simultaneous removal of the congenital cholesteatoma can be 
performed safely. However, to prevent recurrence, the capsule of the 
cholesteatoma must not be damaged and complete laser ablation of the surface, 
where suspicious epithelial cells could remain, is recommended. In our opinion, 
cholesteatoma removal and cochlear implantation should be staged if these 
conditions are not met, and/or the disease is at a more advanced stage. It is 
suspected, that the incidence of congenital cholesteatoma in pediatric CI 
candidates is much higher that in average pediatric population.

DOI: 10.1186/s40463-016-0119-5
PMCID: PMC4736255
PMID: 26829926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]