1. Translation (Austin). 2013 Apr 1;1(1):e24400. doi: 10.4161/trla.24400. 
eCollection 2013.

Physical evidence supporting a ribosomal shunting mechanism of translation 
initiation for BACE1 mRNA.

Koh DC(1), Edelman GM(1), Mauro VP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology; The Scripps Research Institute; La 
Jolla, CA USA.

In Alzheimer disease, elevated levels of the BACE1 enzyme are correlated with 
increased production of amyloid peptides and disease pathology. The increase in 
BACE1 levels is post-transcriptional and may involve altered translation 
efficiency. Earlier studies have indicated that translation of BACE1 mRNA is 
cap-dependent. As ribosomal subunits move from the cap-structure to the 
initiation codon, they fail to recognize several AUG codons in the 5' leader. In 
this study, we looked for physical evidence of the mechanism underlying 
ribosomal scanning or shunting along the BACE1 5' leader by investigating 
structural stability in the 5' leaders of endogenous mRNAs in vivo. To perform 
this analysis, we probed RNAs using lead(II) acetate, a cell-permeable chemical 
that induces cleavage of unpaired nucleotides having conformational flexibility. 
The data revealed that the â‰ˆ440-nt 5' leader was generally resistant to cleavage 
except for a region upstream of the initiation codon. Cleavage continued into 
the coding region, consistent with destabilization of secondary structures by 
translating ribosomes. Evidence that a large segment of the BACE1 5' leader was 
not cleaved indicates that this region is structurally stable and suggests that 
it is not scanned. The data support a mechanism of translation initiation in 
which ribosomal subunits bypass (shunt) part of the BACE1 5' leader to reach the 
initiation codon. We suggest that a nucleotide bias in the 5' leader may 
predispose the initiation codon to be more accessible than other AUG codons in 
the 5' leader, leading to an increase in its relative utilization.

DOI: 10.4161/trla.24400
PMCID: PMC4718059
PMID: 26824018