1. Nutrients. 2016 Jan 27;8(2):68. doi: 10.3390/nu8020068.

B Vitamins and the Brain: Mechanisms, Dose and Efficacy--A Review.

Kennedy DO(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain, Performance and Nutrition Research Centre, Northumbria University, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. david.kennedy@northumbria.ac.uk.

The B-vitamins comprise a group of eight water soluble vitamins that perform 
essential, closely inter-related roles in cellular functioning, acting as 
co-enzymes in a vast array of catabolic and anabolic enzymatic reactions. Their 
collective effects are particularly prevalent to numerous aspects of brain 
function, including energy production, DNA/RNA synthesis/repair, genomic and 
non-genomic methylation, and the synthesis of numerous neurochemicals and 
signaling molecules. However, human epidemiological and controlled trial 
investigations, and the resultant scientific commentary, have focused almost 
exclusively on the small sub-set of vitamins (B9/B12/B6) that are the most 
prominent (but not the exclusive) B-vitamins involved in homocysteine 
metabolism. Scant regard has been paid to the other B vitamins. This review 
describes the closely inter-related functions of the eight B-vitamins and 
marshals evidence suggesting that adequate levels of all members of this group 
of micronutrients are essential for optimal physiological and neurological 
functioning. Furthermore, evidence from human research clearly shows both that a 
significant proportion of the populations of developed countries suffer from 
deficiencies or insufficiencies in one or more of this group of vitamins, and 
that, in the absence of an optimal diet, administration of the entire B-vitamin 
group, rather than a small sub-set, at doses greatly in excess of the current 
governmental recommendations, would be a rational approach for preserving brain 
health.

DOI: 10.3390/nu8020068
PMCID: PMC4772032
PMID: 26828517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]