1. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2016 Feb 1;15:20. doi: 10.1186/s12933-016-0337-1.

Evaluation of pleiotropic effects among common genetic loci identified for 
cardio-metabolic traits in a Korean population.

Kim YK(1), Hwang MY(2), Kim YJ(3), Moon S(4), Han S(5), Kim BJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. bborumi@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. myhwang85@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. anwltlarkr@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. moon.sanghoon@daum.net.
(5)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. smallstar1999@hanmail.net.
(6)Division of Structural and Functional Genomics, Center for Genome Sciences, 
National Institute of Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Cheongju-si, Chungcheongbuk-do, 28159, South Korea. kbj6181@cdc.go.kr.

BACKGROUND: The genetic contribution to complex diseases or traits, including 
cardio-metabolic traits, has been elucidated recently by large-scale genome-wide 
association studies. These genome-wide association studies have indicated that 
most pleiotropic loci contain genes associated with lipids. Clinically, lipid 
related abnormalities are strongly associated with other diseases such as type 2 
diabetes, coronary artery disease and hypertension. The aim of this study was to 
evaluate the shared genetic background of lipids and other cardio-metabolic 
traits.
METHODS: We conducted meta-analyses of the association between 157 published 
lipid-associated loci and 10 cardio-metabolic traits in 14,028 Korean 
individuals genotyped using the Exome chip (Illumina HumanExome BeadChip). We 
also examined whether the pleiotropic effects of such loci constituted 
independent (i.e., biological) pleiotropy or mediated pleiotropy in these 
metabolic pathways.
RESULTS: Eighteen lipid-associated loci were significantly associated with one 
of six cardio-metabolic traits after correction for multiple testing (P < 3.70 Ã— 
10(-4)). Region 12q24.12 had pleiotropic effects on fasting plasma glucose, 
blood pressure and obesity-related traits (body mass index and waist-hip ratio) 
independent of its effects on the lipid profile. Lipid risk scores, calculated 
according to whether or not subjects carried the risk allele for lipid traits, 
were significantly associated with fasting plasma glucose, blood pressure and 
obesity-related traits.
CONCLUSIONS: The 12q24.12 region showed ethnic-specific genetic pleiotropy among 
cardio-metabolic traits in this study. Our findings may help to account for 
molecular mechanisms based on shared genetic background underlying not only 
dyslipidemia, but also cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12933-016-0337-1
PMCID: PMC4736473
PMID: 26833210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]