1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 3;6:20566. doi: 10.1038/srep20566.

Three DUF1996 Proteins Localize in Vacuoles and Function in Fungal Responses to 
Multiple Stresses and Metal Ions.

Tong SM(1), Chen Y(1), Ying SH(1), Feng MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310058, People's Republic of China.

Many annotated fungal genomes harbour high proportions of hypothetical proteins 
with or without domains of unknown function (DUF). Here, three novel proteins 
(342-497 amino acids), each containing only a single large DUF1996 (231-250 
residues) region with highly conserved head (DPIXXP) and tail (HXDXXXGW) 
signatures, were expressed as eGFP-tagged fusion proteins and shown to 
specifically localize in the vacuoles of Beauveria bassiana, a filamentous 
fungal entomopathogen; therefore, these proteins were named vacuole-localized 
proteins (VLPs). The VLPs have one to three homologues in other entomopathogenic 
or non-entomopathogenic filamentous fungi but no homologues in yeasts. The large 
DUF1996 regions can be formulated as 
D-X4-P-X5-6-H-X-H-X3-G-X25-26-D-X-S-X-YW-X-P-X123-203-CP-X39-48-H-X-D-X3-GW; the 
identical residues likely involve in a proton antiport system for intracellular 
homeostasis. Single deletions of three VLP-coding genes (vlp1-3) increased 
fungal sensitivities to cell wall perturbation, high osmolarity, oxidation, and 
several metal ions. Conidial thermotolerance decreased by ~11% in two Δvlp 
mutants, and UV-B resistance decreased by 41-57% in three Δvlp mutants. All the 
changes were restored by targeted gene complementation. However, the deletions 
did not influence fungal growth, conidiation, virulence or Cu(2+) sensitivity. 
Our findings unveiled a role for the DUF1996 regions of three B. bassiana VLPs 
in the regulation of multiple stress responses and environmental adaptation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep20566
PMCID: PMC4738358
PMID: 26839279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]