1. J Neuroendocrinol. 2016 Apr;28(4):n/a. doi: 10.1111/jne.12371.

Epigenetic Control of the Vasopressin Promoter Explains Physiological Ability to 
Regulate Vasopressin Transcription in Dehydration and Salt Loading States in the 
Rat.

Greenwood MP(1), Greenwood M(1), Gillard BT(1), Loh SY(2), Paton JF(3), Murphy 
D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)School of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

The synthesis of arginine vasopressin (AVP) in the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus is sensitive to increased 
plasma osmolality and a decreased blood volume, and thus is robustly increased 
by both dehydration (increased plasma osmolality and decreased blood volume) and 
salt loading (increased plasma osmolality). Both stimuli result in functional 
remodelling of the SON and PVN, a process referred to as functional-related 
plasticity. Such plastic changes in the brain have recently been associated with 
altered patterns of DNA methylation at CpG (cytosine-phosphate-guanine) 
residues, a process considered to be important for the regulation of gene 
transcription. In this regard, the proximal Avp promoter contains a number of 
CpG sites and is recognised as one of four CpG islands for the Avp gene, 
suggesting that methylation may be regulating Avp transcription. In the present 
study, we show that, in an immortalised hypothalamic cell line 4B, the proximal 
Avp promoter is highly methylated, and treatment of these cells with the DNA 
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine to demethylate DNA 
dramatically increases basal and stimulated Avp biosynthesis. We report no 
changes in the expression of DNA methyltransferases, Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a, whereas 
there is decreased expression of the demethylating enzyme 
ten-eleven-translocation 2, Tet2, in the SON by dehydration and salt loading. We 
found higher methylation of the SON Avp promoter in dehydrated but not 
salt-loaded rats. By analysis of individual CpG sites, we observed 
hypomethylation, hypermethylation and no change in methylation of specific CpGs 
in the SON Avp promoter of the dehydrated rat. Using reporter gene assays, we 
show that mutation of individual CpGs can result in altered Avp promoter 
activity. We propose that methylation of the SON Avp promoter is necessary to 
co-ordinate the duel inputs of increased plasma osmolality and decreased blood 
volume on Avp transcription in the chronically dehydrated rat.

Â© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Neuroendocrinology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of British Society for Neuroendocrinology.

DOI: 10.1111/jne.12371
PMCID: PMC4855680
PMID: 26833868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]