1. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2016 Apr;52:12-20. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.01.040.
Epub  2016 Feb 2.

The role of mTOR signalling in neurogenesis, insights from tuberous sclerosis 
complex.

Tee AR(1), Sampson JR(1), Pal DK(2), Bateman JM(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer & Genetics, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Institute of Medical Genetics Building, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN UK.
(2)Department of Basic & Clinical Neurosciences, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College, London SE5 8RX UK.
(3)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London SE1 1UL UK. Electronic address: joseph_matthew.bateman@kcl.ac.uk.

Understanding the development and function of the nervous system is one of the 
foremost aims of current biomedical research. The nervous system is generated 
during a relatively short period of intense neurogenesis that is orchestrated by 
a number of key molecular signalling pathways. Even subtle defects in the 
activity of these molecules can have serious repercussions resulting in 
neurological, neurodevelopmental and neurocognitive problems including epilepsy, 
intellectual disability and autism. Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a 
monogenic disease characterised by these problems and by the formation of benign 
tumours in multiple organs, including the brain. TSC is caused by mutations in 
the TSC1 or TSC2 gene leading to activation of the mechanistic target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) signalling pathway. A desire to understand the neurological 
manifestations of TSC has stimulated research into the role of the mTOR pathway 
in neurogenesis. In this review we describe TSC neurobiology and how the use of 
animal model systems has provided insights into the roles of mTOR signalling in 
neuronal differentiation and migration. Recent progress in this field has 
identified novel mTOR pathway components regulating neuronal differentiation. 
The roles of mTOR signalling and aberrant neurogenesis in epilepsy are also 
discussed. Continuing efforts to understand mTOR neurobiology will help to 
identify new therapeutic targets for TSC and other neurological diseases.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2016.01.040
PMCID: PMC6379054
PMID: 26849906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]