1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Apr;48(4):1628-38. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3366. Epub 2016 Feb
 1.

Ribosomal protein S15A promotes malignant transformation and predicts poor 
outcome in colorectal cancer through misregulation of p53 signaling pathway.

Chen J(1), Wei Y(1), Feng Q(1), Ren L(1), He G(1), Chang W(1), Zhu D(1), Yi 
T(1), Lin Q(1), Tang W(1), Xu J(1), Qin X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200032, P.R. China.

Ribosomal protein S15A (RPS15A), which has been identified as a highly conserved 
40S ribosomal protein, is essential for cell survival and proliferation. The 
present study evaluated the functional role of RPS15A in colorectal cancer 
(CRC), and our investigation found that RPS15A was highly expressed in a cohort 
of human CRC. High RPS15A expression was associated with older age (P=0.035), 
not receiving preoperative neoadjuvant treatment (P=0.048), higher primary pN 
stage (P=0.007) and slightly more synchronous distant metastases (P=0.058). The 
Cox univariate and multivariate hazard regression analysis revealed that higher 
expression of RPS15A led to a reduction of overall survival rate in CRC, 
indicating that enhanced RPS15A expression functions as an independent risk 
factor for the prognosis of CRC patients (P<0.001). Cell based analysis showed 
that RPS15A was widely expressed in human CRC cell lines. Knockdown of RPS15A 
significantly suppressed cell proliferation and colony formation in HCT116 and 
DLD-1 cells, and induced cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase. Genechip analysis 
suggested that knockdown of RPS15A might affect the p53 signaling pathway. 
Further study indicated that RPS15A knockdown upregulated p53 and p21 expression 
whereas downregulated CDK1 expression. In summary, the present study identified 
RPS15A as a novel univariate prognostic factor predicting a poor outcome in CRC 
patients. The RPS15A overexpression induced by malignant transformation of CRC 
might function through the p53 signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3366
PMID: 26847263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]