1. Ear Hear. 2016 Jul-Aug;37(4):e238-46. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000278.

Confirmation of PDZD7 as a Nonsyndromic Hearing Loss Gene.

Vona B(1), Lechno S, Hofrichter MA, Hopf S, Läig AK, Haaf T, Keilmann A, Zechner 
U, Bartsch O.

Author information:
(1)1Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians University Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany; 2Institute of Human Genetics, 3Department of Ophthalmology, 
University Medical Centre, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany; and 
4Division of Communication Disorders, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
University Medical Centre, Mainz, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: PDZD7 was identified in 2009 in a family with apparent nonsyndromic 
sensorineural hearing loss. However, subsequent clinical reports have associated 
PDZD7 with digenic Usher syndrome, the most common cause of deaf-blindness, or 
as a modifier of retinal disease. No further reports have validated this gene 
for nonsyndromic hearing loss, intuitively calling correct genotype-phenotype 
association into question. This report describes a validating second case for 
biallelic mutations in PDZD7 causing nonsyndromic mild to severe sensorineural 
hearing loss. It also provides detailed audiometric and ophthalmologic data 
excluding Usher syndrome in both the present proband (proband 1) and the first 
proband described in 2009 (proband 2).
DESIGN: Proband 1 was sequenced using a custom-designed next generation 
sequencing panel consisting of 151 deafness genes. Bioinformatics analysis and 
filtering disclosed two PDZD7 sequence variants (c.1648C>T, p.Q550* and 
c.2107del, p.S703Vfs*20). Segregation testing followed in the family. For both 
probands, audiograms were collected and analyzed for progressive hearing loss 
and detailed ophthalmic evaluations were performed including 
electroretinography.
RESULTS: Proband 1 demonstrated a prelingual, nonsyndromic, sensorineural 
hearing loss that progressed in the higher frequencies between 4 and 9 years 
old. PDZD7 segregation analysis confirmed biallelic inheritance (compound 
heterozygosity). Mutation analysis determined the c.1648C>T mutation as novel 
and reported the c.2107del deletion as rs397516633 with a calculated minor 
allele frequency of 0.000018. Clinical evaluation spanning well over a decade in 
proband 2 disclosed bilateral, nonprogressive hearing loss. Both probands showed 
healthy retinas, excluding Usher syndrome-like changes in the eye.
CONCLUSIONS: PDZD7 is confirmed as a bona fide autosomal recessive nonsyndromic 
hearing loss gene. In both probands, there was no evidence of impaired vision or 
ophthalmic pathology. As the current understanding of PDZD7 mutations bridge 
Mendelian and complex phenotypes, the authors recommend careful variant 
interpretation, since PDZD7 is one of many genes associated with both Usher 
syndrome and autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss. Additional reports 
are required for understanding the complete phenotypic spectrum of this gene, 
including the possibility of high-frequency progression, as well as 
noise-induced hearing loss susceptibility in adult carriers. This report rules 
out all forms of Usher syndrome with an onset before 12 and 15 years old in 
probands 1 and 2, respectively. However, due to the young ages of the probands, 
this report is uninformative regarding older patients.

DOI: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000278
PMID: 26849169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]