1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 5;11(2):e0148472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148472. 
eCollection 2016.

Transgenic Expression of the Formin Protein Fhod3 Selectively in the Embryonic 
Heart: Role of Actin-Binding Activity of Fhod3 and Its Sarcomeric Localization 
during Myofibrillogenesis.

Fujimoto N(1)(2), Kan-O M(1)(3), Ushijima T(1)(2), Kage Y(1)(2), Tominaga R(3), 
Sumimoto H(1), Takeya R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Departments of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 
5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.
(3)Departments of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kyushu University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Fhod3 is a cardiac member of the formin family proteins that play pivotal roles 
in actin filament assembly in various cellular contexts. The targeted deletion 
of mouse Fhod3 gene leads to defects in cardiogenesis, particularly during 
myofibrillogenesis, followed by lethality at embryonic day (E) 11.5. However, it 
remains largely unknown how Fhod3 functions during myofibrillogenesis. In this 
study, to assess the mechanism whereby Fhod3 regulates myofibrillogenesis during 
embryonic cardiogenesis, we generated transgenic mice expressing Fhod3 
selectively in embryonic cardiomyocytes under the control of the β-myosin heavy 
chain (MHC) promoter. Mice expressing wild-type Fhod3 in embryonic 
cardiomyocytes survive to adulthood and are fertile, whereas those expressing 
Fhod3 (I1127A) defective in binding to actin die by E11.5 with cardiac defects. 
This cardiac phenotype of the Fhod3 mutant embryos is almost identical to that 
observed in Fhod3 null embryos, suggesting that the actin-binding activity of 
Fhod3 is crucial for embryonic cardiogenesis. On the other hand, the β-MHC 
promoter-driven expression of wild-type Fhod3 sufficiently rescues cardiac 
defects of Fhod3-null embryos, indicating that the Fhod3 protein expressed in a 
transgenic manner can function properly to achieve myofibril maturation in 
embryonic cardiomyocytes. Using the transgenic mice, we further examined 
detailed localization of Fhod3 during myofibrillogenesis in situ and found that 
Fhod3 localizes to the specific central region of nascent sarcomeres prior to 
massive rearrangement of actin filaments and remains there throughout 
myofibrillogenesis. Taken together, the present findings suggest that, during 
embryonic cardiogenesis, Fhod3 functions as the essential reorganizer of actin 
filaments at the central region of maturating sarcomeres via the actin-binding 
activity of the FH2 domain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148472
PMCID: PMC4744011
PMID: 26848968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.