1. Minerva Med. 2016 Apr;107(2):84-91. Epub 2016 Feb 3.

Positive association between IL-16 rs1131445 polymorphism and cancer risk: a 
meta-analysis.

Liu FT(1), Zhu PQ, Ou YX, Liu WW, Xia GF, Luo HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, China - 517295653@qq.com.

INTRODUCTION: The association between IL-16 rs1131445 polymorphism and cancer 
risk is not consistent or even contradictory, this meta-analysis aims to 
investigate the role of IL-16 gene rs1131445 polymorphisms in the risk of 
cancer.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A comprehensive online search was conducted in PubMed, 
EMBASE and CNKI databases to identify eligible studies. The case-control studies 
related IL-16 rs1131445 C/T polymorphism with the cancer susceptibility were 
selected according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. After extracting the 
basic data information and quality of literature evaluation, the meta-analysis 
was performed by using STATA 12.0 software, with calculating odds ratio and 95% 
confidence interval, and further subgroup analysis, literature publication bias 
test and sensitivity analysis.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: There are totally 1677 cases and 1989 non-tumor controls 
finally involved. Meta-analysis showed that there are statistical correlations 
between the IL-16 rs1131445 C/T polymorphism and the cancer risk in Asian 
populations (TS vs. C, OR=0.80, 95%CI: 0.73-0.88; TT vs. TC, OR=0.75, 95%CI: 
0.65-0.87; TT vs. CC, OR=0.69, 95% CI: 0.56-0.84; CC+TC vs. TT, OR=1.36, 95%CI: 
1.19-1.55; CC vs. TC+TT, OR=1.27, 95%CI: 1.05-1.53) (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: IL-16 rs1131445 C/T polymorphism is related to the susceptibility 
to cancer in Asians, suggesting that the C allelic gene of rs1131445 is 
significantly associated with an increasing cancer risk.

PMID: 26842762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]