1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 15;7(11):12525-36. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7123.

Naturally occurring basal core promoter A1762T/G1764A dual mutations increase 
the risk of HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma: a meta-analysis.

Yang Z(1), Zhuang L(2)(3), Lu Y(1), Xu Q(1), Tang B(1), Chen X(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Basal core promoter (BCP) A1762T/G1764A dual mutations in hepatocarcinogenesis 
remain controversial. Published studies up to June 1, 2015 investigating the 
frequency of A1762T/G1764A dual mutations from chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), were systematically 
identified. A total of 10,240 patients with chronic HBV infection, including 
3729 HCC cases, were included in 52 identified studies. HCC patients had a 
higher frequency of BCP A1762T/G1764A dual mutations compared with asymptomatic 
HBsAg carriers (ASC) and patients with chronic hepatitis B (CHB) and liver 
cirrhosis (LC) (OR = 5.59, P < 0.00001; OR = 2.87, P < 0.00001; OR = 1.55, P = 
0.02, respectively). No statistically significant difference was observed in the 
frequency of A1762T/G1764A dual mutations in cirrhotic HCC versus non-cirrhotic 
HCC patients (OR = 2.06, P = 0.05). Chronic HBV-infected patients and HCC 
patients with genotype B had a significantly lower risk of A1762T/G1764A dual 
mutations compared with patients with genotype C (OR = 0.30, P < 0.0001 and OR = 
0.34, P = 0.04, respectively). In HBV genotype C subjects, A1762T/G1764A dual 
mutations contributed to significantly higher risk for HCC developing compared 
with non-mutation ones (OR = 3.47, P < 0.00001). In conclusion, A1762T/G1764A 
dual mutations increase the risk of HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma, 
particularly in an HBV genotype C population, even without progression to 
cirrhosis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7123
PMCID: PMC4914302
PMID: 26848866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There is no conflict of 
interest.