1. Microb Drug Resist. 2016 Jul;22(5):404-11. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2015.0018. Epub
2016  Feb 9.

Structural Insights into the Fluoroquinolone Resistance Mechanism of Shigella 
flexneri DNA Gyrase and Topoisomerase IV.

Tamanna(1), Ramana J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Jaypee University of 
Information Technology , Waknaghat, Solan, India .

Traveler's diarrhea (TD) is an important public health concern that can result 
from a variety of intestinal pathogens, including bacteria, parasites, and 
virus. A number of antibiotics are being used to cure TD, but due to widespread 
use of these antibiotics, the pathogens are becoming resistant to them. In this 
work, we performed docking studies of DNA gyraseA (GyrA) and topoisomerase IV 
(ParC) of Shigella flexneri and their mutants with two different 
fluoroquinolones, ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, to understand their resistance 
mechanism at the structural level. S. flexneri strains with mutations at serine 
83 to leucine and aspartic acid 87 to glutamate or asparagine of GyrA and that 
of serine 80 to isoleucine in ParC have decreased susceptibility to 
fluoroquinolones. This analysis revealed that interaction of 
ciprofloxacin/norfloxacin with all the mutants was weaker than the interaction 
of ciprofloxacin/norfloxacin with the wild type. This study highlights the 
importance of aspartic acid and serine in GyrA and that of serine in ParC, 
forming bonds with ciprofloxacin/norfloxacin, which may play a crucial role in 
antibiotic resistance. This work corelates very well with the experimental 
outcomes and gives a good explanation for fluoroquinolone resistance in S. 
flexneri.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2015.0018
PMID: 26859259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]