1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2016 Apr 1;296:73-84. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.02.001.
 Epub 2016 Feb 4.

Cytochrome P450 20A1 in zebrafish: Cloning, regulation and potential involvement 
in hyperactivity disorders.

Lemaire B(#)(1), Kubota A(1), O'Meara CM(1), Lamb DC(2), Tanguay RL(3), 
Goldstone JV(1), Stegeman JJ(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Institute of Life Science, Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, Oregon, United States of America.
(#)Contributed equally

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes for which there is no functional information are 
considered "orphan" CYPs. Previous studies showed that CYP20A1, an orphan, is 
expressed in human hippocampus and substantia nigra, and in zebrafish (Danio 
rerio) CYP20A1 maternal transcript occurs in eggs, suggesting involvement in 
brain and in early development. Moreover, hyperactivity is reported in humans 
with chromosome 2 microdeletions including CYP20A1. We examined CYP20A1 in 
zebrafish, including impacts of chemical exposure on expression. Zebrafish 
CYP20A1 cDNA was cloned, sequenced, and aligned with cloned human CYP20A1 and 
predicted vertebrate orthologs. CYP20A1s share a highly conserved N-terminal 
region and unusual sequences in the I-helix and the heme-binding CYP signature 
motifs. CYP20A1 mRNA expression was observed in adult zebrafish organs including 
the liver, heart, gonads, spleen and brain, as well as the eye and optic nerve. 
Putative binding sites in proximal promoter regions of CYP20A1s, and response of 
zebrafish CYP20A1 to selected nuclear and xenobiotic receptor agonists, point to 
up-regulation by agents involved in steroid hormone response, cholesterol and 
lipid metabolism. There also was a dose-dependent reduction of CYP20A1 
expression in embryos exposed to environmentally relevant levels of 
methylmercury. Morpholino knockdown of CYP20A1 in developing zebrafish resulted 
in behavioral effects, including hyperactivity and a slowing of the optomotor 
response in larvae. The results suggest that altered expression of CYP20A1 might 
be part of a mechanism linking methylmercury exposure to neurobehavioral 
deficits. The expanded information on CYP20A1 brings us closer to 
"deorphanization", that is, identifying CYP20A1 functions and its roles in 
health and disease.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.02.001
PMCID: PMC4807407
PMID: 26853319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]