1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2016 Apr;66(4):1862-1868. doi: 
10.1099/ijsem.0.000958. Epub 2016 Feb 10.

Tessaracoccus flavus sp. nov., isolated from the drainage system of a 
lindane-producing factory.

Kumari R(1), Singh P(1), Schumann P(2), Lal R(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, 
Delhi- 110007, India.
(2)Leibniz-Institut DSMZ - Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und 
Zellkulturen GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany.

Strain RP1T, a Gram-stain-positive, non-motile, non-spore-forming, coccus-shaped 
bacterium, was isolated from drainage of India Pesticides Limited, a 
lindane-producing unit situated at Chinhat, Lucknow, India. 16S rRNA gene 
sequence analysis revealed that strain RP1T belongs to the family 
Propionibacteriaceae and was closely related to the members of the genus 
Tessaracoccus with a similarity range of 95.4-97.6%. Strain RP1T was 
facultatively anaerobic, oxidase-negative, catalase-positive and capable of 
nitrate reduction. Strain RP1T contained peptidoglycan type A3γ', with 
ll-diaminopimelic acid as the diagnostic diamino acid and glycine at position 1 
of the peptide subunit. The major cellular fatty acid of strain RP1T was 
anteiso-C15 : 0 but a significant amount of iso-C14:0 was also detected. 
MK-9(H4) was the major respiratory quinone and polyamines detected were spermine 
and spermidine. The polar lipids included diphosphatidylglycerol, 
phosphatidylglycerol, two unknown glycolipids and two unknown phospholipids. The 
G+C content of the DNA was 66.7 mol%. The levels of DNA-DNA relatedness between 
RP1T and Tessaracoccus lubricantis KSS-17SeT, Tessaracoccus oleiagri 
SL014B-20A1T and Tessaracoccus flavescens SST-39T were 49.8, 34.8 and 23.5%, 
respectively. Based on the phenotypic and phylogenetic data presented, strain 
RP1T can be differentiated from previously described species of the genus 
Tessaracoccus, and thus represents a novel species, for which the name 
Tessaracoccus flavus sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is RP1T (=DSM 
100159T=MCC 2769T=KCTC 39686T).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.000958
PMID: 26869509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]