1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016 Feb;95(6):e2846. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002846.

Association Between 3 IL-10 Gene Polymorphisms and Cardiovascular Disease Risk: 
Systematic Review With Meta-Analysis and Trial Sequential Analysis.

Xuan Y(1), Wang L, Zhi H, Li X, Wei P.

Author information:
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine Engineering, Ministry of 
Education, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public 
Health, Southeast University (YX, LW, XL, PW); and Department of Cardiology, 
Affiliated ZhongDa Hospital of Southeast University (HZ), Nanjing, China..

Previous studies have yielded controversial results related to the contribution 
of interleukin 10 (IL-10) gene polymorphisms (IL-10 -592C/A, IL-10 -1082G/A, and 
IL-10 -819C/T) in the progression of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Thus, we 
performed a meta-analysis to summarize this situation.Eligible studies were 
retrieved by searching PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library with 
the last search up to July 7, 2015. Data were pooled by odds ratios (ORs) and 
their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). False-positive report probability (FPRP) 
analysis was conducted for all significant findings. Genotype-based mRNA 
expression analysis was also performed using data from 270 individuals with 
different ethnicities.Finally, 19 studies for IL-10 -592C/A polymorphism (7284 
cases and 7469 controls), 21 studies for IL-10 -1082G/A polymorphism (8263 cases 
and 5765 controls), and 12 studies for IL-10 -819C/T polymorphism (4502 cases 
and 3190 controls) were included in the meta-analyses. With respect to IL-10 
-819C/T polymorphism, statistically significant decreased CVD risk was found 
when all studies were pooled into the meta-analysis (T vs C: OR = 0.91, 95% 
CI = 0.84-0.98; TT + TC vs CC: OR = 0.90, 95% CI = 0.81-1.00). Subgroup analyses 
stratified by disease subtype suggested the -819C/T polymorphism was 
significantly associated with a decreased CAD risk (T vs C: OR = 0.90, 95% 
CI = 0.83-0.97; TT vs CC: OR = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.66-1.00; TT vs TC + CC: 
OR = 0.82, 95% CI = 0.69-0.98; TT + TC vs CC: OR = 0.89, 95% CI = 0.80-0.99), 
which was noteworthy finding as evaluated by FPRP. However, with regard to IL-10 
-592C/A and IL-10 -1082G/A polymorphisms, no significant association with CVD 
risk was observed in the overall and subgroup analyses.In conventional 
meta-analyses, the results suggested that IL-10 -819C/T polymorphism was 
associated with decreased risk of CVD, especially CAD outcome, whereas IL-10 
-592C/A and IL-10 -1082G/A polymorphisms might have no influence on the 
susceptibility of CVD. However, trial sequential analysis does not allow us to 
draw any solid conclusion for the association between IL-10 -592C/A or IL-10 
-1082G/A polymorphism and CVD risk. Further large and well-designed studies are 
still needed.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000002846
PMCID: PMC4753955
PMID: 26871859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.