1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 16;6:21248. doi: 10.1038/srep21248.

Allosteric coupling between proximal C-terminus and selectivity filter is 
facilitated by the movement of transmembrane segment 4 in TREK-2 channel.

Zhuo RG(1), Peng P(1)(2), Liu XY(1), Yan HT(1), Xu JP(3), Zheng JQ(1), Wei 
XL(1), Ma XY(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Biochemical Pharmacology, 
Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing 100850, China.
(2)Anesthesia and Operation Center, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

TREK-2, a member of two-pore-domain potassium channel family, regulates cellular 
excitability in response to diverse stimuli. However, how such stimuli control 
channel function remains unclear. Here, by characterizing the responses of 
cytosolic proximal C-terminus deletant (ΔpCt) and transmembrane segment 4 
(M4)-glycine hinge mutant (G312A) to 2-Aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB), an 
activator of TREK-2, we show that the transduction initiated from pCt domain is 
allosterically coupled with the conformation of selectivity filter (SF) via the 
movements of M4, without depending on the original status of SF. Moreover, ΔpCt 
and G312A also exhibited blunted responses to extracellular alkalization, a 
model to induce SF conformational transition. These results suggest that the 
coupling between pCt domain and SF is bidirectional, and M4 movements are 
involved in both processes. Further mechanistic exploration reveals that the 
function of Phe316, a residue close to the C-terminus of M4, is associated with 
such communications. However, unlike TREK-2, M4-hinge of TREK-1 only controls 
the transmission from pCt to SF, rather than SF conformational changes triggered 
by pHo changes. Together, our findings uncover the unique gating properties of 
TREK-2, and elucidate the mechanisms for how the extracellular and intracellular 
stimuli harness the pore gating allosterically.

DOI: 10.1038/srep21248
PMCID: PMC4754649
PMID: 26879043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]