1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2016 Mar 15;775:149-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.02.031.
Epub  2016 Feb 9.

Assessment of direct gating and allosteric modulatory effects of meprobamate in 
recombinant GABA(A) receptors.

Kumar M(1), Dillon GH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Center for Neuroscience, Robert 
C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Center for Neuroscience, Robert 
C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA; 
Center for Neuroscience Discovery, University of North Texas Health Science 
Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA. Electronic address: glenn.dillon@unthsc.edu.

Meprobamate is a schedule IV anxiolytic and the primary metabolite of the muscle 
relaxant carisoprodol. Meprobamate modulates GABAA (γ-aminobutyric acid Type A) 
receptors, and has barbiturate-like activity. To gain insight into its actions, 
we have conducted a series of studies using recombinant GABAA receptors. In 
αxβzγ2 GABAA receptors (where x=1-6 and z=1-3), the ability to enhance 
GABA-mediated current was evident for all α subunit isoforms, with the largest 
effect observed in α5-expressing receptors. Direct gating was present with all α 
subunits, although attenuated in α3-expressing receptors. Allosteric and direct 
effects were comparable in α1β1γ2 and α1β2γ2 receptors, whereas allosteric 
effects were enhanced in α1β2 compared to α1β2γ2 receptors. In "extrasynaptic" 
(α1β3δ and α4β3δ) receptors, meprobamate enhanced EC20 and saturating GABA 
currents, and directly activated these receptors. The barbiturate antagonist 
bemegride attenuated direct effects of meprobamate. Whereas pentobarbital 
directly gated homomeric β3 receptors, meprobamate did not, and instead blocked 
the spontaneously open current present in these receptors. In wild type 
homomeric ρ1 receptors, pentobarbital and meprobamate were ineffective in direct 
gating; a mutation known to confer sensitivity to pentobarbital did not confer 
sensitivity to meprobamate. Our results provide insight into the actions of 
meprobamate and parent therapeutic agents such as carisoprodol. Whereas in 
general actions of meprobamate were comparable to those of carisoprodol, 
differential effects of meprobamate at some receptor subtypes suggest potential 
advantages of meprobamate may be exploited. A re-assessment of previously 
synthesized meprobamate-related carbamate molecules for myorelaxant and other 
therapeutic indications is warranted.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.02.031
PMCID: PMC4806799
PMID: 26872987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]