1. Acta Crystallogr E Crystallogr Commun. 2016 Jan 1;72(Pt 1):35-9. doi: 
10.1107/S2056989015023373. eCollection 2016 Jan 1.

Crystal structures of three complexes of zinc chloride with 
tri-tert-butyl-phosphane.

Finke AD(1), Gray DL(2), Moore JS(3).

Author information:
(1)Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland.
(2)University of Illinois, School of Chemical Sciences, Box 59-1, 505 South 
Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.
(3)University of Illinois, School of Chemical Sciences, Box 55-5, 600 South 
Mathews Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Under anhydrous conditions and in the absence of a Lewis-base solvent, a zinc 
chloride complex with tri-tert-butyl-phosphane as the μ-bridged dimer is formed, 
viz. di-μ-chlorido-bis-[chlorido-bis-(tri-tert-butyl-phosphane)zinc], 
[ZnCl4(C12H27P)2], (1), which features a nearly square-shaped (ZnCl)2 cyclic 
core and whose Cl atoms inter-act weakly with C-H groups on the phosphane 
ligand. In the presence of THF, monomeric 
di-chlorido-(tetra-hydro-furan-κO)(tri-tert-butyl-phosphane-κP)zinc, 
[ZnCl2(C4H8O)(C12H27P)] or [P(tBu3)(THF)ZnCl2], (2), is formed. This slightly 
distorted tetra-hedral Zn complex has weak C-H⋯Cl inter-actions between the Cl 
atoms and phosphane and THF C-H groups. Under ambient conditions, the hydrolysed 
complex tri-tert-butyl-phospho-nium aqua-tri-chlorido-zincate 
1,2-di-chloro-ethane monosolvate, (C12H28P)[ZnCl3(H2O)]·C2H4Cl2 or [HPtBu3](+) 
[(H2O)ZnCl3](-)·C2H4Cl2, (3), is formed. This complex forms chains of 
[(H2O)ZnCl3](-) anions from hydrogen-bonding inter-actions between the water H 
atoms and Cl atoms that propagate along the b axis.

DOI: 10.1107/S2056989015023373
PMCID: PMC4704762
PMID: 26870580