1. Braz J Microbiol. 2016 Jan-Mar;47(1):251-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bjm.2015.11.016.
Epub  2016 Jan 27.

Phylogenetic analysis of Dengue virus 1 isolated from South Minas Gerais, 
Brazil.

Drumond BP(1), Fagundes LG(2), Rocha RP(2), Fumagalli MJ(2), Araki CS(3), 
Colombo TE(3), Nogueira ML(3), Castilho TE(4), da Silveira NJ(4), Malaquias 
LC(1), Coelho LF(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Virologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Vacinas, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
Federal de Alfenas, Alfenas, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Pesquisas Em Virologia, Departamento de Doenças Infecciosas e 
Parasitárias, Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Bioinformática, Universidade Federal de Alfenas, Alfenas, 
Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Virologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: 
coelho@unifal-mg.edu.br.

Dengue is a major worldwide public health problem, especially in the tropical 
and subtropical regions of the world. Primary infection with a single Dengue 
virus serotype causes a mild, self-limiting febrile illness called dengue fever. 
However, a subset of patients who experience secondary infection with a 
different serotype can progress to a more severe form of the disease, called 
dengue hemorrhagic fever. The four Dengue virus serotypes (1-4) are 
antigenically and genetically distinct and each serotype is composed of multiple 
genotypes. In this study we isolated one Dengue virus 1 serotype, named 
BR/Alfenas/2012, from a patient with dengue hemorrhagic fever in Alfenas, South 
Minas Gerais, Brazil and molecular identification was performed based on the 
analysis of NS5 gene. Swiss mice were infected with this isolate to verify its 
potential to induce histopathological alterations characteristic of dengue. 
Liver histopathological analysis of infected animals showed the presence of 
inflammatory infiltrates, hepatic steatosis, as well as edema, hemorrhage and 
necrosis focal points. Phylogenetic and evolutionary analyses based on the 
envelope gene provided evidence that the isolate BR/Alfenas/2012 belongs to 
genotype V, lineage I and it is probably derived from isolates of Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil. The isolate BR/Alfenas/2012 showed two unique amino acids 
substitutions (SER222THRE and PHE306SER) when compared to other Brazilian 
isolates from the same genotype/lineage. Molecular models were generated for the 
envelope protein indicating that the amino acid alteration PHE 306 SER could 
contribute to a different folding in this region located within the domain III. 
Further genetic and animal model studies using BR/Alfenas/2012 and other 
isolates belonging to the same lineage/genotype could help determine the 
relation of these genetic alterations and dengue hemorrhagic fever in a 
susceptible population.

Copyright © 2015 Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia. Published by Elsevier 
Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjm.2015.11.016
PMCID: PMC4827697
PMID: 26887252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]