1. Scientifica (Cairo). 2016;2016:1876218. doi: 10.1155/2016/1876218. Epub 2016
Jan  11.

Primary Lymphoepithelioma-Like Carcinoma of the Prostate Gland: A Review of the 
Literature.

Venyo AK(1).

Author information:
(1)North Manchester General Hospital, Department of Urology, Delaunay's Road, 
Crumpsall, Manchester, UK.

Background. Primary lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of the prostate gland 
(PLELCP) is rare with hardly any information on its diagnostic features and 
biological behaviour. Aim. To review the literature. Method. Various Internet 
data bases were searched. Literature Review. PLELCP is extremely rare and there 
are hardly any pictures of the tumour involving the prostate; hence it would 
appear that clinicians would need to use their knowledge of the microscopic and 
immunohistochemical characteristics of the tumour in the nasopharynx and urinary 
bladder as diagnostic aid. PLELCP on microscopy mimics nasopharyngeal LELC. The 
LELC component of the tumour is characterized by indistinct cytoplasmic borders 
and a syncytial growth pattern. The stroma may be densely infiltrated by 
lymphoid cells admixed with some plasma cells and neutrophils and at times 
prominent infiltration of eosinophils. PLELCPs tend to have adenocarcinoma, 
either as the only pattern or with additional ductal components or adenosquamous 
carcinoma. PLELCPs stain positively with PSA, PSAP, AMACR/P504S, EMA, and 
cytokeratins AE1/AE3, 7, 8, and 20. There is no consensus on treatment of PLECP. 
The reported prognosis has been poor. Conclusions. PLELCPs should be entered 
into a multicenter trial to determine the biological behaviour and to find the 
best treatment option that would improve the prognosis.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/1876218
PMCID: PMC4737053
PMID: 26881187