1. Braz J Microbiol. 2016 Jan-Mar;47(1):150-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bjm.2015.11.005.
Epub  2016 Jan 27.

Resistance patterns, ESBL genes, and genetic relatedness of Escherichia coli 
from dogs and owners.

Carvalho AC(1), Barbosa AV(2), Arais LR(2), Ribeiro PF(2), Carneiro VC(2), 
Cerqueira AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Departamento Interdisciplinar de Rio das 
Ostras, Instituto de Humanidades e Saúde, Pólo Universitário de Rio das Ostras, 
Rio das Ostras, RJ, Brazil; Laboratório de Enteropatógenos, Microbiologia 
Veterinária e de Alimentos/(LEMA), Departamento de Microbiologia e 
Parasitologia, Instituto Biomédico, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, 
RJ, Brazil. Electronic address: doutoracristiane@ig.com.br.
(2)Laboratório de Enteropatógenos, Microbiologia Veterinária e de 
Alimentos/(LEMA), Departamento de Microbiologia e Parasitologia, Instituto 
Biomédico, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, RJ, Brazil.

Antimicrobial resistance in Escherichia coli isolated from pet dogs can be 
considered a potential threat of infection for the human population. Our 
objective was to characterize the resistance pattern, extended spectrum 
beta-lactamase production and genetic relatedness of multiresistant E. coli 
strains isolated from dogs (n=134), their owners (n=134), and humans who claim 
to have no contact with dogs (n=44, control), searching for sharing of strains. 
The strains were assessed for their genetic relatedness by phylogenetic grouping 
and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Multiresistant E. coli strains were 
isolated from 42 (31.3%) fecal samples from pairs of dogs and owners, totaling 
84 isolates, and from 19 (43.1%) control group subjects. The strains showed high 
levels of resistance to ampicillin, streptomycin, tetracycline, trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole regardless of host species or group of origin. The blaTEM, 
blaCTX-M, and blaSHV genes were detected in similar proportions in all groups. 
All isolates positive for bla genes were ESBL producers. The phylogenetic group 
A was the most prevalent, irrespective of the host species. None of the strains 
belonging to the B2 group contained bla genes. Similar resistance patterns were 
found for strains from dogs, owners and controls; furthermore, identical PFGE 
profiles were detected in four (9.5%) isolate pairs from dogs and owners, 
denoting the sharing of strains. Pet dogs were shown to be a potential household 
source of multiresistant E. coli strains.

Copyright © 2016 Sociedade Brasileira de Microbiologia. Published by Elsevier 
Editora Ltda. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjm.2015.11.005
PMCID: PMC4822764
PMID: 26887238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]