1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;53(12):925-30.

[Clinical features and genotype analysis of 132 patients with Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Li W(1), Liu D(1), Zhang X(1), Ding Y(2), Zhao X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development 
and Disorders, Chongqing 400014, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development 
and Disorders, Chongqing 400014, China; Email: dingyuan1981444@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and immunological laboratory features, 
gene mutations, treatment and prognosis in children with Wiskott-Aldrich 
syndrome (WAS).
METHOD: The clinical, laboratory characteristics, treatment and prognosis of 132 
children with WAS, who visited Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University from April 2000 to June 2015, were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULT: All patients were male. The median age of disease onset was 15 days and 
the median age at diagnosis was 10 months. Of the 132 cases, 112 had classic 
WAS, 20 had X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT). The median platelet count was 
23Ã—10(9)/L. All cases had the clinical characteristics of WAS including 
bleeding, eczema, and being susceptible to infection. The initial symptoms 
include hemorrhage (75.0%) and eczema (16.7%). Twenty-one cases had autoimmune 
diseases and one patient had leukemia. WAS protein (WASP) expression in 115 
cases were measured by flow cytometry, 88 cases were negative, in 12 cases WASP 
decreased, in 5 cases it was normal, 10 cases had bimodal distribution. 
Eighty-one kinds of mutations were found in 122 families, including eight kinds 
of hot-spot mutations, which were 290 C> N / 291G> N (R86C / H / L), 665 C> T 
(R211X), 155 C> T (R41X), 168 C> T (T45 M), IVS1+ 1 g> t/ a, IVS6 + 5 g> a, IVS8 
+ 1 g> a and IVS8 + 1to + 6del gtga. Meantime, 29 kinds of novel mutations were 
found, which were 321T>C, 415C>A, 471C>T, 102-105delC, 521 del C, 1330 del A, 
IVS2-2 a>c, 168 C>A/1412 C> T, exon1-2 del/1412 C>T, and so on. The proportion 
of CD3(+) T cells (31.3%), helper T cells (37.3%) and cytotoxic T cells (38.6%) 
in the peripheral blood declined. The serum levels of IgG (51.1%), IgA (43.3%) 
and IgE (40.0%) increased, IgM (25.6%) decreased. Of the 132 cases, 72 remain 
survived, of whom 36 cases received hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
(HSCT), 14 patients with classic WAS received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 
therapy. With regular IVIG therapy, the frequency of infections was reduced and 
the patients' symptoms were improved.
CONCLUSION: The clinical characteristics of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome were early 
age of onset, microthrombocytopenia, eczema and recurrent infections. The 
proportion of T lymphocyte declined, the serum levels of IgG, IgA, and IgE 
increased, and level of IgM decreased in a part of patients. The detection of 
WAS gene mutation and WAS protein detection was the key diagnostic methods. 
Regular IVIG can gain more time for children who will receive HSCT and improve 
their quality of life.

PMID: 26887548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]