1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Feb 18;12(2):e1005873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005873. 
eCollection 2016 Feb.

A Novel Epigenetic Silencing Pathway Involving the Highly Conserved 5'-3' 
Exoribonuclease Dhp1/Rat1/Xrn2 in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Tucker JF(1), Ohle C(2), Schermann G(2), Bendrin K(2), Zhang W(3), Fischer T(2), 
Zhang K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, 
United States of America.
(2)Biochemistry Center (BZH), Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Epigenetic gene silencing plays a critical role in regulating gene expression 
and contributes to organismal development and cell fate acquisition in 
eukaryotes. In fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, 
heterochromatin-associated gene silencing is known to be mediated by RNA 
processing pathways including RNA interference (RNAi) and a 3'-5' 
exoribonuclease complex, the exosome. Here, we report a new RNA-processing 
pathway that contributes to epigenetic gene silencing and assembly of 
heterochromatin mediated by 5'-3' exoribonuclease Dhp1/Rat1/Xrn2. Dhp1 mutation 
causes defective gene silencing both at peri-centromeric regions and at the 
silent mating type locus. Intriguingly, mutation in either of the two 
well-characterized Dhp1-interacting proteins, the Din1 pyrophosphohydrolase or 
the Rhn1 transcription termination factor, does not result in silencing defects 
at the main heterochromatic regions. We demonstrate that Dhp1 interacts with 
heterochromatic factors and is essential in the sequential steps of establishing 
silencing in a manner independent of both RNAi and the exosome. Genomic and 
genetic analyses suggest that Dhp1 is involved in post-transcriptional silencing 
of repetitive regions through its RNA processing activity. The results describe 
the unexpected role of Dhp1/Rat1/Xrn2 in chromatin-based silencing and elucidate 
how various RNA-processing pathways, acting together or independently, 
contribute to epigenetic regulation of the eukaryotic genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005873
PMCID: PMC4758730
PMID: 26889830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.