1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016 Oct;25(10):1081-9. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-016-0828-3. Epub 2016 Feb 20.

Epigenetic regulation of the DRD4 gene and dimensions of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children.

Dadds MR(1), Schollar-Root O(2), Lenroot R(2), Moul C(2), Hawes DJ(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, 
Australia. mark.dadds@sydney.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, 
Australia.
(3)University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.

Recent evidence suggests that epigenetic regulation of the DRD4 gene may 
characterise specific aspects of ADHD symptomology. We tested associations 
between ADHD symptoms and epigenetic changes to the DRD4 gene in DNA extracted 
from blood and saliva in N = 330 children referred for a variety of behavioural 
and emotional problems. ADHD was indexed using DSM diagnoses as well as mother, 
father, and teacher reports. Methylation levels were assayed for the island of 
18 CpG sites in the DRD4 receptor gene. A nearby SNP, rs3758653, was also 
genotyped as it has previously been shown to influence methylation levels. There 
was high consistency of methylation levels across CpG sites and tissue sources, 
and higher methylation levels were associated with the major allele of SNP 
rs3758653. Higher methylation levels were associated with more severe ADHD 
independent of SNP status, tissue source, ethnicity, environmental adversity, 
and comorbid conduct problems. The association applied specifically to the 
cognitive/attentional, rather than hyperactivity problems that characterise 
ADHD. The results indicate that epigenetic regulation of the DRD4 gene in the 
form of increased methylation is associated with the cognitive/attentional 
deficits in ADHD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-016-0828-3
PMID: 26897359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]