1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016 Feb 17;13(2):221. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph13020221.

Pollution and Oral Bioaccessibility of Pb in Soils of Villages and Cities with a 
Long Habitation History.

Walraven N(1), Bakker M(2), van Os B(3), Klaver G(4), Middelburg JJ(5), Davies 
G(6).

Author information:
(1)GeoConnect, Meester Dekkerstraat 4, Castricum 1901 PV, The Netherlands. 
n.walraven@geoconnect.nl.
(2)Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, Bilthoven 
3720 BA, The Netherlands. martine.bakker@rivm.nl.
(3)Rijksdienst voor het Cultureel Erfgoed, Cultural Heritage Agency, P.O. Box 
1600, Amersfoort 3800 BP, The Netherlands. B.van.Os@cultureelerfgoed.nl.
(4)Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières (BRGM), 3 Avenue 
Claude-Guillemin, BP 36009, Orléans Cedex 2 45060, The Netherlands. 
gerardklaver3@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Earth Sciences, University Utrecht, P.O. Box 80021, Utrecht 
3508 TA, The Netherlands. j.b.m.middelburg@uu.nl.
(6)Geology & Geochemistry, Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, VU University 
Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, Amsterdam 1081 HV, The Netherlands. 
g.r.davies@vu.nl.

The Dutch cities Utrecht and Wijk bij Duurstede were founded by the Romans 
around 50 B.C. and the village Fijnaart and Graft-De Rijp around 1600 A.D. The 
soils of these villages are polluted with Pb (up to ~5000 mg/kg). Lead isotope 
ratios were used to trace the sources of Pb pollution in the urban soils. In 
~75% of the urban soils the source of the Pb pollution was a mixture of glazed 
potsherd, sherds of glazed roof tiles, building remnants (Pb sheets), metal 
slag, Pb-based paint flakes and coal ashes. These anthropogenic Pb sources most 
likely entered the urban soils due to historical smelting activities, renovation 
and demolition of houses, disposal of coal ashes and raising and fertilization 
of land with city waste. Since many houses still contain Pb-based building 
materials, careless renovation or demolition can cause new or more extensive Pb 
pollution in urban soils. In ~25% of the studied urban topsoils, Pb isotope 
compositions suggest Pb pollution was caused by incinerator ash and/or gasoline 
Pb suggesting atmospheric deposition as the major source. The bioaccessible Pb 
fraction of 14 selected urban soils was determined with an in vitro test and 
varied from 16% to 82% of total Pb. The bioaccessibility appears related to the 
chemical composition and grain size of the primary Pb phases and pollution age. 
Risk assessment based on the in vitro test results imply that risk to children 
may be underestimated in ~90% of the studied sample sites (13 out of 14).

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph13020221
PMCID: PMC4772241
PMID: 26901208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]