1. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Jan 29;15(1). doi: 10.4238/gmr.15016363.

Sequence analysis of the S1PR1 gene in river buffalo.

Stafuzza NB(1)(2), Naressi BC(1), Borges MM(1), Amaral-Trusty ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de Biociências, Letras e Ciências Exatas, 
Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho, São José do Rio Preto, 
SP, Brasil.
(2)Departamento de Ciências Exatas, Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e 
Veterinárias, Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho, 
Jaboticabal, SP, Brasil.

Recent developments in methodologies for genomic analyses have enabled a 
significant advance in understanding of the river buffalo genome. The S1PR1 gene 
has been mapped to buffalo chromosome 6 and bovine chromosome 3; this gene is of 
interest as it is a candidate for marbling in meat, an important economic trait. 
Here, we performed next generation sequencing in a buffalo BAC DNA clone and 
obtained a 54.5-kb sequence encompassing the entire buffalo S1PR1 gene as well 
as the 27 kb upstream region and the 22 kb downstream region. The gene had a 
total length of 4716 bp, including three exons and two introns; exons 1 and 2 
were classified as non-protein-coding. In comparison with homologues from other 
species, the structural organization of buffalo S1PR1 was closest to that of the 
goat and in both species exon 2 of the gene was non-protein-coding. One hundred 
and nine repetitive elements were found within the buffalo gene and its boundary 
regions, with 50 SINE repeats being the most abundant. Alignment of S1PR1 
sequences from the Murrah and Mediterranean breeds revealed two nucleotide 
substitutions (g.1176C>G and g.2740T>C), which represent potential SNPs that 
could be used in further studies of buffalo genetic structure.

DOI: 10.4238/gmr.15016363
PMID: 26909928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]