1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jul;1863(7 Pt B):1799-805. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.02.014. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

The role of mutations in the SCN5A gene in cardiomyopathies.

Zaklyazminskaya E(1), Dzemeshkevich S(2).

Author information:
(1)Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Abricosovsky pereulok, 119991 
Moscow, Russia; Department of Molecular and Cellular Genetics, Pirogov Russian 
National Research Medical University, Ostrovityanova str. 1, Moscow 117997, 
Russia. Electronic address: zhelene@mail.ru.
(2)Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Abricosovsky pereulok, 119991 
Moscow, Russia. Electronic address: sdzemeshkevich@gmail.com.

The SCN5A gene encodes the alpha-subunit of the Nav1.5 ion channel protein, 
which is responsible for the sodium inward current (INa). Since 1995 several 
hundred mutations in this gene have been found to be causative for inherited 
arrhythmias including Long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, cardiac conduction 
disease, sudden infant death syndrome, etc. As expected these syndromes are 
primarily electrical heart diseases leading to life-threatening arrhythmias with 
an "apparently normal heart". In 2003 a new form of dilated cardiomyopathy was 
identified associated with mutations in the SCN5A gene. Recently mutations have 
been also found in patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
and atrial standstill. The purpose of this review is to outline and analyze the 
following four topics: 1) SCN5A genetic variants linked to different 
cardiomyopathies; 2) clinical manifestations of the known mutations; 3) possible 
molecular mechanisms of myocardial remodeling; and 4) the potential implications 
of gene-specific treatment for those disorders. This article is part of a 
Special Issue entitled: Cardiomyocyte Biology: Integration of Developmental and 
Environmental Cues in the Heart edited by Marcus Schaub and Hughes Abriel.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.02.014
PMID: 26916278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]