1. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 26;6:22222. doi: 10.1038/srep22222.

An extract of Urtica dioica L. mitigates obesity induced insulin resistance in 
mice skeletal muscle via protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A).

Obanda DN(1), Ribnicky D(2), Yu Y(1), Stephens J(1), Cefalu WT(1).

Author information:
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, LA 70808, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, 
USA.

The leaf extract of Urtica dioica L. (UT) has been reported to improve glucose 
homeostasis in vivo, but definitive studies on efficacy and mechanism of action 
are lacking. We investigated the effects of UT on obesity- induced insulin 
resistance in skeletal muscle. Male C57BL/6J mice were divided into three 
groups: low-fat diet (LFD), high-fat diet (HFD) and HFD supplemented with UT. 
Body weight, body composition, plasma glucose and plasma insulin were monitored. 
Skeletal muscle (gastrocnemius) was analyzed for insulin sensitivity, ceramide 
accumulation and the post translational modification and activity of protein 
phosphatase 2A (PP2A). PP2A is activated by ceramides and dephosphorylates Akt. 
C2C12 myotubes exposed to excess free fatty acids with or without UT were also 
evaluated for insulin signaling and modulation of PP2A. The HFD induced insulin 
resistance, increased fasting plasma glucose, enhanced ceramide accumulation and 
PP2A activity in skeletal muscle. Supplementation with UT improved plasma 
glucose homeostasis and enhanced skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity without 
affecting body weight and body composition. In myotubes, UT attenuated the 
ability of FFAs to induce insulin resistance and PP2A hyperactivity without 
affecting ceramide accumulation and PP2A expression. UT decreased PP2A activity 
through posttranslational modification that was accompanied by a reduction in 
Akt dephosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1038/srep22222
PMCID: PMC4768183
PMID: 26916435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]