1. Drugs. 2016 Apr;76(5):533-49. doi: 10.1007/s40265-016-0546-7.

Serious Non-AIDS Events: Therapeutic Targets of Immune Activation and Chronic 
Inflammation in HIV Infection.

Hsu DC(1), Sereti I(2).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bg 10 Rm 11B07. 10 Center Dr, Bethesda, MD, 20814, 
USA.
(2)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bg 10 Rm 11B07. 10 Center Dr, Bethesda, MD, 20814, 
USA. isereti@niaid.nih.gov.

In the antiretroviral therapy (ART) era, serious non-AIDS events (SNAEs) have 
become the major causes of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected persons. 
Early ART initiation has the strongest evidence for reducing SNAEs and 
mortality. Biomarkers of immune activation, inflammation and coagulopathy do not 
fully normalize despite virologic suppression and persistent immune activation 
is an important contributor to SNAEs. A number of strategies aimed to reduce 
persistent immune activation including ART intensification to reduce residual 
viremia; treatment of co-infections to reduce chronic antigen stimulation; the 
use of anti-inflammatory agents, reducing microbial translocation as well as 
interventions to improve immune recovery through cytokine administration and 
reducing lymphoid tissue fibrosis, have been investigated. To date, there is 
little conclusive evidence on which strategies beyond treatment of hepatitis B 
and C co-infections and reducing cardiovascular risk factors will result in 
clinical benefits in patients already on ART with viral suppression. The use of 
statins seems to show early promise and larger clinical trials are underway to 
confirm their efficacy. At this stage, clinical care of HIV-infected patients 
should therefore focus on early diagnosis and prompt ART initiation, treatment 
of active co-infections and the aggressive management of co-morbidities until 
further data are available.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-016-0546-7
PMCID: PMC5578711
PMID: 26915027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.