1. Biochem J. 2016 Apr 15;473(8):1073-83. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20160118. Epub 2016 Feb
 25.

Small molecules reveal an alternative mechanism of Bax activation.

Brahmbhatt H(1), Uehling D(2), Al-Awar R(2), Leber B(3), Andrews D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada, L8S 4L8 Department of Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook 
Research Institute, University of Toronto, ON, Canada, M4N 3M5.
(2)Drug Discovery Program, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, M5G 0A3.
(3)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, L8S 4L8.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada, L8S 4L8 Department of Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook 
Research Institute, University of Toronto, ON, Canada, M4N 3M5 
david.andrews@sri.utoronto.ca.

The pro-apoptotic protein Bax commits a cell to death by permeabilizing the 
mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM). To obtain small-molecule probes for 
elucidating the molecular mechanism(s) of Bax activation, we screened for 
compounds that induced Bax-mediated liposome permeabilization. We identified 
five structurally different small molecules that promoted both Bax targeting to 
and oligomerization at membranes. All five compounds initiated Bax 
oligomerization in the absence of membranes by a mechanism unlike Bax activation 
by Bcl-2 homology 3 domain (BH3) proteins. Some of the compounds induced 
Bax/Bak-dependent apoptosis in cells. Activation of Bax by the most active 
compound was poorly inhibited by the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-XL and requires 
a cysteine residue at position 126 of Bax that is not required for activation by 
BH3 proteins. Our results reveal a novel pathway for Bax activation independent 
of pro-apoptotic BH3 proteins that may have important implications for the 
regulation of Bax activity in cells.

Â© 2016 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20160118
PMCID: PMC4847155
PMID: 26916338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]