1. Mol Cells. 2016 Mar;39(3):266-79. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2016.2362. Epub 2016 
Feb 24.

Regulations of Reversal of Senescence by PKC Isozymes in Response to 
12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-Acetate via Nuclear Translocation of pErk1/2.

Lee YY(1), Ryu MS(1), Kim HS(1), Suganuma M(2), Song KY(3), Lim IK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon 443-380, Korea.
(2)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, Seoul 
156-756, Korea.

The mechanism by which 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) bypasses 
cellular senescence was investigated using human diploid fibroblast (HDF) cell 
replicative senescence as a model. Upon TPA treatment, protein kinase C (PKC) α 
and PKCβ1 exerted differential effects on the nuclear translocation of 
cytoplasmic pErk1/2, a protein which maintains senescence. PKCα accompanied 
pErk1/2 to the nucleus after freeing it from PEA-15pS(104) via PKCβ1 and then 
was rapidly ubiquitinated and degraded within the nucleus. Mitogen-activated 
protein kinase docking motif and kinase activity of PKCα were both required for 
pErk1/2 transport to the nucleus. Repetitive exposure of mouse skin to TPA 
downregulated PKCα expression and increased epidermal and hair follicle cell 
proliferation. Thus, PKCα downregulation is accompanied by in vivo cell 
proliferation, as evidenced in 7, 12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene 
(DMBA)-TPA-mediated carcinogenesis. The ability of TPA to reverse senescence was 
further demonstrated in old HDF cells using RNA-sequencing analyses in which 
TPA-induced nuclear PKCα degradation freed nuclear pErk1/2 to induce cell 
proliferation and facilitated the recovery of mitochondrial energy metabolism. 
Our data indicate that TPA-induced senescence reversal and carcinogenesis 
promotion share the same molecular pathway. Loss of PKCα expression following 
TPA treatment reduces pErk1/2-activated SP1 biding to the p21(WAF1) gene 
promoter, thus preventing senescence onset and overcoming G1/S cell cycle arrest 
in senescent cells.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2016.2362
PMCID: PMC4794609
PMID: 26912086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]