1. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 8;14(9):2041-2049. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.011. Epub 
2016 Feb 25.

Reciprocal Degradation of YME1L and OMA1 Adapts Mitochondrial Proteolytic 
Activity during Stress.

Rainbolt TK(1), Lebeau J(1), Puchades C(1), Wiseman RL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Department of Chemical 
Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Department of Chemical 
Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic 
address: wiseman@scripps.edu.

The mitochondrial inner membrane proteases YME1L and OMA1 are critical 
regulators of essential mitochondrial functions, including inner membrane 
proteostasis maintenance and mitochondrial dynamics. Here, we show that YME1L 
and OMA1 are reciprocally degraded in response to distinct types of cellular 
stress. OMA1 is degraded through a YME1L-dependent mechanism in response to 
toxic insults that depolarize the mitochondrial membrane. Alternatively, insults 
that depolarize mitochondria and deplete cellular ATP stabilize active OMA1 and 
promote YME1L degradation. We show that the differential degradation of YME1L 
and OMA1 alters their proteolytic processing of the dynamin-like GTPase OPA1, a 
critical regulator of mitochondrial inner membrane morphology, which influences 
the recovery of tubular mitochondria following membrane-depolarization-induced 
fragmentation. Our results reveal the differential stress-induced degradation of 
YME1L and OMA1 as a mechanism for sensitively adapting mitochondrial inner 
membrane protease activity and function in response to distinct types of 
cellular insults.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.011
PMCID: PMC4785047
PMID: 26923599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]