1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jun;1858(6):1278-87. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamem.2016.02.032. Epub 2016 Mar 21.

Interaction of lipids with the neurotensin receptor 1.

Bolivar JH(1), Muñoz-García JC(1), Castro-Dopico T(1), Dijkman PM(1), Stansfeld 
PJ(1), Watts A(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomembrane Structure Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, 
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK.
(2)Biomembrane Structure Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, 
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK. Electronic address: 
anthony.watts@bioch.ox.ac.uk.

Information about lipid-protein interactions for G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs) is scarce. Here, we use electron spin resonance (ESR) and spin-labelled 
lipids to study lipid interactions with the rat neurotensin receptor 1 (NTS1). A 
fusion protein containing rat NTS1 fully able to bind its ligand neurotensin was 
reconstituted into phosphatidylcholine (PC) bilayers at specific lipid:protein 
molar ratios. The fraction of motionally restricted lipids in the range of 40:1 
to 80:1 lipids per receptor suggested an oligomeric state of the protein, and 
the result was unaffected by increasing the hydrophobic thickness of the lipid 
bilayer from C-18 to C-20 or C-22 chain length PC membranes. Comparison of the 
ESR spectra of different spin-labelled lipids allowed direct measurement of 
lipid binding constants relative to PC (Kr), with spin-labelled 
phosphatidylethanolamine (PESL), phosphatidylserine (PSSL), stearic acid (SASL), 
and a spin labelled cholesterol analogue (CSL) Kr values of 1.05±0.05, 
1.92±0.08, 5.20±0.51 and 0.91±0.19, respectively. The results contrast with 
those from rhodopsin, the only other GPCR studied this way, which has no 
selectivity for the lipids analysed here. Molecular dynamics simulations of NTS1 
in bilayers are in agreement with the ESR data, and point to sites in the 
receptor where PS could interact with higher affinity. Lipid selectivity could 
be necessary for regulation of ligand binding, oligomerisation and/or G protein 
activation processes. Our results provide insight into the potential modulatory 
mechanisms that lipids can exert on GPCRs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2016.02.032
PMID: 26926422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]