1. Cancer Res. 2016 Apr 15;76(8):2327-39. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1443.
Epub  2016 Feb 26.

Resistance to Anti-VEGF Therapy Mediated by Autocrine IL6/STAT3 Signaling and 
Overcome by IL6 Blockade.

Eichten A(1), Su J(1), Adler AP(1), Zhang L(1), Ioffe E(1), Parveen AA(1), 
Yancopoulos GD(1), Rudge J(1), Lowy I(1), Lin HC(1), MacDonald D(1), Daly C(1), 
Duan X(1), Thurston G(2).

Author information:
(1)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, New York.
(2)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, New York. gavin.thurston@regeneron.com.

Anti-VEGF therapies benefit several cancer types, but drug resistance that 
limits therapeutic response can emerge. We generated cell lines from 
anti-VEGF-resistant tumor xenografts to investigate the mechanisms by which 
resistance develops. Of all tumor cells tested, only A431 (A431-V) epidermoid 
carcinoma cells developed partial resistance to the VEGF inhibitor aflibercept. 
Compared with the parental tumors, A431-V tumors secreted greater amounts of IL6 
and exhibited higher levels of phospho-STAT3. Notably, combined blockade of IL6 
receptor (IL6R) and VEGF resulted in enhanced activity against A431-V tumors. 
Similarly, inhibition of IL6R enhanced the antitumor effects of aflibercept in 
DU145 prostate tumor cells that displays high endogenous IL6R activity. In 
addition, post hoc stratification of data obtained from a clinical trial 
investigating aflibercept efficacy in ovarian cancer showed poorer survival in 
patients with high levels of circulating IL6. These results suggest that the 
activation of the IL6/STAT3 pathway in tumor cells may provide a survival 
advantage during anti-VEGF treatment, suggesting its utility as a source of 
response biomarkers and as a therapeutic target to heighten efficacious results. 
Cancer Res; 76(8); 2327-39. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1443
PMID: 26921327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]