1. Clin Genet. 2016 Dec;90(6):540-544. doi: 10.1111/cge.12764. Epub 2016 May 2.

Expanding the phenotype of CRB2 mutations - A new ciliopathy syndrome?

Jaron R(1), Rosenfeld N(1)(2), Zahdeh F(3)(4), Carmi S(5), Beni-Adani L(6)(7), 
Doviner V(8), Picard E(2)(9), Segel R(1)(2), Zeligson S(1), Carmel L(3), Renbaum 
P(1), Levy-Lahad E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, 
Faculty of Science Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Hereditary Research Lab, Life Sciences Department, Bethlehem University, 
Bethlehem, Israel.
(5)Braun School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Pediatric Neurosurgery, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(7)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(8)Department of Pathology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(9)Pediatric Pulmonary Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Shaare Zedek Medical 
Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Recessive CRB2 mutations were recently reported to cause both steroid resistant 
nephrotic syndrome and prenatal onset ventriculomegaly with kidney disease. We 
report two Ashkenazi Jewish siblings clinically diagnosed with ciliopathy. Both 
presented with severe congenital hydrocephalus and mild urinary tract anomalies. 
One affected sibling also has lung hypoplasia and heart defects. Exome 
sequencing and further CRB2 analysis revealed that both siblings are compound 
heterozygotes for CRB2 mutations p.N800K and p.Gly1036Alafs*43, and heterozygous 
for a deleterious splice variant in the ciliopathy gene TTCB21. CRB2 is a 
polarity protein which plays a role in ciliogenesis and ciliary function. 
Biallelic CRB2 mutations in animal models result in phenotypes consistent with 
ciliopathy. This report expands the phenotype of CRB2 mutations to include lung 
hypoplasia and uretero-pelvic renal anomalies, and confirms cardiac malformation 
as a feature. We suggest that CRB2-associated disease is a new ciliopathy 
syndrome with possible digenic/triallelic inheritance, as observed in other 
ciliopathies. Clinically, CRB2 should be assessed when ciliopathy is suspected, 
especially in Ashkenazi Jews, where we found that p.N800K carrier frequency is 1 
of 64. Patients harboring CRB2 mutations should be tested for the complete range 
of ciliopathy manifestations.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12764
PMID: 26925547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]