1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 5;7(14):18638-50. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7888.

Overexpression of RPS27a contributes to enhanced chemoresistance of CML cells to 
imatinib by the transactivated STAT3.

Wang H(1), Xie B(1), Kong Y(1), Tao Y(1), Yang G(1), Gao M(1), Xu H(2), Zhan 
F(2), Shi J(1), Zhang Y(1), Wu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa, USA.

STAT3 plays a pivotal role in the hematopoietic system, which constitutively 
activated by BCR-ABL via JAK and Erk/MAP-kinase pathways. Phospho-STAT3 was 
overexpressed in imatinib-resistant CML patients as relative to imatinib 
responsive ones. By activation of the STAT3 pathway, BCR-ABL can promote cell 
cycling, and inhibit differentiation and apoptosis. Ribosomal protein S27a 
(RPS27a) performs extra-ribosomal functions besides imparting a role in ribosome 
biogenesis and post-translational modifications of proteins. RPS27a can promote 
proliferation, regulate cell cycle progression and inhibit apoptosis of leukemia 
cells. However, the relationship between STAT3 and RPS27a has not been reported. 
In this study, we detected a significantly increased expression of STAT3 and 
RPS27a in bone marrow samples from CML-AP/BP patients compared with those from 
CML-CP. In addition, we also demonstrated that it was a positive correlation 
between the level of STAT3 and that of RPS27a. Imatinib-resistant K562/G01 cells 
expressed significantly higher levels of STAT3 and RPS27a compared with those of 
K562 cells. RPS27a could be transactivated by p-STAT3 through the specific 
p-STAT3-binding site located nt -633 to -625 and -486 to -478 of the RPS27a gene 
promoter in a dose-dependent manner. The transactivated RPS27a could decrease 
the percentage of apoptotic CML cells induced by imatinib. And the effect of 
STAT3 overexpression could be counteracted by the p-STAT3 inhibitor WP1066 or 
RPS27a knockdown. These results suggest that drugs targeting 
STAT3/p-STAT3/RPS27a combining with TKI might represent a novel therapy strategy 
in patients with TKI-resistant CML.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7888
PMCID: PMC4951316
PMID: 26942564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
financial or other conflicts of interest.