1. Antiviral Res. 2016 Jun;130:19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.03.003. Epub 
2016 Mar 2.

Recombinant duck enteritis viruses expressing major structural proteins of the 
infectious bronchitis virus provide protection against infectious bronchitis in 
chickens.

Li H(1), Wang Y(2), Han Z(1), Wang Y(1), Liang S(1), Jiang L(1), Hu Y(3), Kong 
X(1), Liu S(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Avian Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(2)Division of Avian Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China; College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, PR China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 
730070, PR China.
(4)Division of Avian Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Veterinary 
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China. Electronic address: 
swliu@hvri.ac.cn.

To design an alternative vaccine for control of infectious bronchitis in 
chickens, three recombinant duck enteritis viruses (rDEVs) expressing the N, S, 
or S1 protein of infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) were constructed using 
conventional homologous recombination methods, and were designated as rDEV-N, 
rDEV-S, and rDEV-S1, respectively. Chickens were divided into five vaccinated 
groups, which were each immunized with one of the rDEVs, covalent vaccination 
with rDEV-N & rDEV-S, or covalent vaccination with rDEV-N & rDEV-S1, and a 
control group. An antibody response against IBV was detectable and the ratio of 
CD4(+)/CD8(+) T-lymphocytes decreased at 7 days post-vaccination in each 
vaccinated group, suggesting that humoral and cellular responses were elicited 
in each group as early as 7 days post-immunization. After challenge with a 
homologous virulent IBV strain at 21 days post-immunization, vaccinated groups 
showed significant differences in the percentage of birds with clinical signs, 
as compared to the control group (p < 0.01), as the two covalent-vaccination 
groups and the rDEV-S group provided better protection than the rDEV-N- or 
rDEV-S1-vaccinated group. There was less viral shedding in the rDEV-N & rDEV-S- 
(2/10) and rDEV-N & rDEV-S1- (2/10) vaccinated groups than the other three 
vaccinated groups. Based on the clinical signs, viral shedding, and mortality 
rates, rDEV-N & rDEV-S1 covalent vaccination conferred better protection than 
use of any of the single rDEVs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.03.003
PMCID: PMC7172294
PMID: 26946113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]