1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 4;6:22637. doi: 10.1038/srep22637.

Age-associated metabolic dysregulation in bone marrow-derived macrophages 
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide.

Fei F(1)(2), Lee KM(2), McCarry BE(1), Bowdish DM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton 
L8S4M1, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Michael G. DeGroote Institute 
for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton L8N3Z5, Canada.

Macrophages are major contributors to age-associated inflammation. Metabolic 
processes such as oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis and the urea cycle 
regulate inflammatory responses by macrophages. Metabolic profiles changes with 
age; therefore, we hypothesized that dysregulation of metabolic processes could 
contribute to macrophage hyporesponsiveness to LPS. We examined the 
intracellular metabolome of bone marrow-derived macrophages from young (6-8 wk) 
and old (18-22 mo) mice following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation and 
tolerance. We discovered known and novel metabolites that were associated with 
the LPS response of macrophages from young mice, which were not inducible in 
macrophages from old mice. Macrophages from old mice were largely non-responsive 
towards LPS stimulation, and we did not observe a shift from oxidative 
phosphorylation to glycolysis. The critical regulatory metabolites succinate, 
γ-aminobutyric acid, arginine, ornithine and adenosine were increased in 
LPS-stimulated macrophages from young mice, but not macrophages from old mice. A 
shift between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation was not observed during 
LPS tolerance in macrophages from either young or old mice. Metabolic 
bottlenecks may be one of the mechanisms that contribute to the dysregulation of 
LPS responses with age.

DOI: 10.1038/srep22637
PMCID: PMC4778050
PMID: 26940652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]