1. J Exp Bot. 2016 Apr;67(9):2587-601. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw082. Epub 2016 Mar 8.

The unique structural and biochemical development of single cell C4 
photosynthesis along longitudinal leaf gradients in Bienertia sinuspersici and 
Suaeda aralocaspica (Chenopodiaceae).

Koteyeva NK(1), Voznesenskaya EV(1), Berry JO(2), Cousins AB(3), Edwards GE(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy and Morphology, VL Komarov Botanical Institute of 
Russian Academy of Sciences, St Petersburg, 197376, Russia.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY 
14260, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164-4236, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164-4236, USA edwardsg@wsu.edu.

Temporal and spatial patterns of photosynthetic enzyme expression and structural 
maturation of chlorenchyma cells along longitudinal developmental gradients were 
characterized in young leaves of two single cell C4 species, Bienertia 
sinuspersici and Suaeda aralocaspica Both species partition photosynthetic 
functions between distinct intracellular domains. In the C4-C domain, C4 acids 
are formed in the C4 cycle during capture of atmospheric CO2 by 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase. In the C4-D domain, CO2 released in the C4 
cycle via mitochondrial NAD-malic enzyme is refixed by Rubisco. Despite striking 
differences in origin and intracellular positioning of domains, these species 
show strong convergence in C4 developmental patterns. Both progress through a 
gradual developmental transition towards full C4 photosynthesis, with an 
associated increase in levels of photosynthetic enzymes. Analysis of 
longitudinal sections showed undeveloped domains at the leaf base, with Rubisco 
rbcL mRNA and protein contained within all chloroplasts. The two domains were 
first distinguishable in chlorenchyma cells at the leaf mid-regions, but still 
contained structurally similar chloroplasts with equivalent amounts of rbcL mRNA 
and protein; while mitochondria had become confined to just one domain 
(proto-C4-D). The C4 state was fully formed towards the leaf tips, Rubisco 
transcripts and protein were compartmentalized specifically to structurally 
distinct chloroplasts in the C4-D domains indicating selective regulation of 
Rubisco expression may occur by control of transcription or stability of rbcL 
mRNA. Determination of CO2 compensation points showed young leaves were not 
functionally C4, consistent with cytological observations of the developmental 
progression from C3 default to intermediate to C4 photosynthesis.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw082
PMCID: PMC4861011
PMID: 26957565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]