1. Nature. 2016 Mar 17;531(7594):329-34. doi: 10.1038/nature16966. Epub 2016 Mar
9.

Observing cellulose biosynthesis and membrane translocation in crystallo.

Morgan JL(1), McNamara JT(1), Fischer M(2), Rich J(2), Chen HM(2), Withers 
SG(2), Zimmer J(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia School of Medicine, Center for Membrane Biology, 
Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, 480 Ray C. Hunt Drive, 
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, 2036 Main Mall, 
Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z1, Canada.

Many biopolymers, including polysaccharides, must be translocated across at 
least one membrane to reach their site of biological function. Cellulose is a 
linear glucose polymer synthesized and secreted by a membrane-integrated 
cellulose synthase. Here, in crystallo enzymology with the catalytically active 
bacterial cellulose synthase BcsA-BcsB complex reveals structural snapshots of a 
complete cellulose biosynthesis cycle, from substrate binding to polymer 
translocation. Substrate- and product-bound structures of BcsA provide the basis 
for substrate recognition and demonstrate the stepwise elongation of cellulose. 
Furthermore, the structural snapshots show that BcsA translocates cellulose via 
a ratcheting mechanism involving a 'finger helix' that contacts the polymer's 
terminal glucose. Cooperating with BcsA's gating loop, the finger helix moves 
'up' and 'down' in response to substrate binding and polymer elongation, 
respectively, thereby pushing the elongated polymer into BcsA's transmembrane 
channel. This mechanism is validated experimentally by tethering BcsA's finger 
helix, which inhibits polymer translocation but not elongation.

DOI: 10.1038/nature16966
PMCID: PMC4843519
PMID: 26958837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]