1. Biogerontology. 2016 Aug;17(4):725-36. doi: 10.1007/s10522-016-9643-y. Epub
2016  Mar 10.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms linked to mitochondrial uncoupling protein genes 
UCP2 and UCP3 affect mitochondrial metabolism and healthy aging in female 
nonagenarians.

Kim S(1), Myers L(2), Ravussin E(3), Cherry KE(4), Jazwinski SM(5).

Author information:
(1)Tulane Center for Aging and Department of Medicine, Tulane University Health 
Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, SL-12, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. 
skim5@tulane.edu.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, School of Public Health and 
Tropical Medicine, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, 
USA.
(3)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA.
(5)Tulane Center for Aging and Department of Medicine, Tulane University Health 
Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave, SL-12, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Energy expenditure decreases with age, but in the oldest-old, energy demand for 
maintenance of body functions increases with declining health. Uncoupling 
proteins have profound impact on mitochondrial metabolic processes; therefore, 
we focused attention on mitochondrial uncoupling protein genes. Alongside 
resting metabolic rate (RMR), two SNPs in the promoter region of UCP2 were 
associated with healthy aging. These SNPs mark potential binding sites for 
several transcription factors; thus, they may affect expression of the gene. A 
third SNP in the 3'-UTR of UCP3 interacted with RMR. This UCP3 SNP is known to 
impact UCP3 expression in tissue culture cells, and it has been associated with 
body weight and mitochondrial energy metabolism. The significant main effects of 
the UCP2 SNPs and the interaction effect of the UCP3 SNP were also observed 
after controlling for fat-free mass (FFM) and physical-activity related energy 
consumption. The association of UCP2/3 with healthy aging was not found in 
males. Thus, our study provides evidence that the genetic risk factors for 
healthy aging differ in males and females, as expected from the differences in 
the phenotypes associated with healthy aging between the two sexes. It also has 
implications for how mitochondrial function changes during aging.

DOI: 10.1007/s10522-016-9643-y
PMCID: PMC4935613
PMID: 26965008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]