1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016 Jun;9(3):266-278. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001190. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

International Genome-Wide Association Study Consortium Identifies Novel Loci 
Associated With Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents.

Parmar PG, Taal HR, Timpson NJ, Thiering E(#), Lehtimäki T(#), Marinelli M(#), 
Lind PA(#), Howe LD, Verwoert G, Aalto V, Uitterlinden AG, Briollais L, Evans 
DM, Wright MJ, Newnham JP, Whitfield JB, Lyytikäinen LP, Rivadeneira F, Boomsma 
DI, Viikari J, Gillman MW, St Pourcain B, Hottenga JJ, Montgomery GW, Hofman A, 
Kähönen M, Martin NG, Tobin MD, Raitakari O, Vioque J, Jaddoe VWV, Jarvelin MR, 
Beilin LJ, Heinrich J, van Duijn CM, Pennell CE, Lawlor DA, Palmer LJ; Early 
Genetics and Lifecourse Epidemiology Consortium.

Author information:
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Our aim was to identify genetic variants associated with blood 
pressure (BP) in childhood and adolescence.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Genome-wide association study data from participating 
European ancestry cohorts of the Early Genetics and Lifecourse Epidemiology 
(EAGLE) Consortium was meta-analyzed across 3 epochs; prepuberty (4-7 years), 
puberty (8-12 years), and postpuberty (13-20 years). Two novel loci were 
identified as having genome-wide associations with systolic BP across specific 
age epochs: rs1563894 (ITGA11, located in active H3K27Ac mark and transcription 
factor chromatin immunoprecipitation and 5'-C-phosphate-G-3' methylation site) 
during prepuberty (P=2.86×10(-8)) and rs872256 during puberty (P=8.67×10(-9)). 
Several single-nucleotide polymorphism clusters were also associated with 
childhood BP at P<5×10(-3). Using a P value threshold of <5×10(-3), we found 
some overlap in variants across the different age epochs within our study and 
between several single-nucleotide polymorphisms in any of the 3 epochs and adult 
BP-related single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genetic determinants of BP act from 
childhood, develop over the lifecourse, and show some evidence of age-specific 
effects.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001190
PMCID: PMC5279885
PMID: 26969751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Lawlor, Timpson, Howe, Evans work in a unit 
that receives funding from the UK Medical Research Council (MC_UU_12013/3, 
MC_UU_12013/4, MC_UU_12013/5, and MC_UU_12013/9). Dr Howe is funded by a UK 
Medical Research Council fellowship (G1002375) and is supported by a fellowship 
from the UK Medical Research Council (MR/M020894/1). Dr Howe has also received 
grant income from the UK Economic and Social Research Council, the UK 
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, and the US National 
Institute on Aging; these grants are not related to the content of this 
publication. Dr Gillman received royalties from Cambridge University Press for 
Maternal Obesity (2012), which they coedited, and from UpToDate for a chapter on 
dietary fat. Dr Pennell received the National Health and Medical Research 
Council of Australia (Grants 572613, 403981, 963209, 211912, 003209, and 353514) 
and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Grant MOP 82893). The other 
authors report no conflicts.