1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 16;6:23262. doi: 10.1038/srep23262.

Safety and Efficacy of Trastuzumab Emtansine in Advanced Human Epidermal Growth 
Factor Receptor 2-Positive Breast Cancer: a Meta-analysis.

Shen K(1), Ma X(1), Zhu C(1), Wu X(1), Jia H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 
610041, PR China.

Advanced or metastatic breast cancer is an incurable disease with high mortality 
rate worldwide and about 20% of breast cancers overexpress and amplify the human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Achievements in targeted therapy have 
benefited people during the past decades. Trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), a novel 
antibody-drug conjugate playing a powerful role in anti-tumor activity, not only 
blocks the HER2 signaling pathways, but also disturbs the microtubule dynamics. 
To access the efficacy and safety of T-DM1, we analyzed 9 clinical trials on 
T-DM1. Results showed that fatigue (0.604, 95% CI 0.551, 0.654), nausea (0.450, 
95% CI 0.365, 0.537), increased transaminases (0.425, 95% CI 0.353, 0.500) and 
thrombocytopenia (0.383, 95% CI 0.322, 0.448) occurred more frequently in 
participants with single T-DM1. In controlled trials, increased transaminases 
(OR = 4.040, 95% CI 1.429, 11.427), thrombocytopenia (OR = 8.500, 95% CI 3.964, 
18.226) and fatigue (OR = 1.288, 95% CI 1.041, 1.593) were statistically 
significant. Only thrombocytopenia appeared as severe adverse event (grade â‰¥ 3) 
in single-arm and control-arm studies. Meanwhile, T-DM1 stabilized cancer and 
prolonged life with notable improved progression-free survival (PFS) and overall 
survival (OS). In conclusion, it is a safe and effective agent in advanced or 
metastatic breast cancer, but should be carefully applied on patients with 
severe hepatic and neurological disease.

DOI: 10.1038/srep23262
PMCID: PMC4793192
PMID: 26979925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]