1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9398435. doi: 
10.1155/2016/9398435. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Therapeutic Effects of Chinese Medicine Herb Pair, Huzhang and Guizhi, on 
Monosodium Urate Crystal-Induced Gouty Arthritis in Rats Revealed by 
Anti-Inflammatory Assessments and NMR-Based Metabonomics.

Han B(1), Huang H(1), Li Z(1), Gong M(1), Shi W(1), Zhu C(1), Gu Z(1), Zou Z(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, 
Guangzhou 510006, China.

The present study was undertaken to evaluate the therapeutic effects of 
Huzhang-Guizhi herb pair (HG), firstly included in Hu-Zhang Power documented in 
Taiping Shenghui Fang, on monosodium urate (MSU) crystals-induced gouty 
arthritis in rats. We found that pretreatment with HG in rats with gouty 
arthritis could significantly attenuate the ankle joint swelling, and this 
beneficial antigout effect might be mediated, at least in part, by inhibiting 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) production in 
synovial fluid as well as nuclear transcription factor-κB p65 (NF-κB p65) 
protein expression in synovial tissue. Moreover, metabonomic analysis 
demonstrated that 5 and 6 potential biomarkers associated with gouty arthritis 
in plasma and urine, respectively, which were mainly involved in energy 
metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and gut microbe metabolism, were identified. 
HG could reverse the pathological process of MSU-induced gouty arthritis through 
regulating the disturbed metabolic pathways. These results provided important 
mechanistic insights into the protective effects of HG against MSU-induced gouty 
arthritis in rats.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9398435
PMCID: PMC4771918
PMID: 26989428