1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 21;6:23463. doi: 10.1038/srep23463.

Lighting Up Clostridium Difficile: Reporting Gene Expression Using Fluorescent 
Lov Domains.

Buckley AM(1), Jukes C(1), Candlish D(1), Irvine JJ(1), Spencer J(1), Fagan 
RP(2), Roe AJ(1), Christie JM(3), Fairweather NF(4), Douce GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, 
Veterinary &Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA U.K.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, 
Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN U.K.
(3)Institute of Molecular Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA U.K.
(4)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and 
Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ U.K.

The uses of fluorescent reporters derived from green fluorescent protein have 
proved invaluable for the visualisation of biological processes in bacteria 
grown under aerobic conditions. However, their requirement for oxygen has 
limited their application in obligate anaerobes such as Clostridium difficile. 
Fluorescent proteins derived from Light, Oxygen or Voltage sensing (LOV) domains 
have been shown to bridge this limitation, but their utility as translational 
fusions to monitor protein expression and localisation in a strict anaerobic 
bacterium has not been reported. Here we demonstrate the utility of phiLOV in 
three species of Clostridium and its application as a marker of real-time 
protein translation and dynamics through genetic fusion with the cell division 
protein, FtsZ. Time lapse microscopy of dividing cells suggests that Z ring 
assembly arises through the extension of the FtsZ arc starting from one point on 
the circumference. Furthermore, through incorporation of phiLOV into the 
flagella subunit, FliC, we show the potential of bacterial LOV-based fusion 
proteins to be successfully exported to the extracellular environment.

DOI: 10.1038/srep23463
PMCID: PMC4800718
PMID: 26996606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]