1. Elife. 2016 Mar 21;5:e13503. doi: 10.7554/eLife.13503.

A Mammalian enhancer trap resource for discovering and manipulating neuronal 
cell types.

Shima Y(1), Sugino K(2), Hempel CM(1), Shima M(1), Taneja P(1), Bullis JB(1), 
Mehta S(1), Lois C(3), Nelson SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and National Center for Behavioral Genomics, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, United States.
(2)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, United 
States.
(3)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, Beckman Institute, California 
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, United States.

There is a continuing need for driver strains to enable cell-type-specific 
manipulation in the nervous system. Each cell type expresses a unique set of 
genes, and recapitulating expression of marker genes by BAC transgenesis or 
knock-in has generated useful transgenic mouse lines. However, since genes are 
often expressed in many cell types, many of these lines have relatively broad 
expression patterns. We report an alternative transgenic approach capturing 
distal enhancers for more focused expression. We identified an enhancer trap 
probe often producing restricted reporter expression and developed efficient 
enhancer trap screening with the PiggyBac transposon. We established more than 
200 lines and found many lines that label small subsets of neurons in brain 
substructures, including known and novel cell types. Images and other 
information about each line are available online 
(enhancertrap.bio.brandeis.edu).

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.13503
PMCID: PMC4846381
PMID: 26999799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SBN: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors 
declare that no competing interests exist.