1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 9;17(3):355. doi: 10.3390/ijms17030355.

Type 2 Diabetes in Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Hepatitis C Virus 
Infection--Liver: The "Musketeer" in the Spotlight.

Ballestri S(1), Nascimbeni F(2)(3), Romagnoli D(4), Baldelli E(5), Targher G(6), 
Lonardo A(7).

Author information:
(1)Operating Unit Internal Medicine, Pavullo General Hospital, Azienda USL 
Modena, ViaSuore di San Giuseppe Benedetto Cottolengo, 5, Pavullo, 41026 Modena, 
Italy. stefanoballestri@tiscali.it.
(2)Outpatient Liver Clinic and Operating Unit Internal Medicine, NOCSAE, Azienda 
USL Modena, Via P. Giardini, 1355, 41126 Modena, Italy. 
fabio.nascimbeni@libero.it.
(3)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia, Via P. Giardini, 1355, 41126 Modena, Italy. 
fabio.nascimbeni@libero.it.
(4)Outpatient Liver Clinic and Operating Unit Internal Medicine, NOCSAE, Azienda 
USL Modena, Via P. Giardini, 1355, 41126 Modena, Italy. danter1@alice.it.
(5)Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena 
and Reggio Emilia, Via P. Giardini, 1355, 41126 Modena, Italy. 
enrica.baldelli@unimore.it.
(6)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
University and Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata of Verona, Piazzale 
Stefani, 1, 37126 Verona, Italy. giovanni.targher@univr.it.
(7)Outpatient Liver Clinic and Operating Unit Internal Medicine, NOCSAE, Azienda 
USL Modena, Via P. Giardini, 1355, 41126 Modena, Italy. a.lonardo@libero.it.

The pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D) involves chronic hyperinsulinemia due 
to systemic and hepatic insulin resistance (IR), which if uncorrected, will lead 
to progressive pancreatic beta cell failure in predisposed individuals. 
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) encompasses a spectrum of fatty 
(simple steatosis and steatohepatitis) and non-fatty liver changes 
(NASH-cirrhosis with or without hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)) that are 
commonly observed among individuals with multiple metabolic derangements, 
notably including visceral obesity, IR and T2D. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
infection is also often associated with both hepatic steatosis and features of a 
specific HCV-associated dysmetabolic syndrome. In recent years, the key role of 
the steatotic liver in the development of IR and T2D has been increasingly 
recognized. Thus, in this comprehensive review we summarize the rapidly 
expanding body of evidence that links T2D with NAFLD and HCV infection. For each 
of these two liver diseases with systemic manifestations, we discuss the 
epidemiological burden, the pathophysiologic mechanisms and the clinical 
implications. To date, substantial evidence suggests that NAFLD and HCV play a 
key role in T2D development and that the interaction of T2D with liver disease 
may result in a "vicious circle", eventually leading to an increased risk of 
all-cause mortality and liver-related and cardiovascular complications. 
Preliminary evidence also suggests that improvement of NAFLD is associated with 
a decreased incidence of T2D. Similarly, the prevention of T2D following HCV 
eradication in the era of direct-acting antiviral agents is a biologically 
plausible result. However, additional studies are required for further 
clarification of mechanisms involved.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17030355
PMCID: PMC4813216
PMID: 27005620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]