1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 24;6:23605. doi: 10.1038/srep23605.

Ligand-binding specificity and promiscuity of the main lignocellulolytic enzyme 
families as revealed by active-site architecture analysis.

Tian L(1), Liu S(2), Wang S(1), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, 
250100, P.R. China.
(2)Taishan College, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, P.R. China.

Biomass can be converted into sugars by a series of lignocellulolytic enzymes, 
which belong to the glycoside hydrolase (GH) families summarized in CAZy 
databases. Here, using a structural bioinformatics method, we analyzed the 
active site architecture of the main lignocellulolytic enzyme families. The 
aromatic amino acids Trp/Tyr and polar amino acids Glu/Asp/Asn/Gln/Arg occurred 
at higher frequencies in the active site architecture than in the whole enzyme 
structure. And the number of potential subsites was significantly different 
among different families. In the cellulase and xylanase families, the conserved 
amino acids in the active site architecture were mostly found at the -2 to +1 
subsites, while in Î²-glucosidase they were mainly concentrated at the -1 
subsite. Families with more conserved binding amino acid residues displayed 
strong selectivity for their ligands, while those with fewer conserved binding 
amino acid residues often exhibited promiscuity when recognizing ligands. 
Enzymes with different activities also tended to bind different hydroxyl oxygen 
atoms on the ligand. These results may help us to better understand the common 
and unique structural bases of enzyme-ligand recognition from different families 
and provide a theoretical basis for the functional evolution and rational design 
of major lignocellulolytic enzymes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep23605
PMCID: PMC4806347
PMID: 27009476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]