1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 19;17(3):388. doi: 10.3390/ijms17030388.

A Comparative Study of Molecular Structure, pKa, Lipophilicity, Solubility, 
Absorption and Polar Surface Area of Some Antiplatelet Drugs.

Remko M(1), Remková A(2), Broer R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Comenius 
University in Bratislava, Odbojarov 10, SK-832 32 Bratislava, Slovakia. 
remko@fpharm.uniba.sk.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Slovak Medical 
University, Limbová 12, SK-833 03 Bratislava, Slovakia. aremkova@szu.sk.
(3)Department of Theoretical Chemistry, Zernike Institute for Advanced 
Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG Groningen, The 
Netherlands. R.Broer@rug.nl.

Theoretical chemistry methods have been used to study the molecular properties 
of antiplatelet agents (ticlopidine, clopidogrel, prasugrel, elinogrel, 
ticagrelor and cangrelor) and several thiol-containing active metabolites. The 
geometries and energies of most stable conformers of these drugs have been 
computed at the Becke3LYP/6-311++G(d,p) level of density functional theory. 
Computed dissociation constants show that the active metabolites of prodrugs 
(ticlopidine, clopidogrel and prasugrel) and drugs elinogrel and cangrelor are 
completely ionized at pH 7.4. Both ticagrelor and its active metabolite are 
present at pH = 7.4 in neutral undissociated form. The thienopyridine prodrugs 
ticlopidine, clopidogrel and prasugrel are lipophilic and insoluble in water. 
Their lipophilicity is very high (about 2.5-3.5 logP values). The polar surface 
area, with regard to the structurally-heterogeneous character of these 
antiplatelet drugs, is from very large interval of values of 3-255 Å². 
Thienopyridine prodrugs, like ticlopidine, clopidogrel and prasugrel, with the 
lowest polar surface area (PSA) values, exhibit the largest absorption. A high 
value of polar surface area (PSA) of cangrelor (255 Å²) results in substantial 
worsening of the absorption in comparison with thienopyridine drugs.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17030388
PMCID: PMC4813244
PMID: 27007371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]