1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Jul;40(7):923-33. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000646.

Two Subtypes of Atypical Leiomyoma: Clinical, Histologic, and Molecular 
Analysis.

Ubago JM(1), Zhang Q, Kim JJ, Kong B, Wei JJ.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Pathology ‡Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL †Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Shandong University, Jinan, China.

Atypical leiomyoma (ALM) is a rare variant of uterine smooth muscle tumors. 
Several recent studies have suggested that ALM has distinct, but also 
heterogenous, histologic and molecular features, yet little is known about the 
biology and histogenesis of ALM. Some have even postulated whether the atypical 
histologic features represent true atypia or simply degenerative changes. In 
this study, we analyzed the cytologic features of 60 ALM cases and found that 
ALM could be further divided into 2 subtypes, type I and type II, based 
primarily on nuclear features. Type I ALM showed round or oval nuclei, distinct 
and smooth nuclear membranes, prominent nucleoli with perinucleolar halos, and 
open coarse chromatin. Type II ALM showed elongated or spindled nuclei, 
irregular nuclear membranes, pinpoint or no nucleoli, and dark smudgy chromatin. 
There were also architectural differences between type I and type II ALM. Type I 
ALM often showed diffuse atypia within the tumor, whereas the atypia in type II 
ALM was patchy, surrounded by usual-type leiomyoma. The 2 subtypes also differed 
when we compared the immunohistochemical and molecular patterns. Type II tumors 
showed significantly higher rates of immunoreactivity for p16, p53, and HMGA2 
and showed MED12 mutations more frequently than the type I counterparts. Our 
findings suggest that the type I and type II subtypes of ALM may arise from 2 
different pathways. Type I tumors may be related to fumarate hydratase 
mutations, whereas type II ALM appear to arise in a existing usual-type 
leiomyomas.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000646
PMCID: PMC5777155
PMID: 27015034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors have no conflicts of 
interest or funding to disclose