1. World J Gastroenterol. 2016 Mar 28;22(12):3372-80. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v22.i12.3372.

Association between polymorphisms of APE1 and OGG1 and risk of colorectal cancer 
in Taiwan.

Lai CY(1), Hsieh LL(1), Tang R(1), Santella RM(1), Chang-Chieh CR(1), Yeh CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Ching-Yu Lai, Chih-Ching Yeh, School of Public Health, College of Public 
Health and Nutrition, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.

AIM: To evaluate the effects of OGG1 (Ser326Cys, 11657A/G, and Arg154His) and 
APE1 (Asp148Glu, and T-656G) polymorphisms on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk.
METHODS: We enrolled 727 cases newly diagnosed with colorectal adenocarcinoma 
and 736 age- and sex-matched healthy controls from a medical center in Taiwan. 
Genomic DNA isolated from the buffy coat was used for genotyping through 
polymerase chain reaction. Unconditional logistic regressions were used for 
calculating ORs and 95%CIs to determine the association between the genetic 
polymorphisms and CRC risk. Haplotype frequencies were estimated using PHASE 
software. Moreover, stratification analyses on the basis of sex, age at 
diagnosis, and tumor subsite and stage were performed.
RESULTS: The CRC risk was higher in patients with the OGG1 326Ser/Cys + Cys/Cys 
genotype (OR = 1.38, 95%CI: 1.03-1.85, P = 0.030), particularly high in patients 
with stage III + IV cancer (OR = 1.48, 95%CI: 1.03-2.13) compared with patients 
with the Ser/Ser genotype. In addition, OGG1 11657G allele carriers had a 41% 
reduced CRC risk among stage 0-II patients (OR = 0.59, 95%CI: 0.35-0.98). The 
CRC risk was significantly higher among females with the APE1 Glu allele (OR = 
1.41, 95%CI: 1.02-1.96). The APE1 148Glu/-656G haplotype was also associated 
with a significant CRC risk in females (OR = 1.36, 95%CI: 1.03-1.78).
CONCLUSION: OGG1 and APE1 polymorphisms are associated with stage- and 
sex-specific risk of CRC in the Taiwanese population.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i12.3372
PMCID: PMC4806195
PMID: 27022219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]