1. Matrix Biol. 2016 May-Jul;52-54:29-42. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.03.005. Epub
 2016 Mar 31.

Makings of a brittle bone: Unexpected lessons from a low protein diet study of a 
mouse OI model.

Mertz EL(1), Makareeva E(1), Mirigian LS(1), Koon KY(1), Perosky JE(2), Kozloff 
KM(2), Leikin S(3).

Author information:
(1)Section on Physical Biochemistry, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD 20892, USA.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.
(3)Section on Physical Biochemistry, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: leikins@mail.nih.gov.

Glycine substitutions in type I collagen appear to cause osteogenesis imperfecta 
(OI) by disrupting folding of the triple helix, the structure of which requires 
Gly in every third position. It is less clear, however, whether the resulting 
bone malformations and fragility are caused by effects of intracellular 
accumulation of misfolded collagen on differentiation and function of 
osteoblasts, effects of secreted misfolded collagen on the function of bone 
matrix, or both. Here we describe a study originally conceived for testing how 
reducing intracellular accumulation of misfolded collagen would affect mice with 
a Gly610 to Cys substitution in the triple helical region of the Î±2(I) chain. To 
stimulate degradation of misfolded collagen by autophagy, we utilized a low 
protein diet. The diet had beneficial effects on osteoblast differentiation and 
bone matrix mineralization, but also affected bone modeling and suppressed 
overall animal growth. Our more important observations, however, were not 
related to the diet. They revealed how altered osteoblast function and deficient 
bone formation by each cell caused by the G610C mutation combined with increased 
osteoblastogenesis might make the bone more brittle, all of which are common OI 
features. In G610C mice, increased bone formation surface compensated for 
reduced mineral apposition rate, resulting in normal cortical area and thickness 
at the cost of altering cortical modeling process, retaining woven bone, and 
reducing the ability of bone to absorb energy through plastic deformation. 
Reduced collagen and increased mineral density in extracellular matrix of 
lamellar bone compounded the problem, further reducing bone toughness. The 
latter observations might have particularly important implications for 
understanding OI pathophysiology and designing more effective therapeutic 
interventions.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.03.005
PMCID: PMC5061452
PMID: 27039252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]