1. Cornea. 2016 Jun;35(6):853-9. doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000824.

Identification of Mutations in the PRDM5 Gene in Brittle Cornea Syndrome.

Micheal S(1), Khan MI, Islam F, Akhtar F, Qamar R, Tassignon MJ, Loeys B, den 
Hollander AI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of *Ophthalmology; †Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; ‡Al-Shifa Eye Trust Hospital, Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan; §Department of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information 
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan; ¶Al-Nafees Medical College and Hospital, Isra 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan; ‖Department of Ophthalmology, Antwerp 
University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; and **Center for 
Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
connective tissue disease characterized by variable combinations of corneal 
thinning and fragility, corneal ruptures either spontaneously or after minor 
trauma, blue sclerae, keratoconus, keratoglobus, and high myopia. So far, 
mutations in 2 genes, PRDM5 and ZNF469, have been associated with BCS. The 
purpose of this study is to describe novel mutations in the PRDM5 gene in 
patients with BCS.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using homozygosity mapping with single-nucleotide 
polymorphism markers followed by whole-exome sequencing, we identified a novel 
homozygous splice site variant (c.93+5G>A) in the PRDM5 gene in a consanguineous 
Pakistani family with 4 affected individuals. Reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction analysis from lymphocyte-derived RNA failed to reveal any exon 
skipping because of this splice site variant. A homozygous variant (c.11T>G; 
p.Gln4Pro) in SEC24D also segregated with the disease in this particular family. 
One previously known mutation (c.974del; p.Cys325LeufsX2) was identified in a 
sporadic patient with BCS from Serbia.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study revealed a novel mutation in the PRDM5 gene in a 
BCS family and recurrent mutation in a sporadic BCS patient. A variant in the 
SEC24D gene also segregated in the BCS family, although its role in the disease 
remains unclear.

DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000000824
PMID: 27032025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]