1. Stat Methods Med Res. 2018 Feb;27(2):593-607. doi: 10.1177/0962280216639859. 
Epub 2016 Apr 4.

Continuous time Markov chain approaches for analyzing transtheoretical models of 
health behavioral change: A case study and comparison of model estimations.

Ma J(1)(2), Chan W(2), Tilley BC(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, USA.
(2)2 Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, USA.

Continuous time Markov chain models are frequently employed in medical research 
to study the disease progression but are rarely applied to the transtheoretical 
model, a psychosocial model widely used in the studies of health-related 
outcomes. The transtheoretical model often includes more than three states and 
conceptually allows for all possible instantaneous transitions (referred to as 
general continuous time Markov chain). This complicates the likelihood function 
because it involves calculating a matrix exponential that may not be simplified 
for general continuous time Markov chain models. We undertook a Bayesian 
approach wherein we numerically evaluated the likelihood using ordinary 
differential equation solvers available from the gnu scientific library. We 
compared our Bayesian approach with the maximum likelihood method implemented 
with the R package MSM. Our simulation study showed that the Bayesian approach 
provided more accurate point and interval estimates than the maximum likelihood 
method, especially in complex continuous time Markov chain models with five 
states. When applied to data from a four-state transtheoretical model collected 
from a nutrition intervention study in the next step trial, we observed results 
consistent with the results of the simulation study. Specifically, the two 
approaches provided comparable point estimates and standard errors for most 
parameters, but the maximum likelihood offered substantially smaller standard 
errors for some parameters. Comparable estimates of the standard errors are 
obtainable from package MSM, which works only when the model estimation 
algorithm converges.

DOI: 10.1177/0962280216639859
PMCID: PMC5329136
PMID: 27048681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]