1. Neuron. 2016 Apr 20;90(2):235-44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.03.002. Epub 2016
 Mar 31.

Receptor-type Guanylyl Cyclases Confer Thermosensory Responses in C. elegans.

Takeishi A(1), Yu YV(1), Hapiak VM(1), Bell HW(1), O'Leary T(2), Sengupta P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and National Center for Behavioral Genomics, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA.
(2)Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1TN, UK.
(3)Department of Biology and National Center for Behavioral Genomics, Brandeis 
University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA. Electronic address: sengupta@brandeis.edu.

Thermosensation is critical for optimal regulation of physiology and behavior. 
C. elegans acclimates to its cultivation temperature (Tc) and exhibits 
thermosensitive behaviors at temperatures relative to Tc. These behaviors are 
mediated primarily by the AFD sensory neurons, which are extraordinarily 
thermosensitive and respond to thermal fluctuations at temperatures above a 
Tc-determined threshold. Although cGMP signaling is necessary for 
thermotransduction, the thermosensors in AFD are unknown. We show that 
AFD-specific receptor guanylyl cyclases (rGCs) are instructive for 
thermosensation. In addition to being necessary for thermotransduction, ectopic 
expression of these rGCs confers highly temperature-dependent responses onto 
diverse cell types. We find that the temperature response threshold is 
determined by the rGC and cellular context, and that multiple domains contribute 
to their thermosensory properties. Identification of thermosensory rGCs in 
C. elegans provides insight into mechanisms of thermosensation and thermal 
acclimation and suggests that rGCs may represent a new family of molecular 
thermosensors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.03.002
PMCID: PMC4840083
PMID: 27041501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]