1. Virus Genes. 2016 Aug;52(4):484-94. doi: 10.1007/s11262-016-1325-y. Epub 2016 
Apr 8.

Mutations in the C-terminal region affect subcellular localization of crucian 
carp herpesvirus (CaHV) GPCR.

Wang J(1), Gui L(2), Chen ZY(1), Zhang QY(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, China.
(2)Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 200120, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, China. zhangqy@ihb.ac.cn.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are known as seven transmembrane domain 
receptors and consequently can mediate diverse biological functions via 
regulation of their subcellular localization. Crucian carp herpesvirus (CaHV) 
was recently isolated from infected fish with acute gill hemorrhage. CaHV GPCR 
of 349 amino acids (aa) was identified based on amino acid identity. A series of 
variants with truncation/deletion/substitution mutation in the C-terminal (aa 
315-349) were constructed and expressed in fathead minnow (FHM) cells. The roles 
of three key C-terminal regions in subcellular localization of CaHV GPCR were 
determined. Lysine-315 (K-315) directed the aggregation of the protein 
preferentially at the nuclear side. Predicted N-myristoylation site (GGGWTR, aa 
335-340) was responsible for punctate distribution in periplasm or throughout 
the cytoplasm. Predicted phosphorylation site (SSR, aa 327-329) and GGGWTR 
together determined the punctate distribution in cytoplasm. Detection of 
organelles localization by specific markers showed that the protein retaining 
K-315 colocalized with the Golgi apparatus. These experiments provided first 
evidence that different mutations of CaHV GPCR C-terminals have different 
affects on the subcellular localization of fish herpesvirus-encoded GPCRs. The 
study provided valuable information and new insights into the precise 
interactions between herpesvirus and fish cells, and could also provide useful 
targets for antiviral agents in aquaculture.

DOI: 10.1007/s11262-016-1325-y
PMCID: PMC4923094
PMID: 27059239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]