1. Thromb Res. 2016 Apr;140 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S27-36. doi: 
10.1016/S0049-3848(16)30095-0.

Activated tumor cell integrin αvβ3 cooperates with platelets to promote 
extravasation and metastasis from the blood stream.

Weber MR(1), Zuka M(1), Lorger M(1), Tschan M(1), Torbett BE(1), Zijlstra A(2), 
Quigley JP(2), Staflin K(1), Eliceiri BP(3), Krueger JS(1), Marchese P(1), 
Ruggeri ZM(1), Felding BH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 
92103, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA; Department of Chemical Physiology, The 
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. Electronic address: 
brunie@scripps.edu.

Metastasis is the main cause of death in cancer patients, and understanding 
mechanisms that control tumor cell dissemination may lead to improved therapy. 
Tumor cell adhesion receptors contribute to cancer spreading. We noted earlier 
that tumor cells can expressing the adhesion receptor integrin αvβ3 in distinct 
states of activation, and found that cells which metastasize from the blood 
stream express it in a constitutively high affinity form. Here, we analyzed 
steps of the metastatic cascade in vivo and asked, when and how the affinity 
state of integrin αvβ3 confers a critical advantage to cancer spreading. 
Following tumor cells by real time PCR, non-invasive bioluminescence imaging, 
intravital microscopy and histology allowed us to identify tumor cell 
extravasation from the blood stream as a rate-limiting step supported by high 
affinity αvβ3. Successful transendothelial migration depended on cooperation 
between tumor cells and platelets involving the high affinity tumor cell 
integrin and release of platelet granules. Thus, this study identifies the high 
affinity conformer of integrin αvβ3 and its interaction with platelets as 
critical for early steps during hematogenous metastasis and target for 
prevention of metastatic disease.

© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0049-3848(16)30095-0
PMCID: PMC4888909
PMID: 27067975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]