1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2016 Mar 30;10:63. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00063. 
eCollection 2016.

Activation of Pyramidal Neurons in Mouse Medial Prefrontal Cortex Enhances 
Food-Seeking Behavior While Reducing Impulsivity in the Absence of an Effect on 
Food Intake.

Warthen DM(1), Lambeth PS(1), Ottolini M(2), Shi Y(1), Barker BS(2), Gaykema 
RP(1), Newmyer BA(1), Joy-Gaba J(1), Ohmura Y(3), Perez-Reyes E(1), GÃ¼ler AD(4), 
Patel MK(3), Scott MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neuropharmacology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA, USA.

The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is involved in a wide range of executive 
cognitive functions, including reward evaluation, decision-making, memory 
extinction, mood, and task switching. Manipulation of the mPFC has been shown to 
alter food intake and food reward valuation, but whether exclusive stimulation 
of mPFC pyramidal neurons (PN), which form the principle output of the mPFC, is 
sufficient to mediate food rewarded instrumental behavior is unknown. We sought 
to determine the behavioral consequences of manipulating mPFC output by exciting 
PN in mouse mPFC during performance of a panel of behavioral assays, focusing on 
food reward. We found that increasing mPFC pyramidal cell output using designer 
receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADD) enhanced performance 
in instrumental food reward assays that assess food seeking behavior, while 
sparing effects on affect and food intake. Specifically, activation of mPFC PN 
enhanced operant responding for food reward, reinstatement of palatable food 
seeking, and suppression of impulsive responding for food reward. Conversely, 
activation of mPFC PN had no effect on unconditioned food intake, social 
interaction, or behavior in an open field. Furthermore, we found that behavioral 
outcome is influenced by the degree of mPFC activation, with a low drive 
sufficient to enhance operant responding and a higher drive required to alter 
impulsivity. Additionally, we provide data demonstrating that DREADD stimulation 
involves a nitric oxide (NO) synthase dependent pathway, similar to endogenous 
muscarinic M3 receptor stimulation, a finding that provides novel mechanistic 
insight into an increasingly widespread method of remote neuronal control.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00063
PMCID: PMC4813092
PMID: 27065827