1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Jul 5;429:106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.04.002.
Epub  2016 Apr 7.

Brain derived neurotrophic factor in newly diagnosed diabetes and prediabetes.

Liu W(1), Han X(1), Zhou X(1), Zhang S(1), Cai X(1), Zhang L(1), Li Y(1), Li 
M(1), Gong S(1), Ji L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, 
China. Electronic address: jiln@bjmu.edu.cn.

Brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is thought to play an important role in 
glucose metabolism, but the exact mechanism has not been elucidated. The aim was 
to assess differences in serum BDNF levels across individuals with varying 
levels of glucose tolerance, and the association of serum BDNF levels with 
genetic variants and DNA methylation. Participants were selected from an ongoing 
population-based cohort study in rural China. In a randomly selected subsample 
of healthy participants (n = 33 males, n = 52 female), we assessed serum BDNF 
and in n = 50 of these, also DNA methylation. In a second subsample (all women; 
n = 28 with diabetes, n = 104 with prediabetes, and n = 105 age- and body mass 
index (BMI)-matched controls), we assessed serum BDNF and genetic variants. In a 
third subsample (all with diabetes; n = 7 normal BMI + low insulin level, n = 9 
normal BMI + high insulin level, n = 9 obese + high insulin level), we assessed 
DNA methylation. Compared to age- and BMI-matched controls (24.71 (IQR, 20.44, 
29.80) ng/ml), serum BDNF was higher in participants with prediabetes (27.38 
(IQR, 20.64, 34.29) ng/ml), but lower in those with diabetes (23.40 (IQR, 18.12, 
30.34) ng/ml) (P < 0.05). Two genetic variants near BDNF (rs4074134 and rs6265) 
were confirmed to be associated with BMI. BDNF CpG-6 methylation was positively 
associated with waist-to-hip ratio (P < 0.05). Furthermore, hyper-methylation in 
this site was found in participants with diabetes and high fasting insulin 
levels compared to those with diabetes and low fasting insulin levels, 
regardless of BMI status (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). Observed 
differences in serum BDNF levels, genetic variants, and DNA methylation patterns 
across different glucose metabolic state suggest that BDNF may be involved in 
the pathophysiological process of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.04.002
PMID: 27062899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]