1. Proc Biol Sci. 2016 Apr 13;283(1828):20160266. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.0266.

Self-harm to preferentially harm the pathogens within: non-specific stressors in 
innate immunity.

LeGrand EK(1), Day JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA elegrand@utk.edu.
(2)Department of Mathematics and National Institute for Mathematical and 
Biological Synthesis, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA.

Therapies with increasing specificity against pathogens follow the immune 
system's evolutionary course in maximizing host defence while minimizing 
self-harm. Nevertheless, even completely non-specific stressors, such as 
reactive molecular species, heat, nutrient and oxygen deprivation, and acidity 
can be used to preferentially harm pathogens. Strategic use of non-specific 
stressors requires exploiting differences in stress vulnerability between 
pathogens and hosts. Two basic vulnerabilities of pathogens are: (i) the 
inherent vulnerability to stress of growth and replication (more immediately 
crucial for pathogens than for host cells) and (ii) the degree of pathogen 
localization, permitting the host's use of locally and regionally intense 
stress. Each of the various types of non-specific stressors is present during 
severe infections at all levels of localization: (i) ultra-locally within 
phagolysosomes, (ii) locally at the infected site, (iii) regionally around the 
infected site and (iv) systemically as part of the acute-phase response. We 
propose that hosts strategically use a coordinated system of non-specific 
stressors at local, regional and systemic levels to preferentially harm the 
pathogens within. With the rising concern over emergence of resistance to 
specific therapies, we suggest more scrutiny of strategies using less specific 
therapies in pathogen control. Hosts' active use of multiple non-specific 
stressors is likely an evolutionarily basic defence whose retention underlies 
and supplements the well-recognized immune defences that directly target 
pathogens.

Â© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rspb.2016.0266
PMCID: PMC4843660
PMID: 27075254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]