1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Apr 12;12(4):e1005570. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005570. 
eCollection 2016 Apr.

ToxR Antagonizes H-NS Regulation of Horizontally Acquired Genes to Drive Host 
Colonization.

Kazi MI(1), Conrado AR(1), Mey AR(1), Payne SM(1)(2), Davies BW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, Texas, United States of America.
(2)Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at 
Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America.

The virulence regulator ToxR initiates and coordinates gene expression needed by 
Vibrio cholerae to colonize the small intestine and cause disease. Despite its 
prominence in V. cholerae virulence, our understanding of the direct ToxR 
regulon is limited to four genes: toxT, ompT, ompU and ctxA. Here, we determine 
ToxR's genome-wide DNA-binding profile and demonstrate that ToxR is a global 
regulator of both progenitor genome-encoded genes and horizontally acquired 
islands that encode V. cholerae's major virulence factors and define pandemic 
lineages. We show that ToxR shares more than a third of its regulon with the 
histone-like nucleoid structuring protein H-NS, and antagonizes H-NS binding at 
shared binding locations. Importantly, we demonstrate that this regulatory 
interaction is the critical function of ToxR in V. cholerae colonization and 
biofilm formation. In the absence of H-NS, ToxR is no longer required for V. 
cholerae to colonize the infant mouse intestine or for robust biofilm formation. 
We further illustrate a dramatic difference in regulatory scope between ToxR and 
other prominent virulence regulators, despite similar predicted requirements for 
DNA binding. Our results suggest that factors in addition to primary DNA 
structure influence the ability of ToxR to recognize its target promoters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005570
PMCID: PMC4829181
PMID: 27070545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.