1. J Immunother. 2016 May;39(4):181-7. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000119.

MAGE-A is More Highly Expressed Than NY-ESO-1 in a Systematic 
Immunohistochemical Analysis of 3668 Cases.

Kerkar SP(1), Wang ZF, Lasota J, Park T, Patel K, Groh E, Rosenberg SA, 
Miettinen MM.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
†Laboratory of Pathology ‡Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National 
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Two cancer testis antigens, the New York esophageal squamous cell carcinoma-1 
(NY-ESO-1) and the melanoma-antigen family A (MAGE-A), represent promising 
immunotherapy targets due to the low expression of these antigens in 
nonmalignant tissue. To assess overexpression patterns in various cancers, we 
performed a systematic immunohistochemical analysis for NY-ESO-1 and MAGE-A on 
tissue array samples of 3668 common epithelial carcinomas (CA) and germ cell 
tumors of high prevalence and mortality. Here, we find significantly higher 
expression of MAGE-A (>50% on tumor cells) compared with NY-ESO-1 in several CAs 
including cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) (52.8%/2.8%), esophageal SCC 
(50%/0%), head and neck SCC (41.1%/<1%), bladder urothelial CA (40.4%/8.3%), 
cervical/anal SCC (37.5%/0%), lung SCC (34%/3.8%), lung adenocarcinomas 
(27.6%/3.9%), ovarian CA (26.4%/3.6%), endometrial CA (26.3%/1.3%), lung small 
cell CA (24.4%/2.4%), gastric adenocarcinomas (20%/4%), breast mucinous CA 
(19.3%/0%), hepatocellular CA (18.8%/1.2%), breast infiltrating ductal CA 
(16.4%/1.8%), colorectal adenocarcinomas (10.7%/<1%), cholangiocarcinomas 
(9.8%/0%), thymic CA (9%/4.5%), and mesotheliomas (7.9%/<1%). Furthermore, high 
expression of MAGE-A, but not NY-ESO-1, was seen in whole slide evaluations of 
an independent cohort of metastatic SCC (45.5%/3.6%) and metastatic CA 
(13.5%/0%) of various primaries with significantly higher expression of MAGE-A 
in metastatic SCC compared with other metastatic CA. MAGE-A is also more highly 
expressed in germ cell tumors, seminomas (69%/3.5%) and nonseminomas 
(40.1%/4.7%). In summary, MAGE-A is more highly expressed than NY-ESO-1 in a 
majority of human malignancies, and targeting MAGE-A may benefit a large number 
of patients.

DOI: 10.1097/CJI.0000000000000119
PMCID: PMC4831141
PMID: 27070449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/Conflict of Interest The authors do 
not possess any conflicts of interest