1. Ecol Evol. 2016 Feb 9;6(5):1555-75. doi: 10.1002/ece3.1989. eCollection 2016 
Mar.

Divergent ecological histories of two sister Antarctic krill species led to 
contrasted patterns of genetic diversity in their heat-shock protein (hsp70) 
arsenal.

Papot C(1), Cascella K(2), Toullec JY(2), Jollivet D(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lille 1 CNRS UMR 8198 Groupe 'Ecoimmunology of Marine Annelids' 
Bât SN2, 1er étage porte 113 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq France.
(2)CNRS UMR 7144 Equipe ABICE Station Biologique de Roscoff 29682 Roscoff 
France; Laboratoire 'Adaptation et Diversité en Milieu Marin' UPMC Station 
Biologique 29682 Roscoff France.

The Arctic and the Antarctic Peninsula are currently experiencing some of the 
most rapid rates of ocean warming on the planet. This raises the question of how 
the initial adaptation to extreme cold temperatures was put in place and whether 
or not directional selection has led to the loss of genetic variation at key 
adaptive systems, and thus polar species' (re)adaptability to higher 
temperatures. In the Southern Ocean, krill represents the most abundant fauna 
and is a critical member at the base of the Antarctic food web. To better 
understand the role of selection in shaping current patterns of polymorphisms, 
we examined genetic diversity of the cox-1 and hsp70 genes by comparing two 
closely related species of Euphausiid that differ in ecology. Results on mtcox-1 
agreed with previous studies, indicating high and similar effective population 
sizes. However, a coalescent-based approach on hsp70 genes highlighted the role 
of positive selection and past demographic changes in their recent evolution. 
Firstly, some form of balancing selection was acting on the inducible isoform C, 
which reflected the maintenance of an ancestral adaptive polymorphism in both 
species. Secondly, E. crystallorophias seems to have lost most of its hsp70 
diversity because of a population crash and/or directional selection to cold. 
Nonsynonymous diversities were always greater in E. superba, suggesting that it 
might have evolved under more heterogeneous conditions. This can be linked to 
species' ecology with E. superba living in more variable pelagic conditions, 
while E. crystallorophias is strictly associated with continental shelves and 
sea ice.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.1989
PMCID: PMC4775515
PMID: 27087928