1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016 Sep;73(17):3221-47. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2223-0.
Epub  2016 Apr 21.

Role of Nrf2/HO-1 system in development, oxidative stress response and diseases: 
an evolutionarily conserved mechanism.

Loboda A(1)(2), Damulewicz M(3), Pyza E(3), Jozkowicz A(4), Dulak J(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387, Krakow, Poland. 
agnieszka.loboda@uj.edu.pl.
(2)Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. 
agnieszka.loboda@uj.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Imaging, Faculty of Biology and Earth 
Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387, Krakow, Poland.
(5)Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.

The multifunctional regulator nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2) 
is considered not only as a cytoprotective factor regulating the expression of 
genes coding for anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and detoxifying proteins, but 
it is also a powerful modulator of species longevity. The vertebrate Nrf2 
belongs to Cap 'n' Collar (Cnc) bZIP family of transcription factors and shares 
a high homology with SKN-1 from Caenorhabditis elegans or CncC found in 
Drosophila melanogaster. The major characteristics of Nrf2 are to some extent 
mimicked by Nrf2-dependent genes and their proteins including heme oxygenase-1 
(HO-1), which besides removing toxic heme, produces biliverdin, iron ions and 
carbon monoxide. HO-1 and their products exert beneficial effects through the 
protection against oxidative injury, regulation of apoptosis, modulation of 
inflammation as well as contribution to angiogenesis. On the other hand, the 
disturbances in the proper HO-1 level are associated with the pathogenesis of 
some age-dependent disorders, including neurodegeneration, cancer or macular 
degeneration. This review summarizes our knowledge about Nrf2 and HO-1 across 
different phyla suggesting their conservative role as stress-protective and 
anti-aging factors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-016-2223-0
PMCID: PMC4967105
PMID: 27100828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]