1. Comput Biol Chem. 2016 Jun;62:70-4. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.04.003. 
Epub 2016 Apr 11.

Sequence-based analysis of 5'UTR and coding regions of CASP3 in terms of miRSNPs 
and SNPs in targetting miRNAs.

Ergun S(1), Oztuzcu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Ulubey Vocational Higher School, Ordu University, Ordu, Turkey. Electronic 
address: sercanergun@msn.com.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Gaziantep University, 
Gaziantep, Turkey.

Apoptosis is described as a mechanism of cell death occurring after adequate 
cellular harm. Deregulation of apoptosis occurs in many human conditions such as 
autoimmune disorders, ischemic damage, neurodegenerative diseases and different 
cancer types. Information relating miRNAs to cancer is increasing. miRNAs can 
affect development of cancer via many different pathways, including apoptosis. 
Polymorphisms in miRNA genes or miRNA target sites (miRSNPs) can change miRNA 
activity. Although polymorphisms in miRNA genes are very uncommon, SNPs in 
miRNA-binding sites of target genes are quite common. Many researches have 
revealed that SNPs in miRNA target sites improve or decrease the efficacy of the 
interaction between miRNAs and their target genes. Our aim was to specify 
miRSNPs on CASP3 gene (caspase-3) and SNPs in miRNA genes targeting 5'UTR and 
coding exons of CASP3, and evaluate the effect of these miRSNPs and SNPs of 
miRNA genes with respect to apoptosis. We detected 141 different miRNA binding 
sites (126 different miRNAs) and 7 different SNPs in binding sites of miRNA in 
5'UTR and CDS of CASP3 gene. Intriguingly, miR-339-3p's binding site on CASP3 
has a SNP (rs35372903, G/A) on CASP3 5'UTR and its genomic sequence has a SNP 
(rs565188493, G/A) at the same nucleotide with rs35372903. Also, miR-339-3p has 
two other SNPs (rs373011663, C/T rs72631820, A/G) of which the first is 
positioned at the binding site. Here, miRSNP (rs35372903) at CASP3 5'UTR and SNP 
(rs565188493) at miR-339-3p genomic sequence cross-matches at the same site of 
binding region. Besides, miR-339-3p targets many apoptosis related genes 
(ZNF346, TAOK2, PIM2, HIP1, BBC3, TNFRSF25, CLCF1, IHPK2, NOL3) although it had 
no apoptosis related interaction proven before. This means that miR-339-3p may 
also have a critical effect on apoptosis via different pathways other than 
caspase-3. Hence, we can deduce that this is the first study demonstrating a 
powerful association between miR-339-3p and apoptosis upon computational 
analysis.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.04.003
PMID: 27107179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]