1. Mod Pathol. 2016 Jul;29(7):685-97. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.79. Epub 2016
Apr  22.

Comprehensive genomic profiling of orbital and ocular adnexal lymphomas 
identifies frequent alterations in MYD88 and chromatin modifiers: new routes to 
targeted therapies.

Cani AK(1)(2), Soliman M(3), Hovelson DH(1)(4), Liu CJ(1)(2), McDaniel AS(1)(2), 
Haller MJ(1)(2), Bratley JV(1)(2), Rahrig SE(1)(2), Li Q(3), Brice√±o CA(3), 
Tomlins SA(1)(2)(5)(6), Rao RC(2)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, W.K. Kellogg Eye Center, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Urology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.
(6)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(7)Section of Ophthalmology, Surgical Service, Veterans Administration Ann Arbor 
Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Non-Hodgkin lymphoma of the orbit and ocular adnexa is the most common primary 
orbital malignancy. Treatments for low- (extra-nodal marginal zone and 
follicular lymphomas) and high-grade (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) are 
associated with local and vision-threatening toxicities. High-grade lymphomas 
relapse frequently and exhibit poor survival rates. Despite advances in genomic 
profiling and precision medicine, orbital and ocular adnexal lymphomas remain 
poorly characterized molecularly. We performed targeted next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) profiling of 38 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded orbital and 
ocular adnexal lymphomas obtained from a single-center using a panel targeting 
near-term, clinically relevant genes. Potentially actionable mutations and copy 
number alterations were prioritized based on gain- and loss-of-function 
analyses, and catalogued, approved, and investigational therapies. Of 36 
informative samples, including marginal zone lymphomas (n=20), follicular 
lymphomas (n=9), and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (n=7), 53% harbored a 
prioritized alteration (median=1, range 0-5/sample). MYD88 was the most 
frequently altered gene in our cohort, with potentially clinically relevant 
hotspot gain-of-function mutations identified in 71% of diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas and 25% of marginal zone lymphomas. Prioritized alterations in 
epigenetic modulators were common and included gain-of-function EZH2 and 
loss-of-function ARID1A mutations (14% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and 22% 
of follicular lymphomas contained alterations in each of these two genes). 
Single prioritized alterations were also identified in the histone 
methyltransferases KMT2B (follicular lymphoma) and KMT3B (diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma). Loss-of-function mutations and copy number alterations in the tumor 
suppressors TP53 (diffuse large B-cell and follicular lymphoma), CDKN2A (diffuse 
large B-cell and marginal zone lymphoma), PTEN (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma), 
ATM (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma), and NF1 (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma), 
and gain-of-function mutations in the oncogenes HRAS (follicular lymphoma) and 
NRAS (diffuse large B-cell lymphoma) were also observed. Together, our study 
demonstrates that NGS can be used to profile routine formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded orbital and ocular adnexal lymphomas for identification of 
somatic-driving alterations and nomination of potential therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.79
PMCID: PMC4925176
PMID: 27102345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The other authors have no conflicts 
of interest related to this subject matter to declare.