1. Sci Rep. 2016 Apr 26;6:25031. doi: 10.1038/srep25031.

Local adaptation to temperature and precipitation in naturally fragmented 
populations of Cephalotaxus oliveri, an endangered conifer endemic to China.

Wang T(1), Wang Z(2), Xia F(3), Su Y(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 
510642, China.
(2)College of Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

Cephalotaxus oliveri is an endangered tertiary relict conifer endemic to China. 
The species survives in a wide range from west to east with heterogeneous 
climatic conditions. Precipitation and temperature are main restrictive factors 
for distribution of C. oliveri. In order to comprehend the mechanism of adaptive 
evolution to climate variation, we employed ISSR markers to detect adaptive 
evolution loci, to identify the association between variation in temperature and 
precipitation and adaptive loci, and to investigate the genetic structure for 22 
C. oliveri natural populations. In total, 14 outlier loci were identified, of 
which five were associated with temperature and precipitation. Among outlier 
loci, linkage disequilibrium (LD) was high (42.86%), which also provided strong 
evidence for selection. In addition, C. oliveri possessed high genetic variation 
(93.31%) and population differentiation, which may provide raw material to 
evolution and accelerate local adaptation, respectively. Ecological niche 
modeling showed that global warming will cause a shift for populations of C. 
oliveri from south to north with a shrinkage of southern areas. Our results 
contribute to understand the potential response of conifers to climatic changes, 
and provide new insights for conifer resource management and conservation 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/srep25031
PMCID: PMC4844950
PMID: 27113970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]