1. Biochimie. 2016 Aug;127:44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.04.020. Epub 2016 Apr
 25.

Familial mutations in fibrinogen Aα (FGA) chain identified in renal amyloidosis 
increase in vitro amyloidogenicity of FGA fragment.

Sivalingam V(1), Patel BK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Sangareddy, Medak Dist., Telangana 502285, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Sangareddy, Medak Dist., Telangana 502285, India. Electronic address: 
basantkpatel@iith.ac.in.

Amyloidoses are clinical disorders where deposition of β-sheet rich, misfolded 
protein aggregates called amyloid occurs in vital organs like brain, kidney, 
liver or heart etc. Aggregation of several proteins such as immunoglobulin light 
chain, fibrinogen Aα chain (FGA) and lysozyme have been found to be associated 
with renal amyloidosis. Fibrinogen amyloidosis (AFib) is predominantly familial 
and is associated with the deposition of mutant FGA amyloid, primarily in 
kidneys. Over ten substitution and frame-shift mutations in FGA have been 
identified from AFib patients. Whether wild-type FGA is also involved in AFib is 
yet unknown. The affected tissues from AFib patients usually show ∼10 kDA 
peptide from C-terminal 80 amino acid residues of mutant FGA. Notably, this 
region also encompasses all known disease-related mutations. Whether these point 
mutations increase the amyloidogenicity of FGA leading to disease progression, 
have not been studied yet. Here, we have investigated the role of two 
disease-related mutations in affecting amyloidogenic propensity of an 
FGA(496-581) fragment. We found that at physiological pH, the wild-type 
FGA(496-581) fragment remains monomeric, whereas its E540V mutant forms 
amyloid-like fibrils as observed by AFM. Also, FGA(496-581) harbouring another 
familial mutation, R554L, converts in vitro into globular, β-sheet rich 
aggregates, showing amyloid-like properties. These findings suggest that 
familial mutations in FGA may have role in renal amyloidosis via enhanced 
amyloid formation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie 
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2016.04.020
PMID: 27126074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]