1. Biosci Rep. 2016 Jun 3;36(3):e00340. doi: 10.1042/BSR20160098. Print 2016 Jul.

The first EGF domain of coagulation factor IX attenuates cell adhesion and 
induces apoptosis.

Ishikawa T(1), Kitano H(2), Mamiya A(2), Kokubun S(1), Hidai C(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Physiology, Department of Biomedical Science, School of Medicine, 
Nihon University, 30-1, Oyaguchi Kami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.
(2)Division of Dental Surgery, School of Medicine, Nihon University, 30-1, 
Oyaguchi Kami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.
(3)Division of Physiology, Department of Biomedical Science, School of Medicine, 
Nihon University, 30-1, Oyaguchi Kami-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8610, Japan 
hidai.chiaki@nihon-u.ac.jp.

Coagulation factor IX (FIX) is an essential plasma protein for blood 
coagulation. The first epidermal growth factor (EGF) motif of FIX (EGF-F9) has 
been reported to attenuate cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix (ECM). The 
purpose of the present study was to determine the effects of this motif on cell 
adhesion and apoptosis. Treatment with a recombinant EGF-F9 attenuated cell 
adhesion to the ECM within 10 min. De-adhesion assays with native FIX 
recombinant FIX deletion mutant proteins suggested that the de-adhesion activity 
of EGF-F9 requires the same process of FIX activation as that which occurs for 
coagulation activity. The recombinant EGF-F9 increased lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) activity release into the medium and increased the number of cells stained 
with annexin V and activated caspase-3, by 8.8- and 2.7-fold respectively, 
indicating that EGF-F9 induced apoptosis. Activated caspase-3 increased very 
rapidly after only 5 min of administration of recombinant EGF-F9. Treatment with 
EGF-F9 increased the level of phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK), but not that of phosphorylated MAPK 44/42 or c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase (JNK). Inhibitors of caspase-3 suppressed the release of LDH. Caspase-3 
inhibitors also suppressed the attenuation of cell adhesion and phosphorylation 
of p38 MAPK by EGF-F9. Our data indicated that EGF-F9 activated signals for 
apoptosis and induced de-adhesion in a caspase-3 dependent manner.

© 2016 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20160098
PMCID: PMC5293593
PMID: 27129300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]