1. Int J Immunogenet. 2016 Jun;43(3):151-8. doi: 10.1111/iji.12263. Epub 2016 Apr
 28.

Association between interleukin-21 gene polymorphisms (rs12508721) and 
HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang QX(1), Li SL(2), Yao YQ(1), Li TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Interleukin-21 (IL-21), as a multifunctional cytokine, plays an important role 
in many diseases, such as cancer, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. We aimed 
to investigate the relationship between polymorphisms of IL-21 gene and 
susceptibility of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
in a Chinese population. Studied subjects were divided into three groups: 100 
patients with HBV-related HCC, 115 patients with chronic HBV infection and 127 
healthy controls. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood, and the 
polymerase chain reaction-ligase detection reaction (PCR-LDR) method was used to 
genotype the SNPs (rs2221903, rs907715 and rs12508721) within IL-21 gene. Our 
results showed that IL-21 polymorphisms were associated with the risk of HCC and 
chronic HBV infection when compared with healthy controls. The rs2221903A/G AG 
genotype was associated with a higher risk of chronic HBV infection when 
compared with healthy controls [AG versus AA + GG, P = 0.036, OR = 1.898, 
95%CI = 1.038-3.471]. The rs12508721C/T TT genotype was related with a lower 
risk of chronic HBV infection and HBV-related HCC than in healthy controls [TT 
versus CT + CC, P = 0.026, OR = 0.451, 95%CI = 0.221-0.920; P = 0.049, 
OR = 0.482, 95%CI = 0.231-1.005]. No significant difference in the genotype and 
allele distrubutions of rs907715G/A SNP was observed in the HBV-related HCC 
group, chronic HBV-infected group and the healthy control group when compared to 
each other. Our findings suggest that the rs12508721T/C and rs2221903A/G 
polymorphisms of IL-21 gene are associated with the susceptibility of 
HBV-related HCC and chronic HBV infection. The genetic variant may in fact cause 
protection against the HBV-related HCC. However, the function in these SNPs of 
IL-21 gene needs to clarify the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of 
HBV-related HCC further.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iji.12263
PMID: 27122304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]