1. Gene. 2016 Aug 1;587(1):1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.04.051. Epub 2016 Apr
26.

Tenogenic modulating insider factor: Systematic assessment on the functions of 
tenomodulin gene.

Dex S(1), Lin D(1), Shukunami C(2), Docheva D(3).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Surgery and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Division of Basic Life 
Sciences, Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Experimental Surgery and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), Munich, Germany; Department of Medical 
Biology, Medical University-Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
denitsa.docheva@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Tenomodulin (TNMD, Tnmd) is a gene highly expressed in tendon known to be 
important for tendon maturation with key implications for the residing tendon 
stem/progenitor cells as well as for the regulation of endothelial cell 
migration in chordae tendineae cordis in the heart and in experimental tumour 
models. This review aims at providing an encompassing overview of this gene and 
its protein. In addition, its known expression pattern as well as putative 
signalling pathways will be described. A chronological overview of the 
discovered functions of this gene in tendon and other tissues and cells is 
provided as well as its use as a tendon and ligament lineage marker is assessed 
in detail and discussed. Last, information about the possible connections 
between TNMD genomic mutations and mRNA expression to various diseases is 
delivered. Taken together this review offers a solid synopsis on the up-to-date 
information available about TNMD and aids at directing and focusing the future 
research to fully uncover the roles and implications of this interesting gene.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.04.051
PMCID: PMC4897592
PMID: 27129941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]