1. Clin Exp Med. 2017 May;17(2):225-232. doi: 10.1007/s10238-016-0423-4. Epub
2016  Apr 28.

Interferon lambda polymorphisms associate with body iron indices and hepatic 
expression of interferon-responsive long non-coding RNA in chronic hepatitis C.

Wróblewska A(1), Bernat A(1), Woziwodzka A(1), Markiewicz J(2), Romanowski T(1), 
Bielawski KP(1), Smiatacz T(3), Sikorska K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology 
UG and MUG, Abrahama 58, 80-307, Gdańsk, Poland.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Pomeranian Center of Infectious Diseases, 
Smoluchowskiego 18, 80-214, Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medical University of Gdansk, 
Smoluchowskiego 18, 80-214, Gdańsk, Poland.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medical University of Gdansk, 
Smoluchowskiego 18, 80-214, Gdańsk, Poland. ksikorska@gumed.edu.pl.
(5)Department of Tropical Medicine and Epidemiology, Medical University of 
Gdansk, Powstania Styczniowego 9b, 81-519, Gdynia, Poland. 
ksikorska@gumed.edu.pl.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within DNA region containing interferon 
lambda 3 (IFNL3) and IFNL4 genes are prognostic factors of treatment response in 
chronic hepatitis C (CHC). Iron overload, frequently diagnosed in CHC, is 
associated with unfavorable disease course and a risk of carcinogenesis. Its 
etiology and relationship with the immune response in CHC are not fully 
explained. Our aim was to determine whether IFNL polymorphisms in CHC patients 
associate with body iron indices, and whether they are linked with hepatic 
expression of genes involved in iron homeostasis and IFN signaling. For 192 CHC 
patients, four SNPs within IFNL3-IFNL4 region (rs12979860, rs368234815, 
rs8099917, rs12980275) were genotyped. In 185 liver biopsies, histopathological 
analyses were performed. Expression of five mRNAs and three long non-coding RNAs 
(lncRNAs) was determined with qRT-PCR in 105 liver samples. Rs12979860 TT or 
rs8099917 GG genotypes as well as markers of serum and hepatocyte iron overload 
associated with higher activity of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase and liver 
steatosis. The presence of two minor alleles in any of the tested SNPs 
predisposed to abnormally high serum iron concentration and correlated with 
higher hepatic expression of lncRNA NRIR. On the other hand, homozygosity in any 
major allele associated with higher viral load. Patients bearing rs12979860 CC 
genotype had lower hepatic expression of hepcidin (HAMP; P = 0.03). HAMP mRNA 
level positively correlated with serum iron indices and degree of hepatocyte 
iron deposits. IFNL polymorphisms influence regulatory pathways of cellular 
response to IFN and affect body iron balance in chronic hepatitis C virus 
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-016-0423-4
PMCID: PMC5403869
PMID: 27125837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: The study protocol was 
approved by the Local Independent Bioethics Committee at the Medical University 
of Gdansk (NKEB 246/2011) in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 
INFORMED CONSENT: All enrolled participants of this study provided written 
informed consent.