1. Oncotarget. 2016 May 24;7(21):31204-14. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9100.

Relationship between insulin-like growth factor axis gene polymorphisms and 
clinical outcome in advanced gastric cancer patients treated with FOLFOX.

Oh SY(1), Shin A(2), Kim SG(3), Hwang JA(4), Hong SH(4), Lee YS(4), Kwon HC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine, 
Busan, Korea.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital, 
Yangsan, Korea.
(4)Cancer Genomics Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, 
Gyeonggi-do, Korea.
(5)Sillajen Inc., Busan, Korea.

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis plays a crucial role in proliferation, 
differentiation, migration, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. The present study 
evaluated the associations between IGF axis single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) and clinical outcomes in advanced gastric cancer (AGC) patients treated 
with oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX). A total of 190 
patients undergoing FOLFOX chemotherapy for AGC were considered eligible for 
this study. Forty-four SNPs of 10 IGF axis genes were genotyped. Levels of serum 
IGF1 were measured using enzyme-linked immunoassays. SNPs of the IGF1R 
(rs12423791), and IGF1 (rs2162679, rs5742612, rs35767) genes were significantly 
associated with tumor response to FOLFOX. SNPs of rs4619 and rs17847203 were 
significantly associated with PFS (hazard ratio [HR] 0.575, 95% CI 0.385-0.858, 
P = 0.007; and HR 2.530, 95% CI 1.289-4.966, P = 0.007; respectively). SNPs of 
rs2872060 were significantly associated with OS-OS was shorter in patients 
carrying the TT variant than in those with the GG/GT genotypes (HR, 1.708, 95% 
CI 1.024-2.850, P = 0.040). The GT genotype of rs12847203 was also identified as 
an independent prognostic factor (HR 2.087, 95% CI 1.070-4.069, P = 0.031). 
These results suggest that IGF axis-pathway SNPs could be used as prognostic 
biomarkers of the outcome of FOLFOX chemotherapy in AGC patients. This 
information may facilitate identification of population subgroups that could 
benefit from IGF1R-targeted agents.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9100
PMCID: PMC5058750
PMID: 27144430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of Interest.