1. Melanoma Res. 2016 Aug;26(4):348-53. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000267.

Polymorphisms in CYP19A1 and NFKB1 genes are associated with cutaneous melanoma 
risk in southern Brazilian patients.

Escobar GF(1), Arraes JA, Bakos L, Ashton-Prolla P, Giugliani R, 
Callegari-Jacques SM, Santos S, Bakos RM.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Dermatology, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA) 
bDepartment of Genetics, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), 
Experimental Research Center and Medical Genetics Service, HCPA cPostgraduate 
Program in Medical Sciences dDepartment of Statistics, UFRGS, Porto Alegre 
eLaboratory of Human and Medical Genetics, Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA), 
Belém, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is the leading cause of death from skin cancers and its 
etiology is complex. Recent discoveries related to genetic risk factors are 
helping us to understand melanoma pathogenesis better. Nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) 
has a critical role in immunity, inflammation, and tumor growth. The 94ins/del 
ATTG (rs28362491) polymorphism located in the NFKB1 gene has been associated to 
various cancers and the ATTG2/ATTG2 genotype was correlated to melanoma risk in 
Sweden. The CYP19A1 gene encodes the enzyme aromatase, which is active in 
malignant melanoma tissue. In addition, the CYP19A1 TCT insertion/deletion 
variant in intron 4 (rs11575899) has been associated with an increased incidence 
of cancer, albeit with conflicting results. The goal of this study was to 
investigate possible associations between these two gene variants and melanoma.
METHODS: In this case-control study, we evaluated 117 cutaneous melanoma 
patients and 116 controls from southern Brazil. Genotyping of rs28362491 and 
rs11575899 was carried out by means of PCR amplification and capillary 
electrophoresis. Logistic regression was used to obtain odds ratios (ORs) of 
melanoma, according to genotypes.
RESULTS: We identified an association between the ATTG2/ATTG2 and melanoma 
[OR=1.78; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.06-3.00; P=0.03]. In addition, there 
was a dose effect: for each ins allele in the genotype, the risk for melanoma 
increased (OR=1.51; 95% CI: 1.08-2.11; P=0.017). As regards the CYP19A1 variant, 
genotype 11 (del/del) was more frequent in patients than in controls (OR=1.85; 
95% CI 1.06-3.22; P=0.03).
CONCLUSION: The NFKB1 ATTG2/ATTG2 and CYP19A1 del/del genotypes are 
significantly associated with melanoma and could be genetic markers of melanoma 
susceptibility in southern Brazilian population.

DOI: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000267
PMID: 27145040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]