1. Theriogenology. 2016 Jul 1;86(1):427-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2016.04.057. Epub 2016 Apr 21.

Lessons learned from the cystic fibrosis pig.

Meyerholz DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA. Electronic address: david-meyerholz@uiowa.edu.

Deficient function in the anion channel cystic fibrosis (CF) transmembrane 
conductance regulator is the fundamental cause for CF. This is a monogenic 
condition that causes lesions in several organs including the respiratory tract, 
pancreas, liver, intestines, and reproductive tract. Lung disease is most 
notable, given it is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in people with 
CF. Shortly after the identification of CF transmembrane conductance regulator, 
CF mouse models were developed that did not show spontaneous lung disease as 
seen in humans, and this spurred development of additional CF animal models. Pig 
models were considered a leading choice for several reasons including their 
similarity to humans in respiratory anatomy, physiology, and in size for 
translational imaging. The first CF pig models were reported in 2008 and have 
been extremely valuable to help clarify persistent questions in the field and 
advance understanding of disease pathogenesis. Because CF pigs are susceptible 
to lung disease like humans, they have direct utility in translational research. 
In addition, CF pig models are useful to compare and contrast with current CF 
mouse models, human clinical studies, and even newer CF animal models being 
characterized. This "triangulation" strategy could help identify genetic 
differences that underlie phenotypic variations, so as to focus and accelerate 
translational research.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2016.04.057
PMCID: PMC4885762
PMID: 27142487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]