1. J Transl Med. 2016 May 4;14(1):115. doi: 10.1186/s12967-016-0870-4.

Next-generation sequencing for diagnosis of thoracic aortic aneurysms and 
dissections: diagnostic yield, novel mutations and genotype phenotype 
correlations.

Poninska JK(1), Bilinska ZT(2), Franaszczyk M(1), Michalak E(3), Rydzanicz M(4), 
Szpakowski E(5), Pollak A(6), Milanowska B(3), Truszkowska G(1), Chmielewski 
P(3), Sioma A(3), Janaszek-Sitkowska H(7), Klisiewicz A(8), Michalowska I(9), 
Makowiecka-Ciesla M(7), Kolsut P(5), Stawinski P(4)(6), Foss-Nieradko B(3), 
Szperl M(1), Grzybowski J(10), Hoffman P(8), Januszewicz A(7), Kusmierczyk M(5), 
Ploski R(11).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Unit for Screening Studies in Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Institute of 
Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland. zbilinska@ikard.pl.
(3)Unit for Screening Studies in Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Institute of 
Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Cardiac Surgery and Transplantation, Institute of Cardiology, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Hypertension, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Congenital Cardiac Defects, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(9)Department of Radiology, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(10)Department of Cardiomyopathy, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, Medical University 
of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. rploski@wp.pl.

BACKGROUND: Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD) are silent but 
possibly lethal condition with up to 40 % of cases being hereditary. Genetic 
background is heterogeneous. Recently next-generation sequencing enabled 
efficient and cost-effective examination of gene panels. Aim of the study was to 
define the diagnostic yield of NGS in the 51 TAAD patients and to look for 
genotype-phenotype correlations within families of the patients with TAAD.
METHODS: 51 unrelated TAAD patients were examined by either whole exome 
sequencing or TruSight One sequencing panel. We analyzed rare variants in 10 
established thoracic aortic aneurysms-associated genes. Whenever possible, we 
looked for co-segregation in the families. Kaplan-Meier survival curve was 
constructed to compare the event-free survival depending on genotype. Aortic 
events were defined as acute aortic dissection or first planned aortic surgery.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: In 21 TAAD patients we found 22 rare variants, 6 
(27.3 %) of these were previously reported, and 16 (73.7 %) were novel. Based on 
segregation data, functional analysis and software estimations we assumed that 
three of novel variants were causative, nine likely causative. Remaining four 
were classified as of unknown significance (2) and likely benign (2). In all, 9 
(17.6 %) of 51 probands had a positive result when considering variants 
classified as causative only and 18 (35.3 %) if likely causative were also 
included. Genotype-positive probands (n = 18) showed shorter mean event free 
survival (41 years, CI 35-46) than reference group, i.e. those (n = 29) without 
any plausible variant identified (51 years, CI 45-57, p = 0.0083). This effect 
was also found when the 'genotype-positive' group was restricted to probands 
with 'likely causative' variants (p = 0.0092) which further supports 
pathogenicity of these variants. The mean event free survival was particularly 
low (37 years, CI 27-47) among the probands with defects in the TGF beta 
signaling (p = 0.0033 vs. the reference group).
CONCLUSIONS: This study broadens the spectrum of genetic background of thoracic 
aneurysms and dissections and supports its potential role as a prognostic factor 
in the patients with the disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-016-0870-4
PMCID: PMC4855821
PMID: 27146836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]