1. Int J Reprod Biomed. 2015 Dec;13(12):771-8.

No relationship between most polymorphisms of steroidogenic acute regulatory 
(StAR) gene with polycystic ovarian syndrome.

Nazouri AS(1), Khosravifar M(2), Akhlaghi AA(3), Shiva M(4), Afsharian P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Sciences Faculty, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, 
Iran.; Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan 
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan 
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Reproductive Health, Reproductive Epidemiology 
Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Female Infertility, Reproductive Biomedicine 
Research Center, Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common endocrine 
women's disorders in reproductive age. Hyperandrogenism has a critical role in 
the etiology of PCOS and it can cause fault in Steroidogenesis process. During 
steroidogenesis, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) seems to increase 
the delivery of cholesterol through mitochondrial membrane. Therefore, 
polymorphisms of StAR might effect on this protein and play a role in the 
etiology of PCOS.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the association between StAR 
SNPs with PCOS. Thus, seven polymorphisms in this gene: rs104894086, 
rs104894089, rs104894090, rs137852689, rs10489487, rs104894085 were detected.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this case control study, 45 PCOS women, 40 male 
factor/unexplained infertile women, and 40 fertile women as two control groups 
were participated from 2008-2012. Polymorphisms were detected using restriction 
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method.
RESULTS: Heterozygote genotyping for rs137852689 SNP (amino acid 218 C > T) was 
only seen in seven PCOS patients, one in normal ovulatory women, and five in 
male factor/unexplained infertile women (15.5%, 2.5%, 12.5%, respectively) (p= 
0.12). While, it has shown no association between other SNPS with PCOs.
CONCLUSION: The RFLP results for seven chosen SNPs, which located in exon 5 and 
7 showed normal status in three groups, it means no heterozygous or homozygous 
forms of selected SNPs were observed. So, it seems evaluation of the active 
amino acid sites should be investigated and also the study population should be 
increased.

PMCID: PMC4827514
PMID: 27141537