1. Diabetologia. 2016 Aug;59(8):1579-93. doi: 10.1007/s00125-016-3967-7. Epub
2016  May 7.

Islet biology, the CDKN2A/B locus and type 2 diabetes risk.

Kong Y(1), Sharma RB(1), Nwosu BU(2), Alonso LC(3).

Author information:
(1)AS7-2047, Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(3)AS7-2047, Division of Diabetes, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA. 
Laura.Alonso@umassmed.edu.

Type 2 diabetes, fuelled by the obesity epidemic, is an escalating worldwide 
cause of personal hardship and public cost. Diabetes incidence increases with 
age, and many studies link the classic senescence and ageing protein p16(INK4A) 
to diabetes pathophysiology via pancreatic islet biology. Genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs) have unequivocally linked the CDKN2A/B locus, which 
encodes p16 inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase (p16(INK4A)) and three other 
gene products, p14 alternate reading frame (p14(ARF)), p15(INK4B) and antisense 
non-coding RNA in the INK4 locus (ANRIL), with human diabetes risk. However, the 
mechanism by which the CDKN2A/B locus influences diabetes risk remains 
uncertain. Here, we weigh the evidence that CDKN2A/B polymorphisms impact 
metabolic health via islet biology vs effects in other tissues. Structured in a 
bedside-to-bench-to-bedside approach, we begin with a summary of the evidence 
that the CDKN2A/B locus impacts diabetes risk and a brief review of the basic 
biology of CDKN2A/B gene products. The main emphasis of this work is an in-depth 
look at the nuanced roles that CDKN2A/B gene products and related proteins play 
in the regulation of beta cell mass, proliferation and insulin secretory 
function, as well as roles in other metabolic tissues. We finish with a 
synthesis of basic biology and clinical observations, incorporating human 
physiology data. We conclude that it is likely that the CDKN2A/B locus 
influences diabetes risk through both islet and non-islet mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-016-3967-7
PMCID: PMC4930689
PMID: 27155872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]