1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Aug;1862(8):1433-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.05.003. Epub 2016 May 4.

Lens ER-stress response during cataract development in Mip-mutant mice.

Zhou Y(1), Bennett TM(1), Shiels A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
shiels@vision.wustl.edu.

Major intrinsic protein (MIP) is a functional water-channel (AQP0) that also 
plays a key role in establishing lens fiber cell architecture. Genetic variants 
of MIP have been associated with inherited and age-related forms of cataract; 
however, the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are unclear. Here we have used 
lens transcriptome profiling by microarray-hybridization and qPCR to identify 
pathogenic changes during cataract development in Mip-mutant (Lop/+) mice. In 
postnatal Lop/+ lenses (P7) 99 genes were up-regulated and 75 were 
down-regulated (>2-fold, p=<0.05) when compared with wild-type. A pathway 
analysis of up-regulated genes in the Lop/+ lens (P7) was consistent with 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress and activation of the unfolded protein 
response (UPR). The most up-regulated UPR genes (>4-fold) in the Lop/+ lens 
included Chac1>Ddit3>Atf3>Trib3>Xbp1 and the most down-regulated genes (>5-fold) 
included two anti-oxidant genes, Hspb1 and Hmox1. Lop/+ lenses were further 
characterized by abundant TUNEL-positive nuclei within central degenerating 
fiber cells, glutathione depletion, free-radical overproduction, and calpain 
hyper-activation. These data suggest that Lop/+ lenses undergo proteotoxic 
ER-stress induced cell-death resulting from prolonged activation of the 
Eif2ak3/Perk-Atf4-Ddit3-Chac1 branch of the UPR coupled with severe 
oxidative-stress.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.05.003
PMCID: PMC4885755
PMID: 27155571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]