1. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Dec;117(12):2682-2692. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25592. Epub 2016 
Jun 3.

TP53 Mutations in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Their Impact on 
Disease Progression and Treatment Response.

Zhou G(1), Liu Z(1), Myers JN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 77030.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 77030. jmyers@mdanderson.org.

Recent studies describing the mutational landscape of head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) on a genomic scale by our group and others, including The 
Cancer Genome Atlas, have provided unprecedented perspective for understanding 
the molecular pathogenesis of HNSCC progression and response to treatment. These 
studies confirmed that mutations of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene were the most 
frequent of all somatic genomic alterations in HNSCC, alluding to the importance 
of the TP53 gene in suppressing the development and progression of this disease. 
Clinically, TP53 mutations are significantly associated with short survival time 
and tumor resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy in HNSCC patients, which 
makes the TP53 mutation status a potentially useful molecular factor for risk 
stratification and predictor of clinical response in these patients. In addition 
to loss of wild-type p53 function and the dominant-negative effect on the 
remaining wild-type p53, some p53 mutants often gain oncogenic functions to 
promote tumorigenesis and progression. Different p53 mutants may possess 
different gain-of-function properties. Herein, we review the most up-to-date 
information about TP53 mutations available via The Cancer Genome Atlas-based 
analysis of HNSCC and discuss our current understanding of the potential 
tumor-suppressive role of p53, focusing on gain-of-function activities of p53 
mutations. We also summarize our knowledge regarding the use of the TP53 
mutation status as a potential evaluation or stratification biomarker for 
prognosis and a predictor of clinical response to radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
in HNSCC patients. Finally, we discuss possible strategies for targeting HNSCCs 
bearing TP53 mutations. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 2682-2692, 2016. © 2016 Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.25592
PMCID: PMC5493146
PMID: 27166782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]