1. BMJ Open. 2016 May 12;6(5):e010719. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010719.

Mutation screening of the TPO gene in a cohort of 192 Chinese patients with 
congenital hypothyroidism.

Fu C(1), Xie B(1), Zhang S(1), Wang J(1), Luo S(1), Zheng H(1), Su J(1), Hu 
X(1), Chen R(1), Fan X(1), Luo J(1), Gu X(2), Chen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Maternal and Child 
Health Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning, People's Republic 
of China Guangxi Center for Birth Defects Research and Prevention, Nanning, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)Endocrinology and Genetic Metabolism of Institute for Pediatric Research, 
Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: Defects in the human thyroid peroxidase (TPO) gene are reported to 
be one of the causes of congenital hypothyroidism (CH) due to dyshormonogenesis. 
The aim of this study was to examine the TPO mutation spectrum and prevalence 
among patients with CH in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of China and to 
define the relationships between TPO genotypes and clinical phenotypes.
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 192 patients with CH in the Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, China and genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral 
blood leucocytes. All exons of the 10 common CH-associated genes including TPO 
together with their exon-intron boundaries were screened by next-generation 
sequencing (NGS). The effect of the novel TPO mutation was investigated by 'in 
silico' studies.
RESULTS: NGS analysis of TPO in 192 patients with CH revealed 3 different 
variations in 2 individuals (2/192, 1%). Sequencing other CH candidate genes in 
the patients with TPO variants revealed that patient 1 was homozygous for 
c.2422delT TPO mutation combined with double heterozygous DUOX2 pathogenic 
variants (p.R683L/p.L1343F) and patient 2 was triallelic for TPO pathogenic 
variants (p.R648Q/p.T561M/p.T561M). The present study identified a novel TPO 
variation c.1682C>T/p.T561M; and four known mutations: c.2422delT/p.C808AfsÃ—24 
and c.1943C>T/p.R648Q in TPO, c.2048G>T/p.R683L and c.4027C>T/p.L1343F in DUOX2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicated that the prevalence of TPO mutations was 1% 
among studied Chinese patients with CH. More than two variations in one or more 
CH-associated genes can be found in a single patient, and may, in combination, 
affect the phenotype of the individual. A novel TPO variation c.1682C>T/p.T561M 
was found, thereby expanding the mutational spectrum of the gene.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010719
PMCID: PMC4874165
PMID: 27173810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]