1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jul 12;7(28):43088-43094. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9292.

Importance of the residue 190 on bactericidal activity of the 
bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein 5.

Wu H(1)(2), Liu L(1), Lin M(1), Liu L(1), He C(1), Zheng D(2), Huang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Reprogramming Technology, Shenzhen Second People's 
Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Shenzhen University Health Sciences Center, Shenzhen, China.

The bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (BPI) with bactericidal and 
endotoxin-neutralizing activity is of considerable interest in clinical 
applications. However, the crucial residues responsible for the bactericidal 
activity of BPI remain elusive. In previous study, we identified the mutation of 
mBPI5 associated with the male infertility of mice. Here, the effects of 
Asp190Ala mutation on the antibacterial activity of mBPI5 have been determined. 
Substitution of Asp190 by alanine caused significant improvement in cytotoxic 
effect toward both E.coli J5 and P.aeruginosa. Liposome co-sedimentation assay 
showed that the ratio of Asp190Ala mutant binding to lipids increased by 8 
folds. These results were well consistent with known fact that antibacterial 
activity of BPI is attributed to its high affinity for lipid moiety of 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS). The constructed structure of mBPI5 revealed that 
Asp190 was located close to 6 positively charged residues on the surface of 
N-terminal domain. When replacing Asp190 with alanine, salt linkages with Arg188 
were broken, making the side chain of Arg188 be free to move and form tighter 
contacts with negatively charged LPS. These findings suggest that residue 190 
combined with surrounding positively charged residues largely contribute to 
bactericidal and endotoxin-neutralizing activities of mBPI5.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9292
PMCID: PMC5190010
PMID: 27177329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.