1. Oncol Res. 2016;24(1):1-7. doi: 10.3727/096504016X14570992647087.

Radiosensitization of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Cells by Inhibition of TGF-β1 
Signaling With SB431542 Is Dependent on p53 Status.

Zhao Y(1), Wang L, Huang Q, Jiang Y, Wang J, Zhang L, Tian Y, Yang H.

Author information:
(1)School of Radiation Medicine and Protection, Medical College of Soochow 
University/Collaborative Innovation Center of Radiation Medicine of Jiangsu 
Higher Education Institutions, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Although medically inoperable patients with stage I non-small cell lung cancer 
cells (NSCLC) are often treated with stereotactic body radiation therapy, its 
efficacy can be compromised due to poor radiosensitivity of cancer cells. 
Inhibition of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1) using LY364947 and 
LY2109761 has been demonstrated to radiosensitize cancer cells such as breast 
cancer, glioblastoma, and lung cancer. Our previous results have demonstrated 
that another potent and selective inhibitor of TGF-β1 receptor kinases, 
SB431542, could radiosensitize H460 cells both in vitro and in vivo. In the 
present study, we investigated whether SB431542 could radiosensitize other NSCLC 
cell lines, trying to explore the potential implication of this TGF-β1 inhibitor 
in radiotherapy for NSCLC patients. The results showed that A549 cells were 
significantly radiosensitized by SB431542, whereas no radiosensitizing effect 
was observed in H1299 cells. Interestingly, both H460 and A549 cells have 
wild-type p53, while H1299 cells have deficient p53. To study whether the 
radiosensitizing effect of SB431542 was associated with p53 status of cancer 
cells, the p53 of H460 cells was silenced using shRNA transfection. Then it was 
found that the radiosensitizing effect of SB431542 on H460 cells was not 
observed in H460 cells with silenced p53. Moreover, X-irradiation caused rapid 
Smad2 activation in H460 and A549 cells but not in H1299 and H460 cells with 
silenced p53. The Smad2 activation postirradiation could be abolished by 
SB431542. This may explain the lack of radiosensitizing effect of SB431542 in 
H1299 and H460 cells with silenced p53. Thus, we concluded that the 
radiosensitizing effect of inhibition of TGF-β1 signaling in NSCLC cells by 
SB431542 was p53 dependent, suggesting that using TGF-β1 inhibitor in 
radiotherapy may be more complicated than previously thought and may need 
further investigation.

DOI: 10.3727/096504016X14570992647087
PMCID: PMC7838670
PMID: 27178816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]