1. Mol Pharmacol. 2016 Jul;90(1):35-41. doi: 10.1124/mol.116.104190. Epub 2016
May  11.

Cryo-EM Analysis of the Conformational Landscape of Human P-glycoprotein (ABCB1) 
During its Catalytic Cycle.

Frank GA(1), Shukla S(1), Rao P(1), Borgnia MJ(1), Bartesaghi A(1), Merk A(1), 
Mobin A(1), Esser L(1), Earl LA(1), Gottesman MM(1), Xia D(1), Ambudkar SV(2), 
Subramaniam S(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
ambudkar@helix.nih.gov ss1@nih.gov.

The multidrug transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp, ABCB1) is an ATP-dependent pump 
that mediates the efflux of structurally diverse drugs and xenobiotics across 
cell membranes, affecting drug pharmacokinetics and contributing to the 
development of multidrug resistance. Structural information about the 
conformational changes in human P-gp during the ATP hydrolysis cycle has not 
been directly demonstrated, although mechanistic information has been inferred 
from biochemical and biophysical studies conducted with P-gp and its orthologs, 
or from structures of other ATP-binding cassette transporters. Using 
single-particle cryo-electron microscopy, we report the surprising discovery 
that, in the absence of the transport substrate and nucleotides, human P-gp can 
exist in both open [nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) apart; inward-facing] and 
closed (NBDs close; outward-facing) conformations. We also probe conformational 
states of human P-gp during the catalytic cycle, and demonstrate that, following 
ATP hydrolysis, P-gp transitions through a complete closed conformation to a 
complete open conformation in the presence of ADP.

U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.116.104190
PMCID: PMC4931865
PMID: 27190212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]