1. Neuron. 2016 May 18;90(4):724-39. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.05.003.

TREM2 Haplodeficiency in Mice and Humans Impairs the Microglia Barrier Function 
Leading to Decreased Amyloid Compaction and Severe Axonal Dystrophy.

Yuan P(1), Condello C(2), Keene CD(3), Wang Y(4), Bird TD(5), Paul SM(6), Luo 
W(6), Colonna M(4), Baddeley D(7), Grutzendler J(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA; 
Department of Neuroscience, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(6)The Helen and Robert Appel Alzheimer's Disease Research Institute, Brain and 
Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA; 
Nanobiology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT 06515, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA; 
Department of Neuroscience, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. 
Electronic address: jaime.grutzendler@yale.edu.

Haplodeficiency of the microglia gene TREM2 increases risk for late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) but the mechanisms remain uncertain. To investigate 
this, we used high-resolution confocal and super-resolution (STORM) microscopy 
in AD-like mice and human AD tissue. We found that microglia processes, rich in 
TREM2, tightly surround early amyloid fibrils and plaques promoting their 
compaction and insulation. In Trem2- or DAP12-haplodeficient mice and in humans 
with R47H TREM2 mutations, microglia had a markedly reduced ability to envelop 
amyloid deposits. This led to an increase in less compact plaques with longer 
and branched amyloid fibrils resulting in greater surface exposure to adjacent 
neurites. This was associated with more severe neuritic tau hyperphosphorylation 
and axonal dystrophy around amyloid deposits. Thus, TREM2 deficiency may disrupt 
the formation of a neuroprotective microglia barrier that regulates amyloid 
compaction and insulation. Pharmacological modulation of this barrier could be a 
novel therapeutic strategy for AD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.05.003
PMCID: PMC4898967
PMID: 27196974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors claim no 
conflict of interest