1. Przegl Lek. 2016;73(2):59-66.

Paraoxonase-1 activity and pleiotropic properties of simvastatin in obese and 
non-obese patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD).

Januszek R.

OBJECTIVES: The study was aimed to assess paraoxonase-1 (PON1) activity, 
pleiotropic effects of simvastatin, and its relationship to Q192R and M55L 
polymorphisms in obese and non-obese subjects with stable coronary artery 
disease (CAD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 53 subjects (22 obese) aged from 35 to 
65 years with CAD. The control group consisted of 53 (18 obese) police officers 
without CAD. Patients with CAD were treated with simvastatin 40 mg/day for 12 
months. The lipid profile, flow mediated dilation (FMD), intima media-thickness 
(IMT), fibrinogen, hs-CRP, TNF-α, urine 8-iso-PGF2α, and PON1 activity were 
evaluated in definite time points. PON1 polymorphisms were assessed at baseline 
in all observed individuals.
RESULTS: The patients with CAD and obesity presented at baseline significantly 
increased hs-CRP level, insignificantly decreased FMD and lower PON1 activity 
compared to non-obese individuals. There was no association of obesity with 
8-iso-PGF2α in the CAD and control group. The PON1 activity was significantly 
higher in 192R carriers in patients and controls, irrespective of obesity. 
Obesity was not associated with the effects of simvastatin on PON1 activity, 
urine 8-iso-PGF2α, and TNF-α, whereas it blunted its effect on the FMD 
improvement. The Q192R polymorphism was associated with simvastatin 
effectiveness on hs-CRP and FMD.
CONCLUSION: Obesity and Q192R PON1 polymorphism are significantly associated 
with pleiotropic effects of simvastatin therapy in patients with stable CAD.

PMID: 27197424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]