1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Aug;15(8):1988-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0737. 
Epub 2016 May 20.

Afatinib against Esophageal or Head-and-Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: 
Significance of Activating Oncogenic HER4 Mutations in HNSCC.

Nakamura Y(1), Togashi Y(2), Nakahara H(3), Tomida S(2), Banno E(2), Terashima 
M(2), Hayashi H(4), de Velasco MA(2), Sakai K(2), Fujita Y(2), Okegawa T(5), 
Nutahara K(5), Hamada S(6), Nishio K(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan. Department of Urology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kindai University Faculty of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan. Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Urology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kindai University Faculty of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan. knishio@med.kindai.ac.jp.

The prognosis for patients with advanced esophageal or head-and-neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (ESCC or HNSCC) remains poor, and the identification of 
additional oncogenes and their inhibitors is needed. In this study, we evaluated 
the sensitivities of several ESCC and HNSCC cell lines to HER inhibitors 
(cetuximab, erlotinib, and afatinib) in vitro and found two cell lines that were 
hypersensitive to afatinib. Sequence analyses for the afatinib-targeted HER 
family genes in the two cell lines revealed that one cell line had a previously 
reported activating EGFR L861Q mutation, whereas the other had an HER4 G1109C 
mutation of unknown function. No amplification of HER family genes was found in 
either of the two cell lines. The phosphorylation level of HER4 was elevated in 
the HER4 G1109C mutation-overexpressed HEK293 cell line, and the mutation had a 
transforming potential and exhibited tumorigenicity in an NIH3T3 cell line, 
indicating that this HER4 mutation was an activating oncogenic mutation. 
Afatinib dramatically reduced the phosphorylation level of EGFR or HER4 and 
induced apoptosis in the two cell lines. In vivo, tumor growth was also 
dramatically decreased by afatinib. In a database, the frequencies of HER family 
gene mutations in ESCC or HNSCC ranged from 0% to 5%. In particular, HER4 
mutations have been found relatively frequently in HNSCC. Considering the 
addiction of cancer cells to activating oncogenic EGFR or HER4 mutations for 
proliferation, HNSCC or ESCC with such oncogenic mutations might be suitable for 
targeted therapy with afatinib. Mol Cancer Ther; 15(8); 1988-97. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0737
PMID: 27207775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]