1. Arch Toxicol. 2017 Jan;91(1):35-61. doi: 10.1007/s00204-016-1733-8. Epub 2016 
May 21.

Re-evaluation of the WHO (2010) formaldehyde indoor air quality guideline for 
cancer risk assessment.

Nielsen GD(1), Larsen ST(2), Wolkoff P(2).

Author information:
(1)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Lersø Parkallé 105, 
2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. gdn@nrcwe.dk.
(2)National Research Centre for the Working Environment, Lersø Parkallé 105, 
2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.

In 2010, the World Health Organization (WHO) established an indoor air quality 
guideline for short- and long-term exposures to formaldehyde (FA) of 0.1 mg/m3 
(0.08 ppm) for all 30-min periods at lifelong exposure. This guideline was 
supported by studies from 2010 to 2013. Since 2013, new key studies have been 
published and key cancer cohorts have been updated, which we have evaluated and 
compared with the WHO guideline. FA is genotoxic, causing DNA adduct formation, 
and has a clastogenic effect; exposure-response relationships were nonlinear. 
Relevant genetic polymorphisms were not identified. Normal indoor air FA 
concentrations do not pass beyond the respiratory epithelium, and therefore FA's 
direct effects are limited to portal-of-entry effects. However, systemic effects 
have been observed in rats and mice, which may be due to secondary effects as 
airway inflammation and (sensory) irritation of eyes and the upper airways, 
which inter alia decreases respiratory ventilation. Both secondary effects are 
prevented at the guideline level. Nasopharyngeal cancer and leukaemia were 
observed inconsistently among studies; new updates of the US National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) cohort confirmed that the relative risk was not increased with 
mean FA exposures below 1 ppm and peak exposures below 4 ppm. Hodgkin's 
lymphoma, not observed in the other studies reviewed and not considered FA 
dependent, was increased in the NCI cohort at a mean concentration ≥0.6 mg/m3 
and at peak exposures ≥2.5 mg/m3; both levels are above the WHO guideline. 
Overall, the credibility of the WHO guideline has not been challenged by new 
studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-016-1733-8
PMCID: PMC5225186
PMID: 27209488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.