1. PLoS Genet. 2016 May 23;12(5):e1006080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006080. 
eCollection 2016 May.

A Minimal Threshold of c-di-GMP Is Essential for Fruiting Body Formation and 
Sporulation in Myxococcus xanthus.

Skotnicka D(1), Smaldone GT(2), Petters T(1), Trampari E(3), Liang J(2), Kaever 
V(4), Malone JG(3)(5), Singer M(2), SÃ¸gaard-Andersen L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecophysiology, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial 
Microbiology, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California - 
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.
(3)Molecular Microbiology Department, John Innes Centre, Norwich, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Research Core Unit Metabolomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United 
Kingdom.

Generally, the second messenger bis-(3'-5')-cyclic dimeric GMP (c-di-GMP) 
regulates the switch between motile and sessile lifestyles in bacteria. Here, we 
show that c-di-GMP is an essential regulator of multicellular development in the 
social bacterium Myxococcus xanthus. In response to starvation, M. xanthus 
initiates a developmental program that culminates in formation of spore-filled 
fruiting bodies. We show that c-di-GMP accumulates at elevated levels during 
development and that this increase is essential for completion of development 
whereas excess c-di-GMP does not interfere with development. MXAN3735 (renamed 
DmxB) is identified as a diguanylate cyclase that only functions during 
development and is responsible for this increased c-di-GMP accumulation. DmxB 
synthesis is induced in response to starvation, thereby restricting DmxB 
activity to development. DmxB is essential for development and functions 
downstream of the Dif chemosensory system to stimulate exopolysaccharide 
accumulation by inducing transcription of a subset of the genes encoding 
proteins involved in exopolysaccharide synthesis. The developmental defects in 
the dmxB mutant are non-cell autonomous and rescued by co-development with a 
strain proficient in exopolysaccharide synthesis, suggesting reduced 
exopolysaccharide accumulation as the causative defect in this mutant. The 
NtrC-like transcriptional regulator EpsI/Nla24, which is required for 
exopolysaccharide accumulation, is identified as a c-di-GMP receptor, and thus a 
putative target for DmxB generated c-di-GMP. Because DmxB can be-at least 
partially-functionally replaced by a heterologous diguanylate cyclase, these 
results altogether suggest a model in which a minimum threshold level of 
c-di-GMP is essential for the successful completion of multicellular development 
in M. xanthus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006080
PMCID: PMC4877007
PMID: 27214040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.