1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Jun 22;138(24):7626-35. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b02724. Epub
2016  Jun 8.

Selective Phosphorylation Inhibitor of Delta Protein Kinase C-Pyruvate 
Dehydrogenase Kinase Protein-Protein Interactions: Application for Myocardial 
Injury in Vivo.

Qvit N(1), Disatnik MH(1), Sho E(2), Mochly-Rosen D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University , Stanford, California 94305-5174, United States.
(2)Nanjing, Jiangsu 210000, P.R. China.

Protein kinases regulate numerous cellular processes, including cell growth, 
metabolism, and cell death. Because the primary sequence and the 
three-dimensional structure of many kinases are highly similar, the development 
of selective inhibitors for only one kinase is challenging. Furthermore, many 
protein kinases are pleiotropic, mediating diverse and sometimes even opposing 
functions by phosphorylating multiple protein substrates. Here, we set out to 
develop an inhibitor of a selective protein kinase phosphorylation of only one 
of its substrates. Focusing on the pleiotropic delta protein kinase C (δPKC), we 
used a rational approach to identify a distal docking site on δPKC for its 
substrate, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK). We reasoned that an inhibitor of 
PDK's docking should selectively inhibit the phosphorylation of only PDK without 
affecting phosphorylation of the other δPKC substrates. Our approach identified 
a selective inhibitor of PDK docking to δPKC with an in vitro Kd of ∼50 nM and 
reducing cardiac injury IC50 of ∼5 nM. This inhibitor, which did not affect the 
phosphorylation of other δPKC substrates even at 1 μM, demonstrated that PDK 
phosphorylation alone is critical for δPKC-mediated injury by heart attack. The 
approach we describe is likely applicable for the identification of other 
substrate-specific kinase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b02724
PMCID: PMC5065007
PMID: 27218445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]