1. Nat Commun. 2016 May 25;7:11707. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11707.

CRISPR-dCas9 and sgRNA scaffolds enable dual-colour live imaging of satellite 
sequences and repeat-enriched individual loci.

Fu Y(1)(2), Rocha PP(1), Luo VM(1)(2), Raviram R(1)(2), Deng Y(3), Mazzoni 
EO(2), Skok JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, Sml 311, New York, New York 10016, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, New York 10003, USA.
(3)Microscopy Core, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 
10016, USA.

Imaging systems that allow visualization of specific loci and nuclear structures 
are highly relevant for investigating how organizational changes within the 
nucleus play a role in regulating gene expression and other cellular processes. 
Here we present a live imaging system for targeted detection of genomic regions. 
Our approach involves generating chimaeric transcripts of viral RNAs (MS2 and 
PP7) and single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs), which when co-expressed with a 
cleavage-deficient Cas9 can recruit fluorescently tagged viral RNA-binding 
proteins (MCP and PCP) to specific genomic sites. This allows for rapid, stable, 
low-background visualization of target loci. We demonstrate the efficiency and 
flexibility of our method by simultaneously labelling major and minor satellite 
regions as well as two individual loci on mouse chromosome 12. This system 
provides a tool for dual-colour labelling, which is important for tracking the 
dynamics of chromatin interactions and for validating epigenetic processes 
identified in fixed cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms11707
PMCID: PMC4894952
PMID: 27222091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]