1. MethodsX. 2016 Apr 19;3:326-32. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2016.04.002. eCollection 
2016.

Design and construction of a low-cost nose poke system for rodents.

Rizzi G(1), Lodge ME(1), Tan KR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, 4056 Basel, 
Switzerland.

Operant behavioral tasks for animals have long been used to probe the function 
of multiple brain regions (i.e., understanding the role of dopamine in 
electrical brain stimulation reward [1], or determining the rewarding properties 
of feeding oriented brain pathways [2]). The recent development of tools and 
techniques has opened the door to refine the answer to these same questions with 
a much higher degree of specificity and accuracy, both in biological and 
spatial-temporal terms [3], [4]. A variety of systems designed to test operant 
behavior are now commercially available, but have prohibitive costs. Here, we 
provide a low-cost alternative to a nose poke system for mice. Adapting a freely 
available sketch for ARDUINO boards, in combination with an in-house built PVC 
box and inexpensive electronic material we constructed a four-port nose poke 
system that detects and counts port entries. To verify the applicability and 
validity of our system we tested the behavior of DAT-CRE transgenic mice 
injected with an adeno-associated virus to express ChannelRhodopsin 2 in the 
Ventral tegmental area (VTA) and used the BNC output to drive a blue laser 
coupled to a fiber implanted above the VTA. Over 6 days, mice perform as it has 
been reported previously [5] exhibiting a remarkable preference for the port 
that triggers optogenetic stimulation of VTA dopamine neurons. •We provide a low 
cost alternative to commercially available nose poke system.•Our custom made 
apparatus is open source and TTL compatible.•We validate our system with 
optogenetic self-stimulation of dopamine neurons.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mex.2016.04.002
PMCID: PMC4855068
PMID: 27222822