1. Molecules. 2016 May 30;21(6):708. doi: 10.3390/molecules21060708.

Antioxidative and Antidiabetic Effects of Natural Polyphenols and Isoflavones.

Umeno A(1), Horie M(2), Murotomi K(3), Nakajima Y(4), Yoshida Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan. 
a-umeno@aist.go.jp.
(2)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan. 
masa-horie@aist.go.jp.
(3)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan. 
murotomi@aist.go.jp.
(4)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan. 
y-nakajima@aist.go.jp.
(5)Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), 2217-14 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan. 
yoshida-ya@aist.go.jp.

Many polyphenols that contain more than two phenolic hydroxyl groups are natural 
antioxidants and can provide health benefits to humans. These polyphenols 
include, for example, oleuropein, hydroxytyrosol, catechin, chlorogenic acids, 
hesperidin, nobiletin, and isoflavones. These have been studied widely because 
of their strong radical-scavenging and antioxidative effects. These effects may 
contribute to the prevention of diseases, such as diabetes. Insulin secretion, 
insulin resistance, and homeostasis are important factors in the onset of 
diabetes, a disease that is associated with dysfunction of pancreatic Î²-cells. 
Oxidative stress is thought to contribute to this dysfunction and the effects of 
antioxidants on the pathogenesis of diabetes have, therefore, been investigated. 
Here, we summarize the antioxidative effects of polyphenols from the perspective 
of their radical-scavenging activities as well as their effects on signal 
transduction pathways. We also describe the preventative effects of polyphenols 
on diabetes by referring to recent studies including those reported by us. 
Appropriate analytical approaches for evaluating antioxidants in studies on the 
prevention of diabetes are comprehensively reviewed.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules21060708
PMCID: PMC6274112
PMID: 27248987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.