1. Nat Cell Biol. 2016 Jul;18(7):814-21. doi: 10.1038/ncb3369. Epub 2016 May 30.

Pten regulates spindle pole movement through Dlg1-mediated recruitment of Eg5 to 
centrosomes.

van Ree JH(1), Nam HJ(1), Jeganathan KB(1), Kanakkanthara A(1), van Deursen 
JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Phosphatase and tensin homologue (Pten) suppresses neoplastic growth by 
negatively regulating PI(3)K signalling through its phosphatase activity. To 
gain insight into the actions of non-catalytic Pten domains in normal 
physiological processes and tumorigenesis, we engineered mice lacking the 
PDZ-binding domain (PDZ-BD). Here, we show that the PDZ-BD regulates centrosome 
movement and that its heterozygous or homozygous deletion promotes aneuploidy 
and tumour formation. We found that Pten is recruited to pre-mitotic centrosomes 
in a Plk1-dependent fashion to create a docking site for protein complexes 
containing the PDZ-domain-containing protein Dlg1 (also known as Sap97) and Eg5 
(also known as Kif11), a kinesin essential for centrosome movement and bipolar 
spindle formation. Docking of Dlg1-Eg5 complexes to Pten depended on Eg5 
phosphorylation by the Nek9-Nek6 mitotic kinase cascade and Cdk1. PDZ-BD 
deletion or Dlg1 ablation impaired loading of Eg5 onto centrosomes and spindle 
pole motility, yielding asymmetrical spindles that are prone to chromosome 
missegregation. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Pten, through the 
Dlg1-binding ability of its PDZ-BD, accumulates phosphorylated Eg5 at duplicated 
centrosomes to establish symmetrical bipolar spindles that properly segregate 
chromosomes, and suggest that this function contributes to tumour suppression.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb3369
PMCID: PMC5004208
PMID: 27240320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]