1. J Exp Bot. 2016 May;67(11):3457-69. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw167.

The RICE MINUTE-LIKE1 (RML1) gene, encoding a ribosomal large subunit protein 
L3B, regulates leaf morphology and plant architecture in rice.

Zheng M(1), Wang Y(1), Liu X(1), Sun J(1), Wang Y(1), Xu Y(1), Lv J(1), Long 
W(1), Zhu X(1), Guo X(2), Jiang L(1), Wang C(1), Wan J(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, P.R. China.
(2)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, 
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 
100081, P.R. China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, P.R. China National Key Facility for 
Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Institute of Crop Science, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, P.R. China wanjm@njau.edu.cn 
wanjianmin@caas.cn.

Mutations of ribosomal proteins (RPs) are known to cause developmental 
abnormalities in yeast, mammals, and dicotyledonous plants; however, their 
effects have not been studied in rice. Here, we identifiy a ribosomal biogenesis 
mutant, rice minute-like1 (rml1) that displays a minute phenotype as evidenced 
by retarded growth and defects in the vascular system. We determine that RML1 
encodes a ribosome large subunit protein 3B (RPL3B) in rice by means of 
map-based cloning and genetic complementation. RPL3B is abundantly expressed in 
all the tissues, whereas RPL3A, another RPL3 gene family member, is expressed at 
low levels. Notably, the expression level of RPL3A in the rml1 mutant is similar 
to that in the wild-type, suggesting that RPL3A provides no functional 
compensation for RPL3B in rml1 plants. Ribosomal profiles show that mutation of 
RPL3B leads to a significant reduction in free 60S ribosomal subunits and 
polysomes, indicating a ribosomal insufficiency in the rml1 mutant. Our results 
demonstrate that the ribosomal protein gene RPL3B is required for maintaining 
normal leaf morphology and plant architecture in rice through its regulation of 
ribosome biogenesis.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw167
PMCID: PMC4939763
PMID: 27241493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]