1. J Med Case Rep. 2016 Jun 1;10(1):143. doi: 10.1186/s13256-016-0925-4.

Visceral symptoms as a key diagnostic sign for the early infantile form of 
Niemann-Pick disease type C in a Russian patient: a case report.

Degtyareva AV(1), Mikhailova SV(2), Zakharova EY(3), Tumanova EL(4), Puchkova 
AA(5).

Author information:
(1)Federal State Budget Institution, Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology 
and Perinatology, Federal State Budget Institution, 117997 Oparina str. 4, 
Moscow, Russia. annadim@yahoo.com.
(2)Russian Children's Hospital, 117997 Leninsky Prospect 117, Moscow, Russia.
(3)State Institution Medical Genetic Research Center, 115478, Moskvorechje str. 
1, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Russian National Research Medical University, 117997, Ostrovitjanova str. 1, 
Moscow, Russia.
(5)Federal State Budget Institution, Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology 
and Perinatology, Federal State Budget Institution, 117997 Oparina str. 4, 
Moscow, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick disease type C is a rare metabolic disease 
characterized by progressive neurological deterioration with childhood onset, 
and often results in premature mortality. Niemann-Pick disease type C has an 
extremely heterogeneous clinical presentation with a wide range of visceral and 
neurological signs and symptoms that are not specific to the disease, and which 
progress over varied periods of time. The incidence and epidemiology of 
Niemann-Pick disease type C in Russia have not been characterized. We report the 
case of a Russian newborn with early-infantile onset Niemann-Pick disease type C 
who displayed prolonged neonatal jaundice and hepatosplenomegaly.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 5-year-old white boy born to non-consanguineous Russian 
parents was originally diagnosed with galactosemia at the age of 2 months based 
on a raised blood galactose level. A galactose-free and lactose-free diet 
resulted in achievement of a normal galactose level, but hepatosplenomegaly and 
cholestatic signs persisted. Liver biopsy results hinted at possible 
Niemann-Pick disease type C, but differential diagnostic investigations for 
progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 2 (Byler syndrome) indicated 
a heterozygous genotype suggestive of this disease. Further, progressive 
neurological symptoms prompted additional genetic analyses for possible 
Niemann-Pick disease type C, from which an as-yet unreported combination of 
known NPC1 gene mutations was identified, and a final diagnosis of Niemann-Pick 
disease type C was established. The patient subsequently developed typical 
neurological symptoms of early-infantile Niemann-Pick disease type C, including 
vertical supranuclear ophthalmoparesis and cerebellar ataxia. Miglustat therapy 
was initiated 2.5 years ago, and some improvements in movement and speech have 
since been observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the continued challenges associated with 
diagnosing Niemann-Pick disease type C based on the appearance of nonspecific 
cholestatic symptoms. Based on this case we recommend examination of all 
newborns and children who display unexplained cholestasis or isolated 
splenomegaly/hepatosplenomegaly during the first months of life for other signs 
of possible Niemann-Pick disease type C.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-016-0925-4
PMCID: PMC4888417
PMID: 27250337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]