1. Rev Inst Med Trop Sao Paulo. 2016;58:41. doi: 10.1590/S1678-9946201658041.
Epub  2016 May 24.

PERFORMANCE OF CONVENTIONAL PCRs BASED ON PRIMERS DIRECTED TO NUCLEAR AND 
MITOCHONDRIAL GENES FOR THE DETECTION AND IDENTIFICATION OF Leishmania spp.

Lopes EG(1), Geraldo Junior CA(1), Marcili A(1), Silva RD(1), Keid LB(2), 
Oliveira TM(2), Soares RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, Universidade de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, 
Pirassununga, SP, Brasil.

In visceral leishmaniasis, the detection of the agent is of paramount importance 
to identify reservoirs of infection. Here, we evaluated the diagnostic 
attributes of PCRs based on primers directed to cytochrome-B (cytB), 
cytochrome-oxidase-subunit II (coxII), cytochrome-C (cytC), and the 
minicircle-kDNA. Although PCRs directed to cytB, coxII, cytC were able to detect 
different species of Leishmania, and the nucleotide sequence of their amplicons 
allowed the unequivocal differentiation of species, the analytical and 
diagnostic sensitivity of these PCRs were much lower than the analytical and 
diagnostic sensitivity of the kDNA-PCR. Among the 73 seropositive animals, the 
asymptomatic dogs had spleen and bone marrow samples collected and tested; only 
two animals were positive by PCRs based on cytB, coxII, and cytC, whereas 18 
were positive by the kDNA-PCR. Considering the kDNA-PCR results, six dogs had 
positive spleen and bone marrow samples, eight dogs had positive bone marrow 
results but negative results in spleen samples and, in four dogs, the reverse 
situation occurred. We concluded that PCRs based on cytB, coxII, and cytC can be 
useful tools to identify Leishmania species when used in combination with 
automated sequencing. The discordance between the results of the kDNA-PCR in 
bone marrow and spleen samples may indicate that conventional PCR lacks 
sensitivity for the detection of infected dogs. Thus, primers based on the kDNA 
should be preferred for the screening of infected dogs.

DOI: 10.1590/S1678-9946201658041
PMCID: PMC4879998
PMID: 27253743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]