1. Turk J Haematol. 2011 Dec 5;28(4):299-305. doi: 10.5152/tjh.2011.84.

Factor V G1691A (Leiden) is a major etiological factor in Egyptian Budd-Chiari 
syndrome patients.

[Article in English]

Abdel Ghaffar TY, Elsayed SM(1), Sakr MA, Elsobky ES, Abdelhakam SM, Yousuf S, 
Eğin Y, Akar N.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Center, 27A Baghdad Street, Korba, 11341 Cairo, Egypt, 
Phone: +202 241 51 999 E-mail: elsayed683@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: Budd-Chiari syndrome is a multifactorial disease in which several 
prothrombotic disorders may predispose patients to the development of thrombosis 
at this uncommon location (hepatic veins). The aim of this study was to 
determine the prevalence and characteristics of inherited thrombophilia in 
Egyptian Budd-Chiari syndrome patients.
METHODS: The study included 47 Budd-Chiari syndrome patients (20 children and 27 
adults). Genotyping of Factor V G1691A (Leiden), prothrombin G20210A (PT), and 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T were performed using real-time PCR and 
fluorescence melting curve detection analysis.
RESULTS: Factor V Leiden was observed in 29 patients (61.7%). It is the only 
factor that caused Budd-Chiari syndrome in 18 of the patients and in 5 of the 
patients with inferior vena cava involvement. Myeloproliferative disease was 
noted in 12 (25.5%) patients, antiphospholipid syndrome in 5 (10.6%), and 
Behcet's disease in 3 (6.4%). Interestingly, 3 of the children with Budd-Chiari 
syndrome had lipid storage disease.
CONCLUSION: Factor V Leiden was a major etiological factor in Egyptian 
Budd-Chiari syndrome patients, which may have been related to the high frequency 
of this mutation in the study region. Factor V Leiden was also a strong 
thrombophilic factor and the leading cause of inferior vena cava thrombosis in 
these patients. Lipid storage disease should be included as a risk factor for 
Budd-Chiari syndrome.

Publisher: AMAÇ: Budd-Chiari sendromunun etyolojisinde çok farklı nedenler rol 
oynayabilir. Farklı protrombotik bozukluklar, bu sendromun oluşmasına yol 
açabilir. Bu çalışmada Mısır’lı Budd Chiari Sendromu tanısı almış hastalarda 
trombofilik nedenlerin sıklığıyla hastaların özelliklerinin karşılaştırılması 
amaçlanmıştır. YÖNTEMLER: Çalışmaya 20 çocuk ve 27 erişkin olmak üzere 47 hasta 
dahil edilmiştir. Faktör V Leiden G1691A, Prothrombin G20210A and 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T genotiplemeleri gerçek zamanlı 
polimeraz zincir reaksiyon (PZR) yöntemi kullanılarak gerçekleştirilmiştir. FV 
Leiden toplam 29 hastada (%61.7) saptanmış olup, daha once yapılan çalışmalara 
göre yüksek bir orandır. 18 hastada Budd Chiari sendromu oluşması için tek 
etyolojik neden olarak göze çarpmaktadır. Myeloproliferatif hastalık sadece 12 
(%25.5), antifosfolipid sendromu 5 (%10.6), ve Behçet hastalığı 3 (%6.4) hastada 
saptanmıştır. İlginç olan 3 çocukta lipid depo hastalıkların da belirlenmiş 
olmasıdır. SONUÇ: Faktör V Leiden'ın Budd Chiarinin oluşmasındaki temel 
etyolojik faktörlerden biri olarak göze çarpmaktadır. Bu ise mutasyonun Mısır 
toplumunda yüksek oranda bulunmasına bağlanabilir. Lipid depo hastalıklarının da 
Budd Chiari için risk faktörü olarak dahil edilmesi gerekmektedir.

DOI: 10.5152/tjh.2011.84
PMID: 27264587