1. Brain Behav Immun. 2016 Nov;58:130-141. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.05.022. Epub 
2016 Jun 2.

Evidence for an immune signature of prenatal alcohol exposure in female rats.

Bodnar TS(1), Hill LA(2), Weinberg J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. Electronic 
address: tamara.bodnar@ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British 
Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Evidence for immune/neuroimmune disturbances as a possible root cause of a range 
of disorders, including neurodevelopmental disorders, is growing. Although 
prenatal alcohol exposure (PAE) impacts immune function, few studies to date 
have examined immune function in relation to long-term negative health outcomes 
following PAE, and most have focused on males. To fill this gap, we utilized a 
rat model to examine the effects of PAE on immune/neuroimmune function during 
early-life [postnatal day 1 (P1), P8, and P22] in PAE and control females. Due 
to the extensive interplay between the immune and endocrine systems, we also 
measured levels of corticosterone and corticosterone binding globulin (CBG). 
While corticosterone levels were not different among groups, CBG levels were 
lower in PAE offspring from P1 to P8, suggesting a lower corticosterone 
reservoir that may underlie susceptibility to inflammation. Spleen weights were 
increased in PAE rats on P22, a marker of altered immune function. Moreover, we 
detected a unique cytokine profile in PAE compared to control offspring on P8 - 
higher levels in the PFC and hippocampus, and lower levels in the hypothalamus 
and spleen. The finding of a specific immune signature in PAE offspring during a 
sensitive developmental period has important implications for understanding the 
basis of long-term immune alterations and health outcomes in children with Fetal 
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD). Our findings also highlight the future 
possibility that immune-based intervention strategies could be considered as an 
adjunctive novel therapeutic approach for individuals with FASD.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2016.05.022
PMCID: PMC5067180
PMID: 27263429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]