1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 7;6:27402. doi: 10.1038/srep27402.

Photodynamic therapy inhibit Fibroblast Growth Factor-10 induced keratinocyte 
differentiation and proliferation through ROS in Fibroblast Growth Factor 
Receptor-2b pathway.

Gozali MV(1), Yi F(1), Zhang JA(1), Liu J(1), Wu HJ(1), Xu Y(1), Luo D(1), Zhou 
BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China.

5-aminolevulinic acid-photodynamic therapy (ALA-PDT) is known to be effective in 
several skin diseases such as acne, actinic keratoses, condyloma acuminata. 
However, some detailed mechanisms of ALA-PDT to treat these skin diseases still 
remain elusive. In this study, we aimed to investigate mechanism of ALA-PDT in 
in-vitro and in-vivo models. For in vitro, we use human keratinocyte cell line 
(HaCaT) cells. CCK-8 was used to detect cell proliferation activity, 
immunofluorescence and western blotting method to detect the content of keratin 
(K)1, K6, K16, protein kinase C (PKC), fibroblast growth factor receptor-2b 
(FGFR2b) protein, ELISA and RT-PCR to detect expression of interleukin (IL) 1α 
in the cell supernatant, and detect reactive oxygen species (ROS). For in vivo, 
we use 20 rabbits to induce hyperkeratosis acne model in their ear. Dermatoscope 
was used to see follicle hyperkeratosis and skin biopsy to analyze histology and 
immunohistochemical of PKC, FGFR2b, K1, K6 and K16. Results from this study 
suggest that ROS stimulated by ALA-PDT lead to inhibition of FGFR2b pathway in 
PKC downstream to cause reduction of IL1α expression, and eventually, 
keratinocytes differentiation and proliferation. Our data thus reveal a 
treatment mechanism of ALA-PDT underlying hyperkeratosis related dermatoses.

DOI: 10.1038/srep27402
PMCID: PMC4895211
PMID: 27273653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]