1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016 Aug;44(8):1349-63. doi: 10.1124/dmd.116.069823. Epub 
2016 Jun 8.

Biotransformation and Rearrangement of Laromustine.

Nassar AE(1), Wisnewski AV(2), King I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut (A.-E.F.N., A.V.W.); Department of Chemistry, University of 
Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut (A.-E.F.N.); Metastagen, Inc., Wilmington, 
Delaware (I.K.) ala.nassar@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut (A.-E.F.N., A.V.W.); Department of Chemistry, University of 
Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut (A.-E.F.N.); Metastagen, Inc., Wilmington, 
Delaware (I.K.).

This review highlights the recent research into the biotransformations and 
rearrangement of the sulfonylhydrazine-alkylating agent laromustine. Incubation 
of [(14)C]laromustine with rat, dog, monkey, and human liver microsomes produced 
eight radioactive components (C-1 to C-8). There was little difference in the 
metabolite profile among the species examined, partly because NADPH was not 
required for the formation of most components, which instead involved 
decomposition and/or hydrolysis. The exception was C-7, a hydroxylated 
metabolite, largely formed by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4/5. Liquid 
chromatography-multistage mass spectrometry (LC-MS(n)) studies determined that 
collision-induced dissociation, and not biotransformation or enzyme catalysis, 
produced the unique mass spectral rearrangement. Accurate mass measurements 
performed with a Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer 
(FTICR-MS) significantly aided determination of the elemental compositions of 
the fragments and in the case of laromustine revealed the possibility of 
rearrangement. Further, collision-induced dissociation produced the loss of 
nitrogen (N2) and methylsulfonyl and methyl isocyanate moieties. The 
rearrangement, metabolite/decomposition products, and conjugation reactions were 
analyzed utilizing hydrogen-deuterium exchange, exact mass, (13)C-labeled 
laromustine, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and LC-MS(n) 
experiments to assist with the assignments of these fragments and possible 
mechanistic rearrangement. Such techniques produced valuable insights into these 
functions: 1) Cytochrome P450 is involved in C-7 formation but plays little or 
no role in the conversion of [(14)C]laromustine to C-1 through C-6 and C-8; 2) 
the relative abundance of individual degradation/metabolite products was not 
species-dependent; and 3) laromustine produces several reactive intermediates 
that may produce the toxicities seen in the clinical trials.

Copyright Â© 2016 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/dmd.116.069823
PMID: 27278961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]