1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Jul;94(7):739-46. doi: 10.1007/s00109-016-1427-y. Epub 
2016 Jun 9.

Apolipoprotein E: from cardiovascular disease to neurodegenerative disorders.

Mahley RW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, 1650 Owens Street, San 
Francisco, CA, 94158, USA. robert.mahley@gladstone.ucsf.edu.
(2)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, 94143, USA. robert.mahley@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Apolipoprotein (apo) E was initially described as a lipid transport protein and 
major ligand for low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors with a role in 
cholesterol metabolism and cardiovascular disease. It has since emerged as a 
major risk factor (causative gene) for Alzheimer's disease and other 
neurodegenerative disorders. Detailed understanding of the structural features 
of the three isoforms (apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4), which differ by only a single 
amino acid interchange, has elucidated their unique functions. ApoE2 and apoE4 
increase the risk for heart disease: apoE2 increases atherogenic lipoprotein 
levels (it binds poorly to LDL receptors), and apoE4 increases LDL levels (it 
binds preferentially to triglyceride-rich, very low density lipoproteins, 
leading to downregulation of LDL receptors). ApoE4 also increases the risk for 
neurodegenerative diseases, decreases their age of onset, or alters their 
progression. ApoE4 likely causes neurodegeneration secondary to its abnormal 
structure, caused by an interaction between its carboxyl- and amino-terminal 
domains, called domain interaction. When neurons are stressed or injured, they 
synthesize apoE to redistribute cholesterol for neuronal repair or remodeling. 
However, because of its altered structure, neuronal apoE4 undergoes 
neuron-specific proteolysis, generating neurotoxic fragments (12-29Â kDa) that 
escape the secretory pathway and cause mitochondrial dysfunction and 
cytoskeletal alterations, including tau phosphorylation. ApoE4-associated 
pathology can be prevented by small-molecule structure correctors that block 
domain interaction by converting apoE4 to a molecule that resembles apoE3 both 
structurally and functionally. Structure correctors are a potential therapeutic 
approach to reduce apoE4 pathology in both cardiovascular and neurological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-016-1427-y
PMCID: PMC4921111
PMID: 27277824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]