1. Exp Neurol. 2016 Sep;283(Pt A):97-109. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.05.039. 
Epub 2016 Jun 7.

Influence of early life status epilepticus on the developmental expression 
profile of the GluA2 subunit of AMPA receptors.

Szczurowska E(1), Ergang P(2), Kubová H(3), Druga R(4), Salaj M(5), Mareš P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Epileptology, Institute of Physiology CAS, 
Vídeňská 1083, 124 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic; National Institute of Mental 
Health, Topolová 748, 250 67 Klecany, Czech Republic. Electronic address: 
ewa.szczurowska@epilepsy.biomed.cas.cz.
(2)Department of Epithelial Physiology, Institute of Physiology CAS, Vídeňská 
1083, 124 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Developmental Epileptology, Institute of Physiology CAS, 
Vídeňská 1083, 124 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Developmental Epileptology, Institute of Physiology CAS, 
Vídeňská 1083, 124 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic; Institute of Anatomy, Second 
Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, U nemocnice 3, 128 00 Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(5)Institute of Anatomy, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, U 
nemocnice 3, 128 00 Prague, Czech Republic.

AMPA receptors (AMPARs) are responsible for fast excitatory neurotransmission, 
and their prolonged activation can result in the generation and spread of 
epileptic seizures. At early stages of postnatal development, the majority of 
AMPARs are permeable to both Na(+) and Ca(2+) ions. This permeability, which 
increases neuronal excitability, is due to the lack of the GluA2 subunit, 
encoded by the GRIA2A gene, and/or the presence of an unedited GluA2 subunit Q/R 
site (glutamine instead of arginine). Lithium chloride- and pilocarpine-induced 
status epilepticus (LiCl/Pilo-SE) in rodents represents a model of severe 
seizures that result in development of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). The aim of 
this study was to determine how LiCl/Pilo-SE induced early in life (at postnatal 
day 12; P12) alters normal expression of the GRIA2A gene and GluA2 protein. SE 
was interrupted by an injection of paraldehyde (Para). Control groups were 1) 
naïve animals, and 2) siblings of SE rats receiving only LiCl and paraldehyde 
(LiCl/Para). The expression profile of GRIA2A mRNA was determined via qPCR, and 
GluA2 protein levels were measured by western blotting. The analysis was 
performed at 3h (protein levels), and then 3-, 6-, 13-, and 60days, following 
LiCl/Pilo-SE or LiCl/Para injection (i.e. at P12, P15, P18, P25, P72 
respectively). Six different brain regions were analyzed: frontal (CXFR), 
parietal (CXPAR), and occipital (CXOC) cortex, dorsal (HD) and ventral (HV) 
hippocampus, and thalamus (TH). There was a significant increase in GRIA2A mRNA 
expression in the CXFR, CXPAR, and CXOC of P18 SE animals. In CXFR and HD, 
increased expression of GluA2 AMPAR subunit protein was detected, as well as a 
surge in GRIA2A mRNA and GluA2 protein expression especially at P18. In HD the 
surge was detected not only during development (P18), but also later in life 
(P72). Since high levels of GluA2 can be neuroprotective (by decreasing Ca(2+) 
permeability), our data suggest that the neocortex and dorsal hippocampus are 
able to activate endogenous antiepileptic mechanisms. A marked decrease in the 
overall expression of GluA2 protein in the HV in the LiCl/Pilo-SE and LiCl/Para 
rats, suggests that the HV is predisposed to excitotoxicity, not only during 
development, but even in adulthood. Interestingly, LiCl in combination with 
paraldehyde can also strongly alter the normal ontogeny of GRIA2A mRNA as well 
as GluA2 subunit protein expression.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.05.039
PMID: 27288240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]