1. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 Jul 12;8(7):2076-92. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evw132.

Emergence and Evolution of Hominidae-Specific Coding and Noncoding Genomic 
Sequences.

Saber MM(1), Adeyemi Babarinde I(2), Hettiarachchi N(2), Saitou N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of 
Tokyo Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan.
(2)Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan Department of Genetics, School of Life Science, Graduate University for 
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Mishima, Japan.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of 
Tokyo Division of Population Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan Department of Genetics, School of Life Science, Graduate University for 
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Mishima, Japan saitounr@nig.ac.jp.

Family Hominidae, which includes humans and great apes, is recognized for unique 
complex social behavior and intellectual abilities. Despite the increasing 
genome data, however, the genomic origin of its phenotypic uniqueness has 
remained elusive. Clade-specific genes and highly conserved noncoding sequences 
(HCNSs) are among the high-potential evolutionary candidates involved in driving 
clade-specific characters and phenotypes. On this premise, we analyzed whole 
genome sequences along with gene orthology data retrieved from major DNA 
databases to find Hominidae-specific (HS) genes and HCNSs. We discovered that 
Down syndrome critical region 4 (DSCR4) is the only experimentally verified gene 
uniquely present in Hominidae. DSCR4 has no structural homology to any known 
protein and was inferred to have emerged in several steps through LTR/ERV1, 
LTR/ERVL retrotransposition, and transversion. Using the genomic distance as 
neutral evolution threshold, we identified 1,658 HS HCNSs. Polymorphism coverage 
and derived allele frequency analysis of HS HCNSs showed that these HCNSs are 
under purifying selection, indicating that they may harbor important functions. 
They are overrepresented in promoters/untranslated regions, in close proximity 
of genes involved in sensory perception of sound and developmental process, and 
also showed a significantly lower nucleosome occupancy probability. 
Interestingly, many ancestral sequences of the HS HCNSs showed very high 
evolutionary rates. This suggests that new functions emerged through some kind 
of positive selection, and then purifying selection started to operate to keep 
these functions.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evw132
PMCID: PMC4987104
PMID: 27289096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]