1. Math Med Biol. 2017 Sep 1;34(3):313-333. doi: 10.1093/imammb/dqw010.

Renal medullary and urinary oxygen tension during cardiopulmonary bypass in the 
rat.

Sgouralis I(1), Evans RG(2), Layton AT(3).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis, NIMBioS, 
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Disease Program, Bioscience Discovery Institute and Department 
of Physiology, Monash University, Monash, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Duke, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Renal hypoxia could result from a mismatch in renal oxygen supply and demand, 
particularly in the renal medulla. Medullary hypoxic damage is believed to give 
rise to acute kidney injury, which is a prevalent complication of cardiac 
surgery performed on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). To determine the mechanisms 
that could lead to medullary hypoxia during CPB in the rat kidney, we developed 
a mathematical model which incorporates (i) autoregulation of renal blood flow 
and glomerular filtration rate, (ii) detailed oxygen transport and utilization 
in the renal medulla and (iii) oxygen transport along the ureter. Within the 
outer medulla, the lowest interstitial tissue P$_{\rm O2}$, which is an 
indicator of renal hypoxia, is predicted near the thick ascending limbs. 
Interstitial tissue P$_{\rm O2}$ exhibits a general decrease along the inner 
medullary axis, but urine P$_{\rm O2}$ increases significantly along the ureter. 
Thus, bladder urinary P$_{\rm O2}$ is predicted to be substantially higher than 
medullary P$_{\rm O2}$. The model is used to identify the phase of cardiac 
surgery performed on CPB that is associated with the highest risk for hypoxic 
kidney injury. Simulation results indicate that the outer medulla's 
vulnerability to hypoxic injury depends, in part, on the extent to which 
medullary blood flow is autoregulated. With imperfect medullary blood flow 
autoregulation, the model predicts that the rewarming phase of CPB, in which 
medullary blood flow is low but medullary oxygen consumption remains high, is 
the phase in which the kidney is most likely to suffer hypoxic injury.

Â© The authors 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Institute of Mathematics and its Applications. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/imammb/dqw010
PMCID: PMC5432426
PMID: 27281792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]