1. Hum Genet. 2016 Sep;135(9):993-1010. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1696-0. Epub 2016
 Jun 17.

Treating hemoglobinopathies using gene-correction approaches: promises and 
challenges.

Cottle RN(1), Lee CM(2), Bao G(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioengineering Program, Clemson University and Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, 29425, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. 
gang.bao@rice.edu.

Hemoglobinopathies are genetic disorders caused by aberrant hemoglobin 
expression or structure changes, resulting in severe mortality and health 
disparities worldwide. Sickle cell disease (SCD) and β-thalassemia, the most 
common forms of hemoglobinopathies, are typically treated using transfusions and 
pharmacological agents. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is 
the only curative therapy, but has limited clinical applicability. Although gene 
therapy approaches have been proposed based on the insertion and forced 
expression of wild-type or anti-sickling β-globin variants, safety concerns may 
impede their clinical application. A novel curative approach is nuclease-based 
gene correction, which involves the application of precision genome-editing 
tools to correct the disease-causing mutation. This review describes the 
development and potential application of gene therapy and precision 
genome-editing approaches for treating SCD and β-thalassemia. The opportunities 
and challenges in advancing a curative therapy for hemoglobinopathies are also 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-016-1696-0
PMCID: PMC5002253
PMID: 27314256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]