1. Nutrients. 2016 Jun 7;8(6):337. doi: 10.3390/nu8060337.

Efficacy of Folic Acid Supplementation in Autistic Children Participating in 
Structured Teaching: An Open-Label Trial.

Sun C(1), Zou M(2), Zhao D(3), Xia W(4), Wu L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. suncaihong2003@163.com.
(2)Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. mingyangshine@sina.com.
(3)Zhejiang Provincial Center For Disease Prevention and Control, Hangzhou 
310009, China. dzhao@cdc.zj.cn.
(4)Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. xiawei1023@126.com.
(5)Department of Children's and Adolescent Health, Public Health College of 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. wulijiehyd@126.com.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are recognized as a major public health issue. 
Here, we evaluated the effects of folic acid intervention on methylation cycles 
and oxidative stress in autistic children enrolled in structured teaching. 
Sixty-six autistic children enrolled in this open-label trial and participated 
in three months of structured teaching. Forty-four children were treated with 
400 Î¼g folic acid (two times/daily) for a period of three months during their 
structured teaching (intervention group), while the remaining 22 children were 
not given any supplement for the duration of the study (control group). The 
Autism Treatment Evaluation Checklist (ATEC) and Psychoeducational Profile-third 
edition (PEP-3) were measured at the beginning and end of the treatment period. 
Folic acid, homocysteine, and glutathione metabolism in plasma were measured 
before and after treatment in 29 autistic children randomly selected from the 
intervention group and were compared with 29 age-matched unaffected children 
(typical developmental group). The results illustrated folic acid intervention 
improved autism symptoms towards sociability, cognitive verbal/preverbal, 
receptive language, and affective expression and communication. Furthermore, 
this treatment also improved the concentrations of folic acid, homocysteine, and 
normalized glutathione redox metabolism. Folic acid supplementation may have a 
certain role in the treatment of children with autism.

DOI: 10.3390/nu8060337
PMCID: PMC4924178
PMID: 27338456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]