1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jun 27;6:28684. doi: 10.1038/srep28684.

Ndk, a novel host-responsive regulator, negatively regulates bacterial virulence 
through quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Yu H(1)(2), Xiong J(2), Zhang R(3), Hu X(1), Qiu J(2), Zhang D(2), Xu X(2), Xin 
R(2), He X(2), Xie W(2), Sheng H(2), Chen Q(2), Zhang L(2), Rao X(1), Zhang 
K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third Military 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Central Laboratory, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.

Pathogenic bacteria could adjust gene expression to enable their survival in the 
distinct host environment. However, the mechanism by which bacteria adapt to the 
host environment is not well described. In this study, we demonstrated that 
nucleoside diphosphate kinase (Ndk) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is critical for 
adjusting the bacterial virulence determinants during infection. Ndk expression 
was down-regulated in the pulmonary alveoli of a mouse model of acute pneumonia. 
Knockout of ndk up-regulated transcription factor ExsA-mediated T3S regulon 
expression and decreased exoproduct-related gene expression through the 
inhibition of the quorum sensing hierarchy. Moreover, in vitro and in vivo 
studies demonstrated that the ndk mutant exhibits enhanced cytotoxicity and host 
pathogenicity by increasing T3SS proteins. Taken together, our data reveal that 
ndk is a critical novel host-responsive gene required for coordinating P. 
aeruginosa virulence upon acute infection.

DOI: 10.1038/srep28684
PMCID: PMC4921839
PMID: 27345215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]