1. Clin Exp Immunol. 2016 Nov;186(2):157-163. doi: 10.1111/cei.12831. Epub 2016
Aug  2.

Polymorphisms in STAT-4, IL-10, PSORS1C1, PTPN2 and MIR146A genes are associated 
differently with prognostic factors in Italian patients affected by rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Ciccacci C(1), Conigliaro P(2), Perricone C(3), Rufini S(1), Triggianese P(2), 
Politi C(1), Novelli G(1), Perricone R(2), Borgiani P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Genetics Section, Rome, Italy.
(2)Clinic of Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of 
'Medicina Dei Sistemi', University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', Rome, Italy.
(3)Reumatologia, Dipartimento Di Medicina Interna E Specialità Mediche, Sapienza 
Università Di Roma, Rome, Italy. carlo.perricone@gmail.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease resulting in chronic 
inflammation of the synovium and consequent cartilage and bone erosion. RA is 
associated strongly with the presence of rheumatoid factor (RF), and consists of 
clinical subsets of anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-positive and 
-negative patients. This study was designed to evaluate whether relevant single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with RA and other autoimmune 
disorders are related to RF, ACPA and clinical phenotype in a cohort of biologic 
drugs naive Italian RA patients; 192 RA patients and 278 age-matched healthy 
controls were included. Clinical and laboratory data were registered. We 
analysed a total of 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in signal 
transducer and activator of transcription-4 (STAT-4), interleukin (IL)-10, 
psoriasis susceptibility 1 candidate 1 (PSORS1C1), protein tyrosine phosphatase, 
non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2), endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1), 
tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated 3 interacting protein 2 (TRAF3IP2) 
and microRNA 146a (MIR146A) genes by allelic discrimination assays. Case-control 
association studies and genotype/phenotype correlation analyses were performed. 
A higher risk to develop RA was observed for rs7574865 in the STAT-4 gene, while 
the rs1800872 in the IL-10 gene showed a protective effect. The presence of RF 
was associated significantly with rs1800872 variant in IL-10, while rs2910164 in 
MIR146A was protective. ACPA were associated significantly with rs7574865 in 
STAT-4. The SNP rs2233945 in the PSORS1C1 gene was protective regarding the 
presence of bone erosions, while rs2542151 in PTPN2 gene was associated with 
joint damage. Our results confirm that polymorphisms in STAT-4 and IL-10 genes 
confer susceptibility to RA. For the first time, we described that SNPs in 
PSORS1C1, PTPN2 and MIR146A genes were associated differently with a severe 
disease phenotype in terms of autoantibody status and radiographic damage in an 
Italian RA population.

© 2016 British Society for Immunology.

DOI: 10.1111/cei.12831
PMCID: PMC5054570
PMID: 27342690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]