1. Molecules. 2016 Jun 25;21(7):810. doi: 10.3390/molecules21070810.

Extraction of Flavonoids from the Flowers of Abelmoschus manihot (L.) Medic by 
Modified Supercritical CO₂ Extraction and Determination of Antioxidant and 
Anti-Adipogenic Activity.

Li J(1)(2), Zhang J(3), Wang M(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, #24 
Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China. pingljj@126.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Zhejiang Pharmaceutical College, 
#888 Yin Xian Avenue Eastern Section, Ningbo 315000, China. pingljj@126.com.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, #24 
Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China. juancpu@126.com.
(4)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, #24 
Tong Jia Xiang, Nanjing 210009, China. Minwang@cpu.edu.cn.

Abelmoschus manihot (L.) Medic has been used for many years in Chinese 
traditional medicine. In this study, supercritical CO₂ plus a modifier was 
utilized to extract flavonoids from the flowers of Abelmoschus manihot (L.) 
Medic. The effects of temperature (40 °C-60 °C), pressure (10-30 MPa) and 
different concentrations of ethanol as modifier (60%-90%, ethanol:water, v/v) on 
major flavonol content and the antioxidant activity of the extracts were studied 
by response surface methodology (RSM) using a Box-Behnken design. The flavonol 
content was calculated as the sum of the concentrations of seven major 
flavonoids, namely rutin, hyperin, isoquercetin, hibifolin, myricetin, 
quercetin-3'-O-glucoside and quercetin, which were simultaneously determined by 
a HPLC method. The antioxidant activity was evaluated by a 
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydarzyl (DPPH) free radical-scavenging assay. The results 
showed that three factors and their interactions could be well fitted to 
second-order polynomial models (p < 0.05). At the optimal extraction conditions 
for flavonol content (20 MPa, 52 °C, and 85% ethanol content), the yield of 
flavonoids was 41.96 mg/g and the IC50 value was 0.288 mg/mL, respectively, 
suggesting the extract has high antioxidant activity. Furthermore, the 
anti-adipogenic activity of the extract on the 3T3-L1 cell line was 
investigated. The results indicated that it can downregulate PPARγ and C/EBPα 
expression at mRNA. In summary, in this study, we have established a 
cost-effective method for the extraction of flavonoids from the flowers of 
Abelmoschus manihot (L.) Medic using supercritical fluid extraction and the 
extracts exhibited potent antioxidant and anti-adipogenic effects, suggesting a 
possible therapeutic approach for the prevention and treatment of obesity.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules21070810
PMCID: PMC6273967
PMID: 27347916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.