1. J R Soc Interface. 2016 Jun;13(119):20160233. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0233.

Self-organization of chemoattractant waves in Dictyostelium depends on F-actin 
and cell-substrate adhesion.

Fukujin F(1), Nakajima A(2), Shimada N(1), Sawai S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Science, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Complex Systems Biology, Graduate School of Arts and 
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
(3)Department of Basic Science, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan Research Center for 
Complex Systems Biology, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of 
Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan PRESTO, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency, Kawaguchi-shi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan 
cssawai@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

In the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, travelling waves of extracellular 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) self-organize in cell populations and 
direct aggregation of individual cells to form multicellular fruiting bodies. In 
contrast to the large body of studies that addressed how movement of cells is 
determined by spatial and temporal cues encoded in the dynamic cAMP gradients, 
how cell mechanics affect the formation of a self-generated chemoattractant 
field has received less attention. Here, we show, by live cell imaging analysis, 
that the periodicity of the synchronized cAMP waves increases in cells treated 
with the actin inhibitor latrunculin. Detail analysis of the extracellular 
cAMP-induced transients of cytosolic cAMP (cAMP relay response) in well-isolated 
cells demonstrated that their amplitude and duration were markedly reduced in 
latrunculin-treated cells. Similarly, in cells strongly adhered to a 
poly-l-lysine-coated surface, the response was suppressed, and the periodicity 
of the population-level oscillations was markedly lengthened. Our results 
suggest that cortical F-actin is dispensable for the basic low amplitude relay 
response but essential for its full amplification and that this enhanced 
response is necessary to establish high-frequency signalling centres. The 
observed F-actin dependence may prevent aggregation centres from establishing in 
microenvironments that are incompatible with cell migration.

Â© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0233
PMCID: PMC4938087
PMID: 27358278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]