1. Metallomics. 2016 Sep 1;8(9):1002-11. doi: 10.1039/c6mt00099a. Epub 2016 Jun
30.

Endogenous Cu in the central nervous system fails to satiate the elevated 
requirement for Cu in a mutant SOD1 mouse model of ALS.

Hilton JB(1), White AR, Crouch PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, the University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, 
Australia. pjcrouch@unimelb.edu.au.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common form of motor neuron 
disease, a fatal degenerative disorder in which motor neurons in the central 
nervous system (CNS) progressively deteriorate. Most cases of ALS are sporadic, 
but 10% are familial and mutations affecting the copper (Cu)-dependent 
antioxidant Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1) are the most common familial 
cause. Cu malfunction is evident in CNS tissue from transgenic mice that 
over-express mutant SOD1 and modulating Cu bioavailability in the CNS provides 
positive therapeutic outcomes. In the present study we assessed levels of Cu and 
Zn, SOD activity, and SOD1 protein levels in CNS and non-CNS tissue from 
transgenic mutant SOD1 mice (SOD1(G37R)) and non-transgenic controls. 
Physiological SOD1 binds one structural Zn and one catalytic Cu per subunit. Due 
to over-expression of the transgene, SOD activity and SOD1 protein levels are 
elevated in all tissues examined from the SOD1(G37R) mice and a commensurate 
increase in Zn is evident. There is a comparable increase in Cu in non-CNS 
tissue, but the increase in Cu in the SOD1(G37R) mouse brain is limited and 
there is no increase in Cu in the spinal cord. The limited change in CNS Cu is 
associated with a strong disparity between SOD1 protein and SOD activity in the 
brain and spinal cord. We hypothesise that the limited capacity for CNS tissue 
to respond to an increased requirement for bioavailable Cu contributes to CNS 
vulnerability in ALS.

DOI: 10.1039/c6mt00099a
PMID: 27357743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]