1. J Neurosci. 2016 Jun 29;36(26):7055-65. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1241-16.2016.

Poststroke Induction of α-Synuclein Mediates Ischemic Brain Damage.

Kim T(1), Mehta SL(2), Kaimal B(2), Lyons K(2), Dempsey RJ(3), Vemuganti R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Neuroscience Training Program.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery.
(3)Department of Neurological Surgery, Neuroscience Training Program, William S. 
Middleton Veterans Administration Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin 53705.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, Neuroscience Training Program, Cellular & 
Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53792 and William S. Middleton Veterans Administration Hospital, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53705 vemuganti@neurosurgery.wisc.edu.

α-Synuclein (α-Syn), one of the most abundant proteins in the CNS, is known to 
be a major player in the neurodegeneration observed in Parkinson's disease. We 
currently report that transient focal ischemia upregulates α-Syn protein 
expression and nuclear translocation in neurons of the adult rodent brain. We 
further show that knockdown or knock-out of α-Syn significantly decreases the 
infarction and promotes better neurological recovery in rodents subjected to 
focal ischemia. Furthermore, α-Syn knockdown significantly reduced postischemic 
induction of phospho-Drp1, 3-nitrotyrosine, cleaved caspase-3, and LC-3 II/I, 
indicating its role in modulating mitochondrial fragmentation, oxidative stress, 
apoptosis, and autophagy, which are known to mediate poststroke neuronal death. 
Transient focal ischemia also significantly upregulated serine-129 (S129) 
phosphorylation (pα-Syn) of α-Syn and nuclear translocation of pα-Syn. 
Furthermore, knock-out mice that lack PLK2 (the predominant kinase that mediates 
S129 phosphorylation) showed better functional recovery and smaller infarcts 
when subjected to transient focal ischemia, indicating a detrimental role of 
S129 phosphorylation of α-Syn. In conclusion, our studies indicate that α-Syn is 
a potential therapeutic target to minimize poststroke brain damage.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Abnormal aggregation of α-synuclein (α-Syn) has been 
known to cause Parkinson's disease and other chronic synucleinopathies. However, 
even though α-Syn is linked to pathophysiological mechanisms similar to those 
that produce acute neurodenegerative disorders, such as stroke, the role of 
α-Syn in such disorder is not clear. We presently studied whether α-Syn mediates 
poststroke brain damage and more importantly whether preventing α-Syn expression 
is neuroprotective and leads to better physiological and functional outcome 
after stroke. Our study indicates that α-Syn is a potential therapeutic target 
for stroke therapy.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/367055-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1241-16.2016
PMCID: PMC4994709
PMID: 27358461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]