1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Oct;99:174-187. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.06.068.
Epub  2016 Jul 2.

Modeling Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange in the heart: Allosteric activation, spatial 
localization, sparks and excitation-contraction coupling.

Chu L(1), Greenstein JL(2), Winslow RL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Institute for Computational 
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Whiting School of 
Engineering, 3400 N Charles Street, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA. Electronic 
address: lchu4@jhu.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Institute for Computational 
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Whiting School of 
Engineering, 3400 N Charles Street, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA. Electronic 
address: jgreenst@jhu.edu.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Institute for Computational 
Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and Whiting School of 
Engineering, 3400 N Charles Street, Baltimore, MD, 21218, USA. Electronic 
address: rwinslow@jhu.edu.

The cardiac sodium (Na+)/calcium (Ca2+) exchanger (NCX1) is an electrogenic 
membrane transporter that regulates Ca2+ homeostasis in cardiomyocytes, serving 
mainly to extrude Ca2+ during diastole. The direction of Ca2+ transport reverses 
at membrane potentials near that of the action potential plateau, generating an 
influx of Ca2+ into the cell. Therefore, there has been great interest in the 
possible roles of NCX1 in cardiac Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR). Interest has 
been reinvigorated by a recent super-resolution optical imaging study suggesting 
that ~18% of NCX1 co-localize with ryanodine receptor (RyR2) clusters, and ~30% 
of additional NCX1 are localized to within ~120nm of the nearest RyR2. NCX1 may 
therefore occupy a privileged position in which to modulate CICR. To examine 
this question, we have developed a mechanistic biophysically-detailed model of 
NCX1 that describes both NCX1 transport kinetics and Ca2+-dependent allosteric 
regulation. This NCX1 model was incorporated into a previously developed 
super-resolution model of the Ca2+ spark as well as a computational model of the 
cardiac ventricular myocyte that includes a detailed description of CICR with 
stochastic gating of L-type Ca2+ channels and RyR2s, and that accounts for local 
Ca2+ gradients near the dyad via inclusion of a peri-dyadic (PD) compartment. 
Both models predict that increasing the fraction of NCX1 in the dyad and PD 
decreases spark frequency, fidelity, and diastolic Ca2+ levels. Spark amplitude 
and duration are less sensitive to NCX1 spatial redistribution. On the other 
hand, NCX1 plays an important role in promoting Ca2+ entry into the dyad, and 
hence contributing to the trigger for RyR2 release at depolarized membrane 
potentials and in the presence of elevated local Na+ concentration. Whole-cell 
simulation of NCX1 tail currents are consistent with the finding that a 
relatively high fraction of NCX1 (~45%) resides in the dyadic and PD spaces, 
with a dyad-to-PD ratio of roughly 1:2. Allosteric Ca2+ activation of NCX1 helps 
to "functionally localize" exchanger activity to the dyad and PD by reducing 
exchanger activity in the cytosol thereby protecting the cell from excessive 
loss of Ca2+ during diastole.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.06.068
PMCID: PMC5534334
PMID: 27377851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]