1. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Jul 12;7(1):95-109. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.05.015.
 Epub 2016 Jun 30.

Dopamine D2 Receptor-Mediated Regulation of Pancreatic β Cell Mass.

Sakano D(1), Choi S(2), Kataoka M(2), Shiraki N(1), Uesugi M(3), Kume K(4), Kume 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Technology, School of Life Science and 
Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B-25 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8501, Japan.
(2)Division of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and 
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
(3)Department of Chemical Biology, Institute for Chemical Research, Institute 
for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe Street, Mizuho, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.
(5)Department of Life Science and Technology, School of Life Science and 
Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B-25 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: skume@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate β cell mass and 
proliferation is important for the treatment of diabetes. Here, we identified 
domperidone (DPD), a dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) antagonist that enhances β cell 
mass. Over time, islet β cell loss occurs in dissociation cultures, and this was 
inhibited by DPD. DPD increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis of β cells 
through increasing intracellular cAMP. DPD prevented β cell dedifferentiation, 
which together highly contributed to the increased β cell mass. DRD2 knockdown 
phenocopied the effects of domperidone and increased the number of β cells. Drd2 
overexpression sensitized the dopamine responsiveness of β cells and increased 
apoptosis. Further analysis revealed that the adenosine agonist 
5'-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine, a previously identified promoter of β cell 
proliferation, acted with DPD to increase the number of β cells. In humans, 
dopamine also modulates β cell mass through DRD2 and exerts an inhibitory effect 
on adenosine signaling.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.05.015
PMCID: PMC4944721
PMID: 27373926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]