1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2016 Jun 22;3:16040. doi: 10.1038/mtm.2016.40. 
eCollection 2016.

An HSV-based library screen identifies PP1α as a negative TRPV1 regulator with 
analgesic activity in models of pain.

Reinhart B(1), Goins WF(1), Harel A(1), Chaudhry S(1), Goss JR(1), Yoshimura 
N(2), de Groat WC(3), Cohen JB(1), Glorioso JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Urology, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) is a pronociceptive cation 
channel involved in persistent inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) vector expression of TRPV1 causes cell death in the presence of 
capsaicin, thereby completely blocking virus replication. Here we describe a 
selection system for negative regulators of TRPV1 based on rescue of virus 
replication. HSV-based coexpression of TRPV1 and a PC12 cell-derived cDNA 
library identified protein phosphatase 1α (PP1α) as a negative regulator of 
TRPV1, mimicking the activity of "poreless" (PL), a dominant-negative mutant of 
TRPV1. Vectors expressing PP1α or PL reduced thermal sensitivity following virus 
injection into rat footpads, but failed to reduce the nocifensive responses to 
menthol/icilin-activated cold pain or formalin, demonstrating that the activity 
identified in vitro is functional in vivo with a degree of specificity. This 
system should prove powerful for identifying other cellular factors that can 
inhibit ion channel activity.

DOI: 10.1038/mtm.2016.40
PMCID: PMC4916946
PMID: 27382601