1. Environ Health Perspect. 2017 Jan;125(1):56-65. doi: 10.1289/EHP155. Epub 2016
 Jul 6.

Colorectal Cancer and Long-Term Exposure to Trihalomethanes in Drinking Water: A 
Multicenter Case-Control Study in Spain and Italy.

Villanueva CM(1), Gracia-Lavedan E, Bosetti C, Righi E, Molina AJ, Martín V, 
Boldo E, Aragonés N, Perez-Gomez B, Pollan M, Acebo IG, Altzibar JM, Zabala AJ, 
Ardanaz E, Peiró R, Tardón A, Chirlaque MD, Tavani A, Polesel J, Serraino D, 
Pisa F, Castaño-Vinyals G, Espinosa A, Espejo-Herrera N, Palau M, Moreno V, La 
Vecchia C, Aggazzotti G, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Kogevinas M.

Author information:
(1)ISGlobal, Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), 
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Evidence on the association between colorectal cancer and exposure 
to disinfection by-products in drinking water is inconsistent.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed long-term exposure to trihalomethanes (THMs), the most 
prevalent group of chlorination by-products, to evaluate the association with 
colorectal cancer.
METHODS: A multicenter case-control study was conducted in Spain and Italy in 
2008-2013. Hospital-based incident cases and population-based (Spain) and 
hospital-based (Italy) controls were interviewed to ascertain residential 
histories, type of water consumed in each residence, frequency and duration of 
showering/bathing, and major recognized risk factors for colorectal cancer. We 
estimated adjusted odds ratios (OR) for colorectal cancer in association with 
quartiles of estimated average lifetime THM concentrations in each participant's 
residential tap water (micrograms/liter; from age 18 to 2 years before the 
interview) and estimated average lifetime THM ingestion from drinking 
residential tap water (micrograms/day).
RESULTS: We analyzed 2,047 cases and 3,718 controls. Median values (ranges) for 
average lifetime residential tap water concentrations of total THMs, chloroform, 
and brominated THMs were 30 (0-174), 17 (0-63), and 9 (0-145) μg/L, 
respectively. Total THM concentration in residential tap water was not 
associated with colorectal cancer (OR = 0.92, 95% CI: 0.66, 1.28 for highest vs. 
lowest quartile), but chloroform concentrations were inversely associated (OR = 
0.31, 95% CI: 0.24, 0.41 for highest vs. lowest quartile). Brominated THM 
concentrations showed a positive association among men in the highest versus the 
lowest quartile (OR = 1.43, 95% CI: 0.83, 2.46). Patterns of association were 
similar for estimated average THM ingestion through residential water 
consumption.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find clear evidence of an association between detailed 
estimates of lifetime total THM exposure and colorectal cancer in our large 
case-control study population. Negative associations with chloroform 
concentrations and ingestion suggest differences among specific THMs, but these 
findings should be confirmed in other study populations. Citation: Villanueva 
CM, Gracia-Lavedan E, Bosetti C, Righi E, Molina AJ, Martín V, Boldo E, Aragonés 
N, Perez-Gomez B, Pollan M, Gomez Acebo I, Altzibar JM, Jiménez Zabala A, 
Ardanaz E, Peiró R, Tardón A, Chirlaque MD, Tavani A, Polesel J, Serraino D, 
Pisa F, Castaño-Vinyals G, Espinosa A, Espejo-Herrera N, Palau M, Moreno V, La 
Vecchia C, Aggazzotti G, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Kogevinas M. 2017. Colorectal cancer 
and long-term exposure to trihalomethanes in drinking water: a multicenter 
case---control study in Spain and Italy. Environ Health Perspect 
125:56-65; http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/EHP155.

DOI: 10.1289/EHP155
PMCID: PMC5226692
PMID: 27383820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no actual or 
potential competing financial interests.