1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jul 7;12(7):e1005748. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005748. 
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Human Cytomegalovirus Immediate-Early 1 Protein Rewires Upstream STAT3 to 
Downstream STAT1 Signaling Switching an IL6-Type to an IFNγ-Like Response.

Harwardt T(1), Lukas S(1), Zenger M(1), Reitberger T(1), Danzer D(1), Übner 
T(1), Munday DC(2), Nevels M(1)(2), Paulus C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Regensburg, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, 
United Kingdom.

The human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) major immediate-early 1 protein (IE1) is best 
known for activating transcription to facilitate viral replication. Here we 
present transcriptome data indicating that IE1 is as significant a repressor as 
it is an activator of host gene expression. Human cells induced to express IE1 
exhibit global repression of IL6- and oncostatin M-responsive STAT3 target 
genes. This repression is followed by STAT1 phosphorylation and activation of 
STAT1 target genes normally induced by IFNγ. The observed repression and 
subsequent activation are both mediated through the same region (amino acids 410 
to 445) in the C-terminal domain of IE1, and this region serves as a binding 
site for STAT3. Depletion of STAT3 phenocopies the STAT1-dependent IFNγ-like 
response to IE1. In contrast, depletion of the IL6 receptor (IL6ST) or the STAT 
kinase JAK1 prevents this response. Accordingly, treatment with IL6 leads to 
prolonged STAT1 instead of STAT3 activation in wild-type IE1 expressing cells, 
but not in cells expressing a mutant protein (IE1dl410-420) deficient for STAT3 
binding. A very similar STAT1-directed response to IL6 is also present in cells 
infected with a wild-type or revertant hCMV, but not an IE1dl410-420 mutant 
virus, and this response results in restricted viral replication. We conclude 
that IE1 is sufficient and necessary to rewire upstream IL6-type to downstream 
IFNγ-like signaling, two pathways linked to opposing actions, resulting in 
repressed STAT3- and activated STAT1-responsive genes. These findings relate 
transcriptional repressor and activator functions of IE1 and suggest unexpected 
outcomes relevant to viral pathogenesis in response to cytokines or growth 
factors that signal through the IL6ST-JAK1-STAT3 axis in hCMV-infected cells. 
Our results also reveal that IE1, a protein considered to be a key activator of 
the hCMV productive cycle, has an unanticipated role in tempering viral 
replication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005748
PMCID: PMC4936752
PMID: 27387064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.