1. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2016;11(3):191-210. doi:
10.2174/1574884711666160701000900.

Polymorphism in Endothelin-1 Gene: An Overview.

Ahmed M(1), Rghigh A.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Benghazi, Benghazi, Libya. 
mabuajila@yahoo.ca.

Endothelin-1, (ET-1, EDN1) is an endogenous polypeptide which demonstrates 
dominant vasoconstriction activity and mitogenic effect. It has positive 
inotropic and chronotropic effects on the heart, stimulates the sympathetic and 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone systems and modifies homeostasis. The human 
ET-1 gene which consists of 6836 nucleotides located on chromosome 6p23-p24 
produces Pre-pro-ET-1, which is consequently cleaved to big-ET-1. The mature 
21-amino acid ET-1 is generated by subsequent enzymatic cleavage of the 
big-ET-1. A comprehensive review of the literature on the consequences of 
different ET-1 gene variants on ET-1 linked diseases has not been accomplished. 
Many variants of ET-1 gene, including transversion, transition, insertion, and 
repeated nucleotide polymorphisms, which influence the hereditary risk of 
cardiovascular and other related diseases have already been located, genotyped, 
and examined. Among them ten polymorphisms including transversion; -1370 
(T-1370G) (rs1800541), +5665 (Lys198Asn) (rs5370), G2288T polymorphisms 
(rs2070699), and -974 C<A (rs3087459) polymorphism, transition; +3660 
(Glu106Glu) (rs5369), G(8002)A (rs2071942), rs1476046 polymorphism , rs2071943 
polymorphism, and rs9296345 polymorphism, and insertion/delete; +138 
(+138/ex1ins/delA) (rs1800997) were studied and phenotyped extensively. Some 
significant associations with many different diseases (phenotypes) especially 
those related to cardiovascular system diseases such as hypertension, ischemic 
diseases, angina, and acute coronary syndrome have been described in the 
literature. Some are associated with other diseases such as asthma, pulmonary 
edema, hearing impairment, obesity and sleep apnea. Moreover, some are modifying 
the course and adverse effects of several drugs. Many of these polymorphisms 
were studied, thus some inner complex association manner was also described.

DOI: 10.2174/1574884711666160701000900
PMID: 27397091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]