1. Springerplus. 2016 Jul 7;5(1):997. doi: 10.1186/s40064-016-2673-8. eCollection
 2016.

Preparation of a functional fluorescent human Fas ligand extracellular domain 
derivative using a three-dimensional structure guided site-specific fluorochrome 
conjugation.

Muraki M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, 305-8566 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Human Fas ligand extracellular domain has been investigated as an 
important target protein in the field of medical biotechnology. In a recent 
study, the author developed an effective method to produce biologically active 
human Fas ligand extracellular domain derivatives using site-specific chemical 
modifications.
FINDINGS: A human Fas ligand extracellular domain derivative containing a 
reactive cysteine residue within its N-terminal tag sequence, which locates not 
proximal to the binding interface between the ligand and the receptor in terms 
of the three-dimensional structure, was modified by Fluorescein-5-Maleimide 
without impairing the specific binding activity toward human Fas receptor 
extracellular domain. The purified protein sample free of low molecular-weight 
contaminants showed a characteristic fluorescence spectrum derived from the 
attached Fluorescein moieties, and formed a stable binding complex with human 
Fas receptor extracellular domain-human IgG1 Fc domain fusion protein in 
solution. The conjugation number of the fluorochrome was estimated to be 2.5 per 
a single human Fas ligand extracellular domain trimer from the ratio of the 
absorbance value at 280 nm to that at 495 nm.
CONCLUSIONS: A functional fluorescent human Fas ligand extracellular domain 
derivative was prepared via a site-specific conjugation of fluorochrome, which 
was guided by the three-dimensional structure information on the ligand-receptor 
complex. Fluorescent derivatives created by this method may contribute to the 
development of an improved diagnosis system for the diseases related to Fas 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1186/s40064-016-2673-8
PMCID: PMC4936993
PMID: 27398274