1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Jul 1;53(4):1341-51. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160098.

Diagnosis of Dementia in the Specialist Setting: A Comparison Between 
the Swedish Dementia Registry (SveDem) and the Registry of Dementias of Girona 
(ReDeGi).

Garre-Olmo J(1)(2), Garcia-Ptacek S(3)(4), Calvó-Perxas L(1), Turró-Garriga 
O(1), López-Pousa S(1), Eriksdotter M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Girona Biomedical Research Institute [IDIBGI] - Institut d'Assistència 
Sanitària, Girona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Deparment of Medical Sciences, University of Girona, Girona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Center for Alzheimer 
research, Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

The aim of this study was to compare the frequency of dementia diagnoses from 
two dementia registries in Europe. Patients registered between 2007 and 2013 in 
the Swedish Dementia Registry (SveDem; Sweden) and in the Registry of Dementias 
of Girona (ReDeGi; North-East of Spain) were selected. We compared 
sociodemographic data, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores, dementia 
subtype, and medication consumption of 22,384 cases from SveDem and 5,032 cases 
from ReDeGi. The average age (78.1 years SveDem versus 79.7 years ReDeGi) and 
the gender (female 58.2% SveDem versus 61.5% ReDeGi) did not greatly differ. 
MMSE score at diagnosis was higher for SveDem cases (22.1 versus 17.8). 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) accounted for the main dementia subtype (36.6% SveDem 
versus 55.6% ReDeGi). The proportion of vascular dementia (VaD) and mixed 
dementia was higher in SveDem (18.8% versus 6.4% and 24.9 versus 13.4%), with an 
odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for SveDem relative to the 
ReDeGi of 3.41 (3.03-3.84) for VaD, and 2.15 (1.97-2.35) for mixed dementia. 
This was at the expense of a lower frequency of AD in SveDem (OR 0.41; 95% CI 
0.39-0.44). Other dementia diagnoses such as frontotemporal dementia or dementia 
with Lewy bodies did not significantly differ between registries (2.3% versus 
2.9%; 1.9 versus 3.1%). Large differences in medication consumption at the time 
of dementia diagnosis were detected (4.7 treatments SveDem versus 6.8 ReDeGi). 
Northern and southern European dementia cohorts differ in demographic 
characteristics, MMSE score at diagnosis, and drug treatment profile.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160098
PMCID: PMC5115613
PMID: 27392854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]