1. Nature. 2016 Jul 21;535(7612):448-52. doi: 10.1038/nature18636. Epub 2016 Jul 
13.

Allosteric nanobodies reveal the dynamic range and diverse mechanisms of 
G-protein-coupled receptor activation.

Staus DP, Strachan RT, Manglik A, Pani B, Kahsai AW, Kim TH, Wingler LM, Ahn S, 
Chatterjee A, Masoudi A, Kruse AC, Pardon E, Steyaert J, Weis WI, Prosser RS, 
Kobilka BK, Costa T, Lefkowitz RJ.

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) modulate many physiological processes by 
transducing a variety of extracellular cues into intracellular responses. Ligand 
binding to an extracellular orthosteric pocket propagates conformational change 
to the receptor cytosolic region to promote binding and activation of downstream 
signalling effectors such as G proteins and β-arrestins. It is well known that 
different agonists can share the same binding pocket but evoke unique receptor 
conformations leading to a wide range of downstream responses (‘efficacy’). 
Furthermore, increasing biophysical evidence, primarily using the β2-adrenergic 
receptor (β2AR) as a model system, supports the existence of multiple active and 
inactive conformational states. However, how agonists with varying efficacy 
modulate these receptor states to initiate cellular responses is not well 
understood. Here we report stabilization of two distinct β2AR conformations 
using single domain camelid antibodies (nanobodies)—a previously described 
positive allosteric nanobody (Nb80) and a newly identified negative allosteric 
nanobody (Nb60). We show that Nb60 stabilizes a previously unappreciated 
low-affinity receptor state which corresponds to one of two inactive receptor 
conformations as delineated by X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. We 
find that the agonist isoprenaline has a 15,000-fold higher affinity for β2AR in 
the presence of Nb80 compared to the affinity of isoprenaline for β2AR in the 
presence of Nb60, highlighting the full allosteric range of a GPCR. Assessing 
the binding of 17 ligands of varying efficacy to the β2AR in the absence and 
presence of Nb60 or Nb80 reveals large ligand-specific effects that can only be 
explained using an allosteric model which assumes equilibrium amongst at least 
three receptor states. Agonists generally exert efficacy by stabilizing the 
active Nb80-stabilized receptor state (R80). In contrast, for a number of 
partial agonists, both stabilization of R80 and destabilization of the inactive, 
Nb60-bound state (R60) contribute to their ability to modulate receptor 
activation. These data demonstrate that ligands can initiate a wide range of 
cellular responses by differentially stabilizing multiple receptor states.

DOI: 10.1038/nature18636
PMCID: PMC4961583
PMID: 27409812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]