1. Hypertension. 2016 Sep;68(3):796-808. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07668. 
Epub 2016 Jul 11.

Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate Oxidase-Mediated Redox Signaling and 
Vascular Remodeling by 16α-Hydroxyestrone in Human Pulmonary Artery Cells: 
Implications in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.

Hood KY(1), Montezano AC(1), Harvey AP(1), Nilsen M(1), MacLean MR(1), Touyz 
RM(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)From the Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, United Kingdom. rhian.touyz@glasgow.ac.uk.

Estrogen and oxidative stress have been implicated in pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH). Mechanisms linking these systems are elusive. We 
hypothesized that estrogen metabolite, 16α-hydroxyestrone (16αOHE1), stimulates 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (Nox)-induced reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) generation and proliferative responses in human pulmonary 
artery smooth muscle cells (hPASMCs) and that in PAH aberrant growth signaling 
promotes vascular remodeling. The pathophysiological significance of 
estrogen-Nox-dependent processes was studied in female Nox1(-/-) and Nox4(-/-) 
mice with PAH. PASMCs from control subjects (control hPASMCs) and PAH patients 
(PAH-hPASMCs) were exposed to estrogen and 16αOHE1 in the presence/absence of 
inhibitors of Nox, cytochrome P450 1B1, and estrogen receptors. Estrogen, 
through estrogen receptor-α, increased Nox-derived ROS and redox-sensitive 
growth in hPASMCs, with greater effects in PAH-hPASMCs versus control hPASMCs. 
Estrogen effects were inhibited by cytochrome P450 1B1 blockade. 16αOHE1 
stimulated transient ROS production in hPASMCs, with sustained responses in 
PAH-hPASMCs. Basal expression of Nox1/Nox4 was potentiated in PAH-hPASMCs. In 
hPASMCs, 16αOHE1 increased Nox1 expression, stimulated irreversible oxidation of 
protein tyrosine phosphatases, decreased nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 
2 activity and expression of nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 2-regulated 
antioxidant genes, and promoted proliferation. This was further amplified in 
PAH-hPASMCs. Nox1(-/-) but not Nox4(-/-) mice were protected against PAH and 
vascular remodeling. Our findings demonstrate that in PAH-hPASMCs, 16αOHE1 
stimulates redox-sensitive cell growth primarily through Nox1. Supporting this, 
in vivo studies exhibited protection against pulmonary hypertension and 
remodeling in Nox1(-/-) mice. This study provides new insights through Nox1/ROS 
and nuclear factor erythroid-related factor 2 whereby 16αOHE1 influences hPASMC 
function, which when upregulated may contribute to vascular injury in PAH, 
particularly important in women.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.116.07668
PMCID: PMC4978604
PMID: 27402919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]