1. Biochemistry. 1989 Apr 4;28(7):3094-105. doi: 10.1021/bi00433a053.

High-resolution NMR studies of fibrinogen-like peptides in solution: structure 
of a thrombin-bound peptide corresponding to residues 7-16 of the A alpha chain 
of human fibrinogen.

Ni F(1), Meinwald YC, VÃ¡squez M, Scheraga HA.

Author information:
(1)Baker Laboratory of Chemistry, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 
14853-1301.

The interaction of the following human fibrinogen-like peptides with bovine 
thrombin was studied by one- and two-dimensional NMR techniques in aqueous 
solution: 
acetyl-Phe(8)-Leu(9)-Ala(10)-Glu-(11)-Gly(12)-Gly(13)-Gly(14)-Val(15)-Ar g(16)- 
Gly(17)-Pro(18)-NHMe (F6), acetyl-Phe-Leu-Ala-Glu-Gly-Gly-Gly-Val-Arg(16) (tF6), 
acetyl-Asp(7)-Phe-Leu-Ala-Glu-Gly-Gly-Gly-Val-Arg(16)-Gly(17)-Pro- 
Arg(19)-Val(20)-NHMe (F8), and 
acetyl-Asp-Phe-Leu-Ala-Glu-Gly-Gly-Gly-Val-Arg(16) (tF8). At pH 5.3 and 25 
degrees C, the Arg(16)-Gly(17) peptide bonds in both F6 and F8 were cleaved 
instantaneously in the presence of 0.5 mM thrombin, producing truncated peptides 
tF6 and tF8 and other peptide fragments. On the basis of observations of line 
broadening, thrombin was found to bind to the cleavage products, tF6 and tF8, of 
peptides F6 and F8. Peptide tF8 may have a higher affinity for thrombin than 
peptide tF6, as suggested by the more pronounced thrombin-induced line 
broadening on the proton resonances in peptide tF8. Transferred NOE (TRNOE) 
measurements were made of the complexes between thrombin and peptides tF6 and 
tF8. Medium- and long-range NOE interactions were found between the NH proton of 
Asp(7) and the C beta H protons of Ala(10), between the C alpha H proton of 
Glu(11) and the NH proton of Gly(13), and between the ring protons of Phe(8) and 
the C alpha H protons of Gly(14) and the C gamma H protons of Val(15). Sets of 
structures of the decapeptide tF8 were deduced by use of distance geometry 
calculations based on sequential and medium- and long-range TRNOEs from the 
thrombin-bound peptide. A predominant feature of these structures is the 
nonpolar cluster formed by the side chains of residues Phe(8), Leu(9), and 
Val(15) that are directly involved in binding to thrombin. This structural 
feature is brought about by an alpha-helical segment involving residues 
Phe(8)-Ala(10), followed by a multiple-turn structure involving residues 
Glu(11)-Val(15). These results provide an explanation for the observations that 
Asp(7), Phe(8), and Gly(12) are strongly conserved in mammalian fibrinogens and 
that the mutations of Asp(7) to Asn(7) and of Gly(12) to Val(12), result in 
delayed release of fibrinopeptide A, producing human bleeding disorders.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00433a053
PMID: 2742827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]