1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jul 20;12(7):e1005775. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005775. 
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Sterol Biosynthesis and Azole Tolerance Is Governed by the Opposing Actions of 
SrbA and the CCAAT Binding Complex.

Gsaller F(1), Hortschansky P(2), Furukawa T(1), Carr PD(1), Rash B(1), Capilla 
J(3), MÃ¼ller C(4), Bracher F(4), Bowyer P(1), Haas H(5), Brakhage AA(2)(6), 
Bromley MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Fungal Infection Group, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for 
Natural Product Research and Infection Biology (HKI), Jena, Germany.
(3)Microbiology Unit, Medical School, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Center for Drug Research, Ludwig-Maximilians 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Division of Molecular Biology, Biocentre, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Institute for Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Jena, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2016 Dec 14;12(12):e1006106. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006106.

Azole drugs selectively target fungal sterol biosynthesis and are critical to 
our antifungal therapeutic arsenal. However, resistance to this class of drugs, 
particularly in the major human mould pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus, is 
emerging and reaching levels that have prompted some to suggest that there is a 
realistic probability that they will be lost for clinical use. The dominating 
class of pan-azole resistant isolates is characterized by the presence of a 
tandem repeat of at least 34 bases (TR34) within the promoter of cyp51A, the 
gene encoding the azole drug target sterol C14-demethylase. Here we demonstrate 
that the repeat sequence in TR34 is bound by both the sterol regulatory element 
binding protein (SREBP) SrbA, and the CCAAT binding complex (CBC). We show that 
the CBC acts complementary to SrbA as a negative regulator of ergosterol 
biosynthesis and show that lack of CBC activity results in increased sterol 
levels via transcriptional derepression of multiple ergosterol biosynthetic 
genes including those coding for HMG-CoA-synthase, HMG-CoA-reductase and sterol 
C14-demethylase. In agreement with these findings, inactivation of the CBC 
increased tolerance to different classes of drugs targeting ergosterol 
biosynthesis including the azoles, allylamines (terbinafine) and statins 
(simvastatin). We reveal that a clinically relevant mutation in HapE (P88L) 
significantly impairs the binding affinity of the CBC to its target site. We 
identify that the mechanism underpinning TR34 driven overexpression of cyp51A 
results from duplication of SrbA but not CBC binding sites and show that 
deletion of the 34 mer results in lack of cyp51A expression and increased azole 
susceptibility similar to a cyp51A null mutant. Finally we show that strains 
lacking a functional CBC are severely attenuated for pathogenicity in a 
pulmonary and systemic model of aspergillosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005775
PMCID: PMC4954732
PMID: 27438727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.