1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Aug;12(2):649-652. doi: 10.3892/etm.2016.3388. Epub 2016
May  25.

Novel SLC5A2 mutation contributes to familial renal glucosuria: Abnormal 
expression in renal tissues.

Yu L(1), Hou P(2), Liu GP(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Inner Mongolia People's Hospital, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia 
010017, P.R. China.
(2)Renal Division, Peking University First Hospital, Peking University Institute 
of Nephrology, Key Laboratory of Renal Disease, Ministry of Health of China, 
Beijing 100034, P.R. China.

Familial renal glucosuria (FRG) is characterized by persistent glucosuria in the 
presence of normal serum glucose concentrations, while other impairments of 
tubular function are absent. Mutations in the sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 
(SLC5A2) gene have been found to be responsible for FRG. However, direct 
evidence for the presence of SLC5A2 mutant in renal tissues is very rare. In 
previous studies, a non-sense mutation (c.1320 G>A:p.W440X) that would cause 
premature termination of the protein was found. However, the effects in the 
renal tissues were not reported. In the current study, a patient with FRG and a 
urinary glucose excretion rate of 8.3 g/day is described, for whom a novel 
missense mutation (c.1319G>A:p.W440X) was revealed by sequencing. Furthermore, 
in the immunofluorescence examination of a renal biopsy specimen, SLC5A2 was 
detected in the apical side of the proximal convoluted tubule, discontinuously 
decreased in comparison with that in normal and disease controls. The results 
imply that both wild-type SLC5A2 and mutant SLC5A2 with abnormal distribution 
were expressed in the renal tissues, and that the reduction of SLC5A2 expression 
and function were due to the c.1319G>A:p.W440X mutation. The current study 
provides valuable clues regarding the SLC5A2 molecule from genotype to phenotype 
in families affected by FRG.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2016.3388
PMCID: PMC4950299
PMID: 27446256