1. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 16;7(33):53558-53570. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.10669.

miR-7 reverses the resistance to BRAFi in melanoma by targeting EGFR/IGF-1R/CRAF 
and inhibiting the MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways.

Sun X(1), Li J(1), Sun Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Dong L(1), Shen C(1), Yang L(1), Yang 
M(2), Li Y(1), Shen G(3), Tu Y(1), Tao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430022, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Wuhan Central Hospital, Wuhan 430014, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Tongji Medical College, HUST, Wuhan 430030, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are attractive therapeutic targets for various 
therapy-resistant tumors. However, the association between miRNA and BRAF 
inhibitor resistance in melanoma remains to be elucidated. We used microarray 
analysis to comprehensively study the miRNA expression profiling of vemurafenib 
resistant (VemR) A375 melanoma cells in relation to parental A375 melanoma 
cells. MicroRNA-7 (miR-7) was identified to be the most significantly 
down-regulated miRNA in VemR A375 melanoma cells. We also found that miR-7 was 
down-regulated in Mel-CVR cells (vemurafenib resistant Mel-CV melanoma cells). 
Reestablishment of miR-7 expression could reverse the resistance of both cells 
to vemurafenib. We showed that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), 
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) and CRAF were over-expressed in 
VemR A375 melanoma cells. Introduction of miR-7 mimics could markedly decrease 
the expressions of EGFR, IGF-1R and CRAF and further suppressed the activation 
of MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathway in VemR A375 melanoma cells. Furthermore, tumor 
growth was inhibited in an in vivo murine VemR A375 melanoma tumor model 
transfected with miR-7 mimics. Collectively, our study demonstrated that miR-7 
could reverse the resistance to BRAF inhibitors in certain vemurafenib resistant 
melanoma cell lines. It could advance the field and provide the basis for 
further studies in BRAF inhibitor resistance in melanoma.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.10669
PMCID: PMC5288205
PMID: 27448964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state no conflict of interest.