1. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Jun 30;7:958. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00958. eCollection 
2016.

Construction of Global Acyl Lipid Metabolic Map by Comparative Genomics and 
Subcellular Localization Analysis in the Red Alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae.

Mori N(1), Moriyama T(1), Toyoshima M(1), Sato N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of TokyoTokyo, Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, Core Research for 
Evolutional Science and TechnologyTokyo, Japan.

Pathways of lipid metabolism have been established in land plants, such as 
Arabidopsis thaliana, but the information on exact pathways is still under study 
in microalgae. In contrast with Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which is currently 
studied extensively, the pathway information in red algae is still in the state 
in which enzymes and pathways are estimated by analogy with the knowledge in 
plants. Here we attempt to construct the entire acyl lipid metabolic pathways in 
a model red alga, Cyanidioschyzon merolae, as an initial basis for future 
genetic and biochemical studies, by exploiting comparative genomics and 
localization analysis. First, the data of whole genome clustering by Gclust were 
used to identify 121 acyl lipid-related enzymes. Then, the localization of 113 
of these enzymes was analyzed by GFP-based techniques. We found that most of the 
predictions on the subcellular localization by existing tools gave erroneous 
results, probably because these tools had been tuned for plants or green algae. 
The experimental data in the present study as well as the data reported before 
in our laboratory will constitute a good training set for tuning these tools. 
The lipid metabolic map thus constructed show that the lipid metabolic pathways 
in the red alga are essentially similar to those in A. thaliana, except that the 
number of enzymes catalyzing individual reactions is quite limited. The absence 
of fatty acid desaturation to produce oleic and linoleic acids within the 
plastid, however, highlights the central importance of desaturation and acyl 
editing in the endoplasmic reticulum, for the synthesis of plastid lipids as 
well as other cellular lipids. Additionally, some notable characteristics of 
lipid metabolism in C. merolae were found. For example, phosphatidylcholine is 
synthesized by the methylation of phosphatidylethanolamine as in yeasts. It is 
possible that a single 3-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase is involved in 
the condensation reactions of fatty acid synthesis in the plastid. We will also 
discuss on the redundant Î²-oxidation enzymes, which are characteristic to red 
algae.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00958
PMCID: PMC4928187
PMID: 27446184