1. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Jun 29;7:967. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00967. eCollection 
2016.

HyPRP1 Gene Suppressed by Multiple Stresses Plays a Negative Role in Abiotic 
Stress Tolerance in Tomato.

Li J(1), Ouyang B(2), Wang T(2), Luo Z(2), Yang C(2), Li H(2), Sima W(2), Zhang 
J(2), Ye Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticulture Science for Southern Mountainous Regions, 
Ministry of Education; College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, 
Southwest UniversityChongqing, China; Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant 
Biology (MOE), Huazhong Agricultural UniversityWuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (MOE), Huazhong Agricultural 
University Wuhan, China.

Many hybrid proline-rich protein (HyPRP) genes respond to biotic and abiotic 
stresses in plants, but little is known about their roles other than as putative 
cell-wall structural proteins. A HyPRP1 gene encodes a protein with proline-rich 
domain, and an eight-cysteine motif was identified from our previous microarray 
experiments on drought-tolerant tomato. In this study, the expression of the 
HyPRP1 gene in tomato was suppressed under various abiotic stresses, such as 
drought, high salinity, cold, heat, and oxidative stress. Transgenic functional 
analysis showed no obvious changes in phenotypes, but enhanced tolerance to 
various abiotic stresses (e.g., oxidative stress, dehydration, and salinity) was 
observed in RNAi transgenic plants. Interestingly, several SO2 
detoxification-related enzymes, including sulfite oxidase, ferredoxins (Fds), 
and methionine sulfoxide reductase A (Msr A), were revealed in 
HyPRP1-interacting proteins identified by Yeast Two-Hybrid screening. More 
sulfates and transcripts of Msr A and Fds were accumulated in HyPRP1 knockdown 
lines when wild-type plants were exposed to SO2 gas. Our findings illustrate 
that the tomato HyPRP1 is a negative regulator of salt and oxidative stresses 
and is probably involved in sulfite metabolism.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00967
PMCID: PMC4925714
PMID: 27446190