1. Nutrients. 2016 Jul 20;8(7):380. doi: 10.3390/nu8070380.

EGCG Suppresses ERK5 Activation to Reverse Tobacco Smoke-Triggered Gastric 
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in BALB/c Mice.

Lu L(1), Chen J(2), Tang H(3), Bai L(4), Lu C(5), Wang K(6), Li M(7), Yan Y(8), 
Tang L(9), Wu R(10), Ye Y(11), Jin L(12), Liang Z(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
lu_ling60@sina.com.
(2)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
lengyuing@163.com.
(3)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
zjfyeb@163.com.
(4)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
bai_ling1234@126.com.
(5)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
lucn816@163.com.
(6)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
m17705286156@163.com.
(7)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
limanli123@126.com.
(8)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
18752970933@163.com.
(9)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
m17705286167_1@163.com.
(10)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
w871647946@163.com.
(11)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health Laboratory Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China. 
jamesnone@163.com.
(12)Zhenjiang Matemity and Child Health Care Hospital, Zhenjiang 212001, China. 
13862451566@163.com.
(13)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health Laboratory Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China. 
liangzhaofeng@ujs.edu.cn.
(14)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China. liangzhaofeng@ujs.edu.cn.

Tobacco smoke is an important risk factor of gastric cancer. 
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition is a crucial pathophysiological process in 
cancer development. ERK5 regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition may be 
sensitive to cell types and/or the cellular microenvironment and its role in the 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process remain elusive. 
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is a promising chemopreventive agent for 
several types of cancers. In the present study we investigated the regulatory 
role of ERK5 in tobacco smoke-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the 
stomach of mice and the preventive effect of EGCG. Exposure of mice to tobacco 
smoke for 12 weeks reduced expression of epithelial markers E-cadherin, ZO-1, 
and CK5, while the expression of mesenchymal markers Snail-1, Vimentin, and 
N-cadherin were increased. Importantly, we demonstrated that ERK5 modulated 
tobacco smoke-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition in mice stomach, as 
evidenced by the findings that tobacco smoke elevated ERK5 activation, and that 
tobacco smoke-triggered epithelial-mesenchymal transition was reversed by ERK5 
inhibition. Treatment of EGCG (100 mg/kg BW) effectively attenuated tobacco 
smoke-triggered activation of ERK5 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
alterations in mice stomach. Collectively, these data suggested that ERK5 was 
required for tobacco smoke-triggered gastric epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
and that EGCG suppressed ERK5 activation to reverse tobacco smoke-triggered 
gastric epithelial-mesenchymal transition in BALB/c mice. These findings provide 
new insights into the mechanism of tobacco smoke-associated gastric 
tumorigenesis and the chemoprevention of tobacco smoke-associated gastric 
cancer.

DOI: 10.3390/nu8070380
PMCID: PMC4963860
PMID: 27447666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]