1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Aug;12(2):702-710. doi: 10.3892/etm.2016.3342. Epub 2016
May  16.

OPG rs2073617 polymorphism is associated with upregulated OPG protein expression 
and an increased risk of intervertebral disc degeneration.

Xue JB(1), Zhan XL(2), Wang WJ(3), Yan YG(3), Liu C(2).

Author information:
(1)Spine and Osteopathy Ward, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530000, P.R. China; Department of Spine Surgery, 
The First Affiliated Hospital of the University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan 
421001, P.R. China.
(2)Spine and Osteopathy Ward, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Spine Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of the University 
of South China, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the associations between three distinct 
osteoprotegerin (OPG) gene polymorphisms and the risk of intervertebral disc 
degeneration (IDD). A total of 200 IDD patients and 200 healthy controls were 
recruited from the Department of Spine Surgery at the First Affiliated Hospital 
of the University of South China (Hengyang, China) between January 2013 and May 
2014. The allele, genotype and haplotype frequency distributions of three OPG 
polymorphisms in the study and control populations were analyzed by polymerase 
chain reaction prior to restriction fragment length polymorphism or high 
resolution melting assays. In addition, serum OPG levels were measured via an 
ELISA. The genotype and allele frequencies of the OPG rs2073617 polymorphisms 
were significantly higher in the IDD patients, as compared with the control 
group (P<0.05). Furthermore, carriers of the C allele exhibited a higher risk of 
IDD, as compared with carriers of the T allele (P<0.001). Conversely, the 
genotype and allele frequencies of the two other gene polymorphisms, rs2073618 
and rs3102735, showed no significant differences between the patients and 
controls (P>0.05). The serum OPG levels were significantly higher in IDD 
patients with TT, TC and CC genotypes at the OPG rs2073617 polymorphism, as 
compared with the control group (P<0.05). Logistic-regression analysis suggested 
that high serum levels of OPG were positively correlated with IDD risk, whereas 
the T-C-A, T-G-A and T-G-G haplotypes were negatively correlated with IDD risk 
(P<0.05). Furthermore, the G-T-G haplotype was associated with protection 
against IDD (P=0.008), whereas the G-C-G haplotype was associated with an 
elevated susceptibility to IDD (P=0.007). The results of the present study 
suggested that OPG rs2073617 polymorphisms and upregulated serum levels of OPG 
were associated with an increased risk of IDD, whereas the T-C-A, T-G-A and 
T-G-G haplotypes were protective factors for IDD. The results of the present 
study suggested that the OPG gene polymorphism may have an important role in the 
progression of IDD, and its serum level may function as a valuable predictive 
indicator of the severity of degenerative disc diseases.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2016.3342
PMCID: PMC4950610
PMID: 27446264