1. Sensors (Basel). 2016 Jul 19;16(7):1113. doi: 10.3390/s16071113.

Telecommunication Platforms for Transmitting Sensor Data over Communication 
Networks-State of the Art and Challenges.

Staniec K(1), Habrych M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Telecommunications and Teleinformatics, Wroclaw University of 
Science and Technology, Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland. 
kamil.staniec@pwr.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Electrical Power Engineering, Wroclaw University of Science and 
Technology, Wybrzeze Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, Poland. 
marcin.habrych@pwr.edu.pl.

The importance of constructing wide-area sensor networks for holistic 
environmental state evaluation has been demonstrated. A general structure of 
such a network has been presented with distinction of three segments: local 
(based on ZigBee, Ethernet and ModBus techniques), core (base on cellular 
technologies) and the storage/application. The implementation of these 
techniques requires knowledge of their technical limitations and electromagnetic 
compatibility issues. The former refer to ZigBee performance degradation in 
multi-hop transmission, whereas the latter are associated with the common 
electromagnetic spectrum sharing with other existing technologies or with 
undesired radiated emissions generated by the radio modules of the sensor 
network. In many cases, it is also necessary to provide a measurement station 
with autonomous energy source, such as solar. As stems from measurements of the 
energetic efficiency of these sources, one should apply them with care and 
perform detailed power budget since their real performance may turn out to be 
far from expected. This, in turn, may negatively affect-in particular-the 
operation of chemical sensors implemented in the network as they often require 
additional heating.

DOI: 10.3390/s16071113
PMCID: PMC4970156
PMID: 27447633