1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2016 Jun 29;14:283-97. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2016.06.005. eCollection 2016.

Chimeric mitochondrial peptides from contiguous regular and swinger RNA.

Seligmann H(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et Tropicales Émergentes, 
Faculté de Médecine, URMITE CNRS-IRD 198 UMER 6236, Université de la 
Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

Previous mass spectrometry analyses described human mitochondrial peptides 
entirely translated from swinger RNAs, RNAs where polymerization systematically 
exchanged nucleotides. Exchanges follow one among 23 bijective transformation 
rules, nine symmetric exchanges (X ↔ Y, e.g. A ↔ C) and fourteen asymmetric 
exchanges (X → Y → Z → X, e.g. A → C → G → A), multiplying by 24 DNA's protein 
coding potential. Abrupt switches from regular to swinger polymerization produce 
chimeric RNAs. Here, human mitochondrial proteomic analyses assuming abrupt 
switches between regular and swinger transcriptions, detect chimeric peptides, 
encoded by part regular, part swinger RNA. Contiguous regular- and 
swinger-encoded residues within single peptides are stronger evidence for 
translation of swinger RNA than previously detected, entirely swinger-encoded 
peptides: regular parts are positive controls matched with contiguous swinger 
parts, increasing confidence in results. Chimeric peptides are 200 × rarer than 
swinger peptides (3/100,000 versus 6/1000). Among 186 peptides with > 8 residues 
for each regular and swinger parts, regular parts of eleven chimeric peptides 
correspond to six among the thirteen recognized, mitochondrial protein-coding 
genes. Chimeric peptides matching partly regular proteins are rarer and less 
expressed than chimeric peptides matching non-coding sequences, suggesting 
targeted degradation of misfolded proteins. Present results strengthen 
hypotheses that the short mitogenome encodes far more proteins than hitherto 
assumed. Entirely swinger-encoded proteins could exist.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2016.06.005
PMCID: PMC4942731
PMID: 27453772