1. Am J Hematol. 2016 Nov;91(11):E478-E479. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24496. Epub 2016 Aug
 22.

Clinical and molecular characteristics of XPO1 mutations in patients with 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Jain P(1), Kanagal-Shamanna R(2), Wierda W(1), Keating M(1), Sarwari N(1), 
Rozovski U(1), Thompson P(1), Burger J(1), Kantarjian H(1), Patel KP(2), 
Medeiros LJ(2), Luthra R(2), Estrov Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas. zestrov@mdanderson.org.

The XPO1 (exportin) gene (also referred to as chromosome region maintenance 1; 
CRM1) is a karyopherin that exports proteins and RNA fragments from the nucleus 
into the cytoplasm., The human XPO1 gene, located on chromosome 2 (2p15), is 
believed to encode an oncogenic protein since many of the molecules exported by 
XPO1 into the cytoplasm are associated with either known tumor-suppressor genes, 
such as TP53 or FOXO3A, or transcription factors that contribute to cell 
proliferation and survival such as IkB-Î± or STAT3 whose accumulation in the 
nucleus results in cell death. The binding of XPO1 to various proteins is 
mediated by recognizing the leucine-rich nuclear export signals (LR-NES) on the 
N-terminus of snurportin 1 (SNUPN) forming a nuclear pore complex or a cargo, 
thereby transporting proteins out of the nuclear membrane. Overexpression, 
deregulation, or dysfunction of XPO1 has been reported in various types of 
cancer. XPO1 is a therapeutic target in CLL, and selective inhibitors of nuclear 
transport (SINE) such as selinexor are now being investigated in clinical trials 
in CLL.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.24496
PMCID: PMC5073031
PMID: 27468087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts-of-Interest Disclosure: None from any 
authors.