1. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Jul 11;7:1021. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01021. eCollection
 2016.

The Banana Transcriptional Repressor MaDEAR1 Negatively Regulates Cell 
Wall-Modifying Genes Involved in Fruit Ripening.

Fan ZQ(1), Kuang JF(1), Fu CC(1), Shan W(1), Han YC(1), Xiao YY(1), Ye YJ(1), Lu 
WJ(1), Lakshmanan P(2), Duan XW(3), Chen JY(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science, College of 
Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University Guangzhou, China.
(2)Sugar Research Australia, Brisbane QLD, Australia.
(3)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences Guangzhou, China.

Ethylene plays an essential role in many biological processes including fruit 
ripening via modulation of ethylene signaling pathway. Ethylene Response Factors 
(ERFs) are key transcription factors (TFs) involved in ethylene perception and 
are divided into AP2, RAV, ERF, and DREB sub-families. Although a number of 
studies have implicated the involvement of DREB sub-family genes in stress 
responses, little is known about their roles in fruit ripening. In this study, 
we identified a DREB TF with a EAR motif, designated as MaDEAR1, which is a 
nucleus-localized transcriptional repressor. Expression analysis indicated that 
MaDEAR1 expression was repressed by ethylene, with reduced levels of histone H3 
and H4 acetylation at its regulatory regions during fruit ripening. In addition, 
MaDEAR1 promoter activity was also suppressed in response to ethylene treatment. 
More importantly, MaDEAR1 directly binds to the DRE/CRT motifs in promoters of 
several cell wall-modifying genes including MaEXP1/3, MaPG1, MaXTH10, MaPL3, and 
MaPME3 associated with fruit softening during ripening and represses their 
activities. These data suggest that MaDEAR1 acts as a transcriptional repressor 
of cell wall-modifying genes, and may be negatively involved in 
ethylene-mediated ripening of banana fruit. Our findings provide new insights 
into the involvement of DREB TFs in the regulation of fruit ripening.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01021
PMCID: PMC4939300
PMID: 27462342