1. Dev Biol. 2017 Jun 15;426(2):360-373. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.06.003. Epub 
2016 Jul 26.

Translational profiling of retinal ganglion cell optic nerve regeneration in 
Xenopus laevis.

Whitworth GB(1), Misaghi BC(1), Rosenthal DM(1), Mills EA(2), Heinen DJ(1), 
Watson AH(1), Ives CW(1), Ali SH(1), Bezold K(1), Marsh-Armstrong N(2), Watson 
FL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, VA, United 
States.
(2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Solomon H. Snyder Dept. of 
Neuroscience and Hugo Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, VA, United 
States. Electronic address: watsonf@wlu.edu.

Unlike adult mammals, adult frogs regrow their optic nerve following a crush 
injury, making Xenopus laevis a compelling model for studying the molecular 
mechanisms that underlie neuronal regeneration. Using Translational Ribosome 
Affinity Purification (TRAP), a method to isolate ribosome-associated mRNAs from 
a target cell population, we have generated a transcriptional profile by RNA-Seq 
for retinal ganglion cells (RGC) during the period of recovery following an 
optic nerve injury. Based on bioinformatic analysis using the Xenopus laevis 9.1 
genome assembly, our results reveal a profound shift in the composition of 
ribosome-associated mRNAs during the early stages of RGC regeneration. As 
factors involved in cell signaling are rapidly down-regulated, those involved in 
protein biosynthesis are up-regulated alongside key initiators of axon 
development. Using the new genome assembly, we were also able to analyze gene 
expression profiles of homeologous gene pairs arising from a whole-genome 
duplication in the Xenopus lineage. Here we see evidence of divergence in 
regulatory control among a significant proportion of pairs. Our data should 
provide a valuable resource for identifying genes involved in the regeneration 
process to target for future functional studies, in both naturally regenerative 
and non-regenerative vertebrates.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.06.003
PMCID: PMC5897040
PMID: 27471010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]