1. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Aug 10;20(2):202-14. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.07.001. 
Epub 2016 Jul 28.

Gut Microbial Metabolites Fuel Host Antibody Responses.

Kim M(1), Qie Y(1), Park J(1), Kim CH(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Department of Comparative 
Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Immunology and Hematopoiesis, Department of Comparative 
Pathobiology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Weldon School of 
Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Purdue 
Institute for Inflammation, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Purdue Center for Cancer Research, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. Electronic address: 
chkim@purdue.edu.

Comment in
    Microb Cell. 2016 Sep 23;3(10):529-531. doi: 10.15698/mic2016.10.536.

Antibody production is a metabolically demanding process that is regulated by 
gut microbiota, but the microbial products supporting B cell responses remain 
incompletely identified. We report that short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 
produced by gut microbiota as fermentation products of dietary fiber, support 
host antibody responses. In B cells, SCFAs increase acetyl-CoA and regulate 
metabolic sensors to increase oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, and fatty 
acid synthesis, which produce energy and building blocks supporting antibody 
production. In parallel, SCFAs control gene expression to express molecules 
necessary for plasma B cell differentiation. Mice with low SCFA production due 
to reduced dietary fiber consumption or microbial insufficiency are defective in 
homeostatic and pathogen-specific antibody responses, resulting in greater 
pathogen susceptibility. However, SCFA or dietary fiber intake restores this 
immune deficiency. This B cell-helping function of SCFAs is detected from the 
intestines to systemic tissues and conserved among mouse and human B cells, 
highlighting its importance.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.07.001
PMCID: PMC4982788
PMID: 27476413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]