1. Pharmacol Res. 2016 Sep;111:784-803. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.07.038. Epub
2016  Jul 26.

Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors in the treatment of inflammatory and neoplastic 
diseases.

Roskoski R Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research, 3754 Brevard Road, Suite 116, Box 
19, Horse Shoe, NC 28742-8814, United States. Electronic address: rrj@brimr.org.

The Janus kinase (JAK) family of non-receptor protein-tyrosine kinases consists 
of JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2 (tyrosine kinase-2). Each of these proteins 
contains a JAK homology pseudokinase (JH2) domain that regulates the adjacent 
protein kinase domain (JH1). JAK1/2 and TYK2 are ubiquitously expressed whereas 
JAK3 is found predominantly in hematopoietic cells. The Janus kinase family is 
regulated by numerous cytokines including interleukins, interferons, and 
hormones such as erythropoietin, thrombopoietin, and growth hormone. Ligand 
binding to cytokine and hormone receptors leads to the activation of associated 
Janus kinases, which then mediate the phosphorylation of the receptors. The SH2 
domain of STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) binds to 
the receptor phosphotyrosines thereby promoting STAT phosphorylation by the 
Janus kinases and consequent activation. STAT dimers are translocated to the 
nucleus where they participate in the regulation of the expression of thousands 
of proteins. JAK-STAT dysregulation results in autoimmune disorders such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, and Crohn disease. JAK-STAT 
dysregulation also plays a role in the pathogenesis of myelofibrosis, 
polycythemia vera, and other myeloproliferative illnesses. An activating JAK2 
V617F mutation occurs in 95% of people with polycythemia vera and in a lower 
percentage of people with other neoplasms. JAK1/3 signaling participates in the 
pathogenesis of inflammatory afflictions while JAK1/2 signaling participates in 
the development of several malignancies including leukemias and lymphomas as 
well as myeloproliferative neoplasms. Tofacitinib is a pan-JAK inhibitor that is 
approved by the FDA for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and ruxolitinib is 
a JAK1/2 inhibitor that is approved for the treatment of polycythemia vera and 
myelofibrosis.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.07.038
PMID: 27473820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]