1. Physiol Rep. 2016 Aug;4(15):e12873. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12873.

5-HT2B receptor antagonists attenuate myofibroblast differentiation and 
subsequent fibrotic responses in vitro and in vivo.

Löfdahl A(1), Rydell-Törmänen K(2), Müller C(2), Martina Holst C(2), Thiman 
L(2), Ekström G(3), Wenglén C(3), Larsson-Callerfelt AK(2), Westergren-Thorsson 
G(2).

Author information:
(1)Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden anna.lofdahl@med.lu.se.
(2)Lung Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.
(3)AnaMar AB, Lund, Sweden.

Pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by excessive accumulation of connective 
tissue, along with activated extracellular matrix (ECM)-producing cells, 
myofibroblasts. The pathological mechanisms are not well known, however 
serotonin (5-HT) and 5-HT class 2 (5-HT2) receptors have been associated with 
fibrosis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of 5-HT2B 
receptors in fibrosis, using small molecular 5-HT2B receptor antagonists EXT5 
and EXT9, with slightly different receptor affinity. Myofibroblast 
differentiation [production of alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)] and ECM 
synthesis were quantified in vitro, and the effects of the receptor antagonists 
were evaluated. Pulmonary fibrosis was also modeled in mice by subcutaneous 
bleomycin administrations (under light isoflurane anesthesia), and the effects 
of receptor antagonists on tissue density, collagen-producing cells, 
myofibroblasts and decorin expression were investigated. In addition, cytokine 
expression was analyzed in serum. Lung fibroblasts displayed an increased α-SMA 
(P < 0.05) and total proteoglycan production (P < 0.01) when cultured with 
TGF-β1 together with 5-HT, which were significantly reduced with both receptor 
antagonists. Following treatment with EXT5 or EXT9, tissue density, expression 
of decorin, number of collagen-producing cells, and myofibroblasts were 
significantly decreased in vivo compared to bleomycin-treated mice. Receptor 
antagonization also significantly reduced systemic levels of TNF-α and IL-1β, 
indicating a role in systemic inflammation. In conclusion, 5-HT2B receptor 
antagonists have potential to prevent myofibroblast differentiation, in vitro 
and in vivo, with subsequent effect on matrix deposition. The attenuating 
effects of 5-HT2B receptor antagonists on fibrotic tissue remodeling suggest 
these receptors as novel targets for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.

© 2016 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.12873
PMCID: PMC4985542
PMID: 27482070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]