1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 2;6:30903. doi: 10.1038/srep30903.

Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1 inhibition promotes reprogramming by 
facilitating the expression of exogenous transcriptional factors and metabolic 
switch.

Sun H(1)(2), Liang L(1), Li Y(1), Feng C(1), Li L(1), Zhang Y(1), He S(1), Pei 
D(1), Guo Y(2), Zheng H(1).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of 
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China.
(2)College of Biological Sciences and Technology, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing 100083, China.

Lysine-specific histone demethylase 1 (LSD1) regulates histone methylation and 
influences the epigenetic state of cells during the generation of induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here we reported that LSD1 inhibition via shRNA 
or specific inhibitor, tranylcypromine, promoted reprogramming at early stage 
via two mechanisms. At early stage of reprogramming, LSD1 inhibition increased 
the retrovirus-mediated exogenous expression of Oct4, Klf4, and Sox2 by blocking 
related H3K4 demethylation. Since LSD1 inhibition still promoted reprogramming 
even when iPSCs were induced with small-molecule compounds in a virus-free 
system, additional mechanisms should be involved. When RNA-seq was used for 
analysis, it was found that LSD1 inhibition reversed some gene expression 
changes induced by OKS, which subsequently promoted reprogramming. For example, 
by partially rescuing the decreased expression of Hif1Î±, LSD1 inhibition 
reversed the up-regulation of genes in oxidative phosphorylation pathway and the 
down-regulation of genes in glycolysis pathway. Such effects facilitated the 
metabolic switch from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis and subsequently 
promoted iPSCs induction. In addition, LSD1 inhibition also promoted the 
conversion from pre-iPSCs to iPSCs by facilitating the similar metabolic switch. 
Therefore, LSD1 inhibition promotes reprogramming by facilitating the expression 
of exogenous transcriptional factors and metabolic switch.

DOI: 10.1038/srep30903
PMCID: PMC4969595
PMID: 27481483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]