1. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2017 Jan;274(1):119-125. doi: 
10.1007/s00405-016-4229-5. Epub 2016 Aug 1.

Rare compound heterozygosity involving dominant and recessive mutations of GJB2 
gene in an assortative mating hearing impaired Indian family.

Pavithra A(1), Chandru J(1), Jeffrey JM(1), Karthikeyen NP(2), Srisailapathy 
CRS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr. ALM Post Graduate Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, University of Madras, Taramani Campus, Chennai, 600113, India.
(2)DOAST Ear Care Center, Anna Nagar, Chennai, India.
(3)Department of Genetics, Dr. ALM Post Graduate Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, University of Madras, Taramani Campus, Chennai, 600113, India. 
srikumaripavithra@gmail.com.

Connexin 26 (Cx-26), a gap junction protein coded by GJB2 gene, plays a very 
important role in recycling of potassium ions, one of the vital steps in the 
mechanotransduction process of hearing. Mutations in the GJB2 gene have been 
associated with both autosomal recessive as well as dominant nonsyndromic 
hearing loss. As Cx-26 is linked with skin homeostasis, mutations in this gene 
are sometimes associated with syndromic forms of hearing loss showing skin 
anomalies. We report here a non consanguineous assortatively mating hearing 
impaired family with one of the hearing impaired partners, their hearing 
impaired sibling and hearing impaired offspring showing compound heterozygosity 
in the GJB2 gene, involving a dominant mutation p.R184Q and two recessive 
mutations p.Q124X and c.IVS 1+1G>A in a unique triallelic combination. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first report from India on p.R184Q mutation 
in the GJB2 gene associated with rare compound heterozygosity showing 
nonsyndromic presentation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-016-4229-5
PMID: 27481527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]