1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2016 Jul 13;8:34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.06.007. 
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Clinical experience with N-carbamylglutamate in a single-centre cohort of 
patients with propionic and methylmalonic aciduria.

Burlina A(1), Cazzorla C(1), Zanonato E(1), Viggiano E(1), Fasan I(1), Polo 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital of Padova, 
Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The effect of long-term N-carbamylglutamate (NCG) treatment on the 
rate and severity of decompensations due to propionic aciduria (PA) and 
methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is unknown. This paper presents clinical experience 
from a single-centre cohort of patients with PA and MMA who received continuous 
long-term treatment with NCG.
METHODS: The effect of oral NCG treatment (initial dose: 50 mg/kg/day) was 
investigated in patients with PA or MMA who were experiencing frequent 
progressive episodes of metabolic decompensation, who had pathological levels of 
ammonia, and who were referred to the Division of Metabolic Diseases, University 
Hospital of Padova between August 2014 and December 2015. Clinical and 
biochemical data, including the number of metabolic decompensations, lactic 
acid, uric acid and plasma ammonia levels, protein intake and body weight, were 
collected before and after the initiation of NCG treatment.
RESULTS: Eight patients with PA (n = 4) and MMA (n = 4) aged 2-20 years were 
treated with NCG (50 mg/kg/day) for 7-16 months. Metabolic decompensation 
episodes decreased in number and severity, with three of the patients having no 
episodes (pre-treatment: 24 episodes; post-treatment: 9 episodes). After NCG 
treatment, all episodes were treated at home and none required hospitalisation, 
lactic acid values were 1.3-2.1 mmol/L and uric acid values were 
0.21-0.36 mmol/L. Significant reductions in blood ammonia levels after NCG 
initiation were observed in five patients, whereas levels were reduced or 
maintained in the normal range in the remainder. Over the treatment period, 
patients had an increase in natural protein intake of 20-50% and gained 0-6.5 kg 
in bodyweight.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggest that, in addition to short-term benefits 
for the acute treatment of hyperammonaemia, NCG may be effective and well 
tolerated as a long-term treatment in patients with severe PA and MMA, and that 
further prospective studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.06.007
PMCID: PMC4949587
PMID: 27489777