1. Cancer Res Treat. 2017 Apr;49(2):553-558. doi: 10.4143/crt.2016.078. Epub 2016
 Jul 28.

Erdheim-Chester Disease with Emperipolesis: A Unique Case Involving the Heart.

Zhu P(1)(2), Li N(1)(2), Yu L(1)(2), Miranda MN(2), Wang G(1)(2), Duan Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Science, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Comment in
    Rev Neurol (Paris). 2021 Jun;177(6):708-710. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2020.09.010.

Histiocytosis is an uncommon disease characterized by excessive accumulation of 
histiocytes. Here, we report a rare case of non-Langerhans-cell histiocytosis in 
a 51-year-old woman who presented with severe symptoms of pericardial effusion. 
Radiologic investigation also detected multiple bone (lower limbs, vertebrae, 
ribs, and ilium) lesions. Resected pericardium showed abundant mono- or 
multi-nucleated non-foamy histiocytes (CD68+/CD163+/S-100+/CD1Î±-/langerin-) in a 
fibroinflammatory background. The histiocytes demonstrated emperipolesis of 
lymphocytes, a hallmark feature of Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD). However, 
molecular analysis revealed a BRAF V600E mutation of the proliferating 
histiocytes, highlighting the neoplastic features frequently observed in another 
non-Langerhans-cell histiocytosis known as Erdheim-Chester Disease (ECD). We 
consider this case to be a unique presentation of ECD harboring some RDD-like 
cells with emperipolesis, but not a case of RDD with a BRAF mutation concerning 
its clinical manifestation (involvement of the heart and bones) and neoplastic 
features.

DOI: 10.4143/crt.2016.078
PMCID: PMC5398381
PMID: 27488869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest relevant to this article 
was not reported.