1. Dis Model Mech. 2016 Jul 1;9(7):811-20. doi: 10.1242/dmm.024166. Epub 2016 May
 11.

Long-term drug administration in the adult zebrafish using oral gavage for 
cancer preclinical studies.

Dang M(1), Henderson RE(2), Garraway LA(3), Zon LI(1).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02138, USA 
mdang@fas.harvard.edu zon@enders.tch.harvard.edu.
(2)Stem Cell Program and Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02138, USA Department of Medical Oncology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA The Broad Institute of MIT 
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Zebrafish are a major model for chemical genetics, and most studies use embryos 
when investigating small molecules that cause interesting phenotypes or that can 
rescue disease models. Limited studies have dosed adults with small molecules by 
means of water-borne exposure or injection techniques. Challenges in the form of 
drug delivery-related trauma and anesthesia-related toxicity have excluded the 
adult zebrafish from long-term drug efficacy studies. Here, we introduce a novel 
anesthetic combination of MS-222 and isoflurane to an oral gavage technique for 
a non-toxic, non-invasive and long-term drug administration platform. As a proof 
of principle, we established drug efficacy of the FDA-approved BRAF(V600E) 
inhibitor, Vemurafenib, in adult zebrafish harboring BRAF(V600E) melanoma 
tumors. In the model, adult casper zebrafish intraperitoneally transplanted with 
a zebrafish melanoma cell line (ZMEL1) and exposed to daily sub-lethal dosing at 
100 mg/kg of Vemurafenib for 2 weeks via oral gavage resulted in an average 65% 
decrease in tumor burden and a 15% mortality rate. In contrast, 
Vemurafenib-resistant ZMEL1 cell lines, generated in culture from low-dose drug 
exposure for 4 months, did not respond to the oral gavage treatment regimen. 
Similarly, this drug treatment regimen can be applied for treatment of primary 
melanoma tumors in the zebrafish. Taken together, we developed an effective 
long-term drug treatment system that will allow the adult zebrafish to be used 
to identify more effective anti-melanoma combination therapies and opens up 
possibilities for treating adult models of other diseases.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.024166
PMCID: PMC4958307
PMID: 27482819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests L.I.Z. is a Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute Investigator and a founder and stockholder of Fate, Inc., 
Scholar Rock and Marauder Therapeutics. L.A.G. is a consultant for Foundation 
Medicine, Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Third Rock; an equity holder in 
Foundation Medicine; and a member of the Scientific Advisory Board at Warp 
Drive. L.A.G. receives sponsored research support from Novartis, Astellas, BMS 
and Merck.