1. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2016;2016:16-0034. doi:
10.1530/EDM-16-0034.  Epub 2016 Jul 28.

Deep vein thrombosis, an unreported first manifestation of polyglandular 
autoimmune syndrome type III.

Horsey M(1), Hogan P(2), Oliver T(2).

Author information:
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine , Washington, District of Columbia , 
USA.
(2)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center , Bethesda, Maryland , USA.

A 71-year-old woman with severe right lower leg pain, edema and erythema was 
presented to the Emergency Department and was found to have an extensive deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT) confirmed by ultrasound. She underwent an extensive 
evaluation due to her prior history of malignancy and new hypercoagulable state, 
but no evidence of recurrent disease was detected. Further investigation 
revealed pernicious anemia (PA), confirmed by the presence of a macrocytic 
anemia (MCV=115.8fL/red cell, Hgb=9.0g/dL), decreased serum B12 levels 
(56pg/mL), with resultant increased methylmalonic acid (5303nmol/L) and 
hyperhomocysteinemia (131Î¼mol/L), the presumed etiology of the DVT. The patient 
also suffered from autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD), and both antithyroglobulin 
and anti-intrinsic factor antibodies were detected. She responded briskly to 
anticoagulation with heparin and coumadin and treatment of PA with intramuscular 
vitamin B12 injections. Our case suggests that a DVT secondary to 
hyperhomocystenemia may represent the first sign of polyglandular autoimmune 
syndrome III-B (PAS III-B), defined as the coexistent autoimmune conditions AITD 
and PA. It is important to recognize this clinical entity, as patients may not 
only require acute treatment with vitamin B12 supplementation and prolonged 
anticoagulation, as in this patient, but may also harbor other autoimmune 
diseases.
LEARNING POINTS: A DVT can be the first physical manifestation of a 
polyglandular autoimmune syndrome.Hyperhomocysteinemia secondary to pernicious 
anemia should be considered as an etiology of an unprovoked DVT in a euthyroid 
patient with autoimmune thyroid disease.Patients with DVT secondary to 
hyperhomocysteinemia should undergo screening for the presence of co-existent 
autoimmune diseases in addition to treatment with B12 supplementation and 
anticoagulation to prevent recurrent thromboembolism.

DOI: 10.1530/EDM-16-0034
PMCID: PMC4967110
PMID: 27482386