1. Br J Nutr. 2016 Sep;116(6):961-8. doi: 10.1017/S0007114516002956. Epub 2016
Aug  4.

Dietary choline and betaine intake, choline-metabolising genetic polymorphisms 
and breast cancer risk: a case-control study in China.

Du YF(1), Luo WP(1), Lin FY(2), Lian ZQ(3), Mo XF(4), Yan B(1), Xu M(1), Huang 
WQ(1), Huang J(1), Zhang CX(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology,School of Public 
Health,Sun Yat-sen University,Guangzhou 510080,People's Republic of China.
(2)3Nursing Department,The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University,Guangzhou 510080,People's Republic of China.
(3)4Breast Disease Center,Guangdong Women and Children Hospital,Guangzhou 
Medical University,Guangzhou 511400,People's Republic of China.
(4)5Department of Vascular Surgery,The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University,Guangzhou 510080,People's Republic of China.

Choline and betaine are essential nutrients involved in one-carbon metabolism 
and have been hypothesised to affect breast cancer risk. Functional 
polymorphisms in genes encoding choline-related one-carbon metabolism enzymes, 
including phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PEMT), choline 
dehydrogenase (CHDH) and betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase (BHMT), have 
important roles in choline metabolism and may thus interact with dietary choline 
and betaine intake to modify breast cancer risk. This study aimed to investigate 
the interactive effect of polymorphisms in PEMT, BHMT and CHDH genes with 
choline/betaine intake on breast cancer risk among Chinese women. This 
hospital-based case-control study consecutively recruited 570 cases with 
histologically confirmed breast cancer and 576 age-matched (5-year interval) 
controls. Choline and betaine intakes were assessed by a validated FFQ, and 
genotyping was conducted for PEMT rs7946, CHDH rs9001 and BHMT rs3733890. OR and 
95 % CI were estimated using unconditional logistic regression. Compared with 
the highest quartile of choline intake, the lowest intake quartile showed a 
significant increased risk of breast cancer. The SNP PEMT rs7946, CHDH rs9001 
and BHMT rs3733890 had no overall association with breast cancer, but a 
significant risk reduction was observed among postmenopausal women with AA 
genotype of BHMT rs3733890 (OR 0·49; 95 % CI 0·25, 0·98). Significant 
interactions were observed between choline intake and SNP PEMT rs7946 (P 
interaction=0·029) and BHMT rs3733890 (P interaction=0·006) in relation to 
breast cancer risk. Our results suggest that SNP PEMT rs7946 and BHMT rs3733890 
may interact with choline intake on breast cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114516002956
PMID: 27488260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]