1. BMC Genet. 2016 Aug 5;17(1):115. doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0422-1.

Genome-wide association study revealed genomic regions related to white/red 
earlobe color trait in the Rhode Island Red chickens.

Nie C(1), Zhang Z(1), Zheng J(1), Sun H(2), Ning Z(1), Xu G(1), Yang N(1), Qu 
L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 
Jiangsu, 225009, China.
(3)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China. 
quluj@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Earlobe color is a naturally and artificially selected trait in 
chicken. As a head furnishing trait, it has been selected as a breed 
characteristic. Research has demonstrated that white/red earlobe color was 
related to at least three loci and sex-linked. However, there has been little 
work to date to identify the specific genomic regions and genes response to 
earlobe color in Rhode Island Red chickens. Currently, it is possible to 
identify the genomic regions responsible for white/red earlobe in Rhode Island 
Red chicken to eliminate this gap in knowledge by using genome-wide association 
(GWA) analysis.
RESULTS: In the present study, genome-wide association (GWA) analysis was 
conducted to explore the candidate genomic regions response to chicken earlobe 
color phenotype. Hens with red dominant and white dominant earlobe was used for 
case-control analysis by Illumina 600 K SNP arrays. The GWA results showed that 
2.38 Mb genomic region (50.13 to 52.51 Mb) with 282 SNPs on chromosome Z were 
significantly correlated to earlobe color, including sixteen known genes and 
seven anonymous genes. The sixteen genes were PAM, SLCO4C1, ST8SIA4, FAM174A, 
CHD1, RGMB, RIOK2, LIX1, LNPEP, SHB, RNF38, TRIM14, NANS, CLTA, GNE, and CPLX1.
CONCLUSIONS: The study has revealed the white/red earlobe trait is polygenic and 
sex-linked in Rhode Island Red chickens. In the genome significant ~2.38 Mb 
region, twenty-three genes were found and some of them could play critical roles 
in the formation of white/red earlobe color, especially gene SLCO4C1. Taken 
together, the candidate genes findings herein can help elucidate the genomic 
architecture of response to white/red earlobe and provide a new insight on 
mechanisms underlying earlobe color in Rhode Island Red chickens and other 
breeds.

DOI: 10.1186/s12863-016-0422-1
PMCID: PMC4974732
PMID: 27496128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]