1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Dec;1866(2):151-162. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbcan.2016.08.001. Epub 2016 Aug 4.

Mechanism of antineoplastic activity of lonidamine.

Nath K(1), Guo L(2), Nancolas B(3), Nelson DS(4), Shestov AA(4), Lee SC(4), 
Roman J(4), Zhou R(4), Leeper DB(5), Halestrap AP(3), Blair IA(2), Glickson 
JD(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Department of Radiology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
Electronic address: kavindra.nath@uphs.upenn.edu.
(2)Center of Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, Department of Systems 
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
BS8 1TD, UK.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Imaging, Department of Radiology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

Lonidamine (LND) was initially introduced as an antispermatogenic agent. It was 
later found to have anticancer activity sensitizing tumors to chemo-, radio-, 
and photodynamic-therapy and hyperthermia. Although the mechanism of action 
remained unclear, LND treatment has been known to target metabolic pathways in 
cancer cells. It has been reported to alter the bioenergetics of tumor cells by 
inhibiting glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration, while indirect evidence 
suggested that it also inhibited l-lactic acid efflux from cells mediated by 
members of the proton-linked monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) family and also 
pyruvate uptake into the mitochondria by the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier 
(MPC). Recent studies have demonstrated that LND potently inhibits MPC activity 
in isolated rat liver mitochondria (Ki 2.5μM) and cooperatively inhibits 
l-lactate transport by MCT1, MCT2 and MCT4 expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes 
with K0.5 and Hill coefficient values of 36-40μM and 1.65-1.85, respectively. In 
rat heart mitochondria LND inhibited the MPC with similar potency and uncoupled 
oxidation of pyruvate was inhibited more effectively (IC50~7μM) than other 
substrates including glutamate (IC50~20μM). LND inhibits the 
succinate-ubiquinone reductase activity of respiratory Complex II without fully 
blocking succinate dehydrogenase activity. LND also induces cellular reactive 
oxygen species through Complex II and has been reported to promote cell death by 
suppression of the pentose phosphate pathway, which resulted in inhibition of 
NADPH and glutathione generation. We conclude that MPC inhibition is the most 
sensitive anti-tumour target for LND, with additional inhibitory effects on 
MCT-mediated l-lactic acid efflux, Complex II and glutamine/glutamate oxidation.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2016.08.001
PMCID: PMC5138080
PMID: 27497601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]