1. PLoS One. 2016 Aug 4;11(8):e0160525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160525. 
eCollection 2016.

AP-1 Inhibition by SR 11302 Protects Human Hepatoma HepG2 Cells from Bile 
Acid-Induced Cytotoxicity by Restoring the NOS-3 Expression.

González-Rubio S(1), Linares CI(1), Aguilar-Melero P(1), Rodríguez-Perálvarez 
M(1)(2), Montero-Álvarez JL(1)(2), de la Mata M(1)(2), Ferrín G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Maimonides Institute of Biomedical Research in Córdoba (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía 
University Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Biomedical Research Centre Network, Digestive and Liver Diseases (CIBEREHD), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Córdoba, Spain.

The harmful effects of bile acid accumulation occurring during cholestatic liver 
diseases have been associated with oxidative stress increase and endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase (NOS-3) expression decrease in liver cells. We have 
previously reported that glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDCA) down-regulates gene 
expression by increasing SP1 binding to the NOS-3 promoter in an oxidative 
stress dependent manner. In the present study, we aimed to investigate the role 
of transcription factor (TF) AP-1 on the NOS-3 deregulation during GCDCA-induced 
cholestasis. The cytotoxic response to GCDCA was characterized by 1) the 
increased expression and activation of TFs cJun and c-Fos; 2) a higher binding 
capability of these at position -666 of the NOS-3 promoter; 3) a decrease of the 
transcriptional activity of the promoter and the expression and activity of 
NOS-3; and 4) the expression increase of cyclin D1. Specific inhibition of AP-1 
by the retinoid SR 11302 counteracted the cytotoxic effects induced by GCDCA 
while promoting NOS-3 expression recovery and cyclin D1 reduction. NOS activity 
inhibition by L-NAME inhibited the protective effect of SR 11302. Inducible NOS 
isoform was no detected in this experimental model of cholestasis. Our data 
provide direct evidence for the involvement of AP-1 in the NOS-3 expression 
regulation during cholestasis and define a critical role for NOS-3 in regulating 
the expression of cyclin D1 during the cell damage induced by bile acids. AP-1 
appears as a potential therapeutic target in cholestatic liver diseases given 
its role as a transcriptional repressor of NOS-3.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160525
PMCID: PMC4973998
PMID: 27490694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.