1. Mol Inform. 2015 Feb;34(2-3):105-14. doi: 10.1002/minf.201400070. Epub 2015
Jan  30.

Computational Investigation and Experimental Validation of Crizotinib Resistance 
Conferred by C1156Y Mutant Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase.

Kumar A(1), Shanthi V(1), Ramanathan K(2).

Author information:
(1)Industrial Biotechnology Division, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, VIT 
University, Vellore - 632014, Tamil Nadu, India tel: +91 4162202608; fax: 
+91 4162243092.
(2)Industrial Biotechnology Division, School of Bio Sciences and Technology, VIT 
University, Vellore - 632014, Tamil Nadu, India tel: +91 4162202608; fax: 
+91 4162243092. kramanathan@vit.ac.in.

Crizotinib is an anticancer drug approved by FDA for the treatment of non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The main target for crizotinib was anaplastic lymphoma 
kinase (ALK). However, evidences available indicate that C1156Y mutation in ALK 
confers resistance to crizotinib. Unfortunately, how mutation actually confers 
drug resistance is not well understood. Hence, in the present study 
computational approaches have been employed alongside KINOMEscan profiling 
technique to reveal the mechanism behind crizotinib resistance in ALK at a 
molecular level. The results of our analysis indicate that C1156Y mutation 
alters the conformation of the ALK binding pocket residues which results in a 
marked decrease in hydrogen bond interactions between crizotinib and ALK. This 
indicates that hydrogen bonding was a crucial effector of decreased binding 
affinity. Interestingly, the docking study also indicates that C1156Y mutation 
increases the affinity for ATP. Finally, our analysis theoretically suggests 
that M-1199 is a key residue responsible for the ALK drug selectivity. We 
certainly believe that these results may be immense importance for the molecular 
level understanding of crizotinib resistance pattern and also for designing a 
potential drug molecule for the treatment of lung cancer in the near future.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.201400070
PMID: 27490033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]