1. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jul 25;7:223. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00223. eCollection
 2016.

A Standardized Chemically Modified Curcuma longa Extract Modulates IRAK-MAPK 
Signaling in Inflammation and Potentiates Cytotoxicity.

Rana M(1), Maurya P(1), Reddy SS(1), Singh V(1), Ahmad H(2), Dwivedi AK(2), 
Dikshit M(1), Barthwal MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Division, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research - 
Central Drug Research Institute Lucknow, India.
(2)Division of Pharmaceutics, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research - 
Central Drug Research Institute Lucknow, India.

The TLR/IL-1R pathway is a critical signaling module that is misregulated in 
pathologies like inflammation and cancer. Extracts from turmeric (Curcuma longa 
L.) enriched in curcumin and carbonyls like turmerones have been shown to exert 
potent anti-inflammatory effects. The present study evaluated the 
anti-inflammatory activity, cytotoxic effect and the underlying mechanism of a 
novel chemically modified, non-carbonyl compound enriched Curcuma longa L. (C. 
longa) extract (CMCE). CMCE (1 or 10 μg/mL; 14 h) significantly decreased LPS 
(50-100 ng/mL) induced TNF-α and IL-1β production in THP-1 cells, human, and 
mouse whole blood as measured by ELISA. LPS-induced IRAK1, MAPK activation, TLR4 
expression, TLR4-MyD88 interaction, and IκBα degradation were significantly 
reduced in CMCE pre-treated THP-1 cells as assessed by Western blotting. CMCE 
(30, 100, and 300 mg/kg; 10 days p.o.) pre-treated and LPS (10 mg/kg) challenged 
Swiss mice exhibited attenuated plasma TNF-α, IL-1β, nitrite, aortic iNOS 
expression, and vascular dysfunction. In a PI permeability assay, cell lines 
derived from acute myeloid leukemia were most sensitive to the cytotoxic effects 
of CMCE. Analysis of Sub-G1 phase, Annexin V-PI positivity, loss of 
mitochondrial membrane potential, increased caspase-3, and PARP-1 activation 
confirmed CMCE induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells. IRAK inhibition also sensitized 
HL-60 cells to CMCE induced cytotoxicity. The present study defines the 
mechanism underlying the action of CMCE and suggests a therapeutic potential for 
its use in sepsis and leukemia.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00223
PMCID: PMC4959270
PMID: 27504095