1. Biochemistry. 1989 May 2;28(9):3771-81. doi: 10.1021/bi00435a022.

Electrostatic interactions in wild-type and mutant recombinant human myoglobins.

Varadarajan R(1), Lambright DG, Boxer SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, California 94305.

Residue Val68 in human myoglobin has been replaced by Asn, Asp, and Glu with 
site-directed mutagenesis. Purified proteins were characterized by isoelectric 
focusing and by absorption, CD, and NMR spectroscopy. These studies demonstrated 
that Mb is able to tolerate substitution of the buried hydrophobic residue Val68 
by Asn, Asp, and Glu. In the metaquo derivatives of the Glu and Asp mutants, the 
negative charge at residue 68 is stabilized by a favorable Coulombic interaction 
with the heme iron. In the absence of this interaction, as in the metcyano and 
ferrous deoxy derivatives, the relatively nonpolar protein interior cannot 
stabilize an isolated buried negative charge, and the carboxylate is either 
protonated or stabilized via a salt bridge with the nearby distal histidine. 
Hence in the Asp and Glu mutant proteins, both reduction and cyanide binding are 
accompanied by proton uptake by the protein. The apoproteins were prepared and 
reconstituted with the chlorophyll derivative zinc pyrochlorophyllide a. 
Absorption and fluorescence spectra were quite similar for wild-type and all 
mutant proteins reconstituted with this derivative. These results do not support 
the point charge model for the red shifts observed in the spectra of 
chlorophylls associated with photosynthetic proteins. From the pH dependence of 
the absorption spectrum of zinc pyrochlorophyllide a in the Glu mutant, the 
apparent pKa of the buried glutamate residue was estimated to be 8.9. This 
increase of 4.4 pH units, over the value for Glu in aqueous solution, provides a 
measure of the polarity of the protein interior.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00435a022
PMID: 2751994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]