1. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Jul 25;15(3). doi: 10.4238/gmr.15037641.

Association between Toll-like receptor 9 gene polymorphisms and risk of 
bacterial meningitis in a Chinese population.

Wang XH(1), Shi HP(2), Li FJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Tuberculosis Hospital of Shanxi Province, Xi'an, China.
(2)Tuberculosis Hospital of Shanxi Province, Xi'an, China haipingshii@163.com.

We determined whether two common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 
Toll-like receptor 9 gene (TLR9) (TLR9+2848 rs352140 and TLR9-1237 rs5743836) 
influenced susceptibility to bacterial meningitis in a Chinese population. The 
study comprised 126 patients with bacterial meningitis and 252 control subjects, 
all of whom were recruited from the Tuberculosis Hospital of Shanxi Province. 
Genotyping of TLR9+2848 rs352140 and TLR9-1237 rs5743836 was performed by 
polymerase chain reaction coupled with restriction fragment length polymorphism. 
Using logistic regression analysis, we found that individuals with the AA 
genotype were associated with an increased risk of bacterial meningitis compared 
with those with the GG genotype (OR = 0.43, 95%CI = 0.19-0.95; P = 0.03). In a 
recessive model, the AA genotype was correlated with an elevated risk of 
bacterial meningitis compared with the GG+GA genotype (OR = 0.49, 95%CI = 
0.22-0.99; P = 0.04). However, no significant differences were observed in the 
association between the TLR9-1237 rs5743836 polymorphism and the risk of 
bacterial meningitis in the codominant, dominant, or recessive models. In 
conclusion, the results of our study suggest an association between the 
TLR9+2848 polymorphism and a reduced risk of bacterial meningitis in the 
codominant and recessive models.

DOI: 10.4238/gmr.15037641
PMID: 27525854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.