1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Oct 14;44(18):8556-8575. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw723. Epub
 2016 Aug 12.

Allosteric control of mammalian DNA methyltransferases - a new regulatory 
paradigm.

Jeltsch A(1), Jurkowska RZ(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Pfaffenwaldring 55, Faculty of Chemistry, 
University of Stuttgart, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany 
albert.jeltsch@ibc.uni-stuttgart.de.
(2)BioMed X Innovation Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 583, D-69120 Heidelberg, 
Germany jurkowska@bio.mx.

In mammals, DNA methylation is introduced by the DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B 
methyltransferases, which are all large multi-domain proteins containing a 
catalytic C-terminal domain and an N-terminal part with regulatory functions. 
Recently, two novel regulatory principles of DNMTs were uncovered. It was shown 
that their catalytic activity is under allosteric control of N-terminal domains 
with autoinhibitory function, the RFT and CXXC domains in DNMT1 and the ADD 
domain in DNMT3. Moreover, targeting and activity of DNMTs were found to be 
regulated in a concerted manner by interactors and posttranslational 
modifications (PTMs). In this review, we describe the structures and domain 
composition of the DNMT1 and DNMT3 enzymes, their DNA binding, catalytic 
mechanism, multimerization and the processes controlling their stability in 
cells with a focus on their regulation and chromatin targeting by PTMs, 
interactors and chromatin modifications. We propose that the allosteric 
regulation of DNMTs by autoinhibitory domains acts as a general switch for the 
modulation of the function of DNMTs, providing numerous possibilities for 
interacting proteins, nucleic acids or PTMs to regulate DNMT activity and 
targeting. The combined regulation of DNMT targeting and catalytic activity 
contributes to the precise spatiotemporal control of DNMT function and genome 
methylation in cells.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw723
PMCID: PMC5062992
PMID: 27521372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]