1. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 30;7(35):56083-56106. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.11270.

The HERC2 ubiquitin ligase is essential for embryonic development and regulates 
motor coordination.

Cubillos-Rojas M(1), Schneider T(1), Hadjebi O(1), Pedrazza L(1)(2), de Oliveira 
JR(2), Langa F(3), Guénet JL(3), Duran J(4), de Anta JM(4), Alcántara S(4), Ruiz 
R(5)(6), Pérez-Villegas EM(6), Aguilar-Montilla FJ(6), Carrión ÁM(6), Armengol 
JA(6), Baple E(7), Crosby AH(7), Bartrons R(1), Ventura F(1), Rosa JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Fisiològiques, IDIBELL, Campus de Bellvitge, 
Universitat de Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Biofísica Celular e Inflamação, Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, 
Brazil.
(3)Département de Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Departament de Patologia i Terapèutica Experimental, Campus de Bellvitge, 
Universitat de Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Farmacia, 
Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
(6)Departamento de Fisiología, Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide, Sevilla, Spain.
(7)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, Exeter, UK.

A mutation in the HERC2 gene has been linked to a severe neurodevelopmental 
disorder with similarities to the Angelman syndrome. This gene codifies a 
protein with ubiquitin ligase activity that regulates the activity of tumor 
protein p53 and is involved in important cellular processes such as DNA repair, 
cell cycle, cancer, and iron metabolism. Despite the critical role of HERC2 in 
these physiological and pathological processes, little is known about its 
relevance in vivo. Here, we described a mouse with targeted inactivation of the 
Herc2 gene. Homozygous mice were not viable. Distinct from other ubiquitin 
ligases that interact with p53, such as MDM2 or MDM4, p53 depletion did not 
rescue the lethality of homozygous mice. The HERC2 protein levels were reduced 
by approximately one-half in heterozygous mice. Consequently, HERC2 activities, 
including ubiquitin ligase and stimulation of p53 activity, were lower in 
heterozygous mice. A decrease in HERC2 activities was also observed in human 
skin fibroblasts from individuals with an Angelman-like syndrome that express an 
unstable mutant protein of HERC2. Behavioural analysis of heterozygous mice 
identified an impaired motor synchronization with normal neuromuscular function. 
This effect was not observed in p53 knockout mice, indicating that a mechanism 
independent of p53 activity is involved. Morphological analysis showed the 
presence of HERC2 in Purkinje cells and a specific loss of these neurons in the 
cerebella of heterozygous mice. In these animals, an increase of autophagosomes 
and lysosomes was observed. Our findings establish a crucial role of HERC2 in 
embryonic development and motor coordination.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.11270
PMCID: PMC5302898
PMID: 27528230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have not conflicts of interest to 
disclose.