1. Immunotargets Ther. 2016 Jun 16;5:57-68. doi: 10.2147/ITT.S64795. eCollection 
2016.

Prion diseases: immunotargets and therapy.

Burchell JT(1), Panegyres PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Disorders Research Pty Ltd, West Perth, Western Australia, 
Australia.

Transmissible spongiform encephathalopathies or prion diseases are a group of 
neurological disorders characterized by neuronal loss, spongiform degeneration, 
and activation of astrocytes or microglia. These diseases affect humans and 
animals with an extremely high prevalence in some species such as deer and elk 
in North America. Although rare in humans, they result in a devastatingly swift 
neurological progression with dementia and ataxia. Patients usually die within a 
year of diagnosis. Prion diseases are familial, sporadic, iatrogenic, or 
transmissible. Human prion diseases include Kuru, sporadic, iatrogenic, and 
familial forms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 
Gerstmann-Str√§ussler-Scheinker disease, and fatal familial insomnia. The 
causative agent is a misfolded version of the physiological prion protein called 
PrP(Sc) in the brain. There are a number of therapeutic options currently under 
investigation. A number of small molecules have had some success in delaying 
disease progression in animal models and mixed results in clinical trials, 
including pentosan polysulfate, quinacrine, and amphotericin B. More 
promisingly, immunotherapy has reported success in vitro and in vivo in animal 
studies and clinical trials. The three main branches of immunotherapy research 
are focus on antibody vaccines, dendritic cell vaccines, and adoptive transfer 
of physiological prion protein-specific CD4(+) T-lymphocytes. Vaccines utilizing 
antibodies generally target disease-specific epitopes that are only exposed in 
the misfolded PrP(Sc) conformation. Vaccines utilizing antigen-loaded dendritic 
cell have the ability to bypass immune tolerance and prime CD4(+) cells to 
initiate an immune response. Adoptive transfer of CD4(+) T-cells is another 
promising target as this cell type can orchestrate the adaptive immune response. 
Although more research into mechanisms and safety is required, these 
immunotherapies offer novel therapeutic targets for prion diseases.

DOI: 10.2147/ITT.S64795
PMCID: PMC4970640
PMID: 27529062