1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Oct 14;291(42):22106-22117. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.731695.
Epub  2016 Aug 17.

New Helical Binding Domain Mediates a Glycosyltransferase Activity of a 
Bifunctional Protein.

Zhang H(1), Zhou M(1), Yang T(2), Haslam SM(2), Dell A(2), Wu H(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric Dentistry and Microbiology, Schools of 
Dentistry and Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 
35294 and.
(2)the Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, 
United Kingdom.
(3)From the Departments of Pediatric Dentistry and Microbiology, Schools of 
Dentistry and Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 
35294 and hwu@uab.edu.

Serine-rich repeat glycoproteins (SRRPs) conserved in streptococci and 
staphylococci are important for bacterial colonization and pathogenesis. Fap1, a 
well studied SRRP is a major surface constituent of Streptococcus parasanguinis 
and is required for bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation. Biogenesis of Fap1 
is a multistep process that involves both glycosylation and secretion. A series 
of glycosyltransferases catalyze sequential glycosylation of Fap1. We have 
identified a unique hybrid protein dGT1 (dual glycosyltransferase 1) that 
contains two distinct domains. N-terminal DUF1792 is a novel GT-D-type 
glycosyltransferase, transferring Glc residues to Glc-GlcNAc-modified Fap1. 
C-terminal dGT1 (CgT) is predicted to possess a typical GT-A-type 
glycosyltransferase, however, the activity remains unknown. In this study, we 
determine that CgT is a distinct glycosyltransferase, transferring GlcNAc 
residues to Glc-Glc-GlcNAc-modified Fap1. A 2.4-Å x-ray crystal structure 
reveals that CgT has a unique binding domain consisting of three α helices in 
addition to a typical GT-A-type glycosyltransferase domain. The helical domain 
is crucial for the oligomerization of CgT. Structural and biochemical studies 
revealed that the helix domain is required for the protein-protein interaction 
and crucial for the glycosyltransferase activity of CgT in vitro and in vivo As 
the helix domain presents a novel structural fold, we conclude that CgT 
represents a new member of GT-A-type glycosyltransferases.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.731695
PMCID: PMC5063993
PMID: 27539847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]