1. Oncotarget. 2016 Sep 6;7(36):57556-57570. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.11353.

Spatial learning and memory impairments are associated with increased neuronal 
activity in 5XFAD mouse as measured by manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance 
imaging.

Tang X(1), Wu D(1), Gu LH(1), Nie BB(2), Qi XY(1), Wang YJ(1), Wu FF(1), Li 
XL(1), Bai F(1), Chen XC(3), Xu L(4)(5), Ren QG(1), Zhang ZJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated ZhongDa Hospital, Neuropsychiatric 
Institute, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Nuclear Analytical Techniques, Institute of High Energy 
Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Geriatrics, Fujian Institute of Geriatrics, 
Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming, Yunnan, 
China.
(5)Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Dysfunction of neuronal activity is a major and early contributor to cognitive 
impairment in Alzheimer's disease (AD). To investigate neuronal activity 
alterations at early stage of AD, we encompassed behavioral testing and in vivo 
manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MEMRI) in 5XFAD mice at early 
ages (1-, 2-, 3- and 5-month). The 5XFAD model over-express human amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) and presenilin 1 (PS1) harboring five familial AD 
mutations, which have a high APP expression correlating with a high burden and 
an accelerated accumulation of the 42 amino acid species of amyloid-Î². In the 
Morris water maze, 5XFAD mice showed longer escape latency and poorer memory 
retention. In the MEMRI, 5XFAD mice showed increased signal intensity in the 
brain regions involved in spatial cognition, including the entorhinal cortex, 
the hippocampus, the retrosplenial cortex and the caudate putamen. Of note, the 
observed alterations in spatial cognition were associated with increased MEMRI 
signal intensity. These findings indicate that aberrant increased basal neuronal 
activity may contribute to the spatial cognitive function impairment at early 
stage of AD, and may further suggest the potential use of MEMRI to predict 
cognitive impairments. Early intervention that targets aberrant neuronal 
activity may be crucial to prevent cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.11353
PMCID: PMC5295372
PMID: 27542275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.