1. Sci Rep. 2016 Aug 22;6:31765. doi: 10.1038/srep31765.

Effect of MDR1 gene polymorphisms on mortality in paraquat intoxicated patients.

Kim HJ(1), Kim HK(1), Kwon JT(1), Lee SH(2), El Park S(2), Gil HW(2), Song 
HY(3), Hong SY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang 
University, Cheonan, Choongcheongnam-do 330-930, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, 
Cheonan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Soonchunhyang University, 
Cheonan, Republic of Korea.

Paraquat is a fatal herbicide following acute exposure. Previous studies have 
suggested that multidrug resistance protein 1 (MDR1) might help remove paraquat 
from the lungs and the kidney. MDR1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are 
involved in the pharmacokinetics of many drugs. The purpose of this study was to 
determine whether MDR1 SNPs were associated with the mortality in paraquat 
intoxicated patients. We recruited 109 patients admitted with acute paraquat 
poisoning. They were genotyped for C1236T, G2677T/A, and C3435T 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of MDR1 gene. Their effects on mortality 
of paraquat intoxicated patients were evaluated. Overall mortality rate was 
66.1%. Regarding the C1236T of the MDR1 gene polymorphism, 21 (19.3%) had the 
wild type MDR1 while 88 (80.7%) had homozygous mutation. Regarding the C3435T 
MDR1 gene polymorphism, 37(33.9%) patients had the wild type, 23 (21.1%) had 
heterozygous mutation, and 49 (45.0%) had homozygous mutation. Regarding the 
G2677T/A MDR1 gene polymorphism, 38 (34.9%) patients had the wild type, 57 
(52.3%) had heterozygous mutation, and 14 (12.8%) had homozygous mutation. None 
of the individual mutations or combination of mutations (two or three) of MDR1 
SNP genotypes altered the morality rate. The mortality rate was not 
significantly different among SNP groups of patients with <4.0 μg/mL paraquat. 
In conclusion, MDR1 SNPs have no effect on the mortality rate of paraquat 
intoxicated patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep31765
PMCID: PMC4992846
PMID: 27545861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]