1. Pain. 2016 Nov;157(11):2476-2482. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000664.

Genetic variants associated with thermal pain sensitivity in a paediatric 
population.

Matic M(1)(2), van den Bosch GE(2), de Wildt SN(2)(3), Tibboel D(2), van Schaik 
RHN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasmus MC-University Medical Centre 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Intensive Care and Department of Paediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC-University 
Medical Centre Rotterdam, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Radboud University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Pain. 2017 Aug;158(8):1622-1623. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000946.
    Pain. 2017 Aug;158(8):1623. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000945.

Pain sensitivity is an inherited factor that varies strongly between 
individuals. We investigated whether genetic polymorphisms in the candidate 
genes COMT, OPRM1, OPRD1, TAOK3, TRPA1, TRPV1, and SCN9A are contributing to 
experimental pain variability between children. Our study included 136 children 
and adolescents (8-18 years). Cold and heat pain thresholds were determined with 
a Thermal Sensory Analyzer. Women and young children were significantly more 
sensitive to pain (P < 0.05). After correction for age, gender, reaction time, 
and correction for multiple testing, OPRM1 118A>G G-allele carriers (AG and GG) 
rated the hot stimulus as significantly less painful than did OPRM1 118A>G AA 
genotyped individuals (2[1-5] vs 7 [3-9], respectively; P = 0.00005). 
Additionally, OPRM1 118G allele carriers reached more frequently the minimum 
temperature limit (44% vs 17%, respectively; P = 0.003) and maximum temperature 
limit (52% vs 24%, respectively; P = 0.0052), indicative for lower pain 
sensitivity. The combined genotype, based on expected pain sensitivity, OPRM1 
118AA/COMT 472 GA or AA genotyped children, was associated with lower pain 
thresholds (ie, higher pain sensitivity) than were the OPRM1 118GA or GG/COMT 
472GG genotyped children. This is the first study reporting on genetic variants 
and experimental thermal pain in children and adolescents. OPRM1 rs1799971 and 
the combined OPRM1/COMT genotype could serve as biomarkers for pain sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000664
PMID: 27541715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]