1. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2017 Oct;25(9):645-650. doi: 
10.1097/PAI.0000000000000432.

Succinate Dehydrogenase B (SDHB) Immunohistochemistry for the Evaluation of 
Muscle Biopsies.

Punsoni M(1), Mangray S, Lombardo KA, Heath N, Stopa EG, Yakirevich E.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital 
â€ Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI.

Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) is a key mitochondrial enzyme complex composed of 
4 subunits. SDH histochemistry is routinely utilized in the assessment of muscle 
biopsies to reveal underlying pathology such as subsarcolemmal mitochondrial 
aggregates. In this study, we evaluated the utility of succinate dehydrogenase B 
(SDHB) immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 27 muscle biopsies, including 13 
mitochondrial myopathies (MMs), 9 inflammatory myopathies, and 5 controls. SDHB 
IHC was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections with a 
mouse monoclonal antibody (Abcam 21A11AE7) in parallel with histochemical SDH 
stains on a fresh-frozen tissue. In all muscle biopsies, SDHB IHC exhibited 
granular immunoreactivity and highlighted the dark type 1 and lighter type 2 
staining pattern observed by histochemistry. In all cases of MM, SDHB IHC showed 
subsarcolemmal granular aggregates involving the entire periphery of the fibers 
that were more distinct than those seen by SDH histochemistry. In 3 extraocular 
muscle biopsies, SDHB immunoreactive speckles of various sizes were distributed 
throughout the entire sarcoplasm that were more prominent than those seen on SDH 
histochemistry. Subsarcolemmal and cytoplasmic granular aggregates seen on SDHB 
IHC correlated with mitochondrial pathology on electron microscopy. In cases of 
inflammatory myopathy, there was diffuse sarcoplasmic SDHB immunoreactivity in 
degenerating fibers, but no evidence of subsarcolemmal aggregates. This study 
demonstrates that SDHB IHC is highly sensitive and specific in the 
identification of MM. The automation, reproducibility, and cost efficiency of 
SDHB IHC offer advantages over the labor-intensive histochemical method 
requiring frozen sections. As this technique is performed on formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissues, it can be easily applied for retrospective studies.

DOI: 10.1097/PAI.0000000000000432
PMCID: PMC5323393
PMID: 27556822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]