1. Nat Commun. 2016 Aug 25;7:12617. doi: 10.1038/ncomms12617.

Efficient and transgene-free genome editing in wheat through transient 
expression of CRISPR/Cas9 DNA or RNA.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Liang Z(1)(2), Zong Y(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Liu J(1), Chen K(1), 
Qiu JL(3), Gao C(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Cell and Chromosome Engineering, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Editing plant genomes is technically challenging in hard-to-transform plants and 
usually involves transgenic intermediates, which causes regulatory concerns. 
Here we report two simple and efficient genome-editing methods in which plants 
are regenerated from callus cells transiently expressing CRISPR/Cas9 introduced 
as DNA or RNA. This transient expression-based genome-editing system is highly 
efficient and specific for producing transgene-free and homozygous wheat mutants 
in the T0 generation. We demonstrate our protocol to edit genes in hexaploid 
bread wheat and tetraploid durum wheat, and show that we are able to generate 
mutants with no detectable transgenes. Our methods may be applicable to other 
plant species, thus offering the potential to accelerate basic and applied plant 
genome-engineering research.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms12617
PMCID: PMC5007326
PMID: 27558837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.G., Y.W., Yi, Z. and J.L. filed a Chinese 
patent application (Application Number 201510025857.3) based on the results 
reported in this paper. The remaining authors declare no competing financial 
interest.