1. J Am Chem Soc. 2016 Sep 28;138(38):12486-93. doi: 10.1021/jacs.6b05990. Epub 
2016 Sep 13.

Biaryl Phosphine Based Pd(II) Amido Complexes: The Effect of Ligand Structure on 
Reductive Elimination.

Arrechea PL(1), Buchwald SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 77 
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge Massachusetts 02319, United States.

Kinetic studies conducted under both catalytic and stoichiometric conditions 
were employed to investigate the reductive elimination of RuPhos 
(2-dicyclohexylphosphino-2',6'-diisopropoxybiphenyl) based palladium amido 
complexes. These complexes were found to be the resting state in Pd-catalyzed 
cross-coupling reactions for a range of aryl halides and diarylamines. Hammett 
plots demonstrated that Pd(II) amido complexes derived from electron-deficient 
aryl halides or electron-rich diarylamines undergo faster rates of reductive 
elimination. A Hammett study employing SPhos 
(2-dicyclohexylphosphino-2',6'-dimethoxybiphenyl) and analogues of SPhos 
demonstrated that electron donation of the "lower" aryl group is key to the 
stability of the amido complex with respect to reductive elimination. The rate 
of reductive elimination of an amido complex based on a BrettPhos-RuPhos hybrid 
ligand (2-(dicyclohexylphosphino)-3,6-dimethoxy-2',6'-diisopropoxybiphenyl) 
demonstrated that the presence of the 3-methoxy substituent on the "upper" ring 
of the ligand slows the rate of reductive elimination. These studies indicate 
that reductive elimination occurs readily for more nucleophilic amines such as 
N-alkyl anilines, N,N-dialkyl amines, and primary aliphatic amines using this 
class of ligands.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.6b05990
PMCID: PMC5127253
PMID: 27562724

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): MIT has patents on ligands used during the course of this 
research, from which S.L.B. and coworkers receive royalty payments.