1. Neoplasia. 2016 Aug;18(8):512-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.07.003.

NHERF1/EBP50 Suppresses Wnt-β-Catenin Pathway-Driven Intestinal Neoplasia.

Georgescu MM(1), Gagea M(2), Cote G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Translational Pathobiology, Louisiana State 
University, Shreveport, LA, 71103, USA. Electronic address: 
mmgeorgescu@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Endocrine Neoplasia and Hormonal Disorders, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.

NHERF1/EBP50, an adaptor molecule that interacts with β-catenin, YAP, and PTEN, 
has been recently implicated in the progression of various human malignancies, 
including colorectal cancer. We report here that NHERF1 acts as a tumor 
suppressor in vivo for intestinal adenoma development. NHERF1 is highly 
expressed at the apical membrane of mucosa intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) 
and serosa mesothelial cells. NHERF1-deficient mice show overall longer small 
intestine and colon that most likely could be attributed to a combination of 
defects, including altered apical brush border of absorbtive IECs and increased 
number of secretory IECs. NHERF1 deficiency in Apc(Min/+) mice resulted in 
significantly shorter animal survival due to markedly increased tumor burden. 
This resulted from a moderate increase of the overall tumor density, more 
pronounced in females than males, and a massive increase in the number of large 
adenomas in both genders. The analysis of possible pathways controlling tumor 
size showed upregulation of Wnt-β-catenin pathway, higher expression of 
unphosphorylated YAP, and prominent nuclear expression of cyclin D1 in 
NHERF1-deficient tumors. Similar YAP changes, with relative decrease of 
phosphorylated YAP and increase of nuclear YAP expression, were observed as 
early as the adenoma stages in the progression of human colorectal cancer. This 
study discusses a complex role of NHERF1 for intestinal morphology and presents 
indisputable evidence for its in vivo tumor suppressor function upstream of 
Wnt-β-catenin and Hippo-YAP pathways.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.07.003
PMCID: PMC5018097
PMID: 27566107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]