1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Sep 6;54(2):717-21. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160185.

Non Fluent Variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia Due to the Novel GRN 
g.9543delA(IVS3-2delA) Mutation.

Cioffi SM(1), Galimberti D(1), Barocco F(2)(3), Spallazzi M(2)(3), Fenoglio 
C(1), Serpente M(1), Arcaro M(1), Gardini S(2)(3), Scarpini E(1), Caffarra 
P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University 
of Milan, Fondazione Ca' Granda, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Center for Cognitive Disorders and Dementia (CDCD), AUSL, Parma, Italy.

Mutations in progranulin gene (GRN) are a common cause of autosomal dominant 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes and are associated with a wide 
phenotypic heterogeneity. The majority of genetic defects in GRN consists of 
loss-of-function mutations, causing haploinsufficiency, and is associated with 
extremely low plasma progranulin levels. Herein, we describe a patient who 
developed language dysfunctions and memory disturbances at 63 years of age. 
Considering the early onset and the positive family history (sister aged 50 with 
non-fluent/agrammatic variant of primary progressive aphasia, father with 
behavioral disturbances in his sixties), a genetic analysis was carried out, 
showing the presence of a novel mutation [g.9543delA (IVS3-2delA)] in a 
predicted splicing site of GRN. Her progranulin plasma levels were under the 
reference threshold, as in her sister, thus supporting the causative role of the 
new variant. The same genetic mutation was confirmed by sequencing in her 
sister. Results described enlarge current knowledge on genetic causes of the 
disease and clinical characteristics of carriers.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-160185
PMID: 27567822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]