1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2016 Aug 17;9:69. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2016.00069.
eCollection  2016.

Aberration of miRNAs Expression in Leukocytes from Sporadic Amyotrophic Lateral 
Sclerosis.

Chen Y(1), Wei Q(1), Chen X(1), Li C(1), Cao B(1), Ou R(1), Hadano S(2), Shang 
HF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu, 
China.
(2)Department of Molecular Life Sciences, Tokai University School of 
MedicineIsehara, Japan; The Institute of Medical Sciences, Tokai 
UniversityIsehara, Japan; Research Center for Brain and Nervous Diseases, Tokai 
University Graduate School of MedicineIsehara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence indicates that miRNAs play an important role 
in the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Most of previous 
studies on miRNA dysregulation in ALS focused on the alterative expression in 
ALS animal model or in limited samples from European patients with ALS. In the 
present study, the miRNA expression profiles were investigated in Chinese ALS 
patients to explore leukocytes miRNAs as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis 
of ALS.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression profiles of 1733 human mature miRNAs using 
microarray technology in leukocytes obtained from 5 patients with sporadic ALS 
(SALS) and 5 healthy controls. An independent group of 83 SALS patients, 24 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and 61 controls was used for validation by 
real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. Area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (AUC) was used to evaluate diagnostic accuracy. In 
addition, target genes and signaling information of validated differential 
expression miRNAs were predicted using Bioinformatics.
RESULTS: Eleven miRNAs, including four over-expressed and seven under-expressed 
miRNAs detected in SALS patients compared to healthy controls were selected for 
validation. Four under-expressed microRNAs, including hsa-miR-183, hsa-miR-193b, 
hsa-miR-451, and hsa-miR-3935, were confirmed in validation stage by comparison 
of 83 SALS patients and 61 HCs. Moreover, we identified a miRNA panel 
(hsa-miR-183, hsa-miR-193b, hsa-miR-451, and hsa-miR-3935) having a high 
diagnostic accuracy of SALS (AUC 0.857 for the validation group). However, only 
hsa-miR-183 was significantly lower in SALS patients than that in PD patients 
and in HCs, while no differences were found between PD patients and HCs. By 
bioinformatics analysis, we obtained a large number of target genes and 
signaling information that are linked to neurodegeneration.
CONCLUSION: This study provided evidence of abnormal miRNA expression patterns 
in the peripheral blood leukocytes of SALS patients. Leukocytes miRNAs provide a 
promising opportunity for detection of SALS. The specificity of under-expression 
of hsa-miR-183 in SALS needs to be confirmed by further miRNA studies on other 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2016.00069
PMCID: PMC4987348
PMID: 27582688