1. Genes Immun. 2016 Dec;17(7):380-385. doi: 10.1038/gene.2016.35. Epub 2016 Sep
1.

Maternal and child cytokine relationship in early life is not altered by 
cytokine gene polymorphisms.

Djuardi Y(1)(2), Supali T(1), Wibowo H(1), Heijmans BT(3), Deelen J(3), Slagboom 
EP(3), Houwing-Duistermaat JJ(4), Sartono E(2), Yazdanbakhsh M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Molecular Epidemiology, Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Medical Statistics, Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The development of immune responses is influenced by the interaction between 
environmental and genetic factors. Our previous study showed a close association 
between maternal and young infant's cytokine responses. The question is how this 
association evolves over time and the contribution of genetic polymorphisms to 
this association. Five cytokines in mitogen-stimulated whole blood culture were 
measured from pregnant mothers and their children aged 2, 5, 12, 24 and 48 
months. Cytokine gene polymorphisms were determined in both mothers and 
children. High production of maternal interleukin (IL)-10, tumour necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) was significantly associated with 
higher levels of the corresponding cytokines in their children at 2 months (T2), 
but the association decreased over time. Maternal single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) in IFN-γ gene, rs3181032, was found to be associated with child's IFN-γ 
levels at T2 only, whereas maternal IL-10 rs4579758 and child's TNF-α rs13215091 
were associated with child's corresponding cytokines at later ages but not at 
T2. In the final models including the gene polymorphisms, maternal cytokines 
were still the strongest determinant of child cytokines. Maternal cytokine 
during pregnancy, which could be a proxy for child's environmental factors, 
showed its highest impact at early age, with no or little influence from genetic 
factors.

DOI: 10.1038/gene.2016.35
PMCID: PMC5223084
PMID: 27581100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]