1. Biomed Rep. 2016 Sep;5(3):337-343. doi: 10.3892/br.2016.736. Epub 2016 Aug 3.

Matrix metalloproteinase-3 gene promoter polymorphisms: A potential risk factor 
for pelvic organ prolapse.

Karachalios C(1), Bakas P(1), Kaparos G(2), Demeridou S(2), Liapis I(1), 
Grigoriadis C(1), Liapis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aretaieio University 
Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens 
11528, Greece.
(2)Department of Biopathology, Aretaieio University Hospital, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Medical School, Athens 11528, Greece.

Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a common multifactorial condition. Matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes capable of breaking down various 
connective tissue elements. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in regulatory 
areas of MMP-encoding genes can alter their transcription rate, and therefore 
the possible effect on pelvic floor supporting structures. The insertion of an 
adenine (A) base in the promoter of the MMP-3 gene at position -1612/-1617 
produces a sequence of six adenines (6A), whereas the other allele has five 
(5A). The aim of the present study was to investigate the possible association 
of MMP-3 gene promoter SNPs with the risk of POP. The patient group comprised 80 
women with clinically significant POP [Stage II, III or IV; POP quantification 
(POP-Q) system]. The control group consisted of 80 females without any or 
important pelvic floor support defects (Stages 0 or I; POP-Q system). All the 
participants underwent the same preoperative evaluation. SNP detection was 
determined with whole blood sample DNA analysis by quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) in LightCyclerÂ® PCR platforms, using the technique of 
sequence-specific hybridization probe-binding assays and melting temperature 
curve analysis. The results showed there was no statistically significant 
difference between 5A/5A, 5A/6A and 6A/6A MMP-3 gene promoter variants in the 
two study groups (P=0.4758). Therefore, MMP-3 gene promoter SNPs alone is 
insufficient to increase the genetic susceptibility to POP development.

DOI: 10.3892/br.2016.736
PMCID: PMC4997987
PMID: 27588175