1. Anal Biochem. 2017 Jul 15;529:179-192. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2016.08.025. Epub
2016  Aug 28.

In vivo N-15 MRS study of glutamate metabolism in the rat brain.

Kanamori K(1).

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Laboratory, Huntington Medical Research 
Institutes, Pasadena, CA 91105, USA. Electronic address: 
kkanamori.hmri@gmail.com.

In vivo 15N MRS has made a unique contribution to kinetic studies of the 
individual pathways that control glutamate flux in the rat brain. This review 
covers the following topics: (1) the advantages and limitations of in vivo 15N 
MRS and its indirect detection through coupled 1H; (2) kinetic methods; (3) 
major findings from our and other laboratories in the areas: (a) the uptake of 
the neurotransmitter glutamate from the extracellular fluid into glia; (b) the 
metabolism of glutamate to glutamine; (c) glutamine transport to the 
extracellular fluid; (d) hydrolysis of neuronal glutamine to glutamate; and (e) 
contribution of transamination from leucine to replenish the glutamate nitrogen. 
In vivo glutamine synthetase activities measured at several levels of 
hyperammonemia showed that this enzyme becomes saturated at blood ammonia 
concentration >0.9 μmol/g, and causes the elevation of brain ammonia. 
Implications of the results for the cause of hyperammonemic encephalopathy are 
discussed. Leucine provides >25% of glutamate nitrogen. An intriguing 
possibility that supplementing leucine may restore cognitive function after 
brain injury is discussed. Finally, some characteristics of 15N MRS that may 
facilitate the future application of this technique to the study of the human 
brain at 4 or 7 T are described.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2016.08.025
PMCID: PMC5330946
PMID: 27580850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]