1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Aug 31;10(8):e0004969. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0004969. eCollection 2016 Aug.

The Ectodomain of Glycoprotein from the Candid#1 Vaccine Strain of Junin Virus 
Rendered Machupo Virus Partially Attenuated in Mice Lacking IFN-αβ/γ Receptor.

Koma T(1), Huang C(1), Aronson JF(1), Walker AG(1), Miller M(1), Smith JN(1), 
Patterson M(1), Paessler S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, 
Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Machupo virus (MACV), a New World arenavirus, is the etiological agent of 
Bolivian hemorrhagic fever (BHF). Junin virus (JUNV), a close relative, causes 
Argentine hemorrhagic fever (AHF). Previously, we reported that a recombinant, 
chimeric MACV (rMACV/Cd#1-GPC) expressing glycoprotein from the Candid#1 (Cd#1) 
vaccine strain of JUNV is completely attenuated in a murine model and protects 
animals from lethal challenge with MACV. A rMACV with a single F438I 
substitution in the transmembrane domain (TMD) of GPC, which is equivalent to 
the F427I attenuating mutation in Cd#1 GPC, was attenuated in a murine model but 
genetically unstable. In addition, the TMD mutation alone was not sufficient to 
fully attenuate JUNV, indicating that other domains of the GPC may also 
contribute to the attenuation. To investigate the requirement of different 
domains of Cd#1 GPC for successful attenuation of MACV, we rescued several 
rMACVs expressing the ectodomain of GPC from Cd#1 either alone (MCg1), along 
with the TMD F438I substitution (MCg2), or with the TMD of Cd#1 (MCg3). All 
rMACVs exhibited similar growth curves in cultured cells. In mice, the MCg1 
displayed significant reduction in lethality as compared with rMACV. The MCg1 
was detected in brains and spleens of MCg1-infected mice and the infection was 
associated with tissue inflammation. On the other hand, all animals survived 
MCg2 and MCg3 infection without detectable levels of virus in various organs 
while producing neutralizing antibody against Cd#1. Overall our data suggest the 
indispensable role of each GPC domain in the full attenuation and immunogenicity 
of rMACV/Cd#1 GPC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004969
PMCID: PMC5006991
PMID: 27580122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.