1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Sep;12(3):1867-1872. doi: 10.3892/etm.2016.3521. Epub 2016 
Jul 13.

A polymorphism at the microRNA binding site in the 3'-untranslated region of 
C14orf101 is associated with the risk of gastric cancer development.

Wang C(1), Zhao Y(2), Ming Y(2), Zhao S(2), Guo Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology Ultrasound, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050011, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei 
Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050011, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) bind to the 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTRs) of mRNAs, 
affecting translation and regulating cell differentiation, tumorigenesis and 
apoptosis. Genetic polymorphisms in these regions in target genes are able to 
affect the binding affinity between miRNA and target genes, ultimately affecting 
the expression of individual miRNAs. In the present case-control study, 
genotyping of 5 microRNA single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located at the 
binding site of the 3'-UTR of RYR3 (rs1044129), C14orf101 (rs4901706), KIAA0423 
(rs1053667), GOLGA7 (rs11337) and KRT81 (rs3660) genes was assessed in order to 
investigate its role in gastric cancer (GC). The results indicated that the 
rs4901706 SNP, which is located in the 3'-UTR of C14orf101, was associated with 
GC development risk, as determined by Ï‡2 analysis (relative risk, 1.630; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.070-2.483; P=0.022). A Renilla/luciferase reporter assay 
also indicated the different binding affinity between the SNP of rs4901706 and 
microRNA. In conclusion, rs4901706 SNP of C14orf101 gene in the microRNA binding 
site may be used as a valuable biomarker when predicting GC risk.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2016.3521
PMCID: PMC4998151
PMID: 27602096