1. Am J Psychiatry. 2017 Feb 1;174(2):118-124. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16020171.  Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Imaging Microglial Activation in Untreated First-Episode Psychosis: A PET Study 
With [(18)F]FEPPA.

Hafizi S(1), Tseng HH(1), Rao N(1), Selvanathan T(1), Kenk M(1), Bazinet RP(1), 
Suridjan I(1), Wilson AA(1), Meyer JH(1), Remington G(1), Houle S(1), Rusjan 
PM(1), Mizrahi R(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Research Imaging Centre and the Campbell Family Mental Health 
Research Institute, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto; the 
Departments of Psychiatry and of Nutritional Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto; and the Institute of Medical Science, University 
of Toronto, Toronto.

OBJECTIVE: Neuroinflammation and abnormal immune responses are increasingly 
implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Previous positron emission 
tomography (PET) studies targeting the translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) have 
been limited by high nonspecific binding of the first-generation radioligand, 
low-resolution scanners, small sample sizes, and psychotic patients being on 
antipsychotics or not being in the first episode of their illness. The present 
study uses the novel second-generation TSPO PET radioligand [18F]FEPPA to 
evaluate whether microglial activation is elevated in the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of untreated patients with first-episode 
psychosis.
METHOD: Nineteen untreated patients with first-episode psychosis (14 of them 
antipsychotic naive) and 20 healthy volunteers underwent a high-resolution 
[18F]FEPPA PET scan and MRI. Dynamic PET data were analyzed using the validated 
two-tissue compartment model with arterial plasma input function with total 
volume of distribution (VT) as outcome measure. All analyses were corrected for 
TSPO rs6971 polymorphism (which is implicated in differential binding affinity).
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed between patients and healthy 
volunteers in microglial activation, as indexed by [18F]FEPPA VT, in either the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex or the hippocampus. There were no significant 
correlations between [18F]FEPPA VT and duration of illness, clinical 
presentation, or neuropsychological measures after adjusting for multiple 
testing.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of significant differences in [18F]FEPPA VT between groups 
suggests that microglial activation is not present in first-episode psychosis.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16020171
PMCID: PMC5342628
PMID: 27609240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]