1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 7;6:30823. doi: 10.1038/srep30823.

Vancomycin susceptibility in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus is 
mediated by YycHI activation of the WalRK essential two-component regulatory 
system.

Cameron DR(1), Jiang JH(1), Kostoulias X(1), Foxwell DJ(1), Peleg AY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Alfred Hospital and Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia.

The treatment of infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus is complicated by the emergence of strains with intermediate-level 
resistance to vancomycin (termed VISA). We have characterised a molecular 
pathway involved in the in vivo evolution of VISA mediated by the regulatory 
proteins YycH and YycI. In contrast to their function in other bacterial 
species, we report a positive role for these auxiliary proteins in regulation of 
the two-component regulator WalRK. Transcriptional profiling of yycH and yycI 
deletion mutants revealed downregulation of the 'WalRK regulon' including cell 
wall hydrolase genes atlA and sle1, with functional autolysis assays supporting 
these data by showing an impaired autolytic phenotype for each deletion strain. 
Using bacterial-two hybrid assays, we showed that YycH and YycI interact, and 
that YycHI also interacts with the sensor kinase WalK, forming a ternary protein 
complex. Mutation to YycH or YycI associated with clinical VISA strains had a 
deleterious impact on the YycHI/WalK complex, suggesting that the interaction is 
important for the regulation of WalRK. Taken together, we have described a novel 
antibiotic resistance strategy for the human pathogen S. aureus, whereby YycHI 
mutations are selected for in vivo leading to reduced WalRK activation, impaired 
cell wall turnover and ultimately reduced vancomycin efficacy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep30823
PMCID: PMC5013275
PMID: 27600558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]