1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 7;6:32626. doi: 10.1038/srep32626.

G-actin guides p53 nuclear transport: potential contribution of monomeric actin 
in altered localization of mutant p53.

Saha T(1), Guha D(1), Manna A(1), Panda AK(1), Bhat J(2), Chatterjee S(2), Sa 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P-1/12, CIT Scheme VII M, 
Kolkata-700054, India.
(2)Division of Biophysics, Bose Institute, P-1/12, CIT Scheme VII M, 
Kolkata-700054, India.

p53 preserves genomic integrity by restricting anomaly at the gene level. Till 
date, limited information is available for cytosol to nuclear shuttling of p53; 
except microtubule-based trafficking route, which utilizes minus-end directed 
motor dynein. The present study suggests that monomeric actin (G-actin) guides 
p53 traffic towards the nucleus. Histidine-tag pull-down assay using purified 
p53(1-393)-His and G-actin confirms direct physical association between p53 and 
monomeric G-actin. Co-immunoprecipitation data supports the same. Confocal 
imaging explores intense perinuclear colocalization between p53 and G-actin. To 
address atomistic details of the complex, constraint-based docked model of 
p53:G-actin complex was generated based on crystal structures. MD simulation 
reveals that p53 DNA-binding domain arrests very well the G-actin protein. 
Docking benchmark studies have been carried out for a known crystal structure, 
1YCS (complex between p53DBD and BP2), which validates the docking protocol we 
adopted. Co-immunoprecipitation study using "hot-spot" p53 mutants suggested 
reduced G-actin association with cancer-associated p53 conformational mutants 
(R175H and R249S). Considering these findings, we hypothesized that point 
mutation in p53 structure, which diminishes p53:G-actin complexation results in 
mutant p53 altered subcellular localization. Our model suggests p53Arg249 form 
polar-contact with Arg357 of G-actin, which upon mutation, destabilizes 
p53:G-actin interaction and results in cytoplasmic retention of p53R249S.

DOI: 10.1038/srep32626
PMCID: PMC5013524
PMID: 27601274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]