1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Sep 8;12(9):e1005832. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005832. 
eCollection 2016 Sep.

Cytomegalovirus Infection Leads to Development of High Frequencies of Cytotoxic 
Virus-Specific CD4+ T Cells Targeted to Vascular Endothelium.

Pachnio A(1), Ciaurriz M(1)(2), Begum J(1), Lal N(1), Zuo J(1), Beggs A(3), Moss 
P(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Institute 
of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Oncohematology Research Group, Navarrabiomed-Fundación Miguel Servet, IDISNA 
(Navarra's Health Research Institute), Pamplona, Spain.
(3)University of Birmingham, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Institute 
of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection elicits a very strong and sustained 
intravascular T cell immune response which may contribute towards development of 
accelerated immune senescence and vascular disease in older people. 
Virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses have been investigated extensively through 
the use of HLA-peptide tetramers but much less is known regarding CMV-specific 
CD4+ T cells. We used a range of HLA class II-peptide tetramers to investigate 
the phenotypic and transcriptional profile of CMV-specific CD4+ T cells within 
healthy donors. We show that such cells comprise an average of 0.45% of the CD4+ 
T cell pool and can reach up to 24% in some individuals (range 0.01-24%). 
CMV-specific CD4+ T cells display a highly differentiated effector memory 
phenotype and express a range of cytokines, dominated by dual TNF-α and IFN-γ 
expression, although substantial populations which express IL-4 were seen in 
some donors. Microarray analysis and phenotypic expression revealed a profile of 
unique features. These include the expression of CX3CR1, which would direct 
cells towards fractalkine on activated endothelium, and the β2-adrenergic 
receptor, which could permit rapid response to stress. CMV-specific CD4+ T cells 
display an intense cytotoxic profile with high level expression of granzyme B 
and perforin, a pattern which increases further during aging. In addition 
CMV-specific CD4+ T cells demonstrate strong cytotoxic activity against 
antigen-loaded target cells when isolated directly ex vivo. PD-1 expression is 
present on 47% of cells but both the intensity and distribution of the 
inhibitory receptor is reduced in older people. These findings reveal the marked 
accumulation and unique phenotype of CMV-specific CD4+ T cells and indicate how 
such T cells may contribute to the vascular complications associated with CMV in 
older people.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005832
PMCID: PMC5015996
PMID: 27606804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.