1. J Reward Defic Syndr. 2015;1(3):105-116. doi: 10.17756/jrds.2015-017. Epub
2015  Oct 30.

Brain Reward Pathway Dysfunction in Maternal Depression and Addiction: A Present 
and Future Transgenerational Risk.

Nephew BC(1), Murgatroyd C(2), Pittet F(1), Febo M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Section of Neuroscience and Reproductive 
Biology, Tufts University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, 
MA, USA.
(2)Manchester Metropolitan University School of Healthcare Science, Manchester, 
UK.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.

Two research areas that could benefit from a greater focus on the role of the 
reward pathway are maternal depression and maternal addiction. Both depression 
and addiction in mothers are mediated by deficiencies in the reward pathway and 
represent substantial risks to the health of offspring and future generations. 
This targeted review discusses maternal reward deficits in depressed and 
addicted mothers, neural, genetic, and epigenetic mechanisms, and the 
transgenerational transmission of these deficits from mother to offspring. 
Postpartum depression and drug use disorders may entail alterations in the 
reward pathway, particularly in striatal and prefrontal areas, which may affect 
maternal attachment to offspring and heighten the risk of transgenerational 
effects on the oxytocin and dopamine systems. Alterations may involve neural 
circuitry changes, genetic factors that impact monoaminergic neurotransmission, 
as well as growth factors such as BDNF and stress-associated signaling in the 
brain. Improved maternal reward-based preventative measures and treatments may 
be specifically effective for mothers and their offspring suffering from 
depression and/or addiction.

DOI: 10.17756/jrds.2015-017
PMCID: PMC5013732
PMID: 27617302