1. Immunobiology. 2017 Oct;222(10):960-966. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2016.08.008.
Epub  2016 Sep 3.

Association of the I148M/PNPLA3 (rs738409) polymorphism with premature coronary 
artery disease, fatty liver, and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic patients 
and healthy controls. The GEA study.

Posadas-Sánchez R(1), López-Uribe ÁR(2), Posadas-Romero C(2), Pérez-Hernández 
N(3), Rodríguez-Pérez JM(3), Ocampo-Arcos WA(2), Fragoso JM(3), Cardoso-Saldaña 
G(2), Vargas-Alarcón G(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Department, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: rossy_posadas_s@yahoo.it.
(2)Endocrinology Department, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio Chávez, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Molecular Biology Department, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología Ignacio 
Chávez, Mexico City, Mexico.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential use of the I148M/PNPLA3 
(rs738409) gene polymorphism as a susceptibility marker for premature coronary 
artery disease (pCAD) and/or cardiovascular risk factors in Mexican type 2 
diabetes mellitus patients (T2DM). The polymorphism was genotyped by 5' 
exonuclease TaqMan assays in a group of 2572 subjects (1103 with pCAD and 1469 
healthy controls) belonging to the Genetics of Atherosclerotic Disease (GEA) 
Mexican Study. Anthropometric and biochemical measurements were performed in all 
individuals. The association between the I148M/PNPLA3 (rs738409) gene 
polymorphism with pCAD and other metabolic and cardiovascular risk factors was 
evaluated using logistic regression analysis under different statistical 
approaches including dominant, recessive, heterozygous, additive, and 
co-dominant models. The polymorphism was not associated with pCAD in the whole 
group of participants, however, when patients and controls were divided into 
those with and without T2DM, under additive model, the polymorphism was 
associated with the presence of pCAD only in patients with T2DM (OR=1.20, 95% 
CI: 1.01-1.42, Padd=0.042). On the other hand, under several models adjusted for 
age, gender, body mass index and T2DM, the polymorphism was associated with 
increased risk of fatty liver and elevated levels of alanine transaminase (ALT) 
in the whole group of pCAD patients and controls. In the control group, the 
polymorphism was associated with insulin resistance and coronary artery 
calcification (CAC) score≥10 under several models. The results suggest that the 
I148M/PNPLA3 (rs738409) polymorphism is associated with the presence of pCAD in 
T2DM patients and with some cardiometabolic parameters. The association detected 
with CAC in the control group indicates that this polymorphism could be a marker 
for subclinical atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2016.08.008
PMID: 27615511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]