1. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:2839232. doi: 10.1155/2016/2839232. Epub 2016 Aug
 17.

Interferon Tau Affects Mouse Intestinal Microbiota and Expression of IL-17.

Ren W(1), Chen S(2), Zhang L(3), Liu G(2), Hussain T(2), Hao X(2), Yin J(2), 
Duan J(2), Tan B(2), Wu G(4), Bazer FW(4), Yin Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Agro-Ecological Processes in Subtropical Region, Institute 
of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Observation and 
Experiment Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science in South-Central China, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan Provincial Engineering Research Center for 
Healthy Livestock and Poultry Production, Changsha, Hunan 410125, China; 
University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 10008, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agro-Ecological Processes in Subtropical Region, Institute 
of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Observation and 
Experiment Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science in South-Central China, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan Provincial Engineering Research Center for 
Healthy Livestock and Poultry Production, Changsha, Hunan 410125, China.
(3)Jinan First People's Hospital, Shandong 250011, China.
(4)Department of Animal Science, Texas A&M University, 2471 TAMU, College 
Station, TX 77843-2471, USA.

This study was conducted to explore the effects of interferon tau (IFNT) on the 
intestinal microbiota and expression of interleukin 17 (IL-17) in the intestine 
of mice. IFNT supplementation increased microbial diversity in the jejunum and 
ileum but decreased microbial diversity in the feces. IFNT supplementation 
influenced the composition of the intestinal microbiota as follows: (1) 
decreasing the percentage of Firmicutes and increasing Bacteroidetes in the 
jejunum and ileum; (2) enhancing the percentage of Firmicutes but decreasing 
Bacteroidetes in the colon and feces; (3) decreasing Lactobacillus in the 
jejunum and ileum; (4) increasing the percentage of Blautia, Bacteroides, 
Alloprevotella, and Lactobacillus in the colon; and (5) increasing the 
percentage of Lactobacillus, Bacteroides, and Allobaculum, while decreasing 
Blautia in the feces. Also, IFNT supplementation decreased the expression of 
IL-17 in the intestines of normal mice and of an intestinal pathogen infected 
mice. In conclusion, IFNT supplementation modulates the intestinal microbiota 
and intestinal IL-17 expression, indicating the applicability of IFNT to treat 
the intestinal diseases involving IL-17 expression and microbiota.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/2839232
PMCID: PMC5005528
PMID: 27610003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]