1. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Dec;111:231-241. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.09.010.  Epub 2016 Sep 10.

Disrupting GluA2 phosphorylation potentiates reinstatement of cocaine seeking.

Briand LA(1), Deutschmann AU(2), Ellis AS(3), Fosnocht AQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA; Neuroscience Program, 
Temple University, USA. Electronic address: lbriand@temple.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Temple University, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Program, Temple University, USA.

Addiction is associated with changes in synaptic plasticity mediated, in part, 
by alterations in the trafficking and stabilization of AMPA receptors at 
synapses within the nucleus accumbens. Exposure to cocaine can lead to protein 
kinase C-mediated phosphorylation of GluA2 AMPA subunits and this 
phosphorylation event leads to the internalization of GluA2-containing AMPARs, 
which are calcium-impermeable. However, it is not clear whether this 
internalization is necessary for the expression of addictive phenotypes. 
Utilizing a mouse with a point mutation within the GluA2 subunit c-terminus, the 
current study demonstrates that disrupting PKC-mediated GluA2 phosphorylation 
potentiates reinstatement of both cue-induced cocaine seeking and cocaine 
conditioned reward without affecting operant learning, food self-administration 
or cocaine sensitization. Electrophysiological recordings revealed increased 
GluA2-mediated AMPA transmission as evidenced by increased sEPSC amplitude 
without any changes in sEPSC frequency or rectification. In support of this 
increase in GluA2 activity mediating the augmented cocaine reinstatement, we 
found that accumbal overexpression of GluA2 recapitulated this behavioral effect 
in wildtype mice while not altering reinstatement behavior in the GluA2 K882A 
knock-in mice. In addition, disrupting GluA2 phosphorylation was associated with 
blunted long-term depression in the nucleus accumbens, mimicking the 
anaplasticity seen following cocaine self-administration. Taken together these 
results indicate that disrupting GluA2 phosphorylation and increasing 
GluA2-mediated transmission in the nucleus accumbens leads to increased 
vulnerability to cocaine relapse. Further, these results indicate that 
modulating GluA2-containing AMPAR trafficking can contribute to addictive 
phenotypes in the absence of alterations in GluA2-lacking receptors. These 
results highlight the GluA2 phosphorylation site as a novel target for the 
development of cocaine addiction therapeutics.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.09.010
PMCID: PMC5074807
PMID: 27622930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.