1. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Nov;14(11):1068-1077. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0209.
 Epub 2016 Sep 12.

Estrogen Drives Cellular Transformation and Mutagenesis in Cells Expressing the 
Breast Cancer-Associated R438W DNA Polymerase Lambda Protein.

Nemec AA(1), Bush KB(2), Towle-Weicksel JB(2), Taylor BF(2), Schulz V(3), 
Weidhaas JB(2)(4), Tuck DP(5), Sweasy JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. 
antonia.nemec@med.fsu.edu joann.sweasy@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(4)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.
(5)Departmentof Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.

Repair of DNA damage is critical for maintaining the genomic integrity of cells. 
DNA polymerase lambda (POLL/Pol λ) is suggested to function in base excision 
repair (BER) and nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ), and is likely to play a role 
in damage tolerance at the replication fork. Here, using next-generation 
sequencing, it was discovered that the POLL rs3730477 single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) encoding R438W Pol λ was significantly enriched in the 
germlines of breast cancer patients. Expression of R438W Pol λ in human breast 
epithelial cells induces cellular transformation and chromosomal aberrations. 
The role of estrogen was assessed as it is commonly used in hormone replacement 
therapies and is a known breast cancer risk factor. Interestingly, the 
combination of estrogen treatment and the expression of the R438W Pol λ SNP 
drastically accelerated the rate of transformation. Estrogen exposure produces 
8-oxoguanine lesions that persist in cells expressing R438W Pol λ compared with 
wild-type (WT) Pol λ-expressing cells. Unlike WT Pol λ, which performs 
error-free bypass of 8-oxoguanine lesions, expression of R438W Pol λ leads to an 
increase in mutagenesis and replicative stress in cells treated with estrogen. 
Together, these data suggest that individuals who carry the rs3730477 POLL 
germline variant have an increased risk of estrogen-associated breast cancer.
IMPLICATIONS: The Pol λ R438W mutation can serve as a biomarker to predict 
cancer risk and implicates that treatment with estrogen in individuals with this 
mutation may further increase their risk of breast cancer. Mol Cancer Res; 
14(11); 1068-77. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-16-0209
PMCID: PMC5107123
PMID: 27621267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts to disclose.