1. Oncoimmunology. 2016 Jun 2;5(7):e1179415. doi: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1179415. 
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Missense mutations in the perforin (PRF1) gene as a cause of hereditary cancer 
predisposition.

Chaudhry MS(1), Gilmour KC(2), House IG(3), Layton M(1), Panoskaltsis N(1), 
Sohal M(4), Trapani JA(3), Voskoboinik I(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London , London, UK.
(2)Department of Immunology, Great Ormond Street Hospital , London, UK.
(3)Cancer Immunology Program, Peter MacCallum Cancer Center , East Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Haematology, Ealing Hospital , London, UK.

Perforin, a pore-forming toxin released from secretory granules of NK cells and 
CTLs, is essential for their cytotoxic activity against infected or cancerous 
target cells. Bi-allelic loss-of-function mutations in the perforin gene are 
invariably associated with a fatal immunoregulatory disorder, familial 
haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 2 (FHL2), in infants. More recently, it 
has also been recognized that partial loss of perforin function can cause 
disease in later life, including delayed onset FHL2 and haematological 
malignancies. Herein, we report a family in which a wide range of systemic 
inflammatory and neoplastic manifestations have occurred across three 
generations. We found that disease was linked to two missense perforin gene 
mutations (encoding A91V, R410W) that cause protein misfolding and partial loss 
of activity. These cases link the partial loss of perforin function with some 
solid tumors that are known to be controlled by the immune system, as well as 
haematological cancers. Our findings also demonstrate that perforin gene 
mutations can contribute to hereditary cancer predisposition.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2016.1179415
PMCID: PMC5006901
PMID: 27622035