1. J Virol. 2016 Oct 28;90(22):10390-10397. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01154-16. Print 2016
 Nov 15.

Characterization of the Glycoprotein Stable Signal Peptide in Mediating Pichinde 
Virus Replication and Virulence.

Shao J(1), Liu X(1), Ly H(1), Liang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, University of Minnesota, 
Twin Cities, Minnesota, USA liangy@umn.edu.

Arenaviruses can cause lethal hemorrhagic fevers in humans with few preventative 
and therapeutic measures. The arenaviral glycoprotein stable signal peptide 
(SSP) is unique among signal peptides in that it is an integral component of the 
mature glycoprotein complex (GPC) and plays important roles not only in GPC 
expression and processing but also in the membrane fusion process during viral 
entry. Using the Pichinde virus (PICV) reverse genetics system, we analyzed the 
effects of alanine substitutions at many conserved residues within the SSP on 
viral replication in cell culture and in a guinea pig infection model. Our data 
showed that the K33A, F49A, and C57A mutations abolished GPC-mediated cell entry 
and therefore could not allow for the generation of viable recombinant viruses, 
demonstrating that these residues are essential for the PICV life cycle. The G2A 
mutation caused a marked reduction of cell entry at the membrane fusion step, 
and while this mutant virus was viable, it was significantly attenuated in vitro 
and in vivo The N20A mutation also reduced membrane fusion activity and viral 
virulence in guinea pigs, but it did not significantly affect cell entry or 
viral growth in cell culture. Two other mutations (N37A and R55A) did not affect 
membrane fusion or viral growth in vitro but significantly reduced viral 
virulence in vivo Taken together, our data suggest that the GPC SSP plays an 
essential role in mediating viral entry and also contributes to viral virulence 
in vivo IMPORTANCE: Several arenaviruses, such as Lassa fever virus, can cause 
severe and lethal hemorrhagic fever diseases with high mortality and morbidity, 
and no FDA-approved vaccines or therapies are currently available. Viral entry 
into cells is mediated by arenavirus GPC that consists of an SSP, the 
receptor-binding GP1, and transmembrane GP2 protein subunits. Using a reverse 
genetics system of a prototypic arenavirus, Pichinde virus (PICV), we have shown 
for the first time in the context of virus infections of cell culture and of 
guinea pigs that the SSP plays an essential role in mediating the membrane 
fusion step as well as in other yet-to-be-determined processes during viral 
infection. Our study provides important insights into the biological roles of 
GPC SSP and implicates it as a good target for the development of antivirals 
against deadly human arenavirus pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01154-16
PMCID: PMC5105672
PMID: 27630230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]