1. F1000Res. 2016 Aug 25;5:F1000 Faculty Rev-2077. doi: 
10.12688/f1000research.8631.1. eCollection 2016.

Recent advances in targeted therapy for Ewing sarcoma.

Pishas KI(1), Lessnick SL(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, Center for Personalized Cancer Medicine, 
Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Center 
for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders, The Research Institute at 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; Division of Pediatric 
Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplant, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
USA.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive, poorly differentiated neoplasm of solid bone 
that disproportionally afflicts the young. Despite intensive multi-modal therapy 
and valiant efforts, 70% of patients with relapsed and metastatic Ewing sarcoma 
will succumb to their disease. The persistent failure to improve overall 
survival for this subset of patients highlights the urgent need for rapid 
translation of novel therapeutic strategies. As Ewing sarcoma is associated with 
a paucity of mutations in readily targetable signal transduction pathways, 
targeting the key genetic aberration and master regulator of Ewing sarcoma, the 
EWS/ETS fusion, remains an important goal.

DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.8631.1
PMCID: PMC5007751
PMID: 27635231

Conflict of interest statement: KIP declares that she has no competing 
interests. SLL is the Acting Chief Medical Officer for Salarius Pharmaceuticals, 
LLC, (Salt Lake City, UT). No competing interests were disclosed. No competing 
interests were disclosed.