1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:1819794. doi: 
10.1155/2016/1819794. Epub 2016 Aug 18.

Oral Chinese Herbal Medicine for Treatment of Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Zhu YS(1), Li YL(1), Ju JQ(1), Du F(2), Zang YP(2), Wang XB(2), Sheng J(2).

Author information:
(1)Traditional Chinese Medicine Clinical Research Base for Hypertension, 
Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, No. 
42, Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250011, China; Shandong University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250355, China.
(2)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250355, 
China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the main causes of heart failure and 
could increase death, hospitalization, and rehospitalization rate. The effect of 
conventional medicine treatment (CMT) is limited; meanwhile, the combination of 
CMT and Oral Chinese Herbal Medicine (OCHM) represents exciting adjunctive 
therapies. In this study, we ascertained the therapeutic effect of OCHM in 
combination with CMT for dilated cardiomyopathy by using meta-analysis methods 
for controlled clinical trials. We searched studies from five databases and 
extracted data from these studies. We also assessed the methodological quality 
of the included studies. We evaluated the following outcome measures to estimate 
the prognosis in patients with DCM: left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 
left ventricular end-diastolic dimension (LVEDD), stroke volume (SV), brain 
natriuretic peptide (BNP), 6-minute walk test (6MWT), and overall efficacy. The 
result showed that OCHM combined with CMT for the improvement of therapeutic 
effect in DCM patients. However, the evidence remains weak due to the small 
sample size, high clinical heterogeneity, and poor methodological quality of the 
included trials. Further, large sample size and well-designed trials are needed.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/1819794
PMCID: PMC5007314
PMID: 27630730