1. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2016 Sep 15;808:38-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.mrgentox.2016.08.003. Epub 2016 Aug 13.

Polymorphisms in metabolism and repair genes affects DNA damage caused by 
open-cast coal mining exposure.

Espitia-Pérez L(1), Sosa MQ(2), Salcedo-Arteaga S(2), León-Mejía G(3), 
Hoyos-Giraldo LS(4), Brango H(5), Kvitko K(6), da Silva J(7), Henriques JA(8).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular (PPGBCM), 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil; 
Departamento de Biofísica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Laboratorio de Investigación Biomédica 
y Biología Molecular, Universidad del Sinú, Montería, Córdoba, Colombia. 
Electronic address: espitiaperez00@gmail.com.
(2)Laboratorio de Investigación Biomédica y Biología Molecular, Universidad del 
Sinú, Montería, Córdoba, Colombia.
(3)Programa de Pós Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular (PPGBCM), 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil; 
Departamento de Biofísica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biology, Research Group Genetic Toxicology and Cytogenetics, 
Faculty of Natural Sciences and Education, Universidad del Cauca, Popayán, 
Cauca, Colombia.
(5)Instituto de Matemática e Estatística, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(6)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética e Biologia Molecular (PPGGBM), 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(7)Laboratório de Genética Toxicológica, Universidade Luterana do Brasil, ULBRA, 
Canoas, RS, Brazil.
(8)Programa de Pós Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular (PPGBCM), 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil; 
Departamento de Biofísica, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: 
pegas@cbiot.ufrgs.br.

Increasing evidence suggest that occupational exposure to open-cast coal mining 
residues like dust particles, heavy metals and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
(PAHs) may cause a wide range of DNA damage and genomic instability that could 
be associated to initial steps in cancer development and other work-related 
diseases. The aim of our study was to evaluate if key polymorphisms in 
metabolism genes CYP1A1Msp1, GSTM1Null, GSTT1Null and DNA repair genes 
XRCC1Arg194Trp and hOGG1Ser326Cys could modify individual susceptibility to 
adverse coal exposure effects, considering the DNA damage (Comet assay) and 
micronucleus formation in lymphocytes (CBMN) and buccal mucosa cells (BMNCyt) as 
endpoints for genotoxicity. The study population is comprised of 200 healthy 
male subjects, 100 open-cast coal-mining workers from "El Cerrejón" (world's 
largest open-cast coal mine located in Guajira - Colombia) and 100 non-exposed 
referents from general population. The data revealed a significant increase of 
CBMN frequency in peripheral lymphocytes of occupationally exposed workers 
carrying the wild-type variant of GSTT1 (+) gene. Exposed subjects carrying 
GSTT1null polymorphism showed a lower micronucleus frequency compared with their 
positive counterparts (FR: 0.83; P=0.04), while BMNCyt, frequency and Comet 
assay parameters in lymphocytes: Damage Index (DI) and percentage of DNA in the 
tail (Tail % DNA) were significantly higher in exposed workers with the 
GSTM1Null polymorphism. Other exfoliated buccal mucosa abnormalities related to 
cell death (Karyorrhexis and Karyolysis) were increased in GSTT/M1Null carriers. 
Nuclear buds were significantly higher in workers carrying the CYP1A1Msp1 
(m1/m2, m2/m2) allele. Moreover, BMNCyt frequency and Comet assay parameters 
were significantly lower in exposed carriers of XRCC1Arg194Trp (Arg/Trp, 
Trp/Trp) and hOGG1Ser326Cys (Ser/Cys, Cys/Cys), thereby providing new data to 
the increasing evidence about the protective role of these polymorphisms. This 
modulation may involve specific and differentiated pathways in different tissues 
that also may cause a differential sensitivity related to differential induction 
of some enzymes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrgentox.2016.08.003
PMID: 27637484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]