1. Mol Psychiatry. 2017 Dec;22(12):1714-1724. doi: 10.1038/mp.2016.155. Epub 2016
 Sep 20.

PDE11A negatively regulates lithium responsivity.

Pathak G(1), Agostino MJ(2), Bishara K(1), Capell WR(1), Fisher JL(1), Hegde 
S(1), Ibrahim BA(1), Pilarzyk K(1), Sabin C(1), Tuczkewycz T(3), Wilson S(1), 
Kelly MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Neuroscience, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, USA.
(2)Pfizer, Andover, MA, USA.
(3)Pfizer, Groton, CT, USA.

Lithium responsivity in patients with bipolar disorder has been genetically 
associated with Phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A), and lithium decreases PDE11A 
mRNA in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived hippocampal neurons originating 
from lithium-responsive patients. PDE11 is an enzyme uniquely enriched in the 
hippocampus that breaks down cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP. Here we determined 
whether decreasing PDE11A expression is sufficient to increase lithium 
responsivity in mice. In dorsal hippocampus and ventral hippocampus (VHIPP), 
lithium-responsive C57BL/6J and 129S6/SvEvTac mice show decreased PDE11A4 
protein expression relative to lithium-unresponsive BALB/cJ mice. In VHIPP, 
C57BL/6J mice also show differences in PDE11A4 compartmentalization relative to 
BALB/cJ mice. In contrast, neither PDE2A nor PDE10A expression differ among the 
strains. The compartment-specific differences in PDE11A4 protein expression are 
explained by a coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at amino acid 499, 
which falls within the GAF-B homodimerization domain. Relative to the BALB/cJ 
499T, the C57BL/6J 499A decreases PDE11A4 homodimerization, which removes 
PDE11A4 from the membrane. Consistent with the observation that lower PDE11A4 
expression correlates with better lithium responsiveness, we found that Pde11a 
knockout mice (KO) given 0.4% lithium chow for 3+ weeks exhibit greater lithium 
responsivity relative to wild-type (WT) littermates in tail suspension, an 
antidepressant-predictive assay, and amphetamine hyperlocomotion, an anti-manic 
predictive assay. Reduced PDE11A4 expression may represent a lithium-sensitive 
pathophysiology, because both C57BL/6J and Pde11a KO mice show increased 
expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) relative to 
BALB/cJ and PDE11A WT mice, respectively. Our finding that PDE11A4 negatively 
regulates lithium responsivity in mice suggests that the PDE11A SNPs identified 
in patients may be functionally relevant.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2016.155
PMCID: PMC5359083
PMID: 27646265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]