1. Dermatol Pract Concept. 2016 Jul 31;6(3):51-4. doi: 10.5826/dpc.0603a10. 
eCollection 2016 Jul.

Multiple familial trichoepithelioma: confirmation via dermoscopy.

Navarrete-Dechent C(1), Bajaj S(2), Marghoob AA(2), González S(3), Muñoz D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Melanoma and Skin Cancer Unit, Facultad de 
Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Dermatology Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Hauppauge, NY, 
USA.
(3)Melanoma and Skin Cancer Unit, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad 
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Department of Pathology, Facultad de 
Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Complejo Asistencial Hospital Sótero del Río, 
Santiago, Chile.

Trichoepitheliomas are uncommon benign adnexal neoplasms that originate from the 
hair follicles. Multiple familial trichoepithelioma constitute an autosomal 
dominant disease characterized by the appearance of multiple flesh-colored, 
symmetrical papules, tumors and/or nodules in the central face and occasionally 
on the scalp. Although clinical diagnosis is usually straightforward in light of 
the family history and naked-eye examination, dermoscopy may aid in its 
confirmation. Dermoscopy of each papule revealed in-focus arborizing vessels, 
multiple milia-like cysts and rosettes amidst a whitish background. In a patient 
with multiple facial papules revealing a dermoscopic appearance described above, 
the diagnosis of sporadic or familial multiple trichoepithelioma should be 
considered.

DOI: 10.5826/dpc.0603a10
PMCID: PMC5006553
PMID: 27648384