1. J Cell Sci. 2016 Nov 1;129(21):4130-4142. doi: 10.1242/jcs.190215. Epub 2016
Sep  21.

PRL-3 disrupts epithelial architecture by altering the post-mitotic midbody 
position.

Luján P(1), Varsano G(1), Rubio T(1), Hennrich ML(2), Sachsenheimer T(3), 
Gálvez-Santisteban M(4), Martín-Belmonte F(4), Gavin AC(2), Brügger B(3), Köhn 
M(5).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg 69117, 
Germany.
(2)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg 69117, Germany.
(3)Heidelberg University Biochemistry Center, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(4)Department of Development and Differentiation, Centro de Biología Molecular 
Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid 
28049, Spain.
(5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg 69117, 
Germany koehn@embl.de.

Disruption of epithelial architecture is a fundamental event during epithelial 
tumorigenesis. We show that the expression of the cancer-promoting phosphatase 
PRL-3 (PTP4A3), which is overexpressed in several epithelial cancers, in 
polarized epithelial MDCK and Caco2 cells leads to invasion and the formation of 
multiple ectopic, fully polarized lumens in cysts. Both processes disrupt 
epithelial architecture and are hallmarks of cancer. The pathological relevance 
of these findings is supported by the knockdown of endogenous PRL-3 in MCF-7 
breast cancer cells grown in three-dimensional branched structures, showing the 
rescue from multiple-lumen- to single-lumen-containing branch ends. 
Mechanistically, it has been previously shown that ectopic lumens can arise from 
midbodies that have been mislocalized through the loss of mitotic spindle 
orientation or through the loss of asymmetric abscission. Here, we show that 
PRL-3 triggers ectopic lumen formation through midbody mispositioning without 
altering the spindle orientation or asymmetric abscission, instead, PRL-3 
accelerates cytokinesis, suggesting that this process is an alternative new 
mechanism for ectopic lumen formation in MDCK cysts. The disruption of 
epithelial architecture by PRL-3 revealed here is a newly recognized mechanism 
for PRL-3-promoted cancer progression.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.190215
PMCID: PMC5117205
PMID: 27656108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing or financial 
interests.