1. Springerplus. 2016 Aug 30;5(1):1442. doi: 10.1186/s40064-016-3148-7.
eCollection  2016.

Development of a fast and economical genotyping protocol for bovine leukocyte 
adhesion deficiency (BLAD) in cattle.

Alyethodi RR(1), Singh U(1), Kumar S(1), Deb R(1), Alex R(1), Sharma S(1), 
Sengar GS(1), Prakash B(1).

Author information:
(1)ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cattle, Grass Farm Road, Meerut Cantt, 
Meerut, UP 250001 India.

Fast and economical means of assaying SNP's are important in diagnostic assays, 
especially when a large number of animals have to be screened for a genetic 
disease. This study was aimed at the development of a fast and economical 
screening assay for bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD) which is an 
important genetic disease of cattle industry. Four primers were designed where 
the outer primers amplify a 354Â bp amplicon of CD18 gene carrying the 
polymorphism responsible for BLAD. The specifically designed inner primers in 
conjunction with the modified reaction mixture and cyclic conditions ensured 
amplification of either of wild or mutated alleles. Together with outer primers, 
the inner primers generated typical banding pattern in agarose gel which 
discriminated the normal animal against the carrier. We successfully used this 
protocol in 200 bulls for genotyping the BLAD allele which confirmed by 
sequencing, showing a cent percentage concordance. With the developed assay the 
need for restriction digestion or use of costly equipment viz. real time PCR was 
eliminated. This genotyping assay ensured fast and economical genotyping and 
could be adopted in every laboratory with a minimum equipment requirement of 
thermocycler and gel documentation system.

DOI: 10.1186/s40064-016-3148-7
PMCID: PMC5005226
PMID: 27652018