1. Sci Rep. 2016 Sep 21;6:33736. doi: 10.1038/srep33736.

MBD3 expression and DNA binding patterns are altered in a rat model of temporal 
lobe epilepsy.

Bednarczyk J(1), DÄ™bski KJ(1)(2), Bot AM(1), Lukasiuk K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Epileptogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Neurobiology Center, Nencki Institute of 
Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to examine involvement of MBD3 
(methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 3), a protein involved in reading DNA 
methylation patterns, in epileptogenesis and epilepsy. We used a 
well-characterized rat model of temporal lobe epilepsy that is triggered by 
status epilepticus, evoked by electrical stimulation of the amygdala. Stimulated 
and sham-operated animals were sacrificed 14 days after stimulation. We found 
that MBD3 transcript was present in neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in 
both control and epileptic animals. We detected the nuclear localization of MBD3 
protein in neurons, mature oligodendrocytes, and a subpopulation of astrocytes 
but not in microglia. Amygdala stimulation significantly increased the level of 
MBD3 immunofluorescence. Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry and 
Western blot revealed that MBD3 in the adult brain assembles the NuRD complex, 
which also contains MTA2, HDAC2, and GATAD2B. Using chromatin 
immunoprecipitation combined with deep sequencing, we observed differences in 
the occupancy of DNA regions by MBD3 protein between control and stimulated 
animals. This was not followed by subsequent changes in the mRNA expression 
levels of selected MBD3 targets. Our data demonstrate for the first time 
alterations in the MBD3 expression and DNA occupancy in the experimental model 
of epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep33736
PMCID: PMC5030630
PMID: 27650712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]