1. Viruses. 2016 Sep 20;8(9):257. doi: 10.3390/v8090257.

Orchestrating the Selection and Packaging of Genomic RNA by Retroviruses: An 
Ensemble of Viral and Host Factors.

Kaddis Maldonado RJ(1), Parent LJ(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, 
Penn State College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey PA 17033, USA. 
rjk297@psu.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, 
Penn State College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey PA 17033, USA. 
lparent@psu.edu.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Penn State College of Medicine, 
500 University Drive, Hershey PA 17033, USA. lparent@psu.edu.

Infectious retrovirus particles contain two copies of unspliced viral RNA that 
serve as the viral genome. Unspliced retroviral RNA is transcribed in the 
nucleus by the host RNA polymerase II and has three potential fates: (1) it can 
be spliced into subgenomic messenger RNAs (mRNAs) for the translation of viral 
proteins; or it can remain unspliced to serve as either (2) the mRNA for the 
translation of Gag and Gag-Pol; or (3) the genomic RNA (gRNA) that is packaged 
into virions. The Gag structural protein recognizes and binds the unspliced 
viral RNA to select it as a genome, which is selected in preference to spliced 
viral RNAs and cellular RNAs. In this review, we summarize the current state of 
understanding about how retroviral packaging is orchestrated within the cell and 
explore potential new mechanisms based on recent discoveries in the field. We 
discuss the cis-acting elements in the unspliced viral RNA and the properties of 
the Gag protein that are required for their interaction. In addition, we discuss 
the role of host factors in influencing the fate of the newly transcribed viral 
RNA, current models for how retroviruses distinguish unspliced viral mRNA from 
viral genomic RNA, and the possible subcellular sites of genomic RNA 
dimerization and selection by Gag. Although this review centers primarily on the 
wealth of data available for the alpharetrovirus Rous sarcoma virus, in which a 
discrete RNA packaging sequence has been identified, we have also summarized the 
cis- and trans-acting factors as well as the mechanisms governing gRNA packaging 
of other retroviruses for comparison.

DOI: 10.3390/v8090257
PMCID: PMC5035971
PMID: 27657110

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.