1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 9;45(1):142-154. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw832. Epub
2016  Sep 19.

The dual role of LSD1 and HDAC3 in STAT5-dependent transcription is determined 
by protein interactions, binding affinities, motifs and genomic positions.

Nanou A(1), Toumpeki C(1), Lavigne MD(1), Lazou V(1), Demmers J(2), Paparountas 
T(1), Thanos D(1), Katsantoni E(3).

Author information:
(1)Basic Research Center, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 
Soranou tou Ephessiou 4, 115 27 Athens, Greece.
(2)Proteomics Center, Erasmus Medical Center, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Basic Research Center, Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 
Soranou tou Ephessiou 4, 115 27 Athens, Greece ekatsantoni@bioacademy.gr.

STAT5 interacts with other factors to control transcription, and the mechanism 
of regulation is of interest as constitutive active STAT5 has been reported in 
malignancies. Here, LSD1 and HDAC3 were identified as novel STAT5a interacting 
partners in pro-B cells. Characterization of STAT5a, LSD1 and HDAC3 target genes 
by ChIP-seq and RNA-seq revealed gene subsets regulated by independent or 
combined action of the factors and LSD1/HDAC3 to play dual role in their 
activation or repression. Genes bound by STAT5a alone or in combination with 
weakly associated LSD1 or HDAC3 were enriched for the canonical STAT5a GAS 
motif, and such binding induced activation or repression. Strong STAT5 binding 
was seen more frequently in intergenic regions, which might function as distal 
enhancer elements. Groups of genes bound weaker by STAT5a and stronger by 
LSD1/HDAC3 showed an absence of the GAS motif, and were differentially regulated 
based on their genomic binding localization and binding affinities. These genes 
exhibited increased binding frequency in promoters, and in conjunction with the 
absence of GAS sites, the data indicate a requirement for stabilization by 
additional factors, which might recruit LSD1/HDAC3. Our study describes an 
interaction network of STAT5a/LSD1/HDAC3 and a dual function of LSD1/HDAC3 on 
STAT5-dependent transcription, defined by protein-protein interactions, genomic 
binding localization/affinity and motifs.

Â© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw832
PMCID: PMC5224505
PMID: 27651463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]