1. Drug Metab Pers Ther. 2016 Sep 1;31(3):173-8. doi: 10.1515/dmpt-2016-0014.

The impact of CYP4F2, ABCB1, and GGCX polymorphisms on bleeding episodes 
associated with acenocoumarol in Russian patients with atrial fibrillation.

Sychev DA, Rozhkov AV, Kazakov RE, Ananichuk AV.

BACKGROUND: Oral anticoagulants are commonly used to treat patients with 
thromboembolic pathology. Genetic variations could influence personal response 
to anticoagulant drugs. Acenocoumarol (AC) is a vitamin K antagonist used in 
anticoagulant therapy and as a prophylaxis measure in Europe. In this study, we 
assessed the effect of CYP4F2 rs2108622, ABCB1, and GGCX polymorphisms on the 
safety profile and regime dosing of AC in patients with nonvalvular atrial 
fibrillation.
METHODS: Fifty patients aged 40-70 years were included. All patients received AC 
in the dose of 1-6 mg daily with a target international normalized ratio of 
2.0-3.0. Genotyping for polymorphism markers C3435T for the ABCB1 gene, 
rs2108622 for the CYP4F2 gene, and rs11676382 for the GGCX gene were designed 
using polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism. 
Statistical analysis was performed using the Fisher exact test and the 
Mann-Whitney U test.
RESULTS: We found that CYP4F2 rs2108622 CT carriers required a higher AC dose 
than CC (p=0.0366), and CT and TT carriers required a higher AC dose than CC 
(p=0.0314).
CONCLUSIONS: We found that ABCB1 CT and TT genotypes are associated with a 
higher risk of bleeding. No influence of ABCB1 and GGCX polymorphisms on the 
doses of AC was established. CYP4F2 could still be a genetic factor responsible 
for the personal variability of AC metabolism.

DOI: 10.1515/dmpt-2016-0014
PMID: 27662649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]