1. Oncotarget. 2016 Nov 8;7(45):72886-72897. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12128.

Synergistic activity of ALK and mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of NPM-ALK 
positive lymphoma.

Redaelli S(1), Ceccon M(1), Antolini L(2), Rigolio R(1), Pirola A(1), Peronaci 
M(1), Gambacorti-Passerini C(1)(3), Mologni L(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Milano Bicocca, School of Medicine, 20900 Monza, Italy.
(2)Center of Biostatistics for Clinical Epidemiology, University of Milano 
Bicocca, School of Medicine, 20900 Monza, Italy.
(3)San Gerardo Hospital, Hematology-Clinical Research Unit, 20900 Monza, Italy.

ALK-positive Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) represents a subset of 
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma whose treatment benefited from crizotinib development, a 
dual ALK/MET inhibitor. Crizotinib blocks ALK-triggered pathways such as 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR, indispensable for survival of ALK-driven tumors.Despite the 
positive impact of targeted treatment in ALCL, resistant clones are often 
selected during therapy. Strategies to overcome resistance include the design of 
second generation drugs and the use of combined therapies that simultaneously 
target multiple nodes essential for cells survival. We investigated the effects 
of combined ALK/mTOR inhibition. We observed a specific synergistic effect of 
combining ALK inhibitors with an mTOR inhibitor (temsirolimus), in ALK+ lymphoma 
cells. The positive cooperation resulted in an increased inhibition of mTOR 
effectors, compared to single treatments, a block in G0/G1 phase and induction 
of apoptosis. The combination was able to prevent the selection of resistant 
clones, while long-term exposure to single agents led to the establishment of 
resistant cell lines, with either ALK inhibitor or temsirolimus. In vivo, mice 
injected with Karpas 299 cells and treated with low dose combination showed 
complete regression of tumors, while only partial inhibition was obtained in 
single agents-treated mice. Upon treatment stop the combination was able to 
significantly delay tumor relapses. Re-challenge of relapsed tumors at a higher 
dose led to full regression of xenografts in the combination group, but not in 
mice treated with lorlatinib alone. In conclusion, our data suggest that the 
combination of ALK and mTOR inhibitors could be a valuable therapeutic option 
for ALK+ ALCL patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12128
PMCID: PMC5341951
PMID: 27662658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST CGP has research funding 
from Pfizer.