1. Protein Expr Purif. 2017 Feb;130:44-54. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.09.009. Epub 
2016 Sep 20.

Expression and purification of tau protein and its frontotemporal dementia 
variants using a cleavable histidine tag.

Karikari TK(1), Turner A(2), Stass R(2), Lee LC(2), Wilson B(2), Nagel DA(3), 
Hill EJ(3), Moffat KG(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK; 
Midlands Integrative Biosciences Training Partnership, University of Warwick, 
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. Electronic address: T.K.Karikari@warwick.ac.uk.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(3)Aston Research Center for Healthy Ageing, School of Life and Health Sciences, 
Aston University, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.

Recombinant tau protein is widely used to study the biochemical, cellular and 
pathological aspects of tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTPD-17). 
Pure tau in high yield is a requirement for in vitro evaluation of the protein's 
physiological and toxic functions. However, the preparation of recombinant tau 
is complicated by the protein's propensity to aggregate and form truncation 
products, necessitating the use of multiple, time-consuming purification 
methods. In this study, we investigated parameters that influence the expression 
of wild type and FTPD-17 pathogenic tau, in an attempt to identify ways to 
maximise expression yield. Here, we report on the influence of the choice of 
host strain, induction temperature, duration of induction, and media 
supplementation with glucose on tau expression in Escherichia coli. We also 
describe a straightforward process to purify the expressed tau proteins using 
immobilised metal affinity chromatography, with favourable yields over previous 
reports. An advantage of the described method is that it enables high yield 
production of functional oligomeric and monomeric tau, both of which can be used 
to study the biochemical, physiological and toxic properties of the protein.

Copyright Â© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2016.09.009
PMCID: PMC5147519
PMID: 27663563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]