1. Front Physiol. 2016 Sep 12;7:385. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00385. eCollection 
2016.

GlyT2-Dependent Preservation of MECP2-Expression in Inhibitory Neurons Improves 
Early Respiratory Symptoms but Does Not Rescue Survival in a Mouse Model of Rett 
Syndrome.

Hülsmann S(1), Mesuret G(1), Dannenberg J(2), Arnoldt M(2), Niebert M(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinic for Anesthesiology, University Medical CenterGöttingen, Germany; 
Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the BrainGöttingen, 
Germany.
(2)Clinic for Anesthesiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the 
BrainGöttingen, Germany; Institute of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology, University 
Medical Center GöttingenGöttingen, Germany.

Mutations in methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene have been shown to 
manifest in a neurodevelopmental disorder that is called Rett syndrome. A 
typical problem that occurs during development is a disturbance of breathing. To 
address the role of inhibitory neurons, we generated a mouse line that restores 
MECP2 in inhibitory neurons in the brainstem by crossbreeding a mouse line that 
expresses the Cre-recombinase (Cre) in inhibitory neurons under the control of 
the glycine transporter 2 (GlyT2, slc6a5) promotor (GlyT2-Cre) with a mouse line 
that has a floxed-stop mutation of the Mecp2 gene (Mecp2 (stop/y)). Unrestrained 
whole-body-plethysmography at postnatal day P60 revealed a low respiratory rate 
and prolonged respiratory pauses in Mecp2 (stop/y) mice. In contrast, GlyT2-Cre 
positive Mecp2 (stop/y) mice (Cre(+) ; Mecp2 (stop/y)) showed greatly improved 
respiration and were indistinguishable from wild type littermates. These data 
support the concept that alterations in inhibitory neurons are important for the 
development of the respiratory phenotype in Rett syndrome.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2016.00385
PMCID: PMC5018520
PMID: 27672368