1. Biol Reprod. 2016 Dec;95(6):129. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.116.142141. Epub 2016
 Sep 28.

Spatial Characterization of Bioenergetics and Metabolism of Primordial to 
Preovulatory Follicles in Whole Ex Vivo Murine Ovary.

Cinco R(1), Digman MA(2)(3), Gratton E(2)(3), Luderer U(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine, California.
(2)Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics, University of California Irvine, 
Irvine, California.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California Irvine, 
Irvine, California.
(4)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine, California uluderer@uci.edu.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California.
(6)Program in Public Health, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
California.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2016 Dec;95(6):136. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.116.146647.

Previous work characterizing ovarian bioenergetics has defined follicular 
metabolism by measuring metabolic by-products in culture media. However, culture 
conditions perturb the native state of the follicle, and these methods do not 
distinguish between metabolism occurring within oocytes or granulosa cells. We 
applied the phasor approach to fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (phasor 
FLIM) at 740-nm two-photon excitation to examine the spatial distribution of 
free and protein-bound nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide hydride (NADH) during 
primordial through preovulatory stages of follicular development in fresh ex 
vivo murine neonatal and gonadotropin stimulated prepubertal ovaries. We 
obtained subcellular resolution phasor FLIM images of primordial through primary 
follicles and quantified the free/bound NADH ratio (relative NADH/NAD+) 
separately for oocyte nucleus and oocyte cytoplasm. We found that dynamic 
changes in oocyte nucleus free/bound NADH paralleled the developmental 
maturation of primordial to primary follicles. Immunohistochemistry of 
NAD+-dependent deacetylase SIRTUIN 1 (SIRT1) in neonatal ovary revealed that 
increasing SIRT1 expression in oocyte nuclei was inversely related to decreasing 
free/bound NADH during the primordial to primary follicle transition. We 
characterized oocyte metabolism at these early stages to be NADH producing 
(glycolysis/Krebs). We extended the results of prior studies to show that 
cumulus and mural granulosa cell metabolism in secondary through preovulatory 
follicles is mainly NADH producing (glycolysis/Krebs cycle), while oocyte 
metabolism is mainly NADH consuming (oxidative phosphorylation). Taken together, 
our data characterize dynamic changes in free/bound NADH and SIRT1 expression 
during early follicular development and confirm results from previous studies 
defining antral and preovulatory follicle metabolism in culture.

Â© 2016 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod.116.142141
PMCID: PMC5315427
PMID: 27683265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]