1. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2016 Nov;12(11):1381-1392. doi: 
10.1080/17425255.2016.1239717. Epub 2016 Oct 11.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of ibrutinib for the treatment of 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia: rationale for lower doses.

Bose P(1), Gandhi VV(1)(2), Keating MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Leukemia , University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , 
Houston , TX , USA.
(2)b Department of Experimental Therapeutics , University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center , Houston , TX , USA.

Ibrutinib, a first-in-class covalent inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase 
(BTK), is approved in many countries for the treatment of relapsed/refractory 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and for previously untreated disease with a 
17p deletion and, most recently, as a frontline therapy for CLL. In controlled 
trials in CLL, ibrutinib produced high response rates and improved survival in 
both the frontline and relapsed settings. While ibrutinib controls CLL with 
impressive efficacy, it only infrequently induces complete remissions, 
particularly of relapsed CLL, and does not eradicate minimal residual disease. 
Finally, ibrutinib is extremely expensive, has off-target toxicities, and 
requires indefinite therapy. Areas covered: In this article, we provide an 
overview of the CLL therapeutic landscape and discuss the pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic aspects of ibrutinib. Major clinical trials of ibrutinib in CLL 
are summarized, and its safety profile explored. Expert opinion: Ibrutinib 
represents a transformative advance in CLL management and has validated BTK as a 
therapeutic target in this disease, but has some limitations, leading to the 
emergence of other BTK inhibitors and mechanism-based combination strategies. 
Given complete BTK occupancy at lower doses of ibrutinib and declining levels of 
BTK on ibrutinib therapy, lower doses of ibrutinib in CLL are being explored.

DOI: 10.1080/17425255.2016.1239717
PMCID: PMC5391303
PMID: 27686109

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest VV Gandhi has received 
research support from Pharmacyclics LLC. The authors have no other relevant 
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a 
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials 
discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.