1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017 Jan;74(1):39-55. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2387-7. Epub 
2016 Oct 3.

From the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane: mechanisms of CFTR 
folding and trafficking.

Farinha CM(1), Canato S(2).

Author information:
(1)BioISI-Biosystems and Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências 
da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande, 1749-016, Lisbon, Portugal. 
cmfarinha@fc.ul.pt.
(2)BioISI-Biosystems and Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências 
da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande, 1749-016, Lisbon, Portugal.

CFTR biogenesis starts with its co-translational insertion into the membrane of 
endoplasmic reticulum and folding of the cytosolic domains, towards the 
acquisition of a fully folded compact native structure. Efficiency of this 
process is assessed by the ER quality control system that allows the exit of 
folded proteins but targets unfolded/misfolded CFTR to degradation. If allowed 
to leave the ER, CFTR is modified at the Golgi and reaches the post-Golgi 
compartments to be delivered to the plasma membrane where it functions as a 
cAMP- and phosphorylation-regulated chloride/bicarbonate channel. CFTR residence 
at the membrane is a balance of membrane delivery, endocytosis, and recycling. 
Several adaptors, motor, and scaffold proteins contribute to the regulation of 
CFTR stability and are involved in continuously assessing its structure through 
peripheral quality control systems. Regulation of CFTR biogenesis and traffic 
(and its dysregulation by mutations, such as the most common F508del) determine 
its overall activity and thus contribute to the fine modulation of chloride 
secretion and hydration of epithelial surfaces. This review covers old and 
recent knowledge on CFTR folding and trafficking from its synthesis to the 
regulation of its stability at the plasma membrane and highlights how several of 
these steps can be modulated to promote the rescue of mutant CFTR.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-016-2387-7
PMCID: PMC11107782
PMID: 27699454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]