1. ACS Infect Dis. 2016 Dec 9;2(12):936-944. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.6b00135.
Epub  2016 Oct 13.

Small-Molecule Probes Reveal Esterases with Persistent Activity in Dormant and 
Reactivating Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Tallman KR(1), Levine SR(1), Beatty KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Chemical Biology and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon 
Health & Science University , Mail Code CL3B, 2730 S.W. Moody Avenue, Portland, 
Oregon 97201, United States.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the deadliest bacterial pathogen in the 
world. An estimated one-third of humans harbor Mtb in a dormant state. These 
asymptomatic, latent infections impede tuberculosis eradication due to the 
long-term potential for reactivation. Dormant Mtb has reduced enzymatic 
activity, but hydrolases that remain active facilitate pathogen survival. We 
targeted Mtb esterases, a diverse set of enzymes in the serine hydrolase family, 
and studied their activities using both activity-based probes (ABPs) and 
fluorogenic esterase substrates. These small-molecule probes revealed functional 
esterases in active, dormant, and reactivating cultures. Using ABPs, we 
identified five esterases that remained active in dormant Mtb, including LipM 
(Rv2284), LipN (Rv2970c), CaeA (Rv2224c), Rv0183, and Rv1683. Three of these, 
CaeA, Rv0183, and Rv1683, were catalytically active in all three culture 
conditions. Fluorogenic probes additionally revealed LipH (Rv1399c), Culp1 
(Rv1984c), and Rv3036c esterase activity in dormant and active cultures. 
Esterases with persistent activity are potential diagnostic biomarkers or 
therapeutic targets for Mtb-infected individuals with latent or active 
tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.6b00135
PMCID: PMC7880555
PMID: 27690385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.