1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Oct;12(4):2053-2062. doi: 10.3892/etm.2016.3589. Epub 2016 
Aug 11.

Reversal effect and mechanism of Ginkgo biloba exocarp extracts in multidrug 
resistance of mice S180 tumor cells.

Hu BY(1), Gu YH(1), Cao CJ(1), Wang J(1), Han DD(1), Tang YC(1), Chen HS(1), Xu 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College of Yangzhou University, Jiangsu 
Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious 
Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the reversal effect and its 
related mechanism of Ginkgo biloba exocarp extracts (GBEEs) in obtained 
multidrug resistance (MDR) of mice S180 tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. In 
order to simulate the clinical PFC [cis-dichlorodiamineplatinum, cisplatin (DDP) 
+ fluorouracil (FU), FU+cyclophosphamide and cyclophosphamide] scheme, a 
gradually increasing dose was administered in a phased induction in order to 
induce S180 cells in vivo and to make them obtain multidrug resistance. The 
results in vitro demonstrated that GBEE could significantly increase the IC50 of 
DDP on S180 MDR cells, increase the accumulation of Adriamycin (ADR) and 
rhodamine 123 (Rho 123), and reduce the efflux of Rho 123 of S180 MDR cells. The 
results from the in vivo treatment with a combination of GBEE and DDP to S180 
MDR ascites tumor in mice demonstrated that each dose of GBEE could effectively 
reverse the drug-resistance of S180 MDR cells to DDP in order to extend the 
survival time of mice with ascite tumors and inhibit tumor growth in solid tumor 
mice. In addition, GBEE effectively inhibited the expression of MDR-1 mRNA and 
multidrug resistance-associated protein-1 mRNA in S180 MDR cells of ascites 
tumor in mice and improved the expression levels of cytokines, including 
interleukin (IL)-3, IL-18 and interferon-Î³ in the blood serum of S180 MDR 
tumor-bearing mice. The present study showed that the mechanism of GBEE reversal 
of MDR may be associated with the inhibition of the functional activity of 
P-glycoprotein, the downregulation of drug resistance related gene expression of 
S180 MDR cells and the improvement of the production of related serum cytokines 
of S180 MDR tumor mice.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2016.3589
PMCID: PMC5038854
PMID: 27698692