1. Clin Pharmacol. 2016 Sep 21;8:127-140. doi: 10.2147/CPAA.S100759. eCollection 
2016.

Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator modulators in cystic 
fibrosis: current perspectives.

Schmidt BZ(1), Haaf JB(2), Leal T(2), Noel S(2).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Biology and Embryology, Department of Development and Regeneration, 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven.
(2)Louvain Center for Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, Université Catholique 
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Mutations of the CFTR gene cause cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common recessive 
monogenic disease worldwide. These mutations alter the synthesis, processing, 
function, or half-life of CFTR, the main chloride channel expressed in the 
apical membrane of epithelial cells in the airway, intestine, pancreas, and 
reproductive tract. Lung disease is the most critical manifestation of CF. It is 
characterized by airway obstruction, infection, and inflammation that lead to 
fatal tissue destruction. In spite of great advances in early and 
multidisciplinary medical care, and in our understanding of the pathophysiology, 
CF is still considerably reducing the life expectancy of patients. This review 
highlights the current development in pharmacological modulators of CFTR, which 
aim at rescuing the expression and/or function of mutated CFTR. While only 
Kalydeco® and Orkambi® are currently available to patients, many other families 
of CFTR modulators are undergoing preclinical and clinical investigations. Drug 
repositioning and personalized medicine are particularly detailed in this review 
as they represent the most promising strategies for restoring CFTR function in 
CF.

DOI: 10.2147/CPAA.S100759
PMCID: PMC5036583
PMID: 27703398