1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 10;11(10):e0164523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164523. 
eCollection 2016.

Cell-Surface Phenol Soluble Modulins Regulate Staphylococcus aureus Colony 
Spreading.

Kizaki H(1), Omae Y(1), Tabuchi F(1), Saito Y(1), Sekimizu K(1), Kaito C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Staphylococcus aureus produces phenol-soluble modulins (PSMs), which are 
amphipathic small peptides with lytic activity against mammalian cells. We 
previously reported that PSMα1-4 stimulate S. aureus colony spreading, the 
phenomenon of S. aureus colony expansion on the surface of soft agar plates, 
whereas δ-toxin (Hld, PSMγ) inhibits colony-spreading activity. In this study, 
we revealed the underlying mechanism of the opposing effects of PSMα1-4 and 
δ-toxin in S. aureus colony spreading. PSMα1-4 and δ-toxin are abundant on the 
S. aureus cell surface, and account for 18% and 8.5% of the total amount of 
PSMα1-4 and δ-toxin, respectively, in S. aureus overnight cultures. Knockout of 
PSMα1-4 did not affect the amount of cell surface δ-toxin. In contrast, knockout 
of δ-toxin increased the amount of cell surface PSMα1-4, and decreased the 
amount of culture supernatant PSMα1-4. The δ-toxin inhibited PSMα3 and PSMα2 
binding to the S. aureus cell surface in vitro. A double knockout strain of 
PSMα1-4 and δ-toxin exhibited decreased colony spreading compared with the 
parent strain. Expression of cell surface PSMα1-4, but not culture supernatant 
PSMα1-4, restored the colony-spreading activity of the PSMα1-4/δ-toxin double 
knockout strain. Expression of δ-toxin on the cell surface or in the culture 
supernatant did not restore the colony-spreading activity of the PSMα1-4/δ-toxin 
double knockout strain. These findings suggest that cell surface PSMα1-4 promote 
S. aureus colony spreading, whereas δ-toxin suppresses colony-spreading activity 
by inhibiting PSMα1-4 binding to the S. aureus cell surface.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164523
PMCID: PMC5056675
PMID: 27723838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.