1. J Vet Med Sci. 2017 Jan 20;79(1):115-122. doi: 10.1292/jvms.16-0329. Epub 2016
 Oct 8.

Isolation and purification of Gallid herpesvirus 2 strains currently distributed 
in Japan.

Machida Y(1), Murata S, Matsuyama-Kato A, Isezaki M, Taneno A, Sakai E, Konnai 
S, Ohashi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-18, Nishi-9, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0818, Japan.

Gallid herpesvirus 2 (GaHV-2) causes malignant lymphomas in chickens (Marek's 
disease, MD). Although MD is controlled through vaccination efforts, field 
isolates of GaHV-2 have increased in virulence worldwide and even cause MD in 
vaccinated chickens. GaHV-2 strains are classified into four categories (mild, 
virulent, very virulent and very virulent +) based on the virulence exhibited in 
experimental infection in unvaccinated or MD-vaccinated susceptible chickens. 
Although MD cases are sporadically reported in Japan, the recent field strains 
of GaHV-2 in Japan have not been characterized. During isolation of recent field 
strains by using primary chicken kidney cell cultures, a method classically used 
for GaHV-2 isolation, vaccine strains were simultaneously isolated. Therefore, 
it is necessary to separate vaccine strains to characterize the virulence and 
pathogenicity of the GaHV-2 strains currently distributed in Japan. In this 
study, we prepared cell suspensions from the spleens of MD-symptomatic chickens, 
inoculated day-old-chicks and isolated GaHV-2 strains by primary chicken kidney 
cell cultures at 2-3 weeks post inoculation. The isolated strains were passaged 
several times on chicken embryo fibroblast cells, and PCR analysis revealed that 
the isolated strains were not contaminated with vaccine strains. Moreover, the 
contaminant vaccine strains were completely removed by the purification of 
plaques observed in chicken kidney cells. These procedures are necessary to 
isolate GaHV-2 field strains from vaccine strains in order to carry out future 
studies to characterize these strains and glean insights into GaHV-2 virulence 
and pathogenicity.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.16-0329
PMCID: PMC5289247
PMID: 27725354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]