1. Biol Psychiatry. 2017 Jan 1;81(1):9-20. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.07.014. 
Epub 2016 Aug 6.

The Role of Genes, Stress, and Dopamine in the Development of Schizophrenia.

Howes OD(1), McCutcheon R(2), Owen MJ(3), Murray RM(4).

Author information:
(1)Psychosis Studies, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; MRC 
Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College Hammersmith Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: oliver.howes@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Psychosis Studies, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; MRC 
Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College Hammersmith Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, and Neuroscience and 
Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Psychosis Studies, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

The dopamine hypothesis is the longest standing pathoetiologic theory of 
schizophrenia. Because it was initially based on indirect evidence and findings 
in patients with established schizophrenia, it was unclear what role dopamine 
played in the onset of the disorder. However, recent studies in people at risk 
of schizophrenia have found elevated striatal dopamine synthesis capacity and 
increased dopamine release to stress. Furthermore, striatal dopamine changes 
have been linked to altered cortical function during cognitive tasks, in line 
with preclinical evidence that a circuit involving cortical projections to the 
striatum and midbrain may underlie the striatal dopamine changes. Other studies 
have shown that a number of environmental risk factors for schizophrenia, such 
as social isolation and childhood trauma, also affect presynaptic dopaminergic 
function. Advances in preclinical work and genetics have begun to unravel the 
molecular architecture linking dopamine, psychosis, and psychosocial stress. 
Included among the many genes associated with risk of schizophrenia are the gene 
encoding the dopamine D2 receptor and those involved in the upstream regulation 
of dopaminergic synthesis, through glutamatergic and gamma-aminobutyric 
acidergic pathways. A number of these pathways are also linked to the stress 
response. We review these new lines of evidence and present a model of how genes 
and environmental factors may sensitize the dopamine system so that it is 
vulnerable to acute stress, leading to progressive dysregulation and the onset 
of psychosis. Finally, we consider the implications for rational drug 
development, in particular regionally selective dopaminergic modulation, and the 
potential of genetic factors to stratify patients.

Copyright Â© 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.07.014
PMCID: PMC5675052
PMID: 27720198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Dr Howes and Prof Murray 
have received investigator-initiated research funding from and/or participated 
in advisory/ speaker meetings organised by pharmaceutical companies including 
Astra-Zeneca, Autifony, BMS, Eli Lilly, Jansenn, Lundbeck, Lyden-Delta, Otsuka, 
Servier, Sunovion, and Roche. Neither they nor their immediate families have 
been employed by or have holdings/ a financial stake in any biomedical company. 
Dr McCutcheon and Prof Owen have no potential conflicts of interest.