1. Aging Cell. 2017 Feb;16(1):27-38. doi: 10.1111/acel.12522. Epub 2016 Oct 8.

Distinct inflammatory phenotypes of microglia and monocyte-derived macrophages 
in Alzheimer's disease models: effects of aging and amyloid pathology.

Martin E(1), Boucher C(1), Fontaine B(1)(2), Delarasse C(1).

Author information:
(1)Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 
1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), F-75013, Paris, 
France.
(2)AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié Salpêtrière, F-75013, Paris, France.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by 
formation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques, activated microglia, and neuronal cell 
death leading to progressive dementia. Recent data indicate that microglia and 
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) are key players in the initiation and 
progression of AD, yet their respective roles remain to be clarified. As AD 
occurs mostly in the elderly and aging impairs myeloid functions, we addressed 
the inflammatory profile of microglia and MDM during aging in TgAPP/PS1 and 
TgAPP/PS1dE9, two transgenic AD mouse models, compared to WT littermates. We 
only found MDM infiltration in very aged mice. We determined that MDM highly 
expressed activation markers at basal state. In contrast, microglia exhibited an 
activated phenotype only with normal aging and Aβ pathology. Our study showed 
that CD14 and CD36, two receptors involved in phagocytosis, were upregulated 
during Aβ pathogenesis. Moreover, we observed, at the protein levels in AD 
models, higher production of pro-inflammatory mediators: IL-1β, p40, iNOS, 
CCL-3, CCL-4, and CXCL-1. Taken together, our data indicate that microglia and 
MDM display distinct phenotypes in AD models and highlight the specific effects 
of normal aging vs Aβ peptides on inflammatory processes that occur during the 
disease progression. These precise phenotypes of different subpopulations of 
myeloid cells in normal and pathologic conditions may allow the design of 
pertinent therapeutic strategy for AD.

© 2016 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12522
PMCID: PMC5242297
PMID: 27723233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]