1. Sci Signal. 2016 Oct 11;9(449):ra100. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aaf6625.

Pressure-induced oxidative activation of PKG enables vasoregulation by Ca2+ 
sparks and BK channels.

Khavandi K(#)(1)(2), Baylie RA(#)(1), Sugden SA(1), Ahmed M(1)(3), Csato 
V(1)(4), Eaton P(2), Hill-Eubanks DC(3), Bonev AD(3), Nelson MT(1)(3), 
Greenstein AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Center, 
Manchester, M13 9NT, UK.
(2)King's College London, Cardiovascular Division, The British Heart Foundation 
Centre of Excellence, The Rayne Institute, Saint Thomas' Hospital, London, SE1 
7EH, UK.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Vermont, Vermont, 05405-0068, USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Physiology, Institute of Cardiology, Research Centre for 
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen 4012, 
Hungary.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Sci Signal. 2016 Oct 11;9(449):fs15. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aak9385.

Activation of Ca2+-sensitive, large-conductance potassium (BK) channels in 
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) by local, ryanodine receptor-mediated Ca2+ 
signals (Ca2+ sparks) acts as a brake on pressure-induced (myogenic) 
vasoconstriction-a fundamental mechanism that regulates blood flow in small 
resistance arteries. We report that physiological intraluminal pressure within 
resistance arteries activated cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) in VSMCs 
through oxidant-induced formation of an intermolecular disulfide bond between 
cysteine residues. Oxidant-activated PKG was required to trigger Ca2+ sparks, BK 
channel activity, and vasodilation in response to pressure. VSMCs from arteries 
from mice expressing a form of PKG that could not be activated by oxidants 
showed reduced Ca2+ spark frequency, and arterial preparations from these mice 
had decreased pressure-induced activation of BK channels. Thus, the absence of 
oxidative activation of PKG disabled the BK channel-mediated negative feedback 
regulation of vasoconstriction. Our results support the concept of a negative 
feedback control mechanism that regulates arterial diameter through 
mechanosensitive production of oxidants to activate PKG and enhance Ca2+ sparks.

Copyright Â© 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aaf6625
PMCID: PMC5154376
PMID: 27729550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.