1. Sci Rep. 2016 Oct 11;6:35117. doi: 10.1038/srep35117.

RAMAN spectroscopy imaging improves the diagnosis of papillary thyroid 
carcinoma.

Rau JV(1), Graziani V(1), Fosca M(1), Taffon C(2), Rocchia M(3), Crucitti P(2), 
Pozzilli P(2), Onetti Muda A(2), Caricato M(2), Crescenzi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Struttura della Materia (ISM-CNR), via del Fosso del Cavaliere 
100, 00133 Roma, Italy.
(2)Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-medico, via Álvaro del Portillo 200, 
00128 Roma, Italy.
(3)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Strada Rivoltana, 20090 Rodano, Milano, Italy.

Recent investigations strongly suggest that Raman spectroscopy (RS) can be used 
as a clinical tool in cancer diagnosis to improve diagnostic accuracy. In this 
study, we evaluated the efficiency of Raman imaging microscopy to discriminate 
between healthy and neoplastic thyroid tissue, by analyzing main variants of 
Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC), the most common type of thyroid cancer. We 
performed Raman imaging of large tissue areas (from 100 × 100 μm2 up to 
1 × 1 mm2), collecting 38 maps containing about 9000 Raman spectra. Multivariate 
statistical methods, including Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), were applied 
to translate Raman spectra differences between healthy and PTC tissues into 
diagnostically useful information for a reliable tissue classification. Our 
study is the first demonstration of specific biochemical features of the PTC 
profile, characterized by significant presence of carotenoids with respect to 
the healthy tissue. Moreover, this is the first evidence of Raman spectra 
differentiation between classical and follicular variant of PTC, discriminated 
by LDA with high efficiency. The combined histological and Raman microscopy 
analyses allow clear-cut integration of morphological and biochemical 
observations, with dramatic improvement of efficiency and reliability in the 
differential diagnosis of neoplastic thyroid nodules, paving the way to 
integrative findings for tumorigenesis and novel therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/srep35117
PMCID: PMC5057130
PMID: 27725756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]