1. BMC Evol Biol. 2016 Oct 13;16(1):214. doi: 10.1186/s12862-016-0780-3.

Huntingtin-associated protein 1: Eutherian adaptation from aÂ TRAK-like protein, 
conserved gene promoter elements, and localization in the human intestine.

Lumsden AL(1), Young RL(2)(3), Pezos N(2)(3), Keating DJ(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience and Department of Human Physiology, Flinders 
University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. 
amanda.lumsden@flinders.edu.au.
(2)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia.
(4)Centre for Neuroscience and Department of Human Physiology, Flinders 
University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. 
damien.keating@flinders.edu.au.
(5)South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia. damien.keating@flinders.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Huntingtin-associated Protein 1 (HAP1) is expressed in neurons and 
endocrine cells, and is critical for postnatal survival in mice. HAP1 shares a 
conserved "HAP1_N" domain with TRAfficking Kinesin proteins TRAK1 and TRAK2 
(vertebrate), Milton (Drosophila) and T27A3.1 (C. elegans). HAP1, TRAK1 and 
TRAK2 have a degree of common function, particularly regarding intracellular 
receptor trafficking. However, TRAK1, TRAK2 and Milton (which have a "Milt/TRAK" 
domain that is absent in human and rodent HAP1) differ in function to HAP1 in 
that they are mitochondrial transport proteins, while HAP1 has emerging roles in 
starvation response. We have investigated HAP1 function by examining its 
evolution, and upstream gene promoter sequences. We performed phylogenetic 
analyses of the HAP1_N domain family of proteins, incorporating HAP1 orthologues 
(identified by genomic synteny) from 5 vertebrate classes, and also searched the 
Dictyostelium proteome for a common ancestor. Computational analyses of 
mammalian HAP1 gene promoters were performed to identify phylogenetically 
conserved regulatory motifs.
RESULTS: We found that as recently as marsupials, HAP1 contained a Milt/TRAK 
domain and was more similar to TRAK1 and TRAK2 than to eutherian HAP1. The 
Milt/TRAK domain likely arose post multicellularity, as it was absent in the 
Dictyostelium proteome. It was lost from HAP1 in the eutherian lineage, and also 
from T27A3.1 in C. elegans. The HAP1 promoter from human, mouse, rat, rabbit, 
horse, dog, Tasmanian devil and opossum contained common sites for transcription 
factors involved in cell cycle, growth, differentiation, and stress response. A 
conserved arrangement of regulatory elements was identified, including sites for 
caudal-related homeobox transcription factors (CDX1 and CDX2), and 
myc-associated factor X (MAX) in the region of the TATA box. CDX1 and CDX2 are 
intestine-enriched factors, prompting investigation of HAP1 protein expression 
in the human duodenum. HAP1 was localized to singly dispersed mucosal cells, 
including a subset of serotonin-positive enterochromaffin cells.
CONCLUSION: We have identified eutherian HAP1 as an evolutionarily recent 
adaptation of a vertebrate TRAK protein-like ancestor, and found conserved 
CDX1/CDX2 and MAX transcription factor binding sites near the TATA box in 
mammalian HAP1 gene promoters. We also demonstrated that HAP1 is expressed in 
endocrine cells of the human gut.

DOI: 10.1186/s12862-016-0780-3
PMCID: PMC5064798
PMID: 27737633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]