1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Dec;49(6):2285-2293. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3721. Epub 2016
Oct  5.

Feasibility of imaging of epidermal growth factor receptor expression with 
ZEGFR:2377 affibody molecule labeled with 99mTc using a peptide-based 
cysteine-containing chelator.

Andersson KG(1), Oroujeni M(2), Garousi J(2), Mitran B(3), Ståhl S(1), Orlova 
A(3), Löfblom J(1), Tolmachev V(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Protein Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10691 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Genetic and Pathology, Uppsala University, SE-75185 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Division of Molecular Imaging, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala 
University, SE-75183 Uppsala, Sweden.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in a number of 
malignant tumors and is a molecular target for several specific anticancer 
antibodies and tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The overexpression of EGFR is a 
predictive biomarker for response to several therapy regimens. Radionuclide 
molecular imaging might enable detection of EGFR overexpression by a 
non-invasive procedure and could be used repeatedly. Affibody molecules are 
engineered scaffold proteins, which could be selected to have a high affinity 
and selectivity to predetermined targets. The anti-EGFR ZEGFR:2377 affibody 
molecule is a potential imaging probe for EGFR detection. The use of the 
generator-produced radionuclide 99mTc should facilitate clinical translation of 
an imaging probe due to its low price, availability and favorable dosimetry of 
the radionuclide. In the present study, we evaluated feasibility of ZEGFR:2377 
labeling with 99mTc using a peptide-based cysteine-containing chelator expressed 
at the C-terminus of ZEGFR:2377. The label was stable in vitro under cysteine 
challenge. In addition, 99mTc-ZEGFR:2377 was capable of specific binding to 
EGFR-expressing cells with high affinity (274 pM). Studies in BALB/C nu/nu mice 
bearing A431 xenografts demonstrated that 99mTc-ZEGFR:2377 accumulates in tumors 
in an EGFR-specific manner. The tumor uptake values were 3.6±1 and 2.5±0.4% ID/g 
at 3 and 24 h after injection, respectively. The corresponding tumor-to-blood 
ratios were 1.8±0.4 and 8±3. The xenografts were clearly visualized at both 
time-points. This study demonstrated the potential of 99mTc-labeled ZEGFR:2377 
for imaging of EGFR in vivo.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3721
PMCID: PMC5118000
PMID: 27748899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]