1. J Immunol Res. 2016;2016:1079851. doi: 10.1155/2016/1079851. Epub 2016 Sep 22.

TNF-α Autocrine Feedback Loops in Human Monocytes: The Pro- and 
Anti-Inflammatory Roles of the TNF-α Receptors Support the Concept of Selective 
TNFR1 Blockade In Vivo.

Gane JM(1), Stockley RA(2), Sapey E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Birmingham, 
Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Lung Investigation Unit, University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.

Selective TNFR1 blockade in inflammatory diseases is emerging as a clinical 
strategy. We studied the roles of the two TNF-α receptors, TNFR1 and TNFR2, in 
human monocytes, the principal producer of TNF-α and central to many TNF-α 
driven diseases. We hypothesised that TNF-α has pro- and anti-inflammatory 
effects on monocytes, occurring differentially via TNFR1 and TNFR2. Monocytes 
were isolated from healthy human subjects and exposed to LPS, plus/minus the 
addition of blocking antibodies to TNF-α or its receptors. Pro- and 
anti-inflammatory cytokine production was quantified using real-time PCR and 
ELISAs. Cell surface expression of TNFR1/2 was measured by flow cytometry. We 
demonstrated that monocytes vary in the expression patterns of TNFR1 and TNFR2. 
Autocrine binding of TNF-α led to sustained upregulation of proinflammatory 
cytokines via TNFR1. In contrast, autocrine binding via TNFR2 upregulated the 
anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10, without proinflammatory effect. TNFR2 was 
responsible for binding soluble TNF-α secreted by monocytes, clearing the 
cytokine from the pericellular environment. TNFR1 blockade did not change the 
cell surface expression of TNFR2, leaving this receptor free to upregulate 
IL-10. These novel results support the concept of selective TNFR1 blockade in 
vivo in order that positive anti-inflammatory effects of TNF-α can be retained 
via TNFR2 ligation.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/1079851
PMCID: PMC5055993
PMID: 27747245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interests.