1. Molecules. 2016 Oct 16;21(10):1384. doi: 10.3390/molecules21101384.

Bioanalytical Method Development Using Liquid Chromatography with Amperometric 
Detection for the Pharmacokinetic Evaluation of Forsythiaside in Rats.

Wu YT(1), Cai MT(2), Chang CW(3), Yen CC(4), Hsu MC(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. 
ytwu@kmu.edu.tw.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. 
cappricio2012@gmail.com.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. 
wxes9050304@gmail.com.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. 
date0315@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Sports Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, 
Taiwan. meichich@kmu.edu.tw.

An analytical method entailing high-performance liquid chromatography coupled 
with electrochemical detection was developed for determining forsythiaside (FTS) 
in rat plasma. Rat plasma samples were prepared through efficient 
trichloroacetic acid deproteination. FTS and the internal standard were 
chromatographically separated on a reversed-phase core-shell silica C18 column 
(100 mm × 2.1 mm, i.d. 2.6 μm), with a mobile phase consisting of an 
acetonitrile-0.05-M phosphate solution (11.8:88.2, v/v), at a flow rate of 400 
μL/min. The calibration curve, with r² > 0.999, was linear in the 20-1000 ng/mL 
range. The intra- and interday precision were less than 9.0%, and the accuracy 
ranged from 94.5% to 106.5% for FTS. The results indicated that the newly 
developed HPLC-EC method is more sensitive than previous reported methods using 
UV detection, and this new analytical method is applied successfully for the 
pharmacokinetic study of FTS. The hydrogel delivery system can efficiently 
improve bioavailability and mean residual time for FTS, as evidenced by the 2.5- 
and 6.3-fold increase of the area under the curve and the extension of the 
half-life, respectively.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules21101384
PMCID: PMC6274433
PMID: 27754467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.