1. Viruses. 2016 Oct 14;8(10):285. doi: 10.3390/v8100285.

Single Amino Acid Substitution N659D in HIV-2 Envelope Glycoprotein (Env) 
Impairs Viral Release and Hampers BST-2 Antagonism.

Dufrasne FE(1), Lombard C(2), Goubau P(3), Ruelle J(4).

Author information:
(1)AIDS Reference Laboratory, Medical Microbiology Unit (MBLG), Institut de 
Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), Université catholique de Louvain, 
Avenue Hippocrate 54 B1.54.05, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. 
francois.dufrasne@uclouvain.be.
(2)Pôle de Pédiatrie (PEDI), Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique 
(IREC), Université catholique de Louvain, Avenue Mounier 52 B1.52.03, B-1200 
Brussels, Belgium. catherine.lombard@uclouvain.be.
(3)AIDS Reference Laboratory, Medical Microbiology Unit (MBLG), Institut de 
Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), Université catholique de Louvain, 
Avenue Hippocrate 54 B1.54.05, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. 
patrick.goubau@uclouvain.be.
(4)AIDS Reference Laboratory, Medical Microbiology Unit (MBLG), Institut de 
Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), Université catholique de Louvain, 
Avenue Hippocrate 54 B1.54.05, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. 
jean.ruelle@uclouvain.be.

BST-2 or tetherin is a host cell restriction factor that prevents the budding of 
enveloped viruses at the cell surface, thus impairing the viral spread. Several 
countermeasures to evade this antiviral factor have been positively selected in 
retroviruses: the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) relies on the 
envelope glycoprotein (Env) to overcome BST-2 restriction. The Env gp36 
ectodomain seems involved in this anti-tetherin activity, however residues and 
regions interacting with BST-2 are not clearly defined. Among 32 HIV-2 ROD Env 
mutants tested, we demonstrated that the asparagine residue at position 659 
located in the gp36 ectodomain is mandatory to exert the anti-tetherin function. 
Viral release assays in cell lines expressing BST-2 showed a loss of viral 
release ability for the HIV-2 N659D mutant virus compared to the HIV-2 wild type 
virus. In bst-2 inactivated H9 cells, those differences were lost. Subtilisin 
treatment of infected cells demonstrated that the N659D mutant was more tethered 
at the cell surface. Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments 
confirmed a direct molecular link between Env and BST-2 and highlighted an 
inability of the mutant to bind BST-2. We also tested a virus presenting a 
truncation of 109 amino acids at the C-terminal part of Env, a cytoplasmic tail 
partial deletion that is spontaneously selected in vitro. Interestingly, viral 
release assays and FRET experiments indicated that a full Env cytoplasmic tail 
was essential in BST-2 antagonism. In HIV-2 infected cells, an efficient 
Env-mediated antagonism of BST-2 is operated through an intermolecular link 
involving the asparagine 659 residue as well as the C-terminal part of the 
cytoplasmic tail.

DOI: 10.3390/v8100285
PMCID: PMC5086617
PMID: 27754450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.