1. J Hypertens. 2017 Jan;35(1):132-139. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000001131.

The antihypertensive MTHFR gene polymorphism rs17367504-G is a possible novel 
protective locus for preeclampsia.

Thomsen LC(1), McCarthy NS, Melton PE, Cadby G, Austgulen R, Nygård OK, Johnson 
MP, Brennecke S, Moses EK, Bjørge L, Iversen AC.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland University Hospital 
bDepartment of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway cCentre 
for Genetic Origins of Health and Disease, University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Australia dDepartment of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Centre 
of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, Trondheim eDepartment of Heart Disease, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway fSouth Texas Diabetes and Obesity Institute, School of 
Medicine, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, Texas, USA 
gDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Parkville 
hPregnancy Research Centre, Department of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Royal Women's 
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria iFaculty of Health Sciences, Curtin University, 
Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Preeclampsia is a complex heterogeneous disease commonly defined by 
new-onset hypertension and proteinuria in pregnancy. Women experiencing 
preeclampsia have increased risk for cardiovascular diseases (CVD) later in 
life. Preeclampsia and CVD share risk factors and pathophysiologic mechanisms, 
including dysregulated inflammation and raised blood pressure. Despite 
commonalities, little is known about the contribution of shared genes 
(pleiotropy) to these diseases. This study aimed to investigate whether genetic 
risk factors for hypertension or inflammation are pleiotropic by also being 
associated with preeclampsia.
METHODS: We genotyped 122 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in women with 
preeclampsia (n = 1006) and nonpreeclamptic controls (n = 816) from the 
Norwegian HUNT Study. SNPs were chosen on the basis of previously reported 
associations with either nongestational hypertension or inflammation in 
genome-wide association studies. The SNPs were tested for association with 
preeclampsia in a multiple logistic regression model.
RESULTS: The minor (G) allele of the intronic SNP rs17367504 in the gene 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) was associated with a protective 
effect on preeclampsia (odds ratio 0.65, 95% confidence interval 0.53-0.80) in 
the Norwegian cohort. This association did not replicate in an Australian 
preeclampsia case-control cohort (P = 0.68, odds ratio 1.05, 95% confidence 
interval 0.83-1.32, minor allele frequency = 0.15).
CONCLUSION: MTHFR is important for regulating transmethylation processes and is 
involved in regulation of folate metabolism. The G allele of rs17367504 has 
previously been shown to protect against nongestational hypertension. Our study 
suggests a novel association between this allele and reduced risk for 
preeclampsia. This is the first study associating the minor (G) allele of a SNP 
within the MTHFR gene with a protective effect on preeclampsia, and in doing so 
identifying a possible pleiotropic protective effect on preeclampsia and 
hypertension.

DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000001131
PMCID: PMC5131692
PMID: 27755385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]