1. BMC Biol. 2016 Oct 19;14(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s12915-016-0313-y.

Oligomeric interface modulation causes misregulation of purine 5´-nucleotidase 
in relapsed leukemia.

Hnízda A(1), Škerlová J(2), Fábry M(3), Pachl P(2), Šinalová M(2), Vrzal L(2), 
Man P(4), Novák P(4), Řezáčová P(2)(3), Veverka V(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the 
Czech Republic, Flemingovo nam. 2, Prague 6, 166 10, Czech Republic. 
hnizda@uochb.cas.cz.
(2)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the 
Czech Republic, Flemingovo nam. 2, Prague 6, 166 10, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Videnska 1083, Prague 4, 142 20, Czech Republic.
(4)Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Videnska 1083, Prague 4, 142 20, Czech Republic.
(5)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the 
Czech Republic, Flemingovo nam. 2, Prague 6, 166 10, Czech Republic. 
veverka@uochb.cas.cz.

BACKGROUND: Relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is one of the main 
causes of mortality in childhood malignancies. Previous genetic studies 
demonstrated that chemoresistant ALL is driven by activating mutations in NT5C2, 
the gene encoding cytosolic 5´-nucleotidase (cN-II). However, molecular 
mechanisms underlying this hyperactivation are still unknown. Here, we present 
kinetic and structural properties of cN-II variants that represent 75 % of 
mutated alleles in patients who experience relapsed ALL (R367Q, R238W and 
L375F).
RESULTS: Enzyme kinetics measurements revealed that the mutants are 
consitutively active without need for allosteric activators. This shows that 
hyperactivity is not caused by a direct catalytic effect but rather by 
misregulation of cN-II. X-ray crystallography combined with mass 
spectrometry-based techniques demonstrated that this misregulation is driven by 
structural modulation of the oligomeric interface within the cN-II 
homotetrameric assembly. These specific conformational changes are shared 
between the studied variants, despite the relatively random spatial distribution 
of the mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings define a common molecular mechanism for cN-II 
hyperactivity, which provides a solid basis for targeted therapy of leukemia. 
Our study highlights the cN-II oligomerization interface as an attractive 
pharmacological target.

DOI: 10.1186/s12915-016-0313-y
PMCID: PMC5070119
PMID: 27756303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]