1. ARYA Atheroscler. 2016 May;12(3):118-123.

Lipid peroxidation and antioxidant enzymes activity in controlled and 
uncontrolled Type 2 diabetic patients.

Zarei M(1), Farahnak Z(1), Hosseinzadeh-Attar MJ(2), Javanbakht MH(3), 
Hosseinzadeh P(4), Derakhshanian H(1), Farahbakhsh-Farsi P(3), Djalali M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Nutrition, School of Nutritional 
Sciences and Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Associate Professor, Department of Clinical Nutrition, School of Nutritional 
Sciences and Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Assistant Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Nutrition, School 
of Nutritional Sciences and Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Nutrition and Biochemistry, The International Campus, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Kish, Iran.
(5)Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Nutrition, School of 
Nutritional Sciences and Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to compare lipid peroxidation and 
antioxidant enzymes activity in Type 2 diabetes patients with good or weak 
glycemic control.
METHODS: In this case-control study, 62 Type 2 diabetic patients with glycated 
hemoglobin (HbA1c) between 6 and 8 were enrolled as the controlled group and 55 
patients with HbA1c > 8 were selected as an uncontrolled group. Patients were 
all referred to Iranian Diabetes Association in Tehran, Iran, from 2010 onward. 
Groups were chosen by convenience sampling and were matched based on age, sex 
and duration of disease. Demographic questionnaire, two 24-hour food recall, 
HbA1c, insulin, malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase 
were measured in blood samples. Data were analyzed by Food Processor II and SPSS 
software.
RESULTS: A mean daily consumption of energy, carbohydrate, protein, and fat was 
not significantly different between two groups. MDA in the uncontrolled group 
was significantly higher than controlled group (2.03 ± 0.88 vs. 1.65 ± 1.01 
nmol/ml; P = 0.030). A mean SOD was slightly higher in the uncontrolled group 
comparing to the control group (843.3 ± 101.9 vs. 828.0 ± 127.3 U/g Hb; P = 
0.400).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that MDA as a lipid peroxidation indicator is 
higher in uncontrolled diabetes probably due to chronic high blood sugar 
followed by higher oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC5055369
PMID: 27752268