1. J Physiol Paris. 2016 Oct;110(3 Pt B):302-313. doi: 
10.1016/j.jphysparis.2016.10.002. Epub 2016 Oct 18.

Evolution of electric communication signals in the South American ghost 
knifefishes (Gymnotiformes: Apteronotidae): A phylogenetic comparative study 
using a sequence-based phylogeny.

Smith AR(1), Proffitt MR(2), Ho WW(3), Mullaney CB(2), Maldonado-Ocampo JA(4), 
Lovejoy NR(5), Alves-Gomes JA(6), Smith GT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, 1001 E. 3rd St, Bloomington, IN 
47405, USA. Electronic address: adarsmit@indiana.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, Indiana University, 1001 E. 3rd St, Bloomington, IN 
47405, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(4)Lab. de Ictiología, Unidad de Ecología y Sistemática (UNESIS), Depto. de 
Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, Carrera 7 N° 
43-82, Edf. 53, Lab. 108B, Bogotá, Colombia.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, 
Toronto, Ontario M1C 1A4, Canada.
(6)Laboratório de Fisiologia Comportamental e Evolução (LFCE), Instituto 
Nacional de Pesquisas de Amazônia (INPA), Av. André Araújo, 2936 Petrópolis, 
Manaus, AM 69067-375, Brazil.

The electric communication signals of weakly electric ghost knifefishes 
(Gymnotiformes: Apteronotidae) provide a valuable model system for understanding 
the evolution and physiology of behavior. Apteronotids produce continuous 
wave-type electric organ discharges (EODs) that are used for electrolocation and 
communication. The frequency and waveform of EODs, as well as the structure of 
transient EOD modulations (chirps), vary substantially across species. 
Understanding how these signals have evolved, however, has been hampered by the 
lack of a well-supported phylogeny for this family. We constructed a molecular 
phylogeny for the Apteronotidae by using sequence data from three genes 
(cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1, recombination activating gene 2, and cytochrome 
oxidase B) in 32 species representing 13 apteronotid genera. This phylogeny and 
an extensive database of apteronotid signals allowed us to examine signal 
evolution by using ancestral state reconstruction (ASR) and phylogenetic 
generalized least squares (PGLS) models. Our molecular phylogeny largely agrees 
with another recent sequence-based phylogeny and identified five robust 
apteronotid clades: (i) Sternarchorhamphus+Orthosternarchus, (ii) 
Adontosternarchus, (iii) Apteronotus+Parapteronotus, (iv) Sternarchorhynchus, 
and (v) a large clade including Porotergus, 'Apteronotus', Compsaraia, 
Sternarchogiton, Sternarchella, and Magosternarchus. We analyzed novel chirp 
recordings from two apteronotid species (Orthosternarchus tamandua and 
Sternarchorhynchus mormyrus), and combined data from these species with that 
from previously recorded species in our phylogenetic analyses. Some signal 
parameters in O. tamandua were plesiomorphic (e.g., low frequency EODs and 
chirps with little frequency modulation that nevertheless interrupt the EOD), 
suggesting that ultra-high frequency EODs and "big" chirps evolved after 
apteronotids diverged from other gymnotiforms. In contrast to previous studies, 
our PGLS analyses using the new phylogeny indicated the presence of phylogenetic 
signals in the relationships between some EOD and chirp parameters. The ASR 
demonstrated that most EOD and chirp parameters are evolutionarily labile and 
have often diversified even among closely related species.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphysparis.2016.10.002
PMCID: PMC5836322
PMID: 27769924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]