1. Orthop Rev (Pavia). 2016 Oct 3;8(3):6600. doi: 10.4081/or.2016.6600.
eCollection  2016 Sep 19.

Personal Trainer Demographics, Current Practice Trends and Common Trainee 
Injuries.

Waryasz GR(1), Daniels AH(1), Gil JA(1), Suric V(2), Eberson CP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University , 
Providence, RI.
(2)Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown University , Providence, RI, USA.

Increasing emphasis on maintaining a healthy lifestyle has led many individuals 
to seek advice on exercise from personal trainers. There are few studies to date 
that evaluate personal trainer education, practice trends, and injuries they 
have seen while training clients. A survey was distributed to personal trainers 
using Survey MonkeyÂ® (Palo Alto, CA, USA) with 605 personal trainers accessing 
the survey. An exercise related bachelor's degree was held by 64.2% of survey 
participants and a certification in personal training by 89.0%. The most common 
personal trainer certifications were from American College of Sports Medicine 
(59.2%) and National Strength and Conditioning Association (28.9%). Only 2.9% of 
all personal trainers surveyed had no exercise-related bachelor's degree and no 
personal trainer certification. The most common injuries seen by personal 
trainers during sessions were lumbar muscle strain (10.7%), rotator cuff 
tear/tendonitis (8.9%), shin splints (8.1%), ankle sprain (7.5%), and cervical 
muscle strain (7.4%). There is variability in the practices between different 
personal trainers when analyzing differences in collegiate education, personal 
trainer certifications, and strength and conditioning certifications. The 
clinical implication of the differences in practices is unknown as to the impact 
on injuries or exercise prescription effectiveness.

DOI: 10.4081/or.2016.6600
PMCID: PMC5066109
PMID: 27761219

Conflict of interest statement: the authors declare no potential conflict of 
interest.