1. Crit Care. 2016 Oct 21;20(1):319. doi: 10.1186/s13054-016-1485-0.

Regulation of blood flow and volume exchange across the microcirculation.

Jacob M(1), Chappell D(2), Becker BF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, St. Elisabeth Hospital Straubing, St. 
Elisabeth Str. 23, 94315, Straubing, Germany. 
matthias.jacob@klinikum-straubing.de.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
Munich, St.-Elisabeth-Str., Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Crit Care. 2017 Mar 8;21(1):49. doi: 10.1186/s13054-017-1621-5.

Oxygen delivery to cells is the basic prerequisite of life. Within the human 
body, an ingenious oxygen delivery system, comprising steps of convection and 
diffusion from the upper airways via the lungs and the cardiovascular system to 
the microvascular area, bridges the gap between oxygen in the outside airspace 
and the interstitial space around the cells. However, the complexity of this 
evolutionary development makes us prone to pathophysiological problems. While 
those problems related to respiration and macrohemodynamics have already been 
successfully addressed by modern medicine, the pathophysiology of the 
microcirculation is still often a closed book in daily practice. Nevertheless, 
here as well, profound physiological understanding is the only key to rational 
therapeutic decisions. The prime guarantor of tissue oxygenation is tissue blood 
flow. Therefore, on the premise of intact macrohemodynamics, the 
microcirculation has three major responsibilities: 1) providing access for 
oxygenated blood to the tissues and appropriate return of volume; 2) maintaining 
global tissue flood flow, even in the face of changes in central blood pressure; 
and 3) linking local blood flow to local metabolic needs. It is an intriguing 
concept of nature to do this mainly by local regulatory mechanisms, impacting 
primarily on flow resistance, be this via endothelial or direct smooth muscle 
actions. The final goal of microvascular blood flow per unit of time is to 
ensure the needed exchange of substances between tissue and blood compartments. 
The two principle means of accomplishing this are diffusion and filtration. 
While simple diffusion is the quantitatively most important form of capillary 
exchange activity for the respiratory gases, water flux across the blood-brain 
barrier is facilitated via preformed specialized channels, the aquaporines. 
Beyond that, the vascular barrier is practically nowhere completely tight for 
water, with paracellular filtration giving rise to generally low but permanent 
fluid flux outwards into the interstitial space at the microvascular high 
pressure segment. At the more leaky venular aspect, both filtration and 
diffusion allow for bidirectional passage of water, nutrients, and waste 
products. We are just beginning to appreciate that a major factor for 
maintaining tissue fluid homeostasis appears to be the integrity of the 
endothelial glycocalyx.

DOI: 10.1186/s13054-016-1485-0
PMCID: PMC5073467
PMID: 27765054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]