1. J Bone Miner Res. 2017 Mar;32(3):641-653. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3022. Epub 2017
Feb  23.

DLX3-Dependent Regulation of Ion Transporters and Carbonic Anhydrases is Crucial 
for Enamel Mineralization.

Duverger O(1), Ohara T(1), Bible PW(1), Zah A(1), Morasso MI(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institutes of Health (NIH), 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Patients with tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome, an ectodermal dysplasia 
caused by mutations in the homeodomain transcription factor DLX3, exhibit enamel 
hypoplasia and hypomineralization. Here we used a conditional knockout mouse 
model to investigate the developmental and molecular consequences of Dlx3 
deletion in the dental epithelium in vivo. Dlx3 deletion in the dental 
epithelium resulted in the formation of chalky hypomineralized enamel in all 
teeth. Interestingly, transcriptomic analysis revealed that major enamel matrix 
proteins and proteases known to be involved in enamel secretion and maturation 
were not affected significantly by Dlx3 deletion in the enamel organ. In 
contrast, expression of several ion transporters and carbonic anhydrases known 
to play an important role in enamel pH regulation during maturation was 
significantly affected in enamel organs lacking DLX3. Most of these affected 
genes showed binding of DLX3 to their proximal promoter as evidenced by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis on rat enamel 
organ. These molecular findings were consistent with altered pH staining 
evidenced by disruption of characteristic pH oscillations in the enamel. Taken 
together, these results show that DLX3 is indispensable for the regulation of 
ion transporters and carbonic anhydrases during the maturation stage of 
amelogenesis, exerting a crucial regulatory function on pH oscillations during 
enamel mineralization. © 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3022
PMCID: PMC11025043
PMID: 27760456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures All authors state that they have no 
conflict of interest.