1. J Arrhythm. 2016 Oct;32(5):344-351. doi: 10.1016/j.joa.2015.09.008. Epub 2015 
Nov 24.

Current topics in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.

Sumitomo N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Saitama Medical University International 
Medical Center,Â 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka-City, Saitama 350-1298, Japan.

Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is induced by 
emotions or exercise in patients without organic heart disease and may be 
polymorphic or bidirectional in nature. The prognosis of CPVT is not good, and 
therefore prevention of sudden death is of utmost importance. Genetic variants 
of CPVT include RyR2, CASQ2, CALM2, TRD, and possibly KCNJ2 and ANK2 gene 
mutations. Hypotheses that suggest the causes of CPVT include weakened binding 
of FKBP12.6 and RyR2, a store overload-induced Ca2+ release (SOICR), unzipping 
of intramolecular domain interactions in RyR2, and molecular and functional 
abnormalities caused by mutations in the CASQ2 gene. The incidence of an RyR2 
anomaly in CPVTs is about 35-79%, whereas anomalies in the CASQ2 gene account 
for 3-5% CPVTs. The ping-pong theory, suggesting that reciprocating delayed 
after depolarization induces bigeminy of the right and left bundle branches, may 
explain the pathogenesis of bidirectional ventricular tachycardia. Flecainide, 
carvedilol, left sympathetic nerve denervation, and catheter ablation of the PVC 
may serve as new therapeutic strategies for CPVT while gene-therapy may be 
applied to some types of CPVT in the future. Although, not all sudden cardiac 
deaths in CPVT patients are currently preventable, new medical and 
interventional therapies may improve CPVT prognosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joa.2015.09.008
PMCID: PMC5063269
PMID: 27761157