1. Blood Rev. 2017 May;31(3):93-99. doi: 10.1016/j.blre.2016.10.002. Epub 2016
Oct  13.

Recent discoveries in the molecular pathogenesis of the inherited bone marrow 
failure syndrome Fanconi anemia.

Mamrak NE(1), Shimamura A(2), Howlett NG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Rhode Island, 120 
Flagg Road, Kingston, RI 02881, United States. Electronic address: 
nicholasmamrak@my.uri.edu.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders 
Center, Boston, MA 02215, United States. Electronic address: 
akiko.shimamura@childrens.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Rhode Island, 120 
Flagg Road, Kingston, RI 02881, United States. Electronic address: 
nhowlett@uri.edu.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal and X-linked genetic disease 
characterized by congenital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow failure 
(BMF), and increased cancer risk during early adulthood. The median lifespan for 
FA patients is approximately 33years. The proteins encoded by the FA genes 
function together in the FA-BRCA pathway to repair DNA damage and to maintain 
genome stability. Within the past two years, five new FA genes have been 
identified-RAD51/FANCR, BRCA1/FANCS, UBE2T/FANCT, XRCC2/FANCU, and 
REV7/FANCV-bringing the total number of disease-causing genes to 21. This review 
summarizes the discovery of these new FA genes and describes how these proteins 
integrate into the FA-BRCA pathway to maintain genome stability and critically 
prevent early-onset BMF and cancer.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.blre.2016.10.002
PMCID: PMC5391297
PMID: 27760710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement There are no 
conflicts of interest to declare.