1. J Integr Plant Biol. 2017 Jan;59(1):60-74. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12505.

Development and utilization of a new chemically-induced soybean library with a 
high mutation density .

Li Z(1), Jiang L(1), Ma Y(1)(2), Wei Z(1), Hong H(1), Liu Z(1), Lei J(1), Liu 
Y(1), Guan R(1), Guo Y(1), Jin L(1), Zhang L(1), Li Y(1), Ren Y(1), He W(1), Liu 
M(1), Htwe NM(1), Liu L(1), Guo B(1), Song J(1), Tan B(1), Liu G(1), Li M(1), 
Zhang X(1), Liu B(1), Shi X(1), Han S(1), Hua S(1), Zhou F(1), Yu L(1), Li Y(1), 
Wang S(1), Wang J(1)(3), Chang R(1), Qiu L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Facility for Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Key 
Laboratory of Crop Germplasm Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of 
Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing 100081, China.
(2)Soybean Research Institute, Heilongjiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Harbin 150086, China.
(3)College of Agriculture, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China.

Mutagenized populations have provided important materials for introducing 
variation and identifying gene function in plants. In this study, an ethyl 
methanesulfonate (EMS)-induced soybean (Glycine max) population, consisting of 
21,600 independent M2 lines, was developed. Over 1,000 M4 (5) families, with 
diverse abnormal phenotypes for seed composition, seed shape, plant morphology 
and maturity that are stably expressed across different environments and 
generations were identified. Phenotypic analysis of the population led to the 
identification of a yellow pigmentation mutant, gyl, that displayed 
significantly decreased chlorophyll (Chl) content and abnormal chloroplast 
development. Sequence analysis showed that gyl is allelic to MinnGold, where a 
different single nucleotide polymorphism variation in the Mg-chelatase subunit 
gene (ChlI1a) results in golden yellow leaves. A cleaved amplified polymorphic 
sequence marker was developed and may be applied to marker-assisted selection 
for the golden yellow phenotype in soybean breeding. We show that the newly 
developed soybean EMS mutant population has potential for functional genomics 
research and genetic improvement in soybean.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Integrative Plant Biology Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences.

DOI: 10.1111/jipb.12505
PMCID: PMC5248594
PMID: 27774740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]