1. Matrix Biol. 2017 Jul;60-61:16-26. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.10.005. Epub
2016  Oct 19.

Candidate gene analysis of the fibrinogen phenotype reveals the importance of 
polygenic co-regulation.

Cronjé HT(1), Nienaber-Rousseau C(2), Zandberg L(1), Chikowore T(1), de Lange 
Z(1), van Zyl T(1), Pieters M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Excellence for Nutrition, North-West University, Potchefstroom, 
South Africa.
(2)Centre of Excellence for Nutrition, North-West University, Potchefstroom, 
South Africa. Electronic address: cornelie.nienaber@nwu.ac.za.

Fibrinogen and its functional aspects have been linked to cardiovascular 
disease. There is vast discrepancy between the heritability of fibrinogen 
concentrations observed in twin studies and the heritability uncovered by genome 
wide association studies. We postulate that some of the missing heritability 
might be explained by the pleiotropic and polygenic co-regulation of fibrinogen 
through multiple targeted genes, apart from the fibrinogen genes themselves. To 
this end we investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes coding 
for phenotypes associated with total and γ' fibrinogen concentrations and clot 
properties. Their individual and accumulative associations with the fibrinogen 
variables were explored together with possible co-regulatory processes as a 
result of the gain and loss of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). 
Seventy-eight SNPs spanning the APOB, APOE, CBS, CRP, F13A1, FGA, FGB, FGG, 
LDL-R, MTHFR, MTR, PCSK-9 and SERPINE-1 genes were included in the final 
analysis. A novel PCSK-9 SNP (rs369066144) was identified in this population, 
which associated significantly (p=0.04) with clot lysis time (CLT). Apart from 
SNPs in the fibrinogen (FGA, FGB and FGG) and FXIII (F13A1) genes, the 
fibrinogen phenotypes were also associated with SNPs in genes playing a role in 
lipid homeostasis (LDL-R, PCSK-9) together with CBS and CRP polymorphisms 
(particularly, CRP-rs3093068). The genetic risk scores, presenting accumulative 
genetic risk, were significantly associated (p≤0.007) with total and γ' 
fibrinogen concentrations, lag time, slope and CLT, highlighting the importance 
of a polygenetic approach in determining complex phenotypes. SNPs significantly 
associated with the fibrinogen phenotypes, resulted in a total of 75 TFBS 
changes, of which 35 resulted in a loss and 40 in a gain of TFBS. In terms of 
co-regulation, V$IRF4.02, V$E2FF and V$HIFF were of particular importance. The 
investigation into TFBS provided valuable insight as to how sequence divergences 
in seemingly unrelated genes can result in transcriptional co-regulation of the 
fibrinogen phenotypes. The observed associations between the identified SNPs and 
the fibrinogen phenotypes therefore do not imply direct effects on 
cardiovascular disease outcomes, but may prove useful in explaining more of the 
genetic regulation of the investigated fibrinogen phenotypes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.10.005
PMID: 27771416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]