1. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2017 Jan;57(1):24-31. doi: 10.1111/cga.12198.

Foxc2(CreERT2) knock-in mice mark stage-specific Foxc2-expressing cells during 
mouse organogenesis.

Amin MB(1), Miura N(1), Uddin MK(1), Islam MJ(1), Yoshida N(2), Iseki S(3), Kume 
T(4), Trainor PA(5)(6), Saitsu H(1), Aoto K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Hamamatsu, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Center for Experimental Medicine and 
Systems Biology, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Erin Lambers, Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of 
Medicine, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(5)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

Foxc2, a member of the winged helix transcription factor family, is essential 
for eye, calvarial bone, cardiovascular and kidney development in mice. 
Nevertheless, how Foxc2-expressing cells and their descendent cells contribute 
to the development of these tissues and organs has not been elucidated. Here, we 
generated a Foxc2 knock-in (Foxc2CreERT2 ) mouse, in which administration of 
estrogen receptor antagonist tamoxifen induces nuclear translocation of Cre 
recombinase in Foxc2-expressing cells. By crossing with ROSA-LacZ reporter mice 
(Foxc2CreERT2 ; R26R), the fate of Foxc2 positive (Foxc2+ ) cells was analyzed 
through LacZ staining at various embryonic stages. We found Foxc2+ cell 
descendants in the supraoccipital and exoccipital bone in E18.5 embryos, when 
tamoxifen was administered at embryonic day (E) 8.5. Furthermore, Foxc2+ 
descendant cranial neural crest cells at E8-10 were restricted to the corneal 
mesenchyme, while Foxc2+ cell derived cardiac neural crest cells at E6-12 were 
found in the aorta, pulmonary trunk and valves, and endocardial cushions. Foxc2+ 
cell descendant contributions to the glomerular podocytes in the kidney were 
also observed following E6.5 tamoxifen treatment. Our results are consistent 
with previous reports of Foxc2 expression during early embryogenesis and the 
Foxc2CreERT2 mouse provides a tool to investigate spatiotemporal roles of Foxc2 
and contributions of Foxc2+ expressing cells during mouse embryogenesis.

Â© 2016 Japanese Teratology Society.

DOI: 10.1111/cga.12198
PMID: 27783871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]