1. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 26;11(10):e0165306. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165306. 
eCollection 2016.

Supercoiling Effects on Short-Range DNA Looping in E. coli.

Mogil LS(1)(2), Becker NA(1), Maher LJ 3rd(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States of 
America.
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology track, Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, United States 
of America.

DNA-protein loops can be essential for gene regulation. The Escherichia coli 
lactose (lac) operon is controlled by DNA-protein loops that have been studied 
for decades. Here we adapt this model to test the hypothesis that negative 
superhelical strain facilitates the formation of short-range (6-8 DNA turns) 
repression loops in E. coli. The natural negative superhelicity of E. coli DNA 
is regulated by the interplay of gyrase and topoisomerase enzymes, adding or 
removing negative supercoils, respectively. Here, we measured quantitatively DNA 
looping in three different E. coli strains characterized by different levels of 
global supercoiling: wild type, gyrase mutant (gyrB226), and topoisomerase 
mutant (Î”topA10). DNA looping in each strain was measured by assaying repression 
of the endogenous lac operon, and repression of ten reporter constructs with DNA 
loop sizes between 70-85 base pairs. Our data are most simply interpreted as 
supporting the hypothesis that negative supercoiling facilitates gene repression 
by small DNA-protein loops in living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165306
PMCID: PMC5081198
PMID: 27783696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.