1. Immunol Rev. 2016 Nov;274(1):233-244. doi: 10.1111/imr.12467.

More than complementing Tolls: complement-Toll-like receptor synergy and 
crosstalk in innate immunity and inflammation.

Hajishengallis G(1), Lambris JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Dental 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. geoh@upenn.edu.
(2)Perelman School of Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Complement and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play key roles in the host immune 
response and are swiftly activated by infection or other types of immunological 
stress. This review focuses on the capacity of complement and TLRs to engage in 
signaling crosstalk, ostensibly to coordinate immune and inflammatory responses 
through synergistic or antagonistic (regulatory) interactions. However, 
overactivation or dysregulation of either system may lead-often 
synergistically-to exaggerated inflammation and host tissue injury. 
Intriguingly, moreover, certain pathogens can manipulate complement-TLR 
crosstalk pathways in ways that undermine host immunity and favor their 
persistence. In the setting of polymicrobial inflammatory disease, subversion of 
complement-TLR crosstalk by keystone pathogens can promote dysbiosis. Knowledge 
of the molecular mechanisms underlying complement-TLR crosstalk pathways can, 
therefore, be used productively for tailored therapeutic approaches, such as, to 
enhance host immunity, mitigate destructive inflammation, or counteract 
microbial subversion of the host response.

Â© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12467
PMCID: PMC5119927
PMID: 27782328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicting financial 
interests.