1. Front Oncol. 2016 Oct 11;6:211. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2016.00211. eCollection
2016.

Intracerebral Distribution of the Oncometabolite d-2-Hydroxyglutarate in Mice 
Bearing Mutant Isocitrate Dehydrogenase Brain Tumors: Implications for 
Tumorigenesis.

Pickard AJ(1), Sohn AS(1), Bartenstein TF(1), He S(2), Zhang Y(2), Gallo JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai , New York, NY , USA.
(2)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

The prevalence of mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) brain tumors has 
generated significant efforts to understand the role of the mutated enzyme 
product d-2-hydroxyglutarate (D2HG), an oncometabolite, in tumorigenesis, as 
well as means to eliminate it. Glymphatic clearance was proposed as a pathway 
that could be manipulated to accelerate D2HG clearance and dictated the study 
design that consisted of two cohorts of mice bearing U87/mutant IDH1 
intracerebral tumors that underwent two microdialysis - providing D2HG 
interstitial fluid concentrations - sampling periods of awake and asleep 
(activate glymphatic clearance) in a crossover manner. Glymphatic clearance was 
found not to have a significant effect on D2HG brain tumor interstitial fluid 
concentrations that were 126.9 ± 74.8 μM awake and 117.6 ± 98.6 μM asleep. These 
concentrations, although low relative to total brain tumor concentrations of 
6.8 ± 3.6 mM, were considered sufficient to be transported by interstitial fluid 
and taken up into normal cells to cause deleterious effects. A model of D2HG CNS 
distribution supported this contention and was further supported by in vitro 
studies that showed D2HG could interfere with immune cell function. The study 
provides insight into the compartmental distribution of D2HG in the brain, 
wherein the interstitial fluid serves as a dynamic pathway for D2HG to enter 
normal cells and contribute to tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2016.00211
PMCID: PMC5057413
PMID: 27781195