1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Oct 25;12(10):e1005075. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005075. eCollection 2016 Oct.

Viral RNA Degradation and Diffusion Act as a Bottleneck for the Influenza A 
Virus Infection Efficiency.

Schelker M(1), Mair CM(2), Jolmes F(2), Welke RW(2), Klipp E(1), Herrmann 
A(2)(3), Flöttmann M(1), Sieben C(2).

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Biophysics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Molecular Biophysics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)IRI Life Sciences, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

After endocytic uptake, influenza viruses transit early endosomal compartments 
and eventually reach late endosomes. There, the viral glycoprotein hemagglutinin 
(HA) triggers fusion between endosomal and viral membrane, a critical step that 
leads to release of the viral segmented genome destined to reach the cell 
nucleus. Endosomal maturation is a complex process involving acidification of 
the endosomal lumen as well as endosome motility along microtubules. While the 
pH drop is clearly critical for the conformational change and membrane fusion 
activity of HA, the effect of intracellular transport dynamics on the progress 
of infection remains largely unclear. In this study, we developed a 
comprehensive mathematical model accounting for the first steps of influenza 
virus infection. We calibrated our model with experimental data and challenged 
its predictions using recombinant viruses with altered pH sensitivity of HA. We 
identified the time point of virus-endosome fusion and thereby the diffusion 
distance of the released viral genome to the nucleus as a critical bottleneck 
for efficient virus infection. Further, we concluded and supported 
experimentally that the viral RNA is subjected to cytosolic degradation strongly 
limiting the probability of a successful genome import into the nucleus.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005075
PMCID: PMC5079570
PMID: 27780209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.