1. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Dec 15;27(25):3980-3990. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E16-06-0362.
Epub  2016 Oct 26.

The role of gigaxonin in the degradation of the glial-specific intermediate 
filament protein GFAP.

Lin NH(1), Huang YS(1), Opal P(2)(3), Goldman RD(3), Messing A(4)(5), Perng 
MD(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Life Sciences, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
(2)Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611.
(4)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705.
(5)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53705.
(6)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Life Sciences, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan mdperng@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Alexander disease (AxD) is a primary genetic disorder of astrocytes caused by 
dominant mutations in the gene encoding the intermediate filament (IF) protein 
GFAP. This disease is characterized by excessive accumulation of GFAP, known as 
Rosenthal fibers, within astrocytes. Abnormal GFAP aggregation also occurs in 
giant axon neuropathy (GAN), which is caused by recessive mutations in the gene 
encoding gigaxonin. Given that one of the functions of gigaxonin is to 
facilitate proteasomal degradation of several IF proteins, we sought to 
determine whether gigaxonin is involved in the degradation of GFAP. Using a 
lentiviral transduction system, we demonstrated that gigaxonin levels influence 
the degradation of GFAP in primary astrocytes and in cell lines that express 
this IF protein. Gigaxonin was similarly involved in the degradation of some but 
not all AxD-associated GFAP mutants. In addition, gigaxonin directly bound to 
GFAP, and inhibition of proteasome reversed the clearance of GFAP in cells 
achieved by overexpressing gigaxonin. These studies identify gigaxonin as an 
important factor that targets GFAP for degradation through the proteasome 
pathway. Our findings provide a critical foundation for future studies aimed at 
reducing or reversing pathological accumulation of GFAP as a potential 
therapeutic strategy for AxD and related diseases.

© 2016 Lin, Huang, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication 
it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E16-06-0362
PMCID: PMC5156539
PMID: 27798231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]