1. J Oral Facial Pain Headache. 2016 Fall;30(4):302-310. doi: 10.11607/ofph.1688.

Genetic Polymorphisms of Catechol-O-Methyltransferase: Association with 
Temporomandibular Disorders and Postoperative Pain.

Mladenovic I, Supic G, Kozomara R, Dodic S, Ivkovic N, Milicevic B, Simic I, 
Magic Z.

AIMS: To evaluate the association between catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
gene polymorphisms and temporomandibular disorders (TMD), TMD pain, psychosocial 
impairment related to TMD, and postoperative pain.
METHODS: A total of 90 patients with a diagnosis of painful TMD and 92 matched 
controls were investigated for the presence of TMD, TMD pain, and psychosocial 
variables by the Research Diagnostic Criteria for TMD. In a prospective cohort 
study of 40 subjects who underwent extraction of at least one fully impacted 
mandibular third molar, subjects had 6 months post-surgery follow-up of 
postoperative pain. DNA extracted from peripheral blood was genotyped for three 
COMT polymorphisms (rs4680, rs6269, and rs165774) by real-time TaqMan method. 
The association between COMT polymorphisms and clinical variables was determined 
by calculating odds ratios (OR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: Homozygous AA genotype and heterozygous variant A allele carriers 
(genotype AG/AA) for rs165774 polymorphism were associated with increased risk 
of TMD compared to wild type (wt) GG genotype (OR = 9.448, P = .006; OR = 2.088, 
P = .017, respectively). In addition, AA genotype was associated with increased 
risk of arthralgia (OR = 4.448, P = .011), myofascial pain (OR = 3.543, P = 
.035), and chronic TMD pain (OR = 6.173, P = .006), compared to wt genotype. AA 
genotype for rs6269 polymorphism was related to less postoperative chronic TMD 
pain (P = .025) and lower postoperative acute pain at the extraction site (P = 
.030). No associations with depression and somatization were observed.
CONCLUSION: AA genotype of rs165774 could be a significant risk factor for the 
development of TMD and TMD pain, while AA genotype of rs6269 presents less 
postoperative chronic TMD pain and acute pain at a dental extraction site.

DOI: 10.11607/ofph.1688
PMID: 27792797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]