1. Med Sci Monit. 2016 Oct 31;22:4107-4113. doi: 10.12659/msm.897626.

Association of UGT2B7 and UGT1A4 Polymorphisms with Serum Concentration of 
Antiepileptic Drugs in Children.

Du Z(1), Jiao Y(1), Shi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Weifang Yidu Central Hospital, Qingzhou, Shandong, 
China (mainland).

BACKGROUND This study aimed to analyze the relationship of UGT2B7 and UGT1A4 
polymorphisms with metabolism of valproic acid (VPA) and lamotrigine (LTG) in 
epileptic children. MATERIAL AND METHODS We administered VPA (102) and LTG (102) 
to 204 children with epilepsy. Blood samples were collected before the morning 
dose. Serum concentration of LTG was measured by high-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC). Serum VPA concentration was tested by fluorescence 
polarization immunoassay. UGT2B7 A268G, C802T, and G211T polymorphisms, as well 
as UGT1A4 L48V polymorphism, were assayed by direct automated DNA sequencing 
after PCR. Evaluation of efficacy was conducted using the Engel method. RESULTS 
The adjusted serum concentration of VPA was 4.26 μg/mL per mg/kg and LTG was 
1.56 μg/mL per mg/kg. Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that VPA or 
LTG adjusted concentration showed a good linear relation with sex and age. 
UGT2B7 A268G and C802T polymorphisms were demonstrated to affect the serum 
concentration of VPA (F=3.147, P=0.047; F=22.754, P=0.000). UGT1A4 L48V 
polymorphism was not related with the serum concentration of LTG (F=5.328, 
P=0.006). In the efficacy analysis, we found that C802T polymorphism exerted 
strong effects on efficacy of VPA (χ²=9.265, P=0.010). L48V polymorphism also 
showed effects on efficacy of LTG (χ²=17.397, P=0.001). CONCLUSIONS UGT2B7, 
UGT1A4 polymorphisms play crucial roles in metabolism of VPA and LTG.

DOI: 10.12659/msm.897626
PMCID: PMC5100833
PMID: 27795544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]