1. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Dec 15;27(25):3964-3971. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E16-07-0511.
Epub  2016 Oct 26.

Dissecting Torsin/cofactor function at the nuclear envelope: a genetic study.

Laudermilch E(1), Tsai PL(1), Graham M(2), Turner E(1), Zhao C(1), Schlieker 
C(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520.
(3)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520 christian.schlieker@yale.edu.

The human genome encodes four Torsin ATPases, the functions of which are poorly 
understood. In this study, we use CRISPR/Cas9 engineering to delete all four 
Torsin ATPases individually and in combination. Using nuclear envelope (NE) 
blebbing as a phenotypic measure, we establish a direct correlation between the 
number of inactivated Torsin alleles and the occurrence of omega-shaped 
herniations within the lumen of the NE. A similar, although not identical, 
redundancy is observed for LAP1 and LULL1, which serve as regulatory cofactors 
for a subset of Torsin ATPases. Unexpectedly, deletion of Tor2A in a 
TorA/B/3A-deficient background results in a stark increase of bleb formation, 
even though Tor2A does not respond to LAP1/LULL1 stimulation. The robustness of 
the observed phenotype in Torsin-deficient cells enables a structural analysis 
via electron microscopy tomography and a compositional analysis via immunogold 
labeling. Ubiquitin and nucleoporins were identified as distinctively localizing 
components of the omega-shaped bleb structure. These findings suggest a 
functional link between the Torsin/cofactor system and NE/nuclear pore complex 
biogenesis or homeostasis and establish a Torsin-deficient cell line as a 
valuable experimental platform with which to decipher Torsin function.

© 2016 Laudermilch et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication 
it is available to the public under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E16-07-0511
PMCID: PMC5156537
PMID: 27798237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]