1. J Cell Sci. 2016 Dec 1;129(23):4366-4378. doi: 10.1242/jcs.192880. Epub 2016
Oct  17.

Yeast cells reveal the misfolding and the cellular mislocalization of the human 
BRCA1 protein.

Thouvenot P(1)(2), Fourrière L(1)(2), Dardillac E(3), Ben Yamin B(1)(2), Lescure 
A(1)(2), Lejour V(1)(2), Heiligenstein X(2)(4), Boulé JB(1)(2), Romao M(2)(4), 
Raposo-Benedetti G(2)(4), Lopez BS(3), Nicolas A(1)(2), Millot GA(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR3244, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris 
F-75005, France.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, UMR3244, Paris F-75005, 
France.
(3)CNRS UMR 8200, Institut de Cancerologie Gustave-Roussy, Université 
Paris-Saclay, 114 Rue Edouard Vaillant, Villejuif 94805, France.
(4)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR144, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris 
F-75005, France.
(5)Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR3244, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris 
F-75005, France gael.millot@curie.fr.

Understanding the effect of an ever-growing number of human variants detected by 
genome sequencing is a medical challenge. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
model has held attention for its capacity to monitor the functional impact of 
missense mutations found in human genes, including the BRCA1 breast and ovarian 
cancer susceptibility gene. When expressed in yeast, the wild-type full-length 
BRCA1 protein forms a single nuclear aggregate and induces a growth inhibition. 
Both events are modified by pathogenic mutations of BRCA1. However, the 
biological processes behind these events in yeast remain to be determined. Here, 
we show that the BRCA1 nuclear aggregation and the growth inhibition are 
sensitive to misfolding effects induced by missense mutations. Moreover, 
misfolding mutations impair the nuclear targeting of BRCA1 in yeast cells and in 
a human cell line. In conclusion, we establish a connection between misfolding 
and nuclear transport impairment, and we illustrate that yeast is a suitable 
model to decipher the effect of misfolding mutations.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.192880
PMID: 27802165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]