1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Nov 15;113(46):13021-13026. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1605685113. Epub 2016 Nov 2.

Structural and functional consequences of a disease mutation in the telomere 
protein TPP1.

Bisht K(1), Smith EM(1)(2), Tesmer VM(1), Nandakumar J(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(2)Program in Chemical Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; jknanda@umich.edu.

Telomerase replicates chromosome ends to facilitate continued cell division. 
Mutations that compromise telomerase function result in stem cell failure 
diseases, such as dyskeratosis congenita (DC). One such mutation (K170Î”), 
residing in the telomerase-recruitment factor TPP1, provides an excellent 
opportunity to structurally, biochemically, and genetically dissect the 
mechanism of such diseases. We show through site-directed mutagenesis and X-ray 
crystallography that this TPP1 disease mutation deforms the conformation of two 
critical amino acids of the TEL [TPP1's glutamate (E) and leucine-rich (L)] 
patch, the surface of TPP1 that binds telomerase. Using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, 
we demonstrate that introduction of this mutation in a heterozygous manner is 
sufficient to shorten telomeres in human cells. Our findings rule out 
dominant-negative effects of the mutation. Instead, these findings implicate 
reduced TEL patch dosage in causing telomere shortening. Our studies provide 
mechanistic insight into telomerase-deficiency diseases and encourage the 
development of gene therapies to counter such diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1605685113
PMCID: PMC5135350
PMID: 27807141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.