1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 2;11(11):e0165559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165559. 
eCollection 2016.

Genetic and Epigenetic Regulation of TOX3 Expression in Breast Cancer.

Han YJ(1), Zhang J(1), Zheng Y(1), Huo D(2), Olopade OI(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics and Global Health; and Section of 
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, United States of America.
(2)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60637, United States of America.

Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified low penetrance and high 
frequency single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that contribute to genetic 
susceptibility of breast cancer. The SNPs at 16q12, close to the TOX3 and CASC16 
genes, represent one of the susceptibility loci identified by GWAS, showing 
strong evidence for breast cancer association across various populations. To 
examine molecular mechanisms of TOX3 regulation in breast cancer, we 
investigated both genetic and epigenetic factors using cell lines and datasets 
derived from primary breast tumors available through The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA). TOX3 expression is highly up-regulated in luminal subtype tumors 
compared to normal breast tissues or basal-like tumors. Expression quantitative 
trait loci (eQTL) analyses revealed significant associations of rs3803662 and 
rs4784227 genotypes with TOX3 expression in breast tumors. Bisulfite sequencing 
of four CpG islands in the TOX3 promoter showed a clear difference between 
luminal and basal-like cancer cell lines. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment of a 
basal-like cancer cell line increased expression of TOX3. TCGA dataset verified 
significantly lower levels of methylation of the promoter in luminal breast 
tumors with an inverse correlation between methylation and expression of TOX3. 
Methylation QTL (mQTL) analyses showed a weak or no correlation of rs3803662 or 
rs4784227 with TOX3 promoter methylation in breast tumors, indicating an 
independent relationship between the genetic and epigenetic events. These data 
suggest a complex system of TOX3 regulation in breast tumors, driven by germline 
variants and somatic epigenetic modifications in a subtype specific manner.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165559
PMCID: PMC5091860
PMID: 27806084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.