1. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1534:1-15. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6670-7_1.

The Immortal Senescence.

Bianchi-Smiraglia A(1), Lipchick BC(1), Nikiforov MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, BLSC 
L3-317, Elm & Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, BLSC 
L3-317, Elm & Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA. 
mikhail.nikiforov@roswellpark.org.

Activation of oncogenic signaling paradoxically results in the permanent 
withdrawal from cell cycle and induction of senescence (oncogene-induced 
senescence (OIS)). OIS is a fail-safe mechanism used by the cells to prevent 
uncontrolled tumor growth, and, as such, it is considered as the first barrier 
against cancer. In order to progress, tumor cells thus need to first overcome 
the senescent phenotype. Despite the increasing attention gained by OIS in the 
past 20 years, this field is still rather young due to continuous emergence of 
novel pathways and processes involved in OIS. Among the many factors 
contributing to incomplete understanding of OIS are the lack of unequivocal 
markers for senescence and the complexity of the phenotypes revealed by 
senescent cells in vivo and in vitro. OIS has been shown to play major roles at 
both the cellular and organismal levels in biological processes ranging from 
embryonic development to barrier to cancer progression. Here we will briefly 
outline major advances in methodologies that are being utilized for induction, 
identification, and characterization of molecular processes in cells undergoing 
oncogene-induced senescence. The full description of such methodologies is 
provided in the corresponding chapters of the book.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-6670-7_1
PMCID: PMC5648013
PMID: 27812863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]