1. PeerJ. 2016 Oct 25;4:e2468. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2468. eCollection 2016.

Antimicrobial activity of Tachyplesin 1 against Burkholderia pseudomallei: an in 
vitro and in silico approach.

Lee LF(1), Mariappan V(1), Vellasamy KM(1), Lee VS(2), Vadivelu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya 
, Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya , Kuala 
Lumpur , Malaysia.

Burkholderia pseudomallei, the causative agent of melioidosis, is intrinsically 
resistant to many conventional antibiotics. Therefore, alternative antimicrobial 
agents such as antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are extensively studied to combat 
this issue. Our study aims to identify and understand the mode of action of the 
potential AMP(s) that are effective against B. pseudomallei in both planktonic 
and biofilm state as well as to predict the possible binding targets on using in 
vitro and in silico approaches. In the in vitro study, 11 AMPs were tested 
against 100 B. pseudomallei isolates for planktonic cell susceptibility, where 
LL-37, and PG1, demonstrated 100.0% susceptibility and TP1 demonstrated 83% 
susceptibility. Since the B. pseudomallei activity was reported on LL-37 and 
PG1, TP1 was selected for further investigation. TP1 inhibited B. pseudomallei 
cells at 61.69 μM, and membrane blebbing was observed using scanning electron 
microscopy. Moreover, TP1 inhibited B. pseudomallei cell growth, reaching 
bactericidal endpoint within 2 h post exposure as compared to ceftazidime (CAZ) 
(8 h). Furthermore, TP1 was shown to suppress the growth of B. pseudomallei 
cells in biofilm state at concentrations above 221 μM. However, TP1 was 
cytotoxic to the mammalian cell lines tested. In the in silico study, molecular 
docking revealed that TP1 demonstrated a strong interaction to the common 
peptide or inhibitor binding targets for lipopolysaccharide of Escherichia coli, 
as well as autolysin, pneumolysin, and pneumococcal surface protein A (PspA) of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae. Homology modelled B. pseudomallei PspA protein (YDP) 
also showed a favourable binding with a strong electrostatic contribution and 
nine hydrogen bonds. In conclusion, TP1 demonstrated a good potential as an 
anti-B. pseudomallei agent.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2468
PMCID: PMC5088614
PMID: 27812400

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.