1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 3;11(11):e0165674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165674. 
eCollection 2016.

Evaluation of the G145R Mutant of the Hepatitis B Virus as a Minor Strain in 
Mother-to-Child Transmission.

Komatsu H(1)(2), Inui A(2), Umetsu S(2), Tsunoda T(2), Sogo T(2), Konishi Y(3), 
Fujisawa T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Toho University, Sakura Medical Center, Chiba, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Eastern Yokohama 
Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Eastern Yokohama Hospital, Kanagawa, 
Japan.

The role of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) mutant G145R, with a single change in 
amino acid 145 of the surface protein, as a minor population remains unknown in 
mother-to-child transmission. The minor strain as well as the major strain of 
the G145R mutant were evaluated in three cohorts using a locked nucleic acid 
probe-based real-time PCR. The breakthrough cohort consisted of children who 
were born to HBV carrier mothers and became HBV carriers despite 
immnoprophylaxis (n = 25). The control cohort consisted of HBV carriers who had 
no history of receiving the hepatitis B vaccine, hepatitis B immunoglobulin or 
antiviral treatment (n = 126). The pregnant cohort comprised pregnant women with 
chronic HBV infection (n = 31). In the breakthrough cohort, 6 showed positive 
PCR results (major, 2; minor, 4). In the control cohort, 13 showed positive PCR 
results (major, 0; minor, 13). HBeAg-positive patients were prone to have the 
G145R mutant as a minor population. Deep sequencing was performed in a total of 
32 children (PCR positive, n = 13; negative, n = 19). In the breakthrough 
cohort, the frequency of the G145R mutant ranged from 0.54% to 6.58%. In the 
control cohort, the frequency of the G145R mutant ranged from 0.42% to 4.1%. Of 
the 31 pregnant women, 4 showed positive PCR results (major, n = 0; minor, n = 
4). All of the pregnant women were positive for HBeAg and showed a high viral 
load. Three babies born to 3 pregnant women with the G145R mutant were 
evaluated. After the completion of immunoprophylaxis, 2 infants became negative 
for HBsAg. The remaining infant became negative for HBsAg after the first dose 
of HB vaccine. G145R was detected in one-fourth of the children with 
immunoprophylaxis failure. However, the pre-existence of the G145R mutant as a 
minor population in pregnant women does not always cause breakthrough infection 
in infants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0165674
PMCID: PMC5094722
PMID: 27812178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.