1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Dec 16;291(51):26515-26528. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.754481.
Epub  2016 Nov 5.

O-GlcNAcylation of 8-Oxoguanine DNA Glycosylase (Ogg1) Impairs Oxidative 
Mitochondrial DNA Lesion Repair in Diabetic Hearts.

Cividini F(1), Scott BT(2), Dai A(2), Han W(2), Suarez J(2), Diaz-Juarez J(3), 
Diemer T(2), Casteel DE(2), Dillmann WH(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093-0671 and fcividini@ucsd.edu.
(2)From the Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093-0671 and.
(3)the Department of Pharmacology, Instituto Nacional de Cardiología, Juan 
Badiano 41, Barrio Belisario Domínguez Secc XVI, 14080 Tlalpan, DF, Mexico.
(4)From the Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093-0671 and wdillmann@ucsd.edu.

mtDNA damage in cardiac myocytes resulting from increased oxidative stress is 
emerging as an important factor in the pathogenesis of diabetic cardiomyopathy. 
A prevalent lesion that occurs in mtDNA damage is the formation of 
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), which can cause mutations when not 
repaired properly by 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (Ogg1). Although the mtDNA 
repair machinery has been described in cardiac myocytes, the regulation of this 
repair has been incompletely investigated. Here we report that the hearts of 
type 1 diabetic mice, despite having increased Ogg1 protein levels, had 
significantly lower Ogg1 activity than the hearts of control, non-type 1 
diabetic mice. In diabetic hearts, we further observed increased levels of 
8-OHdG and an increased amount of mtDNA damage. Interestingly, Ogg1 was found to 
be highly O-GlcNAcylated in diabetic mice compared with controls. In vitro 
experiments demonstrated that O-GlcNAcylation inhibits Ogg1 activity, which 
could explain the mtDNA lesion accumulation observed in vivo Reducing Ogg1 
O-GlcNAcylation in vivo by introducing a dominant negative O-GlcNAc transferase 
mutant (F460A) restored Ogg1 enzymatic activity and, consequently, reduced 
8-OHdG and mtDNA damage despite the adverse hyperglycemic milieu. Taken 
together, our results implicate hyperglycemia-induced O-GlcNAcylation of Ogg1 in 
increased mtDNA damage and, therefore, provide a new plausible biochemical 
mechanism for diabetic cardiomyopathy.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.754481
PMCID: PMC5159511
PMID: 27816939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]