1. Genet Mol Res. 2016 Nov 3;15(4). doi: 10.4238/gmr15048411.

Frequency distribution of interleukin-10 haplotypes (-1082 A>G, -819 C>T, and 
-592 C>A) in a Mexican population.

Vázquez-Villamar M(1), Palafox-Sánchez CA(1), Hernández-Bello J(1), Muñoz-Valle 
JF(1), Valle Y(1), Cruz A(1), Alatorre-Meza AI(1), Oregon-Romero E(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias Biomédicas, Centro Universitario de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México.
(2)Instituto de Investigación en Ciencias Biomédicas, Centro Universitario de 
Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México 
oregon_edith@hotmail.com.

Interleukin 10 (IL-10) is an immunoregulatory cytokine with multiple roles in 
the immune system. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms at positions -1082 
(A>G), -819 (C>T), and -592 (C>A) in the promoter region of the IL10 gene are 
believed to be associated with different inflammatory, infectious, and 
autoimmune diseases. These polymorphisms exhibit a strong linkage disequilibrium 
(LD) and form three principal haplotypes (GCC, ACC, and ATA). The GCC and ATA 
haplotypes have been associated with high and low levels of IL-10 production, 
respectively. The aim of this study was to establish the allele and haplotype 
frequencies of the IL10 polymorphisms in Mestizos from western Mexico. SNPs were 
analyzed in 340 healthy unrelated Mestizos from western Mexico by polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. The studied population 
presented significant differences, in the distribution of IL10 polymorphisms, 
from the Asian, African, and European populations. We also observed a strong LD 
within -1082 A>G, -819 C>T, and -592 C>A (100% pc = 7.735 x 10-18). The 
haplotypes ACC (45.4%), ATA (22.0%), GTA (14.9%), and GCC (13.9%) were most 
frequently observed in this population. The haplotype frequencies, however, 
differed from those reported previously in Mestizos from central Mexico, Asians, 
Africans, and European Caucasians, suggesting a differential gene flow in the 
Mexican Mestizo population. This could account for the genetic variability 
between Mexicans and populations of other ethnicities. The study of these 
polymorphisms and their haplotypes could help in expanding our knowledge to 
design future disease-risk studies on the western Mexican population.

DOI: 10.4238/gmr15048411
PMID: 27819740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]