1. An Bras Dermatol. 2016 Sep-Oct;91(5):595-600. doi: 
10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164957.

Expression of heparanase in basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.

Pinhal MA(1)(2), Almeida MC(2), Costa AS(1), Theodoro TR(1)(2), Serrano RL(1), 
Machado CD Filho(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Medicina do ABC (FMABC), Santo André, SP, Brazil.
(2)Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Heparanase is an enzyme that cleaves heparan sulfate chains. 
Oligosaccharides generated by heparanase induce tumor progression. Basal cell 
carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma comprise types of nonmelanoma skin cancer.
OBJECTIVES: Evaluate the glycosaminoglycans profile and expression of heparanase 
in two human cell lines established in culture, immortalized skin keratinocyte 
(HaCaT) and squamous cell carcinoma (A431) and also investigate the expression 
of heparanase in basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and eyelid skin 
of individuals not affected by the disease (control).
METHODS: Glycosaminoglycans were quantified by electrophoresis and indirect 
ELISA method. The heparanase expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR 
(qRTPCR).
RESULTS: The A431 strain showed significant increase in the sulfated 
glycosaminoglycans, increased heparanase expression and decreased hyaluronic 
acid, comparing to the HaCaT lineage. The mRNA expression of heparanase was 
significantly higher in Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma 
compared with control skin samples. It was also observed increased heparanase 
expression in squamous cell carcinoma compared to the Basal cell carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: The glycosaminoglycans profile, as well as heparanase expression are 
different between HaCaT and A431 cell lines. The increased expression of 
heparanase in Basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma suggests that 
this enzyme could be a marker for the diagnosis of such types of non-melanoma 
cancers, and may be useful as a target molecule for future alternative 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20164957
PMCID: PMC5087216
PMID: 27828631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None