1. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Nov 9;12(11):e1006014. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006014. 
eCollection 2016 Nov.

Cross-Species Rhesus Cytomegalovirus Infection of Cynomolgus Macaques.

Burwitz BJ(1)(2), Malouli D(1), Bimber BN(2), Reed JS(1)(2), Ventura AB(1), 
Hancock MH(1), Uebelhoer LS(1), Bhusari A(1), Hammond KB(1)(2), Espinosa 
Trethewy RG(1), Klug A(2), Legasse AW(2), Axthelm MK(2), Nelson JA(1)(2), Park 
BS(2), Streblow DN(1)(2), Hansen SG(1), Picker LJ(1)(2), Fr√ºh K(1)(2), Sacha 
JB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Beaverton, Oregon, United States of America.
(2)Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Beaverton, Oregon, United States of America.

Cytomegaloviruses (CMV) are highly species-specific due to millennia of 
co-evolution and adaptation to their host, with no successful experimental 
cross-species infection in primates reported to date. Accordingly, full genome 
phylogenetic analysis of multiple new CMV field isolates derived from two 
closely related nonhuman primate species, Indian-origin rhesus macaques (RM) and 
Mauritian-origin cynomolgus macaques (MCM), revealed distinct and tight lineage 
clustering according to the species of origin, with MCM CMV isolates mirroring 
the limited genetic diversity of their primate host that underwent a population 
bottleneck 400 years ago. Despite the ability of Rhesus CMV (RhCMV) laboratory 
strain 68-1 to replicate efficiently in MCM fibroblasts and potently inhibit 
antigen presentation to MCM T cells in vitro, RhCMV 68-1 failed to productively 
infect MCM in vivo, even in the absence of host CD8+ T and NK cells. In 
contrast, RhCMV clone 68-1.2, genetically repaired to express the homologues of 
the HCMV anti-apoptosis gene UL36 and epithelial cell tropism genes UL128 and 
UL130 absent in 68-1, efficiently infected MCM as evidenced by the induction of 
transgene-specific T cells and virus shedding. Recombinant variants of RhCMV 
68-1 and 68-1.2 revealed that expression of either UL36 or UL128 together with 
UL130 enabled productive MCM infection, indicating that multiple layers of 
cross-species restriction operate even between closely related hosts. 
Cumulatively, these results implicate cell tropism and evasion of apoptosis as 
critical determinants of CMV transmission across primate species barriers, and 
extend the macaque model of human CMV infection and immunology to MCM, a 
nonhuman primate species with uniquely simplified host immunogenetics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006014
PMCID: PMC5102353
PMID: 27829026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU), KF, 
LJP, JAN, and SGH have a financial interest in TomegaVax Inc., a company that 
may have a commercial interest in the results of this research and technology. 
JBS and DM are inventors on OHSU patents that have been licensed by TomegaVax, 
and therefore may have future financial interests in TomegaVax Inc. This 
potential individual and institutional conflict of interest has been reviewed 
and managed by OHSU.