1. Front Neural Circuits. 2016 Oct 24;10:84. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00084. 
eCollection 2016.

Axonal Cleaved Caspase-3 Regulates Axon Targeting and Morphogenesis in the 
Developing Auditory Brainstem.

Rotschafer SE(1), Allen-Sharpley MR(1), Cramer KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California Irvine, CA, 
USA.

Caspase-3 is a cysteine protease that is most commonly associated with cell 
death. Recent studies have shown additional roles in mediating cell 
differentiation, cell proliferation and development of cell morphology. We 
investigated the role of caspase-3 in the development of chick auditory 
brainstem nuclei during embryogenesis. Immunofluorescence from embryonic days 
E6-13 revealed that the temporal expression of cleaved caspase-3 follows the 
ascending anatomical pathway. The expression is first seen in the auditory 
portion of VIIIth nerve including central axonal regions projecting to nucleus 
magnocellularis (NM), then later in NM axons projecting to nucleus laminaris 
(NL), and subsequently in NL dendrites. To examine the function of cleaved 
caspase-3 in chick auditory brainstem development, we blocked caspase-3 cleavage 
in developing chick embryos with the caspase-3 inhibitor Z-DEVD-FMK from E6 to 
E9, then examined NM and NL morphology and NM axonal targeting on E10. NL 
lamination in treated embryos was disorganized and the neuropil around NL 
contained a significant number of glial cells normally excluded from this 
region. Additionally, NM axons projected into inappropriate portions of NL in 
Z-DEVD-FMK treated embyros. We found that the presence of misrouted axons was 
associated with more severe NL disorganization. The effects of axonal caspase-3 
inhibition on both NL morphogenesis and NM axon targeting suggest that these 
developmental processes are coordinated, likely through communication between 
axons and their targets.

DOI: 10.3389/fncir.2016.00084
PMCID: PMC5075536
PMID: 27822180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]