1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017 Jan;102:217-228. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.008. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

Hyper-activation of pp60(Src) limits nitric oxide signaling by increasing 
asymmetric dimethylarginine levels during acute lung injury.

Kumar S(1), Sun X(2), Noonepalle SK(2), Lu Q(2), Zemskov E(2), Wang T(2), 
Aggarwal S(3), Gross C(1), Sharma S(4), Desai AA(2), Hou Y(1), Dasarathy S(1), 
Qu N(2), Reddy V(1), Lee SG(1), Cherian-Shaw M(1), Yuan JX(2), Catravas JD(4), 
Rafikov R(2), Garcia JGN(2), Black SM(5).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Center and the Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, 
Augusta University, Augusta, GA, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, 
United States.
(4)Center for Biotechnology & Genomic Medicine, Old Dominion University, 
Norfolk, VA, United States.
(5)Department of Medicine, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, United States. 
Electronic address: steveblack@email.arizona.edu.

The molecular mechanisms by which the endothelial barrier becomes compromised 
during lipopolysaccharide (LPS) mediated acute lung injury (ALI) are still 
unresolved. We have previously reported that the disruption of the endothelial 
barrier is due, at least in part, to the uncoupling of endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) and increased peroxynitrite-mediated nitration of RhoA. The 
purpose of this study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which LPS 
induces eNOS uncoupling during ALI. Exposure of pulmonary endothelial cells 
(PAEC) to LPS increased pp60Src activity and this correlated with an increase in 
nitric oxide (NO) production, but also an increase in NOS derived superoxide, 
peroxynitrite formation and 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) levels. These effects could 
be simulated by the over-expression of a constitutively active pp60Src 
(Y527FSrc) mutant and attenuated by over-expression of dominant negative pp60Src 
mutant or reducing pp60Src expression. LPS induces both RhoA nitration and 
endothelial barrier disruption and these events were attenuated when pp60Src 
expression was reduced. Endothelial NOS uncoupling correlated with an increase 
in the levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) in both LPS exposed and 
Y527FSrc over-expressing PAEC. The effects in PAEC were also recapitulated when 
we transiently over-expressed Y527FSrc in the mouse lung. Finally, we found that 
the pp60-Src-mediated decrease in DDAH activity was mediated by the 
phosphorylation of DDAH II at Y207 and that a Y207F mutant DDAH II was resistant 
to pp60Src-mediated inhibition. We conclude that pp60Src can directly inhibit 
DDAH II and this is involved in the increased ADMA levels that enhance eNOS 
uncoupling during the development of ALI.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.008
PMCID: PMC5449193
PMID: 27838434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]