1. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 6;7(49):81555-81570. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13146.

Celecoxib inhibits proliferation and survival of chronic myelogeous leukemia 
(CML) cells via AMPK-dependent regulation of β-catenin and mTORC1/2.

Riva B(1), De Dominici M(2), Gnemmi I(1), Mariani SA(3), Minassi A(1), Minieri 
V(2), Salomoni P(4), Canonico PL(1), Genazzani AA(1), Calabretta B(2), 
Condorelli F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale "A. 
Avogadro", 28100 Novara, Italy.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia 19107, 
PA, USA.
(3)MRC Centre for Inflammation Research, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 
4TJ, UK.
(4)Samantha Dickson Brain Cancer Unit, University College London Cancer 
Institute, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

CML is effectively treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, the 
efficacy of these drugs is confined to the chronic phase of the disease and 
development of resistance to TKIs remains a pressing issue. The 
anti-inflammatory COX2 inhibitor celecoxib has been utilized as anti-tumour drug 
due to its anti-proliferative activity. However, its effects in hematological 
malignancies, in particular CML, have not been investigated yet. Thus, we tested 
biological effects and mechanisms of action of celecoxib in 
Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) CML and ALL cells.We show here that celecoxib 
suppresses the growth of Ph+ cell lines by increasing G1-phase and apoptotic 
cells and reducing S- and G2-phase cells. These effects were independent of COX2 
inhibition but required the rapid activation of AMP-activated protein kinase 
(AMPK) and the consequent inhibition mTORC1 and 2. Treatment with celecoxib also 
restored GSK3β function and led to down-regulation of β-catenin activity through 
transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms, two effects likely to 
contribute to Ph+ cell growth suppression by celecoxib.Celecoxib inhibited 
colony formation of TKI-resistant Ph+ cell lines including those with the T315I 
BCR-ABL mutation and acted synergistically with imatinib in suppressing colony 
formation of TKI-sensitive Ph+ cell lines. Finally, it suppressed colony 
formation of CD34+ cells from CML patients, while sparing most CD34+ progenitors 
from healthy donors, and induced apoptosis of primary Ph+ ALL cells.Together, 
these findings indicate that celecoxib may serve as a COX2-independent lead 
compound to simultaneously target the mTOR and β-catenin pathways, key players 
in the resistance of CML stem cells to TKIs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13146
PMCID: PMC5348412
PMID: 27835591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.