1. Mol Cell Biol. 2017 Jan 19;37(3):e00457-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00457-16. Print 
2017 Feb 1.

Arginine Methylation by PRMT1 Regulates Muscle Stem Cell Fate.

Blanc RS(1), Vogel G(1), Li X(2), Yu Z(1), Li S(2), Richard S(3).

Author information:
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group and Segal Cancer Center, Bloomfield Center 
for Research on Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, and 
Departments of Oncology and Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group and Segal Cancer Center, Bloomfield Center 
for Research on Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, and 
Departments of Oncology and Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada stephane.richard@mcgill.ca.

Quiescent muscle stem cells (MSCs) become activated in response to skeletal 
muscle injury to initiate regeneration. Activated MSCs proliferate and 
differentiate to repair damaged fibers or self-renew to maintain the pool and 
ensure future regeneration. The balance between self-renewal, proliferation, and 
differentiation is a tightly regulated process controlled by a genetic cascade 
involving determinant transcription factors such as Pax7, Myf5, MyoD, and MyoG. 
Recently, there have been several reports about the role of arginine methylation 
as a requirement for epigenetically mediated control of muscle regeneration. 
Here we report that the protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is 
expressed in MSCs and that conditional ablation of PRMT1 in MSCs using 
Pax7CreERT2 causes impairment of muscle regeneration. Importantly, 
PRMT1-deficient MSCs have enhanced cell proliferation after injury but are 
unable to terminate the myogenic differentiation program, leading to 
regeneration failure. We identify the coactivator of Six1, Eya1, as a substrate 
of PRMT1. We show that PRMT1 methylates Eya1 in vitro and that loss of PRMT1 
function in vivo prevents Eya1 methylation. Moreover, we observe that 
PRMT1-deficient MSCs have reduced expression of Eya1/Six1 target MyoD due to 
disruption of Eya1 recruitment at the MyoD promoter and subsequent Eya1-mediated 
coactivation. These findings suggest that arginine methylation by PRMT1 
regulates muscle stem cell fate through the Eya1/Six1/MyoD axis.

Copyright © 2017 Blanc et al.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00457-16
PMCID: PMC5247616
PMID: 27849571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]