1. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2017 Jul;64(4):464-480. doi: 10.1111/jeu.12384. Epub
2016  Dec 14.

Phosphorylation of Serine 148 in Giardia lamblia End-binding 1 Protein is 
Important for Cell Division.

Kim J(1), Lee HY(1), Lee KH(2), Park SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Medical Biology and Institute of Tropical 
Medicine, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, 03722, South Korea.
(2)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, 04107, South Korea.

Giardia lamblia is a unicellular organism, showing a polarity with two nuclei 
and cytoskeletal structures. Accurate positioning of these organelles is 
essential for division of G. lamblia, which is poorly understood. Giardia 
lamblia end-binding 1 (GlEB1) protein and G. lamblia aurora kinase (GlAK) have 
been shown to modulate microtubule (MT) distribution during cytokinesis. A 
direct association between GlEB1 and GlAK was demonstrated. Like GlEB1, GlAK was 
also found at nuclear envelopes and median bodies of G. lamblia. In vitro kinase 
assays using Giardia lysates immunoprecipitated with anti-GlAK antibodies or 
recombinant GlAK suggested that GlEB1 is a substrate of GlAK. Site-directed 
mutagenesis indicated that threonine-205 in GlAK was auto-phosphorylated and 
that GlAK phosphorylated serine (Ser)-148 in GlEB1. Ectopic expression of a 
mutant GlEB1 (with conversion of Ser-148 into alanine of GlEB1) resulted in an 
increased number of Giardia cells with division defects. Treatment of G. lamblia 
with an AK inhibitor triggered cytokinesis defects, and ectopic expression of a 
phospho-mimetic mutant GlEB1 (with conversion of Ser-148 into aspartate) rescued 
the defects in Giardia cell division caused by the AK inhibitor. These results 
suggested that phosphorylation of GlEB1 played a role in cytokinesis in 
G. lamblia.

© 2016 The Author(s) Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology © 2016 International 
Society of Protistologists.

DOI: 10.1111/jeu.12384
PMID: 27859890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]