1. J Exp Bot. 2016 Dec;67(22):6413-6430. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw411.

Association mapping reveals the genetic architecture of tomato response to water 
deficit: focus on major fruit quality traits.

Albert E(1), Segura V(2), Gricourt J(1), Bonnefoi J(3), Derivot L(3), Causse 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)INRA, UR1052, Génétique et Amélioration des Fruits et Légumes, 67 Allée des 
Chênes, Centre de Recherche PACA, Domaine Saint Maurice, CS60094, Montfavet, 
84143, France.
(2)INRA, UR0588, Amélioration, Génétique et Physiologie Forestières, 2163 Avenue 
de la Pomme de Pin, Centre de Recherche Val de Loire, CS 40001, Orléans, 45075, 
France.
(3)GAUTIER Semences, route d'Avignon, Eyragues, 13630, France.
(4)INRA, UR1052, Génétique et Amélioration des Fruits et Légumes, 67 Allée des 
Chênes, Centre de Recherche PACA, Domaine Saint Maurice, CS60094, Montfavet, 
84143, France Mathilde.Causse@paca.inra.fr.

Water scarcity constitutes a crucial constraint for agriculture productivity. 
High-throughput approaches in model plant species identified hundreds of genes 
potentially involved in survival under drought, but few having beneficial 
effects on quality and yield. Nonetheless, controlled water deficit may improve 
fruit quality through higher concentration of flavor compounds. The underlying 
genetic determinants are still poorly known. In this study, we phenotyped 141 
highly diverse small fruit tomato accessions for 27 traits under two contrasting 
watering conditions. A subset of 55 accessions exhibited increased metabolite 
contents and maintained yield under water deficit. Using 6100 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), association mapping revealed 31, 41, and 44 quantitative 
trait loci (QTLs) under drought, control, and both conditions, respectively. 
Twenty-five additional QTLs were interactive between conditions, emphasizing the 
interest in accounting for QTLs by watering regime interactions in fruit quality 
improvement. Combining our results with the loci previously identified in a 
biparental progeny resulted in 11 common QTLs and contributed to a first 
detailed characterization of the genetic determinants of response to water 
deficit in tomato. Major QTLs for fruit quality traits were dissected and 
candidate genes were proposed using expression and polymorphism data. The 
outcomes provide a basis for fruit quality improvement under deficit irrigation 
while limiting yield losses.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw411
PMCID: PMC5181584
PMID: 27856709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]