1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 18;6:34450. doi: 10.1038/srep34450.

Inter-isoform Hetero-dimerization of Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 
1A1, 1A9, and 2B7 and Impacts on Glucuronidation Activity.

Yuan LM(1), Gao ZZ(1), Sun HY(1), Qian SN(1), Xiao YS(1), Sun LL(1), Zeng S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Drug Metabolism and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Zhejiang Province 
Key Laboratory of Anti-Cancer Drug Research, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.

Human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) play a pivotal role in phase II 
metabolism by catalyzing the glucuronidation of endobiotics and xenobiotics. The 
catalytic activities of UGTs are highly impacted by both genetic polymorphisms 
and oligomerization. The present study aimed to assess the inter-isoform 
hetero-dimerization of UGT1A1, 1A9, and 2B7, including the wild type (1A1*1, 
1A9*1, and 2B7*1) and the naturally occurring (1A1*1b, 1A9*2/*3/*5, and 
2B7*71S/*2/*5) variants. The related enzymes were double expressed in Bac-to-Bac 
systems. The fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) technique and 
co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) revealed stable hetero-dimerization of UGT1A1, 
1A9, and 2B7 allozymes. Variable FRET efficiencies and donor-acceptor distances 
suggested that genetic polymorphisms resulted in altered affinities to the 
target protein. In addition, the metabolic activities of UGTs were 
differentially altered upon hetero-dimerization via double expression systems. 
Moreover, protein interactions also changed the regioselectivity of UGT1A9 for 
querectin glucuronidation. These findings provide in-depth understanding of 
human UGT dimerization as well as clues for complicated UGT dependent metabolism 
in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/srep34450
PMCID: PMC5114717
PMID: 27857056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]