1. Exp Brain Res. 2017 Mar;235(3):731-742. doi: 10.1007/s00221-016-4836-9. Epub 
2016 Nov 19.

Impairment of mitochondria dynamics by human A53T α-synuclein and rescue by NAP 
(davunetide) in a cell model for Parkinson's disease.

Melo TQ(1)(2), van Zomeren KC(2), Ferrari MF(1), Boddeke HW(2), Copray JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute for Biosciences, 
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Section Medical Physiology, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Section Medical Physiology, University Medical 
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, 
The Netherlands. j.c.v.m.copray@umcg.nl.

The formation of oligomers and aggregates of overexpressed or mutant α-synuclein 
play a role in the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease 
by causing dysfunction of mitochondria, reflected in their disturbed mobility 
and production of ROS. The mode of action and mechanisms underlying this 
mitochondrial impairment is still unclear. We have induced stable expression of 
wild-type, A30P or A53T α-synuclein in neuronally differentiated SH-SY5Y 
neuroblastoma cells and studied anterograde and retrograde mitochondrial 
trafficking in this cell model for Parkinson's disease. In contrast to wild-type 
and A30P, A53T α-synuclein significantly inhibited mitochondrial trafficking, at 
first retrogradely and in a later stage anterogradely. Accordingly, A53T 
α-synuclein also caused the highest increase in ROS production in the 
dysmobilized mitochondria in comparison to wild-type or A30P α-synuclein. 
Treatment with NAP, the eight amino acid peptide identified as the active 
component of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP), completely 
annihilated the adverse effects of A53T on mitochondrial dynamics. Our results 
reveal that A53T α-synuclein (oligomers or aggregates) leads to the inhibition 
of mitochondrial trafficking, which can be rescued by NAP, suggesting the 
involvement of microtubule disruption in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-016-4836-9
PMCID: PMC5315729
PMID: 27866262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]