1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017 Jun;107:146-150. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.025. Epub 2016 Nov 17.

Risky repair: DNA-protein crosslinks formed by mitochondrial base excision DNA 
repair enzymes acting on free radical lesions.

Caston RA(1), Demple B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University School of 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University School of 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. Electronic address: 
bruce.demple@stonybrook.edu.

Oxygen is both necessary and dangerous for aerobic cell function. ATP is most 
efficiently made by the electron transport chain, which requires oxygen as an 
electron acceptor. However, the presence of oxygen, and to some extent the 
respiratory chain itself, poses a danger to cellular components. Mitochondria, 
the sites of oxidative phosphorylation, have defense and repair pathways to cope 
with oxidative damage. For mitochondrial DNA, an essential pathway is base 
excision repair, which acts on a variety of small lesions. There are instances, 
however, in which attempted DNA repair results in more damage, such as the 
formation of a DNA-protein crosslink trapping the repair enzyme on the DNA. That 
is the case for mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ acting on abasic sites oxidized 
at the 1-carbon of 2-deoxyribose. Such DNA-protein crosslinks presumably must be 
removed in order to restore function. In nuclear DNA, ubiquitylation of the 
crosslinked protein and digestion by the proteasome are essential first 
processing steps. How and whether such mechanisms operate on DNA-protein 
crosslinks in mitochondria remains to be seen.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.11.025
PMCID: PMC5815828
PMID: 27867099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]