1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2017 May;1861(5 Pt B):1429-1447. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.11.027. Epub 2016 Nov 16.

G-quadruplex-based aptamers against protein targets in therapy and diagnostics.

Platella C(1), Riccardi C(1), Montesarchio D(1), Roviello GN(2), Musumeci D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, 
Italy.
(2)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimages, CNR, Napoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, 
Italy; Institute of Biostructures and Bioimages, CNR, Napoli, Italy. Electronic 
address: domenica.musumeci@unina.it.

Nucleic acid aptamers are single-stranded DNA or RNA molecules identified to 
recognize with high affinity specific targets including proteins, small 
molecules, ions, whole cells and even entire organisms, such as viruses or 
bacteria. They can be identified from combinatorial libraries of DNA or RNA 
oligonucleotides by SELEX technology, an in vitro iterative selection procedure 
consisting of binding (capture), partitioning and amplification steps. 
Remarkably, many of the aptamers selected against biologically relevant protein 
targets are G-rich sequences that can fold into stable G-quadruplex (G4) 
structures. Aiming at disseminating novel inspiring ideas within the scientific 
community in the field of G4-structures, the emphasis of this review is placed 
on: 1) recent advancements in SELEX technology for the efficient and rapid 
identification of new candidate aptamers (introduction of microfluidic systems 
and next generation sequencing); 2) recurrence of G4 structures in aptamers 
selected by SELEX against biologically relevant protein targets; 3) discovery of 
several G4-forming motifs in important regulatory regions of the human or viral 
genome bound by endogenous proteins, which per se can result into potential 
aptamers; 4) an updated overview of G4-based aptamers with therapeutic potential 
and 5) a discussion on the most attractive G4-based aptamers for diagnostic 
applications. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled "G-quadruplex" 
Guest Editor: Dr. Concetta Giancola and Dr. Daniela Montesarchio.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2016.11.027
PMCID: PMC7117017
PMID: 27865995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]