1. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2017 Feb;73(2):157-164. doi: 10.1007/s00228-016-2160-8. 
Epub 2016 Nov 18.

Evaluation of 5-fluorouracil degradation rate and Pharmacogenetic profiling to 
predict toxicity following adjuvant Capecitabine.

Roberto M(1), Romiti A(2), Botticelli A(2), Mazzuca F(2), Lionetto L(3), Gentile 
G(3), Paris I(2), Falcone R(2), Bassanelli M(2), Di Pietro FR(2), Onesti CE(2), 
Anselmi E(2), Macrini S(2), Simmaco M(3), Marchetti P(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Molecular Medicine Department, Sapienza University of Rome - 
Sant'Andrea Hospital, Via di Grottarossa 1035, 00189, Rome, Italy. 
Mikiroberto@hotmail.it.
(2)Clinical and Molecular Medicine Department, Sapienza University of Rome - 
Sant'Andrea Hospital, Via di Grottarossa 1035, 00189, Rome, Italy.
(3)Advanced Molecular Diagnostics Unit, Sant'Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: On account of the lack of predictive biomarkers of toxicity, we 
investigated whether polymorphisms of genes involved in fluoropyrimidine 
metabolism and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) degradation rate were associated with 
outcomes of adjuvant capecitabine in patients with early stage gastrointestinal 
cancers.
METHODS: Genotyping of DPYD GIVS14A, MTHFR C677T and A1298C SNPs were performed 
by pyro-sequencing technology. PCR analysis was used for genotyping TYMS-TSER. 
We also evaluated the 5-FU degradation rate, which determines the amount of drug 
consumed by PBMC in a time unit. Association of these variables with clinical 
outcome was evaluated using multivariate logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-two patients with early stage colon (39%), rectal 
(28%), stomach (20%) and pancreatic (13%) cancer, treated with adjuvant 
capecitabine, were included in this retrospective analysis. Seventy and 20% of 
the patients suffered from at least one G1-4 and G3-4 adverse events, 
respectively. According to the 5-FU degradation rate, three and 13 patients were 
assigned as poor (<0.86 ng/mL/106 cells/min) and ultra-rapid (>2.1 ng/mL/106 
cells/min) metabolizers, respectively. At a multivariate logistic regression 
analysis, an altered 5-FU degradation rate (values <0.86 or >2.10 ng/mL/106 
cells/min) was associated with grade 3-4 adverse events (OR = 2.09, 95% CI: 
1.14-3.82, P = 0.01). No correlation was reported between toxicity and gene 
polymorphisms except for hand-foot syndrome that was more frequent in the MTHFR 
1298CC homozygous variant genotype (OR = 2.03, 95% CI 1.04-3.96, P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: 5-FU degradation rate may be regarded as possible predictive 
biomarker of capecitabine toxicity in early stage gastrointestinal cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-016-2160-8
PMID: 27864592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]