1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 23;6:37515. doi: 10.1038/srep37515.

Multiple crosstalk between TOR and the cell integrity MAPK signaling pathway in 
fission yeast.

Madrid M(1), Vázquez-Marín B(1), Franco A(1), Soto T(1), Vicente-Soler J(1), 
Gacto M(1), Cansado J(1).

Author information:
(1)Yeast Physiology Group, Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Facultad de 
Biología, Universidad de Murcia, 30071 Murcia, Spain.

In eukaryotic cells, the highly conserved Target of Rapamycin (TOR) and the 
Mitogen Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways elicit adaptive 
responses to extra- and intracellular conditions by regulating essential 
cellular functions. However, the nature of the functional relationships between 
both pathways is not fully understood. In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe the cell integrity MAPK pathway (CIP) regulates morphogenesis, cell wall 
structure and ionic homeostasis. We show that the Rab GTPase Ryh1, a TORC2 
complex activator, cross-activates the CIP and its core member, the MAPK Pmk1, 
by two distinct mechanisms. The first one involves TORC2 and its downstream 
effector, Akt ortholog Gad8, which together with TORC1 target Psk1 increase 
protein levels of the PKC ortholog Pck2 during cell wall stress or glucose 
starvation. Also, Ryh1 activates Pmk1 in a TORC2-independent fashion by 
prompting plasma membrane trafficking and stabilization of upstream activators 
of the MAPK cascade, including PDK ortholog Ksg1 or Rho1 GEF Rgf1. Besides, 
stress-activated Pmk1 cross-inhibits Ryh1 signaling by decreasing the GTPase 
activation cycle, and this ensures cell growth during alterations in 
phosphoinositide metabolism. Our results reveal a highly intricate 
cross-regulatory relationship between both pathways that warrants adequate cell 
adaptation and survival in response to environmental changes.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37515
PMCID: PMC5120329
PMID: 27876895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]