1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016 Nov 21;10(11):e0005116. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0005116. eCollection 2016 Nov.

Gene Expression Profile of High IFN-γ Producers Stimulated with Leishmania 
braziliensis Identifies Genes Associated with Cutaneous Leishmaniasis.

Carneiro MW(1), Fukutani KF(1), Andrade BB(1)(2), Curvelo RP(1), Cristal JR(1), 
Carvalho AM(1), Barral A(1)(3), Van Weyenbergh J(4), Barral-Netto M(1)(3), de 
Oliveira CI(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Gonçalo Moniz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
(2)Multinational Organization Network Sponsoring Translational and 
Epidemiological Research (MONSTER) Initiative, Fundação José Silveira, Salvador, 
Brazil.
(3)Federal University of Bahia School of Medicine, Salvador, Brazil.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute for Medical 
Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: The initial response to Leishmania parasites is essential in 
determining disease development or resistance. In vitro, a divergent response to 
Leishmania, characterized by high or low IFN-γ production has been described as 
a potential tool to predict both vaccine response and disease susceptibility in 
vivo.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We identified uninfected and healthy individuals that were 
shown to be either high- or low IFN-γ producers (HPs and LPs, respectively) 
following stimulation of peripheral blood cells with Leishmania braziliensis. 
Following stimulation, RNA was processed for gene expression analysis using 
immune gene arrays. Both HPs and LPs were shown to upregulate the expression of 
CXCL10, IFI27, IL6 and LTA. Genes expressed in HPs only (CCL7, IL8, IFI44L and 
IL1B) were associated with pathways related to IL17 and TREM 1 signaling. In 
LPs, uniquely expressed genes (for example IL9, IFI44, IFIT1 and IL2RA) were 
associated with pathways related to pattern recognition receptors and interferon 
signaling. We then investigated whether the unique gene expression profiles 
described here could be recapitulated in vivo, in individuals with active 
Cutaneous Leishmaniasis or with subclinical infection. Indeed, using a set of 
six genes (TLR2, JAK2, IFI27, IFIT1, IRF1 and IL6) modulated in HPs and LPs, we 
could successfully discriminate these two clinical groups. Finally, we 
demonstrate that these six genes are significantly overexpressed in CL lesions.
CONCLUSION: Upon interrogation of the peripheral response of naive individuals 
with diverging IFN-γ production to L. braziliensis, we identified differences in 
the innate response to the parasite that are recapitulated in vivo and that 
discriminate CL patients from individuals presenting a subclinical infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0005116
PMCID: PMC5117592
PMID: 27870860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.