1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017 Apr;74(8):1511-1525. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2423-7. 
Epub 2016 Nov 23.

A novel 72-kDa leukocyte-derived osteoglycin enhances the activation of 
toll-like receptor 4 and exacerbates cardiac inflammation during viral 
myocarditis.

Rienks M(1), Papageorgiou A(2)(3), Wouters K(2), Verhesen W(2), Leeuwen RV(2), 
Carai P(3), Summer G(2), Westermann D(4), Heymans S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
m.rienks@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Molecular and Vascular Biology, Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, KU 
Leuven, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Centre for Cardiology Research, Hamburg University, Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Viral myocarditis can severely damage the myocardium through 
excessive infiltration of immune cells. Osteoglycin (OGN) is part of the small 
leucine-rich repeat proteoglycan (SLRP) family. SLRP's may affect inflammatory 
and fibrotic processes, but the implication of OGN in cardiac inflammation and 
the resulting injury upon viral myocarditis is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study uncovered a previously unidentified 72-kDa 
variant of OGN that is predominant in cardiac human and mouse samples of viral 
myocarditis. Its absence in mice significantly decreased cardiac inflammation 
and injury in Coxsackievirus-B3-induced myocarditis. It also delayed mortality 
in lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia going along with a reduced systemic 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. This 72-kDa OGN is expressed in the 
cell membrane of circulating and resident cardiac macrophages and neutrophils. 
Co-immunoprecipitation and OGN siRNA experiments revealed that this 72-kDa 
variant activates the toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) with a concomitant increase in 
IL-6, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-12 expression. This immune cell activation by OGN 
occurred via MyD88 and increased phosphorylation of c-jun. Finally, the 72-kDa 
chondroitin sulfate is the result of O-linked glycosylation of the 32-kDa 
protein core of OGN. In contrast, the 34-kDa dermatan sulfate-OGN, involved in 
collagen cross linking, was also the result of O-linked glycosylation.
CONCLUSION: The current study discovered a novel 72-kDa chondroitin sulfate-OGN 
that is specific for innate immune cells. This variant is able to bind and 
activate TLR4. The absence of OGN decreases cytokine production by both 
circulating and cardiac leukocytes upon (systemic) LPS exposure, and reduces 
cardiac inflammation and injury in viral myocarditis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-016-2423-7
PMCID: PMC5357299
PMID: 27878326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.