1. Psychiatr Ann. 2016 Nov;46(11):642-646. doi: 10.3928/00485713-20161006-01.
Epub  2016 Nov 8.

Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Use in the Treatment of Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders: A Brief Review.

Szymkowicz SM(1), McLaren ME(1), Suryadevara U(2), Woods AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology at the University of Florida.
(2)North Florida/South Georgia VA Medical Center; and an Assistant Professor, 
University of Florida College of Medicine.
(3)Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, McKnight Brain Institute, Institute on 
Aging, Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, University of Florida College 
of Medicine.

Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a non-invasive brain 
stimulation technique that has grown in popularity over the past two decades as 
an alternative treatment option for various neuropsychiatric disorders. tDCS 
modulates cortical excitability through the application of a weak direct current 
to the scalp via electrodes placed over cortical regions of interest. It has 
been shown to be a promising and relatively safe treatment tool with few adverse 
events. In this article, we will briefly review the efficacy of tDCS in 
depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
We will also discuss biomarkers of tDCS efficacy in depression, as it is the 
most studied neuropsychiatric disorder using tDCS application. We will then 
offer suggestions for future directions. Although efficacy results show promise, 
more studies with larger samples and longer treatment periods are needed to 
better understand the benefits of using tDCS as an alternative treatment option 
for neuropsychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.3928/00485713-20161006-01
PMCID: PMC5117191
PMID: 27885309