1. PLoS One. 2016 Nov 23;11(11):e0167089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167089. 
eCollection 2016.

Synonymous Co-Variation across the E1/E2 Gene Junction of Hepatitis C Virus 
Defines Virion Fitness.

Palmer BA(1), Fanning LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Virology Diagnostic & Research Laboratory, Department of Medicine, 
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Hepatitis C virus is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus. The gene 
junction partitioning the viral glycoproteins E1 and E2 displays concurrent 
sequence evolution with the 3'-end of E1 highly conserved and the 5'-end of E2 
highly heterogeneous. This gene junction is also believed to contain structured 
RNA elements, with a growing body of evidence suggesting that such structures 
can act as an additional level of viral replication and transcriptional control. 
We have previously used ultradeep pyrosequencing to analyze an amplicon library 
spanning the E1/E2 gene junction from a treatment na√Øve patient where samples 
were collected over 10 years of chronic HCV infection. During this timeframe 
maintenance of an in-frame insertion, recombination and humoral immune targeting 
of discrete virus sub-populations was reported. In the current study, we present 
evidence of epistatic evolution across the E1/E2 gene junction and observe the 
development of co-varying networks of codons set against a background of a 
complex virome with periodic shifts in population dominance. Overtime, the 
number of codons actively mutating decreases for all virus groupings. We 
identify strong synonymous co-variation between codon sites in a group of 
sequences harbouring a 3 bp in-frame insertion and propose that synonymous 
mutation acts to stabilize the RNA structural backbone.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167089
PMCID: PMC5120871
PMID: 27880830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.