1. Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 25;6:37743. doi: 10.1038/srep37743.

Redox cofactors insertion in prokaryotic molybdoenzymes occurs via a conserved 
folding mechanism.

Arias-Cartin R(1), Ceccaldi P(1)(2), Schoepp-Cothenet B(2), Frick K(3), Blanc 
JM(1), Guigliarelli B(2), Walburger A(1), Grimaldi S(2), Friedrich T(3), 
Receveur-Brechot V(4), Magalon A(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, IMM, LCB UMR7283, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, IMM, BIP UMR7281, Marseille, France.
(3)Institut für Biochemie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM UMR7258, 
Marseille, France.

A major gap of knowledge in metalloproteins is the identity of the prefolded 
state of the protein before cofactor insertion. This holds for molybdoenzymes 
serving multiple purposes for life, especially in energy harvesting. This large 
group of prokaryotic enzymes allows for coordination of molybdenum or tungsten 
cofactors (Mo/W-bisPGD) and Fe/S clusters. Here we report the structural data on 
a cofactor-less enzyme, the nitrate reductase respiratory complex and 
characterize the conformational changes accompanying Mo/W-bisPGD and Fe/S 
cofactors insertion. Identified conformational changes are shown to be essential 
for recognition of the dedicated chaperone involved in cofactors insertion. A 
solvent-exposed salt bridge is shown to play a key role in enzyme folding after 
cofactors insertion. Furthermore, this salt bridge is shown to be strictly 
conserved within this prokaryotic molybdoenzyme family as deduced from a 
phylogenetic analysis issued from 3D structure-guided multiple sequence 
alignment. A biochemical analysis with a distantly-related member of the family, 
respiratory complex I, confirmed the critical importance of the salt bridge for 
folding. Overall, our results point to a conserved cofactors insertion mechanism 
within the Mo/W-bisPGD family.

DOI: 10.1038/srep37743
PMCID: PMC5123574
PMID: 27886223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]