1. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Nov 23;17(11):1962. doi: 10.3390/ijms17111962.

Influence of Secondary-Structure Folding on the Mutually Exclusive Folding 
Process of GL5/I27 Protein: Evidence from Molecular Dynamics Simulations.

Wang Q(1), Wang Y(2), Chen G(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry, Ministry of 
Education, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, 
China. wangqing0409@163.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry, Ministry of 
Education, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, 
China. wangy@bnu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Photochemistry, Ministry of 
Education, College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, 
China. gjchen@bnu.edu.cn.

Mutually exclusive folding proteins are a class of multidomain proteins in which 
the host domain remains folded while the guest domain is unfolded, and both 
domains achieve exchange of their folding status by a mutual exclusive folding 
(MEF) process. We carried out conventional and targeted molecular dynamics 
simulations for the mutually exclusive folding protein of GL5/I27 to address the 
MEF transition mechanisms. We constructed two starting models and two targeted 
models, i.e., the starting models GL5/I27-S and GL5/I27-ST in which the first 
model involves the host domain GL5 and the secondary-structure unfolded guest 
domain I27-S, while the second model involves the host domain GL5 and the 
secondary/tertiary-structure extending guest domain I27-ST, and the target 
models GL5-S/I27 and GL5-ST/I27 in which GL5-S and GL5-ST represent the 
secondary-structure unfolding and the secondary/tertiary-structure extending, 
respectively. We investigated four MEF transition processes from both starting 
models to both target models. Based on structural changes and the variations of 
the radius of gyration (Rg) and the fractions of native contacts (Q), the 
formation of the secondary structure of the I27-guest domain induces significant 
extending of the GL5-host domain; but the primary shrinking of the tertiary 
structure of the I27-guest domain causes insignificant extending of the GL5-host 
domain during the processes. The results indicate that only formation of the 
secondary structure in the I27-guest domain provides the main driving force for 
the mutually exclusive folding/unfolding between the I27-guest and GL5-host 
domains. A special structure as an intermediate with both host and guest domains 
being folded at the same time was found, which was suggested by the experiment. 
The analysis of hydrogen bonds and correlation motions supported the studied 
transition mechanism with the dynamical "tug-of-war" phenomenon.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms17111962
PMCID: PMC5133956
PMID: 27886109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.