1. Front Neurosci. 2016 Nov 10;10:492. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00492. eCollection
 2016.

Monoaminergic Mechanisms in Epilepsy May Offer Innovative Therapeutic 
Opportunity for Monoaminergic Multi-Target Drugs.

Svob Strac D(1), Pivac N(1), Smolders IJ(2), Fogel WA(3), De Deurwaerdere P(4), 
Di Giovanni G(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Drug Analysis, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Hormone Biochemistry, Medical University of Lodz Lodz, Poland.
(4)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (Unit√© Mixte de Recherche 5293) 
Bordeaux, France.
(5)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, 
University of Malta Msida, Malta.

A large body of experimental and clinical evidence has strongly suggested that 
monoamines play an important role in regulating epileptogenesis, seizure 
susceptibility, convulsions, and comorbid psychiatric disorders commonly seen in 
people with epilepsy (PWE). However, neither the relative significance of 
individual monoamines nor their interaction has yet been fully clarified due to 
the complexity of these neurotransmitter systems. In addition, epilepsy is 
diverse, with many different seizure types and epilepsy syndromes, and the role 
played by monoamines may vary from one condition to another. In this review, we 
will focus on the role of serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline, histamine, and 
melatonin in epilepsy. Recent experimental, clinical, and genetic evidence will 
be reviewed in consideration of the mutual relationship of monoamines with the 
other putative neurotransmitters. The complexity of epileptic pathogenesis may 
explain why the currently available drugs, developed according to the classic 
drug discovery paradigm of "one-molecule-one-target," have turned out to be 
effective only in a percentage of PWE. Although, no antiepileptic drugs 
currently target specifically monoaminergic systems, multi-target directed 
ligands acting on different monoaminergic proteins, present on both neurons and 
glia cells, may represent a new approach in the management of seizures, and 
their generation as well as comorbid neuropsychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00492
PMCID: PMC5102907
PMID: 27891070