1. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2017;22:414-425. doi: 10.1142/9789813207813_0039.

HUMAN KINASES DISPLAY MUTATIONAL HOTSPOTS AT COGNATE POSITIONS WITHIN CANCER.

Gallion J(1), Wilkins AD, Lichtarge O.

Author information:
(1)Structural Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza Houston, TX, 77030, USAâ€ The authors gratefully 
acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health (GM066099 and 
GM079656), from the National Science Foundation (DBI-1356569), and from DARPA 
(N66001-15-C-4042), Jonathan.Gallion@bcm.edu.

The discovery of driver genes is a major pursuit of cancer genomics, usually 
based on observing the same mutation in different patients. But the 
heterogeneity of cancer pathways plus the high background mutational frequency 
of tumor cells often cloud the distinction between less frequent drivers and 
innocent passenger mutations. Here, to overcome these disadvantages, we grouped 
together mutations from close kinase paralogs under the hypothesis that cognate 
mutations may functionally favor cancer cells in similar ways. Indeed, we find 
that kinase paralogs often bear mutations to the same substituted amino acid at 
the same aligned positions and with a large predicted Evolutionary Action. 
Functionally, these high Evolutionary Action, non-random mutations affect known 
kinase motifs, but strikingly, they do so differently among different kinase 
types and cancers, consistent with differences in selective pressures. Taken 
together, these results suggest that cancer pathways may flexibly distribute a 
dependence on a given functional mutation among multiple close kinase paralogs. 
The recognition of this "mutational delocalization" of cancer drivers among 
groups of paralogs is a new phenomena that may help better identify relevant 
mechanisms and therefore eventually guide personalized therapy.

DOI: 10.1142/9789813207813_0039
PMCID: PMC5157159
PMID: 27896994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]