1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 31;8(5):7891-7899. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.13631.

Genome-wide haplotype association study identify the FGFR2 gene as a risk gene 
for acute myeloid leukemia.

Lv H(1), Zhang M(1), Shang Z(1), Li J(1), Zhang S(2), Lian D(1), Zhang R(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, China.
(2)Hospital of Harbin Turbine Company Limited, Harbin Electric Corporation, 
Harbin, China.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a cancer of the myeloid line of blood cells, and 
generally considered to be caused by environment and genetic factors. In this 
study, we combined a genome-wide haplotype association study (GWHAS) and gene 
prioritization strategy to mine AML-related genetic affect factors and 
understand its pathogenesis. A total of 175 AML patients were downloaded from 
the public GEO database (GSE32462) and 218 matched Caucasian controls were from 
the HapMap Project. We first identified the linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks 
and performed a GWHAS to scan AML-related haplotypes. Then we mapped these 
haplotypes to the corresponding genes as candidate. And finally, we prioritized 
all the AML candidate genes based on the similarity with 38 known AML 
susceptibility genes. The results showed that 1754 haplotypes were significant 
associated with AML (P<1E-5) and mapped to 591 candidate genes. After 
prioritizing all 591 AML candidate genes, we obtained four genes ranking at the 
front as AML risk genes: RUNX1, JAK1, PDGFRA, and FGFR2. Among them, RUNX1, JAK1 
and PDGFRA had been confirmed as AML risk genes. In particular, we found that 
the gene FGFR2 was a novel AML susceptibility gene with a haplotype TT 
(rs7090018 and rs2912759) showed significant association with AML (P-value = 
7.07E-06). In a word, our findings might provide a new perspective to understand 
the pathogenesis of AML.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.13631
PMCID: PMC5352368
PMID: 27903959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.