1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 2;6:38435. doi: 10.1038/srep38435.

Mutational analysis of PRNP in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia 
in China.

Zhang W(1), Jiao B(1), Xiao T(1), Pan C(1), Liu X(1), Zhou L(1)(2), Tang 
B(1)(2)(3), Shen L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Changsha, China.

The prion protein (PRNP) gene is associated with prion diseases, whereas 
variants of the PRNP gene may also explain some cases of Alzheimer disease (AD) 
and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) in Caucasian populations. To determine the 
prevalence of the PRNP gene in patients with AD and FTD in China, we screened 
all exons of the PRNP gene in a cohort of 683 cases (606 AD and 77 FTD) in the 
Chinese Han population and we detected a novel missense mutation p.S17G in a 
late-onset AD (LOAD) patient. Furthermore, we analyzed the PRNP M/V polymorphism 
at codon 129, which was previously reported as a risk factor. However, there 
were no significant differences in genotype and allele frequency either in AD 
(OR = 0.75[0.378-1.49], P = 0.492), or FTD patients (OR = 2.046[0.265-15.783], 
P = 0.707). To our knowledge, this is the first study to reveal a correlation 
between the PRNP gene and Chinese AD and FTD patients in a large cohort. This 
study reports a novel p.S17G mutation in a clinically diagnosed LOAD patient, 
suggesting that the PRNP mutation is present in Chinese AD patients, whereas, 
M129V polymorphism is not a risk factor for AD or FTD in the Chinese Han 
population.

DOI: 10.1038/srep38435
PMCID: PMC5133586
PMID: 27910931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]