1. Front Microbiol. 2016 Nov 18;7:1858. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01858.
eCollection  2016.

The Absence of the N-acyl-homoserine-lactone Autoinducer Synthase Genes traI and 
ngrI Increases the Copy Number of the Symbiotic Plasmid in Sinorhizobium fredii 
NGR234.

Grote J(1), Krysciak D(1), Petersen K(1), Güllert S(1), Schmeisser C(1), 
Förstner KU(2), Krishnan HB(3), Schwalbe H(4), Kubatova N(4), Streit WR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Biocenter Klein Flottbek, 
University of Hamburg Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Core Unit Systems Medicine, University of Würzburg Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Plant Genetics Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, United States 
Department of Agriculture, University of Missouri Columbia, MO, USA.
(4)Institute for Organic Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Biomolecular 
Magnetic Resonance Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.

Plant-released flavonoids induce the transcription of symbiotic genes in 
rhizobia and one of the first bacterial responses is the synthesis of so called 
Nod factors. They are responsible for the initial root hair curling during onset 
of root nodule development. This signal exchange is believed to be essential for 
initiating the plant symbiosis with rhizobia affiliated with the 
Alphaproteobacteria. Here, we provide evidence that in the broad host range 
strain Sinorhizobium fredii NGR234 the complete lack of quorum sensing molecules 
results in an elevated copy number of its symbiotic plasmid (pNGR234a). This in 
turn triggers the expression of symbiotic genes and the production of Nod 
factors in the absence of plant signals. Therefore, increasing the copy number 
of specific plasmids could be a widespread mechanism of specialized bacterial 
populations to bridge gaps in signaling cascades.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.01858
PMCID: PMC5114275
PMID: 27917168