1. Genes Dev. 2016 Nov 15;30(22):2513-2526. doi: 10.1101/gad.288969.116. Epub
2016  Dec 5.

SUV4-20 activity in the preimplantation mouse embryo controls timely 
replication.

Eid A(1), Rodriguez-Terrones D(2), Burton A(1)(2), Torres-Padilla ME(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, U964, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)/Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), F-67404 Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.
(2)Institute of Epigenetics and Stem Cells, Helmholtz Zentrum München, D-81377 
München, Germany.

Extensive chromatin remodeling after fertilization is thought to take place to 
allow a new developmental program to start. This includes dynamic changes in 
histone methylation and, in particular, the remodeling of constitutive 
heterochromatic marks such as histone H4 Lys20 trimethylation (H4K20me3). While 
the essential function of H4K20me1 in preimplantation mouse embryos is well 
established, the role of the additional H4K20 methylation states through the 
action of the SUV4-20 methyltransferases has not been addressed. Here we show 
that Suv4-20h1/h2 are mostly absent in mouse embryos before implantation, 
underscoring a rapid decrease of H4K20me3 from the two-cell stage onward. We 
addressed the functional significance of this remodeling by introducing 
Suv4-20h1 and Suv4-20h2 in early embryos. Ectopic expression of Suv4-20h2 leads 
to sustained levels of H4K20me3, developmental arrest, and defects in S-phase 
progression. The developmental phenotype can be partially overcome through 
inhibition of the ATR pathway, suggesting that the main function for the 
remodeling of H4K20me3 after fertilization is to allow the timely and 
coordinated progression of replication. This is in contrast to the replication 
program in somatic cells, where H4K20me3 has been shown to promote replication 
origin licensing, and anticipates a different regulation of replication during 
this early developmental time window.

© 2016 Eid et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.288969.116
PMCID: PMC5159666
PMID: 27920088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]