1. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Nov 22;7:1719. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01719. eCollection
 2016.

Acclimation of Biochemical and Diffusive Components of Photosynthesis in Rice, 
Wheat, and Maize to Heat and Water Deficit: Implications for Modeling 
Photosynthesis.

Perdomo JA(1), Carmo-Silva E(2), Hermida-Carrera C(3), Flexas J(3), Galmés J(3).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biology and Crop Science, Rothamsted ResearchHarpenden, UK; Research 
Group on Plant Biology under Mediterranean Conditions, Universitat de les Illes 
BalearsPalma, Spain.
(2)Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University Lancaster, UK.
(3)Research Group on Plant Biology under Mediterranean Conditions, Universitat 
de les Illes Balears Palma, Spain.

The impact of the combined effects of heat stress, increased vapor pressure 
deficit (VPD) and water deficit on the physiology of major crops needs to be 
better understood to help identifying the expected negative consequences of 
climate change and heat waves on global agricultural productivity. To address 
this issue, rice, wheat, and maize plants were grown under control temperature 
(CT, 25°C, VPD 1.8 kPa), and a high temperature (HT, 38°C, VPD 3.5 kPa), both 
under well-watered (WW) and water deficit (WD) conditions. Gas-exchange 
measurements showed that, in general, WD conditions affected the leaf 
conductance to CO2, while growth at HT had a more marked effect on the 
biochemistry of photosynthesis. When combined, HT and WD had an additive effect 
in limiting photosynthesis. The negative impacts of the imposed treatments on 
the processes governing leaf gas-exchange were species-dependent. Wheat 
presented a higher sensitivity while rice and maize showed a higher acclimation 
potential to increased temperature. Rubisco and PEPC kinetic constants 
determined in vitro at 25°C and 38°C were used to estimate Vcmax, Jmax, and 
Vpmax in the modeling of C3 and C4 photosynthesis. The results here obtained 
reiterate the need to use species-specific and temperature-specific values for 
Rubisco and PEPC kinetic constants for a precise parameterization of the 
photosynthetic response to changing environmental conditions in different crop 
species.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01719
PMCID: PMC5118457
PMID: 27920782