1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2016 Nov 25;9:257. doi: 10.1186/s13068-016-0673-0. 
eCollection 2016.

Increasing n-butanol production with Saccharomyces cerevisiae by optimizing 
acetyl-CoA synthesis, NADH levels and trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase expression.

Schadeweg V(1), Boles E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue 
Str.9, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

BACKGROUND: n-Butanol can serve as an excellent gasoline substitute. Naturally, 
it is produced by some Clostridia species which, however, exhibit only limited 
suitability for industrial n-butanol production. The yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae would be an ideal host due to its high robustness in fermentation 
processes. Nevertheless, n-butanol yields and titers obtained so far with 
genetically engineered yeast strains are only low.
RESULTS: In our recent work, we showed that n-butanol production via a 
clostridial acetoacetyl-CoA-derived pathway in engineered yeast was limited by 
the availability of coenzyme A (CoA) and cytosolic acetyl-CoA. Increasing their 
levels resulted in a strain producing up to 130 mg/L n-butanol under anaerobic 
conditions. Here, we show that under aerobic conditions. this strain can even 
produce up to 235 mg/L n-butanol probably due to a more efficient NADH 
re-oxidation. Nevertheless, expression of a bacterial water-forming NADH oxidase 
(nox) significantly reduced n-butanol production although it showed a positive 
effect on growth and glucose consumption. Screening for an improved version of 
an acetyl-CoA forming NAD+-dependent acetylating acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, 
adhEA267T/E568K/R577S, and its integration into n-butanol-producing strain 
further improved n-butanol production. Moreover, deletion of the competing 
NADP+-dependent acetaldehyde dehydrogenase Ald6 had a superior effect on 
n-butanol formation. To increase the endogenous supply of CoA, amine oxidase 
Fms1 was overexpressed together with pantothenate kinase coaA from Escherichia 
coli, and could completely compensate the beneficial effect on n-butanol 
synthesis of addition of pantothenate to the medium. By overexpression of each 
of the enzymes of n-butanol pathway in the n-butanol-producing yeast strain, it 
turned out that trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase (ter) was limiting n-butanol 
production. Additional overexpression of ter finally resulted in a yeast strain 
producing n-butanol up to a titer of 0.86 g/L and a yield of 0.071 g/g glucose.
CONCLUSIONS: By further optimizing substrate supply and redox power in the form 
of coenzyme A, acetyl-CoA and NADH, n-butanol production with engineered yeast 
cells could be improved to levels never reached before with S. cerevisiae via an 
acetoacetyl-CoA-derived pathway in synthetic medium. Moreover, our results 
indicate that the NAD+/NADH redox balance and the trans-2-enoyl-CoA reductase 
reaction seem to be bottlenecks for n-butanol production with yeast.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-016-0673-0
PMCID: PMC5123364
PMID: 27924150