1. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Dec 2;54(12):931-935. doi: 
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.12.012.

[Two cases with generalized intracranial calcification due to hereditary folate 
malabsorption and literature review].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Y(1), Wang Q, Li DX, Liu YP, Song JQ, Li MQ, Qin YP, Yang YL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034, 
China.

Objective: This study aimed to investigate the clinical, biochemical and genetic 
features of two Chinese children with hereditary folate malabsorption. Method: 
Clinical features, laboratory examinations, treatment and SLC46A1 gene of two 
cases were studied. Reports on hereditary folate malabsorption utill September 
of 2016 were searched and the clinical and genetic characteristics of reported 
cases were summarized. Result: The two patients presented with megaloblastic 
anemia from their infant period and seizures, psychomotor retardation and 
regression. In case1, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 100 fl. Serum folate was 
9.96 nmol/L. Folate and 5-methylenetetrahydrofolate in cerebrospinal fluid were 
0 and 0.01 separately. In case 2, MCV was 93.9 fl. Serum folate was 4.49 nmol/L. 
The concentration of folate and 5-methylenetetrahydrofolate in cerebrospinal 
fluid were both zero. On their brain CT, progressive bilateral symmetrical 
calcification was observed. On their SLC46A1 gene, four mutations were 
identified. Case 1 had one novel mutation, c. 1238T>C (L413P) and c. 194-195insG 
(p.Cys66LeufsX99). From Case 2, two reported mutations, c. 1A>T (M1L) and c. 
194-195insG (p.Cys66LeufsX99) were identified. The administration of folinic 
acid (60 to 120 mg per day) was initiated after diagnosis. Clinical improvement 
and normalized hematologic markers were observed after treatment. Totally 37 
cases were reported in reviewed English literature, including 30 cases with 
mutations on SLC46A1 gene (only one Chinese patient). All the cases had the 
onset in infancy. The ratio of boys to girls was 1 to 1.5. Main manifestations 
were characterized by megaloblastic anemia (77%), failure to thrive (50%), 
diarrhea (27%), psychomotor retardation (63.6%), epilepsy (27%), and infection 
of respiratory system (45.5%). The concentration of folate in both serum and 
cerebrospinal fluid was decreased (72.7% and 63.6% respectively). 
Hypoimmunoglobulinemia accounted for 27.3%. Most of mutations in HFM were 
distributed between p. 65 and p. 68 (c.194-c.204), mainly due to insertion- or 
deletion-related frame shifts or generation of stop codons. Oral and parenteral 
folinic acid treatment was effective. Conclusion: Hereditary folate 
malabsorption often presented with megaloblastic anemia, abnormalities of 
digestive and nervous system, and hypoimmunoglobulinemia with recurrent 
infections. Low level of serum and CSF folate and screening SLC46A1 gene are 
keys to the etiologic study of the patients. Early supplement with folinic acid 
is beneficial to the prognosis.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1310.2016.12.012
PMID: 27938595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]