1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 9;11(12):e0167215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167215. 
eCollection 2016.

Time-Dependent Regulation of IL-2R α-Chain (CD25) Expression by TCR Signal 
Strength and IL-2-Induced STAT5 Signaling in Activated Human Blood T 
Lymphocytes.

Shatrova AN(1), Mityushova EV(1), Vassilieva IO(1), Aksenov ND(1), Zenin VV(1), 
Nikolsky NN(1), Marakhova II(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Intracellular Signaling and Transport, Institute of Cytology, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, St-Petersburg, Russia.

The expression of the IL-2R α-chain (IL-2Rα) is regulated at the transcriptional 
level via TCR- and IL-2R-signaling. The question is how to precede in time the 
activation signals to induce the IL-2Rα expression in native primary T cells. By 
comparing the effects of selective drugs on the dynamics of CD25 expression 
during the mitogen stimulation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes, we 
identified distinct Src- and JAK-dependent stages of IL-2Rα upregulation. PP2, a 
selective inhibitor of TCR-associated Src kinase, prevents CD25 expression at 
initial stages of T cell activation, prior to the cell growth. This early IL-2Rα 
upregulation underlies the T cell competence and the IL-2 responsiveness. We 
found that the activated with "weak" mitogen, the population of blood 
lymphocytes has some pool of competent CD25+ cells bearing a high affinity 
IL-2R. A distinct pattern of IL-2R signaling in resting and competent T 
lymphocytes has been shown. Based on the inhibitory effect of WHI-P131, a 
selective drug of JAK3 kinase activity, we concluded that in quiescent primary T 
lymphocytes, the constitutive STAT3 and the IL-2-induced prolonged STAT5 
activity (assayed by tyrosine phosphorylation) is mostly JAK3-independent. In 
competent T cells, in the presence of IL-2 JAK3/STAT5 pathway is switched to 
maintain the higher and sustained IL-2Rα expression as well as cell growth and 
proliferation. We believe that understanding the temporal coordination of 
antigen- and cytokine-evoked signals in primary T cells may be useful for 
improving immunotherapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167215
PMCID: PMC5172478
PMID: 27936140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.