1. J Bacteriol. 1989 Oct;171(10):5410-21. doi: 10.1128/jb.171.10.5410-5421.1989.

Characterization of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus catM, a repressor gene 
homologous in sequence to transcriptional activator genes.

Neidle EL(1), Hartnett C, Ornston LN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511.

Two structural genes needed for catechol degradation, catA and catB, encode the 
respective enzymes catechol 1,2-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.1) and muconate 
cycloisomerase (EC 5.5.1.1). Catechol is an intermediate in benzoate 
degradation, and the catA and catB genes are clustered within a 17-kilobase-pair 
(kbp) region of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus chromosomal DNA containing all of 
the structural genes required for the conversion of benzoate to tricarboxylic 
acid cycle intermediates. catA and catB were transcribed in the same direction 
and were separated by 3.8 kbp of DNA. The 3.8-kbp sequence revealed that 
directly downstream from catA and potentially transcribed in the same direction 
were two open reading frames encoding polypeptides of 48 and 36 kilodaltons 
(kDa). Genetic disruption of these open reading frames did not discernably alter 
either catechol metabolism or its regulation. A third open reading frame, 
beginning 123 bp upstream from catB and transcribed divergently from this gene, 
was designated catM. This gene was found to encode a 28-kDa trans-acting 
repressor protein that, in the absence of cis,cis-muconate, prevented expression 
of the cat structural genes. Constitutive expression of the genes was caused by 
a mutation substituting Arg-156 with His-156 in the catM-encoded repressor. The 
repressor protein proved to be a member of a diverse family of procaryotic 
regulatory proteins which, with rare exception, are transcriptional activators. 
Repression mediated by catM was not the sole transcriptional control exercised 
over catA in A. calcoaceticus. Expression of catA was elicited by either 
benzoate or cis,cis-muconate in a genetic background from which catM had been 
deleted. This induction required DNA in a segment lying 1 kbp upstream from the 
catA gene. It is likely that an additional gene, lying outside the region 
containing the structural genes necessary for benzoate metabolism, contributes 
to this control.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.171.10.5410-5421.1989
PMCID: PMC210378
PMID: 2793826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]