1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2017 Mar;67(3):736-743. doi:
10.1099/ijsem.0.001716.  Epub 2017 Apr 3.

Dyella acidisoli sp. nov., D. flagellata sp. nov. and D. nitratireducens sp. 
nov., isolated from forest soil.

Chen MH(1), Xia F(1), Lv YY(1), Zhou XY(1), Qiu LH(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

Bacterial strains 4M-Z03T, 4M-K16T and DHG59T were isolated from forest soil 
samples collected from the Dinghushan Biosphere Reserve, Guangdong Province, PR 
China (112° 31' E 23° 10' N). The three strains grew well at 28 °C, pH 5.0-6.0 
on R2A medium. On the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis, the three 
strains, together with Dyella humi DHG40T, formed a distinct phyletic clade 
within the genus Dyella, and the sequence similarities between any strains of 
the clade ranged from 97.8 to 98.5 %. Sequence analysis of concatenated partial 
gyrB, lepA and recA gene sequences also strongly suggested that the three 
strains represented three novel species of the genus Dyella. The respiratory 
lipoquinone of the three strains was ubiquinone-8, and their DNA G+C content was 
58.2-59.0 mol%. The fatty acid profiles differed substantially among these three 
strains, although they had two common major fatty acids, iso-C15 : 0 and 
iso-C17 : 1ω9c. The DNA-DNA relatedness among the three strains and the type 
strains of the closest species of the genus Dyella examined was lower than 50 %. 
The results of genotypic and phenotypic characterization presented above 
demonstrate that the three strains examined represent three novel species of the 
genus Dyella, for which the names Dyella acidisoli sp. nov. (type strain 
4M-Z03T=NBRC 111980T=KCTC 52131T), Dyella flagellata sp. nov. (type strain 
4M-K16T=NBRC 111981T=KCTC 52130T) and Dyella nitratireducens sp. nov. (type 
strain DHG59T=NBRC 111472T=LMG 29201T=CGMCC 1.15439T) are proposed.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.001716
PMID: 27930272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]