1. Proteins. 2017 May;85(5):775-811. doi: 10.1002/prot.25223. Epub 2017 Mar 16.

The evolution of function within the Nudix homology clan.

Srouji JR(1)(2), Xu A(3), Park A(2), Kirsch JF(2)(3), Brenner SE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Plant and Microbial Biology Department, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, 94720.
(2)Molecular and Cell Biology Department, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, 94720.
(3)Graduate Study in Comparative Biochemistry, University of California, 
Berkeley, California, 94720.

The Nudix homology clan encompasses over 80,000 protein domains from all three 
domains of life, defined by homology to each other. Proteins with a domain from 
this clan fall into four general functional classes: pyrophosphohydrolases, 
isopentenyl diphosphate isomerases (IDIs), adenine/guanine mismatch-specific 
adenine glycosylases (A/G-specific adenine glycosylases), and nonenzymatic 
activities such as protein/protein interaction and transcriptional regulation. 
The largest group, pyrophosphohydrolases, encompasses more than 100 distinct 
hydrolase specificities. To understand the evolution of this vast number of 
activities, we assembled and analyzed experimental and structural data for 205 
Nudix proteins collected from the literature. We corrected erroneous functions 
or provided more appropriate descriptions for 53 annotations described in the 
Gene Ontology Annotation database in this family, and propose 275 new 
experimentally-based annotations. We manually constructed a structure-guided 
sequence alignment of 78 Nudix proteins. Using the structural alignment as a 
seed, we then made an alignment of 347 "select" Nudix homology domains, curated 
from structurally determined, functionally characterized, or phylogenetically 
important Nudix domains. Based on our review of Nudix pyrophosphohydrolase 
structures and specificities, we further analyzed a loop region downstream of 
the Nudix hydrolase motif previously shown to contact the substrate molecule and 
possess known functional motifs. This loop region provides a potential 
structural basis for the functional radiation and evolution of substrate 
specificity within the hydrolase family. Finally, phylogenetic analyses of the 
347 select protein domains and of the complete Nudix homology clan revealed 
general monophyly with regard to function and a few instances of probable 
homoplasy. Proteins 2017; 85:775-811. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 The Authors. Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25223
PMCID: PMC5389931
PMID: 27936487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]