1. Case Rep Endocrinol. 2016;2016:2725486. doi: 10.1155/2016/2725486. Epub 2016
Nov  9.

The Biochemical Profile of Familial Hypocalciuric Hypercalcemia and Primary 
Hyperparathyroidism during Pregnancy and Lactation: Two Case Reports and Review 
of the Literature.

Ghaznavi SA(1), Saad NM(1), Donovan LE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

Background. Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) and Familial Hypocalciuric 
Hypercalcemia (FHH) result in different maternal and fetal complications in 
pregnancy. Calcium to creatinine clearance ratio (CCCR) is commonly used to help 
distinguish these two conditions. Physiological changes in calcium handling 
during pregnancy and lactation can alter CCCR, making it a less useful tool to 
distinguish PHPT from FHH. Cases. A 25-year-old female presented with 
hypercalcemia and an inappropriately normal PTH. Her CCCR was 0.79% before 
pregnancy and rose to 1.99% in her second trimester. The proband's mother and 
neonate had asymptomatic hypercalcemia. Genetic analysis revealed a CaSR 
mutation consistent with FHH. A 19-year-old female presented with a history of 
nephrolithiasis who underwent emergent caesarean section at 29 weeks of 
gestation for severe preeclampsia. At delivery, she was diagnosed with 
hypercalcemia with an inappropriately normal PTH and a CCCR of 2.67%, which fell 
to 0.88% during lactation. Parathyroidectomy cured her hypercalcemia. Pathology 
confirmed a parathyroid adenoma. Conclusion. These cases illustrate the 
influence of pregnancy and lactation on renal calcium indices, such as the CCCR. 
To avoid diagnostic error of women with hypercalcemia during pregnancy and 
lactation, calcium biochemistry of first-degree relatives and genetic testing of 
select patients are recommended.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/2725486
PMCID: PMC5120212
PMID: 27957351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.