1. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 14;6:39034. doi: 10.1038/srep39034.

Biology of archaea from a novel family Cuniculiplasmataceae (Thermoplasmata) 
ubiquitous in hyperacidic environments.

Golyshina OV(1), Kublanov IV(2), Tran H(1), Korzhenkov AA(3), Lünsdorf H(4), 
Nechitaylo TY(5), Gavrilov SN(2), Toshchakov SV(3), Golyshin PN(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Bangor University, Deiniol Rd, Bangor, LL57 
2UW, UK.
(2)Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center for Biotechnology 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospect 60-Letiya Oktyabrya 7/2, Moscow, 117312, 
Russia.
(3)Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, 236040 Kaliningrad, Russia.
(4)Central Unit of Microscopy, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Inhoffenstrasse 7, Braunschweig, 38124, Germany.
(5)Insect Symbiosis Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, 
Hans-Knöll-Strasse 8, Jena, 07745, Germany.

The order Thermoplasmatales (Euryarchaeota) is represented by the most 
acidophilic organisms known so far that are poorly amenable to cultivation. 
Earlier culture-independent studies in Iron Mountain (California) pointed at an 
abundant archaeal group, dubbed 'G-plasma'. We examined the genomes and 
physiology of two cultured representatives of a Family Cuniculiplasmataceae, 
recently isolated from acidic (pH 1-1.5) sites in Spain and UK that are 16S rRNA 
gene sequence-identical with 'G-plasma'. Organisms had largest genomes among 
Thermoplasmatales (1.87-1.94 Mbp), that shared 98.7-98.8% average nucleotide 
identities between themselves and 'G-plasma' and exhibited a high genome 
conservation even within their genomic islands, despite their remote 
geographical localisations. Facultatively anaerobic heterotrophs, they possess 
an ancestral form of A-type terminal oxygen reductase from a distinct parental 
clade. The lack of complete pathways for biosynthesis of histidine, valine, 
leucine, isoleucine, lysine and proline pre-determines the reliance on external 
sources of amino acids and hence the lifestyle of these organisms as scavengers 
of proteinaceous compounds from surrounding microbial community members. In 
contrast to earlier metagenomics-based assumptions, isolates were 
S-layer-deficient, non-motile, non-methylotrophic and devoid of iron-oxidation 
despite the abundance of methylotrophy substrates and ferrous iron in situ, 
which underlines the essentiality of experimental validation of bioinformatic 
predictions.

DOI: 10.1038/srep39034
PMCID: PMC5155288
PMID: 27966672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]