1. Genetics. 2017 Feb;205(2):707-723. doi: 10.1534/genetics.116.190850. Epub 2016
 Dec 14.

Human SOD1 ALS Mutations in a Drosophila Knock-In Model Cause Severe Phenotypes 
and Reveal Dosage-Sensitive Gain- and Loss-of-Function Components.

Şahin A(1), Held A(1), Bredvik K(1), Major P(1), Achilli TM(2), Kerson AG(1), 
Wharton K(1), Stilwell G(2), Reenan R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912.
(2)Department of Biology, Rhode Island College, Providence, Rhode Island 02908.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912 robert_reenan@brown.edu.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult-onset motor neuron 
disease and familial forms can be caused by numerous dominant mutations of the 
copper-zinc superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene. Substantial efforts have been 
invested in studying SOD1-ALS transgenic animal models; yet, the molecular 
mechanisms by which ALS-mutant SOD1 protein acquires toxicity are not well 
understood. ALS-like phenotypes in animal models are highly dependent on 
transgene dosage. Thus, issues of whether the ALS-like phenotypes of these 
models stem from overexpression of mutant alleles or from aspects of the SOD1 
mutation itself are not easily deconvolved. To address concerns about levels of 
mutant SOD1 in disease pathogenesis, we have genetically engineered four human 
ALS-causing SOD1 point mutations (G37R, H48R, H71Y, and G85R) into the 
endogenous locus of Drosophila SOD1 (dsod) via ends-out homologous recombination 
and analyzed the resulting molecular, biochemical, and behavioral phenotypes. 
Contrary to previous transgenic models, we have recapitulated ALS-like 
phenotypes without overexpression of the mutant protein. Drosophila carrying 
homozygous mutations rendering SOD1 protein enzymatically inactive (G85R, H48R, 
and H71Y) exhibited neurodegeneration, locomotor deficits, and shortened life 
span. The mutation retaining enzymatic activity (G37R) was phenotypically 
indistinguishable from controls. While the observed mutant dsod phenotypes were 
recessive, a gain-of-function component was uncovered through dosage studies and 
comparisons with age-matched dsod null animals, which failed to show severe 
locomotor defects or nerve degeneration. We conclude that the Drosophila 
knock-in model captures important aspects of human SOD1-based ALS and provides a 
powerful and useful tool for further genetic studies.

Copyright © 2017 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.116.190850
PMCID: PMC5289846
PMID: 27974499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]