1. J Virol. 2017 Feb 14;91(5):e02019-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02019-16. Print 2017
Mar  1.

Human Adenovirus Type 37 Uses α(V)β(1) and α(3)β(1) Integrins for Infection of 
Human Corneal Cells.

Storm RJ(1), Persson BD(1), Skalman LN(2), Frängsmyr L(1), Lindström M(3), 
Rankin G(4), Lundmark R(2)(3), Domellöf FP(5)(3), Arnberg N(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Norrland University 
Hospital (NUS), Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(5)Department of Clinical Sciences, Ophthalmology, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(6)Division of Virology, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden niklas.arnberg@umu.se.

Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC) is a severe, contagious ocular disease that 
affects 20 to 40 million individuals worldwide every year. EKC is mainly caused 
by six types of human adenovirus (HAdV): HAdV-8, -19, -37, -53, -54, and -56. Of 
these, HAdV-8, -19, and -37 use sialic acid-containing glycans as cellular 
receptors. αVβ3, αVβ5, and a few additional integrins facilitate entry and 
endosomal release of other HAdVs. With the exception of a few biochemical 
analyses indicating that HAdV-37 can interact physically with αVβ5, little is 
known about the integrins used by EKC-causing HAdVs. Here, we investigated the 
overall integrin expression on human corneal cells and found expression of α2, 
α3, α6, αV, β1, and β4 subunits in human corneal in situ epithelium and/or in a 
human corneal epithelial (HCE) cell line but no or less accessible expression of 
α4, α5, β3, or β5. We also identified the integrins used by HAdV-37 through a 
series of binding and infection competition experiments and different 
biochemical approaches. Together, our data suggest that HAdV-37 uses αVβ1 and 
α3β1 integrins for infection of human corneal epithelial cells. Furthermore, to 
confirm the relevance of these integrins in the HAdV-37 life cycle, we developed 
a corneal multilayer tissue system and found that HAdV-37 infection correlated 
well with the patterns of αV, α3, and β1 integrin expression. These results 
provide further insight into the tropism and pathogenesis of EKC-causing HAdVs 
and may be of importance for future development of new antiviral 
drugs.IMPORTANCE Keratitis is a hallmark of EKC, which is caused by six HAdV 
types (HAdV-8, -19, -37, -53, -54, and -56). HAdV-37 and some other HAdV types 
interact with integrin αVβ5 in order to enter nonocular human cells. In this 
study, we found that αVβ5 is not expressed on human corneal epithelial cells, 
thus proposing other host factors mediate corneal infection. Here, we first 
characterized integrin expression patterns on corneal tissue and corneal cells. 
Among the integrins identified, competition binding and infection experiments 
and biochemical assays pointed out αVβ1 and α3β1 to be of importance for HAdV-37 
infection of corneal tissue. In the absence of a good animal model for 
EKC-causing HAdVs, we also developed an in vitro system with multilayer HCE 
cells and confirmed the relevance of the suggested integrins during HAdV-37 
infection.

Copyright © 2017 Storm et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02019-16
PMCID: PMC5309963
PMID: 27974569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]