1. Biochemistry. 2017 Jan 10;56(1):189-201. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00958.
Epub  2016 Dec 16.

Reactions of Ferrous Coproheme Decarboxylase (HemQ) with O(2) and H(2)O(2) Yield 
Ferric Heme b.

Streit BR(1), Celis AI(1), Shisler K(1), Rodgers KR(2), Lukat-Rodgers GS(2), 
DuBois JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University , Bozeman, 
Montana 59715, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, North Dakota State University , 
Fargo, North Dakota 58102, United States.

A recently discovered pathway for the biosynthesis of heme b ends in an unusual 
reaction catalyzed by coproheme decarboxylase (HemQ), where the 
Fe(II)-containing coproheme acts as both substrate and cofactor. Because both O2 
and H2O2 are available as cellular oxidants, pathways for the reaction involving 
either can be proposed. Analysis of reaction kinetics and products showed that, 
under aerobic conditions, the ferrous coproheme-decarboxylase complex is rapidly 
and selectively oxidized by O2 to the ferric state. The subsequent second-order 
reaction between the ferric complex and H2O2 is slow, pH-dependent, and further 
decelerated by D2O2 (average kinetic isotope effect of 2.2). The observation of 
rapid reactivity with peracetic acid suggested the possible involvement of 
Compound I (ferryl porphyrin cation radical), consistent with coproheme and 
harderoheme reduction potentials in the range of heme proteins that 
heterolytically cleave H2O2. Resonance Raman spectroscopy nonetheless indicated 
a remarkably weak Fe-His interaction; how the active site structure may support 
heterolytic H2O2 cleavage is therefore unclear. From a cellular perspective, the 
use of H2O2 as an oxidant in a catalase-positive organism is intriguing, as is 
the unusual generation of heme b in the Fe(III) rather than Fe(II) state as the 
end product of heme synthesis.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00958
PMCID: PMC5368639
PMID: 27982566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]