1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2016 Dec 19;29(12):2175-2183. doi: 
10.1021/acs.chemrestox.6b00339. Epub 2016 Nov 30.

Dynamic Phosphorylation of Apoptosis Signal Regulating Kinase 1 (ASK1) in 
Response to Oxidative and Electrophilic Stress.

Morales Betanzos C(1), Federspiel JD(1), Palubinsky AM(1), McLaughlin B(1), 
Liebler DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
‡Neuroscience Graduate Program, Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt 
University, §Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University , Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232, United States.

Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) is a critical cellular stress sensor 
that senses diverse reactive chemotypes and integrates these chemical signals 
into a single biological pathway response. It is unknown whether ASK1 senses all 
stressors in the same way or if unique stress-specific mechanisms detect 
distinct chemotypes. In order to answer this question, we treated 
ASK1-expressing cells with two distinct stress activators, H2O2 and 
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE), and monitored the phosphorylation state of ASK1. 
Phosphorylation is an important regulator for the activity of ASK1, and we 
hypothesized that these two chemically distinct molecules may produce 
differences in the phosphorylation state of ASK1. Shotgun mass spectrometry and 
manual validation identified 12 distinct ASK1 phosphosites. Targeted parallel 
reaction monitoring assays were used to track the phosphorylation dynamics of 
each confirmed site in response to treatment. Eleven phosphosites exhibited 
dynamic response to one or both treatments. Six of these sites were identified 
in both H2O2- and HNE-treated cells, and four of these exhibited a consistent 
response between the two molecules. The results confirm that different 
chemotypes produce distinct phosphorylation patterns in concert with activation 
of a common MAPK pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.6b00339
PMCID: PMC5937698
PMID: 27989136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]