1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 20;11(12):e0168472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168472. 
eCollection 2016.

Structure Elucidation of a Polysaccharide from Umbilicaria esculenta and Its 
Immunostimulatory Activity.

Zhang BW(1), Xu JL(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang Q(2), Lu J(2), Wang JH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, 
Hefei, People's Republic of China.
(2)Anhui Qiangwang Flavouring Food Co., LTD, Dongcheng Development Zone, Jieshou 
City, Anhui, China.

Umbilicaria esculenta has been used as a tonic food in China for several 
centuries owing to its pleasant flavor and health benefits. In this study, a 
water soluble polysaccharide, which we designated as UP2, with an average 
molecular weight of 3.33 × 105 Da, was isolated from U. esculenta cultivated in 
the Huangshan Mountain, by consecutive hot water extraction and anion-exchange 
chromatography. Gas chromatography analysis indicated that UP2 contained three 
kinds of monosaccharides, including mannose, glucose, and galactose at a molar 
ratio of 1.7:1.0:1.2. Linkage analysis of UP2 revealed the presence of (1 → 
6)-linked glucosyl, (1 → 3,6)-linked glucosyl, t-linked galactosyl, (1 → 
6)-linked galactosyl and (1 → 6)-linked mannosyl at a molar ratio of 
0.7:4.6:4.1:2.2:9.1. Structural analysis determined that UP2 possessed a 
backbone consisting of (1 → 6)-linked β-D-glucopyranosyl and (1 → 6)-linked 
α-D-mannopyranosyl residues, which substituted at the O-3 position of (1 → 
6)-linked β-D-glucopyranosyl residues by branches of (1 → 6)-linked 
α-D-galactopyranosyl and 1-linked β-D-galactopyranosyl residues. 
Immunostimulatory activity analysis showed that UP2 could stimulate the 
proliferation of RAW264.7 cells in a dose-dependent manner, and all the samples 
(20-500 μg/mL) were found to enhance nitric oxide production. The highest 
phagocytic activity of UP2 was observed at 200 μg/mL. Thus, UP2 may be a 
potential source of biological and pharmacological agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168472
PMCID: PMC5172621
PMID: 27997616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Qiang Zhang and Jie Lu are employed by Anhui 
Qiangwang Flavouring Food Co., LTD. There are no patents, products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter our adherence 
to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online 
in the guide for authors.