1. Cereb Cortex. 2018 Feb 1;28(2):538-548. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhw387.

Activity-Independent Effects of CREB on Neuronal Survival and Differentiation 
during Mouse Cerebral Cortex Development.

Landeira BS(1), Santana TTDS(1), Araújo JAM(1), Tabet EI(2)(3), Tannous 
BA(2)(3), Schroeder T(4), Costa MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal 59056-450, 
Brazil.
(2)Experimental Therapeutics and Molecular Imaging Laboratory, Neuroscience 
Center, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Mattenstr. 26, 
4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Neuronal survival and morphological maturation depends on the action of the 
transcription factor calcium responsive element binding protein (CREB), which 
regulates expression of several target genes in an activity-dependent manner. 
However, it remains largely unknown whether CREB-mediated transcription could 
play a role at early stages of neuronal differentiation, prior to the 
establishment of functional synaptic contacts. Here, we show that CREB is 
phosphorylated at very early stages of neuronal differentiation in vivo and in 
vitro, even in the absence of depolarizing agents. Using genetic tools, we also 
show that inhibition of CREB-signaling affects neuronal growth and survival in 
vitro without affecting cell proliferation and neurogenesis. Expression of 
A-CREB or M-CREB, 2 dominant-negative inhibitors of CREB, decreases cell 
survival and the complexity of neuronal arborization. Similar changes are 
observed in neurons treated with protein kinase A (PKA) and 
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) inhibitors, which also show 
decreased levels of pCREBSer133. Notably, expression of CREB-FY, a Tyr134Phe 
CREB mutant with a lower Km for phosphorylation, partly rescues the effects of 
PKA and CaMKII inhibition. Our data indicate that CREB-mediated signaling play 
important roles at early stages of cortical neuron differentiation, prior to the 
establishment of fully functional synaptic contacts.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhw387
PMCID: PMC6248567
PMID: 27999124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]