1. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Dec 15;9:7573-7582. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S101385. 
eCollection 2016.

Sunitinib in the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumor: patient selection 
and perspectives.

Mulet-Margalef N(1), Garcia-Del-Muro X(1).

Author information:
(1)Sarcoma Multidisciplinary Unit and Medical Oncology Department, Institut 
Catal√† d'Oncologia Hospitalet, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common mesenchymal tumor of 
the gastrointestinal tract. In advanced setting and after progression to 
imatinib, the multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib has 
clearly demonstrated a clinical benefit in terms of response rate and 
progression-free survival with an acceptable toxicity profile. The recommended 
schedule for sunitinib administration is 50 mg per day 4 weeks ON and 2 weeks 
OFF; however, potential alternative schedules are also reviewed in the present 
article. Several biomarkers have been explored to better select candidates for 
sunitinib therapy, such as the value of early changes in standardized uptake 
value assessed by positron emission tomography with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, 
circulating biomarkers, clinical biomarkers such as the appearance of arterial 
hypertension during treatment that correlates with better outcomes, and the GIST 
genotype. GISTs with KIT mutations at exon 9 and the so-called wild-type GISTs 
seem to better respond to sunitinib. Nonetheless, further investigation is 
required to confirm these findings as well as to understand the mechanisms of 
sunitinib resistance such as the development of new KIT mutations or 
conformational changes in KIT receptor.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S101385
PMCID: PMC5171199
PMID: 28008275

Conflict of interest statement: Xavier Garcia-del-Muro reports advisory role for 
Pfizer and Bayer. Nuria Mulet-Margalef reports no conflicts of interest in this 
work.