1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Dec 27;68(25):2831-2849. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2016.09.968.

Genetics and Genomics of Single-Gene Cardiovascular Diseases: Common Hereditary 
Cardiomyopathies as Prototypes of Single-Gene Disorders.

Marian AJ(1), van Rooij E(2), Roberts R(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Genetics, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular 
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, and Texas Heart 
Institute, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: Ali.J.Marian@uth.tmc.edu.
(2)Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands; Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona.

This is the first of 2 review papers on genetics and genomics appearing as part 
of the series on "omics." Genomics pertains to all components of an organism's 
genes, whereas genetics involves analysis of a specific gene or genes in the 
context of heredity. The paper provides introductory comments, describes the 
basis of human genetic diversity, and addresses the phenotypic consequences of 
genetic variants. Rare variants with large effect sizes are responsible for 
single-gene disorders, whereas complex polygenic diseases are typically due to 
multiple genetic variants, each exerting a modest effect size. To illustrate the 
clinical implications of genetic variants with large effect sizes, 3 common 
forms of hereditary cardiomyopathies are discussed as prototypic examples of 
single-gene disorders, including their genetics, clinical manifestations, 
pathogenesis, and treatment. The genetic basis of complex traits is discussed in 
a separate paper.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.09.968
PMCID: PMC5189923
PMID: 28007145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]