1. R Soc Open Sci. 2016 Nov 16;3(11):160776. doi: 10.1098/rsos.160776.
eCollection  2016 Nov.

Domain-specific functions of Stardust in Drosophila embryonic development.

Koch L(1), Feicht S(1), Sun R(1), Sen A(1), Krahn MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Anatomy , University of Regensburg , Universit√§tsstr. 
31, 93053 Regensburg , Germany.

In Drosophila, the adaptor protein Stardust is essential for the stabilization 
of the polarity determinant Crumbs in various epithelial tissues, including the 
embryonic epidermis, the follicular epithelium and photoreceptor cells of the 
compound eye. In turn, Stardust recruits another adaptor protein, PATJ, to the 
subapical region to support adherens junction formation and morphogenetic 
events. Moreover, Stardust binds to Lin-7, which is dispensable in epithelial 
cells but functions in postsynaptic vesicle fusion. Finally, Stardust has been 
reported to bind directly to PAR-6, thereby linking the Crumbs-Stardust-PATJ 
complex to the PAR-6/aPKC complex. PAR-6 and aPKC are also capable of directly 
binding Bazooka (the Drosophila homologue of PAR-3) to form the PAR/aPKC 
complex, which is essential for apical-basal polarity and cell-cell contact 
formation in most epithelia. However, little is known about the physiological 
relevance of these interactions in the embryonic epidermis of Drosophila in 
vivo. Thus, we performed a structure-function analysis of the annotated domains 
with GFP-tagged Stardust and evaluated the localization and function of the 
mutant proteins in epithelial cells of the embryonic epidermis. The data 
presented here confirm a crucial role of the PDZ domain in binding Crumbs and 
recruiting the protein to the subapical region. However, the isolated PDZ domain 
is not capable of being recruited to the cortex, and the SH3 domain is essential 
to support the binding to Crumbs. Notably, the conserved N-terminal regions 
(ECR1 and ECR2) are not crucial for epithelial polarity. Finally, the GUK domain 
plays an important role for the protein's function, which is not directly linked 
to Crumbs stabilization, and the L27N domain is essential for epithelial 
polarization independently of recruiting PATJ.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.160776
PMCID: PMC5180163
PMID: 28018665