1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2017 Sep;121 Suppl 3(Suppl 3):63-77. doi: 
10.1111/bcpt.12751. Epub 2017 Mar 14.

Mass Spectrometry-Based Tools to Characterize DNA-Protein Cross-Linking by 
Bis-Electrophiles.

Groehler A 4th(1), Degner A(1), Tretyakova NY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Masonic Cancer Center, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

DNA-protein cross-links (DPCs) are unusually bulky DNA adducts that form in 
cells as a result of exposure to endogenous and exogenous agents including 
reactive oxygen species, ultraviolet light, ionizing radiation, environmental 
agents (e.g. transition metals, formaldehyde, 1,2-dibromoethane, 1,3-butadiene) 
and common chemotherapeutic agents. Covalent DPCs are cytotoxic and mutagenic 
due to their ability to interfere with faithful DNA replication and to prevent 
accurate gene expression. Key to our understanding of the biological 
significance of DPC formation is identifying the proteins most susceptible to 
forming these unusually bulky and complex lesions and quantifying the extent of 
DNA-protein cross-linking in cells and tissues. Recent advances in bottom-up 
mass spectrometry-based proteomics have allowed for an unbiased assessment of 
the whole protein DPC adductome after in vitro and in vivo exposures to 
cross-linking agents. This MiniReview summarizes current and emerging methods 
for DPC isolation and analysis by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We also 
highlight several examples of successful applications of these novel 
methodologies to studies of DPC lesions induced by bis-electrophiles such as 
formaldehyde, 1,2,3,4-diepoxybutane, nitrogen mustards and cisplatin.

Â© 2016 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.12751
PMCID: PMC5491375
PMID: 28032943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]