1. Curr Aging Sci. 2017;10(3):177-184. doi: 10.2174/1874609810666170102144233.

Oxidative Stress, Pro-Inflammatory Cytokines, and Antioxidants Regulate 
Expression Levels of MicroRNAs in Parkinson's Disease.

Prasad KN(1).

Author information:
(1)Engage Global, 245 El-Faisan Drive, San Rafael, CA 94903, United States.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a slow progressive neurodegenerative 
disease associated with abnormal function of extrapyramidal system. Although 
several biochemical and genetic defects are identified, increased oxidative 
stress and chronic inflammation are one of the earliest events that initiate and 
promote PD. Oxidative stress also participates in impaired nonmotor symptoms. 
The levels of microRNAs that are evolutionarily conserved single-stranded 
noncoding RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotide in length may have a role in PD.
METHOD: Published studies on changes in the levels of microRNAs in PD were 
critically reviewed, and the role of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, and antioxidants in regulating the levels of 
microRNAs was evaluated.
RESULTS: MicroRNAs levels were altered in PD. Downregulated microRNAs cause 
neurodegeneration by decreasing the levels of Nrf2 (nuclear transcriptional 
factor-2), mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), and DJ-1 and Parkin genes; and 
by increasing the levels of alpha-synuclein, RelA, Bim and Calpain-1, and A2AR 
(adenosine A2A receptor). Upregulated microRNAs cause degeneration of nerve 
cells by decreasing the levels of IGF-1 (Insulin Growth Factor-1), GRP78 
(glucose regulated protein 78), DJ-1, and Hsc-70 (Heat- Shock Protein-70) that 
enhanced alpha-synuclein levels. ROS and pro-inflammatory cytokines cause 
neurodegeneration by altering the levels of microRNAs. Antioxidants that protect 
neurons by reducing oxidative stress and chronic inflammation altered the levels 
of microRNAs.
CONCLUSION: Increased oxidative stress and chronic inflammation may cause 
neurodegeneration in PD by altering the levels of microRNAs and their target 
proteins. Antioxidants may provide neuroprotection by changing the levels of 
microRNAs and their target proteins.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1874609810666170102144233
PMID: 28042771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]