1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jan 31;8(5):8550-8558. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14347.

Genetic variation in PPARGC1A may affect the role of diet-associated 
inflammation in colorectal carcinogenesis.

Cho YA(1), Lee J(1), Oh JH(2), Chang HJ(2), Sohn DK(2), Shin A(1)(3), Kim J(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(2)Center for Colorectal Cancer, National Cancer Center Hospital, National 
Cancer Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

The role of inflammation in colorectal carcinogenesis may differ according to 
individuals' genetic variations. Therefore, we investigated whether genetic 
susceptibility alters the association between inflammatory potential of diet and 
the risk of colorectal cancer within the Korean population. We genotyped four 
polymorphisms in four genes (IL1B, TNF, PPARG, and PPARGC1A) and calculated the 
dietary inflammatory index (DII) in a case-control study with 701 colorectal 
cancer patients and 1,402 controls. Among the investigated polymorphisms, 
heterozygous carriers of rs3774921 in PPARGC1A showed a higher risk of 
colorectal cancer (OR [95% CI] = 1.26 [1.02-1.55] for TC vs. TT). When the data 
were stratified by rs3774921 genetic variant, the association of a 
pro-inflammatory diet with colorectal cancer risk was more prominent among 
homozygous variant allele carriers (OR [95% CI] = 5.15 [2.35-11.29] for high vs. 
low DII) (P for interaction = 0.009). When stratified by anatomic site, this 
association was much stronger for rectal cancer patients (OR [95% CI] = 8.06 
[2.67-24.16] for high vs. low DII) (P for interaction = 0.006). Additionally, 
this interaction was stronger among those older than 50 years and not exercising 
regularly. Conversely, no association or interaction was found for the other 
investigated polymorphisms. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest 
that a pro-inflammatory diet may have a differential effect on colorectal cancer 
risk based on PPARGC1A genetic variation. This interaction may differ by 
anatomic location and other risk factors.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14347
PMCID: PMC5352421
PMID: 28051997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have declared 
no conflicts of interest.