1. J Exp Bot. 2017 Apr 1;68(8):2027-2036. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw472.

Root xylem plasticity to improve water use and yield in water-stressed soybean.

Prince SJ(1), Murphy M(1), Mutava RN(1), Durnell LA(1), Valliyodan B(1), Shannon 
JG(1), Nguyen HT(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri, Division of Plant Sciences, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that increasing the number of metaxylem vessels would 
enhance the efficiency of water uptake in soybean (Glycine max) and decrease the 
yield gap in water-limited environments. A panel of 41 soybean accessions was 
evaluated in greenhouse, rainout shelter, and rain-fed field environments. The 
metaxylem number influenced the internal capture of CO2 and improved stomatal 
conductance, enhancing water uptake/use in soybeans exposed to stress during the 
reproductive stage. We determined that other root anatomical features, such as 
cortex cell area and the percentage of stele that comprised cortical cells, also 
affected seed yield under similar growth parameters. Seed yield was also 
impacted by pod retention rates under drought stress (24-80 pods/plant). We 
surmise that effective biomass allocation, that is, the transport of available 
photosynthates to floral structures at late reproductive growth stages (R6-R7), 
enables yield protection under drought stress. A mesocosm study of contrasting 
lines for yield under drought stress and root anatomical features revealed that 
increases in metaxylem number as an adaptation to drought in the high-yielding 
lines improved root hydraulic conductivity, which reduced the metabolic cost of 
exploring water in deeper soil strata and enhanced water transport. This allowed 
the maintenance of shoot physiological processes under water-limited conditions.

Â© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erw472
PMCID: PMC5428998
PMID: 28064176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]