1. Biochemistry. 2017 Feb 7;56(5):736-747. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00800. Epub
 2017 Jan 24.

Mispacking and the Fitness Landscape of the Green Fluorescent Protein 
Chromophore Milieu.

Banerjee S(1), Schenkelberg CD(1), Jordan TB(1), Reimertz JM(1), Crone EE(2), 
Crone DE(1), Bystroff C(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Biotechnology and 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy, New York 
12180, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Colgate University , Hamilton, New York 13346, United 
States.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , Troy, New 
York 12180, United States.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry. 2023 Oct 3;62(19):2894. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.3c00450.

The autocatalytic maturation of the chromophore in green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) was thought to require the precise positioning of the side chains 
surrounding it in the core of the protein, many of which are strongly conserved 
among homologous fluorescent proteins. In this study, we screened for green 
fluorescence in an exhaustive set of point mutations of seven residues that make 
up the chromophore microenvironment, excluding R96 and E222 because mutations at 
these positions have been previously characterized. Contrary to expectations, 
nearly all amino acids were tolerated at all seven positions. Only four point 
mutations knocked out fluorescence entirely. However, chromophore maturation was 
found to be slower and/or fluorescence reduced in several cases. Selected 
combinations of mutations showed nonadditive effects, including cooperativity 
and rescue. The results provide guidelines for the computational engineering of 
GFPs.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.6b00800
PMCID: PMC6193456
PMID: 28074648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.