1. Am J Cardiovasc Dis. 2016 Nov 30;6(4):138-145. eCollection 2016.

Screening of SMAD7 in Malay patients with ventricular septal defect.

Mohamed Sa'dom SA(1), Hashim H(1), Maran S(1), Mohd Zain MR(2), Wan Ibrahim 
WP(3), Wong AR(4), Corno AF(5), Wan Taib WR(1), Tan HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Genome Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia 
16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti 
Sains Malaysia 16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti 
Sains Malaysia16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia; Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin20400 Kuala Terengganu, 
Terengganu, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Pediatric, Hospital Raja Perempuan Zainab II 15586 Kota Bharu, 
Kelantan, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Pediatrics Medicine, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti 
Sains Malaysia16150 Kubang Kerian, Kelantan, Malaysia; Pediatric Cardiac 
Surgery, University Hospital LeicesterLeicester, United Kingdom.

Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common form of cardiac malformations 
accounting approximately 20% of all congenital heart defects. SMAD7 is an 
inhibitory protein that antagonizes the signalling of TGF-Î² family member and 
has been found in the development and function of mouse heart models. This study 
aims to screen and identify the polymorphisms of SMAD7 exonic regions in Malay 
population with VSD. Peripheral blood samples were collected and extracted from 
30 clinically diagnosed VSD patients. PCR amplification was performed using 12 
sets of designed primers encompassing seven exons of SMAD7. Re-sequencing was 
conducted to characterize the polymorphisms of SMAD7. Observed polymorphisms 
were then genotyped in 30 healthy individuals using both re-sequencing and 
allele-specific PCR techniques. A total of 10 variants were identified in the 
patient population located in the upstream (rs7236774), exonic (rs368427729, 
rs145686330, rs3764482, rs3809922, rs780863704 and rs3809923), intronic 
(rs3736242) and 3'UTR regions (rs375444823 and rs16950113). No significant 
difference of genotype and allele frequency was observed among these SNPs. Two 
synonymous variants (rs3809922 and rs3809923) were found in complete linkage 
disequilibrium (r2=1.0) with each other indicate a strong correlation of these 
SNPs. The identification of these SNPs provides a new perspective of the VSD 
causation.

PMCID: PMC5218845
PMID: 28078173