1. Cell Death Dis. 2017 Jan 12;8(1):e2551. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.484.

Mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction disturbs neuronal and cardiac lineage 
commitment of human iPSCs.

Yokota M(1)(2), Hatakeyama H(1)(2), Ono Y(1), Kanazawa M(3), Goto YI(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 
187-8502, Japan.
(2)AMED-CREST, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development, Tokyo 
100-0004, Japan.
(3)Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 
187-8551, Japan.

Mitochondrial diseases are genetically heterogeneous and present a broad 
clinical spectrum among patients; in most cases, genetic determinants of 
mitochondrial diseases are heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations. 
However, it is uncertain whether and how heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations affect 
particular cellular fate-determination processes, which are closely associated 
with the cell-type-specific pathophysiology of mitochondrial diseases. In this 
study, we established two isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines 
each carrying different proportions of a heteroplasmic m.3243A>G mutation from 
the same patient; one exhibited apparently normal and the other showed most 
likely impaired mitochondrial respiratory function. Low proportions of m.3243A>G 
exhibited no apparent molecular pathogenic influence on directed differentiation 
into neurons and cardiomyocytes, whereas high proportions of m.3243A>G showed 
both induced neuronal cell death and inhibited cardiac lineage commitment. Such 
neuronal and cardiac maturation defects were also confirmed using another 
patient-derived iPSC line carrying quite high proportion of m.3243A>G. In 
conclusion, mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction strongly inhibits maturation 
and survival of iPSC-derived neurons and cardiomyocytes; our presenting data 
also suggest that appropriate mitochondrial maturation actually contributes to 
cellular fate-determination processes during development.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2016.484
PMCID: PMC5386384
PMID: 28079893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.