1. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:6374082. doi: 10.1155/2016/6374082. Epub 2016 Dec
13.

Multiple Genetic Associations with Irish Wolfhound Dilated Cardiomyopathy.

Simpson S(1), Dunning MD(1), Brownlie S(1), Patel J(1), Godden M(1), Cobb M(1), 
Mongan NP(2), Rutland CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and 
Science, The University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough 
LE12 5RD, UK.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and 
Science, The University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough 
LE12 5RD, UK; Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 
York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Cardiac disease is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in dogs and 
humans, with dilated cardiomyopathy being a large contributor to this. The Irish 
Wolfhound (IWH) is one of the most commonly affected breeds and one of the few 
breeds with genetic loci associated with the disease. Mutations in more than 50 
genes are associated with human dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), yet very few are 
also associated with canine DCM. Furthermore, none of the identified canine loci 
explain many cases of the disease and previous work has indicated that genotypes 
at multiple loci may act together to influence disease development. In this 
study, loci previously associated with DCM in IWH were tested for associations 
in a new cohort both individually and in combination. We have identified loci 
significantly associated with the disease individually, but no genotypes 
individually or in pairs conferred a significantly greater risk of developing 
DCM than the population risk. However combining three loci together did result 
in the identification of a genotype which conferred a greater risk of disease 
than the overall population risk. This study suggests multiple rather than 
individual genetic factors, cooperating to influence DCM risk in IWH.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/6374082
PMCID: PMC5187458
PMID: 28070514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests regarding the publication of this paper.