1. Hum Hered. 2016;81(2):117-126. doi: 10.1159/000448733. Epub 2017 Jan 12.

Identifying Host Genetic Variants Associated with Microbiome Composition by 
Testing Multiple Beta Diversity Matrices.

Hua X(1), Goedert JJ, Landi MT, Shi J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Md., USA.

OBJECTIVES: Host genetics have been recently reported to affect human microbiome 
composition. We previously developed a statistical framework, microbiomeGWAS, to 
identify host genetic variants associated with microbiome composition by testing 
a distance matrix. However, statistical power depends on the choice of a 
microbiome distance matrix. To achieve more robust statistical power, we aim to 
extend microbiomeGWAS to test the association with many distance matrices, which 
are defined based on multilevel taxa abundances and phylogenetic information.
METHODS: The main challenge is to accurately and rapidly evaluate the 
significance for millions of SNPs. We propose methods for approximating p values 
by correcting for the multiple testing introduced by testing many distance 
matrices and by correcting for the skewness and kurtosis of score statistics.
RESULTS: The accuracy of p value approximation was verified by simulations. We 
applied our method to a set of 147 lung cancer patients with 16S rRNA microbiome 
profiles from nonmalignant lung tissues. We show that correcting for skewness 
and kurtosis eliminated dramatic deviations in the quantile-quantile plot.
CONCLUSION: We developed computationally efficient methods for identifying host 
genetic variants associated with microbiome composition by testing many distance 
matrices. The algorithms are implemented in the package microbiomeGWAS 
(https://github.com/lsncibb/microbiomeGWAS).

Â© 2017 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000448733
PMCID: PMC6540989
PMID: 28076867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.