1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jan 13;7:40464. doi: 10.1038/srep40464.

Integrin β4 promotes cell invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition through 
the modulation of Slug expression in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li XL(1), Liu L(2), Li DD(1), He YP(1), Guo LH(1), Sun LP(1), Liu LN(1), Xu 
HX(1), Zhang XP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Ultrasound, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, 
Ultrasound Research and Educational Institute, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China.
(2)Department of Interventional &Vascular Surgery, Tongji University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2023 Feb 6;13(1):2118. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-29191-x.

Integrin β4 (ITGB4) is a transmembrane receptor involved in tumorigenesis and 
the invasiveness of many cancers. However, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC), one of the most prevalent human cancers worldwide, remains unclear. Here, 
we examined the involvement of ITGB4 in HCC and explored the underlying 
mechanisms. Real-time PCR and immunohistochemical analyses of tissues from 82 
patients with HCC and four HCC cell lines showed higher ITGB4 levels in tumor 
than in adjacent non-tumor tissues and in HCC than in normal hepatic cells. 
Silencing of ITGB4 repressed cell proliferation, colony forming ability and cell 
invasiveness, whereas ectopic expression of ITGB4 promoted the proliferation and 
invasion of HCC cells and induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in 
parallel with the upregulation of Slug, as shown by transwell assays, WB and 
immunocytochemistry. Knockdown of Slug reduced cell viability inhibited invasion 
and reversed the effects of ITBG4 overexpression on promoting EMT, and 
AKT/Sox2-Nanog may also be involved. In a xenograft tumor model induced by 
injection of ITGB4-overexpressing cells into nude mice, ITGB4 promoted tumor 
growth and metastasis to the lungs. Taken together, our results indicate that 
ITGB4 plays a tumorigenic and pro-metastatic role mediated by Slug and suggest 
IGTB4 could be a prognostic indicator or a therapeutic target in patients with 
HCC.

DOI: 10.1038/srep40464
PMCID: PMC5233967
PMID: 28084395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]