1. Genesis. 2017 Jan;55(1-2):10.1002/dvg.23002. doi: 10.1002/dvg.23002.

A frog's view of EphrinB signaling.

Hwang YS(1), Daar IO(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Developmental Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, 
Frederick, Maryland, 21702.

Cell-cell and cell-substrate adhesion are essential to the proper formation and 
maintenance of tissue patterns during development, and deregulation of these 
processes can lead to invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Cell surface 
adhesion and signaling molecules are key players in both normal development and 
cancer progression. One set of cell surface proteins, the Eph receptor tyrosine 
kinases and their membrane-bound ligands, ephrins, are significant regulators of 
these processes. During embryonic development, the Eph/ephrin signaling system 
is involved in cell-cell contact events that result in cell sorting and boundary 
formation between receptor and ligand bearing cells. When migrating cells that 
display the membrane bound ligands or receptors come in contact with cells 
bearing the cognate partner, the response may be adhesion or repulsion, 
ultimately leading to the proper positioning of these cells. During cancer 
progression, the signaling between these receptor/ligand pairs is often 
deregulated, leading to increased invasion and metastasis. To gain mechanistic 
insight into the pathways that mediate Eph receptor and ephrin signaling we have 
relied upon a very tractable system, the frog Xenopus. This model system has 
proven to be extremely versatile, and represents a relatively quick and 
manipulable system to explore signaling events and the in vivo processes 
affected by these signals.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.23002
PMCID: PMC7001656
PMID: 28095646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]