1. Oncotarget. 2017 Mar 21;8(12):20441-20451. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.14671.

Efficacy of sequential therapies with sorafenib-sunitinib versus 
sunitinib-sorafenib in metastatic renal cell carcinoma: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Wen T(1), Xiao H(2), Luo C(3), Huang L(4), Xiong M(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou, China.
(3)Department of Urology, People's Hosptial of Pingxiang, Pingxiang, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical 
University, Ganzhou, China.
(5)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical 
University, Ganzhou, China.

The most efficient sequence of targeted agents for metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma patients has yet to be identified. Whether the sequence of sorafenib 
and sunitinib really matters is controversial and not answered clearly until 
now. This meta-analysis aims to estimate the efficacy of receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors sorafenib-sunitinib and sunitinib-sorafenib for metastatic 
renal cell carcinoma, on the outcome of first-line progression-free survival, 
second-line progression-free survival, total progression-free survival and 
overall survival.We searched PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library and 
ClinicalTrails.gov for eligible studies. Data were analyzed using random or 
fixed effects model depending on the heterogeneity of the eligible studies. 
Heterogeneity across studies were analyzed using Q and I2 statistics.Of 902 
identified studies, ten were qualified in our analysis (N = 1732 patients). 
Sorafenib-sunitinib yielded no statistically significant benefit in first-line 
progression-free survival (fixed effects; HR = 0.95; 95%CI 0.75-1.21; p = 
0.702), total progression-free survival (random effects; HR = 0.92; 95%CI 
0.71-1.19; p = 0.531) and overall survival (fixed effects; HR = 0.89; 95%CI 
0.72-1.09; p = 0.257), compared with sunitinib-sorafenib. Second-line 
progression-free survival was longer for sorafenib-sunitinib than 
sunitinib-sorafenib (fixed effects; HR = 0.55; 95%CI 0.44-0.68; p = 
0.000).Sequential therapies with sorafenib and sunitinib is well tolerated and 
efficient in mRCC. However, there are no evidence supported that 
sorafenib-sunitinib has the superiority to sunitinib-sorafenib in sequence. The 
ideal sequence of targeted agents requires further elucidation.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.14671
PMCID: PMC5386775
PMID: 28099901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFILCTS OF INTEREST The authors have declared 
no conflicts of interest.