1. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2016 Dec 31;70(0):1389-1403. doi: 
10.5604/17322693.1227677.

Genetic background of aberrant thermogenin expression (UCP1) in obesity leading 
to metabolic syndrome.

Stosio M(1), Witkowicz A(1), Kowalska A(2), Karabon L(1).

Author information:
(1)Instytut Immunologii i Terapii Doświadczalnej PAN im. L. Hirszfelda we 
Wrocławiu.
(2)Instytut Immunologii i Terapii Doświadczalnej PAN im. L. Hirszfelda we 
Wrocławiu; Insytut Genetyki Człowieka PAN w Poznaniu.

Cardiovascular and metabolic disturbances individually and interdependently lead 
to chronic pathological conditions observed in cardio-metabolic diseases (CMDs). 
In Europe, the morbidity and mortality caused by cardiovascular disease are the 
highest among all diseases. Therefore, it seems important to search for new and 
alternative therapies for obesity, which is the main cause of type 2 diabetes 
(T2D) and cardiovascular disease (CD). Great attention has been paid to the role 
of brown adipose tissue in fat burning and the possibility of transformation of 
the white adipose tissue to cells with brown adipose tissue function as a 
potential form of treatment of obesity. The best-characterized marker of brown 
adipose tissue is uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), which has the ability to 
dissipate energy as heat in the process called non-shivering thermogenesis. 
Numerous studies have shown that altered expression of this protein can lead to 
disturbances in fat metabolism. One possible reason for the aberrant expression 
of UCP1 may be inherited variations in the gene encoding that protein. 
Therefore, several studies investigating the role of polymorphisms in the gene 
encoding UCP1 in susceptibility to obesity or metabolic syndrome have been 
performed. Here we summarize the results of studies describing the associations 
between the UCP1 gene polymorphisms A-3826G, A-1766G, Met229Leu and Ala64Thr and 
polymorphism Trp64Arg in the β3-AR gene, their correlations and their 
associations with the occurrence of metabolic syndrome.

DOI: 10.5604/17322693.1227677
PMID: 28100847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]