1. Dis Model Mech. 2017 May 1;10(5):559-579. doi: 10.1242/dmm.027730. Epub 2017
Jan  18.

Loss of Ranbp2 in motoneurons causes disruption of nucleocytoplasmic and 
chemokine signaling, proteostasis of hnRNPH3 and Mmp28, and development of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-like syndromes.

Cho KI(1), Yoon D(1), Qiu S(1), Danziger Z(2), Grill WM(2), Wetsel WC(3), 
Ferreira PA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Cell Biology, and 
Neurobiology, Mouse Behavioral and Neuroendocrine Analysis Core Facility, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 
27710, USA paulo.ferreira@duke.edu.
(5)Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The pathogenic drivers of sporadic and familial motor neuron disease (MND), such 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), are unknown. MND impairs the Ran GTPase 
cycle, which controls nucleocytoplasmic transport, ribostasis and proteostasis; 
however, cause-effect mechanisms of Ran GTPase modulators in motoneuron 
pathobiology have remained elusive. The cytosolic and peripheral nucleoporin 
Ranbp2 is a crucial regulator of the Ran GTPase cycle and of the proteostasis of 
neurological disease-prone substrates, but the roles of Ranbp2 in motoneuron 
biology and disease remain unknown. This study shows that conditional ablation 
of Ranbp2 in mouse Thy1 motoneurons causes ALS syndromes with hypoactivity 
followed by hindlimb paralysis, respiratory distress and, ultimately, death. 
These phenotypes are accompanied by: a decline in the nerve conduction velocity, 
free fatty acids and phophatidylcholine of the sciatic nerve; a reduction in the 
g-ratios of sciatic and phrenic nerves; and hypertrophy of motoneurons. 
Furthermore, Ranbp2 loss disrupts the nucleocytoplasmic partitioning of the 
import and export nuclear receptors importin β and exportin 1, respectively, Ran 
GTPase and histone deacetylase 4. Whole-transcriptome, proteomic and cellular 
analyses uncovered that the chemokine receptor Cxcr4, its antagonizing ligands 
Cxcl12 and Cxcl14, and effector, latent and activated Stat3 all undergo early 
autocrine and proteostatic deregulation, and intracellular sequestration and 
aggregation as a result of Ranbp2 loss in motoneurons. These effects were 
accompanied by paracrine and autocrine neuroglial deregulation of hnRNPH3 
proteostasis in sciatic nerve and motoneurons, respectively, and 
post-transcriptional downregulation of metalloproteinase 28 in the sciatic 
nerve. Mechanistically, our results demonstrate that Ranbp2 controls 
nucleocytoplasmic, chemokine and metalloproteinase 28 signaling, and 
proteostasis of substrates that are crucial to motoneuronal homeostasis and 
whose impairments by loss of Ranbp2 drive ALS-like syndromes.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.027730
PMCID: PMC5451164
PMID: 28100513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.