1. J Exp Med. 2017 Feb;214(2):269-283. doi: 10.1084/jem.20161846. Epub 2017 Jan
20.

Human immunity against EBV-lessons from the clinic.

Tangye SG(1)(2), Palendira U(3), Edwards ES(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst 2010, 
NSW, Australia s.tangye@garvan.org.au.
(2)St. Vincent's Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, 
NSW, Australia.
(3)Centenary Institute, University of Sydney, Newtown 2042, NSW, Australia.
(4)Immunology Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst 2010, 
NSW, Australia.

The mammalian immune system has evolved over many millennia to be best equipped 
to protect the host from pathogen infection. In many cases, host and pathogen 
have coevolved, each acquiring sophisticated ways of inducing or protecting from 
disease. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human herpes virus that infects >90% of 
individuals. Despite its ubiquity, infection by EBV is often subclinical; this 
invariably reflects the necessity of the virus to preserve its host, balanced 
with sophisticated host immune mechanisms that maintain viral latency. However, 
EBV infection can result in various, and often fatal, clinical sequelae, 
including fulminant infectious mononucleosis, hemophagocytic 
lymphohistiocytosis, lymphoproliferative disease, organomegaly, and/or 
malignancy. Such clinical outcomes are typically observed in immunosuppressed 
individuals, with the most extreme cases being Mendelian primary 
immunodeficiencies (PIDs). Although these conditions are rare, they have 
provided critical insight into the cellular, biochemical, and molecular 
requirements for robust and long-lasting immunity against EBV infection. Here, 
we review the virology of EBV, mechanisms underlying disease pathogenesis in 
PIDs, and developments in immune cell-mediated therapy to treat disorders 
associated with or induced by EBV infection.

Â© 2017 Tangye et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20161846
PMCID: PMC5294862
PMID: 28108590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]