1. J Immunol Res. 2017;2017:5210459. doi: 10.1155/2017/5210459. Epub 2017 Jan 2.

Genetically Modified T-Cell-Based Adoptive Immunotherapy in Hematological 
Malignancies.

Ye B(1), Stary CM(2), Gao Q(1), Wang Q(1), Zeng Z(3), Jian Z(4), Gu L(5), Xiong 
X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430060, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5117, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430060, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430060, China.
(5)Central Laboratory, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430060, 
China.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430060, China; Central Laboratory, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
Hubei 430060, China.

A significant proportion of hematological malignancies remain limited in 
treatment options. Immune system modulation serves as a promising therapeutic 
approach to eliminate malignant cells. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) play a 
central role in antitumor immunity; unfortunately, nonspecific approaches for 
targeted recognition of tumor cells by CTLs to mediate tumor immune evasion in 
hematological malignancies imply multiple mechanisms, which may or may not be 
clinically relevant. Recently, genetically modified T-cell-based adoptive 
immunotherapy approaches, including chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell 
therapy and engineered T-cell receptor (TCR) T-cell therapy, promise to overcome 
immune evasion by redirecting the specificity of CTLs to tumor cells. In clinic 
trials, CAR-T-cell- and TCR-T-cell-based adoptive immunotherapy have produced 
encouraging clinical outcomes, thereby demonstrating their therapeutic potential 
in mitigating tumor development. The purpose of the present review is to (1) 
provide a detailed overview of the multiple mechanisms for immune evasion 
related with T-cell-based therapies; (2) provide a current summary of the 
applications of CAR-T-cell- as well as neoantigen-specific TCR-T-cell-based 
adoptive immunotherapy and routes taken to overcome immune evasion; and (3) 
evaluate alternative approaches targeting immune evasion via optimization of 
CAR-T and TCR-T-cell immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/5210459
PMCID: PMC5237740
PMID: 28116322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests.