1. J Wildl Dis. 2017 Apr;53(2):248-257. doi: 10.7589/2016-05-113. Epub 2017 Jan
24.

HEREDITARY FACTOR VII DEFICIENCY IN THE ASIAN ELEPHANT (ELEPHAS MAXIMUS) CAUSED 
BY A F7 MISSENSE MUTATION.

Lynch M(1), McGrath K(2), Raj K(3), McLaren P(4), Payne K(5), McCoy R(4), Giger 
U(3).

Author information:
(1)1   Melbourne Zoo, PO Box 74, Parkville VIC 3052, Australia.
(2)2   Australian Genome Research Facility, Research Road, University of 
Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia.
(3)3   Section of Medical Genetics, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, 3900 Delancey Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6010, USA.
(4)4   Gribbles Veterinary Pathology, 1868 Dandenong Road, Clayton VIC 3168, 
Australia.
(5)5   Perth Zoo, 20 Labouchere Road, South Perth, Western Australia 6951, 
Australia.

Hereditary disorders and genetic predispositions to disease are rarely reported 
in captive and free-ranging wildlife, and none have been definitively identified 
and characterized in elephants. A wild-caught, 41-yr-old male Asian elephant ( 
Elephas maximus ) without an apparent increased bleeding tendency was 
consistently found to have prolonged prothrombin times (PTs, mean=55±35 s) 
compared to 17 other elephants (PT=10±2 s). This elephant's partial 
thromboplastin times (PTT) fell within the normal range of the other elephants 
(12-30 s). A prolonged PT in the presence of a normal PTT suggests disruption of 
the extrinsic pathway via deficiency of coagulation Factor VII (FVII). This 
elephant's plasma FVII activity was very low (2%) compared to that of 15 other 
elephants (57-80%), but other coagulation factors' activities did not differ 
from the control elephants. Sequencing of genomic DNA from 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid blood revealed a single homozygous point 
mutation (c.202A>G) in the F7 gene of the FVII deficient elephant that was not 
present in unrelated elephants. This mutation causes an amino acid substitution 
(p.Arg68Gly) that is predicted to be deleterious. Two living offspring of the 
affected elephant were heterozygous for the mutation and had normal plasma FVII 
activities and coagulation profiles. Tissue from a third offspring, a deceased 
calf, was utilized to show that it was also a heterozygote. A DNA test has been 
developed to enable the screening of additional elephants for this mutation. 
Consistent with FVII deficiency investigations in other species, the condition 
did not cause a serious bleeding tendency in this individual elephant.

DOI: 10.7589/2016-05-113
PMCID: PMC5383509
PMID: 28118558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]