1. Clin Cancer Res. 2017 May 15;23(10):2382-2390. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-0895. Epub 2017 Jan 30.

Molecular Pathways: Hypoxia-Activated Prodrugs in Cancer Therapy.

Baran N(1), Konopleva M(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(2)Section of Molecular Hematology and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
mkonople@mdanderson.org.

Hypoxia is a known feature of aggressive solid tumors as well as a critical 
hallmark of the niche in aggressive hematologic malignances. Hypoxia is 
associated with insufficient response to standard therapy, resulting in disease 
progression and curtailed patients' survival through maintenance of noncycling 
cancer stem-like cells. A better understanding of the mechanisms and signaling 
pathways induced by hypoxia is essential to overcoming these effects. Recent 
findings demonstrate that bone marrow in the setting of hematologic malignancies 
is highly hypoxic, and that progression of the disease is associated with 
expansion of hypoxic niches and stabilization of the oncogenic hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1alpha (HIF1α). Solid tumors have also been shown to harbor hypoxic 
areas, maintaining survival of cancer cells via the HIF1α pathway. Developing 
new strategies for targeting hypoxia has become a crucial approach in modern 
cancer therapy. The number of preclinical and clinical trials targeting 
low-oxygen tumor compartments or the hypoxic bone marrow niche via 
hypoxia-activated prodrugs is increasing. This review discusses the development 
of the hypoxia-activated prodrugs and their applicability in treating both 
hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res; 23(10); 2382-90. 
©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-16-0895
PMCID: PMC5433896
PMID: 28137923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest 
Conflicts of interest: Threshold and Proacta research support to MK