1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2017 Mar;16(3):516-528. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0552. 
Epub 2017 Jan 30.

Co-targeting HGF/cMET Signaling with MEK Inhibitors in Metastatic Uveal 
Melanoma.

Cheng H(1), Chua V(1), Liao C(1), Purwin TJ(1), Terai M(2), Kageyama K(2), 
Davies MA(3), Sato T(2), Aplin AE(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology and Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Andrew.Aplin@Jefferson.edu.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Patients with metastatic uveal melanoma usually die within 1 year of diagnosis, 
emphasizing an urgent need to develop new treatment strategies. The liver is the 
most common site of metastasis. Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) 
inhibitors improve survival in V600 BRAF-mutated cutaneous melanoma patients but 
have limited efficacy in patients with uveal melanoma. Our previous work showed 
that hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signaling elicits resistance to MEK 
inhibitors in metastatic uveal melanoma. In this study, we demonstrate that 
expression of two BH3-only family proteins, Bim-EL and Bmf, contributes to 
HGF-mediated resistance to MEK inhibitors. Targeting HGF/cMET signaling with 
LY2875358, a neutralizing and internalizing anti-cMET bivalent antibody, and 
LY2801653, a dual cMET/RON inhibitor, overcomes resistance to trametinib 
provided by exogenous HGF and by conditioned medium from primary hepatic 
stellate cells. We further determined that activation of PI3Kα/γ/δ isoforms 
mediates the resistance to MEK inhibitors by HGF. Combination of LY2801653 with 
trametinib decreases AKT phosphorylation and promotes proapoptotic PARP cleavage 
in metastatic uveal melanoma explants. Together, our data support the notion 
that selectively blocking cMET signaling or PI3K isoforms in metastatic uveal 
melanoma may break the intrinsic resistance to MEK inhibitors provided by 
factors from stromal cells in the liver. Mol Cancer Ther; 16(3); 516-28. ©2017 
AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-16-0552
PMCID: PMC5337170
PMID: 28138035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No other conflicts of 
interest were disclosed.