1. Sci Rep. 2017 Feb 2;7:41813. doi: 10.1038/srep41813.

Mitochondrial genome diversity in dagger and needle nematodes (Nematoda: 
Longidoridae).

Palomares-Rius JE(1), Cantalapiedra-Navarrete C(1), Archidona-Yuste A(1), Blok 
VC(2), Castillo P(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agricultura Sostenible (IAS), Agencia Estatal Consejo Superior 
de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Avda. Menéndez Pidal s/n, 14004 Córdoba, 
Spain.
(2)Cell and Molecular Sciences, The James Hutton Institute, Invergowrie, Dundee, 
DD2 5DA, United Kingdom.

Dagger and needle nematodes included in the family Longidoridae (viz. 
Longidorus, Paralongidorus, and Xiphinema) are highly polyphagous 
plant-parasitic nematodes in wild and cultivated plants and some of them are 
plant-virus vectors (nepovirus). The mitochondrial (mt) genomes of the dagger 
and needle nematodes, Xiphinema rivesi, Xiphinema pachtaicum, Longidorus 
vineacola and Paralongidorus litoralis were sequenced in this study. The four 
circular mt genomes have an estimated size of 12.6, 12.5, 13.5 and 12.7 kb, 
respectively. Up to date, the mt genome of X. pachtaicum is the smallest genome 
found in Nematoda. The four mt genomes contain 12 protein-coding genes (viz. 
cox1-3, nad1-6, nad4L, atp6 and cob) and two ribosomal RNA genes (rrnL and 
rrnS), but the atp8 gene was not detected. These mt genomes showed a gene 
arrangement very different within the Longidoridae species sequenced, with the 
exception of very closely related species (X. americanum and X. rivesi). The 
sizes of non-coding regions in the Longidoridae nematodes were very small and 
were present in a few places in the mt genome. Phylogenetic analysis of all 
coding genes showed a closer relationship between Longidorus and Paralongidorus 
and different phylogenetic possibilities for the three Xiphinema species.

DOI: 10.1038/srep41813
PMCID: PMC5288807
PMID: 28150734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.