1. Mol Ther. 2017 Feb 1;25(2):523-533. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2016.11.006.

Selective Blockade of the Ubiquitous Checkpoint Receptor CD47 Is Enabled by 
Dual-Targeting Bispecific Antibodies.

Dheilly E(1), Moine V(1), Broyer L(1), Salgado-Pires S(1), Johnson Z(1), 
Papaioannou A(1), Cons L(1), Calloud S(1), Majocchi S(1), Nelson R(1), Rousseau 
F(1), Ferlin W(1), Kosco-Vilbois M(1), Fischer N(1), Masternak K(2).

Author information:
(1)Novimmune SA, 14 chemin des Aulx, 1228 Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland.
(2)Novimmune SA, 14 chemin des Aulx, 1228 Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland. 
Electronic address: kmasternak@novimmune.com.

CD47 is a ubiquitously expressed immune checkpoint receptor that is often 
upregulated in cancer. CD47 interacts with its counter-receptor SIRPα on 
macrophages and other myeloid cells to inhibit cancer cell phagocytosis and 
drive immune evasion. To overcome tolerability and "antigen sink" issues arising 
from widespread CD47 expression, we generated dual-targeting bispecific 
antibodies that selectively block the CD47-SIRPα interaction on malignant cells 
expressing a specific tumor-associated antigen; e.g., CD19 or mesothelin. These 
bispecific κλ bodies are fully human, native IgG1 molecules, combining tumor 
targeting and selective CD47 blockade with immune activating mechanisms mediated 
by the Fc portion of the antibody. CD47-neutralizing κλ bodies efficiently kill 
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo but interact only weakly with healthy cells 
expressing physiological levels of CD47. Accordingly, a κλ body administered to 
non-human primates showed a typical IgG pharmacokinetic profile and was well 
tolerated. Importantly, κλ bodies preserve their tumoricidal capabilities in the 
presence of a CD47 antigen sink. Thus, dual-targeting κλ bodies allow for 
efficacious yet safe targeting of CD47 in cancer. Such a bispecific design could 
be applied to limit the extent of neutralization of other ubiquitously expressed 
therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2016.11.006
PMCID: PMC5368402
PMID: 28153099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]