1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2016 Dec 20;4(2):98-105. doi: 10.1002/acn3.380. 
eCollection 2017 Feb.

Familial amyloid polyneuropathy in Portugal: New genes modulating age-at-onset.

Santos D(1), Coelho T(2), Alves-Ferreira M(1), Sequeiros J(1), Mendonça D(3), 
Alonso I(1), Lemos C(1), Sousa A(1).

Author information:
(1)i3S Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde Universidade do Porto Porto 
Portugal; UnIGENeIBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology Universidade do 
Porto Porto Portugal; ICBAS Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar 
Universidade do Porto Porto Portugal.
(2)UCA Unidade Corino de Andrade Centro Hospitalar do Porto (CHP) Porto 
Portugal.
(3)ICBA SInstituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar Universidade do Porto Porto 
Portugal; ISPUP Instituto de Saúde Pública Universidade do Porto Porto Portugal.

OBJECTIVES: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP ATTRV30M) shows a wide 
variation in age-at-onset (AO) between clusters, families, and among 
generations. We will now explore some candidate genes involved in altered 
disease pathways in order to assess their role as genetic modifiers of AO, using 
a family-centered approach.
METHODS: We analyzed 62 tagging SNPs from nine 
genes-NGAL,MMP-9,BGN,MEK1,MEK2,ERK1,ERK2,HSP27, and YWHAZ - in a sample of 318 
V30M Portuguese patients (106 families), currently under follow-up. A 
generalized estimating equation analysis was used to take into account 
nonindependency of AO between relatives. Also, an in silico analysis was 
performed in order to assess the functional impact of significant variants 
associated with AO.
RESULTS: We found for the first time variants from six genes (NGAL,BGN (in the 
female group), MEK1,MEK2,HSP27, and YWHAZ) that were significantly associated 
with early- and/or late-onset. Then, we confirmed a strong synergistic 
interaction between NGAL and MMP-9 genes. Additionally, by an in silico 
analysis, we found some variants for MEK1 gene that may alter binding of the 
transcription factors and that influence the regulation of gene expression 
regarding microRNA binding sites and splicing regulatory factors.
INTERPRETATION: These findings showed that different genetic factors can 
modulate differently the onset of disease's symptoms and revealed new mechanisms 
with clinical implications in the genetic counseling and follow-up of mutation 
carriers and could contribute for development of potential therapeutical 
targets.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.380
PMCID: PMC5288465
PMID: 28168209