1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Nov 15;25(22):4996-5005. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw328.

Paternal age effects on sperm FOXK1 and KCNA7 methylation and transmission into 
the next generation.

Atsem S(1), Reichenbach J(1), Potabattula R(1), Dittrich M(1), Nava C(2), 
Depienne C(2)(3), Böhm L(1), Rost S(1), Hahn T(4), Schorsch M(4), Haaf T(1), El 
Hajj N(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Julius-Maximilians University, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(2)INSERM, U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris, 
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, Paris, France.
(3)Département de Médicine translationnelle et Neurogénétique, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 
7104/INSERM U964/Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France
(4)Fertility Center, Wiesbaden, Germany.

Children of older fathers carry an increased risk for developing autism and 
other disorders. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we investigated the 
correlation of sperm DNA methylation with paternal age and its impact on the 
epigenome of the offspring. Methylation levels of nine candidate genes and 
LINE-1 repeats were quantified by bisulfite pyrosequencing in sperm DNA of 162 
donors and 191 cord blood samples of resulting children (conceived by IVF/ICSI 
with the same sperm samples). Four genes showed a significant negative 
correlation between sperm methylation and paternal age. For FOXK1 and KCNA7, the 
age effect on the sperm epigenome was replicated in an independent cohort of 188 
sperm samples. For FOXK1, paternal age also significantly correlated with foetal 
cord blood (FCB) methylation. Deep bisulfite sequencing and allele-specific 
pyrosequencing allowed us to distinguish between maternal and paternal alleles 
in FCB samples with an informative SNP. FCB methylation of the paternal FOXK1 
allele was negatively correlated with paternal age, whereas maternal allele was 
unaffected by maternal age. Since FOXK1 duplication has been associated with 
autism, we studied blood FOXK1 methylation in 74 children with autism and 41 
age-matched controls. The FOXK1 promoter showed a trend for accelerated 
demethylation in the autism group. Dual luciferase reporter assay revealed that 
FOXK1 methylation influences gene expression. Collectively, our study 
demonstrates that age-related DNA methylation changes in sperm can be 
transmitted to the next generation and may contribute to the increased disease 
risk in offspring of older fathers.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw328
PMCID: PMC5418740
PMID: 28171595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]