1. Cell Calcium. 2017 Mar;62:41-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2017.01.010. Epub 2017
Jan  25.

The BH4 domain of Bcl-2 orthologues from different classes of vertebrates can 
act as an evolutionary conserved inhibitor of IP(3) receptor channels.

Ivanova H(1), Luyten T(1), Decrock E(2), Vervliet T(1), Leybaert L(2), Parys 
JB(3), Bultynck G(4).

Author information:
(1)KU Leuven, Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine and, Herestraat 49, BE-3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Ghent University, Physiology Group, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, 
BE-9000, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)KU Leuven, Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine and, Herestraat 49, BE-3000, Leuven, Belgium; KU 
Leuven, Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), BE-3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)KU Leuven, Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine and, Herestraat 49, BE-3000, Leuven, Belgium; KU 
Leuven, Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), BE-3000, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic 
address: geert.bultynck@kuleuven.be.

Ca2+ signalling plays an important role in various physiological processes in 
vertebrates. In mammals, the highly conserved anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma-2 
(Bcl-2) protein is an important modulator of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
receptor (IP3R), i.e. the main intracellular Ca2+ - release channel located at 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The Bcl-2 Homology (BH) 4 domain of Bcl-2 
(BH4-Bcl-2) is a critical determinant for inhibiting IP3Rs, by directly 
targeting a region in the modulatory domain of the receptor (domain 3). In this 
paper, we aimed to track the evolutionary history of IP3R regulation by the BH4 
domain of Bcl-2 orthologues from different classes of vertebrates, including 
Osteichthyes, Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia. The high degree of 
conservation of the BH4 sequences correlated with the ability of all tested 
peptides to bind to the domain 3 of mouse IP3R1 in GST-pull downs and their 
overall ability to inhibit IP3-induced Ca2+ release (IICR) in permeabilized 
cells. Nevertheless, the BH4 domains differed in their potency to suppress IICR. 
The peptide derived from X. laevis was the least potent inhibitor. We identified 
a critical residue in BH4-Bcl-2 from H. sapiens, Thr7, which is replaced by Gly7 
in X. laevis. Compared to the wild type X. laevis BH4-Bcl-2, a "humanized" 
version of the peptide (BH4-Bcl-2 Gly7Thr), displayed increased IP3R-inhibitory 
properties. Despite the differences in the inhibitory efficiency, our data 
indicate that the BH4 domain of Bcl-2 orthologues from different classes of 
vertebrates can act as a binding partner and inhibitor of IP3R channels.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceca.2017.01.010
PMID: 28179071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]