1. J Anal Toxicol. 2017 May 1;41(4):325-333. doi: 10.1093/jat/bkw135.

Tell-Tale SNPs: The Role of CYP2B6 in Methadone Fatalities.

Ahmad T(1), Sabet S(1), Primerano DA(1), Richards-Waugh LL(2), Rankin GO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, 
Marshall University, 1700 Third Avenue, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.
(2)Forensic Science Department, Marshall University, 1401 Forensic Science 
Drive, Huntington, WV 25701, USA.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme 2B6 plays a significant role in the 
stereo-selective metabolism of (S)-methadone to 
2-ethyl-1,5-dimethyl-3,3-diphenylpyrrolidine, an inactive methadone metabolite. 
Elevated (S)-methadone can cause cardiotoxicity by prolonging the QT interval of 
the heart's electrical cycle. Large inter-individual variability of methadone 
pharmacokinetics causes discordance in the relationship between dose, plasma 
concentrations and side effects. The purpose of this study was to determine if 
one or more single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located within the CYP2B6 
gene contributes to a poor metabolizer phenotype for methadone in these fatal 
cases. The genetic analysis was conducted on 125 Caucasian methadone-only 
fatalities obtained from the West Virginia and Kentucky Offices of the Chief 
Medical Examiner. The frequency of eight exonic and intronic SNPs (rs2279344, 
rs3211371, rs3745274, rs4803419, rs8192709, rs8192719, rs12721655 and 
rs35979566) was determined. The frequencies of SNPs rs3745274 (*9, c516G > T, 
Q172H), and rs8192719 (21563 C > T) were enhanced in the methadone-only group. 
Higher blood methadone concentrations were observed in individuals who were 
genotyped homozygous for SNP rs3211371 (*5, c1459C > T, R487C). These results 
indicate that these three CYP2B6 SNPs are associated with methadone fatalities.

Â© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jat/bkw135
PMCID: PMC5412025
PMID: 28184434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]