1. Front Oncol. 2017 Jan 30;7:11. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2017.00011. eCollection 2017.

Peptide Agonists of Vasopressin V2 Receptor Reduce Expression of Neuroendocrine 
Markers and Tumor Growth in Human Lung and Prostate Tumor Cells.

Pifano M(1), Garona J(1), Capobianco CS(1), Gonzalez N(1), Alonso DF(1), Ripoll 
GV(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Quilmes National University , Bernal, 
Buenos Aires , Argentina.

Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) comprise a heterogeneous group of malignancies that 
express neuropeptides as synaptophysin, chromogranin A (CgA), and specific 
neuronal enolase (NSE), among others. Vasopressin (AVP) is a neuropeptide with 
an endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine effect in normal and pathological 
tissues. AVP receptors are present in human lung, breast, pancreatic, 
colorectal, and gastrointestinal tumors. While AVP V1 receptors are associated 
with stimulation of cellular proliferation, AVP V2 receptor (V2r) is related to 
antiproliferative effects. Desmopressin (dDAVP) is a synthetic analog of AVP 
that acts as a selective agonist for the V2r, which shows antitumor properties 
in breast and colorectal cancer models. Recently, we developed a derivative of 
dDAVP named [V4Q5]dDAVP, which presents higher antitumor effects in a breast 
cancer model compared to the parental compound. The goal of present work was to 
explore the antitumor properties of the V2r agonist dDAVP and its novel analog 
[V4Q5]dDAVP on aggressive human lung (NCI-H82) and prostate cancer (PC-3) cell 
lines with neuroendocrine (NE) characteristics. We study the presence of 
specific NE markers (CgA and NSE) and V2r expression in NCI-H82 and PC-3. Both 
cell lines express high levels of NE markers NSE and CgA but then incubation 
with dDAVP diminished expression levels of both markers. DDAVP and [V4Q5]dDAVP 
significantly reduced proliferation, doubling time, and migration in both tumor 
cell cultures. [V4Q5]dDAVP analog showed a higher cytostatic effect than dDAVP, 
on cellular proliferation in the NCI-H82 cell line. Silencing of V2r using small 
interfering RNA significantly attenuated the inhibitory effects of [V4Q5]dDAVP 
on NCI-H82 cell proliferation. We, preliminarily, explored the in vivo effect of 
dDAVP and [V4Q5]dDAVP on NCI-H82 small cell lung cancer xenografts. Treated 
tumors (0.3 μg kg-1, thrice a week) grew slower in comparison to vehicle-treated 
animals. In this work, we demonstrated that the specific agonists of V2r, dDAVP, 
and [V4Q5]dDAVP displays antitumor capacity on different human models of lung 
and prostate cancers with NE features, showing their potential therapeutic 
benefits in the treatment of these aggressive tumors.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2017.00011
PMCID: PMC5276816
PMID: 28194370