1. Biochemistry. 1989 Aug 22;28(17):6848-57. doi: 10.1021/bi00443a011.

Site-directed mutageneses of rat liver cytochrome P-450d: catalytic activities 
toward benzphetamine and 7-ethoxycoumarin.

Furuya H(1), Shimizu T, Hirano K, Hatano M, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Raag R, Poulos TL.

Author information:
(1)Chemical Research Institute of Non-Aqueous Solutions, Tohoku University, 
Sendai, Japan.

Catalytic activities toward benzphetamine and 7-ethoxycoumarin of 11 distal 
mutants, 9 proximal mutants, and 3 aromatic mutants of rat liver cytochrome 
P-450d were studied. A distal mutant Thr319Ala was not catalytically active 
toward benzphetamine, while this mutant retained activity toward 
7-ethoxycoumarin. Distal mutants Gly316Glu, Thr319Ala, and Thr322Ala displayed 
higher activities (kcat/Km) toward 7-ethoxycoumarin that were 2.4-4.7-fold 
higher than that of the wild-type enzyme. Although kcat/Km values of four 
multiple distal mutants toward benzphetamine were less than half that of the 
wild type, activities of these mutants toward 7-ethoxycoumarin were almost the 
same as or higher than the wild-type activity toward this substrate. The distal 
double mutant Glu318Asp, Phe325Tyr showed 6-fold higher activity than the 
wild-type P-450d toward 7-ethoxycoumarin. Activities of the proximal mutants 
Lys453Glu and Arg455Gly toward both substrates were much lower (less than 
one-seventh) than the corresponding wild-type activities. Catalytic activities 
of three aromatic mutants, Phe425Leu, Pro427Leu, and Phe430Leu, toward 
benzphetamine were less than 7% of that of the wild type, while the activities 
of these aromatic mutants toward 7-ethoxycoumarin were more than 2.5 times 
higher than the wild-type activity toward this substrate. From these findings, 
in conjunction with a molecular model for P-450d, we suggest that (1) the 
relative importance to catalysis of various distal helix amino acids differs 
depending on the substrate and that these differences are associated with the 
size, shape, and flexibility of the substrate and (2) the proximal residue 
Lys453 appears to play a critical role in the catalytic activity of P-450d, 
perhaps by participating in forming an intermolecular electron-transfer complex.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00443a011
PMID: 2819037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]