1. Diseases. 2014 Jan 27;2(1):45-70. doi: 10.3390/diseases2010045.

MeCP2-Related Diseases and Animal Models.

Ezeonwuka CD(1), Rastegar M(1).

Author information:
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Department of Biochemistry and Medical 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 745 Bannatyne Avenue, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 0J9, Canada.

The role of epigenetics in human disease has become an area of increased 
research interest. Collaborative efforts from scientists and clinicians have led 
to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which epigenetic 
regulation is involved in the pathogenesis of many human diseases. Several 
neurological and non-neurological disorders are associated with mutations in 
genes that encode for epigenetic factors. One of the most studied proteins that 
impacts human disease and is associated with deregulation of epigenetic 
processes is Methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2). MeCP2 is an epigenetic 
regulator that modulates gene expression by translating epigenetic DNA 
methylation marks into appropriate cellular responses. In order to highlight the 
importance of epigenetics to development and disease, we will discuss how MeCP2 
emerges as a key epigenetic player in human neurodevelopmental, neurological, 
and non-neurological disorders. We will review our current knowledge on 
MeCP2-related diseases, including Rett Syndrome, Angelman Syndrome, Fetal 
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, Hirschsprung disease, and Cancer. Additionally, we 
will briefly discuss about the existing MeCP2 animal models that have been 
generated for a better understanding of how MeCP2 impacts certain human 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/diseases2010045
PMCID: PMC5298922
PMID: 28191346

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.