1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Jun;62(6):615-620. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.8. Epub 2017 Feb
16.

Identification of pathogenic variants in genes related to channelopathy and 
cardiomyopathy in Korean sudden cardiac arrest survivors.

Song JS(1), Kang JS(2), Kim YE(3), Park SJ(4), Park KM(4), Huh J(5), Kim JS(4), 
Cho H(6), Ki CS(1), On YK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Green Cross Genome, Yongin, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Heart Vascular and Stroke Institute, Samsung 
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(6)Department of Physiology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Pathogenic variants in genes related to channelopathy and cardiomyopathy are the 
most common cause of sudden unexplained cardiac death. However, few reports have 
investigated the frequency and/or spectrum of pathogenic variants in these genes 
in Korean sudden cardiac arrest survivors. This study aimed to investigate the 
causative genetic variants of cardiac-associated genes in Korean sudden cardiac 
arrest survivors. We performed exome sequencing followed by filtering and 
validation of variants in 100 genes related to channelopathy and cardiomyopathy 
in 19 Korean patients who survived sudden cardiac arrest. Five of the 19 
patients (26.3%) had either a pathogenic variant or a likely pathogenic variant 
in MYBPC3 (n=1), MYH7 (n=1), RYR2 (n=2), or TNNT2 (n=1). All five variants were 
missense variants that have been reported previously in patients with 
channelopathies or cardiomyopathies. Furthermore, an additional 12 patients 
(63.2%) had more than one variant of uncertain significance. In conclusion, 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in genes related to channelopathy and 
cardiomyopathy are not uncommon in Korean sudden cardiac arrest survivors and 
cardiomyopathy-related genes should be included in the molecular diagnosis of 
sudden cardiac arrest in Korea.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2017.8
PMID: 28202948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]