1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Feb;10(2):e004400. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.116.004400.

Revealing the Concealed Nature of Long-QT Type 3 Syndrome.

Greer-Short A(1), George SA(1), Poelzing S(2), Weinberg SH(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University, Roanoke (A.G.-S., S.A.G., S.P.); and Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (S.H.W.).
(2)From the Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute, Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University, Roanoke (A.G.-S., S.A.G., S.P.); and Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond (S.H.W.). 
shweinberg@vcu.edu poelzing@vtc.vt.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Feb;10(2):e004955. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.117.004955.

BACKGROUND: Gain-of-function mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel 
(Nav1.5) are associated with the long-QT-3 (LQT3) syndrome. Nav1.5 is densely 
expressed at the intercalated disk, and narrow intercellular separation can 
modulate cell-to-cell coupling via extracellular electric fields and depletion 
of local sodium ion nanodomains. Models predict that significantly decreasing 
intercellular cleft widths slows conduction because of reduced sodium current 
driving force, termed "self-attenuation." We tested the novel hypothesis that 
self-attenuation can "mask" the LQT3 phenotype by reducing the driving force and 
late sodium current that produces early afterdepolarizations (EADs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Acute interstitial edema was used to increase intercellular 
cleft width in isolated guinea pig heart experiments. In a drug-induced LQT3 
model, acute interstitial edema exacerbated action potential duration 
prolongation and produced EADs, in particular, at slow pacing rates. In a 
computational cardiac tissue model incorporating extracellular electric field 
coupling, intercellular cleft sodium nanodomains, and LQT3-associated mutant 
channels, myocytes produced EADs for wide intercellular clefts, whereas for 
narrow clefts, EADs were suppressed. For both wide and narrow clefts, mutant 
channels were incompletely inactivated. However, for narrow clefts, late sodium 
current was reduced via self-attenuation, a protective negative feedback 
mechanism, masking EADs.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated a novel mechanism leading to the concealing and 
revealing of EADs in LQT3 models. Simulations predict that this mechanism may 
operate independent of the specific mutation, suggesting that future therapies 
could target intercellular cleft separation as a compliment or alternative to 
sodium channels.

Â© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.116.004400
PMCID: PMC5319726
PMID: 28213505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]