1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Feb 15;18(2):421. doi: 10.3390/ijms18020421.

Methylglyoxal-Derived Advanced Glycation Endproducts in Multiple Sclerosis.

Wetzels S(1)(2), Wouters K(3), Schalkwijk CG(4), Vanmierlo T(5), Hendriks JJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Maastricht University, 6229 Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
suzan.wetzels@uhasselt.be.
(2)Department of Immunology and Biochemistry, Biomedical Research Institute, 
Hasselt University, Martelarenlaan 42, 3500 Hasselt, Belgium. 
suzan.wetzels@uhasselt.be.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Maastricht University, 6229 Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
kristiaan.wouters@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute 
Maastricht, Maastricht University, 6229 Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
c.schalkwijk@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(5)Department of Immunology and Biochemistry, Biomedical Research Institute, 
Hasselt University, Martelarenlaan 42, 3500 Hasselt, Belgium. 
tim.vanmierlo@uhasselt.be.
(6)Department of Immunology and Biochemistry, Biomedical Research Institute, 
Hasselt University, Martelarenlaan 42, 3500 Hasselt, Belgium. 
jerome.hendriks@uhasselt.be.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system 
(CNS). The activation of inflammatory cells is crucial for the development of MS 
and is shown to induce intracellular glycolytic metabolism in pro-inflammatory 
microglia and macrophages, as well as CNS-resident astrocytes. Advanced 
glycation endproducts (AGEs) are stable endproducts formed by a reaction of the 
dicarbonyl compounds methylglyoxal (MGO) and glyoxal (GO) with amino acids in 
proteins, during glycolysis. This suggests that, in MS, MGO-derived AGEs are 
formed in glycolysis-driven cells. MGO and MGO-derived AGEs can further activate 
inflammatory cells by binding to the receptor for advanced glycation endproducts 
(RAGE). Recent studies have revealed that AGEs are increased in the plasma and 
brain of MS patients. Therefore, AGEs might contribute to the inflammatory 
status in MS. Moreover, the main detoxification system of dicarbonyl compounds, 
the glyoxalase system, seems to be affected in MS patients, which may contribute 
to high MGO-derived AGE levels. Altogether, evidence is emerging for a 
contributing role of AGEs in the pathology of MS. In this review, we provide an 
overview of the current knowledge on the involvement of AGEs in MS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18020421
PMCID: PMC5343955
PMID: 28212304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.