1. Front Neurosci. 2017 Feb 2;11:30. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00030. eCollection 
2017.

Cannabinoid Receptor 2 Signaling in Neurodegenerative Disorders: From 
Pathogenesis to a Promising Therapeutic Target.

Cassano T(1), Calcagnini S(2), Pace L(1), De Marco F(3), Romano A(2), Gaetani 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia 
Foggia, Italy.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Sapienza University of Rome Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Virology, The Regina Elena National Cancer Institute IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.

As a consequence of an increasingly aging population, the number of people 
affected by neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, is rapidly increasing. Although 
the etiology of these diseases has not been completely defined, common molecular 
mechanisms including neuroinflammation, excitotoxicity and mitochondrial 
dysfunction have been confirmed and can be targeted therapeutically. Moreover, 
recent studies have shown that endogenous cannabinoid signaling plays a number 
of modulatory roles throughout the central nervous system (CNS), including the 
neuroinflammation and neurogenesis. In particular, the up-regulation of type-2 
cannabinoid (CB2) receptors has been found in a number of neurodegenerative 
disorders. Thus, the modulation of CB2 receptor signaling may represent a 
promising therapeutic target with minimal psychotropic effects that can be used 
to modulate endocannabinoid-based therapeutic approaches and to reduce neuronal 
degeneration. For these reasons this review will focus on the CB2 receptor as a 
promising pharmacological target in a number of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00030
PMCID: PMC5288380
PMID: 28210207