1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Feb 17;18(1):188. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3576-y.

Transcriptomic profiling provides molecular insights into hydrogen 
peroxide-induced adventitious rooting in mung bean seedlings.

Li SW(1), Leng Y(2), Shi RF(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Key Laboratory of Extreme 
Environmental Microbial Resources and Engineering, Gansu Province, Lanzhou 
Jiaotong University, 88 West Anning Road, Lanzhou, 730070, People's Republic of 
China. lishweng@mail.lzjtu.cn.
(2)School of Environmental and Municipal Engineering, Key Laboratory of Extreme 
Environmental Microbial Resources and Engineering, Gansu Province, Lanzhou 
Jiaotong University, 88 West Anning Road, Lanzhou, 730070, People's Republic of 
China.

BACKGROUND: Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) has been known to function as a signalling 
molecule involved in the modulation of various physiological processes in 
plants. H2O2 has been shown to act as a promoter during adventitious root 
formation in hypocotyl cuttings. In this study, RNA-Seq was performed to reveal 
the molecular mechanisms underlying H2O2-induced adventitious rooting.
RESULTS: RNA-Seq data revealed that H2O2 treatment greatly increased the numbers 
of clean reads and expressed genes and abundance of gene expression relative to 
the water treatment. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses indicated that a profound change in 
gene function occurred in the 6-h H2O2 treatment and that H2O2 mainly enhanced 
gene expression levels at the 6-h time point but reduced gene expression levels 
at the 24-h time point compared with the water treatment. In total, 4579 
differentially expressed (2-fold change > 2) unigenes (DEGs), of which 78.3% 
were up-regulated and 21.7% were down-regulated; 3525 DEGs, of which 64.0% were 
up-regulated and 36.0% were down-regulated; and 7383 DEGs, of which 40.8% were 
up-regulated and 59.2% were down-regulated were selected in the 6-h, 24-h, and 
from 6- to 24-h treatments, respectively. The number of DEGs in the 6-h 
treatment was 29.9% higher than that in the 24-h treatment. The functions of the 
most highly regulated genes were associated with stress response, cell redox 
homeostasis and oxidative stress response, cell wall loosening and modification, 
metabolic processes, and transcription factors (TFs), as well as plant hormone 
signalling, including auxin, ethylene, cytokinin, gibberellin, and abscisic acid 
pathways. Notably, a large number of genes encoding for heat shock proteins 
(HSPs) and heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) were significantly 
up-regulated during H2O2 treatments. Furthermore, real-time quantitative PCR 
(qRT-PCR) results showed that, during H2O2 treatments, the expression levels of 
ARFs, IAAs, AUXs, NACs, RD22, AHKs, MYBs, PIN1, AUX15A, LBD29, LBD41, ADH1b, and 
QORL were significantly up-regulated at the 6- and/or 24-h time points. In 
contrast, PER1 and PER2 were significantly down-regulated by H2O2 treatment. 
These qRT-PCR results strongly correlated with the RNA-Seq data.
CONCLUSIONS: Using RNA-Seq and qRT-PCR techniques, we analysed the global 
changes in gene expression and functional profiling during H2O2-induced 
adventitious rooting in mung bean seedlings. These results strengthen the 
current understanding of H2O2-induced adventitious rooting and the molecular 
traits of H2O2 priming in plants.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-3576-y
PMCID: PMC5316208
PMID: 28212614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]