1. J Vet Intern Med. 2017 Mar;31(2):539-544. doi: 10.1111/jvim.14599. Epub 2017
Feb  24.

Precision Medicine in Cats: Novel Niemann-Pick Type C1 Diagnosed by Whole-Genome 
Sequencing.

Mauler DA(1), Gandolfi B(1), Reinero CR(1), O'Brien DP(1), Spooner JL(2), Lyons 
LA(1); and 99 Lives Consortium.

Collaborators: Aberdein D, Alves PC, Barsh GS, Beale HC, Boyko AR, Brockman JA, 
Castelhano MG, Chan PP, Matthew Ellinwood N, Fogle JE, Garrick DJ, Helps CR, 
Hytönen MK, Kaukonen M, Kaelin CB, Leclerc E, Leeb T, Lohi H, Longeri M, Malik 
R, Montague MJ, Munday JS, Murphy WJ, Pedersen NC, Rothschild MF, Stern JA, 
Swanson WF, Terio KA, Todhunter RJ, Ueda Y, Warren WC, Wilcox EA, Wildschutte 
JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine & Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri - Columbia, Columbia, MO.
(2)Klingele Veterinary Clinic, Quincy, IL.

Erratum in
    J Vet Intern Med. 2018 Jul;32(4):1471. doi: 10.1111/jvim.15211.

State-of-the-art health care includes genome sequencing of the patient to 
identify genetic variants that contribute to either the cause of their malady or 
variants that can be targeted to improve treatment. The goal was to introduce 
state-of-the-art health care to cats using genomics and a precision medicine 
approach. To test the feasibility of a precision medicine approach in domestic 
cats, a single cat that presented to the University of Missouri, Veterinary 
Health Center with an undiagnosed neurologic disease was whole-genome sequenced. 
The DNA variants from the cat were compared to the DNA variant database produced 
by the 99 Lives Cat Genome Sequencing Consortium. Approximately 25× genomic 
coverage was produced for the cat. A predicted p.H441P missense mutation was 
identified in NPC1, the gene causing Niemann-Pick type C1 on cat chromosome 
D3.47456793 caused by an adenine-to-cytosine transversion, c.1322A>C. The cat 
was homozygous for the variant. The variant was not identified in any other 73 
domestic and 9 wild felids in the sequence database or 190 additionally 
genotyped cats of various breeds. The successful effort suggested precision 
medicine is feasible for cats and other undiagnosed cats may benefit from a 
genomic analysis approach. The 99 Lives DNA variant database was sufficient but 
would benefit from additional cat sequences. Other cats with the mutation may be 
identified and could be introduced as a new biomedical model for NPC1. A genetic 
test could eliminate the disease variant from the population.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published 
by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the American College of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.14599
PMCID: PMC5354023
PMID: 28233346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]