1. Mol Cancer Res. 2017 Jun;15(6):735-743. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0019.
Epub  2017 Feb 23.

The Cytidine Deaminase APOBEC3 Family Is Subject to Transcriptional Regulation 
by p53.

Menendez D(1), Nguyen TA(2), Snipe J(2), Resnick MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. 
menendez@niehs.nih.gov.
(2)Genome Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

The APOBEC3 (A3) family of proteins are DNA cytidine deaminases that act as 
sentinels in the innate immune response against retroviral infections and are 
responsive to IFN. Recently, a few A3 genes were identified as potent enzymatic 
sources of mutations in several human cancers. Using human cancer cells and 
lymphocytes, we show that under stress conditions and immune challenges, all A3 
genes are direct transcriptional targets of the tumor suppressor p53. Although 
the expression of most A3 genes (including A3C and A3H) was stimulated by the 
activation of p53, treatment with the DNA-damaging agent doxorubicin or the p53 
stabilizer Nutlin led to repression of the A3B gene. Furthermore, p53 could 
enhance IFN type-I induction of A3 genes. Interestingly, overexpression of a 
group of tumor-associated p53 mutants in TP53-null cancer cells promoted A3B 
expression. These findings establish that the "guardian of the genome" role 
ascribed to p53 also extends to a unique component of the immune system, the A3 
genes, thereby integrating human immune and chromosomal stress responses into an 
A3/p53 immune axis.Implications: Activated p53 can integrate chromosomal 
stresses and immune responses through its influence on expression of APOBEC3 
genes, which are key components of the innate immune system that also influence 
genomic stability. Mol Cancer Res; 15(6); 735-44. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0019
PMCID: PMC5457717
PMID: 28232385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest