1. PLoS One. 2017 Feb 23;12(2):e0171311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171311. 
eCollection 2017.

The widely used Nicotiana benthamiana 16c line has an unusual T-DNA integration 
pattern including a transposon sequence.

Philips JG(1), Naim F(1), Lorenc MT(1), Dudley KJ(2), Hellens RP(1)(3), 
Waterhouse PM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Tropical Crops and Biocommodities, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
(2)Institute for Future Environments, Central Analytical Research Facility, 
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)Institute for Future Environments, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia.

Nicotiana benthamiana is employed around the world for many types of research 
and one transgenic line has been used more extensively than any other. This 
line, 16c, expresses the Aequorea victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP), 
highly and constitutively, and has been a major resource for visualising the 
mobility and actions of small RNAs. Insights into the mechanisms studied at a 
molecular level in N. benthamiana 16c are likely to be deeper and more accurate 
with a greater knowledge of the GFP gene integration site. Therefore, using next 
generation sequencing, genome mapping and local alignment, we identified the 
location and characteristics of the integrated T-DNA. As suggested from previous 
molecular hybridisation and inheritance data, the transgenic line contains a 
single GFP-expressing locus. However, the GFP coding sequence differs from that 
originally reported. Furthermore, a 3.2 kb portion of a transposon, appears to 
have co-integrated with the T-DNA. The location of the integration mapped to a 
region of the genome represented by Nbv0.5scaffold4905 in the 
www.benthgenome.com assembly, and with less integrity to Niben101Scf03641 in the 
www.solgenomics.net assembly. The transposon is not endogenous to laboratory 
strains of N. benthamiana or Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain GV3101 (MP90), 
which was reportedly used in the generation of line 16c. However, it is present 
in the popular LBA4404 strain. The integrated transposon sequence includes its 
5' terminal repeat and a transposase gene, and is immediately adjacent to the 
GFP gene. This unexpected genetic arrangement may contribute to the 
characteristics that have made the 16c line such a popular research tool and 
alerts researchers, taking transgenic plants to commercial release, to be aware 
of this genomic hitchhiker.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171311
PMCID: PMC5322946
PMID: 28231340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.