1. GSTF J Adv Med Res. 2014;1(2):17. doi: 10.7603/s40782-014-0017-6. Epub 2015
Jul  9.

Troponin Mutation Caused Diastolic Dysfunction and Experimental Treatment in 
Transgenic Mice with Cardiomyopathy.

Xu Y(1), Tian J(2), Huang X(2).

Author information:
(1)pediatrics research institute in Children's hospital, Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Troponin, a contractile protein of the thin filament of striated muscle, 
consists of three subunits: troponin C (TnC), troponin T (TnT), and troponin I 
(TnI). Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) plays a critical role in regulation of cardiac 
function. The physiological effect of cTnI, as an inhibitory subunit of troponin 
complex, is to prevent the interaction between myosin heavy chain heads and 
actins, i.e. the cross-bridge formation, and to ensure a proper relaxation of 
cardiac myofilaments. In pathological conditions, the deficiency of cTnI or 
mutations in cTnI especially in the C-terminus of cTnI is associated with 
diastolic dysfunction caused by myofibril hypersensitivity to Ca2+. Our 
laboratory has generated cTnI knockout mouse model to investigate the cellular 
and molecular function of cTnI and created cTnI mutant disease mouse models to 
explore the pathophysiology caused by cTnI mutations in the heart. Here, we 
present our recent studies on physiological function of cTnI in the heart and 
the pathological consequences caused by the cTnI mutations in the diseased heart 
using the transgenic mouse models. The mechanisms underlying diastolic 
dysfunction and heart failure caused by cTnI mutations are explored in 
cell-based assays and in transgenic animal models. These studies provide us with 
useful information in searching for therapeutic strategies and target-oriented 
medication for the treatment of diastolic dysfunction and heart failure.

DOI: 10.7603/s40782-014-0017-6
PMCID: PMC5302009
PMID: 28239629