1. J Med Chem. 2017 Apr 13;60(7):2983-2992. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00045.
Epub  2017 Mar 16.

Discovery of a 3-(4-Pyrimidinyl) Indazole (MLi-2), an Orally Available and 
Selective Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) Inhibitor that Reduces Brain 
Kinase Activity.

Scott JD(1), DeMong DE(2), Greshock TJ(3), Basu K(4), Dai X(1), Harris J(1), 
Hruza A(1), Li SW(3), Lin SI(1), Liu H(1), Macala MK(1), Hu Z(1), Mei H(1), 
Zhang H(1), Walsh P(4), Poirier M(1), Shi ZC(1), Xiao L(1), Agnihotri G(1), 
Baptista MA(1), Columbus J(2), Fell MJ(2), Hyde LA(1), Kuvelkar R(1), Lin Y(1), 
Mirescu C(2), Morrow JA(1), Yin Z(1), Zhang X(1), Zhou X(1), Chang RK(3), Embrey 
MW(3), Sanders JM(3), Tiscia HE(3), Drolet RE(3), Kern JT(3), Sur SM(3), Renger 
JJ(3), Bilodeau MT(3), Kennedy ME(2), Parker EM(1), Stamford AW(1), Nargund 
R(1), McCauley JA(3), Miller MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Merck & Co., Inc. , 2015 Galloping Hill Road, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, 
United States.
(2)Merck & Co., Inc. , 33 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
United States.
(3)Merck & Co., Inc. , 770 Sumneytown Pike, West Point, Pennsylvania 19486, 
United States.
(4)Merck & Co., Inc. , 126 East Lincoln Avenue, Rahway, New Jersey 07065, United 
States.

Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a large, multidomain protein which 
contains a kinase domain and GTPase domain among other regions. Individuals 
possessing gain of function mutations in the kinase domain such as the most 
prevalent G2019S mutation have been associated with an increased risk for the 
development of Parkinson's disease (PD). Given this genetic validation for 
inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity as a potential means of affecting disease 
progression, our team set out to develop LRRK2 inhibitors to test this 
hypothesis. A high throughput screen of our compound collection afforded a 
number of promising indazole leads which were truncated in order to identify a 
minimum pharmacophore. Further optimization of these indazoles led to the 
development of MLi-2 (1): a potent, highly selective, orally available, 
brain-penetrant inhibitor of LRRK2.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00045
PMID: 28245354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]