1. J Bone Miner Res. 2017 Jun;32(6):1332-1342. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.3112. Epub 2017 
Mar 29.

N-cadherin Regulation of Bone Growth and Homeostasis Is Osteolineage 
Stage-Specific.

Fontana F(1), Hickman-Brecks CL(1), Salazar VS(1)(2), Revollo L(1)(2), Abou-Ezzi 
G(1)(3), Grimston SK(1), Jeong SY(1), Watkins M(1), Fortunato M(1), Alippe Y(1), 
Link DC(1)(3), Mbalaviele G(1), Civitelli R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, 
Musculoskeletal Research Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Development Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(3)Division of Oncology, Stem Cell Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

N-cadherin inhibits osteogenic cell differentiation and canonical Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling in vitro. However, in vivo both conditional Cdh2 ablation and 
overexpression in osteoblasts lead to low bone mass. We tested the hypothesis 
that N-cadherin has different effects on osteolineage cells depending upon their 
differentiation stage. Embryonic conditional osteolineage Cdh2 deletion in mice 
results in defective growth, low bone mass, and reduced osteoprogenitor number. 
These abnormalities are prevented by delaying Cdh2 ablation until 1 month of 
age, thus targeting only committed and mature osteoblasts, suggesting they are 
the consequence of N-cadherin deficiency in osteoprogenitors. Indeed, diaphyseal 
trabecularization actually increases when Cdh2 is ablated postnatally. The 
sclerostin-insensitive Lrp5A214V mutant, associated with high bone mass, does 
not rescue the growth defect, but it overrides the low bone mass of 
embryonically Cdh2-deleted mice, suggesting N-cadherin interacts with Wnt 
signaling to control bone mass. Finally, bone accrual and β-catenin accumulation 
after administration of an anti-Dkk1 antibody are enhanced in 
N-cadherin-deficient mice. Thus, although lack of N-cadherin in embryonic and 
perinatal age is detrimental to bone growth and bone accrual, in adult mice loss 
of N-cadherin in osteolineage cells favors bone formation. Hence, N-cadherin 
inhibition may widen the therapeutic window of osteoanabolic agents. © 2017 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2017 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.3112
PMCID: PMC5466462
PMID: 28240364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Roberto Civitelli receives 
research support from Amgen, and holds stock of Amgen, Eli-Lilly and Merck & Co. 
Gabriel Mbalaviele is co-founder of Confluence Life Sciences. All other authors 
have no conflicts of interest.