1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2017 Feb 13;4:9. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00009.
eCollection  2017.

Second-Line Treatment of NSCLC-The Pan-ErbB Inhibitor Afatinib in Times of 
Shifting Paradigms.

Köhler J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; West German Cancer Center Essen, Department of Medical 
Oncology, Division of Thoracic Oncology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, 
North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany.

In contrast to the established role of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
inhibitors for the first-line treatment of patients with non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) harboring activating EGFR mutations, the role of EGFR blockade 
and of EGFR molecular testing in the second-line treatment remains less clear. 
The irreversible pan-ErbB family inhibitor afatinib (Gi(l)otrif®) was recently 
FDA- and EMA-approved for the second-line treatment of NSCLC with squamous cell 
histology irrespective of the EGFR mutational status (LUX-Lung 8). Contrariwise, 
results from the TAILOR and DELTA trials among retrospective biomarker analyses 
show the predictive value of the EGFR mutational status for efficacy of 
reversible EGFR inhibitors also as a second-line therapy. This mini review 
critically summarizes the current role of EGFR-targeting strategies in the 
second-line treatment of NSCLC with special respect to afatinib in light of 
emerging T790M-specific EGFR and immune check point inhibitors. The review also 
emphasizes the urgent need for reliable biomarkers to guide therapeutic 
decision-making and outlines prospective changes to the second-line landscape 
with some of the current second-line treatment concepts likely to be moved to 
the first-line.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00009
PMCID: PMC5303897
PMID: 28243590