1. BMJ Open. 2017 Feb 28;7(2):e012926. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012926.

Cohort profiles of the cross-sectional and prospective participant groups in the 
second Diabetes MILES-Australia (MILES-2) study.

Browne JL(1)(2), Holmes-Truscott E(1)(2), Ventura AD(1)(2), Hendrieckx C(1)(2), 
Pouwer F(3), Speight J(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, Victoria Australia.
(2)The Australian Centre for Behavioural Research in Diabetes, Diabetes 
Victoria, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical and Clinical Psychology, Center of Research on 
Psychological and Somatic disorders (CoRPS), Tilburg University, Tilburg, The 
Netherlands.
(4)AHP Research, Hornchurch, Essex, UK.

PURPOSE: More research into the psychosocial aspects of diabetes is needed so 
that the health and quality of life of people with the condition can be 
improved. To fill this gap, we conducted the second Diabetes MILES-Australia 
study (MILES-2), a survey focused on psychological, behavioural and social 
aspects of diabetes. The aim of the MILES-2 study was to provide a (1) 
longitudinal follow-up of the original MILES 2011 study cohort; (2) 
cross-sectional assessment of a new cohort.
PARTICIPANTS: Eligible participants were English-speaking Australians with type 
1 or type 2 diabetes, aged 18-75â€…years. Longitudinal cohort participants were 
mailed/emailed study invitations directly by researchers. Random sampling 
(stratified by diabetes type, insulin use, state) of the National Diabetes 
Services Scheme (NDSS) database and nationwide advertisements were used to 
recruit new cohort participants. The final sample included N=2342 eligible 
respondents (longitudinal cohort: n=504; 2015 new cohort: n=1838); 54% had type 
2 diabetes.
FINDINGS TO DATE: Survey respondents were from an advantaged socioeconomic 
background compared to the general population. Respondents with type 1 diabetes 
were over-represented in the new cohort (45%) relative to the planned 
stratification (40% type 1 diabetes, 60% type 2 diabetes). Respondents with 
insulin-treated type 2 diabetes were under-represented in the new cohort 
relative to the stratified sampling (42% invited vs 50% response). Participants 
who completed both the 2011 and 2015 surveys were more likely than those 
completing the 2011 survey only to have type 1 diabetes, report a higher 
education and annual income, and live in metropolitan areas. Participant 
feedback indicated that the survey was perceived as relevant and valuable.
FUTURE PLANS: The depth and breadth of the data available in this large sample 
will highlight unmet needs and priority areas for future investigation and, 
crucially, will inform policy, programme and intervention development and 
evaluation in Australia.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012926
PMCID: PMC5337738
PMID: 28246132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare: financial support for the submitted work from Sanofi ANZ in the form of 
an unrestricted educational grant; JLB has carried out consultancy work for 
Sanofi ANZ, has served on a Sanofi ANZ advisory board, and has had travel 
expenses covered by Sanofi ANZ, with all monies given to her institution. FP has 
served on an advisory board for Sanofi-Aventis, with monies paid to him 
personally. JS has carried out consultancy work for Sanofi ANZ and has had 
travel expenses covered by Sanofi ANZ, with all monies paid to her institution. 
EHT, ADV and CH have no relevant conflicts of interest to declare.