1. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 3;7:43656. doi: 10.1038/srep43656.

Differences in electroencephalographic non-rapid-eye movement sleep slow-wave 
characteristics between young and old mice.

Panagiotou M(1), Vyazovskiy VV(2), Meijer JH(1), Deboer T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurophysiology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden 
University Medical Centre, 2333 ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, OX1 3PT 
Oxford, UK.

Changes in sleep pattern are typical for the normal aging process. However, aged 
mice show an increase in the amount of sleep, whereas humans show a decrease 
when aging. Mice are considered an important model in aging studies, and this 
divergence warrants further investigation. Recently, insights into the network 
dynamics of cortical activity during sleep were obtained by investigating 
characteristics of individual electroencephalogram (EEG) slow waves in young and 
elderly humans. In this study, we investigated, for the first time, the 
parameters of EEG slow waves, including their incidence, amplitude, duration and 
slopes, in young (6 months) and older (18-24 months) C57BL/6J mice during 
undisturbed 24 h, and after a 6-h sleep deprivation (SD). As expected, older 
mice slept more but, in contrast to humans, absolute NREM sleep EEG slow-wave 
activity (SWA, spectral power density between 0.5-4 Hz) was higher in the older 
mice, as compared to the young controls. Furthermore, slow waves in the older 
mice were characterized by increased amplitude, steeper slopes and fewer 
multipeak waves, indicating increased synchronization of cortical neurons in 
aging, opposite to what was found in humans. Our results suggest that older 
mice, in contrast to elderly humans, live under a high sleep pressure.

DOI: 10.1038/srep43656
PMCID: PMC5334640
PMID: 28255162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.