1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Dec;84(23):8623-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.84.23.8623.

Human aldolase A deficiency associated with a hemolytic anemia: thermolabile 
aldolase due to a single base mutation.

Kishi H(1), Mukai T, Hirono A, Fujii H, Miwa S, Hori K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saga Medical School, Japan.

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase A (fructose-bisphosphate aldolase; EC 
4.1.2.13) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with 
hereditary hemolytic anemia. To clarify the molecular mechanism of the 
deficiency at the nucleotide level, we have cloned aldolase A cDNA from a 
patient's poly(A)+ RNA that was expressed in cultured lymphoblastoid cells. 
Nucleotide analysis of the patient's aldolase A cDNA showed a substitution of a 
single nucleotide (adenine to guanine) at position 386 in a coding region. As a 
result, the 128th amino acid, aspartic acid, was replaced with glycine (GAT to 
GGT). Furthermore, change of the second letter of the aspartic acid codon 
extinguished a F ok I restriction site (GGATG to GGGTG). Southern blot analysis 
of the genomic DNA showed the patient carried a homozygous mutation inherited 
from his parents. When compared with normal human aldolase A, the patient's 
enzyme from erythrocytes and from cultured lymphoblastoid cells was found to be 
highly thermolabile, suggesting that this mutation causes a functional defect of 
the enzyme. To further examine this possibility, the thermal stability of 
aldolase A of the patient and of a normal control, expressed in Escherichia coli 
using expression plasmids, was determined. The results of E. coli expression of 
the mutated aldolase A enzyme confirmed the thermolabile nature of the abnormal 
enzyme. The Asp-128 is conserved in aldolase A, B, and C of eukaryotes, 
including an insect, Drosophila, suggesting that the Asp-128 of the aldolase A 
protein is likely to be an amino acid residue with a crucial role in maintaining 
the correct spatial structure or in performing the catalytic function of the 
enzyme.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.23.8623
PMCID: PMC299598
PMID: 2825199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]