1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2017 Apr;13(4):217-233. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2017.22. Epub 
2017 Mar 9.

Beyond TNF: TNF superfamily cytokines as targets for the treatment of rheumatic 
diseases.

Croft M(1), Siegel RM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immune Regulation, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
and Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92037, USA.
(2)Immunoregulation Section, Autoimmunity Branch, NIAMS, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

TNF blockers are highly efficacious at dampening inflammation and reducing 
symptoms in rheumatic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis 
and ankylosing spondylitis, and also in nonrheumatic syndromes such as 
inflammatory bowel disease. As TNF belongs to a superfamily of 19 structurally 
related proteins that have both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory activity, 
reagents that disrupt the interaction between proinflammatory TNF family 
cytokines and their receptors, or agonize the anti-inflammatory receptors, are 
being considered for the treatment of rheumatic diseases. Biologic agents that 
block B cell activating factor (BAFF) and receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-ÎºB ligand (RANKL) have been approved for the treatment of systemic lupus 
erythematosus and osteoporosis, respectively. In this Review, we focus on 
additional members of the TNF superfamily that could be relevant for the 
pathogenesis of rheumatic disease, including those that can strongly promote 
activity of immune cells or increase activity of tissue cells, as well as those 
that promote death pathways and might limit inflammation. We examine preclinical 
mouse and human data linking these molecules to the control of damage in the 
joints, muscle, bone or other tissues, and discuss their potential as targets 
for future therapy of rheumatic diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2017.22
PMCID: PMC5486401
PMID: 28275260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement M.C. has licensed 
patents on several TNF superfamily molecules. R.S. has issued patents on 
antibodies against the TNF superfamily molecule TL1A.