1. Oncogene. 2017 Jul 13;36(28):4037-4046. doi: 10.1038/onc.2017.47. Epub 2017
Mar  13.

MUC1-C integrates PD-L1 induction with repression of immune effectors in 
non-small-cell lung cancer.

Bouillez A(1), Rajabi H(1), Jin C(1), Samur M(1), Tagde A(1), Alam M(1), Hiraki 
M(1), Maeda T(1), Hu X(1), Adeegbe D(1), Kharbanda S(1), Wong KK(1), Kufe D(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.

Immunotherapeutic approaches, particularly programmed death 1/programmed death 
ligand 1 (PD-1/PD-L1) blockade, have improved the treatment of non-small-cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC), supporting the premise that evasion of immune destruction 
is of importance for NSCLC progression. However, the signals responsible for 
upregulation of PD-L1 in NSCLC cells and whether they are integrated with the 
regulation of other immune-related genes are not known. Mucin 1 (MUC1) is 
aberrantly overexpressed in NSCLC, activates the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) 
p65→︀ZEB1 pathway and confers a poor prognosis. The present studies demonstrate 
that MUC1-C activates PD-L1 expression in NSCLC cells. We show that MUC1-C 
increases NF-κB p65 occupancy on the CD274/PD-L1 promoter and thereby drives 
CD274 transcription. Moreover, we demonstrate that MUC1-C-induced activation of 
NF-κB→︀ZEB1 signaling represses the TLR9 (toll-like receptor 9), IFNG, MCP-1 
(monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and GM-CSF genes, and that this signature 
is associated with decreases in overall survival. In concert with these results, 
targeting MUC1-C in NSCLC tumors suppresses PD-L1 and induces these effectors of 
innate and adaptive immunity. These findings support a previously unrecognized 
central role for MUC1-C in integrating PD-L1 activation with suppression of 
immune effectors and poor clinical outcome.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2017.47
PMCID: PMC5509481
PMID: 28288138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare 
competing financial interests; D.K. holds equity in Genus Oncology and is a 
consultant to the company. The other authors disclosed no potential conflicts of 
interest.