1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 10;12(3):e0173264. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173264. 
eCollection 2017.

Coffee extract inhibits adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocyes by interrupting 
insulin signaling through the downregulation of IRS1.

Maki C(1), Funakoshi-Tago M(1), Aoyagi R(1), Ueda F(1), Kimura M(1), Kobata 
K(2), Tago K(3), Tamura H(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Keio University, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Josai University, Sakado, Saitama, Japan.
(3)Division of Structural Biochemistry, Department of Biochemistry, Jichi 
Medical University, Shimotsuke-shi, Tochigi-ken, Japan.

Although epidemiological data have indicated that a strong negative association 
exists between coffee consumption and the prevalence of obesity-associated 
diseases, the molecular mechanisms by which coffee intake prevents 
obesity-associated diseases has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we found 
that coffee intake significantly suppressed high-fat diet (HFD)-induced 
metabolic alternations such as increases in body weight and the accumulation of 
adipose tissue, and up-regulation of glucose, free fatty acid, total cholesterol 
and insulin levels in the blood. We also found that coffee extract significantly 
inhibited adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. In the early phase of 
adipogenesis, 3T3-L1 cells treated with coffee extract displayed the retardation 
of cell cycle entry into the G2/M phase called as mitotic clonal expansion 
(MCE). Coffee extract also inhibited the activation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein β (C/EBPβ) by preventing its phosphorylation by ERK. Furthermore, the 
coffee extract suppressed the adipogenesis-related events such as MCE and C/EBPβ 
activation through the down-regulation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1). 
The stability of the IRS1 protein was markedly decreased by the treatment with 
coffee extract due to proteasomal degradation. These results have revealed an 
anti-adipogenic function for coffee intake and identified IRS1 as a novel target 
for coffee extract in adipogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0173264
PMCID: PMC5345824
PMID: 28282409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.