1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Jun;62(6):641-646. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2017.21. Epub 2017 Mar
16.

Gain-of-function mutation p.Arg225Cys in SCN11A causes familial episodic pain 
and contributes to essential tremor.

Leng XR(1), Qi XH(1), Zhou YT(2), Wang YP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.

Familial episodic pain is a rare autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by 
recurrent attacks of pain. The pathogenesis of familial episodic pain is not 
very clear so far. Essential tremor is the most common movement disorder, but 
the identification of essential tremor genes has remained elusive. We studied a 
four-generation Chinese family with early-onset familial episodic pain and adult 
onset familial essential tremor. All essential tremor diagnoses were confirmed 
based on a review of the questionnaires, videotaped neurological examinations 
and was then reconfirmed by a senior neurologist specializing in movement 
disorders using published criteria. SCN11A analysis was performed by whole-exome 
sequencing or Sanger sequencing. We confirmed the presence of the SCN11A 
(c.673C>T) mutation in family members with episodic pain and essential tremor. 
We identified a missense mutation of p.Arg225Cys in SCN11A in a four-generation 
Chinese family with early-onset familial episodic pain and adult onset familial 
essential tremor syndrome. This may belong to a rare hereditary syndrome that 
has not been reported up to now. For the first time, we associated the genetic 
variability of SCN11A with the development of essential tremor, and further 
confirmed essential tremor is one of the neurological channelopathies.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2017.21
PMID: 28298626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]