1. Bioconjug Chem. 2017 Mar 15;28(3):768-774. doi:
10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00567.  Epub 2016 Dec 1.

Antisense Oligonucleotides Internally Labeled with Peptides Show Improved Target 
Recognition and Stability to Enzymatic Degradation.

Taskova M, Madsen CS(1), Jensen KJ(1), Hansen LH, Vester B, Astakhova K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen , Thorvaldsensvej 40, 1871 
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Specific target binding and stability in diverse biological media is of crucial 
importance for applications of synthetic oligonucleotides as diagnostic and 
therapeutic tools. So far, these issues have been addressed by chemical 
modification of oligonucleotides and by conjugation with a peptide, most often 
at the terminal position of the oligonucleotide. Herein, we for the first time 
systematically investigate the influence of internally attached short peptides 
on the properties of antisense oligonucleotides. We report the synthesis and 
internal double labeling of 21-mer oligonucleotides that target the BRAF V600E 
oncogene, with a library of rationally designed peptides employing CuAAC "click" 
chemistry. The peptide sequence has an influence on the specificity and affinity 
of target DNA/RNA binding. We also investigated the impact of locked nucleic 
acids (LNAs) on the latter. Lysine residues improve binding of POCs to target 
DNA and RNA, whereas the distance to lysine correlates exclusively with a 
decrease in binding of mismatched RNA targets. Glycine and tyrosine residues 
affect target binding as well. Importantly, the resistance of POCs to enzymatic 
degradation is dramatically improved by the internal attachment of peptides but 
not by LNA alone. Independently of the peptide sequence, the conjugates are 
stable for up to 24 h in 90% human serum and duplexes of POCs with complementary 
DNA for up to 160 h in 90% human serum. Such excellent stability has not been 
previously reported for DNA and makes internally labeled POCs an exciting object 
of study, i.e., showing high target specificity and simultaneous stability in 
biological media.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.6b00567
PMID: 28292178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]