1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Feb 28;8:264. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00264. eCollection 
2017.

Brachypodium distachyon BdPP2CA6 Interacts with BdPYLs and BdSnRK2 and 
Positively Regulates Salt Tolerance in Transgenic Arabidopsis.

Zhang F(1), Wei Q(1), Shi J(1), Jin X(1), He Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Luo Q(1), Wang 
Y(1), Chang J(1), Yang G(1), He G(1).

Author information:
(1)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry 
of Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology Wuhan, China.

The phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) is essential in plant responding to biotic 
and abiotic stresses. Although ABA signaling model is well established in 
Arabidopsis, ABA receptor PYL family and clade A PP2C subfamily are not yet 
characterized in monocot model plant Brachypodium distachyon. In this study, we 
identified 12 PYLs and 8 clade A PP2Cs from B. distachyon genome and 
successfully cloned 12 PYLs and 7 clade A PP2Cs. Bioinformatic and expression 
analyses showed that most of the identified genes respond to several signal 
molecules and abiotic stresses. Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed 
that many BdPYLs and BdPP2CAs participate in the classic ABA-PYL-PP2C-SnRK2 
signaling pathway. A clade A PP2C, designated BdPP2CA6, interacted with BdPYL11 
in the absence of ABA and localized in nucleus. Most clade A PP2C members from 
Arabidopsis showed negatively regulation in ABA signaling pathway, whereas 
BdPP2CA6-overexpression transgenic Arabidopsis showed ABA hypersensitive 
phenotype, resulting in enhanced stomatal closure and salinity tolerance. Our 
results indicate that BdPP2CA6 positively regulates ABA and stress signal 
pathway in transgenic Arabidopsis plant seedlings.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00264
PMCID: PMC5329023
PMID: 28293246