1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2017 Jun 3;13(6):1-11. doi: 
10.1080/21645515.2017.1279765. Epub 2017 Feb 14.

Panblok-H1+advax H1N1/2009pdm vaccine: Insights into rapid development of a 
delta inulin adjuvanted recombinant pandemic influenza vaccine.

Honda-Okubo Y(1)(2), Rajapaksha H(1)(2), Sajkov D(3), Gordon D(4), Cox MMJ(5), 
Petrovsky N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Vaxine Pty Ltd, Flinders Medical Centre , Adelaide , Australia.
(2)b Department of Endocrinology , Flinders University , Adelaide , Australia.
(3)c Australian Respiratory and Sleep Medicine Institute , Adelaide , Australia.
(4)d Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Department , Flinders Medical Centre , 
Adelaide , Australia.
(5)e Protein Sciences Corporation , Meriden , CT , USA.

Timely vaccine supply is critical during influenza pandemics but is impeded by 
current virus-based manufacturing methods. The 2009 H1N1/2009pdm 'swine flu' 
pandemic reinforced the need for innovation in pandemic vaccine design. We 
report on insights gained during rapid development of a pandemic vaccine based 
on recombinant haemagglutinin (rHA) formulated with Advax™ delta inulin adjuvant 
(Panblok-H1/Advax). Panblok-H1/Advax was designed and manufactured within 
1 month of the pandemic declaration by WHO and successfully entered human 
clinical testing in under 3 months from first isolation and sequencing of the 
novel pandemic virus, requiring several major challenges to be overcome. 
Panblok-H1/Advax successfully induced neutralising antibodies against the 
pandemic strain, but also induced cross-neutralising antibodies in a subset of 
subjects against an H1N1 strain (A/Puerto Rico/8/34) derived from the 1918 
Spanish flu, highlighting the possibility to use Advax to induce more broadly 
cross-protective antibody responses. Interestingly, the rHA from H1N1/2009pdm 
exhibited variants in the receptor binding domain that had a major impact on 
receptor binding and hemagglutination ability. We used an in silico structural 
modeling approach to better understand the unusual behavior of the novel 
hemagglutinin, thereby demonstrating the power of computational modeling 
approaches for rapid characterization of new pandemic viruses. While challenges 
remain in ensuring ultrafast vaccine access for the entire population in 
response to future pandemics, the adjuvanted recombinant Panblok-H1/Advax 
vaccine proved its utility during a real-life pandemic situation.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2017.1279765
PMCID: PMC5489286
PMID: 28301280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]