1. Acta Neuropathol. 2017 Jul;134(1):1-14. doi: 10.1007/s00401-017-1697-7. Epub 
2017 Mar 18.

Axonal transport deficits in multiple sclerosis: spiraling into the abyss.

van den Berg R(1), Hoogenraad CC(2), Hintzen RQ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department Of Neurology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
r.vandenberg@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Cell Biology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department Of Neurology, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The transport of mitochondria and other cellular components along the axonal 
microtubule cytoskeleton plays an essential role in neuronal survival. Defects 
in this system have been linked to a large number of neurological disorders. In 
multiple sclerosis (MS) and associated models such as experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis (EAE), alterations in axonal transport have been shown to 
exist before neurodegeneration occurs. Genome-wide association (GWA) studies 
have linked several motor proteins to MS susceptibility, while neuropathological 
studies have shown accumulations of proteins and organelles suggestive for 
transport deficits. A reduced effectiveness of axonal transport can lead to 
neurodegeneration through inhibition of mitochondrial motility, disruption of 
axoglial interaction or prevention of remyelination. In MS, demyelination leads 
to dysregulation of axonal transport, aggravated by the effects of TNF-alpha, 
nitric oxide and glutamate on the cytoskeleton. The combined effect of all these 
pathways is a vicious cycle in which a defective axonal transport system leads 
to an increase in ATP consumption through loss of membrane organization and a 
reduction in available ATP through inhibition of mitochondrial transport, 
resulting in even further inhibition of transport. The persistent activity of 
this positive feedback loop contributes to neurodegeneration in MS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-017-1697-7
PMCID: PMC5486629
PMID: 28315956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]