1. J Oral Biol Craniofac Res. 2017 Jan-Apr;7(1):67-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.jobcr.2016.07.002. Epub 2016 Jul 13.

Apert syndrome with S252W FGFR2 mutation and characterization using Phenomizer: 
An Indian case report.

Kunwar F(1), Tewari S(1), Bakshi SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Science, Nirma University, Sarkhej-Gandhinagar Highway, 
Ahmedabad 382 481, Gujarat, India.

Human genetic disease needs differential diagnosis to optimize clinical 
management, enable prenatal detection, and genetic counselling. The current 
methods of robust DNA sequencing also require next generation phenotyping to 
match with for better interpretation of genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity 
commonly observed. We report use of human ontology based phenotypic 
characterization with Phenomizer that gives statistical score for possible 
diagnoses based on which, the gene mutation was studied. A case of 
craniosynostosis which refers to a group of syndromes characterized by a 
premature fusion of skull was studied. The phenotypic features viz, dental 
crowding and dental malocclusion, bulbous nose, downslanted palpebral fissures, 
radial deviation of thumb, syndactyly of fingers, macrocephaly, and oxycephaly 
were entered to query the web-based tool Phenomizer which indicated high 
probability of mutation in FGFR2 gene. The proband, a 13-year-old male born to 
non-consanguineous parents showed mutation on FGFR2 gene at c.755C>G indicative 
of Apert syndrome. Apert syndrome is one of the most severe craniosynostosis 
syndromes with two possible mutations in the exon IIIa of FGFR2 gene reported in 
majority of the cases. This case study shows the importance of Phenomizer and 
molecular genetic analysis in differential diagnosis of genetic diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jobcr.2016.07.002
PMCID: PMC5343159
PMID: 28316926