1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 22;12(3):e0174237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174237. 
eCollection 2017.

The expression and localization of RNase and RNase inhibitor in blood cells and 
vascular endothelial cells in homeostasis of the vascular system.

Ohashi A(1), Murata A(1), Cho Y(2), Ichinose S(3), Sakamaki Y(3), Nishio M(1), 
Hoshi O(2), Fischer S(4), Preissner KT(4), Koyama T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Molecular Genetics of Hematology, Field of Applied Laboratory 
Science, Graduate School of Health Care Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Anatomy and Physiological Science, Field of Applied Laboratory Science, 
Graduate School of Health Care Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Instrumental Analysis Research Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Institute for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Justus-Liebig-Universit√§t, 
Giessen, Germany.

RNA may be released from vascular cells including endothelial cells in the event 
of injury and in vascular disease. Extracellular RNAs have been recognized as 
novel procoagulant and permeability-increasing factors. Extracellular RNA may 
function as inflammatory host alarm signals that serve to amplify the defense 
mechanism, but it may provide important links to thrombus formation. 
Extracellular RNA is degraded by RNase. We propose that RNase and its inhibitor 
RNase inhibitor (RI) act as modulators of homeostasis in the vasculature to 
control the functions of extracellular RNA. We aimed to investigate the 
expression and localization of RNase 1 and RI in cells that contact blood, such 
as platelets, mononuclear cells, polymorphonuclear cells, and red blood cells. 
RNase 1 and RI expression and localization in blood cells were compared with 
those in the human umbilical vein endothelial cell line, EAhy926. Additionally, 
we further investigated the effect of thrombin on the expression of RNase 1 and 
RI in platelets. We used an RNase activity assay, reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, western blot, immunocytochemistry, 
transmission electron microscopy, and immunoelectron microscopy (pre- and 
post-embedding methods). RNase activity in the supernatant from EAhy926 cells 
was 50 times than in blood cells (after 60 min). RNase 1 mRNA and protein 
expression in EAhy926 cells was highest among the cells examined. However, RI 
mRNA and protein expression was similar in most cell types examined. 
Furthermore, we observed that RNase 1 and von Willebrand factor were partially 
colocalized in EAhy926 cells and platelets. In conclusion, we propose that high 
RNase activity is ordinarily released from endothelial cells to support 
anticoagulation in the vasculature. On the other hand, platelets and leukocytes 
within thrombi at sites of vascular injury show very low RNase activity, which 
may support hemostatic thrombus formation. However, activated platelets and 
leukocytes may accelerate pathologic thrombus formation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174237
PMCID: PMC5362223
PMID: 28329009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest in preparing this article.