1. Immunol Lett. 2017 Sep;189:27-39. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.010. Epub 2017 
Mar 18.

Pharmacological targeting of allergen-specific T lymphocytes.

Tauber PA(1), Pickl WF(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology, and 
Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology, and 
Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
winfried.pickl@meduniwien.ac.at.

Allergic disorders are the result of a complex pathophysiology, involving major 
cellular lineages and a multitude of humoral factors of the innate and adaptive 
immune system, and have the tendency to involve multiple organs. Consequently, 
even standard pharmacological treatment of allergies is rarely specific but 
usually targets more than one pathway/cellular system at a time. Accordingly, 
many of the classic anti-allergic drugs have a critical impact also on T helper 
cells, which are pivotal not only during the sensitization but also the 
maintenance phase of allergic diseases. Recent years have seen a dramatic 
increase of novel drugs with the potency to interfere, more or less 
specifically, with T lymphocyte function, which might, possibly together with 
classic anti-allergic drugs, help harnessing one of the central cellular players 
in allergic responses. A major theme in the years to come will be a thoughtful 
combination of previously established with recently developed treatment 
modalities.

Copyright Â© 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2017.03.010
PMCID: PMC7100038
PMID: 28322861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure Winfried F. 
Pickl: In the last five years consultant and lecture activity with and without 
relation to individual products: Novartis; Shareholder Biomay AG, Vienna, 
Austria. Peter A. Tauber declares no conflict of interest.