1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2017 Jul;23(7):1072-1077. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbmt.2017.03.019. Epub 2017 Mar 18.

Fresh or Cryopreserved CD34(+)-Selected Mobilized Peripheral Blood Stem and 
Progenitor Cells for the Treatment of Poor Graft Function after Allogeneic 
Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.

Ghobadi A(1), Fiala MA(2), Ramsingh G(2), Gao F(3), Abboud CN(2), 
Stockerl-Goldstein K(2), Uy GL(2), Grossman BJ(4), Westervelt P(2), DiPersio 
JF(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Electronic address: arminghobadi@wustl.edu.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(3)Division of Public Health Sciences, Department of Surgery, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(4)Division of Laboratory and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pathology and 
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

CD34+-selected stem cell boost (SCB) without conditioning has recently been 
utilized for poor graft function (PGF) after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation with promising results. Unfortunately, many patients have been 
unable to receive the boost infusion as their donors were unwilling or unable to 
undergo an additional stem cell collection. Therefore, we conducted this study 
utilizing either fresh or cryopreserved peripheral blood stem cell products to 
create CD34+-selected boost infusions for the treatment of PGF. Additionally, to 
explore relationship of CD34+ dose and response, we included a cohort of donors 
mobilized with plerixafor in addition to the standard granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Twenty-six patients with PGF were included in 
this study. Seventeen donor-recipient pairs were enrolled onto the prospective 
study; an additional 9 patients treated off protocol were reviewed 
retrospectively. Three different donor products were used for CD34+ selection: 
(1) fresh mobilized product using G-CSF only, (2) fresh mobilized products using 
G-CSF and plerixafor, and (3) cryopreserved cells mobilized with G-CSF. CD34+ 
cell selection was performed using a CliniMACS. The infusion was not preceded by 
administration of any chemotherapy or conditioning regimen. The primary 
objective was hematologic response rate and secondary objectives included CD34+ 
yields, incidence and severity of acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease 
(GVHD), overall survival (OS), and relapse-free survival (RFS). The median 
post-selection CD34+ counts per kilogram of recipient weight were 3.1 × 106, 
10.9 × 106, and 1 × 106 for G-CSF only, G-CSF plus plerixafor, and cryopreserved 
products, respectively. The median CD34+ yields (defined as the number of CD34+ 
cells after selection/CD34+ cells before CD34+ selection) were 69%, 66%, and 28% 
for G-CSF only, G-CSF plus plerixafor, and cryopreserved products, respectively. 
After SCB, 16 of the 26 recipients (62%) had a complete response, including 5 of 
8 (63%) who received cryopreserved products. Five had a partial response (19%), 
resulting in an overall response rate of 81%. One-year RFS and OS were 50% and 
65%, respectively. There was no treatment-related toxicity reported other than 
GVHD: 6 (23%) developed acute GVHD (2 grade I and 4 grade II) and 8 (31%) 
developed chronic GVHD (2 limited and 6 extensive). Cryopreserved products are 
viable alternatives to create SCB for the treatment of PGF. When collecting 
fresh products is an option, the addition of plerixafor increases CD34+ yield 
over G-CSF alone; however, it is currently unclear if the CD34+ cell dose 
impacts the efficacy of the SCB.

Copyright © 2017 The American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2017.03.019
PMCID: PMC5515540
PMID: 28323004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.