1. World J Gastroenterol. 2017 Mar 7;23(9):1521-1540. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v23.i9.1521.

Host pathogen interactions in Helicobacter pylori related gastric cancer.

Chmiela M(1), Karwowska Z(1), Gonciarz W(1), Allushi B(1), StÄ…czek P(1).

Author information:
(1)Magdalena Chmiela, Weronika Gonciarz, Bujana Allushi, Department of 
Immunology and Infectious Biology, Institute of Microbiology, Biotechnology and 
Immunology, Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Lodz, 
Banacha, 90-237 Lodz, Poland.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori), discovered in 1982, is a microaerophilic, 
spiral-shaped gram-negative bacterium that is able to colonize the human 
stomach. Nearly half of the world's population is infected by this pathogen. Its 
ability to induce gastritis, peptic ulcers, gastric cancer and mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissue lymphoma has been confirmed. The susceptibility of an individual 
to these clinical outcomes is multifactorial and depends on H. pylori virulence, 
environmental factors, the genetic susceptibility of the host and the reactivity 
of the host immune system. Despite the host immune response, H. pylori infection 
can be difficult to eradicate. H. pylori is categorized as a group I carcinogen 
since this bacterium is responsible for the highest rate of cancer-related 
deaths worldwide. Early detection of cancer can be lifesaving. The 5-year 
survival rate for gastric cancer patients diagnosed in the early stages is 
nearly 90%. Gastric cancer is asymptomatic in the early stages but always 
progresses over time and begins to cause symptoms when untreated. In 97% of 
stomach cancer cases, cancer cells metastasize to other organs. H. pylori 
infection is responsible for nearly 60% of the intestinal-type gastric cancer 
cases but also influences the development of diffuse gastric cancer. The host 
genetic susceptibility depends on polymorphisms of genes involved in H. 
pylori-related inflammation and the cytokine response of gastric epithelial and 
immune cells. H. pylori strains differ in their ability to induce a deleterious 
inflammatory response. H. pylori-driven cytokines accelerate the inflammatory 
response and promote malignancy. Chronic H. pylori infection induces genetic 
instability in gastric epithelial cells and affects the DNA damage repair 
systems. Therefore, H. pylori infection should always be considered a 
pro-cancerous factor.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v23.i9.1521
PMCID: PMC5340805
PMID: 28321154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: No potential 
conflicts of interest.