1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Jun;173(6):1640-1643. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38127. Epub 
2017 Mar 23.

BCAP31-associated encephalopathy and complex movement disorder mimicking 
mitochondrial encephalopathy.

Albanyan S(1), Al Teneiji A(1), Monfared N(1), Mercimek-Mahmutoglu S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Toronto, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Genetics and Genome Biology Research Program, Research Institute, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.

BCAP31, encoded by BCAP31, is involved in the export of transmembrane proteins 
from the endoplasmic reticulum. Pathogenic variants in BCAP31 results in global 
developmental delay, dystonia, deafness and dysmorphic features in males, called 
deafness, dystonia, and cerebral hypomyelination (DDCH) syndrome. We report a 
new patient with BCAP3-associated encephalopathy, DDCH syndrome, sensorineural 
hearing loss, generalized dystonia, and choreoathetosis. This 3.5-year-old boy 
had microcephaly and failure to thrive within the first 3 months of life. His 
brain MRI showed bilateral increased signal intensity in globus pallidus at age 
3 months raising the suspicion of mitochondrial encephalopathy. His muscle 
biopsy revealed pleomorphic subsarcolemmal mitochondria collection in electron 
microscopy. Respiratory chain enzyme activities were normal in muscle. He was 
enrolled to a whole exome sequencing research study, which identified a 
hemizygous likely pathogenic truncating variant (c.533_536dup; p.Ser180AlafsX6) 
in BCAP31, inherited from his mother, who had sensorineural hearing loss and 
normal cognitive functions. We report a new patient with BCAP31-associated 
encephalopathy, DDCH syndrome, mimicking mitochondrial encephalopathy. We also 
report a heterozygous mother who has bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. This 
patient's clinical features, muscle histopathology, brain MRI features, and 
family history were suggestive of mitochondrial encephalopathy. Whole exome 
sequencing research study confirmed the diagnosis of BCAP31-associated 
encephalopathy, DDCH syndrome.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38127
PMID: 28332767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]