1. Microb Genom. 2016 Mar 2;2(3):e000050. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000050. eCollection
 2016 Mar.

Repeated local emergence of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii in a 
single hospital ward.

Schultz MB(1)(2), Pham Thanh D(3), Tran Do Hoan N(3), Wick RR(2)(1), Ingle 
DJ(2)(1), Hawkey J(2)(1), Edwards DJ(2)(1), Kenyon JJ(4)(5), Phu Huong Lan 
N(3)(6), Campbell JI(3), Thwaites G(3), Thi Khanh Nhu N(3)(6), Hall RM(4), 
Fournier-Level A(7), Baker S(3)(6), Holt KE(2)(1).

Author information:
(1)2​Centre for Systems Genomics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 
3010, Australia.
(2)1​Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science 
and Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.
(3)3​The Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Wellcome Trust Major Overseas 
Programme, Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
(4)4​School of Molecular Bioscience, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(5)5​School of Biomedical Science, Queensland University of Technology, 
Queensland, Australia.
(6)6​Centre for Tropical Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, Oxford 
University, London, UK.
(7)7​Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, 
Australia.

We recently reported a dramatic increase in the prevalence of 
carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii infections in the intensive care 
unit (ICU) of a Vietnamese hospital. This upsurge was associated with a specific 
oxa23-positive clone that was identified by multilocus VNTR analysis. Here, we 
used whole-genome sequence analysis to dissect the emergence of 
carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii causing ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) 
in the ICU during 2009-2012. To provide historical context and distinguish 
microevolution from strain introduction, we compared these genomes with those of 
A. baumannii asymptomatic carriage and VAP isolates from this same ICU collected 
during 2003-2007. We identified diverse lineages co-circulating over many years. 
Carbapenem resistance was associated with the presence of oxa23, oxa40, oxa58 
and ndm1 genes in multiple lineages. The majority of resistant isolates were 
oxa23-positive global clone GC2; fine-scale phylogenomic analysis revealed five 
distinct GC2 sublineages within the ICU that had evolved locally via independent 
chromosomal insertions of oxa23 transposons. The increase in infections caused 
by carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii was associated with transposon-mediated 
transmission of a carbapenemase gene, rather than clonal expansion or spread of 
a carbapenemase-harbouring plasmid. Additionally, we found evidence of 
homologous recombination creating diversity within the local GC2 population, 
including several events resulting in replacement of the capsule locus. We 
identified likely donors of the imported capsule locus sequences amongst the A. 
baumannii isolated on the same ward, suggesting that diversification was largely 
facilitated via reassortment and sharing of genetic material within the 
localized A. baumannii population.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000050
PMCID: PMC5320574
PMID: 28348846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]