1. J Clin Invest. 2017 May 1;127(5):1700-1713. doi: 10.1172/JCI91913. Epub 2017
Mar  27.

Somatic mutations and progressive monosomy modify SAMD9-related phenotypes in 
humans.

Buonocore F, Kühnen P, Suntharalingham JP, Del Valle I, Digweed M, Stachelscheid 
H, Khajavi N, Didi M, Brady AF, Blankenstein O, Procter AM, Dimitri P, Wales 
JKH, Ghirri P, Knöbl D, Strahm B, Erlacher M, Wlodarski MW, Chen W, Kokai GK, 
Anderson G, Morrogh D, Moulding DA, McKee SA, Niemeyer CM, Grüters A, Achermann 
JC.

It is well established that somatic genomic changes can influence phenotypes in 
cancer, but the role of adaptive changes in developmental disorders is less well 
understood. Here we have used next-generation sequencing approaches to identify 
de novo heterozygous mutations in sterile α motif domain-containing protein 9 
(SAMD9, located on chromosome 7q21.2) in 8 children with a multisystem disorder 
termed MIRAGE syndrome that is characterized by intrauterine growth restriction 
(IUGR) with gonadal, adrenal, and bone marrow failure, predisposition to 
infections, and high mortality. These mutations result in gain of function of 
the growth repressor product SAMD9. Progressive loss of mutated SAMD9 through 
the development of monosomy 7 (-7), deletions of 7q (7q-), and secondary somatic 
loss-of-function (nonsense and frameshift) mutations in SAMD9 rescued the 
growth-restricting effects of mutant SAMD9 proteins in bone marrow and was 
associated with increased length of survival. However, 2 patients with -7 and 
7q- developed myelodysplastic syndrome, most likely due to haploinsufficiency of 
related 7q21.2 genes. Taken together, these findings provide strong evidence 
that progressive somatic changes can occur in specific tissues and can 
subsequently modify disease phenotype and influence survival. Such 
tissue-specific adaptability may be a more common mechanism modifying the 
expression of human genetic conditions than is currently recognized.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI91913
PMCID: PMC5409795
PMID: 28346228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.