1. Iran J Immunol. 2017 Mar;14(1):59-72.

Interleukin-23 Receptor Gene Variants in Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia and Their 
Relation to Prognostic Factors.

Zareinejad M(1), Samiei A, Valibeigi B, Gholami T, Zareifar S, Amirghofran Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin (IL)-23 has an important role in tumor immune 
regulation.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possible association of interleukin-23 receptor 
(IL23R) gene variants rs1884444, rs10889677 and rs11209026 with development of 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
METHODS: The IL23R variants were studied in 164 ALL patients and compared to 175 
healthy controls by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. The relationship between these variants and clinical and 
laboratory features of the patients and response to therapy were evaluated.
RESULTS: No significant differences in genotype and allele frequencies existed 
between patients and controls. The rs1884444TG genotype was significantly lower 
in patients who relapsed (24.2%) compared to those without relapse (55.9%, 
p=0.006). Fewer patients who relapsed had evidence of the G allele (p=0.034). 
The TG genotype was associated with a longer complete remission at 1804±116 days 
compared to other genotypes (<1217 days, p=0.028), however, this result was not 
significant in multivariate analysis. The rs10889677 AA genotype and A allele 
were associated with age (p<0.041) and platelet number (p=0.03) in precursor-B 
cell ALL (B-ALL) patients. Both occurred more frequently in patients aged 2-10 
years (63.6% and 66%, respectively) and in those with platelets >100×10ˆ3 μL 
(68.4% and 52.4%, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Our findings showed a lack of association of the studied 
polymorphisms with the risk of ALL. The influence of the rs1884444 polymorphism 
on relapse rate and association of rs10889677 AA genotype with favorable 
prognostic factors suggest the effect of the studied polymorphisms on ALL 
response to therapy and prognosis.

PMID: 28341819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]