1. RNA Biol. 2017 Sep 2;14(9):1223-1231. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1306173. Epub
 2017 Mar 27.

A to I editing in disease is not fake news.

Bajad P(1), Jantsch MF(1), Keegan L(2), O'Connell M(2).

Author information:
(1)a Medical University of Vienna, Center of Anatomy and Cell Biology , 
Department of Cell- and Developmental Biology , Schwarzspanierstrasse, Vienna , 
Austria.
(2)b CEITEC at Masaryk University , Kamenice, Czech Republic.

Adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADARs) are zinc-containing enzymes that 
deaminate adenosine bases to inosines within dsRNA regions in transcripts. In 
short, structured dsRNA hairpins individual adenosine bases may be targeted 
specifically and edited with up to one hundred percent efficiency, leading to 
the production of alternative protein variants. However, the majority of editing 
events occur within longer stretches of dsRNA formed by pairing of repetitive 
sequences. Here, many different adenosine bases are potential targets but 
editing efficiency is usually much lower. Recent work shows that ADAR-mediated 
RNA editing is also required to prevent aberrant activation of antiviral innate 
immune sensors that detect viral dsRNA in the cytoplasm. Missense mutations in 
the ADAR1 RNA editing enzyme cause a fatal auto-inflammatory disease, 
Aicardi-Gouti√®res syndrome (AGS) in affected children. In addition RNA editing 
by ADARs has been observed to increase in many cancers and also can contribute 
to vascular disease. Thus the role of RNA editing in the progression of various 
diseases can no longer be ignored. The ability of ADARs to alter the sequence of 
RNAs has also been used to artificially target model RNAs in vitro and in cells 
for RNA editing. Potentially this approach may be used to repair genetic defects 
and to alter genetic information at the RNA level. In this review we focus on 
the role of ADARs in disease development and progression and on their potential 
use to artificially modify RNAs in a targeted manner.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2017.1306173
PMCID: PMC5699539
PMID: 28346055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]