1. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 29;12(3):e0174051. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174051. 
eCollection 2017.

Lithic technological responses to Late Pleistocene glacial cycling at Pinnacle 
Point Site 5-6, South Africa.

Wilkins J(1)(2), Brown KS(1), Oestmo S(3), Pereira T(4), Ranhorn KL(5), 
Schoville BJ(1)(3), Marean CW(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Evolution Research Institute, Department of Archaeology, University of 
Cape Town, Rondebosch, Private Bag, South Africa.
(2)Centre for Coastal Paleoscience, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, Port 
Elizabeth, Eastern Cape, South Africa.
(3)Institute of Human Origins, School of Human Evolution and Social Change, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, United States of America.
(4)Interdisciplinary Center for Archaeology and Evolution of Human Behavior, 
Faculdade das CiÃªncias Humanas e Sociais, Universidade do Algarve, Campus 
Gambelas, Faro, Portugal.
(5)Center for the Advanced Study of Human Paleobiology, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC, United States of America.

There are multiple hypotheses for human responses to glacial cycling in the Late 
Pleistocene, including changes in population size, interconnectedness, and 
mobility. Lithic technological analysis informs us of human responses to 
environmental change because lithic assemblage characteristics are a reflection 
of raw material transport, reduction, and discard behaviors that depend on 
hunter-gatherer social and economic decisions. Pinnacle Point Site 5-6 (PP5-6), 
Western Cape, South Africa is an ideal locality for examining the influence of 
glacial cycling on early modern human behaviors because it preserves a long 
sequence spanning marine isotope stages (MIS) 5, 4, and 3 and is associated with 
robust records of paleoenvironmental change. The analysis presented here 
addresses the question, what, if any, lithic assemblage traits at PP5-6 
represent changing behavioral responses to the MIS 5-4-3 interglacial-glacial 
cycle? It statistically evaluates changes in 93 traits with no a priori 
assumptions about which traits may significantly associate with MIS. In contrast 
to other studies that claim that there is little relationship between 
broad-scale patterns of climate change and lithic technology, we identified the 
following characteristics that are associated with MIS 4: increased use of 
quartz, increased evidence for outcrop sources of quartzite and silcrete, 
increased evidence for earlier stages of reduction in silcrete, evidence for 
increased flaking efficiency in all raw material types, and changes in tool 
types and function for silcrete. Based on these results, we suggest that 
foragers responded to MIS 4 glacial environmental conditions at PP5-6 with 
increased population or group sizes, 'place provisioning', longer and/or more 
intense site occupations, and decreased residential mobility. Several other 
traits, including silcrete frequency, do not exhibit an association with MIS. 
Backed pieces, once they appear in the PP5-6 record during MIS 4, persist 
through MIS 3. Changing paleoenvironments explain some, but not all temporal 
technological variability at PP5-6.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0174051
PMCID: PMC5371328
PMID: 28355257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.