1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Mar;96(13):e6537. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006537.

Associations between polymorphisms in coagulation-related genes and venous 
thromboembolism: A meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis.

Jiang J(1), Liu K, Zou J, Ma H, Yang H, Zhang X, Jiao Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, Department of General Surgery Department of 
Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Erratum in
    Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Jun 08;96(23):e7233. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000007233.

BACKGROUND: Recently, several studies showed that the polymorphisms in the 
coagulation-related genes might be associated with venous thromboembolism (VTE); 
however, the results were still controversial. We performed a meta-analysis with 
trial sequential analysis to investigate the associations between the 
endothelial cell-activated protein C receptor (EPCR) rs9574, F11 rs2289252, F11 
rs2036914, FGG rs2066865, FGG rs1049636, CYP4V2 rs13146272, SERPINC1 rs2227589, 
and GP6 rs1613662 polymorphisms with the risk of VTE.
METHODS: We searched both the common English-language databases and the Chinese 
literature databases. Two authors selected studies according to inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Crude odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were 
calculated to estimate the strength of this association. Between-study 
heterogeneity was assessed with the chi-square-based Q test and the I statistic.
RESULTS: Overall, a total of 20 studies were included. The meta-analysis 
revealed that the F11 rs2289252, F11 rs2036914, FGG rs2066865, and CYP4V2 
rs13146272 polymorphisms were closely related to the development of VTE in the 
white race under the best genetic models after multiple testing adjustments. The 
EPCR rs9574, FGG rs1049636, SERPINC1 rs2227589, and GP6 rs1613662 polymorphisms 
might be potential candidates in the pathogenesis of VTE, but trial sequential 
analyses and sensitivity analyses indicated that the evidences were limited. 
Larger scale studies were demanded to avoid false-positive outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Finally, our study demonstrated the important role of rs2289252, 
rs2036914, rs2066865, and rs13146272 polymorphisms in the development of VTE in 
the white race. Rs9574, rs1049636, rs2227589 and rs1613662 polymorphisms might 
be risk factors of VTE. However, more studies involving diverse races are needed 
to probe the ethnic difference and the underlying mechanisms of significant 
associations.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000006537
PMCID: PMC5380300
PMID: 28353616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.