1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 May;15(5):2931-2939. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6393. Epub 2017
Mar  24.

Clinical significance of sCD163 and its possible role in asthma (Review).

Zhi Y(1), Gao P(1), Xin X(1), Li W(1), Ji L(1), Zhang L(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130022, P.R. China.

Macrophages exert important functions in the balance and efficiency of immune 
responses, and participate in innate and adaptive immunity. The proinflammatory 
actions of macrophages are implicated in autoimmune diseases. Unlike classically 
activated M1 macrophages, the alternatively activated cluster of differentiation 
(CD)163+ and CD206+ M2 macrophages are involved in tissue repair and wound 
healing, and use oxidative metabolism to support their long‑term functions. 
CD163 is a member of the scavenger receptor superfamily, categorized into class 
B, and its soluble(s) form, sCD163, is a marker of activated M2 macrophages. 
CD163 is selectively expressed in cells of the monocyte and macrophage lineages; 
however, its biological role has yet to be elucidated. The expression of sCD163 
is markedly induced by anti‑inflammatory mediators, such as glucocorticoids and 
interleukin‑10, whereas it is inhibited by proinflammatory mediators, such as 
interferon‑γ. These findings suggest that CD163 may serve as a potential target 
for the therapeutic modulation of inflammatory responses. The concentration of 
sCD163 in blood is associated with acute and chronic inflammatory processes in 
autoimmune disorders of connective tissue, fat metabolism and cardiovascular 
diseases, and it can be used for the assessment of cancer prognosis. A role for 
sCD163 in the pathogenesis of asthma has also been proposed. The present review 
serves to present the available knowledge concerning the implication of sCD163 
in the pathophysiological mechanisms of asthma, and evaluate its potential as a 
biomarker and possible therapeutic target for asthma.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6393
PMCID: PMC5428902
PMID: 28350095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]