1. J Cell Biol. 2017 May 1;216(5):1421-1438. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201607098. Epub
2017  Apr 3.

Three-tier regulation of cell number plasticity by neurotrophins and Tolls in 
Drosophila.

Foldi I(1), Anthoney N(1), Harrison N(1), Gangloff M(2), Verstak B(2), 
Nallasivan MP(1), AlAhmed S(1), Zhu B(1), Phizacklea M(1), Losada-Perez M(1), 
Moreira M(1), Gay NJ(2), Hidalgo A(3).

Author information:
(1)NeuroDevelopment Group, School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, England, UK.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, 
England, UK.
(3)NeuroDevelopment Group, School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham B15 2TT, England, UK a.hidalgo@bham.ac.uk.

Cell number plasticity is coupled to circuitry in the nervous system, adjusting 
cell mass to functional requirements. In mammals, this is achieved by 
neurotrophin (NT) ligands, which promote cell survival via their Trk and p75NTR 
receptors and cell death via p75NTR and Sortilin. Drosophila NTs (DNTs) bind 
Toll receptors instead to promote neuronal survival, but whether they can also 
regulate cell death is unknown. In this study, we show that DNTs and Tolls can 
switch from promoting cell survival to death in the central nervous system (CNS) 
via a three-tier mechanism. First, DNT cleavage patterns result in alternative 
signaling outcomes. Second, different Tolls can preferentially promote cell 
survival or death. Third, distinct adaptors downstream of Tolls can drive either 
apoptosis or cell survival. Toll-6 promotes cell survival via MyD88-NF-κB and 
cell death via Wek-Sarm-JNK. The distribution of adaptors changes in space and 
time and may segregate to distinct neural circuits. This novel mechanism for CNS 
cell plasticity may operate in wider contexts.

© 2017 Foldi et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201607098
PMCID: PMC5412559
PMID: 28373203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]