1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 May;173(5):1200-1207. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38162. Epub 
2017 Mar 29.

Nonsense pathogenic variants in exon 1 of PHOX2B lead to translational 
reinitiation in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome.

Cain JT(1), Kim DI(1), Quast M(1), Shivega WG(1), Patrick RJ(1), Moser C(2), 
Reuter S(3), Perez M(4), Myers A(5), Weimer JM(1)(5), Roux KJ(1)(5), Landsverk 
M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Children's Health Research Center, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South 
Dakota.
(2)Section of Pediatric Pulmonology, Sanford School of Medicine at the 
University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
(3)Section of Neonatal-Perinatal Medicine, Sanford School of Medicine at the 
University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
(4)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Kaiser Permanente, Roseville, 
California.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine at the University of 
South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.

Pathogenic variants in PHOX2B lead to congenital central hypoventilation 
syndrome (CCHS), a rare disorder of the nervous system characterized by 
autonomic dysregulation and hypoventilation typically presenting in the neonatal 
period, although a milder late-onset (LO) presentation has been reported. More 
than 90% of cases are caused by polyalanine repeat mutations (PARMs) in the 
C-terminus of the protein; however non-polyalanine repeat mutations (NPARMs) 
have been reported. Most NPARMs are located in exon 3 of PHOX2B and result in a 
more severe clinical presentation including Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) and/or 
peripheral neuroblastic tumors (PNTs). A previously reported nonsense pathogenic 
variant in exon 1 of a patient with LO-CCHS and no HSCR or PNTs leads to 
translational reinitiation at a downstream AUG codon producing an N-terminally 
truncated protein. Here we report additional individuals with nonsense 
pathogenic variants in exon 1 of PHOX2B. In vitro analyses were used to 
determine if these and other reported nonsense variants in PHOX2B exon 1 
produced N-terminally truncated proteins. We found that all tested nonsense 
variants in PHOX2B exon 1 produced a truncated protein of the same size. This 
truncated protein localized to the nucleus and transactivated a target promoter. 
These data suggest that nonsense pathogenic variants in the first exon of PHOX2B 
likely escape nonsense mediated decay (NMD) and produce N-terminally truncated 
proteins functionally distinct from those produced by the more common PARMs.

Â© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38162
PMCID: PMC5397359
PMID: 28371199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETITING INTERESTS The authors have no 
competing interests to report.