1. Genes Environ. 2017 Apr 1;39:16. doi: 10.1186/s41021-016-0064-6. eCollection 
2017.

Evaluation of in vivo mutagenesis for assessing the health risk of air 
pollutants.

Aoki Y(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, Center for Health and 
Environmental Risk Research, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506 Japan.

Various kind of chemical substances, including man-made chemical products and 
unintended products, are emitted to ambient air. Some of these substances have 
been shown to be mutagenic and therefore to act as a carcinogen in humans. 
National pollutant inventories (e.g., Pollutant Release and Transfer 
Registration in Japan) have estimated release amounts of man-made chemical 
products, but a major concern is the release of suspended particulate matter 
containing potent mutagens, for example, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and 
related compounds generated by the combustion of fossil fuel, which are not 
estimated by PRTR system. In situ exposure studies have revealed that DNA 
adducts in the lung, and possibly mutations in germline cells are induced in 
rodents by inhalation of ambient air, indicating that evaluating in vivo 
mutations is important for assessing environmental health risks. Transgenic 
rodent systems (Muta, Big Blue, and gpt delta) are good tools for analyzing in 
vivo mutations induced by a mixture of chemical substances present in the 
environment. Following inhalation of diesel exhaust (used as a model mixture), 
mutation frequency was increased in the lung of gpt delta mice and base 
substitutions were induced at specific guanine residues (mutation hotspots) on 
the target transgenes. Mutation hotspots induced by diesel exhaust were 
different from those induced by benzo[a]pyrene, a typical mutagen in ambient 
air, but nearly identical to those induced by 1,6-dinitropyrene contained in 
diesel exhaust. Comparison between mutation hotspots in the TP53 (p53) gene in 
human lung cancer (data extracted from the IARC TP53 database) and mutations we 
identified in gpt delta mice showed that G to A transitions centered in CGT and 
CGG trinucleotides were mutation hotspots on both TP53 genes in human lung 
cancers and gpt genes in transgenic mice that inhaled diesel exhaust. The 
carcinogenic potency (TD50 value) of genotoxic carcinogen was shown to be 
correlated with the in vivo mutagenicity (total dose per increased mutant 
frequency). These results suggest that the mutations identified in transgenic 
rodents can help identify environmental mutagens that cause cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/s41021-016-0064-6
PMCID: PMC5376282
PMID: 28373898