1. mBio. 2017 Apr 4;8(2):e00157-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00157-17.

The R263K Dolutegravir Resistance-Associated Substitution Progressively 
Decreases HIV-1 Integration.

Mesplède T(1), Leng J(1), Pham HT(1), Liang J(1)(2), Quan Y(1), Han Y(1), 
Wainberg MA(3)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)McGill University AIDS Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, 
Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Division of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)McGill University AIDS Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, 
Jewish General Hospital, Montréal, Québec, Canada mark.wainberg@mcgill.ca.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, McGill 
University Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Erratum in
    mBio. 2018 Sep 25;9(5):e01450-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01450-18.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection persists despite decades of active 
antiretroviral therapy (ART), effectively preventing viral eradication. 
Treatment decreases plasma viral RNA, but viral DNA persists, mostly integrated 
within the genome of nucleated blood cells. Viral DNA blood levels correlate 
with comorbidities and the rapidity of viral rebound following treatment 
interruption. To date, no intervention aiming at decreasing HIV DNA levels below 
those attained through ART has been successful. This includes use of some 
integrase inhibitors either as part of ART or in treatment intensification 
studies. We have argued that using the integrase inhibitor dolutegravir (DTG) in 
similar studies may yield better results, but this remains to be studied. In 
treatment-experienced individuals, the most frequent substitution associated 
with failure with dolutegravir is R263K in integrase. R263K decreases 
integration both in cell-free and tissue culture assays. We investigated here 
how integrated DNA levels evolve over time during prolonged infections with 
R263K viruses. To investigate a potential defect in reverse transcription with 
R263K, the levels of reverse transcripts were measured by quantitative PCR. We 
measured HIV type 1 (HIV-1) integration in Jurkat cells over the course of 
4-week infections using Alu-mediated quantitative PCR. The results show that 
R263K did not decrease reverse transcription. Prolonged infections with R263K 
mutant viruses led to less HIV-1 integrated DNA over time compared to wild-type 
viruses. These tissue culture results help to explain the absence of the R263K 
substitution in most individuals experiencing failure with DTG and support 
studies aiming at longitudinally measuring the levels of integrated DNA in 
individuals treated with this drug.IMPORTANCE Antiretroviral treatment decreases 
plasma viral RNA, but HIV DNA persists for decades within infected cells. 
Studies of nonhuman primates have suggested that reducing retroviral DNA levels 
might represent a path to eradication. The integrase inhibitor dolutegravir is 
less susceptible than any other anti-HIV drug to the emergence of resistance in 
treatment-naive individuals. In treatment-experienced individuals, in contrast, 
rare cases of treatment failure were commonly associated with emergence of an 
R263K integrase substitution that confers low-level resistance to dolutegravir. 
It is unclear why this substitution is not more common in individuals 
experiencing failure with dolutegravir. We report here that R263K progressively 
diminishes the levels of integrated HIV-1 DNA in tissue culture over multiple 
cycles of infection. Our results help to explain aspects of the clinical 
efficacy of dolutegravir and suggest that this drug may be able to reduce HIV 
DNA levels within infected individuals compared to other drugs.

Copyright © 2017 Mesplède et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00157-17
PMCID: PMC5380839
PMID: 28377526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]