1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jun 20;45(11):6761-6774. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx225.

An RRM-ZnF RNA recognition module targets RBM10 to exonic sequences to promote 
exon exclusion.

Collins KM(1), Kainov YA(2), Christodolou E(3), Ray D(4), Morris Q(4), Hughes 
T(4), Taylor IA(5), Makeyev EV(2), Ramos A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, 
London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
(2)Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, 
UK.
(3)Structural Biology Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, 
London NW1 1AT, UK.
(4)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 3E1, Canada.
(5)Macromolecular Structure Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 
1AT, UK.

RBM10 is an RNA-binding protein that plays an essential role in development and 
is frequently mutated in the context of human disease. RBM10 recognizes a 
diverse set of RNA motifs in introns and exons and regulates alternative 
splicing. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this seemingly relaxed 
sequence specificity are not understood and functional studies have focused on 
3΄ intronic sites only. Here, we dissect the RNA code recognized by RBM10 and 
relate it to the splicing regulatory function of this protein. We show that a 
two-domain RRM1-ZnF unit recognizes a GGA-centered motif enriched in RBM10 
exonic sites with high affinity and specificity and test that the interaction 
with these exonic sequences promotes exon skipping. Importantly, a second RRM 
domain (RRM2) of RBM10 recognizes a C-rich sequence, which explains its known 
interaction with the intronic 3΄ site of NUMB exon 9 contributing to regulation 
of the Notch pathway in cancer. Together, these findings explain RBM10's broad 
RNA specificity and suggest that RBM10 functions as a splicing regulator using 
two RNA-binding units with different specificities to promote exon skipping.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx225
PMCID: PMC5499739
PMID: 28379442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]