1. Aging Cell. 2017 Jun;16(3):585-593. doi: 10.1111/acel.12589. Epub 2017 Mar 30.

Aging-associated dysregulation of homeostatic immune response termination (and 
not initiation).

Pattabiraman G(1), Palasiewicz K(1), Galvin JP(1), Ucker DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Illinois College of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.

Immunosenescence is a state of unbalanced immune responsiveness, characterized 
by a diverse repertoire of seemingly discreet and paradoxical alterations in all 
aspects of immunity arising in an aging-associated manner. We asked whether 
aging-associated alterations in the ability of apoptotic cells to elicit 
immunomodulatory responses (innate apoptotic immunity; IAI) or in IAI responses 
themselves might underlie the confounding aging-associated anomalies of 
immunosenescence. We explored this question by examining, as a function of 
animal age, responsiveness of murine macrophages on the single cell level. We 
monitored the expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines 
cytofluorimetrically in response to pro-inflammatory Toll-like receptor (TLR) 
stimulation and anti-inflammatory treatment with apoptotic cells. While we found 
no alterations with age in the potency of apoptotic cells or in the initiation 
and magnitude of IAI responses, we did identify a cell-intrinsic deficiency in 
anti-inflammatory IAI response termination linked with age and preceding 
manifestations of immunosenescence. Further, we found that an aging-associated 
deficiency in response termination also is evident following TLR stimulation. 
These surprising observations reveal that a loss of homeostatic immune control 
with animal age results from the dysregulation of response termination (as 
distinct from response initiation) and is exerted on the level of transcription. 
We suggest that, with advancing age, cells become locked into relatively 
longer-lived response states. Aging-associated immune dysfunctions may reflect a 
diminution in the cellular nimbleness of immune responsiveness.

Â© 2017 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acel.12589
PMCID: PMC5418197
PMID: 28371013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]