1. J Cell Biochem. 2017 Nov;118(11):3730-3743. doi: 10.1002/jcb.26020. Epub 2017 
May 18.

A Computational Approach to Identify a Potential Alternative Drug With Its 
Positive Impact Toward PMP22.

Agrahari AK(1), C GPD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, School of BioSciences and Technology, VIT 
University, Vellore, Tamil Nadu 632014, India.

Mutations in the Peripheral Myelin Protein 22 (PMP22) leads to Charcot Marie 
Tooth type 1A (CMT1A, a subtype of CMT1) disease which is the most common 
inherited neuropathy of peripheral nervous system. In the present study, we used 
series of in silico prediction methods to screen and identify the most 
deleterious non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) in PMP22 gene. Out of 48 nsSNPs, five 
nsSNPs (L16P, L19P, T23R, W28R, and L147R) associated with PMP22 were predicted 
to be highly deleterious and destabilizing the protein. To explore the possible 
structure-function relationship, we employed abinitio modeling strategy using 
the CABS-fold server to predict the three-dimensional structure models in the 
absence of crystallized structures in PMP22 protein. We used Cytoscape 3.4.0 
plugin Integrated Complex Traits Networks interface (iCTNet) to identify the 
probable drug-gene interactions in PMP22 gene. A total of 22 chemical compounds 
yielded from the aforementioned tool was subjected to Molinspiration and OSIRIS 
program to screen and identify the potent drug molecules for further analysis. 
Five chemical compounds with excellent bioavailability and drug relevant 
property were selected for molecular docking simulation study. We modeled five 
mutant structures at their corresponding positions and performed molecular 
docking simulation analysis using AutoDock Tools (ADT) version 1.5.6 and 
ArgusLab 4.0.1 tools to analyze their interaction patterns and binding efficacy. 
Based on the results obtained from the computational study, we predict that 
estradiol could be a potential drug of choice for treating patients with CMT1A 
which needs larger attention from biologists in the near future. J. Cell. 
Biochem. 118: 3730-3743, 2017. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.26020
PMID: 28374912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]