1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jun 27;8(26):42621-42637. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16730.

EGFR-induced phosphorylation of type Iγ phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase 
promotes pancreatic cancer progression.

Chen C(1), Wang X(1), Fang J(2), Xue J(3), Xiong X(1), Huang Y(1), Hu J(3), Ling 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN, 
USA.
(2)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest malignancies and effective treatment 
has always been lacking. In current study, we investigated how the type Iγ 
phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase (PIPKIγ) participates in the progression 
of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) for novel therapeutic potentials 
against this lethal disease. We found that PIPKIγ is up-regulated in all tested 
PDAC cell lines. The growth factor (including EGFR)-induced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of PIPKIγ is significantly elevated in in situ and metastatic 
PDAC tissues. Loss of PIPKIγ inhibits the aggressiveness of PDAC cells by 
restraining the activities of AKT and STAT3, as well as MT1-MMP expression. 
Therefore when planted into the pancreas of nude mice, PIPKIγ-depleted PDAC 
cells exhibits substantially repressed tumor growth and metastasis comparing to 
control PDAC cells. Results from further studies showed that the 
phosphorylation-deficient PIPKIγ mutant, unlike its wild-type counterpart, 
cannot rescue PDAC progression inhibited by PIPKIγ depletion. These findings 
indicate that PIPKIγ, functioning downstream of EGFR signaling, is critical to 
the progression of PDAC, and suggest that PIPKIγ is potentially a valuable 
therapeutic target for PDAC treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.16730
PMCID: PMC5522093
PMID: 28388589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.