1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 6;12(4):e0175367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175367. 
eCollection 2017.

Nicotinic alpha 7 receptor expression and modulation of the lung epithelial 
response to lipopolysaccharide.

Gahring LC(1)(2), Myers EJ(2), Dunn DM(3), Weiss RB(3), Rogers SW(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Salt Lake City Veterans 
Administration Medical Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(2)Division of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of 
Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

Nicotine modulates multiple inflammatory responses in the lung through the 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtype alpha7 (α7). Previously we reported 
that α7 modulates both the hematopoietic and epithelium responses in the lung to 
the bacterial inflammogen, lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Here we apply 
immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry and RNA-Seq analysis of isolated distal 
lung epithelium to further define α7-expression and function in this tissue. 
Mouse lines were used that co-express a bicistronic tau-green fluorescent 
protein (tGFP) as a reporter of α7 (α7G) expression and that harbor an α7 with a 
specific point mutation (α7E260A:G) that selectively uncouples it from cell 
calcium-signaling mechanisms. The tGFP reporter reveals strong cell-specific 
α7-expression by alveolar macrophages (AM), Club cells and ATII cells. Ciliated 
cells do not express detectible tGFP, but their numbers decrease by one-third in 
the α7E260A:G lung compared to controls. Transcriptional comparisons (RNA-Seq) 
between α7G and α7E260A:G enriched lung epithelium 24 hours after challenge with 
either intra-nasal (i.n.) saline or LPS reveals a robust α7-genotype impact on 
both the stasis and inflammatory response of this tissue. Overall the α7E260A:G 
lung epithelium exhibits reduced inflammatory cytokine/chemokine expression to 
i.n. LPS. Transcripts specific to Club cells (e.g., CC10, secretoglobins and 
Muc5b) or to ATII cells (e.g., surfactant proteins) were constitutively 
decreased in in the α7E260A:G lung, but they were strongly induced in response 
to i.n. LPS. Protein analysis applying immunohistochemistry and ELISA also 
revealed α7-associated differences suggested by RNA-Seq including altered mucin 
protein 5b (Muc5b) accumulation in the α7E260A:G bronchia, that in some cases 
appeared to form airway plugs, and a substantial increase in extracellular 
matrix deposits around α7E260A:G airway bronchia linings that was not seen in 
controls. Our results show that α7 is an important modulator of normal gene 
expression stasis and the response to an inhaled inflammogen in the distal lung 
epithelium. Further, when normal α7 signaling is disrupted, changes in lung gene 
expression resemble those associated with long-term lung pathologies seen in 
humans who use inhaled nicotine products.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175367
PMCID: PMC5383308
PMID: 28384302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.