1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 5;12(4):e0175105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175105. 
eCollection 2017.

Antagonistic genetic correlations for milking traits within the genome of dairy 
cattle.

Gervais O(1), Pong-Wong R(2), Navarro P(3), Haley CS(2)(3), Nagamine Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Kyoto University, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto Japan.
(2)The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, United 
Kingdom.
(3)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Nihon University, Bio-resource Science, Fujisawa, Japan.

Genome-wide association studies can be applied to identify useful SNPs 
associated with complex traits. Furthermore, regional genomic mapping can be 
used to estimate regional variance and clarify the genomic relationships within 
and outside regions but has not previously been applied to milk traits in 
cattle. We applied both single SNP analysis and regional genomic mapping to 
investigate SNPs or regions associated with milk yield traits in dairy cattle. 
The de-regressed breeding values of three traits, total yield (kg) of milk 
(MLK), fat (FAT), and protein (PRT) in 305 days, from 2,590 Holstein sires in 
Japan were analyzed. All sires were genotyped with 40,646 single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) markers. A genome-wide significant region (P < 0.01) common 
to all three traits was identified by regional genomic mapping on chromosome 
(BTA) 14. In contrast, single SNP analysis identified significant SNPs only for 
MLK and FAT (P < 0.01), but not PRT in the same region. Regional genomic mapping 
revealed an additional significant region (P < 0.01) for FAT on BTA5 that was 
not identified by single SNP analysis. The additive whole-genomic effects 
estimated in the regional genomic mapping analysis for the three traits were 
positively correlated with one another (0.830-0.924). However, the regional 
genomic effects obtained by using a window size of 20 SNPs for FAT on BTA14 were 
negatively correlated (P < 0.01) with the regional genomic effect for MLK 
(-0.940) and PRT (-0.878). The BTA14 regional effect for FAT also showed 
significant negative correlations (P < 0.01) with the whole genomic effects for 
MLK (-0.153), FAT (-0.172), and PRT (-0.181). These negative genomic 
correlations between loci are consistent with the negative linkage 
disequilibrium expected for traits under directional selection. Such 
antagonistic correlations may hamper the fixation of the FAT increasing alleles 
on BTA14. In summary, regional genomic mapping found more regions associated 
with milk production traits than did single SNP analysis. In addition, the 
existence of non-zero covariances between regional and whole genomic effects may 
influence the detection of regional effects, and antagonistic correlations could 
hamper the fixation of major genes under intensive selection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175105
PMCID: PMC5381921
PMID: 28380033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.