1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2017 Sep;49(9):1789-1795. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0000000000001292.

A Ketone Ester Drink Increases Postexercise Muscle Glycogen Synthesis in Humans.

Holdsworth DA(1), Cox PJ, Kirk T, Stradling H, Impey SG, Clarke K.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UNITED KINGDOM; and 2Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, 
Liverpool John Moore's University, Liverpool, UNITED KINGDOM.

INTRODUCTION: Physical endurance can be limited by muscle glycogen stores, in 
that glycogen depletion markedly reduces external work. During carbohydrate 
restriction, the liver synthesizes the ketone bodies, D-β-hydroxybutyrate, and 
acetoacetate from fatty acids. In animals and in the presence of glucose, 
D-β-hydroxybutyrate promotes insulin secretion and increases glycogen synthesis. 
Here we determined whether a dietary ketone ester, combined with plentiful 
glucose, can increase postexercise glycogen synthesis in human skeletal muscle.
METHODS: After an interval-based glycogen depletion exercise protocol, 12 
well-trained male athletes completed a randomized, three-arm, blinded crossover 
recovery study that consisted of consumption of either a taste-matched, 
zero-calorie control or a ketone monoester drink, followed by a 10-mM glucose 
clamp or saline infusion for 2 h. The three postexercise conditions were control 
drink then saline infusion, control drink then hyperglycemic clamp, or ketone 
ester drink then hyperglycemic clamp. Skeletal muscle glycogen content was 
determined in muscle biopsies of vastus lateralis taken before and after the 2-h 
clamps.
RESULTS: The ketone ester drink increased blood D-β-hydroxybutyrate 
concentrations to a maximum of 5.3 versus 0.7 mM for the control drink (P < 
0.0001). During the 2-h glucose clamps, insulin levels were twofold higher (31 
vs 16 mU·L, P < 0.01) and glucose uptake 32% faster (1.66 vs 1.26 g·kg, P < 
0.001). The ketone drink increased by 61 g, the total glucose infused for 2 h, 
from 197 to 258 g, and muscle glycogen was 50% higher (246 vs 164 mmol glycosyl 
units per kilogram dry weight, P < 0.05) than after the control drink.
CONCLUSION: In the presence of constant high glucose concentrations, a ketone 
ester drink increased endogenous insulin levels, glucose uptake, and muscle 
glycogen synthesis.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001292
PMCID: PMC5556006
PMID: 28398950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]