1. Neuroimage. 2018 Apr 15;170:471-481. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.012.
Epub  2017 Apr 6.

Robust automated constellation-based landmark detection in human brain imaging.

Ghayoor A(1), Vaidya JG(2), Johnson HJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 1402 Seamans Center for 
the Engineering Arts and Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52240, 
USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa City, 
IA 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 1402 Seamans Center for 
the Engineering Arts and Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52240, 
USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: hans-johnson@uiowa.edu.

A robust fully automated algorithm for identifying an arbitrary number of 
landmark points in the human brain is described and validated. The proposed 
method combines statistical shape models with trained brain morphometric 
measures to estimate midbrain landmark positions reliably and accurately. Gross 
morphometric constraints provided by automatically identified eye centers and 
the center of the head mass are shown to provide robust initialization in the 
presence of large rotations in the initial head orientation. Detection of 
primary midbrain landmarks are used as the foundation from which extended 
detection of an arbitrary set of secondary landmarks in different brain regions 
by applying a linear model estimation and principle component analysis. This 
estimation model sequentially uses the knowledge of each additional detected 
landmark as an improved foundation for improved prediction of the next landmark 
location. The accuracy and robustness of the presented method was evaluated by 
comparing the automatically generated results to two manual raters on 30 
identified landmark points extracted from each of 30 T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance images. For the landmarks with unambiguous anatomical definitions, the 
average discrepancy between the algorithm results and each human observer 
differed by less than 1 mm from the average inter-observer variability when the 
algorithm was evaluated on imaging data collected from the same site as the 
model building data. Similar results were obtained when the same model was 
applied to a set of heterogeneous image volumes from seven different collection 
sites representing 3 scanner manufacturers. This method is reliable for general 
application in large-scale multi-site studies that consist of a variety of 
imaging data with different orientations, spacings, origins, and field 
strengths.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.012
PMCID: PMC5630513
PMID: 28392490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]