1. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2017 Jul;43(7):1391-1400. doi: 
10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2017.02.013. Epub 2017 Apr 7.

Inertial Cavitation Ultrasound with Microbubbles Improves Reperfusion Efficacy 
When Combined with Tissue Plasminogen Activator in an In Vitro Model of 
Microvascular Obstruction.

Goyal A(1), Yu FTH(1), Tenwalde MG(1), Chen X(1), Althouse A(2), Villanueva 
FS(1), Pacella JJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Ultrasound Molecular Imaging and Therapeutics, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Clinical Biostatistics Core, Heart and Vascular Institute, University of 
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Center for Ultrasound Molecular Imaging and Therapeutics, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic 
address: pacellajj@upmc.edu.

We have previously reported that long-tone-burst, high-mechanical-index 
ultrasound (US) and microbubble (MB) therapy can restore perfusion in both 
in vitro and in vivo models of microvascular obstruction (MVO). Addition of MBs 
to US has been found to potentiate the efficacy of thrombolytics on large venous 
thrombi; however, the optimal US parameters for achieving microvascular 
reperfusion of MVO caused by microthrombi, when combined with tissue plasminogen 
activator (tPA), are unknown. We sought to elucidate the specific effects of US, 
with and without tPA, for effective reperfusion of MVO in an in vitro model 
using both venous and arterial microthrombi. Venous- and arterial-type 
microthrombi were infused onto a mesh with 40-μm pores to simulate MVO. Pulsed 
US (1 MHz) was delivered with inertial cavitation (IC) (1.0 MPa, 1000 cycles, 
0.33 Hz) and stable cavitation (SC) US (0.23 MPa, 20% duty cycle, 0.33 Hz) 
regimes while MB suspension (2 × 106 MBs/mL) was infused. The efficacy of 
sonoreperfusion with these parameters was tested with and without tPA. 
Sonoreperfusion efficacy was significantly greater for IC + tPA compared with 
tPA alone, IC, SC and SC + tPA, suggesting lytic synergism between tPA and US 
for both venous- and arterial-type microthrombi. In contrast to our previous 
in vitro studies using 1.5 MPa at 5000 US cycles without tPA, the IC regime 
employed herein used 90% less US energy. These findings suggest an IC regime can 
be used with tPA synergistically to achieve a high degree of fibrinolysis for 
both thrombus types.

Copyright © 2017 World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ultrasmedbio.2017.02.013
PMCID: PMC5440195
PMID: 28395964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]