1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Mar 24;7:94. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00094. 
eCollection 2017.

Peroxiredoxin-6 Negatively Regulates Bactericidal Activity and NF-κB Activity by 
Interrupting TRAF6-ECSIT Complex.

Min Y(1), Wi SM(1), Shin D(1), Chun E(2), Lee KY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Samsung Biomedical Research 
Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine Suwon, South Korea.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA.

A TRAF6-ECSIT complex is crucial for the generation of mitochondrial reactive 
oxygen species (mROS) and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) activation induced by 
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Peroxiredoxin-6 (Prdx6) as a member of the 
peroxiredoxin family of antioxidant enzymes is involved in antioxidant 
protection and cell signaling. Here, we report on a regulatory role of Prdx6 in 
mROS production and NF-κB activation by TLR4. Prdx6 was translocated into the 
mitochondria by TLR4 stimulation and Prdx6-knockdown (Prdx6KD) THP-1 cells had 
increased level of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species levels and were 
resistant to Salmonella typhimurium infection. Biochemical studies revealed 
Prdx6 interaction with the C-terminal TRAF-C domain of TRAF6, which drove 
translocation into the mitochondria. Interestingly, Prdx6 competitively 
interacted with ECSIT to TRAF6 through its C-terminal TRAF-C domain, leading to 
the interruption of TRAF6-ECSIT interaction. The inhibitory effect was 
critically implicated in the activation of NF-κB induced by TLR4. Overexpression 
of Prdx6 led to the inhibition of NF-κB induced by TLR4, whereas Prdx6KD THP-1 
cells displayed enhanced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines including 
interleukin-6 and -1β, and the up-regulation of NF-κB-dependent genes induced by 
TLR4 stimulation. Taken together, the data demonstrate that Prdx6 interrupts the 
formation of TRAF6-ECSIT complex induced by TLR4 stimulation, leading to 
suppression of bactericidal activity because of inhibited mROS production in 
mitochondria and the inhibition of NF-κB activation in the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00094
PMCID: PMC5364181
PMID: 28393051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]