1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Aug;85(15):5478-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.85.15.5478.

Site-directed mutagenesis of human beta-adrenergic receptors: substitution of 
aspartic acid-130 by asparagine produces a receptor with high-affinity agonist 
binding that is uncoupled from adenylate cyclase.

Fraser CM(1), Chung FZ, Wang CD, Venter JC.

Author information:
(1)Section of Receptor Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Institute of 
Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892.

By using oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis, we have produced a point mutation 
(guanine to adenine) at nucleotide 388 of the gene for human beta-adrenergic 
receptor (beta AR) that results in a substitution of asparagine for the highly 
conserved aspartic acid at position 130 in the putative third transmembrane 
domain of the human beta AR ([Asn130]beta AR). We have examined the functional 
significance of this mutation in B-82 cells continuously expressing the mutant 
[Asn130]beta AR. The mutant [Asn130]beta AR displayed normal antagonist binding 
but unusually high-affinity agonist binding (5- to 10-fold higher than wild-type 
beta AR), consistent with a single class of high-affinity binding sites. The 
mutant beta AR displayed guanine nucleotide-sensitive changes in agonist 
affinity (3- to 5-fold shift) implying an interaction between the beta AR and 
the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory protein; however, the 
ability of guanine nucleotides to alter agonist affinity was attenuated. 
Addition of saturating concentrations of isoproterenol to cell cultures 
expressing mutant [Asn130]-beta ARs had no effect on intracellular levels of 
cAMP, indicating that the mutant beta AR is unable to affect stimulation of 
adenylate cyclase. These results indicate that substitution of the aspartic acid 
with asparagine at residue 130 of the human beta AR dissociates the 
well-characterized guanine nucleotide effects on agonist affinity from those on 
activation of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory protein and 
adenylate cyclase and suggests the existence of two distinct counterions for the 
amine portion of catecholamines that are associated with high- and low-affinity 
agonist binding states of beta AR.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.15.5478
PMCID: PMC281780
PMID: 2840663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]