1. Int J Endocrinol. 2017;2017:1365209. doi: 10.1155/2017/1365209. Epub 2017 Mar 
19.

Combination Therapy with a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitor and a 
Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitor Additively Suppresses Macrophage Foam Cell 
Formation and Atherosclerosis in Diabetic Mice.

Terasaki M(1)(2), Hiromura M(1), Mori Y(1), Kohashi K(1), Kushima H(1), Ohara 
M(1), Watanabe T(3), Andersson O(2), Hirano T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Metabolism, and Endocrinology, 
Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life 
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4is), in addition to their 
antihyperglycemic roles, have antiatherosclerotic effects. We reported that 
sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2is) suppress atherosclerosis in 
a glucose-dependent manner in diabetic mice. Here, we investigated the effects 
of combination therapy with SGLT2i and DPP-4i on atherosclerosis in diabetic 
mice. SGLT2i (ipragliflozin, 1.0 mg/kg/day) and DPP-4i (alogliptin, 
8.0 mg/kg/day), either alone or in combination, were administered to db/db mice 
or streptozotocin-induced diabetic apolipoprotein E-null (Apoe-/- ) mice. 
Ipragliflozin and alogliptin monotherapies improved glucose intolerance; 
however, combination therapy did not show further improvement. The foam cell 
formation of peritoneal macrophages was suppressed by both the ipragliflozin and 
alogliptin monotherapies and was further enhanced by combination therapy. 
Although foam cell formation was closely associated with HbA1c levels in all 
groups, DPP-4i alone or the combination group showed further suppression of foam 
cell formation compared with the control or SGLT2i group at corresponding HbA1c 
levels. Both ipragliflozin and alogliptin monotherapies decreased scavenger 
receptors and increased cholesterol efflux regulatory genes in peritoneal 
macrophages, and combination therapy showed additive changes. In diabetic 
Apoe-/- mice, combination therapy showed the greatest suppression of plaque 
volume in the aortic root. In conclusion, combination therapy with SGLT2i and 
DPP4i synergistically suppresses macrophage foam cell formation and 
atherosclerosis in diabetic mice.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1365209
PMCID: PMC5376482
PMID: 28408925