1. World J Gastroenterol. 2017 Mar 28;23(12):2234-2245. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v23.i12.2234.

Association between COX-2 -1195G>A polymorphism and gastrointestinal cancer 
risk: A meta-analysis.

Zhang XW(1), Li J(1), Jiang YX(1), Chen YX(1).

Author information:
(1)Xiao-Wei Zhang, Jun Li, Yu-Xiang Chen, Department of Gastrointestinal and 
Vascular Surgery, Deyang People's Hospital, Deyang 618099, Sichuan Province, 
China.

AIM: To perform a meta-analysis to investigate the association between 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) -1195G>A gene polymorphism and gastrointestinal 
cancers.
METHODS: Publications related to the COX-2 -1195G>A gene polymorphism and 
gastrointestinal cancers published before July 2016 were retrieved from PubMed, 
EMBASE, Web of Science, China Biological Medicine Database, China National 
Knowledge Infrastructure, and CQVIP Database. Meta-analysis was performed using 
Stata11.0 software. The strength of the association was evaluated by calculating 
the combined odds ratios (ORs) and the corresponding 95%CIs. The retrieved 
publications were excluded or included one by one for sensitivity analysis. In 
addition, the funnel plot, Begg's rank correlation test, and Egger's linear 
regression method were applied to analyse whether the included publications had 
publication bias.
RESULTS: A total of 24 publications related to the COX-2 -1195G>A gene 
polymorphism were included, including 28 studies involving 11043 cases and 18008 
controls. The meta-analysis results showed that the COX-2 -1195G>A gene 
polymorphism significantly correlated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal 
cancers, particularly gastric cancer (A vs G: OR = 1.35; AA/AG vs GG: OR = 1.54; 
AA vs GG/AG: OR = 1.43; AA vs GG: OR = 1.80; AG vs GG: OR = 1.35). Compared to 
the Caucasian population in America and Europe, the COX-2 -1195G>A gene 
polymorphism in the Asian population (A vs G: OR = 1.30; AA/AG vs GG: OR = 1.50; 
AA vs GG/AG: OR = 1.35; AA vs GG: OR = 1.71; AG vs GG: OR = 1.37) significantly 
increased gastrointestinal cancer risk. The sensitivity analysis (P < 0.05) and 
the false positive report probability (P < 0.2) confirmed the reliability of the 
results.
CONCLUSION: The results showed that the COX-2 -1195G>A gene polymorphism might 
be a potential risk factor for gastrointestinal cancers. Further validation by a 
large homogeneous study is warranted.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v23.i12.2234
PMCID: PMC5374136
PMID: 28405152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.