1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2017 Mar 29;12:2489-2504. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S123190. 
eCollection 2017.

Curcumin-loaded redox response of self-assembled micelles for enhanced antitumor 
and anti-inflammation efficacy.

Zhao S(1), Ma L(1), Cao C(1), Yu Q(1), Chen L(1)(2), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Jinan University, Guangzhou.
(2)Department of Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Guangdong Medical University, 
Zhanjiang, People's Republic of China.

At present, it has become evident that inflammation plays a critical role in 
tumor growth; meanwhile, chemotherapeutic agents using nanocarriers have been 
suggested as a promising strategy in cancer treatment. In this study, novel 
redox-responsive micelles were prepared from monomethoxy-poly(ethylene 
glycol)-chitosan-S-S-hexadecyl (C16-SS-CS-mPEG). These micelles were able to 
carry and deliver drugs into tumor cells. To serve as a control, 
monomethoxy-poly(ethylene glycol)-chitosan-C-C-hexadecyl (C16-CC-CS-mPEG) was 
developed in a similar fashion to that used to yield C16-CC-CS-mPEG without a 
redox-responsive disulfide bond. The cellular uptake mechanisms of both micelles 
were determined. The efficient intracellular drug release from micelles in MCF-7 
cells was further confirmed. Results indicated that curcumin (Cur) could rapidly 
form C16-SS-CS-mPEG@ Cur micelles when exposed to reducing agents and 
efficaciously enhance intracellular accumulation. The cytotoxicity assay 
demonstrated that C16-SS-CS-mPEG@Cur exhibited satisfactory cytotoxicity against 
MCF-7 cells. Anti-inflammation assay results indicated that C16-SS-CS-mPEG@Cur 
treatment significantly downregulated tumor necrosis factor (TNF-Î±) expression 
and showed good anti-inflammatory effects in tumor microenvironment. Most 
importantly, antitumor effects in vivo showed satisfactory therapeutic effects 
with C16-SS-CS-mPEG@Cur. Hence, C16-SS-CS-mPEG@Cur micelles can be useful in 
tumor therapy.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S123190
PMCID: PMC5383081
PMID: 28408820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.