1. Oncotarget. 2017 May 9;8(19):31199-31214. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16105.

Endosomal sorting and c-Cbl targeting of paxillin to autophagosomes regulate 
cell-matrix adhesion turnover in human breast cancer cells.

Chang CH(1), Bijian K(1), Qiu D(1), Su J(1), Saad A(1), Dahabieh MS(1), Miller 
WH Jr(1), Alaoui-Jamali MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research and Segal Cancer Center, SMBD 
Jewish General Hospital, Departments of Medicine and Oncology, Faculty of 
Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Post-translational mechanisms regulating cell-matrix adhesion turnover during 
cell locomotion are not fully elucidated. In this study, we uncovered an 
essential role of Y118 site-specific tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin, an 
adapter protein of focal adhesion complexes, in paxillin recruitment to 
autophagosomes to trigger turnover of peripheral focal adhesions in human breast 
cancer cells. We demonstrate that the Rab-7 GTPase is a key upstream regulator 
of late endosomal sorting of tyrosine118-phosphorylated paxillin, which is 
subsequently recruited to autophagosomes via the cargo receptor c-Cbl. 
Essentially, this recruitment involves a direct and selective interaction 
between Y118-phospho-paxillin, c-Cbl, and LC3 and is independent from c-Cbl E3 
ubiquitin ligase activity. Interference with the Rab7-paxillin-autophagy 
regulatory network using genetic and pharmacological approaches greatly impacted 
focal adhesion stability, cell locomotion and progression to metastasis using a 
panel of human breast cancer cells. Together, these results provide novel 
insights into the requirement of phospho-site specific post-translational 
mechanism of paxillin for autophagy targeting to regulate cell-matrix adhesion 
turnover and cell locomotion in breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.16105
PMCID: PMC5458201
PMID: 28415719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None.