1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jun 6;8(23):37032-37040. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16144.

LoLoPicker: detecting low allelic-fraction variants from low-quality cancer 
samples.

Carrot-Zhang J(1)(2), Majewski J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Program, The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Although several programs are designed to identify variants with 
low allelic-fraction, further improvement is needed, especially to push the 
detection limit of low allelic-faction variants in low-quality, "noisy" tumor 
samples.
RESULTS: We developed LoLoPicker, an efficient tool dedicated to calling somatic 
variants from next-generation sequencing (NGS) data of tumor sample against the 
matched normal sample plus a user-defined control panel of additional normal 
samples. The control panel allows accurately estimating background error rate 
and therefore ensures high-accuracy mutation detection.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to other methods, we showed a superior performance of 
LoLoPicker with significantly improved specificity. The algorithm of LoLoPicker 
is particularly useful for calling low allelic-fraction variants from 
low-quality cancer samples such as formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
samples.Implementation and Availability: The main scripts are implemented in 
Python-2.7 and the package is released at 
https://github.com/jcarrotzhang/LoLoPicker.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.16144
PMCID: PMC5514890
PMID: 28416765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.