1. Br J Cancer. 2017 May 9;116(10):1350-1357. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2017.105. Epub
2017  Apr 18.

Targeting of CCBE1 by miR-330-3p in human breast cancer promotes metastasis.

Mesci A(1)(2), Huang X(1), Taeb S(1), Jahangiri S(1), Kim Y(3), Fokas E(4), 
Bruce J(5), Leong HS(3), Liu SK(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Sunnybrook Research Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(5)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRs) are involved in the regulation of many processes 
that contribute to malignancy, including cell proliferation, radiation 
resistance, invasion and metastasis. The role of miR-330-3p, an miR upregulated 
in breast cancer, remains unclear.
METHODS: We examine the association of miR-330-3p with distant relapse-free 
survival in the Oxford cohort of breast cancer patients. We also study 
miR-330-3p function using in vitro invasion and ex ovo metastasis assays. Using 
in vitro luciferase assays, we validate a novel target gene for miR-330-3p, 
Collagen And Calcium Binding EGF Domains 1 (CCBE1). We assess functional 
consequences of CCBE1 loss by using siRNA-mediated knockdown followed by in 
vitro invasion assays. Lastly, we examine the expression profile of CCBE1 in 
breast carcinomas in the Curtis and TCGA Breast Cancer data sets using Oncomine 
Platform as well as distant relapse-free and overall survival of patients in the 
Helsinki University breast cancer data set according to CCBE1 expression status.
RESULTS: miR-330-3p is enriched in breast cancer, and higher levels of 
miR-330-3p expression are associated with lower distant relapse-free survival in 
a cohort of breast cancer patients. Consistent with these observations, 
overexpression of miR-330-3p in breast cancer cell lines results in greater 
invasiveness in vitro, and miR-330-3p-overexpressing cells also metastasise more 
aggressively ex ovo. We identify CCBE1 as a direct target of miR-330-3p, and 
show that knockdown of CCBE1 results in a greater invasive capacity. 
Accordingly, in breast cancer patients CCBE1 is frequently downregulated, and 
its loss is associated with reduced distant relapse-free and overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: We show for the first time that miR-330-3p targets CCBE1 to promote 
invasion and metastasis. miR-330-3p and CCBE1 may represent promising biomarkers 
in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/bjc.2017.105
PMCID: PMC5482727
PMID: 28419078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.