1. Brain Behav. 2017 Mar 9;7(4):e00670. doi: 10.1002/brb3.670. eCollection 2017 
Apr.

Variation within MBP gene predicts disease course in multiple sclerosis.

Zhou Y(1), Simpson S Jr(1), Charlesworth JC(1), van der Mei I(1), Lucas RM(2), 
Ponsonby AL(3); AUSLONG Investigators Group; Taylor BV(1).

Author information:
(1)Menzies Institute for Medical Research University of Tasmania Hobart TAS 
Australia.
(2)National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health Canberra ACT 
Australia.
(3)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute University of Melbourne Melbourne VIC 
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Prognosis following a first demyelinating event is difficult to 
predict, with no genetic markers of MS progression currently identified. Myelin 
basic protein (MBP) is a major component of the myelin sheath of CNS neurons and 
may play a central role in demyelinating diseases such as MS. However, genetic 
variation in MBP has not been implicated in MS onset risk in large genome-wide 
association studies. We hypothesized that genetic variations in MBP may be a 
determinant of MS clinical course.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated whether variations in the MBP gene 
altered clinical course (conversion to MS and/or relapse, and annualized change 
in disability), using a prospectively collected longitudinal cohort study of 127 
persons who had had a first demyelinating event, followed up to the 5-year 
review.
RESULTS: We found one variant, rs12959006, predicted worse clinical outcomes. 
The risk genotype (CT + TT) was significantly associated with hazard of relapse 
(HR = 1.74, 95% CI = 1.19-2.56, p = .005) and of greater annualized disability 
progression (β = 0.18, 95% CI = 0.06-0.30, p = .004). We also found a 
significant interaction between the risk genotype and baseline anti-HHV6 IgG in 
predicting MS (pinteraction = 0.05) and relapse (pinteraction = 0.02). 
Functional prediction analysis showed this variant is the target of many 
transcription factors and the binding sites of miR-218 and miR-188-3p.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide novel insights into the role of genetic 
variation within the MBP gene predicting MS clinical course, both directly and 
by interaction with known environmental MS risk factors.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.670
PMCID: PMC5390844
PMID: 28413712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]