1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Apr 14;13(4):e1006318. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006318. 
eCollection 2017 Apr.

TCR stimulation strength is inversely associated with establishment of 
functional brain-resident memory CD8 T cells during persistent viral infection.

Maru S(1), Jin G(1), Schell TD(1), Lukacher AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Penn State College of Medicine, 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Establishing functional tissue-resident memory (TRM) cells at sites of infection 
is a newfound objective of T cell vaccine design. To directly assess the impact 
of antigen stimulation strength on memory CD8 T cell formation and function 
during a persistent viral infection, we created a library of mouse polyomavirus 
(MuPyV) variants with substitutions in a subdominant CD8 T cell epitope that 
exhibit a broad range of efficiency in stimulating TCR transgenic CD8 T cells. 
By altering a subdominant epitope in a nonstructural viral protein and 
monitoring memory differentiation of donor monoclonal CD8 T cells in 
immunocompetent mice, we circumvented potentially confounding changes in viral 
infection levels, virus-associated inflammation, size of the immunodominant 
virus-specific CD8 T cell response, and shifts in TCR affinity that may 
accompany temporal recruitment of endogenous polyclonal cells. Using this 
strategy, we found that antigen stimulation strength was inversely associated 
with the function of memory CD8 T cells during a persistent viral infection. We 
further show that CD8 TRM cells recruited to the brain following systemic 
infection with viruses expressing epitopes with suboptimal stimulation strength 
respond more efficiently to challenge CNS infection with virus expressing 
cognate antigen. These data demonstrate that the strength of antigenic 
stimulation during recruitment of CD8 T cells influences the functional 
integrity of TRM cells in a persistent viral infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006318
PMCID: PMC5406018
PMID: 28410427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.