1. Neurochem Int. 2017 Oct;109:54-67. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2017.03.020. Epub
2017  Apr 13.

Updates to a (13)C metabolic flux analysis model for evaluating energy 
metabolism in cultured cerebellar granule neurons from neonatal rats.

Jekabsons MB(1), Gebril HM(2), Wang YH(3), Avula B(4), Khan IA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, 110 Shoemaker Hall, University of Mississippi, 
University, MS 38677, USA. Electronic address: jekabson@olemiss.edu.
(2)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 
Electronic address: hoda.gebril@northwestern.edu.
(3)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA. Electronic address: 
wangyh@olemiss.edu.
(4)National Center for Natural Products Research, School of Pharmacy, University 
of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, USA. Electronic address: 
bavula@olemiss.edu.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences and National Center for Natural Products 
Research, School of Pharmacy, University of Mississippi, University, MS 38677, 
USA. Electronic address: ikhan@olemiss.edu.

A hexose phosphate recycling model previously developed to infer fluxes through 
the major glucose consuming pathways in cultured cerebellar granule neurons 
(CGNs) from neonatal rats metabolizing [1,2-13C2]glucose was revised by 
considering reverse flux through the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway 
(PPP) and symmetrical succinate oxidation within the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) 
cycle. The model adjusts three flux ratios to effect 13C distribution in the 
hexose, pentose, and triose phosphate pools, and in TCA cycle malate to minimize 
the error between predicted and measured 13C labeling in exported lactate (i.e., 
unlabeled, single-, double-, and triple-labeled; M, M1, M2, and M3, 
respectively). Inclusion of reverse non-oxidative PPP flux substantially 
increased the number of calculations but ultimately had relatively minor effects 
on the labeling of glycolytic metabolites. From the error-minimized solution in 
which the predicted M-M3 lactate differed by 0.49% from that measured by liquid 
chromatography-triple quadrupole mass spectrometry, the neurons exhibited 
negligible forward non-oxidative PPP flux. Thus, no glucose was used by the 
pentose cycle despite explicit consideration of hexose phosphate recycling. 
Mitochondria consumed only 16% of glucose while 45% was exported as lactate by 
aerobic glycolysis. The remaining 39% of glucose was shunted to pentose 
phosphates presumably for de novo nucleotide synthesis, but the proportion 
metabolized through the oxidative PPP vs. the reverse non-oxidative PPP could 
not be determined. The lactate exported as M1 (2.5%) and M3 (1.2%) was 
attributed to malic enzyme, which was responsible for 7.8% of pyruvate 
production (vs. 92.2% by glycolysis). The updated model is more broadly 
applicable to different cell types by considering bi-directional flux through 
the non-oxidative PPP. Its application to cultured neurons utilizing glucose as 
the sole exogenous substrate has demonstrated substantial oxygen-independent 
glucose utilization by aerobic glycolysis as well as the oxidative PPP and/or 
reverse non-oxidative PPP, but negligible glucose consumption by the pentose 
cycle.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2017.03.020
PMCID: PMC5640475
PMID: 28412312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.