1. Oncotarget. 2017 May 9;8(19):31856-31863. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16255.

Anti-helminthic niclosamide inhibits Ras-driven oncogenic transformation via 
activation of GSK-3.

Ahn SY(1), Yang JH(1), Kim NH(1), Lee K(2)(3), Cha YH(1), Yun JS(1), Kang HE(1), 
Lee Y(1), Choi J(2)(3), Kim HS(1), Yook JI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Oral Cancer Research Institute, Yonsei 
University College of Dentistry, Seoul 03722, Korea.
(2)Bioinformatics and Molecular Design Research Center, Yonsei University, Seoul 
03722, Korea.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Korea.

Despite the importance of Ras oncogenes as a therapeutic target in human cancer, 
their 'undruggable' tertiary structures limit the effectiveness of anti-Ras 
drugs. Canonical Wnt signaling contributes to Ras activity by glycogen synthase 
kinase 3 (GSK-3)-dependent phosphorylation at the C-terminus and subsequent 
degradation. In the accompanying report, we show that the anti-helminthic 
niclosamide directly binds to GSK-3 and inhibits Axin functions in colon cancer 
cells, with reversion of Snail-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition. In 
this study, we report that niclosamide effectively suppresses Ras and nuclear 
NFAT activities regardless of the mutational status of Ras at nM levels. 
Mechanistically, niclosamide increased endogenous GSK-3 activity, shortening the 
half-life of mutant Ras. Further, niclosamide activates Raf-1 kinase inhibitory 
protein, a downstream target of Snail repressor. Niclosamide treatment 
attenuates Ras-induced oncogenic potential in vitro and in vivo. These findings 
provide a clinically available repositioned Ras inhibitor as well as a novel 
strategy for inhibiting the Ras via GSK-3.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.16255
PMCID: PMC5458253
PMID: 28418865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.