1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jun 6;8(23):37239-37249. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16744.

The relevance of a low JAK2V617F allele burden in clinical practice: a 
monocentric study.

Perricone M(1), Polverelli N(1), Martinelli G(1), Catani L(1), Ottaviani E(1), 
Zuffa E(1), Franchini E(1), Dizdari A(1), Forte D(1), Sabattini E(2), Cavo M(1), 
Vianelli N(1), Palandri F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Institute of 
Hematology 'L. and A. Seràgnoli', University of Bologna, S. Orsola-Malpighi 
Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Haematopathology Unit, Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty 
Medicine, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Since low JAK2V617F allele burden (AB) has been detected also in healthy 
subjects, its clinical interpretation may be challenging in patients with 
chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). We tested 1087 subjects for 
JAK2V617F mutation on suspicion of hematological malignancy. Only 497 (45.7%) 
patients were positive. Here we present clinical and laboratory parameters of a 
cohort of 35/497 patients with an AB ≤ 3%.Overall, 22/35 (62.9%) received a 
WHO-defined diagnosis of MPN and in 14/35 cases (40%) diagnosis was supported by 
bone marrow (BM) histology (''Histology-based'' diagnosis). In patients that 
were unable or refused to perform BM evaluation, diagnosis relied on prospective 
clinical observation (12 cases, 34.3%) and molecular monitoring (6 cases, 17.1%) 
(''Clinical-based'' or ''Molecular-based'' diagnosis, respectively). In 11/35 
(31.4%) patients, a low JAK2V617F AB was not conclusive of MPN. The probability 
to have a final hematological diagnosis (ET/PV/MF) was higher in patients with 
thrombocytosis than in patients with polyglobulia (73.7% vs 57.1%, 
respectively). The detection of AB ≥ 0.8% always corresponded to an overt MPN 
phenotype. The repetition of JAK2V617F evaluation over time timely detected the 
spontaneous expansion (11 cases) or reduction (4 cases) of JAK2V617F-positive 
clones and significantly oriented the diagnostic process.Our study confirms that 
histology is relevant to discriminate small foci of clonal hematopoiesis with 
uncertain clinical significance from a full blown disease. Remarkably, our data 
suggest that a cut-off of AB ≥ 0.8% is very indicative for the presence of a 
MPN. Monitoring of the AB over time emerged as a convenient and non-invasive 
method to assess clonal hematopoiesis expansion.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.16744
PMCID: PMC5514906
PMID: 28422729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There is no conflicts of 
interest.