1. Mol Cells. 2017 Apr;40(4):299-306. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2017.0015. Epub 2017
 Apr 20.

Crystal Structure of the Regulatory Domain of AphB from Vibrio vulnificus, a 
Virulence Gene Regulator.

Park N(1), Song S(1), Choi G(1)(2), Jang KK(1)(2), Jo I(1), Choi SH(1)(2), Ha 
NC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Center for Food Safety and 
Toxicology, and Research Institute for Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul 
National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(2)National Research Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Toxicology, Seoul 
National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.

The transcriptional activator AphB has been implicated in acid resistance and 
pathogenesis in the food borne pathogens Vibrio vulnificus and Vibrio cholerae. 
To date, the full-length AphB crystal structure of V. cholerae has been 
determined and characterized by a tetrameric assembly of AphB consisting of a 
DNA binding domain and a regulatory domain (RD). Although acidic pH and low 
oxygen tension might be involved in the activation of AphB, it remains unknown 
which ligand or stimulus activates AphB at the molecular level. In this study, 
we determine the crystal structure of the AphB RD from V. vulnificus under 
aerobic conditions without modification at the conserved cysteine residue of the 
RD, even in the presence of the oxidizing agent cumene hydroperoxide. A cysteine 
to serine amino acid residue mutant RD protein further confirmed that the 
cysteine residue is not involved in sensing oxidative stress in vitro. 
Interestingly, an unidentified small molecule was observed in the 
inter-subdomain cavity in the RD when the crystal was incubated with cumene 
hydroperoxide molecules, suggesting a new ligand-binding site. In addition, we 
confirmed the role of AphB in acid tolerance by observing an aphB-dependent 
increase in cadC transcript level when V. vulnificus was exposed to acidic pH. 
Our study contributes to the understanding of the AphB molecular mechanism in 
the process of recognizing the host environment.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2017.0015
PMCID: PMC5424276
PMID: 28427249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]