1. PLoS One. 2017 Apr 20;12(4):e0175939. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175939. 
eCollection 2017.

Dynamic regulation of Pin1 expression and function during zebrafish development.

Ibarra MS(1), Borini Etichetti C(1), Di Benedetto C(1), Rosano GL(1), Margarit 
E(2), Del Sal G(3)(4), Mione M(5), Girardini J(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR), Consejo Nacional 
de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Rosario, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Estudios Fotosintéticos y Bioquímicos (CEFOBI), Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Rosario, Argentina.
(3)Laboratorio Nazionale CIB, Area Science Park Padriciano, Trieste, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita-Università degli Studi di Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(5)Centre for Integrative Biology-CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.

The prolyl isomerase Pin1 plays a key role in the modulation of proline-directed 
phosphorylation signaling by inducing local conformational changes in 
phosphorylated protein substrates. Extensive studies showed different roles for 
Pin1 in physiological processes and pathological conditions such as cancer and 
neurodegenerative diseases. However, there are still several unanswered 
questions regarding its biological role. Notably, despite evidences from 
cultured cells showing that Pin1 expression and activity may be regulated by 
different mechanisms, little is known on their relevance in vivo. Using Danio 
rerio (zebrafish) as a vertebrate model organism we showed that pin1 expression 
is regulated during embryogenesis to achieve specific mRNA and protein 
distribution patterns. Moreover, we found different subcellular distribution in 
particular stages and cell types and we extended the study of Pin1 expression to 
the adult zebrafish brain. The analysis of Pin1 overexpression showed 
alterations on zebrafish development and the presence of p53-dependent 
apoptosis. Collectively, our results suggest that specific mechanisms are 
operated in different cell types to regulate Pin1 function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0175939
PMCID: PMC5398671
PMID: 28426725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.