1. ACS Chem Biol. 2017 Jun 16;12(6):1611-1620. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00180. 
Epub 2017 May 2.

A Macrocyclic Peptide Ligand Binds the Oncogenic MicroRNA-21 Precursor and 
Suppresses Dicer Processing.

Shortridge MD(1), Walker MJ(1), Pavelitz T(1), Chen Y(1), Yang W(1), Varani 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle , Box 351700, 
Seattle, Washington 98195, United States.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) help orchestrate cellular growth and survival through 
post-transcriptional mechanisms. The dysregulation of miRNA biogenesis can lead 
to cellular growth defects and chemotherapeutic resistance and plays a direct 
role in the development of many chronic diseases. Among these RNAs, miR-21 is 
consistently overexpressed in most human cancers, leading to the down-regulation 
of key tumor-suppressing and pro-apoptotic factors, suggesting that inhibition 
of miR-21 biogenesis could reverse these negative effects. However, targeted 
inhibition of miR-21 using small molecules has had limited success. To overcome 
difficulties in targeting RNA secondary structure with small molecules, we 
developed a class of cyclic Î²-hairpin peptidomimetics which bind to RNA 
stem-loop structures, such as miRNA precursors, with potent affinity and 
specificity. We screened an existing cyclic peptide library and discovered a 
lead structure which binds to pre-miR21 with KD = 200 nM and prefers it over 
other pre-miRNAs. The NMR structure of the complex shows that the peptide 
recognizes the Dicer cleavage site and alters processing of the precursor to the 
mature miRNA in vitro and in cultured cells. The structure provides a rationale 
for the peptide binding activity and clear guidance for further improvements in 
affinity and targeting.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00180
PMCID: PMC5512579
PMID: 28437065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.