1. Neuroscientist. 2018 Feb;24(1):54-72. doi: 10.1177/1073858417705059. Epub 2017
 May 1.

The Actin Cytoskeleton in SMA and ALS: How Does It Contribute to Motoneuron 
Degeneration?

Hensel N(1)(2), Claus P(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Neuroanatomy and Cell Biology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(2)2 Niedersachsen Network on Neuroinfectiology (N-RENNT), Hannover, Germany.
(3)3 Center for Systems Neuroscience (ZSN), Hannover, Germany.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) are 
neurodegenerative diseases with overlapping clinical phenotypes based on 
impaired motoneuron function. However, the pathomechanisms of both diseases are 
largely unknown, and it is still unclear whether they converge on the molecular 
level. SMA is a monogenic disease caused by low levels of functional Survival of 
Motoneuron (SMN) protein, whereas ALS involves multiple genes as well as 
environmental factors. Recent evidence argues for involvement of actin 
regulation as a causative and dysregulated process in both diseases. ALS-causing 
mutations in the actin-binding protein profilin-1 as well as the ability of the 
SMN protein to directly bind to profilins argue in favor of a common molecular 
mechanism involving the actin cytoskeleton. Profilins are major regulat ors of 
actin-dynamics being involved in multiple neuronal motility and transport 
processes as well as modulation of synaptic functions that are impaired in 
models of both motoneuron diseases. In this article, we review the current 
literature in SMA and ALS research with a focus on the actin cytoskeleton. We 
propose a common molecular mechanism that explains the degeneration of 
motoneurons for SMA and some cases of ALS.

DOI: 10.1177/1073858417705059
PMID: 28459188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]