1. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2017 Apr 18;10:115-128. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S131580. 
eCollection 2017.

Pharmacogenetic testing revisited: 5' nuclease real-time polymerase chain 
reaction test panels for genotyping CYP2D6 and CYP2C19.

Larsen JB(1), Rasmussen JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Unit, Danish Epilepsy Centre, Filadelfia, Dianalund, Denmark.

Due to their involvement in the metabolization of commonly prescribed 
psychopharmaceutical drugs, the cytochrome oxidase genes CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 are 
extensive targets for pharmacogenetic testing. The existence of common allelic 
variants allows the prediction of a metabolic phenotype based on a genotype 
result, hereby supplying a clinical tool for optimizing prescription and 
minimizing adverse effects. In this study, we present the development of two 5' 
nuclease real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test panels, capable of 
detecting eight of the most clinically relevant alleles of the CYP2D6 gene (*2, 
*3, *4, *6, *9, *10, 17, *41) and the three most common nonfunctional alleles of 
CYP2C19 (*2, *3, *4). The assays have been thoroughly validated using a large 
collection of reference samples, by parallel testing and by DNA sequencing. The 
reanalysis of reference samples provided the calculation of the frequency of the 
CYP2D6*4K allele in a population, not previously reported. Furthermore, original 
test results from CYP2D6*41, generated based on the presence of the 2850T and 
the lack of the -1584G single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), were compared with 
genotyping based on the current acknowledged founder SNP 2988G of this allele. 
These results indicate that up to 17.7% of the patients originally tested as 
carriers of the CYP2D6*41 allele may have had an incorrect phenotypic result 
assigned. The two 5' nuclease real-time PCR test panels have subsequently been 
optimized for use in the clinical laboratory, using a standard real-time PCR 
instrument and software.

DOI: 10.2147/PGPM.S131580
PMCID: PMC5403119
PMID: 28458572

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.