1. Exp Ther Med. 2017 Mar;13(3):947-951. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.4077. Epub 2017
Jan  23.

Significance of combined detection of JAK2V617F, MPL and CALR gene mutations in 
patients with essential thrombocythemia.

Ji L(1), Qian M(1), Wu N(1), Wu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 
325000, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to analyze the mutation rate of JAK2V617F, MPLW515L/K 
and CALR genes in adult patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) and the 
accuracy of the combined detection by the receiver operating curve. Three 
hundred and forty-two cases with high-platelets (≥300×109/l) were consecutively 
selected. The patients were analyzed for routine blood examination, bone marrow 
biopsy and genetic testing. One hundred and fifty-four cases (45.03%) were 
diagnosed with ET and 188 cases of secondary thrombocythemia according to the 
hematopoietic and lymphoid tissue tumor classification standards of 2008. It was 
found that the mutant type of three genes showed three bands, whereas only one 
band for wild-type. The JAK2V617F and MPL mutations did not cause a change in 
the open reading frame and the CALR mutation resulted in its change. The 
mutation rate of JAK2V617F and CALR in ET group was significantly higher than 
that in the secondary thrombocythemia group (p<0.05). The positive mutation rate 
of MPL was only 4.55%. JAK2V617F-positive mutation alone was used to diagnose 
with ET. The area under the curve (AUC) was 0.721. The sensitivity was 72.4%, 
the specificity was 79.5% and the cut-off value was 0.25. When CALR-positive 
mutation alone was used to diagnose ET, the AUC, sensitivity, specificity and 
cut-off value were 0.664, 68.4, 82.4 and 0.09%, respectively. JAK2V617F combined 
with CALR mutation were used for diagnosis of ET. The AUC was 0.862, the 
sensitivity was 85.9%, the specificity was 87.8%, and the cut-off values were 
0.21 and 0.07. In conclusion, the positive mutation rate of JAK2V617F and CALR 
in ET was higher, and the sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of the diagnosis 
of ET were significantly improved using the detection of JAK2V617F and CALR.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.4077
PMCID: PMC5403657
PMID: 28450924