1. Microbiol Immunol. 1988;32(6):597-605. doi:
10.1111/j.1348-0421.1988.tb01421.x.

Characterization of L1210 S cells with low sensitivity to mouse 
interferon-gamma.

Iwata A(1), Watanabe Y, Sakata T, Sokawa Y, Kawade Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University.

A mouse leukemic cell line L1210 Sg with a low sensitivity to interferon-gamma 
(IFN-gamma) was described. On the nature of the antiviral action and binding of 
IFN, L1210 Sg cells were compared with L1210 m cell line which is sensitive to 
IFN-gamma. For a half reduction of the vesicular stomatitis virus-RNA synthesis, 
L1210 Sg cells required 500-fold more IFN-gamma than L1210 m cells did. However, 
both cell lines were induced to the antiviral state to the same extent with 
IFN-alpha or -beta. L1210 Sg and L1210 m cells were sensitive to the 
anti-proliferative action of IFN-alpha and -beta, but insensitive to IFN-gamma. 
(2'-5')Oligoadenylate synthetase was induced in these cell lines by IFN-beta, 
but not by IFN-gamma, which suggests that the induction of this synthetase may 
not be responsible for the antiviral action of IFN-gamma. No substantial 
difference between L1210 Sg and L1210 m cells was found in IFN receptors for 
IFN-gamma and IFN-beta either in number per cell or in their affinity to 
corresponding IFN type. However, differences were noted in time course profiles 
of cell-associated IFN-gamma at 37 C: in L1210 m cells, a rise-and-decay profile 
of IFN-gamma bound to cells was observed at 37 C, but in L1210 Sg cells, rise 
and slight decay was observed. On the other hand, a similar rise-and-decay curve 
of IFN-beta bound to these cells was observed. These results indicated that the 
low sensitivity of L1210 Sg cells to IFN-gamma may be due to this slight decay 
of receptor-bound IFN-gamma.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1988.tb01421.x
PMID: 2845233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]