1. Oncol Lett. 2017 Apr;13(4):2316-2322. doi: 10.3892/ol.2017.5732. Epub 2017 Feb
 13.

Sphingosine kinase 1: A novel independent prognosis biomarker in hepatocellular 
carcinoma.

Cai H(1), Xie X(1), Ji L(1), Ruan X(1), Zheng Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, P.R. China.

Sphingosine kinase 1 (Sphk1) is an oncogenic kinase that is responsible for the 
phosphorylation of sphingosine to sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). Mounting 
evidence suggests that Sphk1 serves a crucial role in the proliferation and 
development of a variety of human cancer cells. However, the role of Sphk1 in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has not been fully elucidated. Therefore, the 
expression of Sphk1 was examined in 127 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded HCC 
tissues using immunohistochemistry, and its clinical implications and prognostic 
significance were analyzed. As a result, the expression of Sphk1 in HCC tissue 
was revealed to be significantly higher than in normal tissue (P<0.01). In 
addition, Sphk1 expression was significantly associated with tumor size, tumor 
stage and histological differentiation (all P<0.05). The patients with low Sphk1 
expression had higher overall survival and recurrence-free survival rates 
compared with patients with high Sphk1 expression. Furthermore, Sphk1-specific 
shRNA was used to downregulate the expression of Sphk1 in HCC cell lines, 
including hepatoblastoma G2 and HCC-9724. The CRISPR/Cas9 based transcription 
activation system was used to upregulate Sphk1 expression in the normal live 
cell, L02. Cell proliferation, mRNA expression and protein expression were 
measured using Cell Counting Kit-8, reverse transcription polymerase chain 
reaction and western blot analysis in the transfected cells. To the best of our 
knowledge, the present study provides the first evidence that Sphk1 promotes HCC 
cell proliferation and is involved in tumor progression. Notably, the data 
presented suggest that Sphk1 may be a potential independent prognosis biomarker 
for the treatment of HCC.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2017.5732
PMCID: PMC5403457
PMID: 28454397