1. Circ Res. 2017 Apr 28;120(9):1501-1517. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.309732.

Atrial Fibrillation: Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Clinical Outcomes.

Staerk L(1), Sherer JA(2), Ko D(2), Benjamin EJ(2), Helm RH(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Centre, Herlev and Gentofte University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (L.S.); Department of Epidemiology, Boston 
University School of Public Health, MA (L.S., D.K., E.J.B.); Boston University 
and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Framingham Heart Study, MA (L.S., 
E.J.B.); and Department of Medicine (J.A.S.), Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute 
(D.K., E.J.B.), Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine 
(D.K., E.J.B., R.H.H.), and Section of Preventive Medicine, Department of 
Medicine (E.J.B.), Boston University School of Medicine, MA. 
Lailastaerk@gmail.com Robert.Helm@bmc.org.
(2)From the Cardiovascular Research Centre, Herlev and Gentofte University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark (L.S.); Department of Epidemiology, Boston 
University School of Public Health, MA (L.S., D.K., E.J.B.); Boston University 
and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Framingham Heart Study, MA (L.S., 
E.J.B.); and Department of Medicine (J.A.S.), Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute 
(D.K., E.J.B.), Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine 
(D.K., E.J.B., R.H.H.), and Section of Preventive Medicine, Department of 
Medicine (E.J.B.), Boston University School of Medicine, MA.

The past 3 decades have been characterized by an exponential growth in knowledge 
and advances in the clinical treatment of atrial fibrillation (AF). It is now 
known that AF genesis requires a vulnerable atrial substrate and that the 
formation and composition of this substrate may vary depending on comorbid 
conditions, genetics, sex, and other factors. Population-based studies have 
identified numerous factors that modify the atrial substrate and increase AF 
susceptibility. To date, genetic studies have reported 17 independent signals 
for AF at 14 genomic regions. Studies have established that advanced age, male 
sex, and European ancestry are prominent AF risk factors. Other modifiable risk 
factors include sedentary lifestyle, smoking, obesity, diabetes mellitus, 
obstructive sleep apnea, and elevated blood pressure predispose to AF, and each 
factor has been shown to induce structural and electric remodeling of the atria. 
Both heart failure and myocardial infarction increase risk of AF and vice versa 
creating a feed-forward loop that increases mortality. Other cardiovascular 
outcomes attributed to AF, including stroke and thromboembolism, are well 
established, and epidemiology studies have championed therapeutics that mitigate 
these adverse outcomes. However, the role of anticoagulation for preventing 
dementia attributed to AF is less established. Our review is a comprehensive 
examination of the epidemiological data associating unmodifiable and modifiable 
risk factors for AF and of the pathophysiological evidence supporting the 
mechanistic link between each risk factor and AF genesis. Our review also 
critically examines the epidemiological data on clinical outcomes attributed to 
AF and summarizes current evidence linking each outcome with AF.

Â© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.309732
PMCID: PMC5500874
PMID: 28450367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]