1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 3;7(1):1454. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01626-2.

Antagonistic evolution of an antibiotic and its molecular chaperone: how to 
maintain a vital ectosymbiosis in a highly fluctuating habitat.

Papot C(1), Massol F(1), Jollivet D(2), Tasiemski A(3).

Author information:
(1)University Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198 - Evo-Eco-Paleo, SPICI group, F-59000, 
Lille, France.
(2)AD2M, ABICE team, Universit√© Pierre et Marie Curie-CNRS, UMR7144, Station 
Biologique de Roscoff, 29682, Roscoff, France.
(3)University Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198 - Evo-Eco-Paleo, SPICI group, F-59000, 
Lille, France. aurelie.tasiemski@univ-lille1.fr.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2017 Dec 4;7(1):17154. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16211-w.

Evolution of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) has been shown to be driven by 
recurrent duplications and balancing/positive selection in response to new or 
altered bacterial pathogens. We use Alvinella pompejana, the most eurythermal 
animal known on Earth, to decipher the selection patterns acting on AMP in an 
ecological rather than controlled infection approach. The preproalvinellacin 
multigenic family presents the uniqueness to encode a molecular chaperone 
(BRICHOS) together with an AMP (alvinellacin) that controls the vital 
ectosymbiosis of Alvinella. In stark contrast to what is observed in the context 
of the Red queen paradigm, we demonstrate that exhibiting a vital and highly 
conserved ecto-symbiosis in the face of thermal fluctuations has led to a 
peculiar selective trend promoting the adaptive diversification of the molecular 
chaperone of the AMP, but not of the AMP itself. Because BRICHOS stabilizes 
beta-stranded peptides, this polymorphism likely represents an eurythermal 
adaptation to stabilize the structure of alvinellacin, thus hinting at its 
efficiency to select and control the epibiosis across the range of temperatures 
experienced by the worm; Our results fill some knowledge gaps concerning the 
function of BRICHOS in invertebrates and offer perspectives for studying immune 
genes in an evolutionary ecological framework.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-01626-2
PMCID: PMC5431198
PMID: 28469247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.