1. Thyroid. 2017 Jul;27(7):973-982. doi: 10.1089/thy.2017.0157.

Contrasting Phenotypes in Resistance to Thyroid Hormone Alpha Correlate with 
Divergent Properties of Thyroid Hormone Receptor α1 Mutant Proteins.

Moran C(1), Agostini M(1), McGowan A(1), Schoenmakers E(1), Fairall L(2), Lyons 
G(1), Rajanayagam O(1), Watson L(1), Offiah A(3), Barton J(4), Price S(5), 
Schwabe J(2), Chatterjee K(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge 
, Cambridge, United Kingdom .
(2)2 Leicester Institute of Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of 
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Leicester , Leicester, United Kingdom 
.
(3)3 Academic Unit of Child Health, University of Sheffield , Sheffield, United 
Kingdom .
(4)4 Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Bristol Royal Hospital 
for Children , Bristol, United Kingdom .
(5)5 Department of Clinical Genetics, Northampton General Hospital , 
Northampton, United Kingdom .

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone alpha (RTHα), a disorder characterized 
by tissue-selective hypothyroidism and near-normal thyroid function tests due to 
thyroid receptor alpha gene mutations, is rare but probably under-recognized. 
This study sought to correlate the clinical characteristics and response to 
thyroxine (T4) therapy in two adolescent RTHα patients with the properties of 
the THRA mutation, affecting both TRα1 and TRα2 proteins, they harbored.
METHODS: Clinical, auxological, biochemical, and physiological parameters were 
assessed in each patient at baseline and after T4 therapy.
RESULTS: Heterozygous THRA mutations occurring de novo were identified in a 
17-year-old male (patient P1; c.788C>T, p.A263V mutation) investigated for mild 
pubertal delay and in a 15-year-old male (patient P2; c.821T>C, p.L274P 
mutation) with short stature (0.4th centile), skeletal dysplasia, dysmorphic 
facies, and global developmental delay. Both individuals exhibited macrocephaly, 
delayed dentition, and constipation, together with a subnormal 
T4/triiodothyronine (T3) ratio, low reverse T3 levels, and mild anemia. When 
studied in vitro, A263V mutant TRα1 was transcriptionally impaired and inhibited 
the function of its wild-type counterpart at low (0.01-10 nM) T3 levels, with 
higher T3 concentrations (100 nM-1 μM) reversing dysfunction and such dominant 
negative inhibition. In contrast, L274P mutant TRα1 was transcriptionally inert, 
exerting significant dominant negative activity, only overcome with 10 μM of T3. 
Mirroring this, normal expression of KLF9, a TH-responsive target gene, was 
achieved in A263V mutation-containing peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
following 1 μM of T3 exposure, but with markedly reduced expression levels in 
L274P mutation-containing peripheral blood mononuclear cells, even with 10 μM of 
T3. Following T4 therapy, growth, body composition, dyspraxia, and constipation 
improved in P1, whereas growth retardation and constipation in P2 were 
unchanged. Neither A263V nor L274P mutations exhibited gain or loss of function 
in the TRα2 background, and no additional phenotype attributable to this was 
discerned.
CONCLUSIONS: This study correlates a milder clinical phenotype and favorable 
response to T4 therapy in a RTHα patient (P1) with heterozygosity for mutant 
TRα1 exhibiting partial, T3-reversible, loss of function. In contrast, a more 
severe clinical phenotype refractory to hormone therapy was evident in another 
case (P2) associated with severe, virtually irreversible, dysfunction of mutant 
TRα1.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2017.0157
PMCID: PMC5561448
PMID: 28471274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have nothing to declare.