1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2018 Oct;15(10):888-897. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2017.17. Epub 2017
 May 8.

B7-DC (PD-L2) costimulation of CD4(+) T-helper 1 response via RGMb.

Nie X(1), Chen W(1), Zhu Y(1), Huang B(1), Yu W(1), Wu Z(1), Guo S(1), Zhu Y(1), 
Luo L(1), Wang S(2), Chen L(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunotherapy, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Laboratory of Immunotherapy, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. lieping.chen@yale.edu.
(4)>Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 
lieping.chen@yale.edu.

The role of B7-DC in T-cell responses remains controversial because both 
coinhibitory and costimulatory functions have been reported in various 
experimental systems in vitro and in vivo. In addition to interacting with the 
coinhibitory receptor PD-1, B7-DC has also been shown to bind repulsive guidance 
molecule b (RGMb). The functional consequences of the B7-DC/RGMb interaction, 
however, remain unclear. More than a decade ago, we reported that replacement of 
a murine B7-DC mutant lysine with serine (K113S) at positive 113 resulted in a 
loss of binding capacity to PD-1. Nevertheless, K113S remained costimulatory for 
T cells in vitro, implicating a dual functionality for B7-DC in T-cell 
responses. Here we show that recombinant K113S protein interacts with RGMb with 
a similar affinity to wild-type B7-DC. More importantly, K113S costimulates CD4+ 
T-cell responses via RGMb and promotes Th1 polarization. RGMb is expressed on 
the surface of naive mouse T cells, macrophages, neutrophils and dendritic 
cells. Finally, K113S/RGMb costimulation suppresses Th2-mediated asthma and 
ameliorates small airway inflammation and lung pathology in an experimental 
mouse model. Our findings indicate that RGMb is a costimulatory receptor for 
B7-DC. These findings from the K113S variant provide not only a possible 
explanation for the B7-DC-triggered contradictory effects on T-cell responses, 
but also a novel approach to investigate the B7-DC/PD-1/RGMb axis. Recombinant 
K113S or its derivatives could potentially be developed as an agonist for RGMb 
to costimulate the Th1 response without triggering PD-1-mediated T-cell 
inhibition.

DOI: 10.1038/cmi.2017.17
PMCID: PMC6207567
PMID: 28479601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LC is an advisor/board member for Pfizer, 
AstraZeneca, NextCure, GenomiCare and Vcanbio and received research support from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer and NextCure. LC is also an uncompensated adjunct 
faculty member of Sun Yat-sen University. The other authors declare no competing 
financial interests.