1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017 Feb;31(1):113-125. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2017.02.005. Epub 2017 Feb 24.

GH and ageing: Pitfalls and new insights.

Bartke A(1), Darcy J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA. Electronic address: abartke@siumed.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Southern Illinois University School of 
Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA; Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology 
and Cell Biology, Southern Illinois School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA.

The interrelationships of growth hormone (GH) actions and aging are complex and 
incompletely understood. The very pronounced age-related decline in GH secretion 
together with benefits of GH therapy in individuals with congenital or adult GH 
deficiency (GHD) prompted interest in GH as an anti-aging agent. However, the 
benefits of treatment of normal elderly subjects with GH appear to be marginal 
and counterbalanced by worrisome side effects. In laboratory mice, genetic GH 
deficiency or resistance leads to a remarkable extension of longevity 
accompanied by signs of delayed and/or slower aging. Mechanisms believed to 
contribute to extended longevity of GH-related mutants include improved 
anti-oxidant defenses, enhanced insulin sensitivity and reduced insulin levels, 
reduced inflammation and cell senescence, major shifts in mitochondrial function 
and energy metabolism, and greater stress resistance. Negative association of 
the somatotropic signaling and GH/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)-dependent 
traits with longevity has also been shown in other mammalian species. In humans, 
syndromes of GH resistance or deficiency have no consistent effect on longevity, 
but can provide striking protection from cancer, diabetes and atherosclerosis. 
More subtle alterations in various steps of GH and IGF-1 signaling are 
associated with reduced old-age mortality, particularly in women and with 
improved chances of attaining extremes of lifespan. Epidemiological studies 
raise a possibility that the relationship of IGF-1 and perhaps also GH levels 
with human healthy aging and longevity may be biphasic. However, the impact of 
somatotropic signaling on neoplastic disease is difficult to separate from its 
impact on aging, and IGF-1 levels exhibit opposite associations with different 
chronic, age-related diseases.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2017.02.005
PMCID: PMC5424628
PMID: 28477727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]