1. PLoS One. 2017 May 9;12(5):e0177012. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177012. 
eCollection 2017.

Identification and characterization of a neutralizing monoclonal antibody that 
provides complete protection against Yersinia pestis.

Liu W(1), Ren J(1), Zhang J(1), Song X(1), Liu S(1), Chi X(1), Chen Y(1), Wen 
Z(1), Li J(1), Chen W(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Vaccine and Antibody Engineering, Beijing Institute of 
Biotechnology, 20 FengTai Dongdajie Street, Beijing, PR China.

Yersinia pestis (Y. pestis) has caused an alarming number of deaths throughout 
recorded human history, and novel prophylactics and therapeutics are necessary 
given its potential as a bioweapon. Only one monoclonal antibody has been 
identified to date that provides complete protection against Y. pestis. Here, we 
describe a second novel murine monoclonal antibody (F2H5) that provided complete 
protection against Y. pestis 141 infection when administered prophylactically to 
Balb/c mice (100 Î¼g intravenously). We humanized F2H5, characterized its ability 
to bind to the Y. pestis F1 protein and further characterized the neutralizing 
epitope using computational and experimental approaches. While Western blot 
results suggested a linear epitope, peptide mapping using ELISA failed to 
identify an epitope, suggesting a conformational epitope instead. We adopted a 
computational approach based on Residue Contact Frequency to predict the site of 
antigen-antibody interaction and defined the F2H5/F1 binding site 
computationally. Based on computational approach, we determined that residues 
G104E105N106 in F1 were critical to F2H5 binding and that CDRH2 and CDRH3 of 
F2H5 interacted with F1. Our results show that combining computational approach 
and experimental approach can effectively identify epitopes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0177012
PMCID: PMC5423616
PMID: 28486528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.