1. J Hematol Oncol. 2017 May 12;10(1):106. doi: 10.1186/s13045-017-0470-7.

Current status and perspectives of patient-derived xenograft models in cancer 
research.

Lai Y(1)(2), Wei X(1)(2), Lin S(1)(2), Qin L(1)(2), Cheng L(1)(2), Li 
P(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell 
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 
510530, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem Cell 
Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and 
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China. 
li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.
(4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou 
Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 
510530, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.
(5)Department of Abdominal Surgery, Affiliated Cancer Hospital & Institute of 
Guangzhou Medical University of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510095, China. li_peng@gibh.ac.cn.

Cancers remain a major public health problem worldwide, which still require 
profound research in both the basic and preclinical fields. Patient-derived 
xenograft (PDX) models are created when cancerous cells or tissues from 
patients' primary tumors are implanted into immunodeficient mice to simulate 
human tumor biology in vivo, which have been extensively used in cancer 
research. The routes of implantation appeared to affect the outcome of PDX 
research, and there has been increasing applications of patient-derived 
orthotopic xenograft (PDOX) models. In this review, we firstly summarize the 
methodology to establish PDX models and then go over recent application and 
function of PDX models in basic cancer research on the areas of cancer 
characterization, initiation, proliferation, metastasis, and tumor 
microenvironment and in preclinical explorations of anti-cancer targets, drugs, 
and therapeutic strategies and finally give our perspectives on the future 
prospects of PDX models.

DOI: 10.1186/s13045-017-0470-7
PMCID: PMC5427553
PMID: 28499452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]