1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2017 Aug 1;313(2):G129-G137. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00044.2017. Epub 2017 May 11.

A common NHE3 single-nucleotide polymorphism has normal function and sensitivity 
to regulatory ligands.

Yin J(1), Tse CM(1), Cha B(1), Sarker R(1), Zhu XC(2), Walentinsson A(3), 
Greasley PJ(3), Donowitz M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Albany 
Medical College, Albany, New York; and.
(3)AstraZeneca Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; mdonowit@jhmi.edu.

Na+/H+ exchanger NHE3 mediates the majority of intestinal and renal 
electroneutral sodium absorption. Dysfunction of NHE3 is associated with a 
variety of diarrheal diseases. We previously reported that the NHE3 gene 
(SLC9A3) has more than 400 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) but few 
nonsynonymous polymorphisms. Among the latter, one polymorphism (rs2247114-G>A), 
which causes a substitution from arginine to cysteine at amino acid position 799 
(p.R799C), is common in Asian populations. To improve our understanding of the 
population distribution and potential clinical significance of the NHE3-799C 
variant, we investigated the frequency of this polymorphism in different ethnic 
groups using bioinformatics analyses and in a cohort of Japanese patients with 
cardiovascular or renal disease. We also characterized the function of human 
NHE3-799C and its sensitivity to regulatory ligands in an in vitro model. 
NHE3-799C had an allele frequency of 29.5-57.6% in Asian populations, 11.1-23.6% 
in European populations, and 10.2-22.7% in African populations. 
PS120/FLAG-NHERF2 fibroblasts stably expressing NHE3-799C had lower total 
protein expression but a higher percentage of surface expression than those 
expressing NHE3-799R. NHE3-799C had similar basal activity to NHE3-799R and was 
similarly stimulated or inhibited, by serum or forskolin, respectively. 
Tenapanor, a small-molecule NHE3 inhibitor, dose-dependently inhibited NHE3-799R 
and NHE3-799C activities. The IC50 values of tenapanor for NHE3-799C and 
NHE3-799R were significantly different, but both were in the nanomolar range. 
These results suggest that NHE3-799C is a common variant enriched in Asian 
populations, is not associated with compromised function or abnormal regulation, 
and is unlikely to contribute to clinical disease.NEW & NOTEWORTHY This study 
reports results on the functional significance of human NHE3-799C under basal 
conditions and in response to regulatory ligands, including a novel NHE3 
inhibitor called tenapanor. We demonstrate that NHE3-799C is a common variant of 
NHE3 that is enriched in Asian populations; however, in contrast to our previous 
studies using rabbit NHE3, its presence seems to have limited clinical 
significance in humans and is not associated with compromised function or 
abnormal transport regulation.

Copyright © 2017 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00044.2017
PMCID: PMC5582881
PMID: 28495802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]