1. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2017;93(5):251-258. doi:
10.2183/pjab.93.016.

Multiple system atrophy: clinicopathological characteristics in Japanese 
patients.

Ozawa T(1), Onodera O(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Uonuma Institute of Community Medicine, Niigata 
University Medical and Dental Hospital.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University.

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder that 
has both clinical and pathological variants. Clinical examples include MSA with 
predominant cerebellar ataxia (MSA-C) and MSA with predominant parkinsonism 
(MSA-P), whereas olivopontocerebellar atrophy and striatonigral degeneration 
represent pathological variants. We performed systematic reviews of studies that 
addressed the relative frequencies of clinical or pathological variants of MSA 
in various populations to determine the clinicopathological characteristics in 
Japanese MSA. The results revealed that the majority of Japanese patients have 
MSA-C, while the majority of patients in Europe and North America have MSA-P. A 
comparative study of MSA pathology showed that the 
olivopontocerebellar-predominant pathology was more frequent in Japanese MSA 
than in British MSA. Demonstrated differences in pathological subtype thus 
appear consistent with differences in the clinical subtype of MSA demonstrated 
between Japan and European populations. We concluded that 
olivopontocerebellar-predominant pathology and MSA-C may represent 
clinicopathological characteristics in Japanese MSA. Factors determining 
predominant involvement of olivopontocerebellar regions in MSA should therefore 
be explored.

DOI: 10.2183/pjab.93.016
PMCID: PMC5489432
PMID: 28496050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]