1. Nat Commun. 2017 May 11;8:15203. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15203.

Targeting the deubiquitinase STAMBP inhibits NALP7 inflammasome activity.

Bednash JS(1), Weathington N(1), Londino J(1), Rojas M(1), Gulick DL(1), Fort 
R(1), Han S(1), McKelvey AC(1), Chen BB(1), Mallampalli RK(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Acute Lung Injury Center of Excellence, University of 
Pittsburgh, UPMC Montefiore, NW 628, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
(2)Departments of Cell Biology and Physiology and Bioengineering, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
(3)Medical Specialty Service Line, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare 
System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15240, USA.

Inflammasomes regulate innate immune responses by facilitating maturation of 
inflammatory cytokines, interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-18. NACHT, LRR and PYD 
domains-containing protein 7 (NALP7) is one inflammasome constituent, but little 
is known about its cellular handling. Here we show a mechanism for NALP7 protein 
stabilization and activation of the inflammasome by Toll-like receptor (TLR) 
agonism with bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and the synthetic acylated 
lipopeptide Pam3CSK4. NALP7 is constitutively ubiquitinated and recruited to the 
endolysosome for degradation. With TLR ligation, the deubiquitinase enzyme, 
STAM-binding protein (STAMBP) impedes NALP7 trafficking to lysosomes to increase 
NALP7 abundance. STAMBP deubiquitinates NALP7 and STAMBP knockdown abrogates LPS 
or Pam3CSK4-induced increases in NALP7 protein. A small-molecule inhibitor of 
STAMBP deubiquitinase activity, BC-1471, decreases NALP7 protein levels and 
suppresses IL-1β release after TLR agonism. These findings describe a unique 
pathway of inflammasome regulation with the identification of STAMBP as a 
potential therapeutic target to reduce pro-inflammatory stress.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15203
PMCID: PMC5437278
PMID: 28492230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.