1. Mol Neurobiol. 2018 Apr;55(4):3351-3371. doi: 10.1007/s12035-017-0477-7. Epub 
2017 May 11.

Huntington Disease as a Neurodevelopmental Disorder and Early Signs of the 
Disease in Stem Cells.

Wiatr K(1), Szlachcic WJ(1), Trzeciak M(1), Figlerowicz M(1), Figiel M(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 
12/14, 61-704, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 
12/14, 61-704, Poznan, Poland. mfigiel@ibch.poznan.pl.

Huntington disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited disorder caused by a CAG 
expansion mutation in the huntingtin (HTT) gene, which results in the HTT 
protein that contains an expanded polyglutamine tract. The adult form of HD 
exhibits a late onset of the fully symptomatic phase. However, there is also a 
long presymptomatic phase, which has been increasingly investigated and 
recognized as important for the disease development. Moreover, the juvenile form 
of HD, evoked by a higher number of CAG repeats, resembles a neurodevelopmental 
disorder and has recently been the focus of additional interest. Multiple lines 
of data, such as the developmental necessity of HTT, its role in the cell cycle 
and neurogenesis, and findings from pluripotent stem cells, suggest the 
existence of a neurodevelopmental component in HD pathogenesis. Therefore, we 
discuss the early molecular pathogenesis of HD in pluripotent and neural stem 
cells, with respect to the neurodevelopmental aspects of HD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-017-0477-7
PMCID: PMC5842500
PMID: 28497201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FUNDING: This work was supported by a grant from 
the National Science Centre (grant number 2013/10/E/NZ4/00621) and the Polish 
Ministry of Science and Higher Education, under the KNOW program 
(01/KNOW2/2014). W.J.S. received support for young investigators from the Polish 
Ministry of Science and Higher Education (statutory funds). We express our 
gratitude to Pawe≈Ç Goderski for correction of the manuscript for language and 
grammar. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.