1. Neurochem Int. 2017 Oct;109:78-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2017.05.003. Epub
2017  May 12.

An X-chromosome linked mouse model (Ndufa1(S55A)) for systemic partial Complex I 
deficiency for studying predisposition to neurodegeneration and other diseases.

Kim C(1), Potluri P(2), Khalil A(1), Gaut D(2), McManus M(2), Compton S(1), 
Wallace DC(2), Yadava N(3).

Author information:
(1)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, Springfield, MA 01199, USA.
(2)Center for Mitochondrial and Epigenomic Medicine at the Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Pioneer Valley Life Sciences Institute, Springfield, MA 01199, USA; Division 
of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism at Baystate Medical Center, Tufts 
University School of Medicine, Springfield, MA 01199, USA. Electronic address: 
Nagendra.Yadava@baystatehealth.org.

The respiratory chain Complex I deficiencies are the most common cause of 
mitochondrial diseases. Complex I biogenesis is controlled by 58 genes and at 
least 47 of these cause mitochondrial disease in humans. Two of these are 
X-chromosome linked nuclear (nDNA) genes (NDUFA1 and NDUFB11), and 7 are 
mitochondrial (mtDNA, MT-ND1-6, -4L) genes, which may be responsible for 
sex-dependent variation in the presentation of mitochondrial diseases. In this 
study, we describe an X-chromosome linked mouse model (Ndufa1S55A) for systemic 
partial Complex I deficiency. By homologous recombination, a point mutation 
T > G within 55th codon of the Ndufa1 gene was introduced. The resulting allele 
Ndufa1S55A introduced systemic serine-55-alanine (S55A) mutation within the MWFE 
protein, which is essential for Complex I assembly and stability. The S55A 
mutation caused systemic partial Complex I deficiency of ∼50% in both sexes. The 
mutant males (Ndufa1S55A/Y) displayed reduced respiratory exchange ratio (RER) 
and produced less body heat. They were also hypoactive and ate less. They showed 
age-dependent Purkinje neurons degeneration. Metabolic profiling of brain, liver 
and serum from males showed reduced heme levels in mutants, which correlated 
with altered expressions of Fech and Hmox1 mRNAs in tissues. This is the first 
genuine X-chromosome linked mouse model for systemic partial Complex I 
deficiency, which shows age-dependent neurodegeneration. The effect of Complex I 
deficiency on survival patterns of males vs. females was different. We believe 
this model will be very useful for studying sex-dependent predisposition to both 
spontaneous and stress-induced neurodegeneration, cancer, diabetes and other 
diseases.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2017.05.003
PMID: 28506826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]