1. PLoS One. 2017 May 15;12(5):e0176664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176664. 
eCollection 2017.

Whole exome sequencing of a consanguineous family identifies the possible 
modifying effect of a globally rare AK5 allelic variant in celiac disease 
development among Saudi patients.

Al-Aama JY(1)(2), Shaik NA(1)(2), Banaganapalli B(1)(2), Salama MA(2)(3), 
Rashidi O(2), Sahly AN(2), Mohsen MO(2), Shawoosh HA(4), Shalabi HA(5), Edreesi 
MA(6), Alharthi SE(2), Wang J(2), Elango R(1)(2), Saadah OI(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Center of Excellence in Research of Hereditary 
Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, King Fahd Armed Forces Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(5)Primary Healthcare Center, Ministry of Health, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Dhahran Health 
Center, Saudi Aramco Medical Services Organization, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Celiac disease (CD), a multi-factorial auto-inflammatory disease of the small 
intestine, is known to occur in both sporadic and familial forms. Together HLA 
and Non-HLA genes can explain up to 50% of CD's heritability. In order to 
discover the missing heritability due to rare variants, we have exome sequenced 
a consanguineous Saudi family presenting CD in an autosomal recessive (AR) 
pattern. We have identified a rare homozygous insertion c.1683_1684insATT, in 
the conserved coding region of AK5 gene that showed classical AR model 
segregation in this family. Sequence validation of 200 chromosomes each of 
sporadic CD cases and controls, revealed that this extremely rare (EXac MAF 
0.000008) mutation is highly penetrant among general Saudi populations (MAF is 
0.62). Genotype and allelic distribution analysis have indicated that this AK5 
(c.1683_1684insATT) mutation is negatively selected among patient groups and 
positively selected in the control group, in whom it may modify the risk against 
CD development [p<0.002]. Our observation gains additional support from 
computational analysis which predicted that Iso561 insertion shifts the existing 
H-bonds between 400th and 556th amino acid residues lying near the functional 
domain of adenylate kinase. This shuffling of amino acids and their H-bond 
interactions is likely to disturb the secondary structure orientation of the 
polypeptide and induces the gain-of-function in nucleoside phosphate kinase 
activity of AK5, which may eventually down-regulates the reactivity potential of 
CD4+ T-cells against gluten antigens. Our study underlines the need to have 
population-specific genome databases to avoid false leads and to identify true 
candidate causal genes for the familial form of celiac disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0176664
PMCID: PMC5432167
PMID: 28505210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.