1. Gut Liver. 2017 Jul 15;11(4):551-558. doi: 10.5009/gnl16525.

Simeprevir-Based Triple Therapy with Reduced Doses of Pegylated Interferon α-2a 
Plus Ribavirin for Interferon Ineligible Patients with Genotype 1b Hepatitis C 
Virus.

Tamai H(1), Ida Y(1), Kawashima A(2), Shingaki N(1), Shimizu R(1), Moribata 
K(1), Nasu T(2), Maekita T(1), Iguchi M(1), Kato J(1), Nakao T(2), Kitano M(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 
Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Naga Municipal Hospital, Wakayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The present study aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of 
simeprevir-based triple therapy with reduced doses of pegylated interferon 
(PEG-IFN) and ribavirin for interferon (IFN) ineligible patients, such as 
elderly and/or cirrhotic patients, and to elucidate the factors contributing to 
a sustained virologic response (SVR).
METHODS: One hundred IFN ineligible patients infected with genotype 1b hepatitis 
C virus (HCV) were treated. Simeprevir (100 mg) was given orally together with 
reduced doses of PEG-IFN-α 2a (90 μg), and ribavirin (200 mg less than the 
recommended dose).
RESULTS: The patients' median age was 70 years, and 70 patients were cirrhotic. 
Three patients (3%) discontinued treatment due to adverse events. The SVR rate 
was 64%. Factors that significantly contributed to the SVR included the 
γ-glutamyl transferase and α-fetoprotein levels, interleukin- 28B (IL28B) 
polymorphism status, and the level and reduction of HCV RNA at weeks 2 and 4. 
The multivariate analysis showed that the IL28B polymorphism status was the only 
independent factor that predicted the SVR, with a positive predictive value of 
77%.
CONCLUSIONS: Simeprevir-based triple therapy with reduced doses of PEG-IFN and 
ribavirin was safe and effective for IFN ineligible patients infected with 
genotype 1b HCV. IL28B polymorphism status was a useful predictor of the SVR.

DOI: 10.5009/gnl16525
PMCID: PMC5491091
PMID: 28506030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No potential conflict of 
interest relevant to this article was reported.