1. Epilepsy Res. 2017 Aug;134:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.020. Epub
2017  Apr 30.

Heat induced temperature dysregulation and seizures in Dravet Syndrome/GEFS+ 
Gabrg2(+/Q390X) mice.

Warner TA(1), Liu Z(1), Macdonald RL(2), Kang JQ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States; Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, United States; Vanderbilt Kennedy Center of 
Human Development, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States; Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, United States; Vanderbilt Kennedy Center of 
Human Development, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States. Electronic address: jingqiong.kang@vanderbilt.edu.

It has been established that febrile seizures and its extended syndromes like 
generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures (FS) plus (GEFS+) and Dravet syndrome 
have been associated with mutations especially in SCN1A and GABRG2 genes. In 
patients, the onset of FS is likely due to the combined effect of temperature 
and inflammation in genetically vulnerable individuals because fever is often 
associated with infection. Much effort has been spent to understand the 
mechanisms underlying fever induction of seizures. In addition to the role of 
cytokines in FS, previous studies in Scn1a+/- knockout mice, a model of Dravet 
syndrome, indicated that temperature elevation alone could result in seizure 
generation, and the effect of elevated temperature inducing seizures was 
age-dependent. Here, we report the thermal effect in a different mouse model of 
Dravet syndrome, the Gabrg2+/Q390X knockin mouse. We demonstrated age-dependent 
dysregulated temperature control and that temperature elevation produced 
myoclonic jerks, generalized tonic clonic seizures (GTCSs) and heightened 
anxiety-like symptoms in Gabrg2+/Q390X mice. The study indicated that regardless 
of other inflammatory factors, brief heat alone increased brain excitability and 
induced multiple types of seizures in Gabrg2+/Q390X mice, suggesting that 
mutations like GABRG2(Q390X) may alter brain thermal regulation and precipitate 
seizures during temperature elevations.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2017.04.020
PMCID: PMC5512282
PMID: 28505490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None of the authors has any conflict 
of interest to disclose. We confirm that we have read the Journal’s position on 
issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this study is consistent 
with those guidelines.