1. Nat Commun. 2017 May 15;8:15365. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15365.

Targeted calcium influx boosts cytotoxic T lymphocyte function in the tumour 
microenvironment.

Kim KD(1), Bae S(1), Capece T(1), Nedelkovska H(1), de Rubio RG(2), Smrcka 
AV(2), Jun CD(3), Jung W(4), Park B(4), Kim TI(4), Kim M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, David H. Smith Center for Vaccine 
Biology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology &Physiology, University of Rochester, Rochester, 
New York 14642, USA.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Immune Synapse and Cell Therapy Research Center, 
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea.
(4)School of Chemical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 
440-746, Republic of Korea.

Adoptive cell transfer utilizing tumour-targeting cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) 
is one of the most effective immunotherapies against haematological 
malignancies, but significant clinical success has not yet been achieved in 
solid tumours due in part to the strong immunosuppressive tumour 
microenvironment. Here, we show that suppression of CTL killing by 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cell (Treg) is in part mediated by TGFβ-induced 
inhibition of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) production, leading to a decrease in 
T cell receptor (TCR)-dependent intracellular Ca2+ response. Highly selective 
optical control of Ca2+ signalling in adoptively transferred CTLs enhances T 
cell activation and IFN-γ production in vitro, leading to a significant 
reduction in tumour growth in mice. Altogether, our findings indicate that the 
targeted optogenetic stimulation of intracellular Ca2+ signal allows for the 
remote control of cytotoxic effector functions of adoptively transferred T cells 
with outstanding spatial resolution by boosting T cell immune responses at the 
tumour sites.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15365
PMCID: PMC5440668
PMID: 28504276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.