1. EXCLI J. 2017 Mar 7;16:210-228. doi: 10.17179/excli2016-804. eCollection 2017.

Preparation and characterization of beta-glucan particles containing a payload 
of nanoembedded rifabutin for enhanced targeted delivery to macrophages.

Upadhyay TK(1), Fatima N(1), Sharma D(2), Saravanakumar V(2), Sharma R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Integral University, Lucknow, 226026, India.
(2)Pharmaceutics Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 
226031, India.

β-glucan particles (GP) are polymeric carbohydrates, mainly found as components 
of cell wall fungi, yeast, bacteria and also in cereals such as barley and oat, 
and have been recently shown to have application in macrophage-targeted drug 
delivery. The aim of this study was to prepare and characterize GP containing a 
large payload of Rifabutin (RB), an anti-tuberculosis drug effective against 
MDR-TB at lower MIC than Rifampicin. GP were prepared from yeast cells by acidic 
and alkaline extraction were either spray dried or lyophilized, prior to RB 
loading and alginate sealing. The FTIR and 13C-NMR spectra of the GP confirmed a 
β-(1→3) linked glucan structure, with a triple-helical conformation. The spray 
dried GP exhibited better characteristics in terms of uniformity, size range 
(2.9 to 6.1 µm) and more than 75 % particles were below 3.5 μm. The RP-HPLC 
analysis of spray dried GP revealed drug entrapment and drug loading up to 81.46 
± 4.9 % and ~40.5 ± 1.9 %, respectively, as compared to those dried by 
lyophilization. Electron microscopy showed nearly spherical and porous nature of 
GP, and the presence of drug 'nanoprecipitates' filling the pore spaces. The 
formulation showed adequate thermal stability for pharmaceutical application. 
The particles were readily phagocytosed by macrophage(s) within 5 min of 
exposure. Drug release occurred in a sustained manner via diffusion, as the 
release kinetics best fit for drug release was obtained using Higuchi's 
equation. Thus, the spray dried GP-based-formulation technology holds promise 
for enhanced targeted delivery of anti-TB drug(s) to macrophage within a 
therapeutic window for the clearance of intracellular bacteria.

DOI: 10.17179/excli2016-804
PMCID: PMC5427468
PMID: 28507467