1. Hypertension. 2017 Jul;70(1):174-182. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.09276. 
Epub 2017 May 15.

Hypertension-Causing Mutation in Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor γ 
Impairs Nuclear Export of Nuclear Factor-κB p65 in Vascular Smooth Muscle.

Mukohda M(1), Lu KT(1), Guo DF(1), Wu J(1), Keen HL(1), Liu X(1), 
Ketsawatsomkron P(1), Stump M(1), Rahmouni K(1), Quelle FW(1), Sigmund CD(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and UIHC Center for Hypertension 
Research, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa.
(2)From the Department of Pharmacology and UIHC Center for Hypertension 
Research, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa. 
curt-sigmund@uiowa.edu.

Selective expression of dominant negative (DN) peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor γ (PPARγ) in vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) results in 
hypertension, atherosclerosis, and increased nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) target 
gene expression. Mesenteric SMC were cultured from mice designed to 
conditionally express wild-type (WT) or DN-PPARγ in response to Cre recombinase 
to determine how SMC PPARγ regulates expression of NF-κB target inflammatory 
genes. SMC-specific overexpression of WT-PPARγ or agonist-induced activation of 
endogenous PPARγ blunted tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α)-induced NF-κB target 
gene expression and activity of an NF-κB-responsive promoter. TNF-α-induced gene 
expression responses were enhanced by DN-PPARγ in SMC. Although expression of 
NF-κB p65 was unchanged, nuclear export of p65 was accelerated by WT-PPARγ and 
prevented by DN-PPARγ in SMC. Leptomycin B, a nuclear export inhibitor, blocked 
p65 nuclear export and inhibited the anti-inflammatory action of PPARγ. 
Consistent with a role in facilitating p65 nuclear export, WT-PPARγ 
coimmunoprecipitated with p65, and WT-PPARγ was also exported from the nucleus 
after TNF-α treatment. Conversely, DN-PPARγ does not bind to p65 and was 
retained in the nucleus after TNF-α treatment. Transgenic mice expressing 
WT-PPARγ or DN-PPARγ specifically in SMC (S-WT or S-DN) were bred with mice 
expressing luciferase controlled by an NF-κB-responsive promoter to assess 
effects on NF-κB activity in whole tissue. TNF-α-induced NF-κB activity was 
decreased in aorta and carotid artery from S-WT but was increased in vessels 
from S-DN mice. We conclude that SMC PPARγ blunts expression of proinflammatory 
genes by inhibition of NF-κB activity through a mechanism promoting nuclear 
export of p65, which is abolished by DN mutation in PPARγ.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.117.09276
PMCID: PMC5472224
PMID: 28507170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]