1. Sci Rep. 2017 May 18;7(1):2133. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-02375-y.

Movement protein of Apple chlorotic leaf spot virus is genetically unstable and 
negatively regulated by Ribonuclease E in E. coli.

Singh RM(1)(2), Singh D(3)(4), Hallan V(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Plant virus lab, Biotechnology Division, CSIR- Institute of Himalayan 
Bioresource Technology, Palampur, (176061), H.P., India.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Institute of 
Himalayan Bioresource Technology (CSIR-IHBT) Campus, Palampur, India.
(3)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Institute of 
Himalayan Bioresource Technology (CSIR-IHBT) Campus, Palampur, India. 
dharamsingh@ihbt.res.in.
(4)Molecular and Microbial Genetics Lab, Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute 
of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur, (176061), H.P., India. 
dharamsingh@ihbt.res.in.
(5)Plant virus lab, Biotechnology Division, CSIR- Institute of Himalayan 
Bioresource Technology, Palampur, (176061), H.P., India. hallan@ihbt.res.in.
(6)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Institute of 
Himalayan Bioresource Technology (CSIR-IHBT) Campus, Palampur, India. 
hallan@ihbt.res.in.

Movement protein (MP) of Apple chlorotic leaf spot virus (ACLSV) belongs to 
"30 K" superfamily of proteins and members of this family are known to show a 
wide array of functions. In the present study this gene was found to be 
genetically unstable in E. coli when transformed DH5α cells were grown at 28 °C 
and 37 °C. However, genetic instability was not encountered at 20 °C. 
Heterologous over expression failed despite the use of different transcriptional 
promoters and translational fusion constructs. Total cell lysate when subjected 
to western blotting using anti-ACLSV MP antibodies, showed degradation/cleavage 
of the expressed full-length protein. This degradation pointed at severe 
proteolysis or instability of the corresponding mRNA. Predicted secondary 
structure analysis of the transcript revealed a potential cleavage site for an 
endoribonuclease (RNase E) of E. coli. The negating effect of RNase E on 
transcript stability and expression was confirmed by northern blotting and 
quantitative RT-PCR of the RNA extracted from RNase E temperature sensitive 
mutant (strain N3431). The five fold accumulation of transcripts at 
non-permissive temperature (43 °C) suggests the direct role of RNase E in 
regulating the expression of ACLSV MP in E. coli.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-02375-y
PMCID: PMC5437062
PMID: 28522867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.