1. Microb Drug Resist. 2018 Jan/Feb;24(1):18-23. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2016.0207. Epub
 2017 May 18.

Upregulation of AcrEF in Quinolone Resistance Development in Escherichia coli 
When AcrAB-TolC Function Is Impaired.

Zhang CZ(1), Chang MX(1), Yang L(1), Liu YY(1), Chen PX(1), Jiang HX(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Veterinary Pharmaceutics, Development and Safety Evaluation, South China 
Agricultural University (SCAU) , Guangzhou, China .

We studied mechanisms of drug resistance development in Escherichia coli strains 
lacking efflux pump components. E. coli K12 deletion mutants were subjected to 
increasing concentrations of ciprofloxacin (CIP) to determine the frequency of 
target gene mutations. We generated a series of mutants that were selected based 
on their minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to CIP, as well as their 
corresponding point mutations in target genes. The mutants displayed a number of 
target modifications and, in particular, gyrA mutations altering codons 
Ser83Leu, Asp87Gly, and Asp87His as well as a change in parC at 78 (substitution 
of Gly for Asp). All these mutations were related to drug resistance. When 
exposed to CIP, mutants lacking efflux pump genes acrA and acrB demonstrated a 
low level of resistance that was because of point mutations in the target genes. 
High-level resistance was achieved with a 100- to 500-fold increase in 
expression of efflux pump genes acrE and acrF that compensated for the loss of 
AcrA and AcrB, and thus resulted in an obvious increase of CIP MIC. We 
demonstrate that an intact AcrAB-TolC efflux pump is crucial to the development 
of bacterial resistance. Its activity is complemented by expression of the 
alternative AcrEF efflux pump.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2016.0207
PMID: 28520511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]