1. Front Microbiol. 2017 May 9;8:783. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00783. eCollection 
2017.

Temperature and Oxidative Stress as Triggers for Virulence Gene Expression in 
Pathogenic Leptospira spp.

Fraser T(1)(2), Brown PD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Biochemistry Section, University of the 
West IndiesMona, Jamaica.
(2)Veterinary Services Division, Ministry of AgricultureHope Gardens, Jamaica.

Leptospirosis is a zooanthroponosis aetiologically caused by pathogenic bacteria 
belonging to the genus, Leptospira. Environmental signals such as increases in 
temperatures or oxidative stress can trigger response regulatory modes of 
virulence genes during infection. This study sought to determine the effect of 
temperature and oxidative stress on virulence associated genes in highly 
passaged Leptospira borgpeterseneii Jules and L. interrogans Portlandvere. 
Bacteria were grown in EMJH at 30°C, 37°C, or at 30°C before being transferred 
to 37°C. A total of 14 virulence-associated genes (fliY, invA, lenA, ligB, 
lipL32, lipL36, lipL41, lipL45, loa22, lsa21, mce, ompL1, sph2, and tlyC) were 
assessed using endpoint PCR. Transcriptional analyses of lenA, lipL32, lipL41, 
loa22, sph2 were assessed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR at the temperature 
conditions. To assess oxidative stress, bacteria were exposed to H2O2 for 30 and 
60 min with or without the temperature stress. All genes except ligB (for 
Portlandvere) and ligB and mce (for Jules) were detectable in the strains. 
Quantitatively, temperature stress resulted in significant changes in gene 
expression within species or between species. Temperature changes were more 
influential in gene expression for Jules, particularly at 30°C and upshift 
conditions; at 37°C, expression levels were higher for Portlandvere. However, 
compared to Jules, where temperature was influential in two of five genes, 
temperature was an essential element in four of five genes in Portlandvere 
exposed to oxidative stress. At both low and high oxidative stress levels, the 
interplay between genetic predisposition (larger genome size) and temperature 
was biased towards Portlandvere particularly at 30°C and upshift conditions. 
While it is clear that expression of many virulence genes in highly passaged 
strains of Leptospira are attenuated or lost, genetic predisposition, changes in 
growth temperature and/or oxidative intensity and/or duration were factors which 
acted in isolation or together with other regulatory cues to contribute to the 
variable gene expression observed in this study. Overall, differential gene 
expression in serovar Portlandvere was more responsive to temperature and 
oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00783
PMCID: PMC5423269
PMID: 28536558