1. Biochemistry. 1988 Dec 27;27(26):9081-8. doi: 10.1021/bi00426a003.

Site-directed mutagenesis of yeast cytochrome c peroxidase shows histidine 181 
is not required for oxidation of ferrocytochrome c.

Miller MA(1), Hazzard JT, Mauro JM, Edwards SL, Simons PC, Tollin G, Kraut J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The long-distance electron transfer observed in the complex formed between 
ferrocytochrome c and compound I, the peroxide-oxidized form of cytochrome c 
peroxidase (CCP), has been proposed to occur through the participation of His 
181 of CCP and Phe 87 of yeast iso-1 cytochrome c [Poulos, T. L., & Kraut, J. 
(1980) J. Biol. Chem. 255, 10322-10330]. We have examined the role of His 181 of 
CCP in this process through characterization of a mutant CCP in which His 181 
has been replaced by glycine through site-directed mutagenesis. Data from 
single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies, as well as the visible spectra of the 
mutant CCP and its 2-equiv oxidation product, compound I, show that at pH 6.0 
the protein is not dramatically altered by the His 181----Gly mutation. The rate 
of peroxide-dependent oxidation of ferrocytochrome c by the mutant CCP is 
reduced only 2-fold relative to that of the parental CCP, under steady-state 
conditions. Transient kinetic measurements of the intracomplex electron transfer 
rate from ferrous cytochrome c to compound I indicate that the rate of electron 
transfer within the transiently formed complex at high ionic strength (mu = 114 
mM, pH = 6) is also reduced by approximately 2-fold in the mutant CCP protein. 
The relatively minor effect of the loss of the imidazole side chain at position 
181 on the kinetics of electron transfer in the CCP-cytochrome c complex 
precludes an obligatory participation of His 181 in electron transfer from 
ferrous cytochrome c to compound I.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1021/bi00426a003
PMID: 2853973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]