1. J Nutr Metab. 2017;2017:1909101. doi: 10.1155/2017/1909101. Epub 2017 May 4.

Amino Acid Medical Foods Provide a High Dietary Acid Load and Increase Urinary 
Excretion of Renal Net Acid, Calcium, and Magnesium Compared with 
Glycomacropeptide Medical Foods in Phenylketonuria.

Stroup BM(1), Sawin EA(1), Murali SG(1), Binkley N(2), Hansen KE(3), Ney DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Endocrinology and Geriatrics, University 
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Rheumatology and Endocrinology, 
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.

Background. Skeletal fragility is a complication of phenylketonuria (PKU). A 
diet containing amino acids compared with glycomacropeptide reduces bone size 
and strength in mice. Objective. We tested the hypothesis that amino acid 
medical foods (AA-MF) provide a high dietary acid load, subsequently increasing 
urinary excretion of renal net acid, calcium, and magnesium, compared to 
glycomacropeptide medical foods (GMP-MF). Design. In a crossover design, 8 
participants with PKU (16-35 y) provided food records and 24-hr urine samples 
after consuming a low-Phe diet in combination with AA-MF and GMP-MF for 1-3 wks. 
We calculated potential renal acid load (PRAL) of AA-MF and GMP-MF and 
determined bone mineral density (BMD) measurements using dual X-ray 
absorptiometry. Results. AA-MF provided 1.5-2.5-fold higher PRAL and resulted in 
3-fold greater renal net acid excretion compared to GMP-MF (p = 0.002). Dietary 
protein, calcium, and magnesium intake were similar. GMP-MF significantly 
reduced urinary excretion of calcium by 40% (p = 0.012) and magnesium by 30% (p 
= 0.029). Two participants had low BMD-for-age and trabecular bone scores, 
indicating microarchitectural degradation. Urinary calcium with AA-MF negatively 
correlated with L1-L4 BMD. Conclusion. Compared to GMP-MF, AA-MF increase 
dietary acid load, subsequently increasing urinary calcium and magnesium 
excretion, and likely contributing to skeletal fragility in PKU. The trial was 
registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01428258.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/1909101
PMCID: PMC5436062
PMID: 28546877