1. Genom Data. 2017 May 3;12:136-145. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2017.05.006.
eCollection  2017 Jun.

Dynamic regulation of small RNAome during the early stage of cardiac 
differentiation from pluripotent embryonic stem cells.

Li Y(1)(2), Zeng A(1), Li G(1), Guan YN(1), Yang HT(1), Shen B(3), Jing Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai 
Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine and Shanghai Institute for Biological 
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China.
(3)Center for Systems Biology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.

Embryonic stem cells (mESCs), having potential to differentiate into three 
germ-layer cells including cardiomyocytes, shall be a perfect model to help 
understanding heart development. Here, using small RNA deep sequencing, we 
studied the small RNAome in the early stage of mouse cardiac differentiation. We 
found that the expression pattern of most microRNA (miRNA) were highly enriched 
at the beginning and declined thereafter, some were still insufficiently 
expressed on day 6, and most miRNAs recovered in the following days. When 
pluripotent embryonic stem cells are differentiating to cardiomyocytes, targeted 
genes are concentrated on TGF, WNT and cytoskeletal remodeling pathway. The 
pathway and network of dynamically changed target genes of the miRNAs at 
different time points were also investigated. Furthermore, we demonstrated that 
small rDNA-derived RNAs (srRNAs) were significantly up-regulated during 
differentiation, especially in stem cells. The pathways of srRNAs targeted genes 
were also presented. We described the existence and the differential expression 
of transfer RNA (tRNA), Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) and Endogenous siRNAs 
(endo-siRNAs) in this process. This study reports the genome-wide small RNAome 
profile, and provides a uniquely comprehensive view of the small RNA regulatory 
network that governs embryonic stem cell differentiation and cardiac 
development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gdata.2017.05.006
PMCID: PMC5432660
PMID: 28540181