1. Chin Med. 2017 May 24;12:15. doi: 10.1186/s13020-017-0136-y. eCollection 2017.

Chemical constituents from a Gynostemma laxum and their antioxidant and 
neuroprotective activities.

Seo JY(1), Kim SK(2), Nguyen PH(3), Lee JY(1), Tung PHT(1), Sung SH(1), Oh 
WK(1).

Author information:
(1)Korea Bioactive Natural Material Bank, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826 Republic 
of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, 34134 Republic of 
Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Chosun University, Gwangju, 61452 Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: A few bioactivities of constituents from Gynostemma laxum, which has 
been collected in Vietnam, have been reported until now. There is no report 
about the effects of constituents from G. laxum although the nuclear factor 
(erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2)-mediated heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) antioxidant 
defense system is involved in neuroprotection in the brain. Therefore, we 
investigated whether quercetin (2), benzoic acid (10) and their analogues (1, 
3-9 and 11) from G. laxum have the antioxidant and neuroprotective activities 
and also their underlying mechanism.
METHODS: To examine their neuroprotective and antioxidant activities, oxytosis, 
total oxidant scavenging capacity (TOSC), 2,7-dichlorofluorescein (DCFDA), 
dihydroethidium (DHE), antioxidant response element (ARE)-luciferase reporter 
gene assays, Western blot analysis, real time-PCR, immunocytochemistry and in 
silico 3D molecular docking simulation were performed.
RESULTS: The study of constituents using chromatographic techniques and 
spectroscopic analysis showed that G. laxum contained an abundance of quercetin 
(2), benzoic acid (10) and their analogues (1, 3-9 and 11). Our data 
demonstrated that quercetin (2) and its analogue (4) among the constituents from 
G. laxum showed the strongest neuroprotective effect against oxytosis triggered 
by the excessive amount of glutamate. Compounds 2, 4, 6 and 11 exhibited 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) inhibitory and ARE transcriptional activities in 
immortalized hippocampal HT22 cell line. Among them, compound 4, a second active 
compound, induced Nrf2/HO-1 activation. They were also fit stable onto the 
Tramtrack and Bric-Ã -Brac (BTB) domain of Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 
(Keap1), a known Nrf2 inhibitor protein, based on the results of docking and 
interaction energies. Overall, these data suggest that -OH and -OCH3 groups of 
quercetin and its analogues are responsible for their neuroprotective effect.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the major constituents of G. laxum had strong 
antioxidant and neuroprotective activities so that they could consider as a 
natural antioxidant supplement. Furthermore, G. laxum might be used beneficially 
in reducing oxidative complications with the further deep investigation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1186/s13020-017-0136-y
PMCID: PMC5442659
PMID: 28546827