1. Med Sci Monit. 2017 May 31;23:2644-2653. doi: 10.12659/msm.904988.

Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF) Accelerates Wound Healing in 
Hemorrhagic Shock Rats by Enhancing Angiogenesis and Attenuating Apoptosis.

Huang H(1)(2)(3), Zhang Q(1)(2)(3), Liu J(1)(2), Hao H(1)(2), Jiang C(1)(2), Han 
W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Immunological, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 
Beijing, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Bio-Therapeutic, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China 
(mainland).
(3)Medical school of Nankai University, Tianjin, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Following severe trauma, treatment of cutaneous injuries is often 
delayed by inadequate blood supply. The aim of the present study was to 
determine whether granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) protects 
endothelial cells (ECs) and enhances angiogenesis in a rat model of hemorrhagic 
shock (HS) combined with cutaneous injury after resuscitation. MATERIAL AND 
METHODS The HS rats with full-thickness defects were resuscitated and randomly 
divided into a G-CSF group (200 Î¼g/kg body weight), a normal saline group, and a 
blank control group. Histological staining was to used estimate the recovery and 
apoptosis of skin. Apoptosis- and angiogenesis-related factors were analyzed by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot (WB). 
Scratch assay, tube formation, and WB experiments were performed to verify the 
functional effects of G-CSF on HUVECs in vitro. RESULTS H&E staining and Masson 
trichrome staining showed earlier inflammation resolution and collagen synthesis 
in the G-CSF-treated group. Angiogenesis-related factors were elevated at mRNA 
and protein levels. TUNEL staining suggested fewer apoptotic cells in the G-CSF 
group. The apoptotic-related factors were down-regulated and anti-apoptotic 
factors were up-regulated in the G-CSF-treated group. Scratch assay and tube 
formation experiments revealed that G-CSF facilitated migration ability and 
angiogenic potential of HUVECs. The angiogenic and anti-apoptotic effects were 
also enhanced in vitro. CONCLUSIONS Our results suggest that G-CSF after 
resuscitation attenuates local apoptosis and accelerates angiogenesis. These 
findings hold great promise for improving therapy for cutaneous injury in severe 
trauma and ischemia diseases.

DOI: 10.12659/msm.904988
PMCID: PMC5461887
PMID: 28559534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.