1. J Neurol Sci. 2017 Jul 15;378:38-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.04.035. Epub 2017
 Apr 23.

Brain iron concentrations in regions of interest and relation with serum iron 
levels in Parkinson disease.

Costa-Mallen P(1), Gatenby C(2), Friend S(2), Maravilla KR(2), Hu SC(3), Cain 
KC(4), Agarwal P(5), Anzai Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Bastyr University Research Institute, Kenmore, WA 98028, United States. 
Electronic address: pcostamallen@bastyr.edu.
(2)University of Washington, Department of Radiology, Seattle, WA 98195, United 
States.
(3)University of Washington, Department of Neurology, Seattle, WA 98104, United 
States.
(4)University of Washington, Department of Biostatistics, Seattle, WA 98195, 
United States.
(5)Booth Gardner Parkinson's Care Center, Evergreen Health, Kirkland, WA 98034, 
United States.
(6)University of Utah School of Medicine, Clinical Radiology, Salt Lake City, UT 
84132, United States.

Brain iron has been previously found elevated in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta (SNpc), but not in other brain regions, of Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients. However, iron in circulation has been recently observed to be lower 
than normal in PD patients. The regional selectivity of iron deposition in brain 
as well as the relationship between SNpc brain iron and serum iron within PD 
patients has not been completely elucidated. In this pilot study we measured 
brain iron in six regions of interest (ROIs) as well as serum iron and serum 
ferritin, in 24 PD patients and 27 age- gender-matched controls. Brain iron was 
measured on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with a T2 prime (T2') method. 
Difference in brain iron deposition between PD cases and controls for the six 
ROIs were calculated. SNpc/white matter brain iron ratios and SNpc/serum iron 
ratios were calculated for each study participant, and differences between PD 
patients and controls were tested. PD patients overall had higher brain iron 
than controls in the SNpc. PD patients had significantly higher SNpc/white 
matter brain iron ratios than controls, and significantly higher brain SNpc 
iron/serum iron ratios than controls. These results indicate that PD patients' 
iron metabolism is disrupted toward a higher partitioning of iron to the brain 
SNpc at the expenses of iron in the circulation.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2017.04.035
PMCID: PMC5609675
PMID: 28566175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]