1. Clin Med Insights Blood Disord. 2017 Mar 30;10:1179545X17700858. doi: 
10.1177/1179545X17700858. eCollection 2017.

Acute Myeloid Leukemia With Inv(16)(p13q22) Associated With Hidden Systemic 
Mastocytosis: Case Report and Review of Literature.

Hilmi FAI(1), Al-Sabbagh A(1), Soliman DS(1), Sabah HA(2), Ismail OM(2), Yassin 
M(2), El-Omri H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, National Center for Cancer 
Care and Research, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Department of Hematology/Oncology, National Center for Cancer Care and 
Research, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.

Systemic mastocytosis (SM) is a condition associated with clonal neoplastic 
proliferation of mast cells. In up to 40% of systemic mastocytosis cases, an 
associated clonal hematological disease of non-mast cell lineage, such as acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML), is diagnosed before, simultaneously with, or after the 
diagnosis of SM. Herein, we report a case of a 30-year-old man diagnosed with 
AML with inv(16) (p13;q22) CBFB:MYH11. Associated mastocytosis was not noted at 
diagnosis and was only detected in the bone marrow at time of remission after 
successful chemotherapy. The diagnosis of mastocytosis was based on the 
demonstration of a multifocal dense mast cell infiltrate in the marrow biopsy 
with aberrant immunophenotype, with coexpression of tryptase, CD117, and CD25. 
The mast cells showed atypical morphology mostly with irregular nuclear contour, 
bilobed or multilobed nuclei with cytoplasmic hypogranulation or irregular 
metachromatic granule distribution, and some cells with eccentric nucleus or 
spindle shape. Reexamination of the pretherapeutic bone marrow with immunostain 
for tryptase and CD25 revealed that mastocytosis was present from the start but 
masked by extensive blast proliferation. This case indicates that mast cell 
infiltrates are sometimes underappreciated at the original diagnosis of AML with 
inv(16) and that the concurrent diagnosis of SM with AML requires a high index 
of suspicion supported with comprehensive morphologic and immunohistochemical 
evaluation for a neoplastic mast cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1177/1179545X17700858
PMCID: PMC5428180
PMID: 28579854

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.