1. Neuropediatrics. 2017 Oct;48(5):385-389. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1603515. Epub
2017  Jun 1.

GNAQ Mutation in the Venous Vascular Malformation and Underlying Brain Tissue in 
Sturge-Weber Syndrome.

Sundaram SK(1)(2)(3), Michelhaugh SK(4), Klinger NV(4), Kupsky WJ(5), Sood 
S(1)(2)(4), Chugani HT(1)(2)(3)(6)(7), Mittal S(4)(8), Juhász C(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United 
States.
(2)Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan, United States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United 
States.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United 
States.
(5)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United 
States.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Nemours Alfred I. DuPont Hospital for 
Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United States.
(7)Thomas Jefferson University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
United States.
(8)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United 
States.

The recent identification of the somatic GNAQ mutation (c.548G > A) provides 
insight into the pathogenesis of Sturge–Weber syndrome (SWS). Although the 
primary SWS brain pathology is the leptomeningeal angiomatosis (LMA), cerebral 
cortical and white matter abnormalities play a prominent role in the disease 
manifestations. In some cases, SWS brain involvement is present even without 
detectable LMA on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). To expand our understanding 
of the etiology of SWS brain pathology, surgical SWS brain specimens from nine 
children (age: 0.8–7.5 years) were carefully separated into LMA and (non-LMA) 
brain tissue; the latter did not contain any vascular malformation. A custom 
Competitive Allele-Specific TaqMan PCR (castPCR) assay to detect the mutation in 
GNAQ was performed in these separated specimens. The mutation was present in all 
nine LMA and seven of the nine non-LMA brain tissues. LMA tissues were 
significantly enriched by the mutation, as compared with non-LMA brain (mean: 
7.2 ± 2.1% and 1.2 ± 0.4%, respectively; p = 0.008). These results demonstrate 
that the somatic GNAQ mutation in SWS is not confined to the venous vascular 
malformation but can directly (although less severely) affect underlying brain 
parenchyma, not directly affected by LMA, and possibly contribute to SWS brain 
pathology. Future studies should identify the specific cell type(s) affected by 
the mutation in the SWS-affected brain parenchyma.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1603515
PMCID: PMC5587372
PMID: 28571101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors report no 
conflict of interest.