1. Chron Respir Dis. 2018 May;15(2):182-219. doi: 10.1177/1479972317709642. Epub 
2017 Jun 5.

Changes in lower limb muscle function and muscle mass following exercise-based 
interventions in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A review 
of the English-language literature.

De Brandt J(1), Spruit MA(1)(2)(3), Hansen D(1), Franssen FM(2), Derave W(4), 
Sillen MJ(2), Burtin C(1).

Author information:
(1)1 REVAL - Rehabilitation Research Center, BIOMED - Biomedical Research 
Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Hasselt University, 
Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(2)2 Department of Research and Education, CIRO, Center of Expertise for Chronic 
Organ Failure, Horn, the Netherlands.
(3)3 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht, 
the Netherlands.
(4)4 Department of Movement and Sports Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients often experience lower 
limb muscle dysfunction and wasting. Exercise-based training has potential to 
improve muscle function and mass, but literature on this topic is extensive and 
heterogeneous including numerous interventions and outcome measures. This review 
uses a detailed systematic approach to investigate the effect of this wide range 
of exercise-based interventions on muscle function and mass. PUBMED and PEDro 
databases were searched. In all, 70 studies ( n = 2504 COPD patients) that 
implemented an exercise-based intervention and reported muscle strength, 
endurance, or mass in clinically stable COPD patients were critically appraised. 
Aerobic and/or resistance training, high-intensity interval training, electrical 
or magnetic muscle stimulation, whole-body vibration, and water-based training 
were investigated. Muscle strength increased in 78%, muscle endurance in 92%, 
and muscle mass in 88% of the cases where that specific outcome was measured. 
Despite large heterogeneity in exercise-based interventions and outcome measures 
used, most exercise-based trials showed improvements in muscle strength, 
endurance, and mass in COPD patients. Which intervention(s) is (are) best for 
which subgroup of patients remains currently unknown. Furthermore, this 
literature review identifies gaps in the current knowledge and generates 
recommendations for future research to enhance our knowledge on exercise-based 
interventions in COPD patients.

DOI: 10.1177/1479972317709642
PMCID: PMC5958462
PMID: 28580854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.