1. Chem Sci. 2017 May 1;8(5):3770-3774. doi: 10.1039/c7sc00525c. Epub 2017 Mar
17.

Anion-π catalysis: bicyclic products with four contiguous stereogenic centers 
from otherwise elusive diastereospecific domino reactions on π-acidic surfaces.

Liu L(1), Cotelle Y(1)(2), Klehr J(2)(3), Sakai N(1), Ward TR(2)(3), Matile 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry , University of Geneva , Geneva , Switzerland 
. Email: stefan.matile@unige.ch ; www.unige.ch/sciences/chiorg/matile/ ; Tel: 
+41 22 379 6523.
(2)National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) Molecular Systems 
Engineering , Switzerland . www.nccr-mse.ch.
(3)Department of Chemistry , University of Basel , Basel , Switzerland.

Anion-π interactions have been introduced recently to catalysis. The idea of 
stabilizing anionic intermediates and transition states on π-acidic surfaces is 
a new fundamental concept. By now, examples exist for asymmetric enolate, 
enamine, iminium and transamination chemistry, and the first anion-π enzyme has 
been created. Delocalized over large aromatic planes, anion-π interactions 
appear particularly attractive to stabilize extensive long-distance charge 
displacements during domino processes. Moving on from the formation of 
cyclohexane rings with five stereogenic centers in one step on a π-acidic 
surface, we here focus on asymmetric anion-π catalysis of domino reactions that 
afford bicyclic products with quaternary stereogenic centers. Catalyst screening 
includes a newly synthesized, better performing anion-π version of classical 
organocatalysts from cinchona alkaloids, and anion-π enzymes. We find 
stereoselectivities that are clearly better than the best ones reported with 
conventional catalysts, culminating in unprecedented diastereospecificity. 
Moreover, we describe achiral salts as supramolecular chirality enhancers and 
report the first artificial enzyme that operates in neutral water with anion-π 
interactions, i.e., interactions that are essentially new to enzymes. Evidence 
in support of contributions of anion-π interactions to asymmetric catalysis 
include increasing diastereo- and enantioselectivity with increasing rates, 
i.e., asymmetric transition-state stabilization in the presence of π-acidic 
surfaces and inhibition with the anion selectivity sequence NO3- > Br- > BF4- > 
PF6-.

DOI: 10.1039/c7sc00525c
PMCID: PMC5436548
PMID: 28580108