1. J Diabetes Res. 2017;2017:8356537. doi: 10.1155/2017/8356537. Epub 2017 May
11.

The LDL Receptor-Related Protein 1: At the Crossroads of Lipoprotein Metabolism 
and Insulin Signaling.

Au DT(1), Strickland DK(1)(2)(3), Muratoglu SC(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vascular and Inflammatory Diseases, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

The metabolic syndrome is an escalating worldwide public health concern. Defined 
by a combination of physiological, metabolic, and biochemical factors, the 
metabolic syndrome is used as a clinical guideline to identify individuals with 
a higher risk for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Although risk 
factors for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease have been known for 
decades, the molecular mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of these 
diseases and their interrelationship remain unclear. The LDL receptor-related 
protein 1 (LRP1) is a large endocytic and signaling receptor that is widely 
expressed in several tissues. As a member of the LDL receptor family, LRP1 is 
involved in the clearance of chylomicron remnants from the circulation and has 
been demonstrated to be atheroprotective. Recently, studies have shown that LRP1 
is involved in insulin receptor trafficking and regulation and glucose 
metabolism. This review summarizes the role of tissue-specific LRP1 in insulin 
signaling and its potential role as a link between lipoprotein and glucose 
metabolism in diabetes.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/8356537
PMCID: PMC5444004
PMID: 28584820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]