1. Clin Genet. 2018 Jan;93(1):103-110. doi: 10.1111/cge.13072. Epub 2017 Oct 9.

Genetic study of early-onset Graves' disease in the Chinese Han population.

Yuan FF(1)(2), Ye XP(1), Liu W(1)(3), Xue LQ(1), Ma YR(1), Zhang LL(1), Zhang 
MM(1), Sun F(1), Wan YY(1), Zhang QY(1), Zhao SX(1), Song HD(1); China 
Consortium for the Genetics of Autoimmune Thyroid Disease.

Author information:
(1)The Core Laboratory in Medicine Center of Clinical Research, Department of 
Endocrinology, The Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Ninth People's Hospital (the north branch) 
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Graves' disease (GD) is a complex autoimmune disorder in which genetic and 
environmental factors are both involved in the pathogenesis. Early-onset 
patients have a shorter exposure time to environmental factors and are, 
therefore, good models to help understand the genetic architecture of GD. Based 
on previous studies of early-onset GD, 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
and their related SNPs (R2  > .6), SNPs located within a ±1-Mb region of the 
FOXP3 gene, and 20 validated GD-risk SNPs were selected and screened for 
genotyping in 3735 GD and 4893 control patients to investigate whether 
early-onset GD is a subtype of GD with distinct susceptibility genes. 
Ultimately, we did not confirm the reported genetic markers of early-onset GD in 
our Chinese Han population but found that a GD-risk SNP located in the human 
leukocyte antigen class I region-rs4947296-was more strongly correlated with 
early-onset GD than non-early-onset GD. In addition, heterogeneity analysis of 
GD patients suggests that it may be more reasonable to define early-onset GD as 
an onset age ≤20 years.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13072
PMID: 28598035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]