1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Sep 6;45(15):8822-8834. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx518.

Strand-specific CpG hemimethylation, a novel epigenetic modification functional 
for genomic imprinting.

Patiño-Parrado I(1), Gómez-Jiménez Á(1), López-Sánchez N(1), Frade JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Neurobiology, Cajal 
Institute, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (IC-CSIC), Madrid 
E-28002, Spain.

Imprinted genes are regulated by allele-specific differentially DNA-methylated 
regions (DMRs). Epigenetic methylation of the CpGs constituting these DMRs is 
established in the germline, resulting in a 5-methylcytosine-specific pattern 
that is tightly maintained in somatic tissues. Here, we show a novel epigenetic 
mark, characterized by strand-specific hemimethylation of contiguous CpG sites 
affecting the germline DMR of the murine Peg3, but not Snrpn, imprinted domain. 
This modification is enriched in tetraploid cortical neurons, a cell type where 
evidence for a small proportion of formylmethylated CpG sites within the 
Peg3-controlling DMR is also provided. Single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP)-based transcriptional analysis indicated that these epigenetic 
modifications participate in the maintainance of the monoallelic expression 
pattern of the Peg3 imprinted gene. Our results unexpectedly demonstrate that 
the methylation pattern observed in DMRs controlling defined imprinting regions 
can be modified in somatic cells, resulting in a novel epigenetic modification 
that gives rise to strand-specific hemimethylated domains functional for genomic 
imprinting. We anticipate the existence of a novel molecular mechanism 
regulating the transition from fully methylated CpGs to strand-specific 
hemimethylated CpGs.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx518
PMCID: PMC5587773
PMID: 28605464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]