1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 13;8:15676. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15676.

Multiple truncated isoforms of MAVS prevent its spontaneous aggregation in 
antiviral innate immune signalling.

Qi N(1), Shi Y(1), Zhang R(1), Zhu W(1), Yuan B(1), Li X(1), Wang C(1), Zhang 
X(2), Hou F(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling 
Network, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute 
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences; University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75039, USA.

In response to virus infection, RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) sense virus RNA and 
induce MAVS to form prion-like aggregates to further propagate antiviral 
signalling. Although monomeric MAVS recombinant protein can assemble into 
prion-like filaments spontaneously in vitro, endogenous MAVS in cells is 
prevented from aggregation until viral infection. The mechanism preventing 
cellular MAVS from spontaneous aggregation is unclear. Here we show that 
multiple N-terminal truncated isoforms of MAVS are essential in preventing 
full-length MAVS from spontaneous aggregation through transmembrane 
domain-mediated homotypic interaction. Without these shorter isoforms, 
full-length MAVS is prone to spontaneous aggregation and Nix-mediated mitophagic 
degradation. In the absence of N-terminally truncated forms, blocking 
Nix-mediated mitophagy stabilizes full-length MAVS, which aggregates 
spontaneously and induces the subsequent expression of type I interferon and 
other proinflammatory cytokines. Our data thus uncover an important mechanism 
preventing spontaneous aggregation of endogenous MAVS to avoid accidental 
activation of antiviral innate immune signalling.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15676
PMCID: PMC5474743
PMID: 28607490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.