1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 14;7(1):3517. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03742-5.

Hydrogen sulfide stimulates CFTR in Xenopus oocytes by activation of the 
cAMP/PKA signalling axis.

Perniss A(1)(2), Preiss K(1), Nier M(1), Althaus M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Animal Physiology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany.
(2)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, 
Germany.
(3)Institute for Animal Physiology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany. 
Mike.Althaus@newcastle.ac.uk.
(4)School of Biology, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 
Mike.Althaus@newcastle.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2018 Mar 8;8(1):4420. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-21979-6.

Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) has been recognized as a signalling molecule which 
affects the activity of ion channels and transporters in epithelial cells. The 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is an epithelial 
anion channel and a key regulator of electrolyte and fluid homeostasis. In this 
study, we investigated the regulation of CFTR by H2S. Human CFTR was 
heterologously expressed in Xenopus oocytes and its activity was 
electrophysiologically measured by microelectrode recordings. The H2S-forming 
sulphur salt Na2S as well as the slow-releasing H2S-liberating compound GYY4137 
increased transmembrane currents of CFTR-expressing oocytes. Na2S had no effect 
on native, non-injected oocytes. The effect of Na2S was blocked by the CFTR 
inhibitor CFTR_inh172, the adenylyl cyclase inhibitor MDL 12330A, and the 
protein kinase A antagonist cAMPS-Rp. Na2S potentiated CFTR stimulation by 
forskolin, but not that by IBMX. Na2S enhanced CFTR stimulation by 
membrane-permeable 8Br-cAMP under inhibition of adenylyl cyclase-mediated cAMP 
production by MDL 12330A. These data indicate that H2S activates CFTR in Xenopus 
oocytes by inhibiting phosphodiesterase activity and subsequent stimulation of 
CFTR by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. In epithelia, an increased CFTR 
activity may correspond to a pro-secretory response to H2S which may be 
endogenously produced by the epithelium or H2S-generating microflora.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03742-5
PMCID: PMC5471219
PMID: 28615646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.