1. Pharmacol Res. 2017 Nov;125(Pt A):21-38. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2017.06.005. Epub
 2017 Jun 12.

The vasoprotective axes of the renin-angiotensin system: Physiological relevance 
and therapeutic implications in cardiovascular, hypertensive and kidney 
diseases.

Li XC(1), Zhang J(2), Zhuo JL(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Receptor and Signal Transduction, Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216-4505, USA.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(3)Laboratory of Receptor and Signal Transduction, Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216-4505, USA. Electronic address: 
jzhuo@umc.edu.

The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is undisputedly one of the most prominent 
endocrine (tissue-to-tissue), paracrine (cell-to-cell) and intracrine 
(intracellular/nuclear) vasoactive systems in the physiological regulation of 
neural, cardiovascular, blood pressure, and kidney function. The importance of 
the RAS in the development and pathogenesis of cardiovascular, hypertensive and 
kidney diseases has now been firmly established in clinical trials and practice 
using renin inhibitors, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, type 1 
(AT1) angiotensin II (ANG II) receptor blockers (ARBs), or aldosterone receptor 
antagonists as major therapeutic drugs. The major mechanisms of actions for 
these RAS inhibitors or receptor blockers are mediated primarily by blocking the 
detrimental effects of the classic angiotensinogen/renin/ACE/ANG 
II/AT1/aldosterone axis. However, the RAS has expanded from this classic axis to 
include several other complex biochemical and physiological axes, which are 
derived from the metabolism of this classic axis. Currently, at least five axes 
of the RAS have been described, with each having its key substrate, enzyme, 
effector peptide, receptor, and/or downstream signaling pathways. These include 
the classic angiotensinogen/renin/ACE/ANG II/AT1 receptor, the ANG II/APA/ANG 
III/AT2/NO/cGMP, the ANG I/ANG II/ACE2/ANG (1-7)/Mas receptor, the 
prorenin/renin/prorenin receptor (PRR or Atp6ap2)/MAP kinases ERK1/2/V-ATPase, 
and the ANG III/APN/ANG IV/IRAP/AT4 receptor axes. Since the roles and 
therapeutic implications of the classic angiotensinogen/renin/ACE/ANG II/AT1 
receptor axis have been extensively reviewed, this article will focus primarily 
on reviewing the roles and therapeutic implications of the vasoprotective axes 
of the RAS in cardiovascular, hypertensive and kidney diseases.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2017.06.005
PMCID: PMC5607101
PMID: 28619367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]