1. Front Physiol. 2017 May 30;8:372. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00372. eCollection 
2017.

Monitoring Notch Signaling-Associated Activation of Stem Cell Niches within 
Injured Dental Pulp.

Mitsiadis TA(1), Cat√≥n J(2), Pagella P(1), Orsini G(3), Jimenez-Rojo L(1).

Author information:
(1)Orofacial Development and Regeneration, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of 
Oral Biology, ZZM, University of ZurichZurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medical Basic Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University CEU-San 
PabloMadrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Stomatology, Polytechnic University of 
MarcheAncona, Italy.

Dental pulp stem/progenitor cells guarantee tooth homeostasis, repair and 
regeneration throughout life. The decision between renewal and differentiation 
of these cells is influenced by physical and molecular interactions with stromal 
cells and extracellular matrix molecules forming the specialized 
microenvironment of dental pulp stem cell niches. Here we study the activation 
of putative pulp niches after tooth injury through the upregulation of Notch 
signaling pathway. Notch1, Notch2, and Notch3 molecules were used as markers of 
dental pulp stem/progenitor cells. Upon dental injury, Notch1 and Notch3 are 
detected in cells related to vascular structures suggesting a role of these 
proteins in the activation of specific pulpal perivascular niches. In contrast, 
a population of Notch2-positive cells that are actively proliferative is 
observed in the apical part of the pulp. Kinetics of these cells is followed up 
with a lipophilic DiI labeling, showing that apical pulp cells migrate toward 
the injury site where dynamic regenerative/repair events occur. The knowledge of 
the activation and regulation of dental pulp stem/progenitor cells within their 
niches in pathologic conditions may be helpful for the realization of innovative 
dental treatments in the near future.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00372
PMCID: PMC5447770
PMID: 28611689