1. Front Physiol. 2017 May 31;8:365. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00365. eCollection 
2017.

Comparative and Experimental Studies on the Genes Altered by Chronic Hypoxia in 
Human Brain Microendothelial Cells.

Mata-Greenwood E(1), Goyal D(1)(2), Goyal R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, School of Medicine, Loma Linda UniversityLoma 
Linda, CA, United States.
(2)Epigenuity LLCLoma Linda, CA, United States.

Background : Hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1A) is a master regulator of 
acute hypoxia; however, with chronic hypoxia, HIF1A levels return to the 
normoxic levels. Importantly, the genes that are involved in the cell survival 
and viability under chronic hypoxia are not known. Therefore, we tested the 
hypothesis that chronic hypoxia leads to the upregulation of a core group of 
genes with associated changes in the promoter DNA methylation that mediates the 
cell survival under hypoxia. Results : We examined the effect of chronic hypoxia 
(3 days; 0.5% oxygen) on human brain micro endothelial cells (HBMEC) viability 
and apoptosis. Hypoxia caused a significant reduction in cell viability and an 
increase in apoptosis. Next, we examined chronic hypoxia associated changes in 
transcriptome and genome-wide promoter methylation. The data obtained was 
compared with 16 other microarray studies on chronic hypoxia. Nine genes were 
altered in response to chronic hypoxia in all 17 studies. Interestingly, HIF1A 
was not altered with chronic hypoxia in any of the studies. Furthermore, we 
compared our data to three other studies that identified HIF-responsive genes by 
various approaches. Only two genes were found to be HIF dependent. We silenced 
each of these 9 genes using CRISPR/Cas9 system. Downregulation of EGLN3 
significantly increased the cell death under chronic hypoxia, whereas 
downregulation of ERO1L, ENO2, adrenomedullin, and spag4 reduced the cell death 
under hypoxia. Conclusions : We provide a core group of genes that regulates 
cellular acclimatization under chronic hypoxic stress, and most of them are HIF 
independent.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00365
PMCID: PMC5450043
PMID: 28620317