1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 15;7(1):3627. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03456-8.

TGF-beta/atRA-induced Tregs express a selected set of microRNAs involved in the 
repression of transcripts related to Th17 differentiation.

Schiavinato JLDS(1)(2)(3), Haddad R(3)(4), Saldanha-Araujo F(3)(5), Baiochi 
J(3), Araujo AG(3), Santos Scheucher P(3), Covas DT(2)(3), Zago MA(2)(3), 
Panepucci RA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São 
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and for Cell 
Therapy (INCTC) Center for Cell Therapy (CTC) and Regional Blood Center, 
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(3)Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo (FMRP-USP), Ribeirão 
Preto, SP, Brazil.
(4)Faculty of Ceilândia, University of Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(5)Faculty of Healthy Sciences, University of Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(6)National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and for Cell 
Therapy (INCTC) Center for Cell Therapy (CTC) and Regional Blood Center, 
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. rapane@gmail.com.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are essential regulators of immune tolerance. atRA 
and TGF-β can inhibit the polarization of naïve T cells into inflammatory Th17 
cells, favoring the generation of stable iTregs, however the regulatory 
mechanisms involved are not fully understood. In this context, the roles of 
individual microRNAs in Tregs are largely unexplored. Naïve T cells were 
immunomagnetically isolated from umbilical cord blood and activated with 
anti-human CD2/CD3/CD28 beads in the presence of IL-2 alone (CD4Med) or with the 
addition of TGF-β and atRA (CD4TGF/atRA). As compared to CD4Med, the CD4TGF/atRA 
condition allowed the generation of highly suppressive CD4+CD25hiCD127-FOXP3hi 
iTregs. Microarray profiling allowed the identification of a set of microRNAs 
that are exclusively expressed upon TGF-β/atRA treatment and that are predicted 
to target a set of transcripts concordantly downregulated. This set of predicted 
targets were enriched for central components of IL-6/JAK/STAT and AKT-mTOR 
signaling, whose inhibition is known to play important roles in the generation 
and function of regulatory lymphocytes. Finally, we show that mimics of 
exclusively expressed miRs (namely miR-1299 and miR-30a-5p) can reduce the 
levels of its target transcripts, IL6R and IL6ST (GP130), and increase the 
percentage of FoxP3+ cells among CD4+CD25+/hi cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03456-8
PMCID: PMC5472579
PMID: 28620241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.