1. G3 (Bethesda). 2017 Aug 7;7(8):2427-2438. doi: 10.1534/g3.117.044172.

A Genetic Screen Reveals an Unexpected Role for Yorkie Signaling in 
JAK/STAT-Dependent Hematopoietic Malignancies in Drosophila melanogaster.

Anderson AM(1), Bailetti AA(1), Rodkin E(1), De A(1), Bach EA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, The Helen L. and 
Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York 10016.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, The Helen L. and 
Martin S. Kimmel Center for Stem Cell Biology, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York 10016 erika.bach@nyu.edu.

A gain-of-function mutation in the tyrosine kinase JAK2 (JAK2V617F ) causes 
human myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). These patients present with high 
numbers of myeloid lineage cells and have numerous complications. Since current 
MPN therapies are not curative, there is a need to find new regulators and 
targets of Janus kinase/Signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(JAK/STAT) signaling that may represent additional clinical interventions . 
Drosophila melanogaster offers a low complexity model to study MPNs as JAK/STAT 
signaling is simplified with only one JAK [Hopscotch (Hop)] and one STAT 
(Stat92E). hopTumorous-lethal(Tum-l) is a gain-of-function mutation that causes 
dramatic expansion of myeloid cells, which then form lethal melanotic tumors. 
Through an F1 deficiency (Df) screen, we identified 11 suppressors and 35 
enhancers of melanotic tumors in hopTum-l animals. Dfs that uncover the Hippo 
(Hpo) pathway genes expanded (ex) and warts (wts) strongly enhanced the hopTum-l 
tumor burden, as did mutations in ex, wts, and other Hpo pathway genes. Target 
genes of the Hpo pathway effector Yorkie (Yki) were significantly upregulated in 
hopTum-l blood cells, indicating that Yki signaling was increased. Ectopic 
hematopoietic activation of Yki in otherwise wild-type animals increased 
hemocyte proliferation but did not induce melanotic tumors. However, 
hematopoietic depletion of Yki significantly reduced the hopTum-l tumor burden, 
demonstrating that Yki is required for melanotic tumors in this background. 
These results support a model in which elevated Yki signaling increases the 
number of hemocytes, which become melanotic tumors as a result of elevated 
JAK/STAT signaling.

Copyright Â© 2017 Anderson et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.117.044172
PMCID: PMC5555452
PMID: 28620086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]