1. Breast Cancer Res. 2017 Jun 19;19(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s13058-017-0865-y.

miR-629-3p may serve as a novel biomarker and potential therapeutic target for 
lung metastases of triple-negative breast cancer.

Wang J(1), Song C(2), Tang H(2), Zhang C(3), Tang J(2), Li X(2), Chen B(2), Xie 
X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State 
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Cancer Medicine, No.651 Dongfeng East Road, Yuexiu District, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, 510060, People's Republic of China. wangjin1@sysucc.org.cn.
(2)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State 
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Cancer Medicine, No.651 Dongfeng East Road, Yuexiu District, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, 510060, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key 
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer 
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510060, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State 
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Cancer Medicine, No.651 Dongfeng East Road, Yuexiu District, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, 510060, People's Republic of China. xiexm@sysucc.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: Different breast cancer subtypes show distinct tropisms for sites of 
metastasis. Notably, the lung is the most common site for the first distant 
recurrence in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). The identification of novel 
biomarkers for lung metastasis is of great importance to improving the outcome 
of TNBC. In this study, we sought to identify a microRNA (miRNA)-based biomarker 
and therapeutic target for lung metastasis of TNBC.
METHODS: A total of 669 patients without de novo stage IV TNBC were recruited 
for this study. miRNA profiling was conducted in the discovery cohort. 
Diagnostic accuracy and prognostic values of candidate miRNAs were evaluated in 
the training and validation cohorts, respectively. The biological functions of 
candidate miRNAs, as well as potential targets, were further evaluated through 
bioinformatic analysis as well as by performing in vitro and in vivo assays.
RESULTS: In the discovery set, we found that miR-629-3p was specifically 
upregulated in both metastatic foci (fold change 144.16, P < 0.0001) and primary 
tumors (fold change 74.37, P = 0.004) in patients with lung metastases. In the 
training set, the ROC curve showed that miR-629-3p yielded high diagnostic 
accuracy in discriminating patients with lung metastasis from patients without 
recurrence (AUC 0.865, 95% CI 0.800-0.930, P < 0.0001). Although miR-629-3p 
predicted poor overall survival and disease-free survival in the validation set, 
it failed to show significance after multivariate analysis. Notably, logistic 
regression analyses confirmed that miR-629-3p was an independent risk factor for 
lung metastasis (OR 4.1, 95% CI 2.5-6.6, P < 0.001). Inhibition of miR-629-3p 
drastically attenuated the viability and migration of TNBC cells, and it 
markedly suppressed lung metastasis in vivo. Furthermore, we identified the 
leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR), a well-known metastatic suppressive 
gene, to be a direct target of miR-629-3p.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-629-3p may serve as a novel biomarker and potential therapeutic 
target for lung metastases of TNBC mediated via LIFR.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-017-0865-y
PMCID: PMC5477310
PMID: 28629464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]