1. PeerJ. 2017 Jun 13;5:e3284. doi: 10.7717/peerj.3284. eCollection 2017.

Seasonal shifts in accumulation of glycerol biosynthetic gene transcripts in 
mountain pine beetle, Dendroctonus ponderosae Hopkins (Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae), larvae.

Fraser JD(1), Bonnett TR(1), Keeling CI(2)(3), Huber DPW(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecosystem Science and Management Program, University of Northern British 
Columbia, Prince George, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.

Winter mortality is a major factor regulating population size of the mountain 
pine beetle, Dendroctonus ponderosae Hopkins (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). 
Glycerol is the major cryoprotectant in this freeze intolerant insect. We report 
findings from a gene expression study on an overwintering mountain pine beetle 
population over the course of 35 weeks. mRNA transcript levels suggest glycerol 
production in the mountain pine beetle occurs through glycogenolytic, 
gluconeogenic and potentially glyceroneogenic pathways, but not from metabolism 
of lipids. A two-week lag period between fall glycogen phosphorylase transcript 
and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase transcript up-regulation suggests that 
gluconeogenesis serves as a secondary glycerol-production process, subsequent to 
exhaustion of the primary glycogenolytic source. These results provide a first 
look at the details of seasonal gene expression related to the production of 
glycerol in the mountain pine beetle.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.3284
PMCID: PMC5472040
PMID: 28626604

Conflict of interest statement: Dezene P.W. Huber is an Academic Editor for 
PeerJ.