1. Toxins (Basel). 2017 Jun 21;9(6):195. doi: 10.3390/toxins9060195.

Virulence Genes of S. aureus from Dairy Cow Mastitis and Contagiousness Risk.

Magro G(1), Biffani S(2), Minozzi G(3), Ehricht R(4)(5), Monecke S(6)(7)(8), 
Luini M(9), Piccinini R(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via Celoria 10, 20133 
Milan, Italy. giada.magro@unimi.it.
(2)Italian Breeders Association (A.I.A.), via Tomassetti 9, 00161 Rome, Italy. 
ste.bif68@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via Celoria 10, 20133 
Milan, Italy. giulietta.minozzi@unimi.it.
(4)Alere Technologies GmbH, Löbstedter Str. 103-105, 07749 Jena, Germany. 
ralf@clondiag.com.
(5)InfectoGnostics Research Campus, Philosophenweg 7, 07743 Jena, Germany. 
ralf@clondiag.com.
(6)Alere Technologies GmbH, Löbstedter Str. 103-105, 07749 Jena, Germany. 
stefan.monecke@clondiag.com.
(7)InfectoGnostics Research Campus, Philosophenweg 7, 07743 Jena, Germany. 
stefan.monecke@clondiag.com.
(8)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene (IMMH), Technische Universität 
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, D-01307 Dresden, Germany. 
stefan.monecke@clondiag.com.
(9)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia 
Romagna-IZSLER, via Einstein, 26900 Lodi, Italy. mariovittorio.luini@izsler.it.
(10)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via Celoria 10, 
20133 Milan, Italy. renata.piccinini@unimi.it.

Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is a major agent of dairy cow intramammary 
infections: the different prevalences of mastitis reported might be related to a 
combination of S. aureus virulence factors beyond host factors. The present 
study considered 169 isolates from different Italian dairy herds that were 
classified into four groups based on the prevalence of S. aureus infection at 
the first testing: low prevalence (LP), medium-low (MLP), medium-high (MHP) and 
high (HP). We aimed to correlate the presence of virulence genes with the 
prevalence of intramammary infections in order to develop new strategies for the 
control of S. aureus mastitis. Microarray data were statistically evaluated 
using binary logistic regression and correspondence analysis to screen the risk 
factors and the relationship between prevalence group and gene. The analysis 
showed: (1) 24 genes at significant risk of being detected in all the herds with 
infection prevalence >5%, including genes belonging to microbial surface 
components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs), immune evasion and 
serine proteases; and (2) a significant correlation coefficient between the 
genes interacting with the host immune response and HP isolates against LP ones. 
These results support the hypothesis that virulence factors, in addition to cow 
management, could be related to strain contagiousness, offering new insights 
into vaccine development.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins9060195
PMCID: PMC5488045
PMID: 28635647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.