1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2017 Sep;25(9):1040-1048. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.98. Epub
2017  Jun 21.

Phenotypic extremes of BICD2-opathies: from lethal, congenital muscular atrophy 
with arthrogryposis to asymptomatic with subclinical features.

Storbeck M(1)(2)(3), Horsberg Eriksen B(4), Unger A(5), Hölker I(1)(2)(3), 
Aukrust I(6), Martínez-Carrera LA(1)(2)(3), Linke WA(5), Ferbert A(7), Heller 
R(1), Vorgerd M(8), Houge G(6), Wirth B(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, 
Germany.
(3)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Ålesund Hospital, Møre and Romsdal Hospital Trust, 
Ålesund, Norway.
(5)Department of Physiology, Ruhr University Bochum, Universitätsstr, Bochum, 
Germany.
(6)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Kassel, Kassel, Germany.
(8)Department of Neurology, Berufsgenossenschaftliches Universitätsklinikum 
Bergmannsheil, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.

Heterozygous variants in BICD cargo adapter 2 (BICD2) cause autosomal dominant 
spinal muscular atrophy, lower extremity-predominant 2 (SMALED2). The disease is 
usually characterized by a benign or slowly progressive, congenital or early 
onset muscle weakness and atrophy that mainly affects the lower extremities, 
although some affected individuals show involvement of the arms and the shoulder 
girdle. Here we report unusual extremes of BICD2-related diseases: A severe form 
of congenital muscular atrophy with arthrogryposis multiplex, respiratory 
insufficiency and lethality within four months. This was caused by three BICD2 
variants, (c.581A>G, p.(Gln194Arg)), (c.1626C>G, p.(Cys542Trp)) and (c.2080C>T, 
p.(Arg694Cys)), two of which were proven to be de novo. Affected individuals 
showed reduced fetal movement, weak muscle tone and sparse or no spontaneous 
activity after birth. Despite assisted ventilation, the condition led to early 
death. At the other extreme, we identified an asymptomatic woman with a known 
BICD2 variant (c.2108C>T, p.(Thr703Met)). Radiological examination showed fatty 
degeneration of selected thigh and calf muscles without clinical consequences. 
Instead, her son carrying the same variant is affected by a mild childhood onset 
disease with myopathic and neurogenic features. Mechanisms leading to variable 
expressivity and onset of BICD2-related disease may include alterations in 
molecular interactions of BICD2 and suggest the presence of genetic modifiers 
that may act in a protective fashion to ameliorate or abrogate disease. Our data 
define an additional severe disease type caused by BICD2 and emphasize a 
possibly variable etiology of BICD2-opathies with regard to primary muscle and 
neuronal involvement.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2017.98
PMCID: PMC5558181
PMID: 28635954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.