1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 21;8:15896. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15896.

Single-molecule analysis of steroid receptor and cofactor action in living 
cells.

Paakinaho V(1), Presman DM(1), Ball DA(1), Johnson TA(1), Schiltz RL(1), Levitt 
P(1), Mazza D(2), Morisaki T(1), Karpova TS(1), Hager GL(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 41, 41 Library Drive, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(2)Istituto Scientifico Ospedale San Raffaele, Centro di Imaging Sperimentale e 
Universit√† Vita-Salute San Raffaele, 20132 Milano, Italy.

Population-based assays have been employed extensively to investigate the 
interactions of transcription factors (TFs) with chromatin and are often 
interpreted in terms of static and sequential binding. However, fluorescence 
microscopy techniques reveal a more dynamic binding behaviour of TFs in live 
cells. Here we analyse the strengths and limitations of in vivo single-molecule 
tracking and performed a comprehensive analysis on the intranuclear dwell times 
of four steroid receptors and a number of known cofactors. While the absolute 
residence times estimates can depend on imaging acquisition parameters due to 
sampling bias, our results indicate that only a small proportion of factors are 
specifically bound to chromatin at any given time. Interestingly, the 
glucocorticoid receptor and its cofactors affect each other's dwell times in an 
asymmetric manner. Overall, our data indicate transient rather than stable 
TF-cofactors chromatin interactions at response elements at the single-molecule 
level.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15896
PMCID: PMC5482060
PMID: 28635963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.