1. Int J Mol Sci. 2017 Jun 20;18(6):1313. doi: 10.3390/ijms18061313.

Soluble (Pro)renin Receptor and Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome: Oxidative 
Stress in Brain?

Takahashi K(1), Ohba K(2), Tajima K(3), Nishijima T(4), Sakurai S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Applied Medical Science, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. 
ktaka-md@med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Applied Medical Science, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. 
k-ohba@med.tohoku.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Applied Medical Science, Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. 
tajikazu1991@yahoo.co.jp.
(4)Division of Behavioral Sleep Medicine, Iwate Medical University School of 
Medicine, Morioka, Iwate 020-0850, Japan. tsuguo@iwate-med.ac.jp.
(5)Division of Behavioral Sleep Medicine, Iwate Medical University School of 
Medicine, Morioka, Iwate 020-0850, Japan. ssakurai@iwate-med.ac.jp.

(Pro)renin receptor ((P)RR) is a multi-functional molecule that is related to 
both the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) and vacuolar H‚Å∫-ATPase (v-ATPase), an 
ATP-dependent multi-subunit proton pump. Soluble (P)RR (s(P)RR), which consists 
of the extracellular domain of (P)RR, is present in blood and urine. Elevated 
plasma s(P)RR concentrations are reported in patients with chronic kidney 
disease and pregnant women with hypertension or diabetes mellitus. In addition, 
we have shown that plasma s(P)RR concentrations are elevated in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Interestingly, the levels are elevated 
in parallel with the severity of OSAS, but are not related to the presence of 
hypertension or the status of the circulating RAS in OSAS. It is known that 
v-ATPase activity protects cells from endogenous oxidative stress, and loss of 
v-ATPase activity results in chronic oxidative stress. We hypothesize that 
hypoxia and subsequent oxidative stress, perhaps in the brain, may be one of the 
factors that elevate plasma s(P)RR levels in OSAS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms18061313
PMCID: PMC5486134
PMID: 28632190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.