1. Nat Commun. 2017 Jun 20;8:15828. doi: 10.1038/ncomms15828.

Construction of a synthetic metabolic pathway for biosynthesis of the 
non-natural methionine precursor 2,4-dihydroxybutyric acid.

Walther T(1)(2), Topham CM(1), Irague R(1), Auriol C(1)(2), Baylac A(1), Cordier 
H(2), Dressaire C(1)(2), Lozano-Huguet L(1), Tarrat N(1), Martineau N(1)(3), 
Stodel M(1), Malbert Y(1)(2), Maestracci M(3), Huet R(3), André I(1)(2), 
Remaud-Siméon M(1)(2), François JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)LISBP, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRA, INSA, Toulouse, France, 135 Avenue 
de Rangueil, F-31077 Toulouse, France.
(2)TWB, 3 rue des Satellites, Canal Biotech Building 2, Toulouse F-31400, 
France.
(3)Adisseo SA, Antony Parc II, 10 Place General de Gaulle, Antony F-92160, 
France.

2,4-Dihydroxybutyric acid (DHB) is a molecule with considerable potential as a 
versatile chemical synthon. Notably, it may serve as a precursor for chemical 
synthesis of the methionine analogue 2-hydroxy-4-(methylthio)butyrate, thus, 
targeting a considerable market in animal nutrition. However, no natural 
metabolic pathway exists for the biosynthesis of DHB. Here we have therefore 
conceived a three-step metabolic pathway for the synthesis of DHB starting from 
the natural metabolite malate. The pathway employs previously unreported malate 
kinase, malate semialdehyde dehydrogenase and malate semialdehyde reductase 
activities. The kinase and semialdehyde dehydrogenase activities were obtained 
by rational design based on structural and mechanistic knowledge of candidate 
enzymes acting on sterically cognate substrates. Malate semialdehyde reductase 
activity was identified from an initial screening of several natural enzymes, 
and was further improved by rational design. The pathway was expressed in a 
minimally engineered Escherichia coli strain and produces 1.8 g l-1 DHB with a 
molar yield of 0.15.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms15828
PMCID: PMC5481828
PMID: 28631755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.M. and R.H. are employees of the ADISSEO 
Company that provides financial support to this study. T.W., C.D., H.C. and 
J.M.F. are coauthors on a patent based upon this work WO2013/160762A2 (2013). In 
addition, T.W., C.M.T., M.M., R.H., I.A., M.R.-S. & J.M.F. are coauthors of a 
patent that described the present work WO2012/056318A1, that has been granted 
January 19th, 2016 as US 9,238,829 B2. All remaining authors declare no 
competing financial interests.