1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;983:147-157. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-4310-9_10.

Repurposing CRISPR System for Transcriptional Activation.

Chen M(1)(2), Qi LS(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(2)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA. 
stanley.qi@stanford.edu.
(4)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, 94305, USA. stanley.qi@stanford.edu.
(5)ChEM-H, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA. 
stanley.qi@stanford.edu.

In recent years, Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats 
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) system has become the most popular 
one for genome editing. When the nuclease domains of Cas9 protein are mutated 
into deactivated form (dCas9), CRISPR/dCas9 still retains the ability to bind 
the targeted DNA sequence, but loses the endonuclease cleavage activity. Taking 
advantage of the characteristics of this engineered nuclease inactive Cas9, the 
CRISPR/dCas system has been repurposed into versatile RNA-guided, DNA-targeting 
platforms, such as genome imaging, gene regulation, and epigenetic modification. 
Specifically, fusion of dCas9 with activation domains allows specific and 
efficient transcriptional activation on a genome-wide scale among diverse 
organisms. The purpose of this chapter is to review most important the recently 
published literature on CRISPR/dCas9-based transcriptional activation systems. 
Compared with the conventional approaches for enhancement of the expression of 
specific genes of interest, CRISPR/Cas9-based system has emerged as a promising 
technology for genome regulation, allowing specificity, convenience, robustness, 
and scalability for endogenous gene activation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-4310-9_10
PMCID: PMC10211423
PMID: 28639197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]