1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2017 Aug 8;13(8):3881-3897. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00071.  Epub 2017 Jul 11.

A New Mixed All-Atom/Coarse-Grained Model: Application to Melittin Aggregation 
in Aqueous Solution.

Shelley MY(1), Selvan ME(2), Zhao J(3), Babin V(1), Liao C(4), Li J(4), Shelley 
JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Schrödinger, Inc. , 101 SW Main Street, Suite 1300, Portland, Oregon 97204, 
United States.
(2)Schrödinger, Inc. , 120 W. 45th Street, 17th Floor, New York, New York 10036, 
United States.
(3)Cancer and Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute , Frederick, 
Maryland 21702, United States.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Vermont , Burlington, Vermont 05405, 
United States.

We introduce a new mixed resolution, all-atom/coarse-grained approach (AACG), 
for modeling peptides in aqueous solution and apply it to characterizing the 
aggregation of melittin. All of the atoms in peptidic components are 
represented, while a single site is used for each water molecule. With the full 
flexibility of the peptide retained, our AACG method achieves speedups by a 
factor of 3-4 for CPU time reduction and another factor of roughly 7 for 
diffusion. An Ewald treatment permits the inclusion of long-range electrostatic 
interactions. These characteristics fit well with the requirements for studying 
peptide association and aggregation, where the system sizes and time scales 
require considerable computational resources with all-atom models. In 
particular, AACG is well suited for biologics since changes in peptide shape and 
long-range electrostatics may play an important role. The application of AACG to 
melittin, a 26-residue peptide with a well-known propensity to aggregate in 
solution, serves as an initial demonstration of this technology for studying 
peptide aggregation. We observed the formation of melittin aggregates during our 
simulations and characterized the time-evolution of aggregate size distribution, 
buried surface areas, and residue contacts. Key interactions including π-cation 
and π-stacking involving TRP19 were also examined. Our AACG simulations 
demonstrated a clear salt effect and a moderate temperature effect on 
aggregation and support the molten globule model of melittin aggregates. As a 
showcase, this work illustrates the useful role for AACG in investigations of 
peptide aggregation and its potential to guide formulation and design of 
biologics.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00071
PMCID: PMC5551643
PMID: 28636825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following competing 
financial interest(s): Desmond is a product sold to commercial entities by 
Schrödinger, LLC. Mee Shelley, Myvizhi Esai Selvan, Volodymyr Babin, and John 
Shelley performed this research as Schrödinger Employees.