1. New Phytol. 2017 Sep;215(4):1533-1547. doi: 10.1111/nph.14638. Epub 2017 Jun
26.

Regulation of growth-defense balance by the JASMONATE ZIM-DOMAIN (JAZ)-MYC 
transcriptional module.

Major IT(1), Yoshida Y(1), Campos ML(1), Kapali G(1), Xin XF(1), Sugimoto K(1), 
de Oliveira Ferreira D(1), He SY(1)(2)(3)(4), Howe GA(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Energy-Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
48824, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
48824, USA.
(4)Plant Resilience Institute, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
42284, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, 48824, USA.

Comment in
    New Phytol. 2017 Sep;215(4):1291-1294. doi: 10.1111/nph.14720.

The plant hormone jasmonate (JA) promotes the degradation of JASMONATE 
ZIM-DOMAIN (JAZ) proteins to relieve repression on diverse transcription factors 
(TFs) that execute JA responses. However, little is known about how 
combinatorial complexity among JAZ-TF interactions maintains control over myriad 
aspects of growth, development, reproduction, and immunity. We used 
loss-of-function mutations to define epistatic interactions within the core JA 
signaling pathway and to investigate the contribution of MYC TFs to JA responses 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Constitutive JA signaling in a jaz quintuple mutant 
(jazQ) was largely eliminated by mutations that block JA synthesis or 
perception. Comparison of jazQ and a jazQ myc2 myc3 myc4 octuple mutant 
validated known functions of MYC2/3/4 in root growth, chlorophyll degradation, 
and susceptibility to the pathogen Pseudomonas syringae. We found that MYC TFs 
also control both the enhanced resistance of jazQ leaves to insect herbivory and 
restricted leaf growth of jazQ. Epistatic transcriptional profiles mirrored 
these phenotypes and further showed that triterpenoid biosynthetic and 
glucosinolate catabolic genes are up-regulated in jazQ independently of MYC TFs. 
Our study highlights the utility of genetic epistasis to unravel the 
complexities of JAZ-TF interactions and demonstrates that MYC TFs exert master 
control over a JAZ-repressible transcriptional hierarchy that governs 
growth-defense balance.

© 2017 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2017 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.14638
PMCID: PMC5542871
PMID: 28649719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]