1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 22;12(6):e0179997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179997. 
eCollection 2017.

Physiological and genomic features of a novel violacein-producing bacterium 
isolated from surface seawater.

Wu YH(1), Cheng H(1), Xu L(1), Jin XB(1), Wang CS(1), Xu XW(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Ecosystem and Biogeochemistry, Second Institute of 
Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Hangzhou, P. R. China.

Strains JW1T and JW3, isolated from surface seawater of the Arabian Sea, were 
subjected to polyphasic taxonomic analysis. Cells of both strains were 
Gram-stain-negative, aerobic, and rod-shaped. They formed violet pigment and 
produced violacein. On the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis, strains 
JW1T and JW3 showed high 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity with 
Pseudoalteromonas byunsanensis JCM12483T (98.2%), P. shioyasakiensis SE3T 
(97.8%), P. arabiensis JCM 17292T (97.3%), and P. gelatinilytica NH153T (97.1%). 
The 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity between JW1T and JW3 was 100%. 
Phylogenetic analyses revealed that both strains fell within the cluster of the 
genus Pseudoalteromonas and represented an independent lineage. The average 
nucleotide identity and in silico DNA-DNA hybridization values between JW1T and 
type strains of the closely related Pseudoalteromonas species were 70.9-83.3% 
and 20.0-26.4%, respectively. The sole respiratory quinone in both strains is 
ubiquinone 8 (Q-8). The principal fatty acids are summed feature 3 (C16:1ω7c 
and/or iso-C15:0 2OH), C18:1ω7c, and C16:0. The major polar lipids are 
phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylglycerol, one unidentified glycolipid, one 
unidentified aminolipid, and one unidentified phospholipid. The DNA G+C content 
was 43.3 mol%. Differential phylogenetic distinctiveness, chemotaxonomic 
differences, and phenotypic properties indicated that strains JW1T and JW3 could 
be differentiated from the Pseudoalteromonas species with validly published 
names. Therefore, it is proposed that strains JW1T and JW3 represent a novel 
species of the genus Pseudoalteromonas, for which the name Pseudoalteromonas 
amylolytica sp. nov. (type strain, JW1T = CGMCC 1.15681T = KCTC 52406T = MCCC 
1K02162T) is proposed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179997
PMCID: PMC5481030
PMID: 28640915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.