1. Front Plant Sci. 2017 Jun 13;8:974. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00974. eCollection 
2017.

SUMO-Dependent Synergism Involving Heat Shock Transcription Factors with 
Functions Linked to Seed Longevity and Desiccation Tolerance.

Carranco R(1), Prieto-Dapena P(1), Almoguera C(1), Jordano J(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología Vegetal, Instituto de Recursos Naturales y 
Agrobiología de Sevilla, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones CientíficasSeville, 
Spain.

A transcriptional synergism between HaHSFA9 (A9) and HaHSFA4a (A4a) contributes 
to determining longevity and desiccation tolerance of sunflower (Helianthus 
annuus, L.) seeds. Potential lysine SUMOylation sites were identified in A9 and 
A4a and mutated to arginine. We show that A9 is SUMOylated in planta at K38. 
Although we did not directly detect SUMOylated A4a in planta, we provide 
indirect evidence from transient expression experiments indicating that A4a is 
SUMOylated at K172. Different combinations of wild type and SUMOylation site 
mutants of A9 and A4a were analyzed by transient expression in sunflower embryos 
and leaves. Although most of the precedents in literature link SUMOylation with 
repression, the A9 and A4a synergism was fully abolished when the mutant forms 
for both factors were combined. However, the combination of mutant forms of A9 
and A4a did not affect the nuclear retention of A4a by A9; therefore, the 
analyzed mutations would affect the synergism after the mutual interaction and 
nuclear co-localization of A9 and A4a. Our results suggest a role for HSF 
SUMOylation during late, zygotic, embryogenesis. The SUMOylation of A9 (or A4a) 
would allow a crucial, synergic, transcriptional effect that occurs in maturing 
sunflower seeds.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.00974
PMCID: PMC5468958
PMID: 28659940