1. Gene. 2017 Sep 5;627:363-368. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.06.047. Epub 2017 Jun
23.

Genetic variation in bitter taste receptor gene TAS2R38, PROP taster status and 
their association with body mass index and food preferences in Indian 
population.

Deshaware S(1), Singhal R(2).

Author information:
(1)Food Engineering and Technology Department, Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Nathalal Parekh Marg, Matunga, Mumbai 400019, India. Electronic address: 
ft12sr.deshaware@pg.ictmumbai.edu.in.
(2)Food Engineering and Technology Department, Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Nathalal Parekh Marg, Matunga, Mumbai 400019, India. Electronic address: 
rs.singhal@ictmumbai.edu.in.

Polymorphisms in bitter taste receptor gene TAS2R38 alter the ability to sense 
the intensity of bitterness of phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 
6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP). Genetic variation in sensitivity towards PTC and 
PROP may affect food preferences and susceptibility to certain diseases. This is 
the first study aimed at investigating frequency and distribution of TAS2R38 
haplotypes in an Indian cohort. Additionally, we studied the association of 
TAS2R38 and PROP taster status with BMI and food preference. Three hundred and 
ninety three healthy adults who were 19-55years of age were selected as a 
convenience sample from 4 geographical regions of India. Single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) of TAS2R38 (rs713598, s1726866 and rs10246939) were 
analyzed using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. The prevalence of PAV/PAV diplotype was 9.9% and that of AVI/AVI 
diplotype was 43.76% among this Indian population. PROP status was determined on 
the basis of its threshold concentration of detecting bitterness, as evaluated 
by one-solution test. The PROP status revealed 25.95% supertasters, 32.06% 
medium tasters and 41.98% non-tasters (NT). BMI neither significantly (p>0.05) 
correlated with TAS2R38 genotypes nor with PROP taster status. Food preferences 
did not significantly (p>0.05) correlate with TAS2R38 diplotypes or PROP 
phenotypes.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.06.047
PMID: 28652185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]