1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Aug;16(2):1817-1825. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6803. Epub 2017
Jun  19.

Investigation of highly expressed PCSK9 in atherosclerotic plaques and 
ox-LDL-induced endothelial cell apoptosis.

Li J(1), Liang X(1), Wang Y(1), Xu Z(1), Li G(1).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Ionic‑Molecular Function of Cardiovascular Disease, 
Department of Cardiology, Tianjin Institute of Cardiology, The Second Hospital 
of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300211, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to explore the direct toxicity of proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) to atherosclerosis (AS) and its association with 
apoptotic endothelial cells. Apolipoprotein E‑/‑ mice were randomly divided into 
two groups, control and experimental. The control group was administered a 
normal diet and the experimental group was administered a high‑fat diet. After 
20 weeks, the aorta was isolated and dissected. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, 
and immunohistochemical analysis were performed. Human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells were incubated with varied concentrations of oxidized 
low‑density lipoprotein (ox‑LDL) for different times. The apoptotic rate was 
detected by flow cytometry. Western blotting and reverse 
transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis were conducted to 
detect the expression of PCSK9, B‑cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl‑2), bcl‑2‑like protein 4 
(Bax) and caspase-3. Short hairpin (sh) RNA‑PCSK9 was transfected into 
endothelial cells using lentiviral transfection. The expression levels of PCSK9, 
Bax, Bcl‑2, caspase-3 and the mitogen‑activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway 
proteins were detected. The high‑fat group was successfully established as an AS 
model and PCSK9 was highly expressed in the AS plaque. Treatment with ox‑LDL 
induced apoptosis and increased mRNA and protein levels of PCSK9. PCSK9 mRNA and 
proteins levels were downregulated by shRNA‑PCSK9. The deficiency of PCSK9 
markedly inhibited the expression of pro‑apoptotic proteins and promoted 
anti‑apoptotic proteins. In addition, phosphorylation of p38 and c‑Jun 
N‑terminal kinases was altered by shRNA‑PCSK9. Targeting of PCSK9 by shRNA‑PCSK9 
may repress endothelial cell apoptosis through MAPK signaling in AS, providing a 
novel direction for understanding the mechanism and treatment of AS.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6803
PMCID: PMC5561783
PMID: 28656218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]