1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 29;12(6):e0179944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179944. 
eCollection 2017.

Abscisic acid pathway involved in the regulation of watermelon fruit ripening 
and quality trait evolution.

Wang Y(1), Guo S(1), Tian S(1), Zhang J(1), Ren Y(1), Sun H(1), Gong G(1), Zhang 
H(1), Xu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Research Center for Vegetables, Beijing Academy of 
Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic 
Improvement of Horticultural Crops (North China), Beijing Key Laboratory of 
Vegetable Germplasm Improvement, Beijing, China.

Watermelon (Citrullus lanatus (Thunb.) Matsum. & Nakai) is a non-climacteric 
fruit. The modern sweet-dessert watermelon is the result of years of cultivation 
and selection for fruits with desirable qualities. To date, the mechanisms of 
watermelon fruit ripening, and the role of abscisic acid (ABA) in this process, 
has not been well understood. We quantified levels of free and conjugated ABA 
contents in the fruits of cultivated watermelon (97103; C. lanatus subsp. 
vulgaris), semi-wild germplasm (PI179878; C. lanatus subsp. mucosospermus), and 
wild germplasm (PI296341-FR; C. lanatus subsp. lanatus). Results showed that ABA 
content in the fruits of 97103 and PI179878 increased during fruit development 
and ripening, but maintained a low steady state in the center flesh of 
PI296341-FR fruits. ABA levels in fruits were highest in 97103 and lowest in 
PI296341-FR, but no obvious differences in ABA levels were observed in seeds of 
these lines. Examination of 31 representative watermelon accessions, including 
different C. lanatus subspecies and ancestral species, showed a correlation 
between soluble solids content (SSC) and ABA levels in ripening fruits. 
Furthermore, injection of exogenous ABA or nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA) into 
97103 fruits promoted or inhibited ripening, respectively. Transcriptomic 
analyses showed that the expression levels of several genes involved in ABA 
metabolism and signaling, including Cla009779 (NCED), Cla005404 (NCED), 
Cla020673 (CYP707A), Cla006655 (UGT) and Cla020180 (SnRK2), varied significantly 
in cultivated and wild watermelon center flesh. Three SNPs (-738, C/A; -1681, 
C/T; -1832, G/T) in the promoter region of Cla020673 (CYP707A) and one single 
SNP (-701, G/A) in the promoter of Cla020180 (SnRK2) exhibited a high level of 
correlation with SSC variation in the 100 tested accessions. Our results not 
only demonstrate for the first time that ABA is involved in the regulation of 
watermelon fruit ripening, but also provide insights into the evolutionary 
mechanisms of this phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179944
PMCID: PMC5491074
PMID: 28662086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.