1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 29;7(1):4369. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-04703-8.

Detachment and successive re-attachment of multiple, reversibly-binding tethers 
result in irreversible bacterial adhesion to surfaces.

Sjollema J(1), van der Mei HC(2), Hall CL(3), Peterson BW(1), de Vries J(1), 
Song L(1), Jong ED(1), Busscher HJ(1), Swartjes JJTM(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. h.c.van.der.mei@umcg.nl.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The College of New Jersey, Armstong 
Hall, Room 181, P. O. Box 7718, The College of New Jersey, Ewing, NJ, 08628, 
USA.

Bacterial adhesion to surfaces occurs ubiquitously and is initially reversible, 
though becoming more irreversible within minutes after first contact with a 
surface. We here demonstrate for eight bacterial strains comprising four 
species, that bacteria adhere irreversibly to surfaces through multiple, 
reversibly-binding tethers that detach and successively re-attach, but not 
collectively detach to cause detachment of an entire bacterium. Arguments build 
on combining analyses of confined Brownian-motion of bacteria adhering to glass 
and their AFM force-distance curves and include the following observations: (1) 
force-distance curves showed detachment events indicative of multiple binding 
tethers, (2) vibration amplitudes of adhering bacteria parallel to a surface 
decreased with increasing adhesion-forces acting perpendicular to the surface, 
(3) nanoscopic displacements of bacteria with relatively long autocorrelation 
times up to several seconds, in absence of microscopic displacement, (4) 
increases in Mean-Squared-Displacement over prolonged time periods according to 
tα with 0 < α ≪ 1, indicative of confined displacement. Analysis of simulated 
position-maps of adhering particles using a new, in silico model confirmed that 
adhesion to surfaces is irreversible through detachment and successive 
re-attachment of reversibly-binding tethers. This makes bacterial adhesion 
mechanistically comparable with the irreversible adsorption of 
high-molecular-weight proteins to surfaces, mediated by multiple, 
reversibly-binding molecular segments.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-04703-8
PMCID: PMC5491521
PMID: 28663565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.