1. PLoS One. 2017 Jun 29;12(6):e0179456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179456. 
eCollection 2017.

DPAGT1-CDG: Functional analysis of disease-causing pathogenic mutations and role 
of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Yuste-Checa P(1)(2)(3), Vega AI(1)(2)(3), Martín-Higueras C(1)(2)(3), Medrano 
C(1)(2)(3), Gámez A(1)(2)(3), Desviat LR(1)(2)(3), Ugarte M(1)(2)(3), 
Pérez-Cerdá C(1)(2)(3), Pérez B(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología 
Molecular-SO UAM-CSIC, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Campus de Cantoblanco, 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, 
Spain.

Pathogenic mutations in DPAGT1 are manifested as two possible phenotypes: 
congenital disorder of glycosylation DPAGT1-CDG (also known as CDG-Ij), and 
limb-girdle congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) with tubular aggregates. 
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine-dolichyl-phosphate N-acetylglucosamine 
phosphotransferase (GPT), the protein encoded by DPAGT1, is an endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER)-resident protein involved in an initial step in the 
N-glycosylation pathway. The aim of the present study was to examine the effect 
of six variants in DPAGT1 detected in patients with DPAGT1-CDG, and the role of 
endoplasmic reticulum stress, as part of the search for therapeutic strategies 
to use against DPAGT1-CDG. The effect of the six mutations, i.e., c.358C>A 
(p.Leu120Met), c.791T>G (p.Val264Gly), c.901C>T (p.Arg301Cys), c.902G>A 
(p.Arg301His), c.1154T>G (p.Leu385Arg), and of the novel mutation c.329T>C 
(p.Phe110Ser), were examined via the analysis of DPAGT1 transcriptional profiles 
and GTP levels in patient-derived fibroblasts. In addition, the transient 
expression of different mutations was analysed in COS-7 cells. The results 
obtained, together with those of bioinformatic studies, revealed these mutations 
to affect the splicing process, the stability of GTP, or the ability of this 
protein to correctly localise in the ER membrane. The unfolded protein response 
(UPR; the response to ER stress) was found not to be active in patient-derived 
fibroblasts, unlike that seen in cells from patients with PMM2-CDG or DPM1-CDG. 
Even so, the fibroblasts of patients with DPAGT1-CDG seemed to be more sensitive 
to the stressor tunicamycin. The present work improves our knowledge of 
DPAGT1-CDG and provides bases for developing tailored splicing and folding 
therapies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179456
PMCID: PMC5491010
PMID: 28662078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.