1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2017 Jun 1;8:55. doi: 10.1186/s40104-017-0180-6. 
eCollection 2017.

Fluoroacetate in plants - a review of its distribution, toxicity to livestock 
and microbial detoxification.

Leong LEX(#)(1), Khan S(#)(2), Davis CK(1), Denman SE(3), McSweeney CS(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St 
Lucia, 4072 QLD Australia.
(2)School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, St Lucia, 
4072 QLD Australia.
(3)CSIRO Agriculture and Food, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St Lucia, 4072 
QLD Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

Fluoroacetate producing plants grow worldwide and it is believed they produce 
this toxic compound as a defence mechanism against grazing by herbivores. 
Ingestion by livestock often results in fatal poisonings, which causes 
significant economic problems to commercial farmers in many countries such as 
Australia, Brazil and South Africa. Several approaches have been adopted to 
protect livestock from the toxicity with limited success including fencing, 
toxic plant eradication and agents that bind the toxin. Genetically modified 
bacteria capable of degrading fluoroacetate have been able to protect ruminants 
from fluoroacetate toxicity under experimental conditions but concerns over the 
release of these microbes into the environment have prevented the application of 
this technology. Recently, a native bacterium from an Australian bovine rumen 
was isolated which can degrade fluoroacetate. This bacterium, strain MFA1, which 
belongs to the Synergistetes phylum degrades fluoroacetate to fluoride ions and 
acetate. The discovery and isolation of this bacterium provides a new 
opportunity to detoxify fluoroacetate in the rumen. This review focuses on 
fluoroacetate toxicity in ruminant livestock, the mechanism of fluoroacetate 
toxicity, tolerance of some animals to fluoroaceate, previous attempts to 
mitigate toxicity, aerobic and anaerobic microbial degradation of fluoroacetate, 
and future directions to overcome fluoroacetate toxicity.

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-017-0180-6
PMCID: PMC5485738
PMID: 28674607