1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2017 Sep;1863(9):2355-2362. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.06.022. Epub 2017 Jun 30.

High glucose-induced p53 phosphorylation contributes to impairment of 
endothelial antioxidant system.

Wu Y(1), Lee S(1), Bobadilla S(1), Duan SZ(2), Liu X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, 
United States.
(2)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional 
Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, 
United States. Electronic address: xuan.liu@ucr.edu.

High levels of glucose (HG) induce reactive oxygen species-mediated oxidative 
stress in endothelial cells (ECs), which leads to endothelial dysfunction and 
tissue damage. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in HG-induced 
endothelial oxidative stress and damage remain elusive. Here we show that 
cellular ATP level-modulated p53 Thr55 phosphorylation plays a critical role in 
the process. Upon HG exposure, the elevated ATP levels induced the kinase 
activity of TAF1 (TBP-associated factor 1), which leads to p53 Thr55 
phosphorylation. The phosphorylation dissociates p53 from the glutathione 
peroxidase 1 (GPX1) promoter and results in reduction of GPX1 expression. 
Inhibition of TAF1-mediated p53 Thr55 phosphorylation abolished those events, 
supporting the role of TAF1 in sensing cellular ATP elevation and in regulating 
GPX1 expression under the HG condition. Importantly, treating cells with HG 
increased intracellular H2O2 and cell apoptosis, as well as suppressed nitric 
oxide (NO) bioavailability and tube network formation. These effects were also 
remarkably reversed by inhibition of TAF1 and p53 Thr55 phosphorylation. We 
conclude that HG leads to endothelial dysfunction via TAF1-mediated p53 Thr55 
phosphorylation and subsequent GPX1 inactivation. Our study thus revealed a 
novel mechanism by which HG induces endothelial oxidative stress and damage and 
possibly provided an avenue for targeted therapy for diabetes-associated 
cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2017.06.022
PMCID: PMC5939960
PMID: 28673515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]