1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2017 Jul 3;50(7):e6071. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20176071.

Identification of IgE and IgG1 specific antigens in Echinococcus granulosus cyst 
fluid.

Li S(1)(2), Qian R(2), Wang S(3), Ye J(1), Zheng H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical 
University, Urumqi, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, General Hospital, Xinjiang Command PLA, Urumqi, 
China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical College of Xinjiang Medical 
University, Urumqi, China.

Cystic echinococcosis (CE) is an anthropozoonotic disease with worldwide 
distribution and is caused by the cestode Echinococcus granulosus. Anaphylactic 
shock induced by CE rupture is a serious complication especially in patients 
with hydatid infections, as the resulting leakage of fluid contains highly toxic 
endogenous antigen. We aimed to isolate and identify the antigens of specific 
IgE and IgG1 (sIgE and sIgG1) in E. granulosus cyst fluid (EgCF). Crude antigen 
for EgCF was prepared from E. granulosus-infected sheep liver. Antigens were 
separated and identified by one-dimensional sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE), two-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis (2-DE), and immunoblotting. Results of 1D SDS-PAGE and 
immunoblotting showed that 40.5 kDa protein was the major antigen of sIgE, and 
35.5 kDa protein was the major antigen of sIgG1 in EgCF. Results of 2-DE and 
immunoblotting showed that main antigens of sIgE in EgCF were four proteins with 
pI values ranging from 6.5 to 9.0 and a molecular weight of 40.5 kDa. Main 
antigens of sIgG1 in EgCF were five proteins with pI values ranging from 6.5 to 
9.0 and a molecular weight of 35.5 kDa. The antigens identified for sIgE and 
sIgG1 can provide critical insights into cellular and molecular mechanisms 
underlying anaphylactic shock induced by CE.

DOI: 10.1590/1414-431X20176071
PMCID: PMC5496158
PMID: 28678921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]