1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2017 Jun 19;10:191. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00191. 
eCollection 2017.

The Pathophysiological Role of Microglia in Dynamic Surveillance, Phagocytosis 
and Structural Remodeling of the Developing CNS.

Arcuri C(1), Mecca C(1), Bianchi R(1), Giambanco I(1), Donato R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Centro Universitario per la Ricerca 
sulla Genomica Funzionale, Perugia Medical School, University of PerugiaPerugia, 
Italy.

In vertebrates, during an early wave of hematopoiesis in the yolk sac between 
embryonic day E7.0 and E9.0, cells of mesodermal leaflet addressed to macrophage 
lineage enter in developing central nervous system (CNS) and originate the 
developing native microglial cells. Depending on the species, microglial cells 
represent 5-20% of glial cells resident in adult brain. Here, we briefly discuss 
some canonical functions of the microglia, i.e., cytokine secretion and 
functional transition from M1 to M2 phenotype. In addition, we review studies on 
the non-canonical functions of microglia such as regulation of phagocytosis, 
synaptic pruning, and sculpting postnatal neural circuits. In this latter 
context the contribution of microglia to some neurodevelopmental disorders is 
now well established. Nasu-Hakola (NHD) disease is considered a primary 
microgliopathy with alterations of the DNAX activation protein 12 
(DAP12)-Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM-2) signaling and 
removal of macromolecules and apoptotic cells followed by secondary microglia 
activation. In Rett syndrome Mecp2-/- microglia shows a substantial impairment 
of phagocytic ability, although the role of microglia is not yet clear. In a 
mouse model of Tourette syndrome (TS), microglia abnormalities have also been 
described, and deficient microglia-mediated neuroprotection is obvious. Here we 
review the role of microglial cells in neurodevelopmental disorders without 
inflammation and on the complex role of microglia in developing CNS.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00191
PMCID: PMC5474494
PMID: 28674485