1. Mol Clin Oncol. 2017 Jul;7(1):27-31. doi: 10.3892/mco.2017.1272. Epub 2017 May
 29.

Pilot study of sirolimus in patients with PIK3CA mutant/amplified refractory 
solid cancer.

Jung KS(1), Lee J(1), Park SH(1), Park JO(1), Park YS(1), Lim HY(1), Kang WK(1), 
Kim ST(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical 
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul 06351, Republic of 
Korea.

In patients with refractory cancer, the effect of additional chemotherapy is 
very limited. Targeted agents for molecular pathways associated with cancer cell 
progression and survival have emerged as attractive options in several cancer 
types. The current pilot study assessed the efficacy and safety of sirolimus in 
patients with refractory cancer with PIK3CA mutation/amplification. Refractory 
cancer patients with PIK3CA mutation/amplification were enrolled, irrespective 
of tumor-types. Enrolled patients received a daily dose of 1 mg sirolimus and 
one cycle defined as 28 days. An assessment of the efficacy and safety of 
sirolimus was performed. Overall, 4 patients were enrolled between October 2014 
and April 2015. The median of 2.5 cycles of sirolimus was administered. Three 
patients had advanced gastric cancer and one had advanced cholangiocarcinoma. 
The overall response rate was 0%, three patients (75%) had stable disease 
following one cycle and one patient (25%) received sirolimus for 4 cycles 
without disease progression. The median progression free survival was 1.9 months 
[95% confidence interval (CI), 0.3-3.5 months], and the median overall survival 
was 3.6 months (95% CI, 0.4-6.8 months). Grade 3 or greater 
hematologic/non-hematologic toxicity was not observed. Grade 1 nausea was 
reported in one patient each. There were no treatment-associated mortalities. 
Sirolimus had modest efficacy and a tolerable toxicity-profile in patients with 
refractory cancer with PIK3CA mutation/amplification.

DOI: 10.3892/mco.2017.1272
PMCID: PMC5492817
PMID: 28685070