1. Immunogenetics. 2017 Aug;69(8-9):597-603. doi: 10.1007/s00251-017-0987-5. Epub
 2017 Jul 11.

HLA class II and rheumatoid arthritis: the bumpy road of revelation.

Kampstra ASB(1), Toes REM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 
2300RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. a.s.b.kampstra@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 
2300RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic auto-immune disease primarily targeting 
the joints. Approximately 1% of the population is affected by RA, and despite 
the improvements in therapeutic interventions, elucidation of the disease 
pathogenesis is still in its infancy. RA patients can be subdivided on basis of 
the presence of autoantibodies, especially anti-citrullinated protein antibodies 
(ACPA). ACPA+ and ACPA- disease most likely differ in aetiology, as different 
genetic and environmental risk factors are associated with these two disease 
entities. For ACPA+ RA disease, the genetic factors associating with disease 
mainly comprised of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II molecules. The 
predisposing HLA-DR alleles have been depicted as the 'HLA Shared Epitope (SE) 
alleles', as these alleles encode a similar sequence, the shared epitope 
sequence, within the beta chain of the HLA-DR molecule. In addition to the 
involvement of the HLA-SE alleles in the development of ACPA+ RA disease, other 
HLA-DR molecules have been shown to confer protection against this disease 
entity. The protective HLA molecules have, instead of the SE-motif, a different 
but shared sequence at the same location in the beta chain of HLA-DR molecules, 
consisting of the amino acid residues DERAA. The possible contributions of the 
predisposing and protective HLA molecules in association with ACPA-positive RA 
are discussed in this review.

DOI: 10.1007/s00251-017-0987-5
PMCID: PMC5537318
PMID: 28695293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]