1. Chem Sci. 2015 Mar 1;6(3):1770-1779. doi: 10.1039/c4sc02340d. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Protein ubiquitination and formation of polyubiquitin chains without ATP, E1 and 
E2 enzymes.

Park S(1), Krist DT(1), Statsyuk AV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry , Center for Molecular Innovation and Drug Discovery 
, Chemistry of Life Processes Institute , Northwestern University , Silverman 
Hall, 2145 Sheridan Road , Evanston , Illinois 60208 , USA . Email: 
a-statsyuk@northwestern.edu.

Studying protein ubiquitination is difficult due to the complexity of the 
E1-E2-E3 ubiquitination cascade. Here we report the discovery that C-terminal 
ubiquitin thioesters can undergo direct transthiolation with the catalytic 
cysteine of the model HECT E3 ubiquitin ligase Rsp5 to form a catalytically 
active Rsp5∼ubiquitin thioester (Rsp5∼Ub). The resulting Rsp5∼Ub undergoes 
efficient autoubiquitination, ubiquitinates protein substrates, and synthesizes 
polyubiquitin chains with native Ub isopeptide linkage specificity. Since the 
developed chemical system bypasses the need for ATP, E1 and E2 enzymes while 
maintaining the native HECT E3 mechanism, we named it "Bypassing System" (ByS). 
Importantly, ByS provides direct evidence that E2 enzymes are dispensable for 
K63 specific isopeptide bond formation between ubiquitin molecules by Rsp5 in 
vitro. Additionally, six other E3 enzymes including Nedd4-1, Nedd4-2, Itch, and 
Wwp1 HECT ligases, along with Parkin and HHARI RBR ligases processed Ub 
thioesters under ByS reaction conditions. These findings provide general 
mechanistic insights on protein ubiquitination, and offer new strategies for 
assay development to discover pharmacological modulators of E3 enzymes.

DOI: 10.1039/c4sc02340d
PMCID: PMC5485889
PMID: 28706640