1. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Jul;10(7):e005105. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.116.005105.

Electrical and Structural Substrate of Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular 
Cardiomyopathy Determined Using Noninvasive Electrocardiographic Imaging and 
Late Gadolinium Magnetic Resonance Imaging.

Andrews CM(1), Srinivasan NT(2), Rosmini S(2), Bulluck H(2), Orini M(2), Jenkins 
S(2), Pantazis A(2), McKenna WJ(2), Moon JC(2), Lambiase PD(2), Rudy Y(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Engineering (C.M.A., Y.R.) and Cardiac 
Bioelectricity and Arrhythmia Center (C.M.A., Y.R.), Washington University, St. 
Louis, MO; Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Washington 
University in St. Louis, MO (Y.R.); Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology, The 
Barts Heart Center, St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, United Kingdom (N.T.S., 
M.O., S.J., A.P., W.J.M., P.D.L.); and Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
University College London, United Kingdom (N.T.S., S.R., H.B., M.O., S.J., A.P., 
W.J.M., J.C.M., P.D.L.). rudy@wustl.edu.
(2)From the Department of Biomedical Engineering (C.M.A., Y.R.) and Cardiac 
Bioelectricity and Arrhythmia Center (C.M.A., Y.R.), Washington University, St. 
Louis, MO; Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Washington 
University in St. Louis, MO (Y.R.); Department of Cardiac Electrophysiology, The 
Barts Heart Center, St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, United Kingdom (N.T.S., 
M.O., S.J., A.P., W.J.M., P.D.L.); and Institute of Cardiovascular Science, 
University College London, United Kingdom (N.T.S., S.R., H.B., M.O., S.J., A.P., 
W.J.M., J.C.M., P.D.L.).

Comment in
    Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Jul;10(7):e005524. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.117.005524.
    Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Oct;10(10):e005687. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.117.005687.
    Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2017 Oct;10(10):e005768. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCEP.117.005768.

BACKGROUND: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a 
significant cause of sudden cardiac death in the young. Improved noninvasive 
assessment of ARVC and better understanding of the disease substrate are 
important for improving patient outcomes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 20 genotyped ARVC patients with a broad spectrum 
of disease using electrocardiographic imaging (a method for noninvasive cardiac 
electrophysiology mapping) and advanced late gadolinium enhancement cardiac 
magnetic resonance scar imaging. Compared with 20 healthy controls, ARVC 
patients had longer ventricular activation duration (median, 52 versus 42 ms; 
P=0.007) and prolonged mean epicardial activation-recovery intervals (a 
surrogate for local action potential duration; median, 275 versus 241 ms; 
P=0.014). In these patients, we observed abnormal and varied epicardial 
activation breakthrough locations and regions of nonuniform conduction and 
fractionated electrograms. Nonuniform conduction and fractionated electrograms 
were present in the early concealed phase of ARVC. Electrophysiological 
abnormalities colocalized with late gadolinium enhancement scar, indicating a 
relationship with structural disease. Premature ventricular contractions were 
common in ARVC patients with variable initiation sites in both ventricles. 
Premature ventricular contraction rate increased with exercise, and within 
anatomic segments, it correlated with prolonged repolarization, electric markers 
of scar, and late gadolinium enhancement (all P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Electrocardiographic imaging reveals electrophysiological substrate 
properties that differ in ARVC patients compared with healthy controls. A novel 
mechanistic finding is the presence of repolarization abnormalities in regions 
where ventricular ectopy originates. The results suggest a potential role for 
electrocardiographic imaging and late gadolinium enhancement in early diagnosis 
and noninvasive follow-up of ARVC patients.

Â© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCEP.116.005105
PMCID: PMC5533087
PMID: 28705875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]