1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Jul 14;13(7):e1006906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006906. 
eCollection 2017 Jul.

OsCNGC13 promotes seed-setting rate by facilitating pollen tube growth in stylar 
tissues.

Xu Y(1)(2), Yang J(3), Wang Y(1), Wang J(1), Yu Y(1), Long Y(4), Wang Y(1), 
Zhang H(1), Ren Y(2), Chen J(2), Wang Y(2), Zhang X(2), Guo X(2), Wu F(2), Zhu 
S(2), Lin Q(2), Jiang L(1), Wu C(2), Wang H(2), Wan J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Jiangsu 
Plant Gene Engineering Research Center, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, 
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Institute of Food Crops, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of 
Biological Sciences, National Plant Gene Research Centre (Beijing), China 
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2017 Nov 30;13(11):e1007066. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007066.

Seed-setting rate is a critical determinant of grain yield in rice (Oryza sativa 
L.). Rapid and healthy pollen tube growth in the style is required for high 
seed-setting rate. The molecular mechanisms governing this process remain 
largely unknown. In this study, we isolate a dominant low seed-setting rate rice 
mutant, sss1-D. Cellular examination results show that pollen tube growth is 
blocked in about half of the mutant styles. Molecular cloning and functional 
assays reveals that SSS1-D encodes OsCNGC13, a member of the cyclic 
nucleotide-gated channel family. OsCNGC13 is preferentially expressed in the 
pistils and its expression is dramatically reduced in the heterozygous plant, 
suggesting a haploinsufficiency nature for the dominant mutant phenotype. We 
show that OsCNGC13 is permeable to Ca2+. Consistent with this, accumulation of 
cytoplasmic calcium concentration ([Ca2+]cyt) is defective in the sss1-D mutant 
style after pollination. Further, the sss1-D mutant has altered extracellular 
matrix (ECM) components and delayed cell death in the style transmission tract 
(STT). Based on these results, we propose that OsCNGC13 acts as a novel maternal 
sporophytic factor required for stylar [Ca2+]cyt accumulation, ECM components 
modification and STT cell death, thus facilitating the penetration of pollen 
tube in the style for successful double fertilization and seed-setting in rice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006906
PMCID: PMC5533464
PMID: 28708858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.