1. Cell Host Microbe. 2017 Jul 12;22(1):99-110.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2017.06.012.

Fusion Stage of HIV-1 Entry Depends on Virus-Induced Cell Surface Exposure of 
Phosphatidylserine.

Zaitseva E(1), Zaitsev E(1), Melikov K(1), Arakelyan A(2), Marin M(3), Villasmil 
R(4), Margolis LB(2), Melikyan GB(3), Chernomordik LV(5).

Author information:
(1)Section on Membrane Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(2)Section on Intercellular Interactions, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.
(4)Flow Cytometry Core, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Section on Membrane Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA. Electronic address: chernoml@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2017 Sep;15(9):511. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2017.85.

HIV-1 entry into host cells starts with interactions between the viral envelope 
glycoprotein (Env) and cellular CD4 receptors and coreceptors. Previous work has 
suggested that efficient HIV entry also depends on intracellular signaling, but 
this remains controversial. Here we report that formation of the pre-fusion 
Env-CD4-coreceptor complexes triggers non-apoptotic cell surface exposure of the 
membrane lipid phosphatidylserine (PS). HIV-1-induced PS redistribution depends 
on Ca2+ signaling triggered by Env-coreceptor interactions and involves the 
lipid scramblase TMEM16F. Externalized PS strongly promotes Env-mediated 
membrane fusion and HIV-1 infection. Blocking externalized PS or suppressing 
TMEM16F inhibited Env-mediated fusion. Exogenously added PS promoted fusion, 
with fusion dependence on PS being especially strong for cellsÂ with low surface 
density of coreceptors. These findings suggest that cell-surface PS acts as an 
important cofactor that promotes the fusogenic restructuring of pre-fusion 
complexes and likely focuses the infection on cells conducive to PS signaling.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2017.06.012
PMCID: PMC5558241
PMID: 28704658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]