1. Toxins (Basel). 2017 Jul 15;9(7):225. doi: 10.3390/toxins9070225.

Characterization of Enterotoxigenic Bacillus cereus sensu lato and 
Staphylococcus aureus Isolates and Associated Enterotoxin Production Dynamics in 
Milk or Meat-Based Broth.

Walker-York-Moore L(1), Moore SC(2), Fox EM(3).

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Agriculture and Food, Werribee VIC 3030, Australia. 
lrwalkeryorkmoore@gmail.com.
(2)CSIRO Agriculture and Food, Werribee VIC 3030, Australia. 
sean.moore@csiro.au.
(3)CSIRO Agriculture and Food, Werribee VIC 3030, Australia. 
edward.fox@csiro.au.

Bacillus cereus sensu lato species, as well as Staphylococcus aureus, are 
important pathogenic bacteria which can cause foodborne illness through the 
production of enterotoxins. This study characterised enterotoxin genes of these 
species and examined growth and enterotoxin production dynamics of isolates when 
grown in milk or meat-based broth. All B. cereus s. l. isolates harboured nheA, 
hblA and entFM toxin genes, with lower prevalence of bceT and hlyII. When grown 
at 16 °C, toxin production by individual B. cereus s. l. isolates varied 
depending on the food matrix; toxin was detected at cell densities below 5 
log10(CFU/mL). At 16 °C no staphylococcal enterotoxin C (SEC) production was 
detected by S. aureus isolates, although low levels of SED production was noted. 
At 30 °C all S. aureus isolates produced detectable enterotoxin in the simulated 
meat matrix, whereas SEC production was significantly reduced in milk. Relative 
to B. cereus s. l. toxin production, S. aureus typically required reaching 
higher cell numbers to produce detectable levels of enterotoxin. Phylogenetic 
analysis of the sec and sel genes suggested population evolution which 
correlated with animal host adaptation, with subgroups of bovine isolates or 
caprine/ovine isolates noted, which were distinct from human isolates. Taken 
together, this study highlights the marked differences in the production of 
enterotoxins both associated with different growth matrices themselves, but also 
in the behaviour of individual strains when exposed to different food matrices.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins9070225
PMCID: PMC5535172
PMID: 28714887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.