1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 17;7(1):5519. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05736-9.

TKI-addicted ROS1-rearranged cells are destined to survival or death by the 
intensity of ROS1 kinase activity.

Ogura H(1)(2), Nagatake-Kobayashi Y(1)(2), Adachi J(3), Tomonaga T(3), Fujita 
N(1)(2), Katayama R(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Chemotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese 
Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 135-8550, Japan.
(2)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Health and Nutrition, Osaka, 567-0085, Japan.
(4)Division of Experimental Chemotherapy, Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese 
Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 135-8550, Japan. 
ryohei.katayama@jfcr.or.jp.

ROS1 rearrangement is observed in 1-2% of non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). 
The ROS1 tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) crizotinib has induced marked tumour 
shrinkage in ROS1-rearranged cancers. However, emergence of acquired resistance 
to TKI is inevitable within a few years. Previous findings indicate that 
cabozantinib overcomes secondary mutation-mediated crizotinib-resistance in 
ROS1-fusion-positive cells. Here we attempted to establish 
cabozantinib-resistant cells by N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screening 
using CD74-ROS1-expressing Ba/F3 cells. Two resistant cell lines with CD74-ROS1 
F2004V or F2075C mutations, which are homologous to ALK F1174 or F1245 
mutations, survived in the presence of a low dose of ROS1-TKI. Removal of 
ROS1-TKI from these TKI-addicted cells induced excessive activation of ROS1 
tyrosine kinase followed by apoptosis. We succeeded in recapturing the 
TKI-addicted phenotype using doxycycline-inducible CD74-ROS1 mutant 
over-expression in Ba/F3 cells, suggesting that excessive ROS1 oncogenic 
signaling itself induced apoptosis instead of cell growth. Phosphoproteomic 
analysis and high-throughput inhibitor screening revealed that excessive ROS1 
signaling in the TKI-addicted cells phosphorylated or activated 
apoptosis-related molecules such as FAF1 or p38. Collectively, our findings 
partly clarify molecular mechanisms of excessive ROS1 oncogenic signaling that 
mediates paradoxical induction of apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05736-9
PMCID: PMC5514057
PMID: 28717217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.