1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Sep 15;292(37):15408-15425. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.784090.
Epub  2017 Jul 17.

Surface Toll-like receptor 3 expression in metastatic intestinal epithelial 
cells induces inflammatory cytokine production and promotes invasiveness.

Bugge M(1)(2), Bergstrom B(1), Eide OK(1), Solli H(1), Kjønstad IF(1), Stenvik 
J(1), Espevik T(1), Nilsen NJ(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer 
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
7489 Trondheim, Norway and.
(2)the Clinic of Medicine, St. Olav's University Hospital, 7030 Trondheim, 
Norway.
(3)From the Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer 
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
7489 Trondheim, Norway and nadra.nilsen@ntnu.no.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are innate immune receptors for sensing microbial 
molecules and damage-associated molecular patterns released from host cells. 
Double-stranded RNA and the synthetic analog polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid 
(poly(I:C)) bind and activate TLR3. This stimulation leads to recruitment of the 
adaptor molecule TRIF (Toll/IL-1 resistance (TIR) domain-containing 
adapter-inducing interferon β) and activation of the transcription factors 
nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), 
classically inducing IFNβ production. Here we report that, unlike non-metastatic 
intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), metastatic IECs express TLR3 and that TLR3 
promotes invasiveness of these cells. In response to poly(I:C) addition, the 
metastatic IECs also induced the chemokine CXCL10 in a TLR3-, TRIF-, and 
IRF3-dependent manner but failed to produce IFNβ. This was in contrast to 
healthy and non-metastatic IECs, which did not respond to poly(I:C) stimulation. 
Endolysosomal acidification and the endosomal transporter protein UNC93B1 was 
required for poly(I:C)-induced CXCL10 production. However, TLR3-induced CXCL10 
was triggered by immobilized poly(I:C), was only modestly affected by inhibition 
of endocytosis, and could be blocked with an anti-TLR3 antibody, indicating that 
TLR3 can still signal from the cell surface of these cells. Furthermore, plasma 
membrane fractions from metastatic IECs contained both full-length and cleaved 
TLR3, demonstrating surface expression of both forms of TLR3. Our results imply 
that metastatic IECs express surface TLR3, allowing it to sense extracellular 
stimuli that trigger chemokine responses and promote invasiveness in these 
cells. We conclude that altered TLR3 expression and localization may have 
implications for cancer progression.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.784090
PMCID: PMC5602399
PMID: 28717003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article