1. Anat Cell Biol. 2017 Jun;50(2):143-151. doi: 10.5115/acb.2017.50.2.143. Epub 
2017 Jun 27.

Vanillin and 4-hydroxybenzyl alcohol attenuate cognitive impairment and the 
reduction of cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the dentate 
gyrus in a mouse model of scopolamine-induced amnesia.

Kim YH(1), Park JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Kangwon National University School of Medicine, 
Chuncheon, Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Hallym University, Chuncheon, Korea.

4-Hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde (vanillin) and 4-hydroxybenzyl alcohol (4-HBA) 
are natural phenolic compounds, which present in many plants and have diverse 
biological properties. In this study, we examined effects of vanillin and 4-HBA 
on learning and memory function, cell proliferation, and neuroblast 
differentiation in the hippocampal dentate gyrus in a mouse model of 
scopolamine-induced amnesia. Scopolamine (SCO; 1 mg/kg/day, intraperitoneally), 
vanillin, and 4-HBA (40 mg/kg/day, orally) were administered for 28 days. 
Treatment with scopolamine alone impaired learning and memory function in the 
Morris water maze and passive avoidance tests, in addition, the treatment 
significantly reduced cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the 
dentate gyrus, which were examined by immunohistochemistry for Ki-67 (a classic 
marker for cell proliferation) and doublecortin (a marker for neuroblasts). 
However, treatment with vanillin or 4-HBA significantly attenuated SCO-induced 
learning and memory impairment as well as the reduction of cell proliferation 
and neuroblast differentiation in the dentate gyrus. These results indicate that 
vanillin and 4-HBA may be helpful in improving cognitive function and in 
increasing endogenous neuronal proliferation in the brain.

DOI: 10.5115/acb.2017.50.2.143
PMCID: PMC5509898
PMID: 28713618