1. Sci Rep. 2017 Jul 18;7(1):5756. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-05810-2.

Iron overload exacerbates age-associated cardiac hypertrophy in a mouse model of 
hemochromatosis.

Sukumaran A(1), Chang J(1), Han M(1), Mintri S(1), Khaw BA(1), Kim J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 
USA. j.kim@neu.edu.

Cardiac damage associated with iron overload is the most common cause of 
morbidity and mortality in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis, but the 
precise mechanisms leading to disease progression are largely unexplored. Here 
we investigated the effects of iron overload and age on cardiac hypertrophy 
using 1-, 5- and 12-month old Hfe-deficient mice, an animal model of 
hemochromatosis in humans. Cardiac iron levels increased progressively with age, 
which was exacerbated in Hfe-deficient mice. The heart/body weight ratios were 
greater in Hfe-deficient mice at 5- and 12-month old, compared with their 
age-matched wild-type controls. Cardiac hypertrophy in 12-month old 
Hfe-deficient mice was consistent with decreased alpha myosin and increased beta 
myosin heavy chains, suggesting an alpha-to-beta conversion with age. This was 
accompanied by cardiac fibrosis and up-regulation of NFAT-c2, reflecting 
increased calcineurin/NFAT signaling in myocyte hypertrophy. Moreover, there was 
an age-dependent increase in the cardiac isoprostane levels in Hfe-deficient 
mice, indicating elevated oxidative stress. Also, rats fed high-iron diet 
demonstrated increased heart-to-body weight ratios, alpha myosin heavy chain and 
cardiac isoprostane levels, suggesting that iron overload promotes oxidative 
stress and cardiac hypertrophy. Our findings provide a molecular basis for the 
progression of age-dependent cardiac stress exacerbated by iron overload 
hemochromatosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-05810-2
PMCID: PMC5516030
PMID: 28720890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.