1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 20;12(7):e0181598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181598. 
eCollection 2017.

Clinical implications of the novel cytokine IL-38 expressed in lung 
adenocarcinoma: Possible association with PD-L1 expression.

Takada K(1)(2), Okamoto T(1), Tominaga M(3), Teraishi K(1), Akamine T(1), 
Takamori S(1), Katsura M(1), Toyokawa G(1), Shoji F(1), Okamoto M(3), Oda Y(2), 
Hoshino T(3), Maehara Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.

Interleukin (IL)-38, a novel member of the IL-1 cytokine family, is homologous 
to IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) and IL-36Ra, and has been reported to act 
as an antagonist. IL-38 expression is found in tonsil, placenta, and spleen, and 
recent studies suggest an association between IL-38 and autoimmune diseases. 
However, whether IL-38 plays a role in carcinogenesis or cancer growth is 
unclear. In the present study, we identified increases in IL-38 expression by 
immunohistochemistry in multiple types of cancer cells. In the examination of 
417 surgically resected primary lung adenocarcinomas, Fisher's exact tests 
showed significant associations between high IL-38 expression and high tumor 
grades, an advanced T status, advanced N status, advanced stage, and the 
presence of pleural and vessel invasions. Survival analyses by the Kaplan-Meier 
method showed that patients with high expression of IL-38 had significantly 
shorter disease-free survival and shorter overall survival after surgery than 
patients with low expression of IL-38 (log-rank test: P = 0.0021 and P = 0.0035, 
respectively). Moreover, programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1)-positive cases 
showed higher expression of IL-38 than PD-L1-negative cases (Wilcoxon rank-sum 
test: P < 0.0001). In conclusion, IL-38 was expressed in tumor cells of various 
cancers, and IL-38 expression was associated with poor survival of lung 
adenocarcinoma patients. IL-38 may affect host immunity or the tumor 
microenvironment, and contribute to the progression of lung adenocarcinoma.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181598
PMCID: PMC5519175
PMID: 28727766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.