1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 19;12(7):e0181335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181335. 
eCollection 2017.

Evidence for prehistoric origins of the G2019S mutation in the North African 
Berber population.

Ben El Haj R(1), Salmi A(2), Regragui W(1)(3), Moussa A(2), Bouslam N(3), Tibar 
H(1)(3), Benomar A(1)(3), Yahyaoui M(1)(3), Bouhouche A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Team in Neurology and Neurogenetics, Genomics Center of Human 
Pathologies, Medical School and Pharmacy, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco.
(2)Laboratory of Information and Communication Technologies, National School of 
Applied Sciences, Abdelmalek Essaadi University, Tanger, Morocco.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurogenetics, Specialties Hospital, IBN Sina 
University Hospital Center, Rabat, Morocco.

The most common cause of the monogenic form of Parkinson's disease known so far 
is the G2019S mutation of the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene. Its 
frequency varies greatly among ethnic groups and geographic regions ranging from 
less than 0.1% in Asia to 40% in North Africa. This mutation has three distinct 
haplotypes; haplotype 1 being the oldest and most common. Recent studies have 
dated haplotype 1 of the G2019S mutation to about 4000 years ago, but it remains 
controversial whether the mutation has a Near-Eastern or Moroccan-Berber 
ancestral origin. To decipher this evolutionary history, we genotyped 10 
microsatellite markers spanning a region of 11.27 Mb in a total of 57 unrelated 
Moroccan PD patients carrying the G2019S mutation for which the Berber or Arab 
origin was established over 3 generations based on spoken language. We estimated 
the age of the most recent common ancestor for the 36 Arab-speaking and the 15 
Berber-speaking G2019S carriers using the likelihood-based method with a 
mutation rate of 10-4. Data analysis suggests that the shortest haplotype 
originated in a patient of Berber ethnicity. The common founder was estimated to 
have lived 159 generations ago (95% CI 116-224) for Arab patients, and 200 
generations ago (95% CI 123-348) for Berber patients. Then, 29 native North 
African males carrying the mutation were assessed for specific uniparental 
markers by sequencing the Y-chromosome (E-M81, E-M78, and M-267) and 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) hypervariable regions (HV1 and HV2) to examine 
paternal and maternal contributions, respectively. Results showed that the 
autochthonous genetic component reached 76% for mtDNA (Eurasian and north 
African haplogroups) and 59% for the Y-chromosome (E-M81 and E-M78), suggesting 
that the G2019S mutation may have arisen in an autochthonous DNA pool. 
Therefore, we conclude that LRRK2 G2019S mutation most likely originated in a 
Berber founder who lived at least 5000 years ago (95% CI 3075-8700).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181335
PMCID: PMC5517005
PMID: 28723952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.