1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2017 Sep 1;330:93-99. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2017.07.011.
 Epub 2017 Jul 18.

In silico pharmacogenetic approach: The natalizumab case study.

Cavaliere F(1), Montanari E(2), Emerson A(3), Buschini A(4), Cozzini P(5).

Author information:
(1)Human Microbial, Geno-toxicology, and Plant Lab, Department of Chemistry, 
Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Parco Area delle Scienze 11/A, 
43124 Parma, Italy.
(2)Polo Neurologico Interaziendale, ASL Parma, Italy.
(3)Supercomputing Applications and Innovation Dept (SCAI), CINECA, Via 
Magnanelli, 6/3 40033 Casalecchio di Reno (BO), Italy.
(4)Human Microbial, Geno-toxicology, and Plant Lab, Department of Chemistry, 
Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Parco Area delle Scienze 11/A, 
43124 Parma, Italy. Electronic address: annamaria.buschini@unipr.it.
(5)Molecular Modeling Lab, Food and Drug Department, University of Parma, Parco 
Area delle Scienze 17/A, 43124 Parma, Italy. Electronic address: 
pietro.cozzini@unipr.it.

Natalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody to α4β1 integrin and is approved 
for the treatment of Multiple Sclerosis. In patients there is a great variation 
in drug response and there is much evidence that genetic contributors play an 
important role in defining an individual's susceptibility. Natalizumab binds to 
α4-residues Gln-152, Lys-201, Lys256, and these seem to be essential for its 
activity. Studies on a range of species in disease model have showed a loss of 
reactivity when any one of those three residues were different to human. Based 
on these animal studies, we thought that the single nucleotide polymorphism in 
the ITGA4 human gene causing a lysine to arginine transversion at amino acid 
position 256 require further investigations in the context of individual drug 
susceptibility. So, the aim of our study was to investigate the association 
between this genetic polymorphism and the resistance to natalizumab. We had 
applied molecular dynamics simulation to study the possible conformational 
changes induced by Lys256Arg transversion on the overall structure of integrin 
and we have analyzed the binding affinities of natalizumab in the non-mutated 
and mutated structures through HINT score. We found that this SNP does not 
affect the VLA4-natalizumab interaction. Instead, the binding affinities are 
slightly higher in the mutated complex than in the wild-type. We reported one of 
the first work in which MD simulation was applied in the pharmacogenetic 
context, and this approach is rapid and cost effective, since a population 
survey is carried out only after the positive prediction of simulation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2017.07.011
PMID: 28733203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]