1. J Am Stat Assoc. 2017;112(517):64-76. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2016.1192039. Epub
 2017 May 3.

The Generalized Higher Criticism for Testing SNP-Set Effects in Genetic 
Association Studies.

Barnett I(1), Mukherjee R(2), Lin X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

It is of substantial interest to study the effects of genes, genetic pathways, 
and networks on the risk of complex diseases. These genetic constructs each 
contain multiple SNPs, which are often correlated and function jointly, and 
might be large in number. However, only a sparse subset of SNPs in a genetic 
construct is generally associated with the disease of interest. In this article, 
we propose the generalized higher criticism (GHC) to test for the association 
between an SNP set and a disease outcome. The higher criticism is a test 
traditionally used in high-dimensional signal detection settings when marginal 
test statistics are independent and the number of parameters is very large. 
However, these assumptions do not always hold in genetic association studies, 
due to linkage disequilibrium among SNPs and the finite number of SNPs in an SNP 
set in each genetic construct. The proposed GHC overcomes the limitations of the 
higher criticism by allowing for arbitrary correlation structures among the SNPs 
in an SNP-set, while performing accurate analytic p-value calculations for any 
finite number of SNPs in the SNP-set. We obtain the detection boundary of the 
GHC test. We compared empirically using simulations the power of the GHC method 
with existing SNP-set tests over a range of genetic regions with varied 
correlation structures and signal sparsity. We apply the proposed methods to 
analyze the CGEM breast cancer genome-wide association study. Supplementary 
materials for this article are available online.

DOI: 10.1080/01621459.2016.1192039
PMCID: PMC5517103
PMID: 28736464