1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 21;12(7):e0180922. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180922. 
eCollection 2017.

Direct targets of pSTAT5 signalling in erythropoiesis.

Gillinder KR(1), Tuckey H(1)(2), Bell CC(1), Magor GW(1), Huang S(1)(2), Ilsley 
MD(1)(2), Perkins AC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genomics Group, Mater Research Institute - University of Queensland, 
Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Erythropoietin (EPO) acts through the dimeric erythropoietin receptor to 
stimulate proliferation, survival, differentiation and enucleation of erythroid 
progenitor cells. We undertook two complimentary approaches to find 
EPO-dependent pSTAT5 target genes in murine erythroid cells: RNA-seq of newly 
transcribed (4sU-labelled) RNA, and ChIP-seq for pSTAT5 30 minutes after EPO 
stimulation. We found 302 pSTAT5-occupied sites: ~15% of these reside in 
promoters while the rest reside within intronic enhancers or intergenic regions, 
some >100kb from the nearest TSS. The majority of pSTAT5 peaks contain a central 
palindromic GAS element, TTCYXRGAA. There was significant enrichment for GATA 
motifs and CACCC-box motifs within the neighbourhood of pSTAT5-bound peaks, and 
GATA1 and/or KLF1 co-occupancy at many sites. Using 4sU-RNA-seq we determined 
the EPO-induced transcriptome and validated differentially expressed genes using 
dynamic CAGE data and qRT-PCR. We identified known direct pSTAT5 target genes 
such as Bcl2l1, Pim1 and Cish, and many new targets likely to be involved in 
driving erythroid cell differentiation including those involved in mRNA splicing 
(Rbm25), epigenetic regulation (Suv420h2), and EpoR turnover (Clint1/EpsinR). 
Some of these new EpoR-JAK2-pSTAT5 target genes could be used as biomarkers for 
monitoring disease activity in polycythaemia vera, and for monitoring responses 
to JAK inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180922
PMCID: PMC5521770
PMID: 28732065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.