1. J Int Med Res. 2018 Jan;46(1):143-149. doi: 10.1177/0300060517720005. Epub
2017  Jul 31.

Dehydroepiandrosterone supplementation in women undergoing assisted reproductive 
technology with poor ovarian response. A prospective case-control study.

Al-Turki HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor of Infertility and Reproductive Medicine and Consultant 
Obstetrician and Gynecologist, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College 
of Medicine, Imam AbdulRahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam and King Fahd 
Hospital of the University, Al-Khobar, Saudi Arabia.

Objective The effects of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) supplementation in Saudi 
Arabian women with poor ovarian response (POR) is presently unknown. The present 
study aimed to assess the benefits of DHEA supplementation in women undergoing 
in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). Methods 
This was a prospective case-control study involving 62 women who were diagnosed 
with POR and underwent IVF/ICSI between January 2012 and June 2016. The positive 
influence of DHEA in 34 women, compared with 28 women without supplementation, 
was defined as improvements in the number of oocytes retrieved, the 
fertilization rate, the number of grade I embryos generated and the pregnancy 
rate. Results Both groups were evenly matched for age, body mass index and 
laboratory test parameters. There were statistically significant differences 
between the groups with and without DHEA supplementation for oocyte yield 
(6.35 ± 2.41 versus 3.98 ± 3.2), Grade I embryos generated (55% versus 30%), 
positive pregnancy rate (21/34 versus 10/28), and live birth rate (18/34 versus 
4/28). Conclusion DHEA supplementation in women with POR had a positive effect 
on hormonal profiles, the quality of the endometrium, the number of oocytes 
retrieved, the quality of embryos, and the pregnancy and live birth rates.

DOI: 10.1177/0300060517720005
PMCID: PMC6011324
PMID: 28758852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]