1. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 27;12(7):e0182043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182043. 
eCollection 2017.

Crystal structure and kinetic analysis of the class B3 di-zinc 
metallo-β-lactamase LRA-12 from an Alaskan soil metagenome.

Rodríguez MM(1)(2), Herman R(3), Ghiglione B(1)(2), Kerff F(3), D'Amico González 
G(1), Bouillenne F(3), Galleni M(3), Handelsman J(4), Charlier P(3), Gutkind 
G(1)(2), Sauvage E(3), Power P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cátedra de Microbiología, Departamento de Microbiología, Inmunología y 
Biotecnología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)InBioS, Centre d'Ingénierie des Protéines, Université de Liège, Liège, 
Belgium.
(4)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Development Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT, United States of America.

We analyzed the kinetic properties of the metagenomic class B3 β-lactamase 
LRA-12, and determined its crystallographic structure in order to compare it 
with prevalent metallo-β-lactamases (MBLs) associated with clinical pathogens. 
We showed that LRA-12 confers extended-spectrum resistance on E. coli when 
expressed from recombinant clones, and the MIC values for carbapenems were 
similar to those observed in enterobacteria expressing plasmid-borne MBLs such 
as VIM, IMP or NDM. This was in agreement with the strong carbapenemase activity 
displayed by LRA-12, similar to GOB β-lactamases. Among the chelating agents 
evaluated, dipicolinic acid inhibited the enzyme more strongly than EDTA, which 
required pre-incubation with the enzyme to achieve measurable inhibition. 
Structurally, LRA-12 contains the conserved main structural features of di-zinc 
class B β-lactamases, and presents unique structural signatures that 
differentiate this enzyme from others within the family: (i) two loops (α3-β7 
and β11-α5) that could influence antibiotic entrance and remodeling of the 
active site cavity; (ii) a voluminous catalytic cavity probably responsible for 
the high hydrolytic efficiency of the enzyme; (iii) the absence of disulfide 
bridges; (iv) a unique Gln116 at metal-binding site 1; (v) a methionine residue 
at position 221that replaces Cys/Ser found in other B3 β-lactamases in a 
predominantly hydrophobic environment, likely playing a role in protein 
stability. The structure of LRA-12 indicates that MBLs exist in wild microbial 
populations in extreme environments, or environments with low anthropic impact, 
and under the appropriate antibiotic selective pressure could be captured and 
disseminated to pathogens.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182043
PMCID: PMC5531557
PMID: 28750094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.