1. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Jul 17;8:441. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00441. eCollection
 2017.

Optimized AAV rh.10 Vectors That Partially Evade Neutralizing Antibodies during 
Hepatic Gene Transfer.

Selot R(1), Arumugam S(1), Mary B(1), Cheemadan S(2), Jayandharan GR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of 
TechnologyKanpur, India.
(2)Department of Hematology and Centre for Stem Cell Research (CSCR), Christian 
Medical CollegeVellore, India.

Of the 12 common serotypes used for gene delivery applications, Adeno-associated 
virus (AAV)rh.10 serotype has shown sustained hepatic transduction and has the 
lowest seropositivity in humans. We have evaluated if further modifications to 
AAVrh.10 at its phosphodegron like regions or predicted immunogenic epitopes 
could improve its hepatic gene transfer and immune evasion potential. Mutant 
AAVrh.10 vectors were generated by site directed mutagenesis of the predicted 
targets. These mutant vectors were first tested for their transduction 
efficiency in HeLa and HEK293T cells. The optimal vector was further evaluated 
for their cellular uptake, entry, and intracellular trafficking by quantitative 
PCR and time-lapse confocal microscopy. To evaluate their potential during 
hepatic gene therapy, C57BL/6 mice were administered with wild-type or optimal 
mutant AAVrh.10 and the luciferase transgene expression was documented by serial 
bioluminescence imaging at 14, 30, 45, and 72 days post-gene transfer. Their 
hepatic transduction was further verified by a quantitative PCR analysis of AAV 
copy number in the liver tissue. The optimal AAVrh.10 vector was further 
evaluated for their immune escape potential, in animals pre-immunized with human 
intravenous immunoglobulin. Our results demonstrate that a modified AAVrh.10 
S671A vector had enhanced cellular entry (3.6 fold), migrate rapidly to the 
perinuclear region (1 vs. >2 h for wild type vectors) in vitro, which further 
translates to modest increase in hepatic gene transfer efficiency in vivo. More 
importantly, the mutant AAVrh.10 vector was able to partially evade neutralizing 
antibodies (~27-64 fold) in pre-immunized animals. The development of an AAV 
vector system that can escape the circulating neutralizing antibodies in the 
host will substantially widen the scope of gene therapy applications in humans.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00441
PMCID: PMC5511854
PMID: 28769791