1. Cytokine. 2017 Nov;99:203-213. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.07.006. Epub 2017 Jul 
29.

Associations between genetic and epigenetic variations in cytokine genes and 
mild persistent breast pain in women following breast cancer surgery.

Stephens KE(1), Levine JD(2), Aouizerat BE(3), Paul SM(4), Abrams G(2), Conley 
YP(5), Miaskowski C(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United 
States.
(3)College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, NY, United States.
(4)School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United 
States.
(5)School of Nursing, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(6)School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United 
States. Electronic address: chris.miaskowski@ucsf.edu.

Persistent pain following breast cancer surgery is a significant problem. Both 
inherited and acquired mechanisms of inflammation appear to play a role in the 
development and maintenance of persistent pain. In this longitudinal study, 
growth mixture modeling was used to identify persistent breast pain phenotypes 
based on pain assessments obtained prior to and monthly for 6months following 
breast cancer surgery. Associations between the "no pain" and "mild pain" 
phenotypes and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning 15 cytokine genes 
were evaluated. The methylation status of the CpG sites found in the promoters 
of genes associated with pain group membership was determined using bisulfite 
sequencing. In the multivariate analysis, three SNPs (i.e., interleukin 6 (IL6) 
rs2069840, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 8 (CXCL8) rs4073, tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) rs1800610) and two TNF CpG sites (i.e., c.-350C, c.-344C) were associated 
with pain group membership. These findings suggest that variations in IL6, 
CXCL8, and TNF are associated with the development and maintenance of mild 
persistent breast pain. CpG methylation within the TNF promoter may provide an 
additional mechanism through which TNF alters the risk for mild persistent 
breast pain after breast cancer surgery. These genetic and epigenetic variations 
may help to identify individuals who are predisposed to the development of mild 
levels of persistent breast pain following breast cancer surgery.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2017.07.006
PMCID: PMC5675785
PMID: 28764974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: The authors have 
no conflicts of interest to declare.