1. Neurol Genet. 2017 Jul 18;3(4):e176. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000176. 
eCollection 2017 Aug.

UNC5C variants are associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Yang HS(1), White CC(1), Chibnik LB(1), Klein HU(1), Schneider JA(1), Bennett 
DA(1), De Jager PL(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry (H.-S.Y., C.C.W., H.-U.K., P.L.D.J.), 
Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the 
Neurosciences; Department of Neurology (H.-S.Y.), Center for Alzheimer Research 
and Treatment, Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical School (H.-S.Y., 
H.-U.K.); Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health (L.B.C.), Boston; Program in 
Medical and Population Genetics (H.-S.Y., C.C.W., L.B.C., H.-U.K., P.L.D.J.), 
Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA; Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center (J.A.S., D.A.B.) 
and Department of Neurological Sciences (J.A.S., D.A.B.), Rush University 
Medical Center, Chicago, IL; and Department of Neurology (P.L.D.J.), Center for 
Translational & Systems Neuroimmunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether common genetic variants in UNC5C, a recently 
identified late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) dementia susceptibility gene, are 
associated with AD susceptibility or AD-related clinical/pathologic phenotypes.
METHODS: We used data from deceased individuals of European descent who 
participated in the Religious Orders Study or the Rush Memory and Aging Project 
(n = 1,288). We examined whether there were associations between single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within ±100 kb of the UNC5C gene and a diagnosis 
of AD dementia, global cognitive decline, a pathologic diagnosis of AD, 
β-amyloid load, neuritic plaque count, diffuse plaque count, paired helical 
filament tau density, neurofibrillary tangle count, and cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy (CAA) score. We also evaluated the relation of the CAA-associated 
variant and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) UNC5C RNA expression. 
Secondary analyses were performed to examine the interaction of the 
CAA-associated SNP and known genetic risk factors of CAA as well as the 
association of the SNP with other cerebrovascular pathologies.
RESULTS: A set of UNC5C SNPs tagged by rs28660566T was associated with a higher 
CAA score (p = 2.3 × 10-6): each additional rs28660566T allele was associated 
with a 0.60 point higher CAA score, which is equivalent to approximately 75% of 
the higher CAA score associated with each allele of APOE ε4. rs28660566T was 
weakly associated with lower UNC5C expression in the human DLPFC (p = 0.036). 
Moreover, rs28660566T had a synergistic interaction with APOE ε4 on their 
association with higher CAA severity (p = 0.027) and was associated with more 
severe arteriolosclerosis (p = 0.0065).
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted analysis of the UNC5C region uncovered a set of SNPs 
associated with CAA.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000000176
PMCID: PMC5515600
PMID: 28761931