1. Environ Int. 2017 Oct;107:235-242. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2017.06.021.

Exposure to flame retardant chemicals and occurrence and severity of papillary 
thyroid cancer: A case-control study.

Hoffman K(1), Lorenzo A(1), Butt CM(1), Hammel SC(1), Henderson BB(2), Roman 
SA(3), Scheri RP(3), Stapleton HM(1), Sosa JA(4).

Author information:
(1)Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, United 
States.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center and Wake Forest 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, United States.
(3)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
United States; Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 
27710, United States; Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC 27710, United States; Duke Clinical Research Institute, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, United States. Electronic address: 
julie.sosa@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer is the fastest increasing cancer in the U.S., and 
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) accounts for >80% of incident cases. Increasing 
exposure to flame retardant chemicals (FRs) has raised concerns about their 
possible role in this 'epidemic'. The current study was designed to test the 
hypothesis that higher exposure to FRs is associated with increased odds of PTC.
METHODS: PTC patients at the Duke Cancer Institute were approached and invited 
to participate. Age- and gender-matched controls were recruited from the Duke 
Health System and surrounding communities. Because suitable biomarkers of 
long-term exposure do not exist for many common FRs, and levels of FRs in dust 
are significantly correlated with exposure, relationships between FRs in 
household dust and PTC were evaluated in addition to available biomarkers. PTC 
status, measures of aggressiveness (e.g. tumor size) and BRAF V600E mutation 
were included as outcomes.
RESULTS: Higher levels of some FRs, particularly decabromodiphenyl ether 
(BDE-209) and tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate in dust, were associated with 
increased odds of PTC. Participants with dust BDE-209 concentrations above the 
median level were 2.29 times as likely to have PTC [95% confidence interval: 
1.03, 5.08] compared to those with low BDE-209 concentrations. Associations 
varied based on tumor aggressiveness and mutation status; TCEP was more strongly 
associated with larger, more aggressive tumors and BDE-209 was associated with 
smaller, less aggressive tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest exposure to FRs in the home, 
particularly BDE-209 and TCEP, may be associated with PTC occurrence and 
severity, and warrant further study.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2017.06.021
PMID: 28772138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]