1. Biosci Rep. 2017 Aug 23;37(4):BSR20160612. doi: 10.1042/BSR20160612. Print
2017  Aug 31.

Associations of MMP-2 and MMP-9 gene polymorphism with ulinastatin efficacy in 
patients with severe acute pancreatitis.

Zhen GD(1), Zhao LB(1), Wu SS(1), Chen MY(1), Li ZH(1), Zhou SZ(1), Li ZF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency, Yishui Central Hospital of Linyi, Linyi 276400, 
Shandong Province, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Emergency, Yishui Central Hospital of Linyi, Linyi 276400, 
Shandong Province, P.R. China cjl20160622@163.com.

We aim to explore the associations between matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 
MMP-2/MMP-9 gene polymorphism with ulinastatin (UTI) efficacy in treating severe 
acute pancreatitis (SAP). A total of 276 SAP patients were assigned into the 
control (n=135) and observation (n=141) groups. PCR-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) was used for genotype and allele frequency distribution. 
Relevance of MMP-2/MMP-9 genotypes with UTI efficacy was analyzed. The 
observation group showed lowered duration in symptoms (abdominal distension, 
abdominal pain, tenderness, and rebound tenderness) than the control group. 
Laboratory analysis (serum calcium, white blood cells, serum amylase, urine 
amylase, APACHE-II, and Balthazar CTIS scores) were decreased, while serum 
albumin levels increased after 7th day of therapy. The total effective rate of 
UTI for patients with MMP-2 C-1306T C/C genotype was higher than those with C/T 
and T/T genotypes after the 7th day of therapy, which was lower in patients with 
MMP-9 C-1562T C/C and C/T genotypes than those with T/T genotype. The duration 
for symptoms in patients with MMP-9 C-1562T T/T genotype was shorter than those 
with C/C and C/T genotypes, which was less in patients with MMP-2 C-1306T C/C 
genotype than those with C/T and T/T genotypes. The improvement values of 
APACHE-II and Balthazar CTIS scores for patients with MMP-2 C-1306T C/C genotype 
were higher than those with C/T and T/T genotypes, which for patients with MMP-9 
C-1562T C/C and C/T genotypes were lower than those with T/T genotype. These 
results demonstrated that MMP-2/MMP-9 gene polymorphism was associated with UTI 
efficacy for SAP.

Â© 2017 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20160612
PMCID: PMC5569160
PMID: 28779012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.