1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2017 Sep;24(9):717-725. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3448. Epub 2017
 Aug 7.

Katanin spiral and ring structures shed light on power stroke for microtubule 
severing.

Zehr E(1), Szyk A(1), Piszczek G(2), Szczesna E(1), Zuo X(3), Roll-Mecak 
A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit, Porter Neuroscience Research Center, 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(2)Biophysics Core, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(3)X-ray Science Division, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, 
Argonne, Illinois, USA.
(4)Biochemistry and Biophysics Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Microtubule-severing enzymes katanin, spastin and fidgetin are AAA ATPases 
important for the biogenesis and maintenance of complex microtubule arrays in 
axons, spindles and cilia. Because of a lack of known 3D structures for these 
enzymes, their mechanism of action has remained poorly understood. Here we 
report the X-ray crystal structure of the monomeric AAA katanin module from 
Caenorhabditis elegans and cryo-EM reconstructions of the hexamer in two 
conformations. The structures reveal an unexpected asymmetric arrangement of the 
AAA domains mediated by structural elements unique to microtubule-severing 
enzymes and critical for their function. The reconstructions show that katanin 
cycles between open spiral and closed ring conformations, depending on the ATP 
occupancy of a gating protomer that tenses or relaxes interprotomer interfaces. 
Cycling of the hexamer between these conformations would provide the power 
stroke for microtubule severing.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.3448
PMCID: PMC7152510
PMID: 28783150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.