1. Front Neurosci. 2017 Jul 25;11:428. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00428. eCollection
 2017.

miR-16 and Fluoxetine Both Reverse Autophagic and Apoptotic Change in Chronic 
Unpredictable Mild Stress Model Rats.

Yang Y(1), Hu Z(2), Du X(1), Davies H(1), Huo X(1), Fang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Zhejiang University School of MedicineHangzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hangzhou Red Cross HospitalHangzhou, 
China.

In the clinic selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), like Fluoxetine, 
remain the primary treatment for major depression. It has been suggested that 
miR-16 regulates serotonin transporters (SERT) via raphe nuclei and hippocampal 
responses to antidepressants. However, the underlying mechanism and regulatory 
pathways are still obtuse. Here, a chronic unpredicted mild stress (CUMS) 
depression model in rats was established, and then raphe nuclei miR-16 and 
intragastric Fluoxetine injections were administered for a duration of 3 weeks. 
An open field test and sucrose preference quantification displayed a significant 
decrease in the CUMS groups when compare to the control groups, however these 
changes were attenuated by both miR-16 and Fluoxetine treatments. A 
dual-luciferase reporter assay system verified that hsa-miR-16 inhibitory 
effects involve the targeting of 3'UTR on the 5-HTT gene. Expression levels of 
miR-16 and BDNF in the hippocampus were examined with RT-PCR, and it was found 
that increased 5-HT2a receptor expression induced by CUMS can be decreased by 
miR-16 and Fluoxetine administration. Immunofluorescence showed that expression 
levels of neuron NeuN and MAP-2 in CUMS rats were lower. Apoptosis and autophagy 
levels were evaluated separately through relative expression of Bcl-2, 
Caspase-3, Beclin-1, and LC3II. Furthermore, CUMS was found to decrease levels 
of hippocampal mTOR, PI3K, and AKT. These findings indicate that apoptosis and 
autophagy related pathways could be involved in the effectiveness of 
antidepressants, in which miR-16 participates in the regulation of, and is 
likely to help integrate rapid therapeutic strategies to alleviate depression 
clinically. These findings indicate that miR-16 participates in the regulation 
of apoptosis and autophagy and could account for some part of the therapeutic 
effect of SSRIs. This discovery has the potential to further the understanding 
of SSRIs and accelerate the development of new treatments for depression.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00428
PMCID: PMC5524920
PMID: 28790887