1. J Clin Microbiol. 2017 Nov;55(11):3194-3200. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00579-17. Epub 
2017 Aug 9.

French Prospective Clinical Evaluation of the Aptima Mycoplasma genitalium 
CE-IVD Assay and Macrolide Resistance Detection Using Three Distinct Assays.

Le Roy C(1)(2), Pereyre S(1)(2)(3), Hénin N(1)(2), Bébéar C(4)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Bordeaux, USC EA 3671 Mycoplasmal and Chlamydial Infections in Humans, 
Bordeaux, France.
(2)INRA, USC EA 3671 Mycoplasmal and Chlamydial Infections in Humans, Bordeaux, 
France.
(3)CHU Bordeaux, Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Bordeaux, France.
(4)Univ. Bordeaux, USC EA 3671 Mycoplasmal and Chlamydial Infections in Humans, 
Bordeaux, France cecile.bebear@u-bordeaux.fr.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical performance of the Aptima 
Mycoplasma genitalium transcription-mediated amplification (MG-TMA) CE-marked 
for in vitro diagnosis (CE-IVD) assay for the detection of Mycoplasma genitalium 
in male and female clinical samples in comparison with the in-house real-time 
PCR (in-house PCR) assay routinely used in our laboratory. A total of 1,431 
clinical specimens obtained from 1,235 patients were prospectively collected at 
the Bacteriology Department of Bordeaux University Hospital (France). Additional 
research-use-only Aptima M. genitalium transcription-mediated amplification 
(TMA) assays, Alt1-TMA and Alt2-TMA, were performed on discordant specimens to 
determine M. genitalium infection status. All confirmed M. genitalium-positive 
specimens were tested for macrolide resistance using three assays: the in-house 
23S rRNA FRET PCR assay, the SpeeDx ResistancePlus MG assay and the nested 
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) sequencing assay. The comparison of the 
MG-TMA assay with the in-house PCR results showed a moderate correlation (kappa 
value, 0.69). The MG-TMA assay had higher clinical sensitivity compared to that 
of the in-house PCR assay (100% versus 59.74%, respectively) and similar 
specificity (99.10% versus 100%, respectively) for M. genitalium detection. In 
this study, the prevalence of M. genitalium infection was 5.90% (72/1,220 
patients). The nested RT-PCR sequencing assay was the most sensitive but the 
most laborious assay for detecting macrolide-resistance-associated mutations. 
The prevalence of resistance was 8.33% (6/72). To our knowledge, this is the 
first clinical evaluation of the MG-TMA CE-IVD assay. The MG-TMA assay performed 
on the automated Panther system is a very sensitive and specific method for the 
detection of M. genitalium in clinical specimens.

Copyright © 2017 Le Roy et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00579-17
PMCID: PMC5654902
PMID: 28794183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]