1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2017 Jul 28;11:141. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00141. 
eCollection 2017.

Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Technology in the Study of Rodent Behavior.

Gris KV(1), Coutu JP(1), Gris D(1).

Author information:
(1)Gris Lab of Neuroimmunology, Pediatrics, University of SherbrookeSherbrooke, 
QC, Canada.

Quantifying behavior is a challenge for scientists studying neuroscience, 
ethology, psychology, pathology, etc. Until now, behavior was mostly considered 
as qualitative descriptions of postures or labor intensive counting of bouts of 
individual movements. Many prominent behavioral scientists conducted studies 
describing postures of mice and rats, depicting step by step eating, grooming, 
courting, and other behaviors. Automated video assessment technologies permit 
scientists to quantify daily behavioral patterns/routines, social interactions, 
and postural changes in an unbiased manner. Here, we extensively reviewed 
published research on the topic of the structural blocks of behavior and 
proposed a structure of behavior based on the latest publications. We discuss 
the importance of defining a clear structure of behavior to allow professionals 
to write viable algorithms. We presented a discussion of technologies that are 
used in automated video assessment of behavior in mice and rats. We considered 
advantages and limitations of supervised and unsupervised learning. We presented 
the latest scientific discoveries that were made using automated video 
assessment. In conclusion, we proposed that the automated quantitative approach 
to evaluating animal behavior is the future of understanding the effect of brain 
signaling, pathologies, genetic content, and environment on behavior.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00141
PMCID: PMC5532435
PMID: 28804452