1. Int J Biol Sci. 2017 Jul 6;13(7):815-827. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.20052. eCollection
 2017.

FOXO Signaling Pathways as Therapeutic Targets in Cancer.

Farhan M(1), Wang H(2), Gaur U(1), Little PJ(3), Xu J(2), Zheng W(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Pharmacy Australia Centre of Excellence, The University 
of Queensland, Woolloongabba, Queensland, 4102 Australia and Xin Hua College, 
Sun Yat- Sen University, China.

Many transcription factors play a key role in cellular differentiation and the 
delineation of cell phenotype. Transcription factors are regulated by 
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation/deacetylation and interactions 
between two or more proteins controlling multiple signaling pathways. These 
pathways regulate different physiological processes and pathological events, 
such as cancer and other diseases. The Forkhead box O (FOXO) is one subfamily of 
the fork head transcription factor family with important roles in cell fate 
decisions and this subfamily is also suggested to play a pivotal functional role 
as a tumor suppressor in a wide range of cancers. During apoptosis, FOXOs are 
involved in mitochondria-dependent and -independent processes triggering the 
expression of death receptor ligands like Fas ligand, TNF apoptosis ligand and 
Bclâ€‘XL, bNIP3, Bim from Bcl-2 family members. Different types of growth factors 
like insulin play a vital role in the regulation of FOXOs. The most important 
pathway interacting with FOXO in different types of cancers is the PI3K/AKT 
pathway. Some other important pathways such as the Ras-MEK-ERK, IKK and AMPK 
pathways are also associated with FOXOs in tumorigenesis. Therapeutically 
targeting the FOXO signaling pathway(s) could lead to the discovery and 
development of efficacious agents against some cancers, but this requires an 
enhanced understanding and knowledge of FOXO transcription factors and their 
regulation and functioning. This review focused on the current understanding of 
cell biology of FOXO transcription factors which relates to their potential role 
as targets for the treatment and prevention of human cancers. We also discuss 
drugs which are currently being used for cancer treatment along with their 
target pathways and also point out some potential drawbacks of those drugs, 
which further signifies the need for development of new drug strategies in the 
field of cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.20052
PMCID: PMC5555100
PMID: 28808415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.