1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2017 Sep;24(9):R335-R348. doi: 10.1530/ERC-17-0108.

Allosteric alterations in the androgen receptor and activity in prostate cancer.

Uo T(1), Plymate SR(2)(3), Sprenger CC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of MedicineUniversity of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 
tuo@u.washington.edu.
(2)Department of MedicineUniversity of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical CenterVA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Organisms have evolved to generate biological complexity in their proteome and 
transcriptome from a limited number of genes. This concept holds true for the 
androgen receptor, which displays a diversity of inclusion/exclusion events in 
its structural motifs as a mechanism of resistance to the most forefront 
anti-androgen therapies. More than 20 androgen receptor variants that lack 
various portions of ligand-binding domain have been identified in human prostate 
cancer (PCa) samples. Most of the variants are inactive on their own, with a few 
exceptions displaying constitutive activity. The full-length receptor and one or 
more variants can be co-expressed in the same cell under many circumstances, 
which raises the question of how these variants physically and functionally 
interact with the full-length receptor or one another in the course of PCa 
progression. To address this issue, in this review, we will characterize and 
discuss androgen receptor variants, including the novel variants discovered in 
the last couple of years (i) individually, (ii) with respect to their physical 
and functional interaction with one another and (iii) in clinical relevance. 
Here, we also introduce the very recent understanding of AR-Vs obtained through 
successful development of some AR-V-specific antibodies as well as 
identification of novel AR-Vs by data mining approaches.

Â© 2017 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-17-0108
PMCID: PMC6812555
PMID: 28808043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest TU and CTS declare that 
there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the 
impartiality of the research reported. SRP is a consultant for ESSA Pharma, Inc.