1. Cell Rep. 2017 Aug 15;20(7):1681-1691. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.050.

Therapeutic Antibodies to Ganglioside GD2 Evolved from Highly Selective Germline 
Antibodies.

Sterner E(1), Peach ML(2), Nicklaus MC(1), Gildersleeve JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(2)Basic Science Program, Chemical Biology Laboratory, Leidos Biomedical Inc., 
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(3)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. Electronic address: gildersj@mail.nih.gov.

Antibodies play a crucial role in host defense and are indispensable research 
tools, diagnostics, and therapeutics. Antibody generation involves binding of 
genomically encoded germline antibodies followed by somatic hypermutation and 
in vivo selection to obtain antibodies with high affinity and selectivity. 
Understanding this process is critical for developing monoclonal antibodies, 
designing effective vaccines, and understanding autoantibody formation. Prior 
studies have found that antibodies to haptens, peptides, and proteins evolve 
from polyspecific germline antibodies. The immunological evolution of antibodies 
to mammalian glycans has not been studied. Using glycan microarrays, protein 
microarrays, cell binding studies, and molecular modeling, we demonstrate that 
therapeutic antibodies to the tumor-associated ganglioside GD2 evolved from 
highly specific germline precursors. The results have important implications for 
developing vaccines and monoclonal antibodies that target carbohydrate antigens. 
In addition, they demonstrate an alternative pathway for antibody evolution 
within the immune system that is distinct from the polyspecific germline 
pathway.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.050
PMCID: PMC5572838
PMID: 28813678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.