1. Curr Diab Rep. 2017 Aug 16;17(10):89. doi: 10.1007/s11892-017-0916-x.

The Role of Epigenetics in Type 1 Diabetes.

Jerram ST(1), Dang MN(1), Leslie RD(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Rd, London, E1 4NS, UK.
(2)Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Rd, London, E1 4NS, UK. 
r.d.g.leslie@qmul.ac.uk.
(3)The Blizard Institute, London, UK. r.d.g.leslie@qmul.ac.uk.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Epigenetics is defined as mitotically heritable changes in 
gene expression that do not directly alter the DNA sequence. By implication, 
such epigenetic changes are non-genetically determined, although they can be 
affected by inherited genetic variation. Extensive evidence indicates that 
autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes are determined by the interaction 
of genetic and non-genetic factors. Much is known of the genetic causes of these 
diseases, but the non-genetic effects are less clear-cut. Further, it remains 
unclear how they interact to cause the destructive autoimmune process. This 
review identifies the key issues in the genetic/non-genetic interaction, 
examining the most recent evidence of the role of non-genetic effects in the 
disease process, including the impact of epigenetic effects on key pathways.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent research indicates that these pathways likely involve 
immune effector cells both of the innate and adaptive immune response. 
Specifically, there is evidence of cell type-specific enrichment in altered DNA 
methylation, changes which were temporally stable and enriched at gene 
regulatory elements. Epigenomics remains in its infancy, and we anticipate 
further studies will define how the interaction of genetic and non-genetic 
effects induces tissue-specific destruction and enhances our ability to predict, 
and possibly even modify that process.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-017-0916-x
PMCID: PMC5559569
PMID: 28815391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Samuel T. Jerram, Mary N. 
Dang and R. David Leslie declare that they have no conflict of interest. HUMAN 
AND ANIMAL RIGHTS AND INFORMED CONSENT: This article does not contain any 
studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.