1. Cancer Discov. 2017 Sep;7(9):943-962. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-17-0245. Epub 
2017 Aug 17.

New Horizons for Precision Medicine in Biliary Tract Cancers.

Valle JW(1)(2), Lamarca A(3), Goyal L(4), Barriuso J(3)(5), Zhu AX(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow 
Road, Manchester, UK. juan.valle@christie.nhs.uk azhu@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, 
Manchester, UK.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow 
Road, Manchester, UK.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(5)Faculty of Medical, Biological and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Rumford Street, Manchester, UK.
(6)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts. juan.valle@christie.nhs.uk azhu@mgh.harvard.edu.

Biliary tract cancers (BTC), including cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder 
cancer, are poor-prognosis and low-incidence cancers, although the incidence of 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is rising. A minority of patients present with 
resectable disease but relapse rates are high; benefit from adjuvant 
capecitabine chemotherapy has been demonstrated. Cisplatin/gemcitabine 
combination chemotherapy has emerged as the reference first-line treatment 
regimen; there is no standard second-line therapy. Selected patients may be 
suitable for liver-directed therapy (e.g., radioembolization or external beam 
radiation), pending confirmation of benefit in randomized studies. Initial 
trials targeting the epithelial growth factor receptor and angiogenesis pathways 
have failed to deliver new treatments. Emerging data from next-generation 
sequencing analyses have identified actionable mutations (e.g., FGFR fusion 
rearrangements and IDH1 and IDH2 mutations), with several targeted drugs 
entering clinical development with encouraging results. The role of systemic 
therapies, including targeted therapies and immunotherapy for BTC, is rapidly 
evolving and is the subject of this review.Significance: The authors address 
genetic drivers and molecular biology from a translational perspective, in an 
intent to offer a clear view of the recent past, present, and future of BTC. The 
review describes a state-of-the-art update of the current status and future 
directions of research and therapy in advanced BTC. Cancer Discov; 7(9); 943-62. 
©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-17-0245
PMCID: PMC5586506
PMID: 28818953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure statement No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed by the other authors.