1. J Cancer. 2017 Jul 20;8(12):2238-2246. doi: 10.7150/jca.19295. eCollection
2017.

Central Role of CEMIP in Tumorigenesis and Its Potential as Therapeutic Target.

Li L(1), Yan LH(2), Manoj S(3), Li Y(4), Lu L(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning 530021, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Quality Assurance Department, Bristol Laboratories Limited, 5 Traynor Way, 
Whitehouse Business Park, Peterlee, County Durham, SR8 2RU, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Guangxi Bone Hospital, Nanning, 530000, Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Research, Nanning Children Rehabilitation Center, Nanning, 
530003, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, People's Republic of China.

CEMIP (KIAA1199) was identified as migratory indicator protein which had been 
crudely studied in the last decade. Firstly its mutation site was reported to 
cause hearing loss due to the folding change of protein structure, meanwhile the 
over-expression of CEMIP referred to dreadful invasion and uncontrolled 
proliferation of tumor with distant metastasis, dedifferentiation, and limited 
survival opportunity of patients. Especially, over-expressed CEMIP also 
protected malignant tumor from strict microenvironment in hypoxia, low glucose 
and cracked barrier, leading to enhanced adaptability of tumor by stimulating 
the Wnt, EGFR, FGFR pathway. Here, we intend to elaborate the clinical function 
and dysregulation of CEMIP under the tumorous circumstance since CEMIP plays an 
important role in cytokine pathway and its over-expression in tumors provide a 
novel target for individual therapy. Targeting CEMIP would thereby dysregulate 
the cytokine pathway which would in turn, decide the growth and death of the 
vicious tumour cells.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.19295
PMCID: PMC5560141
PMID: 28819426

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: None declared.