1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Oct;173(10):2782-2788. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38381. Epub 
2017 Aug 17.

New intragenic rearrangements in non-Finnish mulibrey nanism.

Jobic F(1)(2), Morin G(1), Vincent-Delorme C(3), Cadet E(2), Cabry R(4), 
Mathieu-Dramard M(1), Copin H(4), Rochette J(2), Jedraszak G(4).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Amiens, 
Amiens, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Médicale, EA4666, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire d'Amiens, Amiens, France.
(3)Consultation de Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier d'Arras, Lille, 
France.
(4)Médecine et Biologie de la Reproduction et Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Amiens, Amiens, France.

Prenatal growth is a complex dynamic process controlled by various genetic and 
environmental factors. Among genetic syndromes characterized by growth 
restriction, MULIBREY nanism represents a rare autosomal recessive condition 
presenting with severe pre- and post-natal growth failure, characteristic 
dysmorphic features but normal neurological development. The phenotype of 
MULIBREY nanism is variable and overlaps with others such as the Silver-Russell 
syndrome. We report here three patients in two distinct non-Finnish families 
from North France who were first suspected to have Silver-Russell syndrome which 
failed to be confirmed on molecular analyses. Clinical features in the three 
patients led us to also consider the diagnosis of MULIBREY nanism. Sequencing of 
the TRIM37 gene showed the three patients shared a novel nonsense mutation 
(c.181 C>T p.Arg61*) in a heterozygous state. Quantitative fluorescent multiplex 
PCR identified a new deletion of exons 15 and 16 in TRIM37 in one isolated 
patient and another deletion of exon 9 in two siblings. Breakpoints of both the 
deletions were localized in Alu sequences. Given the high number of Alu repeats, 
which predispose to gene rearrangements, one should always consider such genetic 
rearrangements in the molecular diagnosis of non-Finnish MULIBREY nanism 
patients. Early diagnosis of the disease would prompt careful cardiac follow up 
of such patients as cardiological complication is a characteristic feature of 
the MULIBREY nanism as described in this report.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38381
PMID: 28815877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]