1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017 Oct;106(4):1142-1156. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.117.156349. Epub 
2017 Aug 16.

Association of TCN2 rs1801198 c.776G>C polymorphism with markers of one-carbon 
metabolism and related diseases: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
genetic association studies.

Oussalah A(1)(2)(3), Levy J(1)(2), Filhine-Trésarrieu P(1)(2)(3), Namour 
F(1)(2)(3), Guéant JL(4)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Personalized Therapeutics.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 
and.
(3)INSERM, Unité 954, Nutrition, Genetics, and Environmental Risk Exposure, 
Faculty of Medicine of Nancy, University of Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, 
France.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Personalized Therapeutics, 
jean-louis.gueant@univ-lorraine.fr.

Background: Vitamin B-12 (cobalamin) deficiency may produce severe neurologic 
and hematologic manifestations. Approximately 20-25% of circulating cobalamin 
binds to transcobalamin 2 (TCN2), which is referred to as active vitamin B-12. 
The G allele of the TCN2 c.776G>C (rs1801198) polymorphism has been associated 
with a lower plasma concentration of holotranscobalamin. However, genotype 
association studies on rs1801198 have led to conflicting results regarding its 
influence on one-carbon metabolism (OCM) markers or its association with 
pathologic conditions.Objective: We assessed the association of rs1801198 
genotypes with OCM marker concentrations and primary risks of congenital 
abnormalities, cancer, and Alzheimer disease.Design: We conducted a systematic 
review of the literature that was published from January 1966 to February 2017 
and included all studies that assessed the association between rs1801198 and OCM 
markers or a pathologic condition.Results: Thirty-four studies met the inclusion 
criteria. Subjects with the rs1801198 GG genotype had significantly lower 
concentrations of holotranscobalamin [standardized mean difference (SMD): -0.445 
(95% CI: -0.673, -0.217; P < 0.001); I2 = 48.16% (95% CI: 0.00%, 78.10%; P = 
0.07)] and higher concentrations of homocysteine (European descent only) [SMD: 
0.070 (95% CI: 0.020, 0.120; P = 0.01); I2 = 0.00% (95% CI: 0.00%, 49.59%; P = 
0.73)] than did subjects with the rs1801198 CC genotype. The meta-analysis on 
the association between rs1801198 and methylmalonic acid (MMA) lacked 
statistical power. No significant difference was observed regarding cobalamin, 
folate, and red blood cell folate. No significant association was observed 
between rs1801198 and primary risks of congenital abnormalities, cancer, or 
Alzheimer disease.Conclusions: Meta-analysis results indicate an influence of 
rs1801198 on holotranscobalamin and homocysteine concentrations in 
European-descent subjects. In addition, well-designed and -powered studies 
should be conducted for assessing the association between rs1801198 and MMA and 
clinical manifestations that are linked to a decreased availability of 
cobalamin. This review was registered at www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero as 
CRD42017058504.

© 2017 American Society for Nutrition.

DOI: 10.3945/ajcn.117.156349
PMCID: PMC5611783
PMID: 28814397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]