1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 21;7(1):8907. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-09331-w.

Protein structure shapes immunodominance in the CD4 T cell response to yellow 
fever vaccination.

Koblischke M(1), Mackroth MS(2), Schwaiger J(1), Fae I(3), Fischer G(3), Stiasny 
K(1), Heinz FX(1), Aberle JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Medicine I, Division of Infectious Diseases and Tropical 
Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Blood Group Serology and Transfusion Medicine, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Center for Virology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
judith.aberle@meduniwien.ac.at.

The live attenuated yellow fever (YF) vaccine is a highly effective human 
vaccine and induces long-term protective neutralizing antibodies directed 
against the viral envelope protein E. The generation of such antibodies requires 
the help of CD4 T cells which recognize peptides derived from proteins in virus 
particles internalized and processed by E-specific B cells. The CD4 T helper 
cell response is restricted to few immunodominant epitopes, but the mechanisms 
of their selection are largely unknown. Here, we report that CD4 T cell 
responses elicited by the YF-17D vaccine are focused to hotspots of two helices 
of the viral capsid protein and to exposed strands and loops of E. We found that 
the locations of immunodominant epitopes within three-dimensional protein 
structures exhibit a high degree of overlap between YF virus and the 
structurally homologous flavivirus tick-borne encephalitis virus, although amino 
acid sequence identity of the epitope regions is only 15-45%. The restriction of 
epitopes to exposed E protein surfaces and their strikingly similar positioning 
within proteins of distantly related flaviviruses are consistent with a strong 
influence of protein structure that shapes CD4 T cell responses and provide 
leads for a rational design of immunogens for vaccination.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-09331-w
PMCID: PMC5566484
PMID: 28827760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.