1. Pediatr Res. 2018 Jan;83(1-1):57-62. doi: 10.1038/pr.2017.195. Epub 2017 Sep
13.

Necrotizing enterocolitis and high intestinal iron uptake due to genetic 
variants.

Göpel W(1), Drese J(1), Rausch TK(2), Twisselmann N(1), Bohnhorst B(3), Müller 
A(4), Franz A(5), Ziegler A(6), Härtel C(1), Herting E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Lübeck, UKSH, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology and Neonatology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)Department of Neonatology, University Children Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)StatSol, Moenring 2, Lübeck, Germany.

BackgroundIntestinal iron is a nutritional compound, which is essential for 
enteric microbiota. We evaluated the hypothesis that polymorphisms, which are 
known modifiers of intestinal iron uptake in adults, are associated with 
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) in preterm infants.MethodsPreterm infants (birth 
weight below 1,500 g) were studied. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms with known 
effects on serum iron levels (rs1800562, rs1799945, and rs855791) were 
determined using PCR. The effects of polymorphisms on NEC surgery were tested by 
Mendelian randomization. Outcome data were compared with χ2-test, Fisher's exact 
test, t-test, and Cochran-Armitage test for trend and multiple logistic 
regression analysis.ResultsComplete genotyping data were available for 11,166 
infants. High serum iron levels due to rs855791 genotype were associated with a 
significantly reduced risk of NEC surgery (odds ratio (OR) 0.265; 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 0.11-0.65; adjusted P=0.011). Carriers of the rs855791 A-allele 
not receiving prophylactic probiotics had a higher risk of NEC surgery (OR 1.12, 
95% CI 1.08-1.70, nominal P=0.002). Prophylactic treatment with probiotics was 
associated with a reduced risk of NEC surgery in carriers of the rs855791 
A-Allele. No differences were found with regard to other short- or long-term 
outcome data.ConclusionPolymorphisms inducing lower intestinal iron uptake like 
the rs855791 A-allele might be an underestimated risk factor for NEC.

DOI: 10.1038/pr.2017.195
PMID: 28820869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]