1. Theranostics. 2017 Jul 8;7(11):2822-2836. doi: 10.7150/thno.19068. eCollection
 2017.

C-X-C Motif Chemokine 10 Impairs Autophagy and Autolysosome Formation in 
Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis.

Zhang X(1), Wu WK(2), Xu W(1), Man K(3), Wang X(1), Han J(1)(4), Leung WY(1), Wu 
R(1), Liu K(1)(5), Yu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease and The Department of Medicine and 
Therapeutics, State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Li Ka Shing Institute 
of Health Sciences, CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong.
(4)Institute of liver disease, Beijing Military General Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

C-X-C motif chemokine 10 (CXCL10) is a crucial pro-inflammatory factor in 
chronic hepatitis. Autophagy dysregulation is known to contribute to hepatic 
inflammatory injury. Hence, we investigated the regulatory effect of CXCL10 on 
the autophagosome-lysosome system during non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD) development. The effect of CXCL10 ablation by neutralizing monoclonal 
antibody (mAb) or genetic knockout on autophagic flux was evaluated in cultured 
hepatocytes and animal models of NAFLD. Results demonstrated that CXCL10 
ablation protected against hepatocyte injury in vitro and steatohepatitis 
development in mice. Autophagic flux impairment was rectified by CXCL10 
inhibition using anti-CXCL10 mAb in AML-12 and HepG2 liver cell lines and 
primary hepatocytes as evidenced by the attenuated accumulation of p62/SQSTM1 
and LC3-II proteins and increased autophagic protein degradation. Impaired 
autophagic flux was significantly restored by CXCL10 knockout or anti-CXCL10 mAb 
in mice. Bafilomycin A1, an inhibitor of autolysosome formation, abolished the 
rectifying effect of anti-CXCL10 mAb or CXCL10 knockdown in AML-12 and primary 
hepatocytes, indicating CXCL10 impaired late-stage autophagy in NAFLD. 
Anti-CXCL10 mAb treatment also increased the fusion of LC3-positive 
autophagosomes with lysosomes in HepG2 cells challenged with palmitic acid, 
suggesting that CXCL10 ablation restored autolysosome formation. Consistently, 
the number of autolysosomes was significantly increased by CXCL10 knockout in 
mice as shown by electron microscopy. In conclusion, upregulated CXCL10 in 
steatohepatitis impairs autophagic flux by reducing autolysosome formation, 
thereby inhibiting autophagic protein degradation and the accumulation of 
ubiquitinated proteins, leading to the development of steatohepatitis.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.19068
PMCID: PMC5562218
PMID: 28824718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.