1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 7;8:935. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00935. eCollection 
2017.

Peptide and Peptide-Dependent Motions in MHC Proteins: Immunological 
Implications and Biophysical Underpinnings.

Ayres CM(1)(2), Corcelli SA(1), Baker BM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre 
Dame, IN, United States.
(2)Harper Cancer Research Institute, University of Notre Dame, South Bend, IN, 
United States.

Structural biology of peptides presented by class I and class II MHC proteins 
has transformed immunology, impacting our understanding of fundamental immune 
mechanisms and allowing researchers to rationalize immunogenicity and design 
novel vaccines. However, proteins are not static structures as often inferred 
from crystallographic structures. Their components move and breathe individually 
and collectively over a range of timescales. Peptides bound within MHC 
peptide-binding grooves are no exception and their motions have been shown to 
impact recognition by T cell and other receptors in ways that influence 
function. Furthermore, peptides tune the motions of MHC proteins themselves, 
which impacts recognition of peptide/MHC complexes by other proteins. Here, we 
review the motional properties of peptides in MHC binding grooves and discuss 
how peptide properties can influence MHC motions. We briefly review theoretical 
concepts about protein motion and highlight key data that illustrate 
immunological consequences. We focus primarily on class I systems due to greater 
availability of data, but segue into class II systems as the concepts and 
consequences overlap. We suggest that characterization of the dynamic "energy 
landscapes" of peptide/MHC complexes and the resulting functional consequences 
is one of the next frontiers in structural immunology.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00935
PMCID: PMC5545744
PMID: 28824655