1. World J Clin Pediatr. 2017 Aug 8;6(3):132-142. doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v6.i3.132. 
eCollection 2017 Aug 8.

Role of vitamin D in cystic fibrosis and non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.

Moustaki M(1), Loukou I(1), Priftis KN(1), Douros K(1).

Author information:
(1)Maria Moustaki, Ioanna Loukou, Cystic Fibrosis Unit, "Aghia Sophia" 
Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece.

Bronchiectasis is usually classified as cystic fibrosis (CF) related or CF 
unrelated (non-CF); the latter is not considered an orphan disease any more, 
even in developed countries. Irrespective of the underlying etiology, 
bronchiectasis is the result of interaction between host, pathogens, and 
environment. Vitamin D is known to be involved in a wide spectrum of significant 
immunomodulatory effects such as down-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines. Respiratory epithelial cells constitutively express 
1Î±-hydroxylase leading to the local transformation of the inactive 
25(OH)-vitamin D to the active 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D. The latter through its 
autocrine and paracrine functions up-regulates vitamin D dependent genes with 
important consequences in the local immunity of lungs. Despite the scarcity of 
direct evidence on the involvement of vitamin D deficiency states in the 
development of bronchiectasis in either CF or non-CF patients, it is reasonable 
to postulate that vitamin D may play some role in the pathogenesis of lung 
diseases and especially bronchiectasis. The potential contribution of vitamin D 
deficiency in the process of bronchiectasis is of particular clinical 
importance, taking into consideration the increasing prevalence of vitamin D 
deficiency worldwide and the significant morbidity of bronchiectasis. Given the 
well-established association of vitamin D deficiency with increased 
inflammation, and the indicative evidence for harmful consequences in lungs, it 
is intriguing to speculate that the administration of vitamin D supplementation 
could be a reasonable and cost effective supplementary therapeutic approach for 
children with non-CF bronchiectasis. Regarding CF patients, maybe in the future 
as more data become available, we have to re-evaluate our policy on the most 
appropriate dosage scheme for vitamin D.

DOI: 10.5409/wjcp.v6.i3.132
PMCID: PMC5547424
PMID: 28828295

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.