1. Int J Med Sci. 2017 Jul 18;14(8):785-790. doi: 10.7150/ijms.19512. eCollection
 2017.

Independent Prognostic Value of Hypoxia-inducible Factor 1-alpha Expression in 
Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Lin CS(1)(2), Liu TC(3), Lee MT(4), Yang SF(1)(5), Tsao TC(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Chest Medicine, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Chest Medicine, Cheng-Ching General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Research Assistant Center, Chang Hua Show Chwan Health Care System, Changhua, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Chest, Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Hypoxia is an important factor in tumor angiogenesis, metastasis, and resistance 
to chemotherapy or radiotherapy, and may be an indicator of poor prognosis. The 
transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is the key regulator of 
the hypoxic state. This study was designed to evaluate the prognostic value of 
HIF-1α expression in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Forty-three 
paraffin-embedded biopsy materials were examined using immunohistochemistry. Our 
results indicated that the expression of HIF-1α was high in males, and patients 
with poor Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status and 
metastases. To elucidate the prognostic value of HIF-1α expression, Kaplan-Meier 
analysis was carried out and the results showed that patients with high HIF-1α 
expression had a poorer prognosis than patients with low expression of HIF-1α. 
After adjusting clinical parameters by the Cox proportional hazards model, our 
results demonstrated that high HIF-1α expression is an independent prognostic 
factor for SCLC with a 39.2-fold risk of death (p<0.003). In conclusion, we have 
provided evidence that HIF-1α expression has significant value in predicting 
survival of patients with SCLC and is an independent prognostic factor beyond 
ECOG performance and metastasis status.

DOI: 10.7150/ijms.19512
PMCID: PMC5562133
PMID: 28824314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.