1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 23;12(8):e0183719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183719. 
eCollection 2017.

TGC repeat expansion in the TCF4 gene increases the risk of Fuchs' endothelial 
corneal dystrophy in Australian cases.

Kuot A(1), Hewitt AW(2)(3), Snibson GR(2), Souzeau E(1), Mills R(1), Craig 
JE(1), Burdon KP(1)(3), Sharma S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders 
University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(2)Centre for Eye Research Australia, Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Tasmania, 
Australia.

Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is a progressive, vision impairing 
disease. Common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and a trinucleotide 
repeat polymorphism, thymine-guanine-cytosine (TGC), in the TCF4 gene have been 
associated with the risk of FECD in some populations. We previously reported 
association of SNPs in TCF4 with FECD risk in the Australian population. The aim 
of this study was to determine whether TGC repeat polymorphism in TCF4 is 
associated with FECD in the Australian population. In 189 unrelated Australian 
cases with advanced late-onset FECD and 183 matched controls, the TGC repeat 
polymorphism located in intron 3 of TCF4 was genotyped using a short tandem 
repeat (STR) assay. The repeat length was verified by direct sequencing in 
selected homozygous carriers. We found significant association between the 
expanded TGC repeat (≥ 40 repeats) in TCF4 and advanced FECD (P = 2.58 × 10-22; 
OR = 15.66 (95% CI: 7.79-31.49)). Genotypic analysis showed that 51% of cases 
(97) compared to 5% of controls (9) were heterozygous or homozygous for the 
expanded repeat allele. Furthermore, the repeat expansion showed stronger 
association than the most significantly associated SNP, rs613872, in TCF4, with 
the disease in the Australian cohort. This and haplotype analysis of both the 
polymorphisms suggest that considering both the polymorphisms together rather 
than either of the two alone would better predict susceptibility to FECD in the 
Australian population. This is the first study to report association of the TGC 
trinucleotide repeat expansion in TCF4 with advanced FECD in the Australian 
population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0183719
PMCID: PMC5568371
PMID: 28832669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.