1. Biol Open. 2017 Oct 15;6(10):1483-1492. doi: 10.1242/bio.024950.

Molecular regulation of high muscle mass in developing Blonde d'Aquitaine cattle 
foetuses.

Cassar-Malek I(1), Boby C(1), Picard B(1), Reverter A(2), Hudson NJ(3).

Author information:
(1)UMR1213 Herbivores, Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, VetAgro 
Sup, 63122 Saint Genès Champanelle, Clermont-Ferrand F-63122, France.
(2)Agriculture, Commonwealth Science and Industrial Research Organisation, 
Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Brisbane 4075, Australia.
(3)School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane 
4075, Australia n.hudson@uq.edu.au.

The Blonde d'Aquitaine (BA) is a French cattle breed with enhanced muscularity, 
partly attributable to a MSTN mutation. The BA m. Semitendinosus has a faster 
muscle fibre isoform phenotype comprising a higher proportion of fast type IIX 
fibres compared to age-matched Charolais (CH). To better understand the 
molecular network of modifications in BA compared to CH muscle, we assayed the 
transcriptomes of the m. Semitendinosus at 110, 180, 210 and 260 days 
postconception (dpc). We used a combination of differential expression (DE) and 
regulatory impact factors (RIF) to compare and contrast muscle gene expression 
between the breeds. Prominently developmentally regulated genes in both breeds 
reflected the replacement of embryonic myosin isoforms (MYL4, MYH3) with adult 
isoforms (MYH1) and the upregulation of mitochondrial metabolism (CKMT2, 
AGXT2L1) in preparation for birth. However, the transition to a fast, glycolytic 
muscle phenotype in the MSTN mutant BA is detectable through downregulation of 
various slow twitch subunits (TNNC1, MYH7, TPM3, CSRP3) beyond 210 dpc, and a 
small but consistent genome-wide reduction in mRNA encoding the mitoproteome. 
Across the breeds, NRIP2 is the regulatory gene possessing a network change most 
similar to that of MSTN.

© 2017. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.024950
PMCID: PMC5665461
PMID: 28838967

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.