1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 24;7(1):9331. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-09750-9.

rs1760944 Polymorphism in the APE1 Region is Associated with Risk and Prognosis 
of Osteosarcoma in the Chinese Han Population.

Xiao X(1), Yang Y(2), Ren Y(1), Zou D(1), Zhang K(1), Wu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Spine Surgery, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Spine Surgery, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Jinan, 
Shandong, China. wu_yingguang@163.com.

The effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at APE1 have been 
investigated in several types of cancer. However, no reports of the association 
of APE1 polymorphisms with osteosarcoma (OS) have been published. The present 
study was designed to determine whether APE1 polymorphisms (rs1130409, 
rs1760944, rs1760941, rs2275008, rs17111750) are associated with OS. A 2-stage 
case-control study was performed in a total of 378 OS patients and 616 normal 
controls. Individuals carrying TG and GG genotypes had significantly lower risk 
of developing OS than those with the WT genotype TT at rs1760944 (OR = 0.65, 
95%CI 0.49-0.86; OR = 0.50, 95%CI 0.34-0.74, respectively). OS patients with 
allele G at rs1760944 were less susceptible to low differentiation tumor and 
metastasis (OR = 0.73, 95%CI 0.54-0.98; OR = 0.63, 95%CI 0.43-0.92, 
respectively). Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank results revealed that OS 
patients harboring genotype GG and G allele at rs1760944 had better survival 
(P < 0.001 for both). In addition, the APE1 protein was underexpressed in 
individuals who carried G allele at rs1760944. This study suggested that APE1 
rs1760944 polymorphism is associated with decreased risk of developing OS and 
better survival of OS patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-09750-9
PMCID: PMC5570937
PMID: 28839218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.