1. J Thorac Dis. 2017 Jul;9(7):2071-2078. doi: 10.21037/jtd.2017.07.14.

Differences between low and high grade fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung: a 
clinicopathological and molecular study.

Zhang J(1), Sun J(1), Liang XL(1), Lu JL(1), Luo YF(1), Liang ZY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC) is a rare entity of lung 
cancer. It is classified into low-grade fetal adenocarcinoma (L-FLAC) and 
high-grade fetal adenocarcinoma (H-FLAC). We aim to report the 
clinicopathological and molecular features of FLAC in Chinese patients.
METHODS: FLACs were screened from a consecutive lung adenocarcinoma series 
comprising 920 cases. The clinicopathological features L-FLAC and H-FLAC were 
retrospectively reviewed via immunohistochemical study and mutation analysis.
RESULTS: Three L-FLAC and five H-FLAC cases were identified. L-FLAC mainly 
occurred in young patients and was predominantly in stage I upon diagnosis and 
conferred favorable outcomes. L-FLAC tumors were characterized by the 
glycogen-rich columnar cells lining the complex glandular structures, with low 
nuclear atypia, morule formation, and mainly nuclear- and cytoplasmic-localized 
β-catenin expression. In contrast, H-FLAC predominantly occurred in elderly men 
with a history of smoking. The stage of H-FLAC was often advanced at 
presentation and had a poor prognosis. H-FLAC tumors exhibited more prominent 
atypia of the nucleus, the absence of morule formation, and largely 
membrane-localized β-catenin. All 5 H-FLACs were immunohistochemically 
characterized by overexpression of the p53 protein; the L-FLAC tumors were 
negative for p53. Two cases of H-FLAC were positive for AFP. No Her-2 or 
ALK-D5F3 overexpression was observed in any of the tumors. EGFR L858R point 
mutation was identified in one of the H-FLAC cases. EGFR T790M mutation was 
detected in one of the L-FLAC cases. No mutations in KRAS, PIK3CA or BRAF were 
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: L-FLAC and H-FLAC exhibited distinctive clinicopathological, 
immunophenotypic and molecular features with potential prognostic value.

DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.07.14
PMCID: PMC5542993
PMID: 28840008

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.