1. Bone Rep. 2016 Jun 14;7:26-32. doi: 10.1016/j.bonr.2016.06.002. eCollection
2017  Dec.

Measles virus nucleocapsid protein modulates the Signal Regulatory Protein-β1 
(SIRPβ1) to enhance osteoclast differentiation in Paget's disease of bone.

Sundaram K(1), Sambandam Y(1), Shanmugarajan S(1), Rao DS(2), Reddy SV(1).

Author information:
(1)Darby Children's Research Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

Paget's disease of bone (PDB) is a chronic localized bone disorder in an elderly 
population. Environmental factors such as paramyxovirus are implicated in PDB 
and measles virus nucleocapsid protein (MVNP) has been shown to induce pagetic 
osteoclasts (OCLs). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying MVNP 
stimulation of OCL differentiation in the PDB are unclear. We therefore 
determined the MVNP regulated gene expression profiling during OCL 
differentiation. Agilent microarray analysis of gene expression identified high 
levels of SIRPβ1 (353-fold) expression in MVNP transduced human bone marrow 
mononuclear cells stimulated with RANKL. Real-time PCR analysis further 
confirmed that MVNP alone upregulates SIRPβ1 mRNA expression in these cells. 
Also, bone marrow mononuclear cells derived from patients with PDB showed high 
levels of SIRPβ1 mRNA expression compared to normal subjects. We further show 
that MVNP increases SIRPβ1 interaction with DAP12 adaptor protein in the 
presence and absence of RANKL stimulation. shRNA knockdown of SIRPβ1 expression 
in normal human bone marrow monocytes decreased the levels of MVNP enhanced 
p-Syk and c-Fos expression. In addition, SIRPβ1 knockdown significantly 
decreased MVNP stimulated dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein 
(DC-STAMP) and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) mRNA expression during OCL 
differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrated the contribution of SIRPβ1 in MVNP 
induced OCL formation and bone resorption. Thus, our results suggest that MVNP 
modulation of SIRPβ1 provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms which 
control high bone turnover in PDB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bonr.2016.06.002
PMCID: PMC5558424
PMID: 28840181