1. J Vasc Surg. 2018 Jul;68(1):225-233.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2017.04.071. Epub 
2017 Aug 26.

Role of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genetic variants in Marfan syndrome.

De Cario R(1), Sticchi E(2), Lucarini L(3), Attanasio M(4), Nistri S(5), 
Marcucci R(6), Pepe G(2), Giusti B(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of Critical Medical 
Care and Medical Specialities, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Marfan 
Syndrome and Related Disorders Regional (Tuscany) Referral Center, Careggi 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of Critical Medical 
Care and Medical Specialities, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Marfan 
Syndrome and Related Disorders Regional (Tuscany) Referral Center, Careggi 
Hospital, Florence, Italy; Center of Excellence for the Study at Molecular and 
Clinical Level of Chronic, Degenerative and Neoplastic Diseases to Develop Novel 
Therapies, DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
(NEUROFARBA), Section of Pharmacology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of Critical Medical 
Care and Medical Specialities, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Center 
for Bleeding Disorders, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(5)Cardiology Service, CMSR Veneto Medica, Altavilla Vicentina, Vicenza, Italy.
(6)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of Critical Medical 
Care and Medical Specialities, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Center 
of Excellence for the Study at Molecular and Clinical Level of Chronic, 
Degenerative and Neoplastic Diseases to Develop Novel Therapies, DENOTHE Center, 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Atherothrombotic Diseases Center, 
Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of Critical Medical 
Care and Medical Specialities, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Marfan 
Syndrome and Related Disorders Regional (Tuscany) Referral Center, Careggi 
Hospital, Florence, Italy; Center of Excellence for the Study at Molecular and 
Clinical Level of Chronic, Degenerative and Neoplastic Diseases to Develop Novel 
Therapies, DENOTHE Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; 
Atherothrombotic Diseases Center, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy. Electronic 
address: betti.giusti@unifi.it.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variants in transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) receptors 
type 1 (TGFBR1) and type 2 (TGFBR2) genes have been associated with different 
hereditary connective tissue disorders sharing thoracic aortic aneurysm and 
dissection (TAA/D). Mutations in both TGFBR1/2 genes have been described in 
patients with TAA/D and Marfan syndrome (MFS), and they are associated 
consistently with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. The existing literature shows discordant 
data resulting from mutational screening of TGFBR1/2 genes in patients with MFS. 
The aim of the study was to investigate the role of TGFBR1/2 genetic variants in 
determining and/or modulating MFS clinical phenotype.
METHODS: We investigated 75 unrelated patients with MFS referred to the Center 
for Marfan Syndrome and Related Disorders (Careggi University Hospital, 
Florence) who were subjected to FBN1 and TGFBR1/2 Sanger mutational screening.
RESULTS: Forty-seven patients with MFS (63%) carried a pathogenetic FBN1 
mutation. No pathogenetic mutations were detected in TGFBR1/2 genes. Ten common 
polymorphisms were identified in TGFBR2 and 6 in TGFBR1. Their association with 
cardiovascular manifestations was evaluated. Carriers of the A allele of 
rs11466512, delA allele of c.383delA or delT allele of c.1256-15del1T 
polymorphisms had a trend toward or significantly reduced z-scores (median 
[interquartile range (IQR)], 2.2 [1.13-4.77]; 2.1 [1.72-3.48]; 2.5 [1.85-3.86]) 
with respect to homozygous patients with wild-type MFS (median [IQR], 4.20 
[2.39-7.25]; 3.9 [2.19-7.00]; 3.9 [2.14-6.93]). Carriers of the A allele of the 
rs2276767 polymorphism showed a trend toward increased z-score (median [IQR], 
4.9 [2.14-7.16]) with respect to patients with wild-type MFS (median [IQR], 3.3 
[1.75-5.45]). The protective effect of TGFBR1/2 genetic score including all the 
4 variants was also evaluated. Patients with MFS with two or more protective 
alleles included in the score had statistically significant reduced aortic 
z-scores (median [IQR], 2.20 [1.48-3.37]) with respect to patients with 1 or no 
protective alleles (median [IQR], 4.20 [2.48-7.12]; P = .007). Patients with 
severe aortic manifestations (aortic z-score ≥ 2 or aortic surgery) showed a 
significantly lower prevalence of subjects with two or more protective alleles 
included in the genetic score (29.7%) than patients with no or milder 
cardiovascular involvement (63.6%; P = .029). The genetic score protective 
effect on global aortic manifestations severity (aortic z-score ≥ 2 or aortic 
surgery) was also observed at the logistic regression analysis adjusted for the 
presence of FBN1 gene mutations (odds ratio, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.05-0.84; P = .028).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our data reappraise the role of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 as 
major genes in patients with MFS, and suggest that TGFBR1/2 genetic variants (in 
particular when evaluated as a burden by score) might play a role in modulating 
the severity of cardiovascular manifestation in MFS.

Copyright © 2017 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2017.04.071
PMID: 28847661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]