1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Oct 20;292(42):17387-17398. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.804971.
Epub  2017 Aug 23.

Conserved functional consequences of disease-associated mutations in the slide 
helix of Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 subunits of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel.

Cooper PE(1), McClenaghan C(1), Chen X(2), Stary-Weinzinger A(2), Nichols CG(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and Center for the 
Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110 and.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Vienna, 
Althanstrasse 14, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)From the Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and Center for the 
Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110 and cnichols@wustl.edu.

Cantu syndrome (CS) is a condition characterized by a range of anatomical 
defects, including cardiomegaly, hyperflexibility of the joints, hypertrichosis, 
and craniofacial dysmorphology. CS is associated with multiple missense 
mutations in the genes encoding the regulatory sulfonylurea receptor 2 (SUR2) 
subunits of the ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channel as well as two mutations (V65M 
and C176S) in the Kir6.1 (KCNJ8) subunit. Previous analysis of leucine and 
alanine substitutions at the Val-65-equivalent site (Val-64) in Kir6.2 indicated 
no major effects on channel function. In this study, we characterized the 
effects of both valine-to-methionine and valine-to-leucine substitutions at this 
position in both Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 using ion flux and patch clamp techniques. We 
report that methionine substitution, but not leucine substitution, results in 
increased open state stability and hence significantly reduced ATP sensitivity 
and a marked increase of channel activity in the intact cell irrespective of the 
identity of the coassembled SUR subunit. Sulfonylurea inhibitors, such as 
glibenclamide, are potential therapies for CS. However, as a consequence of the 
increased open state stability, both Kir6.1(V65M) and Kir6.2(V64M) mutations 
essentially abolish high-affinity sensitivity to the KATP blocker glibenclamide 
in both intact cells and excised patches. This raises the possibility that, at 
least for some CS mutations, sulfonylurea therapy may not prove to be successful 
and highlights the need for detailed pharmacogenomic analyses of CS mutations.

Â© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.804971
PMCID: PMC5655515
PMID: 28842488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article