1. Sci Rep. 2017 Aug 30;7(1):10023. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-09951-2.

A signal-based method for finding driver modules of breast cancer metastasis to 
the lung.

Yan G(1)(2), Chen V(1)(2), Lu X(1)(2), Lu S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(2)Center for Causal Discovery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA. songjian@pitt.edu.
(4)Center for Causal Discovery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
songjian@pitt.edu.

Tumor metastasis is mainly caused by somatic genomic alterations (SGAs) that 
perturb pathways regulating metastasis-relevant activities and thus help the 
primary tumor to adapt to the new microenvironment. Identifying drivers of 
metastasis, i.e. SGAs, sheds light on the metastasis mechanism and provides 
guidance for targeted therapy. In this paper, we introduce a novel method to 
search for SGAs driving breast cancer metastasis to the lung. First, we search 
for transcriptomic modules with genesÂ that are differentially expressed in 
breast cell lines with strong metastatic activities to the lung and co-expressed 
in a large number of breast tumors. Then, for each transcriptomic module, we 
search for a set of SGA genes (driver modules) such that genes in each driver 
module carry a common signal regulating the transcriptomic module. Evaluations 
indicate that many genes in driver modules are indeed related to metastasis, and 
our methods have identified many new driver candidates. We further choose two 
novel metastatic driver genes, BCL2L11 and CDH9, for in vitro verification. The 
wound healing assay reveals that inhibiting either BCL2L11 or CDH9 will enhance 
the migration of cell lines, which provides evidence that these two genes are 
suppressors of tumor metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-09951-2
PMCID: PMC5577160
PMID: 28855549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.