1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Sep 7;101(3):478-484. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.004.
Epub  2017 Aug 31.

Spatial Clustering of de Novo Missense Mutations Identifies Candidate 
Neurodevelopmental Disorder-Associated Genes.

Lelieveld SH(1), Wiel L(2), Venselaar H(3), Pfundt R(4), Vriend G(3), Veltman 
JA(5), Brunner HG(6), Vissers LELM(4), Gilissen C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the Netherlands; Centre 
for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, 
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the 
Netherlands; Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the 
Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre, Maastricht, 6202 AZ, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, the 
Netherlands. Electronic address: christian.gilissen@radboudumc.nl.

Haploinsufficiency (HI) is the best characterized mechanism through which 
dominant mutations exert their effect and cause disease. Non-haploinsufficiency 
(NHI) mechanisms, such as gain-of-function and dominant-negative mechanisms, are 
often characterized by the spatial clustering of mutations, thereby affecting 
only particular regions or base pairs of a gene. Variants leading to 
haploinsufficency might occasionally cluster as well, for example in critical 
domains, but such clustering is on the whole less pronounced with mutations 
often spread throughout the gene. Here we exploit this property and develop a 
method to specifically identify genes with significant spatial clustering 
patterns of de novo mutations in large cohorts. We apply our method to a dataset 
of 4,061 de novo missense mutations from published exome studies of trios with 
intellectual disability and developmental disorders (ID/DD) and successfully 
identify 15 genes with clustering mutations, including 12 genes for which 
mutations are known to cause neurodevelopmental disorders. For 11 out of these 
12, NHI mutation mechanisms have been reported. Additionally, we identify three 
candidate ID/DD-associated genes of which two have an established role in 
neuronal processes. We further observe a higher intolerance to normal genetic 
variation of the identified genes compared to known genes for which mutations 
lead to HI. Finally, 3D modeling of these mutations on their protein structures 
shows that 81% of the observed mutations are unlikely to affect the overall 
structural integrity and that they therefore most likely act through a mechanism 
other than HI.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.08.004
PMCID: PMC5591029
PMID: 28867141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]