1. Front Immunol. 2017 Aug 16;8:983. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00983. eCollection 
2017.

Alanine Mutagenesis in the Complementarity Determining Region 3 of the MTB and 
HIV-1 Peptide-Bispecific T Cell Receptor Beta Chain Affects Ligand Recognition.

Zhou CY(1), Wang RN(1), Wen Q(1), He WT(1), Zhang SM(1), Du XL(1), Yang JH(1), 
Ma L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Immunology, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis/human immunodeficiency virus (MTB/HIV) coinfection 
presents a special challenge to the prevention and treatment of tuberculosis and 
HIV/AIDS. Adoptive transfer of high-affinity T cell receptor (TCR) gene-modified 
T cells against MTB and HIV antigens is a promising approach to treating MTB/HIV 
coinfected patients whose cellular immunity is obviously disordered. We have 
previously successfully identified that a bispecific TCR screened out from 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of a HLA-A*0201+ healthy individual using the 
complementarity determining region 3 (CDR3) spectratype analysis recognizes both 
MTB Ag85B199-207 and HIV-1 Env120-128 peptide. However, it has not been known 
how residues on CDR3 loops, which have been shown to play a leading role in 
antigen binding and specificity contribute to the bispecific TCR contact with 
the peptide-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) complexes. In this study, we 
provided an extensive investigation of residues in the predicted CDR3 of the 
bispecific TCR beta (β) chain using alanine scanning mutagenesis. Our data 
showed that three of the five substituted residues (G115A, T116A, A117G) in 
CDR3β of the bispecific TCR caused a significantly diminished T cell response to 
antigen, whereas the remaining two substituted residues (D114A, S118A) resulted 
in completely eliminated response, thus identifying the two residues that were 
particularly critical for the recognition of peptide-MHC in the bispecific TCR. 
These findings will provide an imperative foundation for generating an improved 
high-affinity bispecific TCR for use in T cell adoptive immunotherapy for 
MTB/HIV coinfected individuals.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.00983
PMCID: PMC5561015
PMID: 28861087