1. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2017 Oct;14(10):881-890. doi: 
10.1080/14789450.2017.1376658. Epub 2017 Sep 14.

Glycosylation profiling to evaluate glycoprotein immunogens against HIV-1.

Behrens AJ(1), Struwe WB(1), Crispin M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a Oxford Glycobiology Institute, Department of Biochemistry , University of 
Oxford , Oxford , UK.
(2)b Department of Immunology and Microbial Science , The Scripps Research 
Institute , La Jolla , CA , USA.
(3)c Centre for Biological Sciences and Institute for Life Sciences , University 
of Southampton , Southampton SO17 1BJ , UK.

Much of the efforts to develop a vaccine against the human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) have focused on the design of recombinant mimics of the viral 
attachment glycoprotein (Env). The leading immunogens exhibit native-like 
antigenic properties and are being investigated for their ability to induce 
broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs). Understanding the relative abundance of 
glycans at particular glycosylation sites on these immunogens is important as 
most bNAbs have evolved to recognize or evade the dense coat of glycans that 
masks much of the protein surface. Understanding the glycan structures on 
candidate immunogens enables triaging between native-like conformations and 
immunogens lacking key structural features as steric constraints limit glycan 
processing. The sensitivity of the processing state of a particular glycan to 
its structural environment has led to the need for quantitative glycan profiling 
and site-specific analysis to probe the structural integrity of immunogens. 
Areas covered: We review analytical methodologies for HIV immunogen evaluation 
and discuss how these studies have led to a greater understanding of the 
structural constraints that control the glycosylation state of the HIV 
attachment and fusion spike. Expert commentary: Total composition and 
site-specific glycosylation profiling are emerging as standard methods in the 
evaluation of Env-based immunogen candidates.

DOI: 10.1080/14789450.2017.1376658
PMCID: PMC5846109
PMID: 28870097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest A.-J. Behrens is a 
recipient of a Chris Scanlan Memorial Scholarship from Corpus Christi College. 
The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with 
any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict 
with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from 
those disclosed