1. IUCrJ. 2017 May 24;4(Pt 4):439-454. doi: 10.1107/S205225251700570X.
eCollection  2017 Jul 1.

Serial millisecond crystallography of membrane and soluble protein microcrystals 
using synchrotron radiation.

Martin-Garcia JM(1), Conrad CE(1)(2), Nelson G(1)(3), Stander N(1)(3), Zatsepin 
NA(1)(3), Zook J(1), Zhu L(1), Geiger J(1), Chun E(1), Kissick D(4), Hilgart 
MC(4), Ogata C(4), Ishchenko A(5), Nagaratnam N(1), Roy-Chowdhury S(1), Coe 
J(1), Subramanian G(1)(3), Schaffer A(1), James D(6), Ketwala G(3), Venugopalan 
N(4), Xu S(4), Corcoran S(4), Ferguson D(4), Weierstall U(1)(3), Spence JCH(3), 
Cherezov V(5), Fromme P(1), Fischetti RF(4), Liu W(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Sciences and Biodesign Center for Applied Structural 
Discovery, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
(2)Structural Biophysics Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA.
(3)Department of Physics, Arizona State University, PO Box 871504, Tempe, AZ 
85287, USA.
(4)Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South Cass Avenue, 
Lemont, IL 60439, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Bridge Institute, University of Southern California, 
3430 South Vermont Avenue, MC 3303, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.
(6)Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen, Switzerland.

Crystal structure determination of biological macromolecules using the novel 
technique of serial femtosecond crystallography (SFX) is severely limited by the 
scarcity of X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) sources. However, recent and future 
upgrades render microfocus beamlines at synchrotron-radiation sources suitable 
for room-temperature serial crystallography data collection also. Owing to the 
longer exposure times that are needed at synchrotrons, serial data collection is 
termed serial millisecond crystallography (SMX). As a result, the number of SMX 
experiments is growing rapidly, with a dozen experiments reported so far. Here, 
the first high-viscosity injector-based SMX experiments carried out at a US 
synchrotron source, the Advanced Photon Source (APS), are reported. 
Microcrystals (5-20 µm) of a wide variety of proteins, including lysozyme, 
thaumatin, phycocyanin, the human A2A adenosine receptor (A2AAR), the soluble 
fragment of the membrane lipoprotein Flpp3 and proteinase K, were screened. 
Crystals suspended in lipidic cubic phase (LCP) or a high-molecular-weight 
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO; molecular weight 8 000 000) were delivered to the 
beam using a high-viscosity injector. In-house data-reduction (hit-finding) 
software developed at APS as well as the SFX data-reduction and analysis 
software suites Cheetah and CrystFEL enabled efficient on-site SMX data 
monitoring, reduction and processing. Complete data sets were collected for 
A2AAR, phycocyanin, Flpp3, proteinase K and lysozyme, and the structures of 
A2AAR, phycocyanin, proteinase K and lysozyme were determined at 3.2, 3.1, 2.65 
and 2.05 Å resolution, respectively. The data demonstrate the feasibility of 
serial millisecond crystallography from 5-20 µm crystals using a high-viscosity 
injector at APS. The resolution of the crystal structures obtained in this study 
was dictated by the current flux density and crystal size, but upcoming 
developments in beamline optics and the planned APS-U upgrade will increase the 
intensity by two orders of magnitude. These developments will enable structure 
determination from smaller and/or weakly diffracting microcrystals.

DOI: 10.1107/S205225251700570X
PMCID: PMC5571807
PMID: 28875031