1. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2018 May;65(3):294-305. doi: 10.1002/bab.1606. Epub 
2017 Sep 23.

Taxadiene-5α-ol is a minor product of CYP725A4 when expressed in Escherichia 
coli.

Sagwan-Barkdoll L(1), Anterola AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL, 
USA.

CYP725A4 is a P450 enzyme from Taxus cuspidata that catalyzes the formation of 
taxadiene-5α-ol (T5α-ol) from taxadiene in paclitaxel biosynthesis. Past 
attempts expressing CYP725A4 in heterologous hosts reported the formation of 
5(12)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (OCT) and/or 5(11)-oxa-3(11)-cyclotaxane (iso-OCT) 
instead of, or in addition to, T5α-ol. Here, we report that T5α-ol is produced 
as a minor product by Escherichia coli expressing both taxadiene synthase and 
CYP725A4. The major products were OCT and iso-OCT, while trace amounts of 
unidentified monooxygenated taxanes were also detected by gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Since OCT and iso-OCT had not been found in 
nature, we tested the hypothesis that protein-protein interaction of CYP725A4 
with redox partners, such as cytochrome P450 reductase (CPR) and cytochrome b5, 
may affect the products formed by CYP725A4, possibly favoring the formation of 
T5α-ol over OCT and iso-OCT. Our results show that coexpression of CYP725A4 with 
CPR from different organisms did not change the relative ratios of OCT, iso-OCT, 
and T5α-ol, while cytochrome b5 decreased overall levels of the products formed. 
Although unsuccessful in finding conditions that promote T5α-ol formation over 
other products, we used our results to clarify conflicting claims in the 
literature and discuss other possible approaches to produce paclitaxel via 
metabolic and enzyme engineering.

© 2017 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.1606
PMCID: PMC5839926
PMID: 28876471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]