1. Virulence. 2018 Jan 1;9(1):133-148. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2017.1366408. Epub 
2017 Sep 21.

Altered virulence of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) H5N8 reassortant 
viruses in mammalian models.

Park SJ(1)(2), Kim EH(1)(2), Kwon HI(1)(2), Song MS(1)(2), Kim SM(1)(2), Kim 
YI(1)(2), Si YJ(1)(2), Lee IW(1), Nguyen HD(1)(2), Shin OS(3), Kim CJ(4), Choi 
YK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Microbiology , College of Medicine and Medical Research 
Institute, Chungbuk National University , Cheongju , Republic of Korea.
(2)b Zoonotic Infectious Diseases Research Center, Chungbuk National University 
, Cheongju , Korea.
(3)c Brain Korea 21 Plus for Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Korea 
University , Seoul , Republic of Korea.
(4)d College of Veterinary Medicine, Chungnam National University , Daejeon , 
Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Virulence. 2018 Jan 1;9(1):20-21. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2017.1386832.

Recently identified highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N8 viruses (clade 
2.3.4.4) are relatively low to moderately pathogenic in mammalian hosts compared 
with HPAI H5N1 viruses. In this study, we generated reassortant viruses 
comprised of A/MD/Korea/W452/2014(H5N8) with substitution of individual genes 
from A/EM/Korea/W149/2006(H5N1) to understand the contribution of each viral 
gene to virulence in mammals. Substituting the PB2 gene segment or the NA gene 
segment of the H5N8 virus by that from the H5N1 virus resulted in significantly 
enhanced pathogenicity compared with the parental H5N8 virus in mice. Of note, 
substitution of the PB2 gene segment of the H5N8 virus by that from the H5N1 
virus resulted in a 1000-fold increase in virulence for mice compared with the 
parental virus (MLD50 decreased from 105.8 to 102.5 EID50). Further, the 
W452W149PB2 virus also induced the highest virus titers in lungs at all time 
points and the highest levels of inflammatory cytokine responses among all 
viruses tested. This high virulence phenotype was also confirmed by high viral 
titers in the respiratory tracts of infected ferrets. Further, a mini-genome 
assay revealed that W452W149PB2 has significantly increased polymerase activity 
(p < 0.001). Taken together, our study demonstrates that a single gene 
substitution from other avian influenza viruses can alter the pathogenicity of 
recent H5N8 viruses, and therefore emphasizes the need for intensive monitoring 
of reassortment events among co-circulating avian and mammalian viruses.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2017.1366408
PMCID: PMC5955454
PMID: 28873012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]