1. Oncotarget. 2017 Apr 24;8(32):52837-52845. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.17375. 
eCollection 2017 Aug 8.

Uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 2B15 D85Y gene polymorphism is 
associated with lower prostate cancer risk: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Zhong X(1), Feng J(1), Xiao Y(1), Wang P(1), Fan Q(1), Wu R(1), Hu W(1), Huang 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing, 400037, P. R. China.

UGT2B15 (uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 2B15) catalyzes the 
conversion of lipophilic C19 steroid androgens such as dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 
into water-soluble metabolites that can be excreted. Studies of the association 
between the UGT2B15 gene D85Y polymorphism and prostate cancer have yielded 
contradictory results. We therefore systematically searched in the PubMed, 
EMBASE, Science Direct/Elsevier, CNKI, and Cochrane Library databases, and 
identified six relevant studies with which to perform a meta-analysis of the 
relation between UGT2B15 D85Y polymorphism and prostate cancer risk. Our 
meta-analysis revealed a significant association between UGT2B15 D85Y gene 
polymorphism and prostate cancer in all genetic models (P<0.05). The combined 
odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were as follows: additive model, 0.53 
and 0.32-0.88; dominant model, 0.51 and 0.33-0.79; recessive model, 0.76 and 
0.60-0.96; co-dominant model, 0.55 and 0.35-0.86; and allele model, 0.70 and 
0.55-0.89. These results are consistent with the idea that the UGT2B15 D85Y 
enzyme variant reduces the risk of prostate cancer by efficiently metabolizing 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), which is associated with prostate cancer progression.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.17375
PMCID: PMC5581074
PMID: 28881775

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.