1. Trends Mol Med. 2017 Oct;23(10):874-898. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2017.08.003.
Epub  2017 Sep 5.

Precision Oncology: The Road Ahead.

Senft D(1), Leiserson MDM(2), Ruppin E(3), Ronai ZA(4).

Author information:
(1)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, NCI designated Cancer Center, 
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Microsoft Research New England, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for 
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD 20742, USA.
(3)School of Computer Sciences and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, 69978, Israel; Center for Bioinformatics and Computational 
Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.
(4)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, NCI designated Cancer Center, 
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Technion Integrated Cancer Center, Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel 
Institute of Technology, Haifa, 31096, Israel. Electronic address: 
zeev@ronailab.net.

Current efforts in precision oncology largely focus on the benefit of 
genomics-guided therapy. Yet, advances in sequencing techniques provide an 
unprecedented view of the complex genetic and nongenetic heterogeneity within 
individual tumors. Herein, we outline the benefits of integrating genomic and 
transcriptomic analyses for advanced precision oncology. We summarize relevant 
computational approaches to detect novel drivers and genetic vulnerabilities, 
suitable for therapeutic exploration. Clinically relevant platforms to 
functionally test predicted drugs/drug combinations for individual patients are 
reviewed. Finally, we highlight the technological advances in single cell 
analysis of tumor specimens. These may ultimately lead to the development of 
next-generation cancer drugs, capable of tackling the hurdles imposed by genetic 
and phenotypic heterogeneity on current anticancer therapies.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2017.08.003
PMCID: PMC5718207
PMID: 28887051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]