1. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 8;7(1):10951. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-11413-8.

Interaction between G-Quadruplex and Zinc Cationic Porphyrin: The Role of the 
Axial Water.

Yao X(1)(2), Song D(3), Qin T(1)(2), Yang C(4), Yu Z(4), Li X(4), Liu K(4), Su 
H(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Institute of 
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China.
(3)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Institute of 
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 
songdi@iccas.ac.cn.
(4)College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China.
(5)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (BNLMS), Institute of 
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. 
hongmei@bnu.edu.cn.
(6)College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China. 
hongmei@bnu.edu.cn.
(7)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. 
hongmei@bnu.edu.cn.

The interaction of ligands with G-quadruplexes has attracted considerable 
attention due to its importance in molecular recognition and anticancer drugs 
design. Here, we utilize triplet excited state as a sensitive reporter to study 
the binding interaction of zinc cationic porphyrin (ZnTMPyP4) with three 
G-quadruplexes, AG3(T2AG3)3, (G4T4G4)2, and (TG4T)4. By monitoring the triplet 
decay dynamics of ZnTMPyP4 with transient absorption spectroscopy, the coexisted 
binding modes via π-π stacking of porphyrin macrocycle and the G-quartets are 
allowed to be identified quantitatively, which involve intercalation (25% and 
36%) versus end-stacking (75% and 64%) for AG3(T2AG3)3 and (G4T4G4)2, and 
end-stacking (23%) versus partial intercalation (77%) for (TG4T)4. It is shown 
that the steric hindrance of the axial water decreases greatly the percentage of 
intercalation. Further, a rapid assessment of binding stoichiometry is fulfilled 
by measuring the triplet decay dynamics under various [G-quadruplex]/[ZnTMPyP4] 
ratios. The binding stoichiometric ratios of G-quadruplex/ZnTMPyP4 are 1:2 for 
AG3(T2AG3)3, 1:1 for (G4T4G4)2, and 1:2 for (TG4T)4, which agree well with 
results obtained by the conventional method of continuous variation analysis. 
These results reveal a clear scenario of G-quadruplex/ZnTMPyP4 interaction and 
provide mechanistic insights for the application of anticancer drug designs 
using G-quadruplex as target.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-11413-8
PMCID: PMC5591184
PMID: 28887497

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.