1. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 8;7(1):10959. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-11497-2.

Neurogenetic plasticity and sex influence the link between corticolimbic 
structural connectivity and trait anxiety.

Kim MJ(1), Avinun R(2), Knodt AR(2), Radtke SR(2), Hariri AR(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of NeuroGenetics, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708, USA. justin.kim@duke.edu.
(2)Laboratory of NeuroGenetics, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke 
University, Durham, NC, 27708, USA.

Corticolimbic pathways connecting the amygdala and ventral prefrontal cortex 
(vPFC) are linked with trait anxiety, but it remains unclear what potential 
genetic moderators contribute to this association. We sought to address this by 
examining the inter-individual variability in neuroplasticity as modeled by a 
functional polymorphism (rs6265) in the human gene for brain derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Amygdala-vPFC pathway fractional anisotropy (FA) 
from 669 diffusion magnetic resonance images was used to examine associations 
with trait anxiety as a function of rs6265 genotype. We first replicated the 
inverse correlation between trait anxiety and amygdala-vPFC pathway FA in women. 
Furthermore, we found a moderating influence of rs6265 genotype such that the 
association between trait anxiety and right amygdala-vPFC pathway FA was 
strongest in women carrying the Met allele, which is linked with decreased 
activity-dependent neuroplasticity. Results indicate that the microstructural 
integrity of pathways supporting communication between the amygdala and vPFC 
help shape the expression of trait anxiety in women, and that this association 
is further modulated by genetically driven variability in neuroplasticity.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-11497-2
PMCID: PMC5591318
PMID: 28887539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.