1. ACS Chem Biol. 2017 Oct 20;12(10):2522-2528. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00711. 
Epub 2017 Sep 13.

Chemoproteomics-Enabled Covalent Ligand Screening Reveals a Thioredoxin-Caspase 
3 Interaction Disruptor That Impairs Breast Cancer Pathogenicity.

Anderson KE(1), To M(1), Olzmann JA(1), Nomura DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, and â€¡Nutritional 
Sciences and Toxicology, University of California, Berkeley , Berkeley, 
California 94720, United States.

Covalent ligand discovery is a promising strategy to develop small-molecule 
effectors against therapeutic targets. Recent studies have shown that 
dichlorotriazines are promising reactive scaffolds that preferentially react 
with lysines. Here, we have synthesized a series of dichlorotriazine-based 
covalent ligands and have screened this library to reveal small molecules that 
impair triple-negative breast cancer cell survival. Upon identifying a lead hit 
from this screen KEA1-97, we used activity-based protein profiling (ABPP)-based 
chemoproteomic platforms to identify that this compound targets lysine 72 of 
thioredoxin-a site previously shown to be important in protein interactions with 
caspase 3 to inhibit caspase 3 activity and suppress apoptosis. We show that 
KEA1-97 disrupts the interaction of thioredoxin with caspase 3, activates 
caspases, and induces apoptosis without affecting thioredoxin activity. 
Moreover, KEA1-97 impairs in vivo breast tumor xenograft growth. Our study 
showcases how the screening of covalent ligands can be coupled with ABPP 
platforms to identify unique anticancer lead and target pairs.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.7b00711
PMCID: PMC6205226
PMID: 28892616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.