1. BMC Res Notes. 2017 Sep 11;10(1):474. doi: 10.1186/s13104-017-2764-9.

Prevalence and trends in transmitted and acquired antiretroviral drug 
resistance, Washington, DC, 1999-2014.

Aldous AM(1), Castel AD(1), Parenti DM(2); DC Cohort Executive Committee.

Collaborators: Greenberg AE, Benator D, Kumar P, Elion R, Ruiz ME, Wood A, 
D'Angelo L, Rakhmanina N, Rana S, Bryant M, Doshi S, Hebou A, Fernandez R, 
Abbott S, Hart R, Kharfen M, Masur H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The George Washington 
University, Milken Institute School of Public Health, Washington, DC, 20037, 
USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, The George Washington University School of 
Medicine, 2150 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC, USA. 
dparenti@mfa.gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Drug resistance limits options for antiretroviral therapy (ART) and 
results in poorer health outcomes among HIV-infected persons. We sought to 
characterize resistance patterns and to identify predictors of resistance in 
Washington, DC.
METHODS: We analyzed resistance in the DC Cohort, a longitudinal study of 
HIV-infected persons in care in Washington, DC. We measured cumulative drug 
resistance (CDR) among participants with any genotype between 1999 and 2014 
(n = 3411), transmitted drug resistance (TDR) in ART-naïve persons (n = 1503), 
and acquired drug resistance (ADR) in persons with genotypes before and after 
ART initiation (n = 309). Using logistic regression, we assessed associations 
between patient characteristics and transmitted resistance to any 
antiretroviral.
RESULTS: Prevalence of TDR was 20.5%, of ADR 40.5%, and of CDR 45.1% in the 
respective analysis groups. From 2004 to 2013, TDR prevalence decreased for 
nucleoside and nucleotide analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (15.0 to 
5.5%; p = 0.0003) and increased for integrase strand transfer inhibitors 
(INSTIs) (0.0-1.4%; p = 0.04). In multivariable analysis, TDR was not associated 
with age, race/ethnicity, HIV risk group, or years from HIV diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this urban cohort of HIV-infected persons, almost half of 
participants tested had evidence of CDR; and resistance to INSTIs was 
increasing. If this trend continues, inclusion of the integrase-encoding region 
in baseline genotype testing should be strongly considered.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-017-2764-9
PMCID: PMC5594524
PMID: 28893321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]