1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Nov;16(5):6722-6728. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7431. Epub 2017
Sep  7.

Simultaneous multi‑gene mutation screening using SNPscan in patients from ethnic 
minorities with nonsyndromic hearing‑impairment in Northwest China.

Duan SH(1), Ma JL(1), Yang XL(1), Guo YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology‑Head and Neck Surgery, Second Hospital of 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730030, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the molecular etiology of nonsyndromic 
hearing impairment (HI) in hearing impaired populations of Hui, Tibetan, and Tu 
ethnicities in northwest China. A total of 283 unrelated subjects with HI who 
attended special education schools in northwest China were enrolled in the 
present study. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in three common 
deafness‑related genes, gap junction protein β2 (GJB2), solute carrier family 26 
member 4 (SLC26A4) and mitochondrially encoded 12S RNA (mtDNA12SrRNA), were 
detected using a SNPscan technique. GJB2 mutations were detected in 14.89% of 
Hui patients, 9.37% of Tibetan patients and 11.83% of Tu patients. The most 
prevalent GJB2 mutation in the Hui and Tu patients was c.235delC. In the Tibetan 
patients, the c.109G>A SNP exhibited the highest allele frequency. SLC26A4 
mutations were detected in 10.64% of Hui patients, 6.25% of Tibetan patients, 
and 8.6% of Tu patients. The most common SLC26A4 mutation was c.919‑2A>Gin the 
Hui, Tibetan, and Tu patients, and the second most common SLC26A4 mutations in 
these patients were c.1517T>G, c.1226G>A andc.2168A>G, respectively. The 
mutation rates ofmtDNA12SrRNA in the Hui, Tibetan, and Tu patients were 1.06, 
5.21, and 5.38%, respectively. These findings demonstrate that the mutation 
spectra of these deafness‑related genes are unique amongst these three ethnic 
groups. This information will be helpful in designing a protocol for genetic 
testing for deafness and for achieving accurate molecular diagnoses in northwest 
China.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7431
PMCID: PMC5865789
PMID: 28901477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]