1. Theranostics. 2017 Jul 23;7(13):3306-3318. doi: 10.7150/thno.20242.
eCollection  2017.

A Nanosystem of Amphiphilic Oligopeptide-Drug Conjugate Actualizing Both αvβ3 
Targeting and Reduction-Triggered Release for Maytansinoid.

Liang Y(1)(2), Li S(2), Wang X(2), He B(2), He B(2), Dai W(2), Zhang H(2), Wang 
X(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Zhou D(1), Zhang Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.

To design a prodrug-based self-assembling nanosystem with both ligand targeting 
and stimuli-responsive features, and elucidate the superiority of each targeting 
strategy and the synergistic effect between them, we synthesized four small 
molecule amphiphilic peptide-drug conjugates (APDCs) using maytansinoid (DM1) as 
a cytotoxic agent, cRGDfK as a homing peptide, and disulfide (SS) or thioether 
(SMCC) as linker. Owing to their amphiphilicity, the APDCs could self-assemble 
into nanoparticles (APDC@NPs) which were evaluated in vitro in three different 
cell lines and in vivo in tumor-bearing C57BL/6 mice. The RSSD@NPs showed the 
strongest interaction with αvβ3 integrin, highest cell uptake and intracellular 
free drug level, and best antitumor efficacy in vitro and in vivo, while it 
shared the same goodness with other test nanosystems in terms of high drug 
loading, EPR effect and free of potentially toxic polymers. Especially, the in 
vivo efficacy of RSSD@NPs was 2 fold of free DM1 which is too cytotoxic to be a 
drug, while the active targeted APDC@NPs demonstrated acceptable system, tissue 
and blood compatibility. In αvβ3-positive cells or tumors, the RGD targeting 
contributed much more than disulfide in anticancer effect. The maximum synergism 
of the two strategies reached to 22 fold in vitro and 3 fold in vivo. Generally, 
the active targeting, prodrug and nanosystem could significantly decrease the 
toxicity of free DM1 and improve its therapy outcome via combining active 
targeting, prodrug and nanopreparation, especially the dual targeting strategies 
and their synergism.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.20242
PMCID: PMC5595133
PMID: 28900511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.