1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2017 Sep;21(9):523-530. doi:
10.1089/gtmb.2016.0426.

A Combined Study of SLC6A15 Gene Polymorphism and the Resting-State Functional 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging in First-Episode Drug-Naive Major Depressive 
Disorder.

Wang L(1)(2), Liu Z(1), Cao X(1), Li J(1), Zhang A(1), Sun N(1), Yang C(1), 
Zhang K(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Psychiatry, The First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University , 
Taiyuan, China .
(2)2 The First Clinical Medical College, Shanxi Medical University , Taiyuan, 
China .

AIMS: The SLC6A15 gene has been identified as a novel candidate gene for major 
depressive disorder (MDD). However, the mechanism underlying the effects of how 
the SLC6A15 gene affects functional brain activity of patients with MDD remains 
unknown.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the effect of the SLC6A15 gene 
polymorphism, rs1545843, on resting-state brain function in MDD with the imaging 
genomic technology and the regional homogeneity (ReHo) method. Sixty-seven MDD 
patients and 44 healthy controls underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging 
scans and genotyping. The differences in ReHo between genotypes were initially 
tested using the student's t test. We then performed a 2 × 2 
(genotypes × disease status) analysis of variance to identify the main effects 
of genotypes, disease status, and their interactions in MDD.
RESULTS: MDD patients with A+ genotypes showed decreased ReHo in the medial 
cingulum compared with MDD patients with the GG genotype. This was in contrast 
to normal controls with A+ genotypes who showed increased ReHo in the posterior 
cingulum and the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes and decreased ReHo in the 
left corpus callosum, compared with controls with the GG genotypes. The main 
effect of disease was found in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes. The 
main effect of genotypes was found in the left corpus callosum and the frontal 
lobe. There was no interaction between rs1545843 genotypes and disease status. 
We found that the left corpus callosum ReHo was positively correlated with total 
scores of the Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD) (p = 0.021), so as was the left 
inferior parietal gyrus ReHo with cognitive disorder (p = 0.02). In addition, 
the right middle temporal gyrus had a negative correlation with retardation 
(p = 0.049).
CONCLUSION: We observed an association between the SLC6A15 rs1545843 and 
resting-state brain function of the corpus callosum, cingulum and the frontal, 
parietal, and temporal lobes in MDD patients, which may be involved in the 
pathogenesis of MDD.

DOI: 10.1089/gtmb.2016.0426
PMID: 28915082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]