1. Exp Ther Med. 2017 Oct;14(4):3093-3097. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.4843. Epub 2017 
Jul 27.

Effects of HV-CRRT on PCT, TNF-α, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10 in patients with 
pancreatitis complicated by acute renal failure.

Liu C(1), Li M(1), Cao S(1), Wang J(1), Huang X(1), Zhong W(1).

Author information:
(1)Intensive Care Unit, Zengcheng District People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 511300, P.R. China.

The aim of the study was to investigate the effects of high-volume continuous 
renal replacement therapy (HV-CRRT) on procalcitonin (PCT), tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10 in acute 
pancreatitis complicated by acute renal failure. Eighty-six patients with acute 
pancreatitis complicated with acute renal failure were selected from September 
2014 to September 2016 in our hospital, and were treated by continuous 
veno-venous hemofiltration (CVVH). The patients were randomly divided into the 
observation group, treated by the HV-CVVH model with a displacement rate of 4 
l/h, and the control group, treated by the normal capacity model with a 
displacement rate of 2 l/h. The levels of PCT, TNF-α, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and 
IL-10 in serum were measured by ELISA before and 2, 6 and 12 h after treatment, 
and 12 h after CVVH. The serum PCT and TNF-α levels in the two groups were 
decreased at 2 h after treatment. The lowest levels appeared at 6 h after 
treatment, and then recovered, but remained lower than those before treatment 
(p<0.05). The levels of IL-4, IL-6, IL-8 and IL-10, as well as PCT and TNF-α in 
the two groups were significantly lower than those before treatment, and the 
decreases in the observation group were more obvious than those in the control 
group (p<0.05). In conclusion, compared with the standard volume method, HV-CRRT 
can more effectively remove various inflammatory factors and reduce the levels 
of serum PCT for the treatment of pancreatitis complicated by acute renal 
failure. Additionally, replacement of the blood filter at appropriate 
time-points can improve the treatment efficacy.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.4843
PMCID: PMC5585724
PMID: 28912860