1. Exp Ther Med. 2017 Oct;14(4):2953-2959. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.4882. Epub 2017 
Aug 3.

Molecular mechanism of miR-181b in heart disease due to pregnancy-induced 
hypertension syndrome.

Gao Z(1), Wang L(2), Wang J(1), Yang F(3), Qu J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laiwu City People's Hospital, Laiwu, 
Shandong 271100, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gynecology, Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250011, P.R. China.
(3)Intensive Care Unit (ICU), Laiwu City People's Hospital, Laiwu, Shandong 
271100, P.R. China.
(4)Ministry of Painless Endoscopy, Jining No. 1 People's Hospital, Jining, 
Shandong 272000, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanisms of microRNA 
(miR)-181b in heart disease due to hypertensive disorders complicating pregnancy 
(HDCP) through regulating the expression of metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 
(TIMP3). miR-181b expression was detected by reverse transcription-quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction in peripheral blood samples from patients with HDCP. 
These samples were analyzed for clinical pathological characteristics. The 
primary cardiomyocytes of rats were cultured in hypoxic conditions for 24 h, in 
which miR-181b expression was detected at different time points. The expression 
of TIMP3 was assessed in normal rat cardiomyocytes following transfection with 
miR-181b mimics by western blot analysis. The TIMP3 protein was also detected in 
cardiomyocytes following transfection with TIMP3 short interfering-RNA. The 
apoptosis rate of transfected cardiomyocytes was detected by flow cytometry 
following 24 h of culture in a hypoxic environment. Luciferase assay was applied 
to validate whether miR-181b binds to the 3' untranslated region of TIMP3 mRNA. 
miR-181b expression was significantly downregulated in the peripheral blood of 
patients with HDCP and the miR-181b expression was negatively associated with 
the grades of hypertension (P<0.05). The results of luciferase assay indicated 
that miR-181b directly targets TIMP3. The apoptosis rates of rat cardiomyocytes 
in the group transfected with miR-181b or TIMP3 siRNA was significantly lower 
than the normal control group (P<0.05). miR-181b may inhibit apoptosis of 
cardiomyocytes to protect myocardial cells through directly targeting TIMP3 
genes, which serve important roles in HDCP.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.4882
PMCID: PMC5585881
PMID: 28912851