1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2017 Sep 15;8:264-276. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2017.06.020.  Epub 2017 Jun 29.

Human DMBT1-Derived Cell-Penetrating Peptides for Intracellular siRNA Delivery.

Tuttolomondo M(1), Casella C(2), Hansen PL(2), Polo E(3), Herda LM(3), Dawson 
KA(3), Ditzel HJ(4), Mollenhauer J(2).

Author information:
(1)Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, University of Southern Denmark, 
5000 Odense C, Denmark; Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, 
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense C, 
Denmark. Electronic address: mtuttolomondo@health.sdu.dk.
(2)Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, University of Southern Denmark, 
5000 Odense C, Denmark; Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, 
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense C, 
Denmark.
(3)Centre for BioNano Interactions, School of Chemistry, University College 
Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(4)Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, University of Southern Denmark, 
5000 Odense C, Denmark; Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, 
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, 5000 Odense C, 
Denmark; Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, 5000 Odense C, 
Denmark. Electronic address: hditzel@health.sdu.dk.

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) is a promising molecule for gene therapy, but its 
therapeutic administration remains problematic. Among the recently proposed 
vectors, cell-penetrating peptides show great promise in in vivo trials for 
siRNA delivery. Human protein DMBT1 (deleted in malignant brain tumor 1) is a 
pattern recognition molecule that interacts with polyanions and recognizes and 
aggregates bacteria. Taking advantage of these properties, we investigated 
whether specific synthetic DMBT1-derived peptides could be used to formulate 
nanoparticles for siRNA administration. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay and UV spectra, we identified two DMBT1 peptides that could encapsulate 
the siRNA with a self- and co-assembly mechanism. The complexes were stable for 
at least 2 hr in the presence of either fetal bovine serum (FBS) or RNase A, 
with peptide-dependent time span protection. ζ-potential, circular dichroism, 
dynamic light scattering, and transmission electron microscopy revealed 
negatively charged nanoparticles with an average diameter of 10-800 nm, 
depending on the reaction conditions, and a spherical or rice-shaped morphology, 
depending on the peptide and β-helix conformation. We successfully transfected 
human MCF7 cells with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-DMBT1-peptide-Cy3-siRNA 
complexes. Finally, DMBT1 peptides encapsulating an siRNA targeting a 
fluorescent reporter gene showed efficient gene silencing in MCF7-recombinant 
cells. These results lay the foundation for a new research line to exploit 
DMBT1-peptide nanocomplexes for therapeutic siRNA delivery.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2017.06.020
PMCID: PMC5514624
PMID: 28918028