1. J Food Drug Anal. 2017 Apr;25(2):260-274. doi: 10.1016/j.jfda.2016.06.008.
Epub  2016 Jul 30.

DNA barcode and identification of the varieties and provenances of Taiwan's 
domestic and imported made teas using ribosomal internal transcribed spacer 2 
sequences.

Lee SC(1), Wang CH(1), Yen CE(1), Chang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of BioIndustry Technology, Dayeh University, Dacun, Changhua, 
Taiwan.

The major aim of made tea identification is to identify the variety and 
provenance of the tea plant. The present experiment used 113 tea plants 
[Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze] housed at the Tea Research and Extension 
Substation, from which 113 internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) fragments, 104 
trnL intron, and 98 trnL-trnF intergenic sequence region DNA sequences were 
successfully sequenced. The similarity of the ITS2 nucleotide sequences between 
tea plants housed at the Tea Research and Extension Substation was 0.379-0.994. 
In this polymerase chain reaction-amplified noncoding region, no varieties 
possessed identical sequences. Compared with the trnL intron and trnL-trnF 
intergenic sequence fragments of chloroplast cpDNA, the proportion of ITS2 
nucleotide sequence variation was large and is more suitable for establishing a 
DNA barcode database to identify tea plant varieties. After establishing the 
database, 30 imported teas and 35 domestic made teas were used in this model 
system to explore the feasibility of using ITS2 sequences to identify the 
varieties and provenances of made teas. A phylogenetic tree was constructed 
using ITS2 sequences with the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean, 
which indicated that the same variety of tea plant is likely to be successfully 
categorized into one cluster, but contamination from other tea plants was also 
detected. This result provides molecular evidence that the similarity between 
important tea varieties in Taiwan remains high. We suggest a direct, wide 
collection of made tea and original samples of tea plants to establish an ITS2 
sequence molecular barcode identification database to identify the varieties and 
provenances of tea plants. The DNA barcode comparison method can satisfy the 
need for a rapid, low-cost, frontline differentiation of the large amount of 
made teas from Taiwan and abroad, and can provide molecular evidence of their 
varieties and provenances.

Copyright Â© 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfda.2016.06.008
PMCID: PMC9332525
PMID: 28911667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.