1. Neuroscience. 2018 Jan 1;368:283-297. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.09.010.
 Epub 2017 Sep 14.

Circuit changes in motor cortex during motor skill learning.

Papale AE(1), Hooks BM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: papalea@pitt.edu.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: hooksm@pitt.edu.

Motor cortex is important for motor skill learning, particularly the dexterous 
skills necessary for our favorite sports and careers. We are especially 
interested in understanding how plasticity in motor cortex contributes to skill 
learning. Although human studies have been helpful in understanding the 
importance of motor cortex in learning skilled tasks, animal models are 
necessary for achieving a detailed understanding of the circuitry underlying 
these behaviors and the changes that occur during training. We review data from 
these models to try to identify sites of plasticity in motor cortex, focusing on 
rodents asa model system. Rodent neocortex contains well-differentiated motor 
and sensory regions, as well as neurons expressing similar genetic markers to 
many of the same circuit components in human cortex. Furthermore, rodents have 
circuit mapping tools for labeling, targeting, and manipulating these cell types 
as circuit nodes. Crucially, the projection from rodent primary somatosensory 
cortex to primary motor cortex is a well-studied corticocortical projection and 
a model of sensorimotor integration. We first summarize some of the descending 
pathways involved in making dexterous movements, including reaching. We then 
describe local and long-range circuitry in mouse motor cortex, summarizing 
structural and functional changes associated with motor skill acquisition. We 
then address which specific connections might be responsible for plasticity. For 
insight into the range of plasticity mechanisms employed by cortex, we review 
plasticity in sensory systems. The similarities and differences between motor 
cortex plasticity and critical periods of plasticity in sensory systems are 
discussed.

Copyright Â© 2017 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.09.010
PMCID: PMC5762136
PMID: 28918262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]