1. AIMS Mol Sci. 2016;3(4):597-634. doi: 10.3934/molsci.2016.4.597. Epub 2016 Oct
 24.

The mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC): looking back and forth after 15 years.

Liu ST(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, 2801 West Bancroft 
St., Toledo, OH 43606, USA.

The mitotic checkpoint is a specialized signal transduction pathway that 
contributes to the fidelity of chromosome segregation. The signaling of the 
checkpoint originates from defective kinetochore-microtubule interactions and 
leads to formation of the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC), a highly potent 
inhibitor of the Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C)-the E3 ubiquitin 
ligase essential for anaphase onset. Many important questions concerning the MCC 
and its interaction with APC/C have been intensively investigated and debated in 
the past 15 years, such as the exact composition of the MCC, how it is assembled 
during a cell cycle, how it inhibits APC/C, and how the MCC is disassembled to 
allow APC/C activation. These efforts have culminated in recently reported 
structure models for human MCC:APC/C supra-complexes at near-atomic resolution 
that shed light on multiple aspects of the mitotic checkpoint mechanisms. 
However, confusing statements regarding the MCC are still scattered in the 
literature, making it difficult for students and scientists alike to obtain a 
clear picture of MCC composition, structure, function and dynamics. This review 
will comb through some of the most popular concepts or misconceptions about the 
MCC, discuss our current understandings, present a synthesized model on 
regulation of CDC20 ubiquitination, and suggest a few future endeavors and 
cautions for next phase of MCC research.

DOI: 10.3934/molsci.2016.4.597
PMCID: PMC5597056
PMID: 28920074

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest in this paper.