1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 19;12(9):e0185194. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185194. 
eCollection 2017.

Risk analysis of inter-species reassortment through a Rift Valley fever 
phlebovirus MP-12 vaccine strain.

Ly HJ(1), Lokugamage N(1), Nishiyama S(1), Ikegami T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America.
(2)Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, United States of America.
(3)Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Rift Valley fever (RVF) is a mosquito-borne zoonotic disease endemic to Africa 
and the Arabian Peninsula. The causative agent, Rift Valley fever phlebovirus 
(RVFV), belongs to the genus Phlebovirus in the family Phenuiviridae and causes 
high rates of abortions in ruminants, and hemorrhagic fever, encephalitis, or 
blindness in humans. Viral maintenance by mosquito vectors has led to sporadic 
RVF outbreaks in ruminants and humans in endemic countries, and effective 
vaccination of animals and humans may minimize the impact of this disease. A 
live-attenuated MP-12 vaccine strain is one of the best characterized RVFV 
strains, and was conditionally approved as a veterinary vaccine in the U.S. 
Live-attenuated RVF vaccines including MP-12 strain may form reassortant strains 
with other bunyavirus species. This study thus aimed to characterize the 
occurrence of genetic reassortment between the MP-12 strain and bunyavirus 
species closely related to RVFV. The Arumowot virus (AMTV) and Gouleako 
goukovirus (GOLV), are transmitted by mosquitoes in Africa. The results of this 
study showed that GOLV does not form detectable reassortant strains with the 
MP-12 strain in co-infected C6/36 cells. The AMTV also did not form any 
reassortant strains with MP-12 strain in co-infected C6/36 cells, due to the 
incompatibility among N, L, and Gn/Gc proteins. A lack of reassortant formation 
could be due to a functional incompatibility of N and L proteins derived from 
heterologous species, and due to a lack of packaging via heterologous Gn/Gc 
proteins. The MP-12 strain did, however, randomly exchange L-, M-, and 
S-segments with a genetic variant strain, rMP12-GM50, in culture cells. The 
MP-12 strain is thus unlikely to form any reassortant strains with AMTV or GOLV 
in nature.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0185194
PMCID: PMC5604998
PMID: 28926632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.