1. Cancer Res. 2017 Oct 15;77(20):5554-5563. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2593. 
Epub 2017 Sep 18.

Adaptation to TKI Treatment Reactivates ERK Signaling in Tyrosine Kinase-Driven 
Leukemias and Other Malignancies.

Bruner JK(1), Ma HS(1), Li L(1), Qin ACR(1), Rudek MA(1), Jones RJ(1), Levis 
MJ(1), Pratz KW(1), Pratilas CA(2)(3), Small D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. donsmall@jhmi.edu 
cpratil1@jhmi.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland.

FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) have been 
tested extensively to limited benefit in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We 
hypothesized that FLT3/internal tandem duplication (ITD) leukemia cells exhibit 
mechanisms of intrinsic signaling adaptation to TKI treatment that are 
associated with an incomplete response. Here, we identified reactivation of ERK 
signaling within hours following treatment of FLT3/ITD AML cells with selective 
inhibitors of FLT3. When these cells were treated with inhibitors of both FLT3 
and MEK in combination, ERK reactivation was abrogated and anti-leukemia effects 
were more pronounced compared with either drug alone. ERK reactivation was also 
observed following inhibition of other tyrosine kinase-driven cancer cells, 
including EGFR-mutant lung cancer, HER2-amplified breast cancer, and BCR-ABL 
leukemia. These studies reveal an adaptive feedback mechanism in tyrosine 
kinase-driven cancers associated with reactivation of ERK signaling in response 
to targeted inhibition. Cancer Res; 77(20); 5554-63. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2593
PMCID: PMC5819342
PMID: 28923853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.