1. Neoplasia. 2017 Oct;19(10):848-855. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2017.08.004. Epub 2017 
Sep 15.

Metagenomic Shotgun Sequencing and Unbiased Metabolomic Profiling Identify 
Specific Human Gut Microbiota and Metabolites Associated with Immune Checkpoint 
Therapy Efficacy in Melanoma Patients.

Frankel AE(1), Coughlin LA(2), Kim J(3), Froehlich TW(4), Xie Y(3), Frenkel 
EP(4), Koh AY(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX. Electronic address: Arthur.frankel@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.

This is the first prospective study of the effects of human gut microbiota and 
metabolites on immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICT) response in metastatic melanoma 
patients. Whereas many melanoma patients exhibit profound response to ICT, there 
are fewer options for patients failing ICT-particularly with BRAF-wild-type 
disease. In preclinical studies, specific gut microbiota promotes regression of 
melanoma in mice. We therefore conducted a study of the effects of pretreatment 
gut microbiota and metabolites on ICT Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors response in 39 metastatic melanoma patients treated with ipilimumab, 
nivolumab, ipilimumab plus nivolumab (IN), or pembrolizumab (P). IN yielded 67% 
responses and 8% stable disease; P achieved 23% responses and 23% stable 
disease. ICT responders for all types of therapies were enriched for Bacteroides 
caccae. Among IN responders, the gut microbiome was enriched for 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bacteroides thetaiotamicron, and Holdemania 
filiformis. Among P responders, the microbiome was enriched for Dorea 
formicogenerans. Unbiased shotgun metabolomics revealed high levels of anacardic 
acid in ICT responders. Based on these pilot studies, both additional 
confirmatory clinical studies and preclinical testing of these bacterial species 
and metabolites are warranted to confirm their ICT enhancing activity.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neo.2017.08.004
PMCID: PMC5602478
PMID: 28923537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]