1. Dermatoendocrinol. 2016 Dec 14;9(1):e1267077. doi: 
10.1080/19381980.2016.1267077. eCollection 2017.

Cutaneous malignant melanoma incidences analyzed worldwide by sex, age, and skin 
type over personal Ultraviolet-B dose shows no role for sunburn but implies one 
for Vitamin D(3).

Godar DE(1), Subramanian M(2), Merrill SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Body of Knowledge, Inc., Division of Human Disease Research Worldwide, 
Racine, WI, USA.
(2)George Washington University, Department of Biomedical Engineering, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Marquette University, Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer 
Science, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Because the incidence of cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM) was reported to 
increase with increasing terrestrial UVR (290-400 nm) doses in the US back in 
1975 and a recent publication showed no association exists with UVR exposure at 
all, we set out to fully elucidate the role of UVR in CMM. To achieve this goal, 
we analyzed the CMM incidences over latitude and estimated the average personal 
UVR dose in the US and numerous countries (> 50) on 5 continents around the 
world. Using data from the International Agency for Research on Cancer in 2005, 
we performed worldwide analysis of CMM over UVR dose by sex, age group (0-14, 
15-29, 30-49, 50-69, 70-85+) and Fitzpatrick skin types I-VI. Surprisingly, 
increasing UVR doses, which represent erythemally-weighted doses comprised 
primarily of UVB (290-315 nm) radiation, did not significantly correlate with 
increasing CMM incidence for people with any skin type anywhere in the world. 
Paradoxically, we found significant correlations between increasing CMM and 
decreasing UVB dose in Europeans with skin types I-IV. Both Europeans and 
Americans in some age groups have significant increasing CMM incidences with 
decreasing UVB dose, which shows UVB is not the main driver in CMM and suggests 
a possible role for lower cutaneous vitamin D3 levels and UVA (315-400 nm) 
radiation. CMM may be initiated or promoted by UVA radiation because people are 
exposed to it indoors through windows and outdoors through some sunscreen 
formulations. Thus, our findings may explain why some broad-spectrum sunscreen 
formulations do not protect against getting CMM.

DOI: 10.1080/19381980.2016.1267077
PMCID: PMC5400110
PMID: 28924456