1. Cell Signal. 2017 Dec;40:133-142. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.09.008. Epub
2017  Sep 18.

The C1 domain of Vav3, a novel potential therapeutic target.

Kelsey JS(1), GÃ©czy T(1), Kaler CJ(1), Blumberg PM(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: 
blumberp@dc37a.nci.nih.gov.

Vav1/2/3 comprise a protein family with guanyl nucleotide exchange activity for 
Rho and Rac as well as with motifs conferring adapter activity. Biologically, 
Vav1 plays a critical role in hematologic cell signaling, whereas Vav2/3 have a 
wider tissue distribution, but all 3 Vav proteins are implicated in cancer 
development. A structural feature of Vav1/2/3 is the presence of an atypical C1 
domain, which possesses close structural homology to the typical C1 domains of 
protein kinase C but which fails to bind the second messenger diacylglycerol or 
the potent analogs, the phorbol esters. Previously, we have shown that five 
residues in the Vav1 C1 domain are responsible for its lack of phorbol ester 
binding. Here, we show that the lack of phorbol ester binding of Vav3 has a 
similar basis. We then explore the consequences of phorbol ester binding to a 
modified Vav3 in which the C1 domain has been altered to allow phorbol ester 
binding. We find both disruption of the guanyl nucleotide exchange activity of 
the modified Vav 3 as well as a shift in localization to the membrane upon 
phorbol ester treatment. This change in localization is associated with altered 
interactions with other signaling proteins. The studies provide a first step in 
assessing the potential for the design of custom C1 domain targeted molecules 
selective for the atypical C1 domains of Vav family proteins.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.09.008
PMCID: PMC5651187
PMID: 28927664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]