1. AMB Express. 2017 Sep 20;7(1):180. doi: 10.1186/s13568-017-0472-4.

Screening, isolation and molecular identification of biodegrading mycobacteria 
from Iranian ecosystems and analysis of their biodegradation activity.

Azadi D(1), Shojaei H(2), Mobasherizadeh S(1), Naser AD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. hasanshojaei@msn.com.
(3)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Isfahan University 
of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Anthropogenic origin pollutants including pesticides, heavy metals, 
pharmaceuticals and industry chemicals impose many risks to human health and 
environment and bioremediation has been considered the strategy of choice to 
reduce the risk of hazardous chemicals. In the current study, we aimed to screen 
and characterize mycobacteria from the diverse range of Iranian aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystems with harsh and unfavorable environmental conditions that 
can be utilized for biodegradation of target pollutants. Mycobacteria were 
isolated from a collection of 90 environmental samples and identified to the 
species level using conventional microbiological and molecular methods including 
the PCR amplification of hsp65 and sequence analysis of, 16S rRNA genetic 
markers. The growth rate of the isolates in presence of pollutants, 
chromatography, Gibbs and turbidometric methods were used to assess their 
biodegradation activity. A total of 39 mycobacterial isolates (43.3%) were 
recovered from 90 samples that belonged to 21 various species consisting of M. 
fortuitum; 6 isolates, M. flavescens and M. paragordonae; 4 isolates each, M. 
monacense, M. fredriksbergense and M. aurum; 2 isolates each, 7 single isolates 
of M. conceptionense, M. porcinum, M. simiae, M. celeriflavum, M. novocastrense, 
M. neoaurum, M. obuense and 12 isolates that belonged to 8 unknown potentially 
novel mycobacterial species. The isolates were categorized in three groups based 
on their bioremediation activity, i.e., 5 (12.8%) organisms without 
biodegradation activity, 20 (51.2%) organisms with previously reported 
biodegradation activity, and 14 (35.9%) organisms that showed biodegradation 
activity but not previously reported. Our results showed that the Iranian 
ecosystems harbor a good reservoir of diverse mycobacterial species with 
biodegrading potentiality for neutralizing environmental chemical pollutants.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-017-0472-4
PMCID: PMC5607059
PMID: 28933031