1. J Cell Biol. 2017 Nov 6;216(11):3695-3712. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201703015. Epub
2017  Sep 21.

Sequence-dependent cargo recognition by SNX-BARs mediates retromer-independent 
transport of CI-MPR.

Simonetti B(1), Danson CM(1), Heesom KJ(2), Cullen PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, England, UK.
(2)Proteomics Facility, School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, 
England, UK.
(3)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, England, UK 
pete.cullen@bristol.ac.uk.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2017 Nov 6;216(11):3433-3436. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201708111.

Endosomal recycling of transmembrane proteins requires sequence-dependent 
recognition of motifs present within their intracellular cytosolic domains. In 
this study, we have reexamined the role of retromer in the sequence-dependent 
endosome-to-trans-Golgi network (TGN) transport of the cation-independent 
mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR). Although the knockdown or knockout of 
retromer does not perturb CI-MPR transport, the targeting of the retromer-linked 
sorting nexin (SNX)-Bin, Amphiphysin, and Rvs (BAR) proteins leads to a 
pronounced defect in CI-MPR endosome-to-TGN transport. The retromer-linked 
SNX-BAR proteins comprise heterodimeric combinations of SNX1 or SNX2 with SNX5 
or SNX6 and serve to regulate the biogenesis of tubular endosomal sorting 
profiles. We establish that SNX5 and SNX6 associate with the CI-MPR through 
recognition of a specific WLM endosome-to-TGN sorting motif. From validating the 
CI-MPR dependency of SNX1/2-SNX5/6 tubular profile formation, we provide a 
mechanism for coupling sequence-dependent cargo recognition with the biogenesis 
of tubular profiles required for endosome-to-TGN transport. Therefore, the data 
presented in this study reappraise retromer's role in CI-MPR transport.

Â© 2017 Simonetti et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201703015
PMCID: PMC5674890
PMID: 28935633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]