1. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2017 Nov 15;57(11):607-611. doi: 
10.2176/nmc.oa.2017-0036. Epub 2017 Sep 21.

Differences in the Genotype Frequency of the RNF213 Variant in Patients with 
Familial Moyamoya Disease in Kyushu, Japan.

Takamatsu Y(1)(2), Higashimoto K(1), Maeda T(1)(3), Kawashima M(2), Matsuo M(3), 
Abe T(2), Matsushima T(2), Soejima H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics & Epigenetics, Department of Biomolecular 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University.

The p.R4810K (rs11273543, c.14429G > A) variant of the RNF213 gene is associated 
with increased risk of Moyamoya disease (MMD), which is an idiopathic 
progressive intracranial vascular steno-occlusive disease, in Asian populations. 
Numerous variant association studies for this MMD variant have been performed in 
Japan to date. Since another genetic study that utilized approximately 140,000 
single nucleotide polymor (SNPs) has indicated that there still are genetic 
differences among mainland Japanese, there is a possibility that the variant 
distribution in patients with MMD and normal individuals varies between 
different Japanese regions. Additionally, the majority of variant association 
studies have used Sanger sequencing, which is labor-intensive, time-consuming, 
and costly. In this study, we analyzed the frequency of the variant genotype in 
patients with MMD and normal individuals in Kyushu using pyrosequencing, which 
is an accurate, cost-effective, and automated method. We found differences in 
the genotype frequencies in familial patients from Kyushu and normal populations 
in Tohoku compared with west Japan, which suggested that there were differences 
in the frequency of the variant among different regions in Japan.

DOI: 10.2176/nmc.oa.2017-0036
PMCID: PMC5709714
PMID: 28931766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Disclosure The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.