1. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Sep 22;13(9):e1006625. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006625. 
eCollection 2017 Sep.

A highly conserved amino acid in VP1 regulates maturation of enterovirus 71.

Zhang YX(1), Huang YM(2), Li QJ(1), Li XY(1), Zhou YD(3), Guo F(4), Zhou JM(1), 
Cen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical School, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, China CDC, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Institute of Pathogen Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical School, Beijing, PR China.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is the major causative agent of hand, foot and mouth 
disease (HFMD) in children, causing severe clinical outcomes and even death. 
Here, we report an important role of the highly conserved alanine residue at 
position 107 in the capsid protein VP1 (VP1A107) in the efficient replication of 
EV71. Substitutional mutations of VP1A107 significantly diminish viral growth 
kinetics without significant effect on viral entry, expression of viral genes 
and viral production. The results of mechanistic studies reveal that VP1A107 
regulates the efficient cleavage of the VP0 precursor during EV71 assembly, 
which is required, in the next round of infection, for the transformation of the 
mature virion (160S) into an intermediate or A-particle (135S), a key step of 
virus uncoating. Furthermore, the results of molecular dynamic simulations and 
hydrogen-bond networks analysis of VP1A107 suggest that flexibility of the VP1 
BC loop or the region surrounding the VP1107 residue directly correlates with 
viral infectivity. It is possible that sufficient flexibility of the region 
surrounding the VP1107 residue favors VP0 conformational change that is required 
for the efficient cleavage of VP0 as well as subsequent viral uncoating and 
viral replication. Taken together, our data reveal the structural role of the 
highly conserved VP1A107 in regulating EV71 maturation. Characterization of this 
novel determinant of EV71 virulence would promote the study on pathogenesis of 
Enteroviruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006625
PMCID: PMC5634653
PMID: 28938017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.