1. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 21;12(9):e0184584. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184584. 
eCollection 2017.

Transcriptome analysis of sex-related genes in the blood clam Tegillarca 
granosa.

Chen H(1)(2)(3), Xiao G(1)(2)(3), Chai X(1)(2)(3), Lin X(1)(2)(3), Fang 
J(1)(2)(3), Teng S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Mariculture Research Institute, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Exploitation and Preservation of Coastal 
Bio-resource, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Engineering Research Center for Marine Bivalves, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Blood clams (Tegillarca granosa) are one of the most commercial 
shellfish in China and South Asia with wide distribution in Indo-Pacific 
tropical to temperate estuaries. However, recent data indicate a decline in the 
germplasm of this species. Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms underpinning 
reproductive regulation remain unclear and information regarding genetic 
diversity is limited. Understanding the reproductive biology of shellfish is 
important in interpreting their embryology development, reproduction and 
population structure. Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) rapidly obtains genetic 
sequence information from almost all transcripts of a particular tissue and 
currently represents the most prevalent and effective method for constructing 
genetic expression profiles.
RESULTS: Non-reference RNA-seq, an Illumina HiSeq2500 Solexa system, and de novo 
assembly were used to construct a gonadal expression profile of the blood clam. 
A total of 63.75 Gb of clean data, with at least 89.46% of Quality30 (Q30), were 
generated which was then combined into 214,440 transcripts and 125,673 unigenes 
with a mean length of 1,122.63 and 781.30 base pairs (bp). In total, 27,325 
genes were annotated by comparison with public databases. Of these, 2,140 and 
2,070 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained (T05 T08 vs T01 T02 
T04, T06 T07 vs T01 T02 T04; in which T01-T04 and T05-T08 represent biological 
replicates of individual female and male clams, respectively) and classified 
into two groups according to the evaluation of biological replicates. Then 35 
DEGs and 5 sex-related unigenes, in other similar species, were investigated 
using qRT-PCR, the results of which were confirmed to data arising from RNA-seq. 
Among the DEGs, sex-related genes were identified, including forkhead box L2 
(Foxl2), sex determining region Y-box (Sox), beta-catenin (Î²-catenin), chromobox 
homolog (CBX) and Sex-lethal (Sxl). In addition, 6,283 simple sequence repeats 
(SSRs) and 614,710 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified from 
the RNA-seq results.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provided the first complete gonadal transcriptome data 
for the blood clam and allowed us to search many aspects of gene sequence 
information, not limited to gender. This data will improve our understanding of 
the transcriptomics and reproductive biology of the blood clam. Furthermore, 
molecular markers such as SSRs and SNPs will be useful in the analysis of 
genetic evolution, bulked segregant analysis (BSA) and genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS). Our transcriptome data will therefore provide important genetic 
information for the breeding and conservation of germplasm.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184584
PMCID: PMC5608214
PMID: 28934256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.