1. Eur J Immunol. 2018 Feb;48(2):306-315. doi: 10.1002/eji.201747092. Epub 2017
Oct  20.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22 regulates IL-1β dependent Th17 responses by 
modulating dectin-1 signaling in mice.

Purvis HA(1), Clarke F(1), Jordan CK(1), Blanco CS(1), Cornish GH(1), Dai X(2), 
Rawlings DJ(2), Zamoyska R(3), Cope AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Academic Department of Rheumatology, Centre for Inflammation Biology and 
Cancer Immunology, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(2)Seattle Children's Research Institute and Departments of Pediatrics and 
Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(3)Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, Centre for Immunity, 
Infection and Evolution, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

A single nucleotide polymorphism within the PTPN22 gene is a strong genetic risk 
factor predisposing to the development of multiple autoimmune diseases. PTPN22 
regulates Syk and Src family kinases downstream of immuno-receptors. Fungal 
β-glucan receptor dectin-1 signals via Syk, and dectin-1 stimulation induces 
arthritis in mouse models. We investigated whether PTPN22 regulates dectin-1 
dependent immune responses. Bone marrow derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) 
generated from C57BL/6 wild type (WT) and Ptpn22-/- mutant mice, were pulsed 
with OVA323-339 and the dectin-1 agonist curdlan and co-cultured in vitro with 
OT-II T-cells or adoptively transferred into OT-II mice, and T-cell responses 
were determined by immunoassay. Dectin-1 activated Ptpn22-/- BMDCs enhanced 
T-cell secretion of IL-17 in vitro and in vivo in an IL-1β dependent manner. 
Immunoblotting revealed that compared to WT, dectin-1 activated Ptpn22-/- BMDCs 
displayed enhanced Syk and Erk phosphorylation. Dectin-1 activation of BMDCs 
expressing Ptpn22R619W (the mouse orthologue of human PTPN22R620W ) also 
resulted in increased IL-1β secretion and T-cell dependent IL-17 responses, 
indicating that in the context of dectin-1 Ptpn22R619W operates as a 
loss-of-function variant. These findings highlight PTPN22 as a novel regulator 
of dectin-1 signals, providing a link between genetically conferred 
perturbations of innate receptor signaling and the risk of autoimmune disease.

© 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201747092
PMCID: PMC5859948
PMID: 28948613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]