1. Physiol Res. 2017 Sep 26;66(Suppl 3):S425-S431. doi:
10.33549/physiolres.933731.

ZBTB16 gene variability influences obesity-related parameters and serum lipid 
levels in Czech adults.

Bendlová B(1), Vaňková M, Hill M, Vacínová G, Lukášová P, VejraŽková D, Šedová 
L, Šeda O, Včelák J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, 
Czech Republic. bbendlova@endo.cz.

The data derived from rat models and the preliminary results of human studies 
provide strong indices of involvement of common ZBTB16 variants in a range of 
cardiovascular and metabolic traits. This cross-sectional study in the Caucasian 
cohort of 1517 Czech adults aimed to verify the hypothesis that ZBTB16 gene 
variation directly affects obesity and serum lipid levels. Genotyping of nine 
polymorphisms of the ZBTB16 gene (rs11214863, rs593731, rs763857, rs2846027, 
rs681200, rs686989, rs661223, rs675044, rs567057) was performed. A multivariate 
bidirectional regression with the reduction of dimensionality (O2PLS model) 
revealed relationships between basal lipid levels and anthropometric parameters 
and some minor ZBTB16 alleles. In men, the predictors - age and presence of 
minor ZBTB16 alleles of rs686989, rs661223, rs675044, rs567057 - were associated 
with significantly higher body mass index, waist to hip ratio, body adiposity 
index, waist and abdominal circumferences, higher total cholesterol and LDL 
cholesterol and explained 20 % of variability of these variables. In women, the 
predictors - age and presence of the rs686989 minor T allele - were also 
associated with increased anthropometric parameters and total cholesterol and 
LDL cholesterol but the obtained O2PLS model explained only 7.8 % of the 
variability of the explained variables. Our study confirmed that the selected 
gene variants of the transcription factor ZBTB16 influence the obesity-related 
parameters and lipid levels. This effect was more pronounced in men.

DOI: 10.33549/physiolres.933731
PMID: 28948827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]