1. Biochemistry. 2018 May 1;57(17):2549-2563. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00310. 
Epub 2017 Oct 11.

Lysines in the RNA Polymerase II C-Terminal Domain Contribute to TAF15 Fibril 
Recruitment.

Janke AM(1), Seo DH(1), Rahmanian V(2), Conicella AE(3), Mathews KL(3), Burke 
KA(1), Mittal J(2), Fawzi NL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology, and Biotechnology , Brown 
University , Providence , Rhode Island 02921 , United States.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , Lehigh University , 
Bethlehem , Pennsylvania 18015 , United States.
(3)Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry , Brown 
University , Providence , Rhode Island 02912 , United States.

Many cancer-causing chromosomal translocations result in transactivating protein 
products encoding FET family (FUS, EWSR1, TAF15) low-complexity (LC) domains 
fused to a DNA binding domain from one of several transcription factors. Recent 
work demonstrates that higher-order assemblies of FET LC domains bind the 
carboxy-terminal domain of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II 
CTD), suggesting FET oncoproteins may mediate aberrant transcriptional 
activation by recruiting RNA polymerase II to promoters of target genes. Here we 
use nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and hydrogel fluorescence 
microscopy localization and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching to 
visualize atomic details of a model of this process, interactions of RNA pol II 
CTD with high-molecular weight TAF15 LC assemblies. We report NMR resonance 
assignments of the intact degenerate repeat half of human RNA pol II CTD alone 
and verify its predominant intrinsic disorder by molecular simulation. By 
measuring NMR spin relaxation and dark-state exchange saturation transfer, we 
characterize the interaction of RNA pol II CTD with amyloid-like hydrogel 
fibrils of TAF15 and hnRNP A2 LC domains and observe that heptads far from the 
acidic C-terminal tail of RNA pol II CTD bind TAF15 fibrils most avidly. 
Mutation of CTD lysines in heptad position 7 to consensus serines reduced the 
overall level of TAF15 fibril binding, suggesting that electrostatic 
interactions contribute to complex formation. Conversely, mutations of position 
7 asparagine residues and truncation of the acidic tail had little effect. Thus, 
weak, multivalent interactions between TAF15 fibrils and heptads throughout RNA 
pol II CTD collectively mediate complex formation.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.7b00310
PMCID: PMC5975632
PMID: 28945358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]