1. eNeuro. 2017 Sep 25;4(5):ENEURO.0248-17.2017. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0248-17.2017.  eCollection 2017 Sep-Oct.

NCS-Rapgef2, the Protein Product of the Neuronal Rapgef2 Gene, Is a Specific 
Activator of D1 Dopamine Receptor-Dependent ERK Phosphorylation in Mouse Brain.

Jiang SZ(1), Xu W(1)(2), Emery AC(1), Gerfen CR(3), Eiden MV(2), Eiden LE(1).

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health 
Intramural Research Program, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(2)Section on Directed Gene Transfer Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular 
Regulation, National Institute of Mental Health Intramural Research Program, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.
(3)Laboratory of Systems Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health 
Intramural Research Program, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Erratum in
    eNeuro. 2018 Oct 15;5(5):ENEURO.0379-18.2018. doi: 
10.1523/ENEURO.0379-18.2018.

The neuritogenic cAMP sensor (NCS), encoded by the Rapgef2 gene, links cAMP 
elevation to activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) in 
neurons and neuroendocrine cells. Transducing human embryonic kidney (HEK)293 
cells, which do not express Rapgef2 protein or respond to cAMP with ERK 
phosphorylation, with a vector encoding a Rapgef2 cDNA reconstituted 
cAMP-dependent ERK activation. Mutation of a single residue in the cyclic 
nucleotide-binding domain (CNBD) conserved across cAMP-binding proteins 
abrogated cAMP-ERK coupling, while deletion of the CNBD altogether resulted in 
constitutive ERK activation. Two types of mRNA are transcribed from Rapgef2 in 
vivo. Rapgef2 protein expression was limited to tissues, i.e., neuronal and 
endocrine, expressing the second type of mRNA, initiated exclusively from an 
alternative first exon called here exon 1', and an alternative 5' protein 
sequence leader fused to a common remaining open reading frame, which is termed 
here NCS-Rapgef2. In the male mouse brain, NCS-Rapgef2 is prominently expressed 
in corticolimbic excitatory neurons, and striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs). 
Rapgef2-dependent ERK activation by the dopamine D1 agonist SKF81297 occurred in 
neuroendocrine neuroscreen-1 (NS-1) cells expressing the human D1 receptor and 
was abolished by deletion of Rapgef2. Corticolimbic [e.g., dentate gyrus (DG), 
basolateral amygdala (BLA)] ERK phosphorylation induced by SKF81297 was 
significantly attenuated in CamK2Î±-Cre+/- ; Rapgef2cko/cko male mice. ERK 
phosphorylation in nucleus accumbens (NAc) MSNs induced by treatment with 
SKF81297, or the psychostimulants cocaine or amphetamine, was abolished in male 
Rapgef2cko/cko mice with NAc NCS-Rapgef2-depleting AAV-Synapsin-Cre injections. 
We conclude that D1-dependent ERK phosphorylation in mouse brain requires 
NCS-Rapgef2 expression.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0248-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5611689
PMID: 28948210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]