1. Lancet Neurol. 2017 Nov;16(11):908-916. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30328-9.
Epub  2017 Sep 25.

Large-scale identification of clinical and genetic predictors of motor 
progression in patients with newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease: a longitudinal 
cohort study and validation.

Latourelle JC(1), Beste MT(2), Hadzi TC(2), Miller RE(2), Oppenheim JN(2), Valko 
MP(2), Wuest DM(2), Church BW(2), Khalil IG(2), Hayete B(2), Venuto CS(3).

Author information:
(1)GNS Healthcare, Cambridge, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
jlatoure@gnshealthcare.com.
(2)GNS Healthcare, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Health and Technology and Department of Neurology, University of 
Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2017 Nov;16(11):860-862. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30331-9.

BACKGROUND: Better understanding and prediction of progression of Parkinson's 
disease could improve disease management and clinical trial design. We aimed to 
use longitudinal clinical, molecular, and genetic data to develop predictive 
models, compare potential biomarkers, and identify novel predictors for motor 
progression in Parkinson's disease. We also sought to assess the use of these 
models in the design of treatment trials in Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: A Bayesian multivariate predictive inference platform was applied to 
data from the Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) study 
(NCT01141023). We used genetic data and baseline molecular and clinical 
variables from patients with Parkinson's disease and healthy controls to 
construct an ensemble of models to predict the annual rate of change in combined 
scores from the Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale (MDS-UPDRS) parts II and III. We tested our overall explanatory power, as 
assessed by the coefficient of determination (R2), and replicated novel findings 
in an independent clinical cohort from the Longitudinal and Biomarker Study in 
Parkinson's disease (LABS-PD; NCT00605163). The potential utility of these 
models for clinical trial design was quantified by comparing simulated 
randomised placebo-controlled trials within the out-of-sample LABS-PD cohort.
FINDINGS: 117 healthy controls and 312 patients with Parkinson's disease from 
the PPMI study were available for analysis, and 317 patients with Parkinson's 
disease from LABS-PD were available for validation. Our model ensemble showed 
strong performance within the PPMI cohort (five-fold cross-validated R2 41%, 95% 
CI 35-47) and significant-albeit reduced-performance in the LABS-PD cohort (R2 
9%, 95% CI 4-16). Individual predictive features identified from PPMI data were 
confirmed in the LABS-PD cohort. These included significant replication of 
higher baseline MDS-UPDRS motor score, male sex, and increased age, as well as a 
novel Parkinson's disease-specific epistatic interaction, all indicative of 
faster motor progression. Genetic variation was the most useful predictive 
marker of motor progression (2·9%, 95% CI 1·5-4·3). CSF biomarkers at baseline 
showed a more modest (0·3%, 95% CI 0·1-0·5) but still significant effect on 
prediction of motor progression. The simulations (n=5000) showed that 
incorporating the predicted rates of motor progression (as assessed by the 
annual change in MDS-UPDRS score) into the final models of treatment effect 
reduced the variability in the study outcome, allowing significant differences 
to be detected at sample sizes up to 20% smaller than in naive trials.
INTERPRETATION: Our model ensemble confirmed established and identified novel 
predictors of Parkinson's disease motor progression. Improvement of existing 
prognostic models through machine-learning approaches should benefit trial 
design and evaluation, as well as clinical disease monitoring and treatment.
FUNDING: Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research and National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30328-9
PMCID: PMC5693218
PMID: 28958801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JCL, MTB, TCH, REM, JNO, 
MPV, DMW, IGK, BH, are currently (JCL, TCH, REM, DMW, IGK, BH) or were at time 
of study (MTB, JNO, MPV) employees of GNS Healthcare.