1. Toxicol Rep. 2016 Aug 23;3:652-663. doi: 10.1016/j.toxrep.2016.08.006. 
eCollection 2016.

C-Glycosylated flavonoids from black gram husk: Protection against DNA and 
erythrocytes from oxidative damage and their cytotoxic effect on HeLa cells.

Girish TK(1), Kumar KA(2), Prasada Rao UJS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, CSIR-CFTRI, Mysore 570 020, India.
(2)Department of Spices and flavour science, CSIR-CFTRI, Mysore 570020, India.

C-Glycosyl flavones are present in different plant tissues and they exhibit 
health benefits. In the present study, it was found that C-glycosyl flavones are 
distributed in different milled fractions of black gram and among these 
fractions, husk had the highest content of C-glycosyl flavones. Two C-glycosyl 
flavones from black gram husk were extracted and purified by preparative 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column. The purity of each 
compound was assessed by analytical C18 column. The structure of each compound 
was confirmed by LC-MS/MS, NMR. The molecular mass of these compounds were found 
to be [M-H]-, m/z 431.36 and [M-H]-, m/z 431.35 and were identified as vitexin 
and isovitexin, respectively. Content of vitexin and isovitexin in aqueous 
ethanol extract was found to be 76 and 65 mg/g of extract, respectively. These 
C-glycosyl flavones protected DNA and erythrocytes from oxidative damage. The 
IC50 values for vitexin, isovitexin and quercetin for hemolysis were 6, 5.7 and 
2.37 μg, respectively. These compounds also triggered the process of apoptosis 
in HeLa cells by downregulating Bcl-2 level with the simultaneous upregulation 
of Bax and caspase-3 protein expression. Thus, C-glycosyl flavones from black 
gram husk protected DNA and erythrocytes from oxidative damage and exhibited 
anticancer activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.toxrep.2016.08.006
PMCID: PMC5616018
PMID: 28959589