1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 13;8:1771. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01771.
eCollection  2017.

Composition of Total and Cell-Proliferating Bacterioplankton Community in Early 
Summer in the North Sea - Roseobacters Are the Most Active Component.

Bakenhus I(1), Dlugosch L(1), Billerbeck S(1), Giebel HA(1), Milke F(1), Simon 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment, University of 
OldenburgOldenburg, Germany.

Heterotrophic bacterioplankton communities play an important role in organic 
matter processing in the oceans worldwide. In order to investigate the 
significance of distinct phylogenetic bacterial groups it is not only important 
to assess their quantitative abundance but also their growth dynamics in 
relation to the entire bacterioplankton. Therefore bacterial abundance, biomass 
production and the composition of the entire and cell-proliferating 
bacterioplankton community were assessed in North Sea surface waters between the 
German Bight and 58Â°N in early summer by applying catalyzed reporter deposition 
(CARD-FISH) and bromodeoxyuridine fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(BrdU-FISH). Bacteroidetes and the Roseobacter group dominated the 
cell-proliferating fraction with 10-55 and 8-31% of total BrdU-positive cells, 
respectively. While Bacteroidetes also showed high abundances in the total 
bacterial fraction, roseobacters constituted only 1-9% of all cells. Despite 
abundances of up to 55% of total bacterial cells, the SAR11 clade constituted 
<6% of BrdU-positive cells. Gammaproteobacteria accounted for 2-16% of the total 
and 2-13% of the cell-proliferating cells. Within the two most active groups, 
BrdU-positive cells made up 28% of Bacteroidetes as an overall mean and 36% of 
roseobacters. Estimated mean growth rates of Bacteroidetes and the Roseobacter 
group were 1.2 and 1.5 day-1, respectively, and much higher than bulk growth 
rates of the bacterioplankton whereas those of the SAR11 clade and 
Gammaproteobacteria were 0.04 and 0.21 day-1, respectively, and much lower than 
bulk growth rates. Only numbers of total and cell-proliferating roseobacters but 
not those of Bacteroidetes and the other groups were significantly correlated to 
chlorophyll fluorescence and bacterioplankton biomass production. The 
Roseobacter group, besides Bacteroidetes, appeared to be a major player in 
processing phytoplankton derived organic matter despite its low partitioning in 
the total bacterioplankton community.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01771
PMCID: PMC5604061
PMID: 28959250