1. Hepatology. 2018 Feb;67(2):662-675. doi: 10.1002/hep.29561. Epub 2018 Jan 2.

A Large-scale, multicenter serum metabolite biomarker identification study for 
the early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Luo P(1)(2), Yin P(1), Hua R(3), Tan Y(4), Li Z(1)(2), Qiu G(5), Yin Z(6), Xie 
X(7), Wang X(3), Chen W(8), Zhou L(1), Wang X(1), Li Y(1), Chen H(7), Gao L(8), 
Lu X(1), Wu T(5), Wang H(4), Niu J(3), Xu G(1).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian 
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Hepatology, First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, 
China.
(4)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern 
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, The Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, China.
(5)MOE Key Laboratory of Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 
China.
(6)Zhongshan Hospital of Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(7)Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, China.
(8)Shangdong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2018 Jun;67(6):2482-2483. doi: 10.1002/hep.29869.
    Hepatology. 2018 Jun;67(6):2483-2484. doi: 10.1002/hep.29868.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most lethal cancer worldwide. The 
lack of effective biomarkers for the early detection of HCC results in 
unsatisfactory curative treatments. Here, metabolite biomarkers were identified 
and validated for HCC diagnosis. A total of 1,448 subjects, including healthy 
controls and patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection, liver cirrhosis, 
and HCC, were recruited from multiple centers in China. Liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolomics methods were used to 
characterize the subjects' serum metabolic profiles and to screen and validate 
the HCC biomarkers. A serum metabolite biomarker panel including 
phenylalanyl-tryptophan and glycocholate was defined. This panel had a higher 
diagnostic performance than did α-fetoprotein (AFP) in differentiating HCC from 
a high-risk population of cirrhosis, such as an area under the 
receiver-operating characteristic curve of 0.930, 0.892, and 0.807 for the panel 
versus 0.657, 0.725, and 0.650 for AFP in the discovery set, test set, and 
cohort 1 of the validation set, respectively. In the nested case-control study, 
this panel had high sensitivity (range 80.0%-70.3%) to detect preclinical HCC, 
and its combination with AFP provided better risk prediction of preclinical HCC 
before clinical diagnosis. Besides, this panel showed a larger area under the 
receiver-operating characteristic curve than did AFP (0.866 versus 0.682) to 
distinguish small HCC, and 80.6% of the AFP false-negative patients with HCC 
were correctly diagnosed using this panel in the test set, which was 
corroborated by the validation set. The specificity and biological relevance of 
the identified biomarkers were further evaluated using sera from another two 
cancers and HCC tissue specimens, respectively. Conclusion: The discovered and 
validated serum metabolite biomarker panel exhibits good diagnostic performance 
for the early detection of HCC from at-risk populations. (Hepatology 
2018;67:662-675).

© 2017 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf 
of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.29561
PMCID: PMC6680350
PMID: 28960374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]