1. Neuropathology. 2018 Feb;38(1):34-40. doi: 10.1111/neup.12432. Epub 2017 Oct
3.

Phenotype variability and histopathological findings in patients with a novel 
DNM2 mutation.

Chen S(1), Huang P(2), Qiu Y(1), Zhou Q(1), Li X(1), Zhu M(1), Hong D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Department of Nutrition, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.

Mutations of Dynamin 2 (DNM2) are responsible for several forms of neuromuscular 
disorder such as centronuclear myopathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) 
dominant intermediate type B, CMT 2M, and lethal congenital contracture syndrome 
5. We describe a young man manifesting as length-dependent sensorimotor 
neuropathy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but his mother only had very mild 
symptoms of peripheral neuropathy. The electrophysiological data meet the 
criteria of intermediate CMT. The main pathological findings of sural nerve 
biopsy reveal a severe loss of large myelinating fibers and some clusters of 
regenerative fibers in fascicles, which are consistent with an axonal 
neuropathy. However, myopathological changes show a chronic myopathy-like 
pattern characterized by great variations of fiber size, increased connective 
tissue, rimmed vacuoles and predominance of type 2 fibers. A novel DNM2 mutation 
(p.G359D) in the middle domain is identified, which is highly evolutionarily 
conserved. DNM2-related CMT disease is phenotypically heterogeneous in age at 
onset, clinical features and electrophysiological changes. The histopathological 
findings indicate the coexistence of typical axonal neuropathy and chronic 
myopathy in DNM2-related neuromuscular diseases.

Â© 2017 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12432
PMID: 28971531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]