1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 22;8(40):68415-68438. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19474. 
eCollection 2017 Sep 15.

HIV-1 Gp120 clade B/C induces a GRP78 driven cytoprotective mechanism in 
astrocytoma.

López SN(1), Rodríguez-Valentín M(1), Rivera M(1), Rodríguez M(1), Babu M(2), 
Cubano LA(1), Xiong H(3), Wang G(4), Kucheryavykh L(5), Boukli NM(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Proteomics Facility, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Universidad Central del Caribe, School of Medicine, Bayamón, PR, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Research and Innovation Center, University of 
Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)RCMI Cancer Research Center, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Universidad Central del Caribe, School of 
Medicine, Bayamón, PR, USA.

HIV-1 clades are known to be one of the key factors implicated in modulating 
HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders. HIV-1 B and C clades account for the 
majority of HIV-1 infections, clade B being the most neuropathogenic. The 
mechanisms behind HIV-mediated neuropathogenesis remain the subject of active 
research. We hypothesized that HIV-1 gp120 clade B and C proteins may exert 
differential proliferation, cell survival and NeuroAIDS effects in human 
astrocytoma cells via the Unfolded Protein Response, an endoplasmic reticulum- 
based cytoprotective mechanism. The differential effect of gp120 clade B and C 
was evaluated using for the first time a Tandem Mass Tag isobaric labeling 
quantitative proteomic approach. Flow cytometry analyses were performed for cell 
cycle and cell death identification. Among the proteins differentiated by HIV-1 
gp120 proteins figure cytoskeleton, oxidative stress, UPR markers and numerous 
glycolytic metabolism enzymes. Our results demonstrate that HIV-1 gp120 B 
induced migration, proliferative and protective responses granted by the 
expression of GRP78, while HIV-1 gp120 C induced the expression of key 
inflammatory and pro-apoptotic markers. These novel findings put forward the 
first evidence that GRP78 is a key player in HIV-1 clade B and C neuropathogenic 
discrepancies and can be used as a novel target for immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19474
PMCID: PMC5620267
PMID: 28978127

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflict of interest to disclose.