1. J Mol Biol. 2017 Nov 24;429(23):3696-3716. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2017.09.016.
Epub  2017 Sep 29.

Nucleotide Binding to ARL2 in the TBCD∙ARL2∙β-Tubulin Complex Drives 
Conformational Changes in β-Tubulin.

Francis JW(1), Goswami D(2), Novick SJ(2), Pascal BD(2), Weikum ER(1), Ortlund 
EA(1), Griffin PR(2), Kahn RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 
33458, United States.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, United States. Electronic address: rkahn@emory.edu.

Microtubules are highly dynamic tubulin polymers that are required for a variety 
of cellular functions. Despite the importance of a cellular population of 
tubulin dimers, we have incomplete information about the mechanisms involved in 
the biogenesis of αβ-tubulin heterodimers. In addition to prefoldin and the 
TCP-1 Ring Complex, five tubulin-specific chaperones, termed cofactors A-E 
(TBCA-E), and GTP are required for the folding of α- and β-tubulin subunits and 
assembly into heterodimers. We recently described the purification of a novel 
trimer, TBCD•ARL2•β-tubulin. Here, we employed hydrogen/deuterium exchange 
coupled with mass spectrometry to explore the dynamics of each of the proteins 
in the trimer. Addition of guanine nucleotides resulted in changes in the 
solvent accessibility of regions of each protein that led to predictions about 
each's role in tubulin folding. Initial testing of that model confirmed that it 
is ARL2, and not β-tubulin, that exchanges GTP in the trimer. Comparisons of the 
dynamics of ARL2 monomer to ARL2 in the trimer suggested that its protein 
interactions were comparable to those of a canonical GTPase with an effector. 
This was supported by the use of nucleotide-binding assays that revealed an 
increase in the affinity for GTP by ARL2 in the trimer. We conclude that the 
TBCD•ARL2•β-tubulin complex represents a functional intermediate in the 
β-tubulin folding pathway whose activity is regulated by the cycling of 
nucleotides on ARL2. The co-purification of guanine nucleotide on the β-tubulin 
in the trimer is also shown, with implications to modeling the pathway.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2017.09.016
PMCID: PMC5693757
PMID: 28970104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.