1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 8;8(37):62131-62142. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19100. 
eCollection 2017 Sep 22.

Inhibitor of H3K27 demethylase JMJD3/UTX GSK-J4 is a potential therapeutic 
option for castration resistant prostate cancer.

Morozov VM(1), Li Y(1)(2), Clowers MM(3), Ishov AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Health Cancer Center, University 
of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(2)IDP Graduate Program, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, 
FL 32610, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Florida Agricultural and 
Mechanical University, Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) mediates initiation and progression of prostate cancer 
(PCa); AR-driven transcription is activated by binding of androgens to the 
ligand-binding domain (LBD) of AR. Androgen ablation therapy offers only a 
temporary relief of locally advanced and metastatic PCa, and the disease 
eventually recurs as a lethal castration-resistant PCa (CRPC) as there is no 
effective treatment for CRPC patients. Thus, it is critical to identify novel 
targeted and combinatorial regimens for clinical management of CRPC. Reduction 
of the repressive epigenetic modification H3K27me2/3 correlates with PCa 
aggressiveness, while corresponding demethylases JMJD3/UTX are overexpressed in 
PCa. We found that JMJD3/UTX inhibitor GSK-J4 reduced more efficiently 
proliferation of AR-ΔLBD cells (CRPC model) compared with isogenic AR-WT cells. 
Inhibition of JMJD3/UTX protects demethylation of H3K27Me2/3, thus reducing 
levels of H3k27Me1. We observed that the reduction dynamics of H3K27Me1 was 
faster and achieved at lower inhibitor concentrations in AR-ΔLBD cells, 
suggesting that inhibition of JMJD3/UTX diminished proliferation of these cells 
by hindering AR-driven transcription. In addition, we observed synergy between 
GSK-J4 and Cabazitaxel, a taxane derivative that is approved for CRPC treatment. 
Collectively, our results point at the H3K27 demethylation pathway as a new 
potential therapeutic target in CRPC patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19100
PMCID: PMC5617492
PMID: 28977932

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No conflicts of interest.