1. Gene. 2018 Jan 10;639:18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.09.063. Epub 2017 Oct 4.

Association study of apoptosis gene polymorphisms in mitochondrial diabetes: A 
potential role in the pathogenicity of MD.

Tabebi M(1), Khabou B(2), Boukadi H(3), Ben Hamad M(2), Ben Rhouma B(2), Tounsi 
S(3), Maalej A(2), Kamoun H(2), Keskes-Ammar L(2), Abid M(4), Mnif M(4), 
Fakhfakh F(5).

Author information:
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, University 
of Sfax, Tunisia. Electronic address: mounamouna62@yahoo.fr.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, University 
of Sfax, Tunisia.
(3)Laboratory of Biopesticides, Centre of Biotechnology of Sfax, University of 
Sfax, Tunisia.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science of Sfax, University of Sfax, 
Tunisia.

Mitochondrial diabetes (MD) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by a 
chronic hyperglycemia and is maternally transmitted. Syndromic MD is a subgroup 
of MD including diabetic microangiopathy and macroangiopathy, in addition to 
extrapancreatic disorder. MD is caused by genetic mutations and deletions 
affecting mitochondrial DNA. This mitochondrial damage initiates apoptosis. In 
this study, we hypothesized that functional polymorphisms in genes involved in 
apoptotic pathway could be associated with the development of apoptosis in MD 
disease and increased its risk. Detection of apoptosis was confirmed on muscle 
biopsies taken from MD patients using the TUNEL method and the Cytochrome c 
protein expression level. We genotyped then 11 published SNPs from intrinsic and 
extrinsic apoptotic pathway and assessed the signification of these 
polymorphisms in 43 MD patients and 100 healthy controls. We found 10 selected 
polymorphisms (p53 (rs1042522 and rs17878362), BCL2 (rs2279115), BAX 
(rs1805419), BAK1 (rs210132 and rs2227925), CASP3 (rs1405937), CASP7 
(rs2227310), CASP8 (rs1045485) and CASP10 (rs13006529)) with a potential 
apoptosis effect in MD patients compared to control population. Specifically, 
SNPs involved in the intrinsic pathway (p53, BCL2, BAK1 and CASP3) presented the 
highest risk of apoptosis. Our result proved that apoptosis initiated by mtDNA 
mutations, can be emphasized by a functional apoptotic polymorphisms associated 
with high expression of cytochrome c protein and more myofibers with apoptosis 
in syndromic MD subgroup compared with non-syndromic MD subgroup.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2017.09.063
PMID: 28987347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]