1. Genet Mol Biol. 2017 Oct-Dec;40(4):743-750. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2014-0338. Epub 2017 Oct 2.

Association of polymorphisms in the heparanase gene (HPSE) with hepatocellular 
carcinoma in Chinese populations.

Yu L(1), Zhang X(2), Zhai Y(2), Zhang H(2), Yue W(2), Zhang X(2), Wang Z(2), 
Zhou H(1), Zhou G(2), Gong F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Beijing, P. R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, P. R. China.

Heparanase activity is involved in cancer growth and development in humans and 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the heparanase gene (HPSE) have been 
shown to be associated with tumors. In this study, we investigated whether SNPs 
in HPSE were a risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by undertaking a 
comprehensive haplotype-tagging, case-control study. For this, six 
haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) in HPSE were genotyped in 400 HCC patients and 
480 controls by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. A log-additive model revealed significant 
correlations between the HPSE polymorphisms rs12331678 and rs12503843 and the 
risk of HCC in the overall samples (p = 0.0046 and p = 0.0055). When the 
analysis was stratified based on hepatitis B virus (HBV) carrier status, 
significant interactions between rs12331678 and rs12503843 and HBV were 
observed. Conditional logistic regression analysis for the independent effect of 
one significant SNP suggested that rs12331678 or rs12503843 contributed an 
independent effect to the significant association with the risk of HCC, 
respectively. Our findings suggest that the SNPs rs12331678 and rs12503843 are 
HCC risk factors, although the potential functional roles of these two SNPs 
remain to be fully elucidated.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2014-0338
PMCID: PMC5738625
PMID: 28981558