1. ACS Omega. 2017 Sep 30;2(9):5840-5849. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01115. Epub
2017  Sep 18.

An Ideal C(3)-Symmetric Sulfate Complex: Molecular Recognition of Oxoanions by 
m-Nitrophenyl- and Pentafluorophenyl-Functionalized Hexaurea Receptors.

Portis B(1), Mirchi A(1), Emami Khansari M(1), Pramanik A(1), Johnson CR(1), 
Powell DR(2), Leszczynski J(1), Hossain MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Jackson State University, Jackson, 
Mississippi 39217, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma 73019, United States.

The anion-binding properties of two tripodal-based hexaureas appended with the 
m-nitrophenyl (1) and pentafluorophenyl (2) groups have been studied both 
experimentally and theoretically, showing strong affinities for sulfate over 
other inorganic oxoanions such as hydrogen sulfate, dihydrogen phosphate, 
bicarbonate, nitrate, and perchlorate. The structural analysis of the sulfate 
complex with 1 reveals that the receptor organizes all urea-binding sites toward 
the cavity at precise orientations around a tetrahedral sulfate anion to form an 
ideal C3-symmetric sulfate complex that is stabilized by 12 hydrogen-bonding 
interactions. The receptor and the encapsulated sulfate are located on the 
threefold axis passing through the bridgehead nitrogen of 1 and the sulfur atom 
of the anionic guest. The high-level density functional theory calculations 
support the crystallographic results, demonstrating that the C3-symmetric 
conformation of the sulfate complex is achieved due to the complementary NH···O 
between the receptor and sulfate.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01115
PMCID: PMC5623944
PMID: 28983526

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.