1. Biosens Bioelectron. 2018 Feb 15;100:526-532. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2017.09.047.
 Epub 2017 Sep 28.

GelRed/[G(3)T](5)/Tb(3+) hybrid: A novel label-free ratiometric fluorescent 
probe for H(2)O(2) and oxidase-based visual biosensing.

Chen JQ(1), Xue SF(1), Chen ZH(1), Zhang S(2), Shi G(1), Zhang M(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory for 
Urban Ecological Processes and Eco-Restoration, East China Normal University, 
500 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200241, China.
(2)College of Resources and Chemical Engineering, Sanming University, Sanming 
365004, China.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Shanghai Key Laboratory for 
Urban Ecological Processes and Eco-Restoration, East China Normal University, 
500 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200241, China. Electronic address: 
mzhang@chem.ecnu.edu.cn.

A novel label-free ratiometric fluorescent probe is developed for the detection 
of H2O2 based on GelRed/[G3T]5/Tb3+ hybrid, in which GelRed (a nucleic acid dye) 
intercalated into the designed single-stranded DNA [G3T]5 (i.e. GelRed/[G3T]5) 
acts as a stable build-in reference with red emission and Tb3+ sensitized by 
[G3T]5 (i.e. [G3T]5/Tb3+) as a sensitive response signal with green 
fluorescence. With the successive addition of Hg2+ and cysteine (Cys) to 
GelRed/[G3T]5/Tb3+, the fluorescence of [G3T]5/Tb3+ can be effectively quenched 
and recovered respectively, while the fluorescence of GelRed/[G3T]5 remains 
unchangeable. Combined with these properties, we have demonstrated its 
application for label-free ratiometric fluorescence detection of H2O2 with 
self-calibration. The sensing mechanism is based on the specific reaction 
between H2O2 and Cys, the resulting disulfide reverses the Cys-mediated 
fluorescence changes of [G3T]5/Tb3+. This method is further applied to the 
monitoring of oxidase-related reactions. As the glucose oxidase 
(GOx)-biocatalyzed oxidation of glucose and the acetylcholine esterase/choline 
oxidase (AChE/ChOx) cascade yield H2O2, such two biocatalytic processes are 
successfully examined utilized our proposed method, indicating its potential 
broad applications in biomedical analysis. In addition, we have also 
demonstrated its feasibility for oxidase-based visual biosensing, in which only 
a handheld UV lamp is used. Importantly, coupled with our proposed visual 
biosensing, a realtime quantitative scanometric assays has been also 
demonstrated by using a smartphone with easy-to-access color-scanning APP as the 
detection platform. Compared to traditional methods, the proposed design is 
cost-effective, simple to prepare and easy-to-use without fluorescence labeling 
or chemical modification.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2017.09.047
PMID: 28988027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]