1. Genet Mol Biol. 2017 Oct-Dec;40(4):774-780. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0323. Epub 2017 Oct 2.

Genetic diversity of the pampas deer (Ozotoceros bezoarticus) population in the 
Brazilian Pantanal assessed by combining fresh fecal DNA analysis and a set of 
heterologous microsatellite loci.

Mantellatto AMB(1), Caparroz R(2), Christofoletti MD(1), Piovezan U(3), Duarte 
JMB(1).

Author information:
(1)Núcleo de Pesquisa e Conservação de Cervídeos, Departamento de Zootecnia, 
Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" (UNESP), Jaboticabal, 
SP, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Genética e Morfologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(3)Centro de Pesquisas Agropecuárias do Pantanal (CPAP), Embrapa, Corumbá, MS, 
Brazil.

The pampas deer (Ozotoceros bezoarticus) is close to being classified as 
'globally threatened', with the largest population occurring in the Brazilian 
Pantanal. Since capture is stressful to these animals, non-invasive sampling 
methods such as the use of feces can provide reliable sources of DNA. The aim of 
this study was to use fecal samples to evaluate the genetic variability of the 
Brazilian Pantanal population of pampas deer. Six heterologous microsatellite 
markers were used to screen 142 stool specimens. Seventy-four deer were 
identified, of which 50 adults were used to determine the genetic 
characteristics of the population. The Pantanal population showed high genetic 
diversity (mean number of alleles per locus = 11.5, expected heterozygosity = 
0.75). This is the first investigation to characterize a South American deer 
species using fecal DNA and demonstrates the usefulness and efficiency of this 
approach, as well as the feasibility of obtaining information that could not 
have been easily obtained by traditional DNA sampling. Our findings suggest that 
management strategies for this species may be much more effective if applied now 
when the population still shows high genetic variability.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0323
PMCID: PMC5738621
PMID: 28981561