1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Dec;16(6):9102-9110. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7727. Epub 2017
Oct  4.

SNPs of CD14 change the mastitis morbidity of Chinese Holstein.

Li J(1), Wang Q(2), Chen F(1), Wang H(3), Chen J(2), Wang Z(2), Huo J(2), Cai 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dairy Science, Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and 
Reproduction, College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Sciences, Anhui Normal University, 
Wuhu, Anhui 241000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Science and Education, The Fourth Hospital of Taizhou, Taizhou, 
Jiangsu 225300, P.R. China.

Gram‑negative (GN) bacterial infection is a main cause of bovine mastitis. The 
cluster of differentiation (CD) 14 gene serves an essential role in GN 
bacterium‑induced innate immune response. CD14 works as a bacterial 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) receptor, combines with LPS‑liposaccharide binding 
protein complex, and causes cellular activation. However, the effects of CD14 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on morbidity of clinical mastitis remain 
unclear. In the present study, To investigate the polymorphisms of CD14 gene and 
its effects on cows' susceptibility to mastitis, polymerase chain 
reaction‑single‑strand conformation polymorphism (PCR‑SSCP) assay was used to 
detect SNPs of CD14 gene in 134 Chinese Holsteins. SNPs were identified in PCR 
products amplified with 3 sets of primers in CD14 exon 2. A total of three SNPs 
were located in that exon: g.528 A→C (147Ser→Arg) in allele B; g.612 A→G 
(175Asn→Asp) in allele D; and g.1022 A→G in allele F (synonymous mutation). The 
SNPs in alleles B and D affected the secondary structure of CD14. A 
3‑dimensional (3D) structural analysis predicted three potential protein forms 
with a similar structure and indicated that the changes of the above‑mentioned 
alleles were on the concave surface of the protein. In more detail, 147 Ser→Arg 
induced a protein kinase C phosphorylation site to move forward, as assessed by 
the motif analysis. The morbidity rate of AB (mixed type g.528 A/C) and CD 
(mixed type g.612 A/G) was the highest among all genotypes presented in the 
current study, and via of tumor necrosis factor‑α and interleukin‑6 mRNA levels 
were upregulated in animals of this genotype compared with others. Taken 
together, the CD14 SNPs identified in the present study, may be closely 
associated with the morbidity of mastitis.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.7727
PMID: 28990093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]