1. J Exp Bot. 2017 Nov 2;68(18):5029-5043. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erx318.

Sorting of SEC translocase SCY components to different membranes in 
chloroplasts.

Singhal R(1), Fernandez DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Exp Bot. 2017 Nov 2;68(18):5013-5016. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erx351.

Membrane proteins that are imported into chloroplasts must be accurately routed 
in order to establish and maintain the highly differentiated membranes 
characteristic of these organelles. Little is known about the targeting 
information or pathways involved, especially in the case of proteins with 
multiple transmembrane domains. We have studied targeting of the SCY components 
of the two SEC translocases in chloroplasts. SCY1 and SCY2 share a similar, 
highly conserved structure with 10 transmembrane domains, but are targeted to 
different membranes: the thylakoids and inner envelope, respectively. We used 
protoplast transfections and a confocal microscopy imaging assay in combination 
with a domain-swapping approach to investigate sorting pathways and identify 
important targeting elements in these proteins. We show that the N-terminal 
region of SCY1 contains targeting determinants that allow SCY1 to be recruited 
to the signal-recognition particle pathway. In addition, substituting the 
N-terminal region of SCY1 for the N-terminal region of SCY2 causes SCY2 to be 
displaced out of the inner envelope. The region of SCY2 that contains 
transmembrane domains 3 and 4 is necessary for localization to the inner 
envelope and may serve as a membrane anchor, enhancing the integration of other 
transmembrane domains via either stop-transfer or post-import mechanisms.

Â© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erx318
PMCID: PMC5853536
PMID: 28992187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]