1. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 9;7(1):12830. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13184-8.

Multiple similarly effective solutions exist for biomedical feature selection 
and classification problems.

Liu J(1), Xu C(1), Yang W(1), Shu Y(1), Zheng W(2), Zhou F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Software, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China.
(2)College of Computer Science and Technology, and Key Laboratory of Symbolic 
Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China.
(3)College of Software, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China. 
FengfengZhou@gmail.com.
(4)College of Computer Science and Technology, and Key Laboratory of Symbolic 
Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, Jilin 
University, Changchun, Jilin, 130012, China. FengfengZhou@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 11;8(1):838. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-19383-1.
    Sci Rep. 2018 Mar 6;8(1):4218. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-22352-3.

Binary classification is a widely employed problem to facilitate the decisions 
on various biomedical big data questions, such as clinical drug trials between 
treated participants and controls, and genome-wide association studies (GWASs) 
between participants with or without a phenotype. A machine learning model is 
trained for this purpose by optimizing the power of discriminating samples from 
two groups. However, most of the classification algorithms tend to generate one 
locally optimal solution according to the input dataset and the mathematical 
presumptions of the dataset. Here we demonstrated from the aspects of both 
disease classification and feature selection that multiple different solutions 
may have similar classification performances. So the existing machine learning 
algorithms may have ignored a horde of fishes by catching only a good one. Since 
most of the existing machine learning algorithms generate a solution by 
optimizing a mathematical goal, it may be essential for understanding the 
biological mechanisms for the investigated classification question, by 
considering both the generated solution and the ignored ones.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-13184-8
PMCID: PMC5634418
PMID: 28993656

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.