1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jan;29(1):155-167. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015060707. Epub
2017  Oct 9.

MYH9 E1841K Mutation Augments Proteinuria and Podocyte Injury and Migration.

Cechova S(1), Dong F(2), Chan F(1), Kelley MJ(2), Ruiz P(3), Le TH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center and Durham Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; and.
(3)Department of Surgery and Pathology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia; 
thl4t@virginia.edu.

Intronic variants of the MYH9 gene that encodes the nonmuscle myosin heavy chain 
IIA are associated with diabetic nephropathy in European Americans and with 
sickle cell disease-associated nephropathy. However, the causal functional 
variants of MYH9 have remained elusive. Rare missense mutations in MYH9 cause 
macrothrombocytopenia and are occasionally associated with development of 
nephropathy. The E1841K mutation is among the common MYH9 missense mutations and 
has been associated with nephropathy in some carriers. To determine the 
contribution of the E1841K mutation in kidney disease, we studied the effects of 
the E1841K mutation in mice subjected to high salt or angiotensin II (Ang II) as 
models of hypertension and in mice subjected to renal mass reduction as a model 
of CKD. Despite similar levels of BP among wild-type (MYH9+/+ ) mice and mice 
heterozygous (MYH9+/E1841K ) and homozygous (MYH9E1841K/E1841K ) for the 
mutation in each model, MYH9E1841K/E1841K mice exhibited mildly increased 
albuminuria in response to high salt; severe albuminuria, nephrinuria, FSGS, and 
podocyte foot effacement in Ang II-induced hypertension; and early mortality in 
the renal mass reduction model. Treatment with candesartan during Ang II-induced 
hypertension attenuated kidney disease development in MYH9E1841K/E1841K mice. In 
vitro, isolated primary podocytes from MYH9E1841K/E1841K mice exhibited 
increased lamellipodia formation and reorganization of F-actin stress fibers. 
Wound healing assays revealed that MYH9+/+ podocytes had the lowest migration 
rate, followed by MYH9+/E1841K then MYH9E1841K/E1841K podocytes. In conclusion, 
the MYH9 E1841K variant alters podocyte cytoskeletal structure and renders 
podocytes more susceptible to injury after a damaging stimulus.

Copyright Â© 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2015060707
PMCID: PMC5748898
PMID: 28993503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]