1. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Sep 26;8:688. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00688. eCollection
 2017.

Folliculin Interacts with Rab35 to Regulate EGF-Induced EGFR Degradation.

Zheng J(1), Duan B(1), Sun S(1)(2), Cui J(2)(3), Du J(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Lab of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Cancer Personalized Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China.

Aims and Hypothesis: This study aims to investigate the mechanism involved in 
intracellular regulation of EGFR degradation induced by EGF. Methods: 
Phosphorylation of proteins related to EGFR signaling was examined by western 
blot analysis. Activation, connection between Rab35 and folliculin (FLCN) were 
assessed by pulldown, coimmunoprecipitation assays separately. The relationship 
between FLCN and cell growth was detected using gene overexpression and 
knock-down techniques. Results: Here, we demonstrate that interfering with FLCN, 
a tumor suppressor, reduces the rate of EGF-induced EGFR degradation, resulting 
in prolonged activation of downstream signaling. Rab35 is also involved in these 
processes. Moreover, C-terminal of FLCN binds to and activates Rab35. Of special 
interest is the observation that erlotinib, a selective EGFR inhibitor, not only 
obstructs the EGFR-mediated cellular signaling, but also abolishes 
EGF-stimulated EGFR degradation. Further results reveal that EGF facilitates the 
activation of Rab35, and FLCN modulates EGF-dependent Rab35 activation and cell 
growth. Conclusions: Taken together, our study proposes a negative-feedback 
regulation model in which FLCN mediates EGF-induced Rab35 activation, thereby 
increasing EGFR degradation and attenuating EGFR signaling.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00688
PMCID: PMC5622982
PMID: 29018350