1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2017 Dec;37(12):2280-2290. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.309913. Epub 2017 Oct 12.

NO Augments Endothelial Reactivity by Reducing Myoendothelial Calcium Signal 
Spreading: A Novel Role for Cx37 (Connexin 37) and the Protein Tyrosine 
Phosphatase SHP-2.

Pogoda K(1), Mannell H(1), Blodow S(1), Schneider H(1), Schubert KM(1), Qiu 
J(1), Schmidt A(1), Imhof A(1), Beck H(1), Tanase LI(1), Pfeifer A(1), Pohl 
U(2), Kameritsch P(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine, University Hospital, 
Biomedical Center, Munich, Germany (K.P., H.M., S.B., H.S., K.M.S., J.Q., H.B., 
L.I.T., U.P., P.K.); Protein Analysis Unit, Biomedical Center, Munich, Germany 
(A.S., A.I.); DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site 
Munich Heart Alliance, Germany (K.P., H.M., S.B., H.S., K.M.S., J.Q., H.B., 
U.P., P.K.); Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergY), Germany (A.I., 
U.P.); and Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Germany (A.P.).
(2)From the Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine, University Hospital, 
Biomedical Center, Munich, Germany (K.P., H.M., S.B., H.S., K.M.S., J.Q., H.B., 
L.I.T., U.P., P.K.); Protein Analysis Unit, Biomedical Center, Munich, Germany 
(A.S., A.I.); DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), partner site 
Munich Heart Alliance, Germany (K.P., H.M., S.B., H.S., K.M.S., J.Q., H.B., 
U.P., P.K.); Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergY), Germany (A.I., 
U.P.); and Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Germany (A.P.). upohl@mail.de.

OBJECTIVE: Because of its strategic position between endothelial and smooth 
muscle cells in microvessels, Cx37 (Connexin 37) plays an important role in 
myoendothelial gap junctional intercellular communication. We have shown before 
that NO inhibits gap junctional intercellular communication through gap 
junctions containing Cx37. However, the underlying mechanism is not yet 
identified.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Using channel-forming Cx37 mutants exhibiting partial 
deletions or amino acid exchanges in their C-terminal loops, we now show that 
the phosphorylation state of a tyrosine residue at position 332 (Y332) in the 
C-terminus of Cx37 controls the gap junction-dependent spread of calcium 
signals. Mass spectra revealed that NO protects Cx37 from dephosphorylation at 
Y332 by inhibition of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2. Functionally, the 
inhibition of gap junctional intercellular communication by NO decreased the 
spread of the calcium signal (induced by mechanical stimulation of individual 
endothelial cells) from endothelial to smooth muscle cells in intact vessels, 
while, at the same time, augmenting the calcium signal spreading within the 
endothelium. Consequently, preincubation of small resistance arteries with 
exogenous NO enhanced the endothelium-dependent dilator response to 
acetylcholine in spite of a pharmacological blockade of NO-dependent cGMP 
formation by the soluable guanylyl cyclase inhibitor ODQ 
(1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify a novel mechanism by which NO can increase the 
efficacy of calcium, rising vasoactive agonists in the microvascular 
endothelium.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.117.309913
PMID: 29025706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]