1. Neuron. 2017 Oct 11;96(2):267-284. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.019.

Striatal Local Circuitry: A New Framework for Lateral Inhibition.

Burke DA(1), Rotstein HG(2), Alvarez VA(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory on Neurobiology of Compulsive Behaviors, Intramural Research 
Program, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA; Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, 
Providence, RI 02912, USA.
(2)Federated Department of Biological Sciences, New Jersey Institute of 
Technology and Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA; Institute for Brain 
and Neuroscience Research, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, 
USA.
(3)Laboratory on Neurobiology of Compulsive Behaviors, Intramural Research 
Program, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA; Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH, 
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. Electronic address: alvarezva@mail.nih.gov.

This Perspective will examine the organization of intrastriatal circuitry, 
review recent findings in this area, and discuss how the pattern of connectivity 
between striatal neurons might give rise to the behaviorally observed synergism 
between the direct/indirect pathway neurons. The emphasis of this Perspective is 
on the underappreciated role of lateral inhibition between striatal projection 
cells in controlling neuronal firing and shaping the output of this circuit. We 
review some classic studies in combination with more recent anatomical and 
functional findings to lay out a framework for an updated model of the 
intrastriatal lateral inhibition, where we explore its contribution to the 
formation of functional units of processing and the integration and filtering of 
inputs to generate motor patterns and learned behaviors.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.019
PMCID: PMC5649445
PMID: 29024654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]