1. Ann Neurol. 2017 Nov;82(5):686-696. doi: 10.1002/ana.25069. Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Prediction of phenotypic severity in mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA.

Knottnerus SJG(1)(2), Nijmeijer SCM(1), IJlst L(2), Te Brinke H(2), van Vlies 
N(2), Wijburg FA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolic Diseases, Emma Children's Hospital and 
Amsterdam Lysosome Center "Sphinx," Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam.
(2)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA or Sanfilippo disease type A is a 
progressive neurodegenerative disorder presenting in early childhood, caused by 
an inherited deficiency of the lysosomal hydrolase sulfamidase. New missense 
mutations, for which genotype-phenotype correlations are currently unknown, are 
frequently reported, hampering early prediction of phenotypic severity and 
efficacy assessment of new disease-modifying treatments. We aimed to design a 
method to determine phenotypic severity early in the disease course.
METHODS: Fifty-three patients were included for whom skin fibroblasts and data 
on disease course and mutation analysis were available. Patients were 
phenotypically characterized on clinical data as rapidly progressing or slowly 
progressing. Sulfamidase activity was measured in fibroblasts cultured at 37 °C 
and at 30 °C.
RESULTS: Sulfamidase activity in fibroblasts from patients homozygous or 
compound heterozygous for a combination of known severe mutations remained below 
the limit of quantification under both culture conditions. In contrast, 
sulfamidase activity in fibroblasts from patients homozygous or compound 
heterozygous for a known mild mutation increased above the limit of 
quantification when cultured at 30 °C. With division on the basis of the 
patients' phenotype, fibroblasts from slowly progressing patients could be 
separated from rapidly progressing patients by increase in sulfamidase activity 
when cultured at 30 °C (p < 0.001, sensitivity = 96%, specificity = 93%).
INTERPRETATION: Phenotypic severity strongly correlates with the potential to 
increase sulfamidase activity in fibroblasts cultured at 30 °C, allowing 
reliable distinction between patients with rapidly progressing or slowly 
progressing phenotypes. This method may provide an essential tool for assessment 
of treatment effects and for health care and life planning decisions. Ann Neurol 
2017;82:686-696.

© 2017 The Authors Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on 
behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25069
PMCID: PMC5725696
PMID: 29023963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]