1. Front Physiol. 2017 Sep 26;8:750. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00750. eCollection 
2017.

Study on the Effect of Wing Bud Chitin Metabolism and Its Developmental Network 
Genes in the Brown Planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens, by Knockdown of TRE Gene.

Zhang L(1), Qiu LY(1), Yang HL(1), Wang HJ(1), Zhou M(1), Wang SG(1), Tang B(1).

Author information:
(1)Hangzhou Key Laboratory of Animal Adaptation and Evolution, College of Life 
and Environmental Sciences, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, China.

The brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens is one of the most serious pests of 
rice, and there is so far no effective way to manage this pest. However, RNA 
interference not only can be used to study gene function, but also provide 
potential opportunities for novel pest management. The development of wing plays 
a key role in insect physiological activities and mainly involves chitin. Hence, 
the regulating role of trehalase (TRE) genes on wing bud formation has been 
studied by RNAi. In this paper, the activity levels of TRE and the contents of 
the two sugars trehalose and glucose were negatively correlated indicating the 
potential role of TRE in the molting process. In addition, NlTRE1-1 and NlTRE2 
were expressed at higher levels in wing bud tissue than in other tissues, and 
abnormal molting and wing deformity or curling were noted 48 h after the insect 
was injected with any double-stranded TRE (dsTRE), even though different TREs 
have compensatory functions. The expression levels of NlCHS1b, NlCht1, NlCht2, 
NlCht6, NlCht7, NlCht8, NlCht10, NlIDGF, and NlENGase decreased significantly 48 
h after the insect was injected with a mixture of three kinds of dsTREs. 
Similarly, the TRE inhibitor validamycin can inhibit NlCHS1 and NlCht gene 
expression. However, the wing deformity was the result of the NlIDGF, NlENGase, 
NlAP, and NlTSH genes being inhibited when a single dsTRE was injected. These 
results demonstrate that silencing of TRE gene expression can lead to wing 
deformities due to the down-regulation of the AP and TSH genes involved in wing 
development and that the TRE inhibitor validamycin can co-regulate chitin 
metabolism and the expression of wing development-related genes in wing bud 
tissue. The results provide a new approach for the prevention and management of 
N. lugens.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00750
PMCID: PMC5627005
PMID: 29033849