1. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017 Dec 1;181:85-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.09.020. Epub 2017 Oct 13.

Maintenance on naltrexone+amphetamine decreases cocaine-vs.-food choice in male 
rhesus monkeys.

Moerke MJ(1), Banks ML(2), Cheng K(3), Rice KC(4), Negus SS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
410 N. 12th St., Richmond, VA 23298, USA. Electronic address: 
megan.moerke@vcuhealth.org.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
410 N. 12th St., Richmond, VA 23298, USA. Electronic address: 
matthew.banks@vcuhealth.org.
(3)Drug Design and Synthesis Section, National Institute on Drug Abuse and 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA; 
Office of Pharmaceutical Quality, The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA. Electronic address: 
kejun.cheng@fda.hhs.gov.
(4)Drug Design and Synthesis Section, National Institute on Drug Abuse and 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA. 
Electronic address: kennerr@nida.nih.gov.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
410 N. 12th St., Richmond, VA 23298, USA. Electronic address: 
sidney.negus@vcuhealth.org.

BACKGROUND: Cocaine use disorder remains a significant public health issue for 
which there are no FDA-approved pharmacotherapies. Amphetamine maintenance 
reduces cocaine use in preclinical and clinical studies, but the mechanism of 
this effect is unknown. Previous studies indicate a role for endogenous opioid 
release and subsequent opioid receptor activation in some amphetamine effects; 
therefore, the current study examined the role of mu-opioid receptor activation 
in d-amphetamine treatment effects in an assay of cocaine-vs-food choice.
METHODS: Adult male rhesus monkeys with double-lumen intravenous catheters 
responded for concurrently available food pellets and cocaine injections 
(0-0.1mg/kg/injection) during daily sessions. Cocaine choice and overall 
reinforcement rates were evaluated during 7-day treatments with saline or test 
drugs.
RESULTS: During saline treatment, cocaine maintained a dose-dependent increase 
in cocaine-vs.-food choice. The mu-opioid receptor agonist morphine 
(0.032-0.32mg/kg/h) dose-dependently increased cocaine choice and decreased 
rates of reinforcement. A dose of the mu-selective opioid receptor antagonist 
naltrexone (0.0032mg/kg/h) that completely blocked morphine effects had no 
effect on cocaine choice when it was administered alone, but it enhanced the 
effectiveness of a threshold dose of 0.032mg/kg/h amphetamine to decrease 
cocaine choice without also enhancing nonselective behavioral disruption by this 
dose of amphetamine. Conversely, the kappa-selective opioid antagonist 
norbinalorphimine did not enhance amphetamine effects on cocaine choice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that amphetamine maintenance produces mu 
opioid-receptor mediated effects that oppose its anti-cocaine effects. 
Co-administration of naltrexone may selectively enhance amphetamine potency to 
decrease cocaine choice without increasing amphetamine potency to produce 
general behavioral disruption.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.09.020
PMCID: PMC5683900
PMID: 29040826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.