1. Nat Commun. 2017 Oct 18;8(1):1021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01309-6.

APOBEC3H structure reveals an unusual mechanism of interaction with duplex RNA.

Bohn JA(1)(2), Thummar K(3)(4), York A(3)(4), Raymond A(3)(4), Brown WC(1), 
Bieniasz PD(3)(4), Hatziioannou T(5), Smith JL(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
48109, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 10065, 
USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
10065, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Retrovirology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 10065, 
USA. thatziio@rockefeller.edu.
(6)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. 
JanetSmith@umich.edu.
(7)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
48109, USA. JanetSmith@umich.edu.

The APOBEC3 family of cytidine deaminases cause lethal hypermutation of 
retroviruses via deamination of newly reverse-transcribed viral DNA. Their 
ability to bind RNA is essential for virion infiltration and antiviral activity, 
yet the mechanisms of viral RNA recognition are unknown. By screening naturally 
occurring, polymorphic, non-human primate APOBEC3H variants for biological and 
crystallization properties, we obtained a 2.24-Ã… crystal structure of pig-tailed 
macaque APOBEC3H with bound RNA. Here, we report that APOBEC3H forms a dimer 
around a short RNA duplex and, despite the bound RNA, has potent cytidine 
deaminase activity. The structure reveals an unusual RNA-binding mode in which 
two APOBEC3H molecules at opposite ends of a seven-base-pair duplex interact 
extensively with both RNA strands, but form no protein-protein contacts. 
CLIP-seq analysis revealed that APOBEC3H preferentially binds to sequences in 
the viral genome predicted to contain duplexes, a property that may facilitate 
both virion incorporation and catalytic activity.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01309-6
PMCID: PMC5647330
PMID: 29044109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.