1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017 Oct;96(42):e8303. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008303.

Case report: Central nervous system involvement of human graft versus host 
disease: Report of 7 cases and a review of literature.

Ruggiu M(1), Cuccuini W, Mokhtari K, Meignin V, Peffault de Latour R, Robin M, 
Fontbrune FS, Xhaard A, Socié G, Michonneau D.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Hématologie Greffe, Hôpital Saint Louis, APHP Université Paris 
Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Saint Louis 
Laboratoire d'anatomie pathologique, Hôpital La Pitié Salpétrière, APHP 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Paris Cité Laboratoire d'Anatomie 
Pathologique, Hôpital Saint Louis, APHP EA3518, Université Paris Diderot INSERM 
U1131, Université Paris Diderot INSERM UMR1160, Institut Universitaire 
d'Hématologie, Centre Hayem, Paris, France.

RATIONALE: Central nervous system (CNS) involvement of graft versus host disease 
(GvHD) is a rare cause of CNS disorders after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (allo-HSCT). Chronic CNS GvHD symptoms are heterogeneous and 
include cerebrovascular manifestations, demyelinating disease and 
immune-mediated encephalitis. CNS-Acute GvHD is not formally defined in 
literature.
PATIENTS CONCERNS AND DIAGNOSES: We report 7 cases of CNS-GvHD among which two 
had histological-proven disease. We reviewed 32 additional cases of CNS GvHD 
published in literature since 1990. In this cohort, 34 patients were 
transplanted for hematologic malignancies, and 5 for non-malignant hematopoiesis 
disorders. Of these patients, 25 had a history of chronic GvHD and 
immunosuppressive treatment had been decreased or discontinued in 14 patients 
before neurological symptoms onset. Median neurological disorder onset was 385 
days [7-7320]. Patients had stroke-like episodes (n = 7), lacunar syndromes 
(n = 3), multiple sclerosis-like presentations (n = 7), acute demyelinating 
encephalomyelitis-like symptoms (n = 4), encephalitis (n = 14), mass syndrome 
(n = 1), and 3 had non-specific symptoms. Median neurological symptoms onset was 
81.5 days [7-1095] for patients without chronic GVHD history versus 549 days 
[11-7300] for patients with chronic GVHD (P = 0.001). Patients with early 
involvement of CNS after allo-HSCT and no chronic GVHD symptoms were more 
frequently suffering from encephalitis (64% versus 28%, P = 0.07), whereas 
stroke-like episodes and lacunar symptoms were less frequent (9% versus 36%, 
P = 0.13).
INTERVENTIONS: 34 patients with CNS-GvHD were treated with immunosuppressive 
therapy, including corticosteroids for 31 of them. Other treatments were 
intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis, cyclophosphamide, calcineurin 
inhibitors, mycophenolic acid, methotrexate and etoposide.
OUTCOMES: 27 patients achieved a response: 10 complete responses, 15 partial 
responses and 2 transient responses. Of 25 patients with sufficient follow-up, 7 
were alive and 18 patients deceased after CNS-GvHD diagnosis.
LESSONS: CNS-related GvHD is a rare cause of CNS disorders after allo-HSCT and 
is associated with a poor prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000008303
PMCID: PMC5662398
PMID: 29049232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.