1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017 Oct 24;13(10):e1005789. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005789. eCollection 2017 Oct.

Prediction of HIV-1 sensitivity to broadly neutralizing antibodies shows a trend 
towards resistance over time.

Hake A(1), Pfeifer N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department Computational Biology and Applied Algorithmics, Max Planck 
Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbr端cken, Germany.
(2)Methods in Medical Informatics, Department of Computer Science, University of 
T端bingen, Germany.
(3)Medical Faculty, University of T端bingen, T端bingen, Germany.

Treatment with broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) has proven effective 
against HIV-1 infections in humanized mice, non-human primates, and humans. Due 
to the high mutation rate of HIV-1, resistance testing of the patient's viral 
strains to the bNAbs is still inevitable. So far, bNAb resistance can only be 
tested in expensive and time-consuming neutralization experiments. Here, we 
introduce well-performing computational models that predict the neutralization 
response of HIV-1 to bNAbs given only the envelope sequence of the virus. Using 
non-linear support vector machines based on a string kernel, the models learnt 
even the important binding sites of bNAbs with more complex epitopes, i.e., the 
CD4 binding site targeting bNAbs, proving thereby the biological relevance of 
the models. To increase the interpretability of the models, we additionally 
provide a new kind of motif logo for each query sequence, visualizing those 
residues of the test sequence that influenced the prediction outcome the most. 
Moreover, we predicted the neutralization sensitivity of around 34,000 HIV-1 
samples from different time points to a broad range of bNAbs, enabling the first 
analysis of HIV resistance to bNAbs on a global scale. The analysis showed for 
many of the bNAbs a trend towards antibody resistance over time, which had 
previously only been discovered for a small non-representative subset of the 
global HIV-1 population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005789
PMCID: PMC5669501
PMID: 29065122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.