1. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 25;7(1):14067. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14564-w.

Probing Resistance Mutations in Retroviral Integrases by Direct Measurement of 
Dolutegravir Fluorescence.

Thierry E(1), Lebourgeois S(1), Simon F(1), Delelis O(2), Deprez E(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biology and Applied Pharmacology (LBPA), CNRS UMR8113, IDA 
FR3242, ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay, F-94235, Cachan, France.
(2)Laboratory of Biology and Applied Pharmacology (LBPA), CNRS UMR8113, IDA 
FR3242, ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay, F-94235, Cachan, France. 
delelis@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr.
(3)Laboratory of Biology and Applied Pharmacology (LBPA), CNRS UMR8113, IDA 
FR3242, ENS Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay, F-94235, Cachan, France. 
deprez@lbpa.ens-cachan.fr.

FDA-approved integrase strand transfer inhibitors (raltegravir, elvitegravir and 
dolutegravir) efficiently inhibit HIV-1 replication. Here, we present 
fluorescence properties of these inhibitors. Dolutegravir displays an excitation 
mode particularly dependent on Mg2+ chelation, allowing to directly probe its 
Mg2+-dependent binding to the prototype foamy virus (PFV) integrase. 
Dolutegravir-binding studied by both its fluorescence anisotropy and subsequent 
emission enhancement, strictly requires a preformed integrase/DNA complex, the 
ten terminal base pairs from the 3'-end of the DNA reactive strand being crucial 
to optimize dolutegravir-binding in the context of the ternary complex. From the 
protein side, mutation of any catalytic residue fully abolishes 
dolutegravir-binding. We also compared dolutegravir-binding to PFV F190Y, G187R 
and S217K mutants, corresponding to HIV-1 F121Y, G118R and G140S/Q148K mutations 
that confer low-to-high resistance levels against raltegravir/dolutegravir. The 
dolutegravir-binding properties derived from fluorescence-based binding assays 
and drug susceptibilities in terms of catalytic activity, are well correlated. 
Indeed, dolutegravir-binding to wild-type and F190Y integrases are comparable 
while strongly compromised with G187R and S217K. Accordingly, the two latter 
mutants are highly resistant to dolutegravir while F190Y shows only moderate or 
no resistance. Intrinsic fluorescence properties of dolutegravir are thus 
particularly suitable for a thorough characterization of both DNA-binding 
properties of integrase and resistance mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-14564-w
PMCID: PMC5656594
PMID: 29070877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.