1. Anim Genet. 2017 Dec;48(6):660-668. doi: 10.1111/age.12620. Epub 2017 Oct 27.

Association of genetic variants and expression levels of porcine FABP4 and FABP5 
genes.

Ballester M(1)(2)(3), Puig-Oliveras A(1)(2), Castelló A(1)(2), Revilla M(1)(2), 
Fernández AI(4), Folch JM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant and Animal Genomics, Centre de Recerca en Agrigenòmica (Consorci 
CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB), Edifici CRAG, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, 08193, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(2)Departament de Ciència Animal i dels Aliments, Facultat de Veterinària, 
Campus UAB, Bellaterra, 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Genètica i Millora Animal, IRTA, Torre Marimon, 08140, Caldes de Montbui, 
Spain.
(4)Departamento de Genética Animal, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y 
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), 28040, Madrid, Spain.

The FABP4 and FABP5 genes, coding for fatty acid transport proteins, have long 
been studied as positional candidate genes for SSC4 QTL affecting fat deposition 
and composition traits in pigs. Polymorphisms in these genes, 
FABP4:g.2634_2635insC and FABP5:g.3000T>G, have previously been associated with 
fatness traits in an Iberian by Landrace cross (IBMAP). The aim of the present 
work was to evaluate the functional implication of these genetic variants. For 
this purpose, FABP4 and FABP5 mRNA expression levels in 114 BC1_LD animals (25% 
Iberian × 75% Landrace) were analyzed using real-time quantitative PCR in 
backfat and muscle. FABP4 gene expression in backfat, but not in muscle, was 
associated with FABP4:g.2634_2635insC. In contrast, FABP5:g.3000T>G was not 
associated with gene expression levels. An expression-based genome-wide 
association study highlighted the FABP4:g.2634_2635insC polymorphism as the 
polymorphism most associated with FABP4 gene expression in backfat. Furthermore, 
other genomic regions associated in trans with the mRNA expression of FABP4 in 
backfat and FABP5 in muscle were also identified. Finally, two putative 
transcription binding sites for PPARG and NR4A2 may be affected by the 
FABP4:g.2634_2635insC polymorphism, modifying FABP4 gene expression. Our results 
reinforce FABP4 as a candidate gene for fatness traits on SSC4.

© 2017 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.12620
PMID: 29076225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]