1. Redox Biol. 2018 Apr;14:423-438. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2017.10.013. Epub 2017
Oct  17.

STAT3-RXR-Nrf2 activates systemic redox and energy homeostasis upon steep 
decline in pO(2) gradient.

Paul S(1), Gangwar A(1), Bhargava K(1), Ahmad Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences (DIPAS), Defence R&D 
Organization (DRDO), Timarpur, New Delhi 110054, India.
(2)Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences (DIPAS), Defence R&D 
Organization (DRDO), Timarpur, New Delhi 110054, India. Electronic address: 
yasminchem@gmail.com.

Hypobaric hypoxia elicits several patho-physiological manifestations, some of 
which are known to be lethal. Among various molecular mechanisms proposed so 
far, perturbation in redox state due to imbalance between radical generation and 
antioxidant defence is promising. These molecular events are also related to 
hypoxic status of cancer cells and therefore its understanding has extended 
clinical advantage beyond high altitude hypoxia. In present study, however, the 
focus was to understand and propose a model for rapid acclimatization of high 
altitude visitors to enhance their performance based on molecular changes. We 
considered using simulated hypobaric hypoxia at some established thresholds of 
high altitude stratification based on known physiological effects. Previous 
studies have focused on the temporal aspect while overlooking the effects of 
varying pO2 levels during exposure to hypobaric hypoxia. The pO2 levels, 
indicative of altitude, are crucial to redox homeostasis and can be the limiting 
factor during acclimatization to hypobaric hypoxia. In this study we present the 
effects of acute (24h) exposure to high (3049m; pO2: 71kPa), very high (4573m; 
pO2: 59kPa) and extreme altitude (7620m; pO2: 40kPa) zones on lung and plasma 
using semi-quantitative redox specific transcripts and quantitative 
proteo-bioinformatics workflow in conjunction with redox stress assays. It was 
observed that direct exposure to extreme altitude caused 100% mortality, which 
turned into high survival rate after pre-exposure to 59kPa, for which molecular 
explanation were also found. The pO2 of 59kPa (very high altitude zone) elicits 
systemic energy and redox homeostatic processes by modulating the STAT3-RXR-Nrf2 
trio. Finally we posit the various processes downstream of STAT3-RXR-Nrf2 and 
the plasma proteins that can be used to ascertain the redox status of an 
individual.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2017.10.013
PMCID: PMC5680518
PMID: 29078168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]