1. Nat Cell Biol. 2017 Dec;19(12):1424-1432. doi: 10.1038/ncb3627. Epub 2017 Oct 
30.

TBC1D23 is a bridging factor for endosomal vesicle capture by golgins at the 
trans-Golgi.

Shin JJH(1), Gillingham AK(1), Begum F(1), Chadwick J(1), Munro S(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2018 Feb;20(2):222. doi: 10.1038/s41556-017-0026-7.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2017 Nov 20;27(22):R1222-R1225. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.003.

The specificity of membrane traffic involves tethers at destination organelles 
that selectively capture incoming transport vesicles to allow SNAREs on opposing 
membranes to then assemble and drive fusion. Tethers include both protein 
complexes and long coiled-coil proteins, although how they contribute to 
specificity remains unclear. The golgin coiled-coil proteins at the Golgi 
apparatus capture vesicles from different origins, but the vesicle-specific 
molecular cues that they recognize are unknown. Vesicle tethering is typically a 
transient process and therefore is challenging to interrogate in vivo. Thus, we 
have used a system in which an ectopic golgin causes vesicles to accumulate in a 
tethered state. By applying proximity biotinylation to the golgin-captured 
vesicles, we identify TBC1D23, an apparently catalytically inactive member of a 
family of Rab GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), as a vesicle-golgin adaptor 
that is required for endosome-to-Golgi trafficking. The Rab GAP domain of 
TBC1D23 binds to a conserved motif at the tip of golgin-245 and golgin-97 at the 
trans-Golgi, while the C terminus binds to the WASH complex on endosome-derived 
vesicles. Thus, TBC1D23 is a specificity determinant that links the vesicle to 
the target membrane during endosome-to-Golgi trafficking.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb3627
PMCID: PMC5712222
PMID: 29084197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.