1. Georgian Med News. 2017 Oct;(271):45-49.

[STUDY OF THE PTPN22 GENE IN CHILDREN WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS IN THE 
AZERBAIJANI POPULATION].

[Article in Russian]

Ahmadov G(1).

Author information:
(1)Azerbaijan Medical University, Department of Children's Diseases II, Baku, 
Azerbaijan.

The PTPN22 gene was studied in 160 children with type 1 diabetes mellitus under 
the age of 18 years and in 271 healthy children. Of the 160 patients, 50.6% 
(n=81) were boys, 49.4% (n=79) were girls. The average age of diabetic children 
was 9.1 years. The survey was conducted on the basis of the Children's Clinical 
Hospital No. 6 in Baku city. For all patients, a special questionnaire was 
filled out. Only children of Azerbaijani nationality were included in the study. 
As a comparison group, 271 students of the Medical College No. 1 of Baku city 
were involved. Of these, 29.1% (n=79) were boys, 70.9% (n = 192) girls. The 
control group did not include children with endocrine diseases. The collected 
blood samples were sent for further investigation to the medical genetic 
laboratory of the University Hospital of Motol at Charles University, located in 
the city of Prague (Czech Republic). This laboratory has a European certificate 
for conducting molecular genetic studies. In the Azerbaijani population, 3 
polymorphisms of the PTPN22 gene were studied: 1123 (rs2488457), +1848 
(rs2476601, or R620W), +2740 (rs1217412). Relationship with insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus was found only in polymorphism R620W. In this case, a minor 
allele (W) was found in 8 (5%) patients with diabetes mellitus and only 2 
(0.74%) of healthy children, which is a reliable result (OR 7.1, 95% CI = 1.5 
-34). Polymorphisms -1123 C/G and +2740 A/G showed no correlation with diabetes 
mellitus. The Azerbaijani population has higher odds ratios for haplotypes-1123C 
W620 + 2740G (OR 14.8, 95% CI=2.0-651). No inter-sex correlation was observed in 
the examined. At the same time, the trend was also not revealed.

PMID: 29099700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]