1. Genes Nutr. 2017 Oct 30;12:30. doi: 10.1186/s12263-017-0586-y. eCollection
2017.

A prospective study of dietary and supplemental zinc intake and risk of type 2 
diabetes depending on genetic variation in SLC30A8.

Drake I(1), Hindy G(1), Ericson U(1), Orho-Melander M(1).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes and Cardiovascular Disease - Genetic Epidemiology, Lund University 
Diabetes Centre, Department of Clinical Sciences in Malmö, Lund University, 
Clinical Research Center 60:13, Jan Waldenströms gata 35, SE-205 02 Malmö, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The solute carrier family 30 member 8 gene (SLC30A8) encodes a zinc 
transporter in the pancreatic beta cells and the major C-allele of a missense 
variant (rs13266634; C/T; R325W) in SLC30A8 is associated with an increased risk 
of type 2 diabetes (T2D). We hypothesized that the association between zinc 
intake and T2D may be modified by the SLC30A8 genotype.
RESULTS: We carried out a prospective study among subjects with no history 
cardio-metabolic diseases in the Malmö Diet and Cancer Study cohort (N = 26,132, 
38% men; 86% with genotype data). Zinc intake was assessed using a diet 
questionnaire and food record. During a median follow-up of 19 years, 3676 T2D 
cases occurred. A BMI-stratified Cox proportional hazards regression model with 
attained age as the time scale was used to model the association between total 
and dietary zinc intake, zinc supplement use, zinc to iron ratio, and risk of 
T2D adjusting for putative confounding factors.The median total zinc intake was 
11.4 mg/day, and the median dietary zinc intake was 10.7 mg/day. Zinc supplement 
users (17%) had a median total zinc intake of 22.4 mg/day. Dietary zinc intake 
was associated with increased risk of T2D (Ptrend < 0.0001). In contrast, we 
observed a lower risk of T2D among zinc supplement users (HR = 0.79, 95% CI 
0.70-0.89). The SLC30A8 CC genotype was associated with a higher risk of T2D 
(HR = 1.16, 95% CI 1.07-1.24), and the effect was stronger among subjects with 
higher BMI (Pinteraction = 0.007). We observed no significant modification of 
the zinc-T2D associations by SLC30A8 genotype. However, a three-way interaction 
between SLC30A8 genotype, BMI, and zinc to iron ratio was observed 
(Pinteraction = 0.007). A high zinc to iron ratio conferred a protective 
associated effect on T2D risk among obese subjects, and the effect was 
significantly more pronounced among T-allele carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: Zinc supplementation and a high zinc to iron intake ratio may lower 
the risk of T2D, but these associations could be modified by obesity and the 
SLC30A8 genotype. The findings implicate that when considering zinc 
supplementation for T2D prevention, both obesity status and SLC30A8 genotype may 
need to be accounted for.

DOI: 10.1186/s12263-017-0586-y
PMCID: PMC5661924
PMID: 29093761

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: In 
agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki, this study was approved by the 
Ethical committee at Lund University (LU 51-90) and informed written consent was 
obtained from all participants. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.