1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 1;7(1):14864. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14964-y.

Implications of mitochondrial network organization in mitochondrial stress 
signalling in NARP cybrid and Rho0 cells.

Walczak J(1), Partyka M(1), Duszy≈Ñski J(1), Szczepanowska J(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes, Department of Biochemistry, 
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Science, 3 Pasteur 
St, 02-993, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Laboratory of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes, Department of Biochemistry, 
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Science, 3 Pasteur 
St, 02-993, Warsaw, Poland. j.szczepanowska@nencki.gov.pl.

Mitochondrial dysfunctions lead to the generation of signalling mediators that 
influence the fate of that organelle. Mitochondrial dynamics and their 
positioning within the cell are important elements of mitochondria-nucleus 
communication. The aim of this project was to examine whether mitochondrial 
shape, distribution and fusion/fission proteins are involved in the 
mitochondrial stress response in a cellular model subjected to specifically 
designed chronic mitochondrial stress: WT human osteosarcoma cells as controls, 
NARP cybrid cells as mild chronic stress and Rho0 as severe chronic stress. We 
characterized mitochondrial distribution in these cells using confocal 
microscopy and evaluated the level of proteins directly involved in the 
mitochondrial dynamics and their regulation. We found that the organization of 
mitochondria within the cell is correlated with changes in the levels of 
proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics and proteins responsible for 
regulation of this process. Induction of the autophagy/mitophagy process, which 
is crucial for cellular homeostasis under stress conditions was also shown. It 
seems that mitochondrial shape and organization within the cell are implicated 
in retrograde signalling in chronic mitochondrial stress.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-14964-y
PMCID: PMC5665886
PMID: 29093569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.