1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2017 Dec;60:52-63. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2017.10.007. Epub 
2017 Oct 19.

XRCC1-mediated repair of strand breaks independent of PNKP binding.

Horton JK(1), Stefanick DF(1), Zhao ML(1), Janoshazi AK(2), Gassman NR(1), 
Seddon HJ(1), Wilson SH(3).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, NIEHS, National 
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
(2)Signal Transduction Laboratory, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.
(3)Genomic Integrity and Structural Biology Laboratory, NIEHS, National 
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. Electronic address: 
wilson5@niehs.nih.gov.

Repair of DNA-protein crosslinks and oxidatively damaged DNA base lesions 
generates intermediates with nicks or gaps with abnormal and blocked 
3'-phosphate and 5'-OH ends that prevent the activity of DNA polymerases and 
ligases. End cleaning in mammalian cells by Tdp1 and PNKP produces the 
conventional 3'-OH and 5'-phosphate DNA ends suitable for completion of repair. 
This repair function of PNKP is facilitated by its binding to the scaffold 
protein XRCC1, and phosphorylation of XRCC1 by CK2 at several consensus sites 
enables PNKP binding and recruitment to DNA damage. To evaluate this documented 
repair process, a phosphorylation mutant of XRCC1, designed to eliminate PNKP 
binding, was stably expressed in Xrcc1-/- mouse fibroblast cells. Analysis of 
PNKP-GFP accumulation at micro-irradiation induced damage confirmed that the 
XRCC1 phosphorylation mutant failed to support efficient PNKP recruitment, 
whereas there was rapid recruitment in cells expressing wild-type XRCC1. 
Recruitment of additional fluorescently-tagged repair factors PARP-1-YFP, 
GFF-XRCC1, PNKP-GFP and Tdp1-GFP to micro-irradiation induced damage was 
assessed in wild-type XRCC1-expressing cells. PARP-1-YFP recruitment was best 
fit to two exponentials, whereas kinetics for the other proteins were fit to a 
single exponential. The similar half-times of recruitment suggest that XRCC1 may 
be recruited with other proteins possibly as a pre-formed complex. Xrcc1-/- 
cells are hypersensitive to the DNA-protein cross-link inducing agent 
camptothecin (CPT) and the DNA oxidative agent H2O2 due in part to compromised 
PNKP-mediated repair. However, cells expressing the PNKP interaction mutant of 
XRCC1 demonstrated marked reversal of CPT hypersensitivity. This reversal 
represents XRCC1-dependent repair in the absence of the 
phosphorylation-dependent PNKP recruitment and suggests either an 
XRCC1-independent mechanism of PNKP recruitment or a functional back-up pathway 
for cleaning of blocked DNA ends.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2017.10.007
PMCID: PMC5696015
PMID: 29100039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare there 
is no conflict of interest.