1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jun 28;8(45):79604-79617. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.18758. 
eCollection 2017 Oct 3.

Positive Helicobacter pylori status is associated with better overall survival 
for gastric cancer patients: evidence from case-cohort studies.

Fang X(1)(2), Liu K(3), Cai J(1), Luo F(2), Yuan F(2), Chen P(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine Research Center, Ruijin Hospital North, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ruijin Hospital North, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital North, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, P. R. China.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection increases the gastric cancer risk; 
however, the influences of H. pylori infection status on the outcomes for 
gastric cancer patients have not yet clearly defined. Herein, we systematically 
assessed the epidemiological studies regarding the associations between the 
H.pylori infection status at diagnosis and the prognosis for gastric cancer 
patients with the meta-analysis methods. Thirty-three eligibility studies with 
8,199 participants that had determined the H.pylori infection status and the 
outcomes for gastric cancer patients were identified through searching the 
PubMed and MEDLINE databases updated to March 1st, 2017. The random-effects 
model suggested that positive H. pylori infection was associated with better 
overall survival with the pooled hazard ratio (HR) was 0.79 [95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 0.66-0.93; Q = 134.86, df = 32, P-heterogeneity < 0.001; I2 = 
76.3%] compared to negative patients. The association was found to be more 
prominent in studies with higher quality, longer following-up time and more 
sensitive detection methods. An inverse but not statistically significant 
association between the H.pylori status and the disease-free survival of the 
patients (pooled HR = 0.84, 95% CI = 0.61-1.05;Q = 30.48, df = 11, 
P-heterogeneity = 0.001; I2 = 63.9%) was found, while no significant association 
was noticed in any subgroup analyses. These results suggested that gastric 
cancer patients with positive H.pylori infection status at diagnosis have better 
overall survival compared to negative; however, more studies are warranted to 
confirm the results and elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.18758
PMCID: PMC5668073
PMID: 29108340

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.