1. Int Heart J. 2017 Dec 12;58(6):939-947. doi: 10.1536/ihj.16-019. Epub 2017 Nov
 8.

Phenotype and Functional Analyses in a Transgenic Mouse Model of Left 
Ventricular Noncompaction Caused by a DTNA Mutation.

Cao Q(1)(2), Shen Y(1), Liu X(1), Yu X(3), Yuan P(1), Wan R(2), Liu X(2), Peng 
X(1)(2), He W(2), Pu J(4), Hong K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University.
(2)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University.
(4)Fuwai Cardiovascular Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College.

DTNA encoding dystrobrevin-α (α-DB) is a putative causal gene associated with 
left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy (LVNC). The aim of the study was 
to investigate the causal role of DTNA in LVNC using a transgenic mouse model.A 
missense mutation (c.146A > G, p.N49S) of DTNA was identified in a patient with 
LVNC by Sanger sequencing. Six independent lines of transgenic mice expressing 
the mutant DTNA under a myosin heavy chain 6 (Myh6) promoter were generated 
(Myh6:DtnaN49S). Phenotypic characteristics of DTNA-p.N49S mutations were 
evaluated by echocardiography, histological observation, and immunoblotting. 
Multiple trabeculation and a higher ratio of non-compacted to compact myocardial 
layer were found in the Myh6:DtnaN49S mice compared to the controls. The 
transgenic mice also showed left ventricular (LV) dilation and cardiac systolic 
dysfunction. In conclusion, overexpression of the DTNA-p.N49S mutation in a 
mouse heart can be responsible for the phenotype of deep trabeculation, dilated 
cardiomyopathy, and cardiac dysfunction, which resembles the phenotype of LVNC.

DOI: 10.1536/ihj.16-019
PMID: 29118297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]