1. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2015 Aug 28;4:39-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.08.018. 
eCollection 2015 Dec.

Post-translational activation of non-selenium glutathione peroxidase of 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii by specific incorporation of selenium.

Takeda T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Bioscience, Faculty of Agriculture, Kinki University 
3327-204 Nakamachi, Nara 631-8505, Japan.

Glutathione peroxidase (GPX) plays a pivotal role in the protection of cells 
against oxidative damage. The green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii expresses 
both selenocysteine-containing GPX and the non-selenium GPX homolog (GPXH). We 
previously reported that supplementation of selenium to algal culture induces 
GPXH to exhibit GPX activity. Here we investigated the incorporation of selenium 
into GPXH and its causal relationship with the upregulation of the enzymatic 
activity. GPXH was purified from algal cells grown with selenium and 
proteolytically digested into four fragments. Selenium content analysis for 
these proteolytic fragments confirmed that GPXH-incorporated selenium is 
predominantly enriched in a fragment that carries the putative catalytic residue 
Cys-38. We next constructed three kinds of engineered GPXH proteins by 
substituting Ser for one of three Cys residues in native GPXH, Cys-38, -66, and 
-84, using a bacterial overexpression system, resulting in Cys38Ser, Cys66Ser, 
and Cys84Ser derivatives, respectively. Of these, the Cys66Ser and Cys84Ser 
derivatives exhibited the same level of selenium-dependent GPX activity as the 
normal recombinant GPXH, whereas the Cys38Ser mutant GPXH not only lost its 
activity completely but also demonstrated severely impaired incorporation of 
selenium. These findings strongly suggest that selenium is post-translationally 
assimilated into the Cys-38 of the GPXH protein, thereby enhancing its enzymatic 
activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrep.2015.08.018
PMCID: PMC5668893
PMID: 29124185