1. Nat Commun. 2017 Nov 9;8(1):1380. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01704-z.

AIP limits neurotransmitter release by inhibiting calcium bursts from the 
ryanodine receptor.

Chen B(1), Liu P(1), Hujber EJ(2)(3), Li Y(1), Jorgensen EM(2)(3), Wang ZW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, CT, 06030, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 
84112, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center, 
Farmington, CT, 06030, USA. zwwang@uchc.edu.

Pituitary tumors are frequently associated with mutations in the AIP gene and 
are sometimes associated with hypersecretion of growth hormone. It is unclear 
whether other factors besides an enlarged pituitary contribute to the 
hypersecretion. In a genetic screen for suppressors of reduced neurotransmitter 
release, we identified a mutation in Caenorhabditis elegans AIPR-1 
(AIP-related-1), which causes profound increases in evoked and spontaneous 
neurotransmitter release, a high frequency of spontaneous calcium transients in 
motor neurons and an enlarged readily releasable pool of vesicles. Calcium 
bursts and hypersecretion are reversed by mutations in the ryanodine receptor 
but not in the voltage-gated calcium channel, indicating that these phenotypes 
are caused by a leaky ryanodine receptor. AIPR-1 is physically associated with 
the ryanodine receptor at synapses. Finally, the phenotypes in aipr-1 mutants 
can be rescued by presynaptic expression of mouse AIP, demonstrating that a 
conserved function of AIP proteins is to inhibit calcium release from ryanodine 
receptors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01704-z
PMCID: PMC5680226
PMID: 29123133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing financial 
interests.