1. Physiol Rep. 2017 Nov;5(21):e13450. doi: 10.14814/phy2.13450.

Dietary weight loss-induced changes in RBP4, FFA, and ACE predict weight regain 
in people with overweight and obesity.

Vink RG(1), Roumans NJ(2), Mariman EC(2), van Baak MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Biology, NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational 
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands r.vink@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Department of Human Biology, NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational 
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands.

Adipokines and other biomarkers were previously identified with roles in energy 
expenditure, appetite, satiety, and adiposity. Therefore, we investigated 
whether dietary weight loss-induced changes in adipokines and other biomarkers 
known to play a role in weight regulation or energy expenditure could predict 
weight regain in people with overweight and obesity. In this randomized 
controlled trial 26 males and 30 females (BMI: 28-35 kg/m2) followed either a 
low-calorie diet (LCD; 1250 kcal/day) for 12 weeks or a very-low-calorie diet 
(VLCD; 500 kcal/day) for 5 weeks followed by a weight stable period of 4 weeks 
(dietary intervention (DI) period) and a 9-month follow-up period. Blood samples 
were taken before and after each period to measure FFA, TAG, total cholesterol, 
insulin, glucose, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) activity, IL-6, RBP4, 
apelin, leptin, adiponectin, vaspin, and nesfatin-1 concentrations. Weight loss 
was similar between groups (LCD: -8.2 ± 0.5 kg; VLCD: -8.9 ± 0.4 kg, P = 0.30). 
Only changes in ACE activity, FFA and RBP4 concentrations during DI were 
correlated with weight regain in the whole group (r = -0.299, P = 0.030, 
r = -0.274, P = 0.047, and r = 0.357, P = 0.008, respectively). Together they 
explained 28% (r = 0.532) of weight regain variation. Dietary weight 
loss-induced changes in ACE activity, FFA and RBP4 independently contribute to 
weight regain prediction.

© 2017 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.13450
PMCID: PMC5688773
PMID: 29122953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]