1. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2017 Dec;40:46-57. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2017.10.016. Epub 
2017 Nov 10.

Inborn errors of immunity underlying fungal diseases in otherwise healthy 
individuals.

Li J(1), Vinh DC(2), Casanova JL(3), Puel A(4).

Author information:
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Infectious Disease Susceptibility Program, McGill University Health Centre 
(MUHC) and Research Institute-MUHC (RI-MUHC), Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA; Laboratory of Human 
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, Necker Hospital 
for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, EU, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine 
Institute, 75015 Paris, EU, France; Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, Necker 
Hospital for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, EU, France; Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(4)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA; Laboratory of Human 
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM U1163, Necker Hospital 
for Sick Children, 75015 Paris, EU, France; Paris Descartes University, Imagine 
Institute, 75015 Paris, EU, France. Electronic address: anne.puel@inserm.fr.

It has been estimated that there are at least 1.5 million fungal species, mostly 
present in the environment, but only a few of these fungi cause human disease. 
Most fungal diseases are self-healing and benign, but some are chronic or 
life-threatening. Acquired and inherited defects of immunity, including breaches 
of mucocutaneous barriers and circulating leukocyte deficiencies, account for 
most severe modern-day mycoses. Other types of infection typically accompany 
these fungal infections. More rarely, severe fungal diseases can strike 
otherwise healthy individuals. Historical reports of fungi causing chronic 
peripheral infections (e.g. affecting the nails, skin, hair), and invasive 
diseases (e.g. brain, lungs, liver), in otherwise healthy patients, can be 
traced back to the mid-20th century. These fungi typically cause endemic, but 
not epidemic diseases, are more likely to underlie sporadic than familial cases, 
and only threaten a small proportion of infected individuals. The basis of this 
'idiosyncratic' susceptibility has long remained unexplained, but it has 
recently become apparent that 'idiopathic' fungal diseases, in children, 
teenagers, and even adults, may be caused by single-gene inborn errors of 
immunity. The study of these unusual primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) has led 
to the identification of molecules and cells playing a crucial role in human 
host defenses against certain fungi at particular anatomic sites. A picture is 
emerging of inborn errors of IL-17 immunity selectively underlying chronic 
mucocutaneous candidiasis, with little inter-individual variability, and of 
inborn errors of CARD9 immunity underlying various life-threatening invasive 
fungal diseases, differing between patients.

Copyright Â© 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2017.10.016
PMCID: PMC5733726
PMID: 29128761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]