1. J Infect Chemother. 2018 Mar;24(3):232-235. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2017.10.013. 
Epub 2017 Nov 11.

GyrA and/or ParC alterations of Haemophilus influenzae strains isolated from the 
urethra of men with acute urethritis.

Kondo H(1), Ito S(2), Hatazaki K(1), Horie K(1), Nakane K(1), Mizutani K(1), 
Tsuchiya T(1), Yasuda M(1), Yokoi S(1), Nakano M(1), Deguchi T(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 1-1 
Yanagido, Gifu, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.
(2)iClinic, 5-9-6 Naga-machi, Taihaku-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 982-0011, Japan.
(3)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 1-1 
Yanagido, Gifu, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. Electronic address: deguchit@gifu-u.ac.jp.

Of 73 clinical strains of Haemophilus influenzae isolated from the urethra of 
men with urogenital infections, we enrolled 6 strains (8.2%) with levofloxacin 
(LVFX) minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ≥0.03 μg/ml in this study. 
All the strains were isolated from non-gonococcal urethritis (NGU). We amplified 
the quinolone resistance-determining region of the gyrA gene and the analogous 
region of the parC gene from bacterial DNAs by PCR and sequenced the PCR 
products. Two strains with a LVFX MIC of 0.03 μg/ml had an amino acid change of 
Asp88 to Gly in GyrA. One with a LVFX MIC of 0.06 μg/ml had a change of Asp88 to 
Tyr in GyrA. Two with respective LVFX MICs of 0.12 and 0.25 μg/ml had a change 
of Ser84 to Leu in GyrA. One with a LVFX MIC of 1 μg/ml had changes of Ser84 to 
Leu in GyrA and of Ser84 to Ile in ParC. Multilocus sequence typing showed two 
strains with a change of Asp88 to Gly in GyrA had the same sequence type, but 
the others had sequence types different from each other. Single amino acid 
changes in GyrA alone or single changes in both GyrA and ParC could contribute 
to decreased susceptibility to fluoroquinolones in H. influenzae isolates from 
NGU. Most of the isolates with GyrA and/or ParC alterations would be 
multiclonal. The prevalence of such isolates would be relatively low, and they 
would still be susceptible to fluoroquinolones commonly prescribed for treatment 
of NGU.

Copyright © 2017 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association 
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2017.10.013
PMID: 29138021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]