1. BMC Genomics. 2017 Nov 13;18(1):872. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-4257-6.

Weighted gene co-expression network analysis of expression data of monozygotic 
twins identifies specific modules and hub genes related to BMI.

Wang W(1), Jiang W(1), Hou L(2), Duan H(1)(3), Wu Y(1), Xu C(1)(3)(4), Tan 
Q(5)(6), Li S(6), Zhang D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, Public Health College, 
Qingdao University, No. 38 Dengzhou Road, Shibei District, Qingdao, 266021, 
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College, Qingdao University, No. 38 
Dengzhou Road, Shibei District, Qingdao, 266021, Shandong Province, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Qingdao Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, No. 175 Shandong 
Road, Shibei District, Qingdao, 266033, Shandong Province, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Qingdao Institute of Preventive Medicine, No. 175 Shandong Road, Shibei 
District, Qingdao, 266033, Shandong Province, People's Republic of China.
(5)Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bio-demography, Institute of Public Health, 
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(6)Human Genetics, Institute of Clinical Research, University of Southern 
Denmark, DK-5000, Odense C, Denmark.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, Public Health College, 
Qingdao University, No. 38 Dengzhou Road, Shibei District, Qingdao, 266021, 
Shandong Province, People's Republic of China. zhangdf1961@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The therapeutic management of obesity is challenging, hence further 
elucidating the underlying mechanisms of obesity development and identifying new 
diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets are urgent and necessary. Here, we 
performed differential gene expression analysis and weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis (WGCNA) to identify significant genes and specific modules 
related to BMI based on gene expression profile data of 7 discordant monozygotic 
twins.
RESULTS: In the differential gene expression analysis, it appeared that 32 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were with a trend of up-regulation in 
twins with higher BMI when compared to their siblings. Categories of positive 
regulation of nitric-oxide synthase biosynthetic process, positive regulation of 
NF-kappa B import into nucleus, and peroxidase activity were significantly 
enriched within GO database and NF-kappa B signaling pathway within KEGG 
database. DEGs of NAMPT, TLR9, PTGS2, HBD, and PCSK1N might be associated with 
obesity. In the WGCNA, among the total 20 distinct co-expression modules 
identified, coral1 module (68 genes) had the strongest positive correlation with 
BMI (r = 0.56, P = 0.04) and disease status (r = 0.56, P = 0.04). Categories of 
positive regulation of phospholipase activity, high-density lipoprotein particle 
clearance, chylomicron remnant clearance, reverse cholesterol transport, 
intermediate-density lipoprotein particle, chylomicron, low-density lipoprotein 
particle, very-low-density lipoprotein particle, voltage-gated potassium channel 
complex, cholesterol transporter activity, and neuropeptide hormone activity 
were significantly enriched within GO database for this module. And alcoholism 
and cell adhesion molecules pathways were significantly enriched within KEGG 
database. Several hub genes, such as GAL, ASB9, NPPB, TBX2, IL17C, APOE, ABCG4, 
and APOC2 were also identified. The module eigengene of saddlebrown module (212 
genes) was also significantly correlated with BMI (r = 0.56, P = 0.04), and hub 
genes of KCNN1 and AQP10 were differentially expressed.
CONCLUSION: We identified significant genes and specific modules potentially 
related to BMI based on the gene expression profile data of monozygotic twins. 
The findings may help further elucidate the underlying mechanisms of obesity 
development and provide novel insights to research potential gene biomarkers and 
signaling pathways for obesity treatment. Further analysis and validation of the 
findings reported here are important and necessary when more sample size is 
acquired.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-017-4257-6
PMCID: PMC5683603
PMID: 29132311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
participants provided written informed consent for participating in the study 
which was approved by the local ethics committee at Qingdao CDC, Qingdao, China. 
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.