1. Oncol Rep. 2017 Dec;38(6):3650-3658. doi: 10.3892/or.2017.6055. Epub 2017 Oct 
24.

Molecular alterations of the NF2 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma and 
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Zhang N(1), Zhao Z(1), Long J(2), Li H(3), Zhang B(1), Chen G(4), Li X(1), Lv 
T(1), Zhang W(1), Ou X(1), Xu A(1), Huang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Liver Research Center, Experimental Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100050, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Oncology Minimally Invasive Interventional Radiology, Beijing 
You-an Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary and Splenic Medicine, The Affiliated 
Hospital of Medical College of Chinese People's Armed Police Force, Tianjin 
300192, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing 100050, P.R. China.

Neurofibromatosis type 2 with mutations in the neurofibromin 2 (NF2) gene, 
encoding the Merlin protein, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by 
enhanced cancer predisposition, particularly tumors of the central nervous 
system. Recent animal studies indicate that disruption of NF2/Merlin function in 
oval cells, which are hepatic progenitor cells, may lead to the development of 
primary liver cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC); however, its role in human primary liver cancer 
remains unclear. In the present study, we explored the role of NF2/Merlin in 
human primary liver cancers. Tumor tissues (n=144) were used for the screening 
of NF2 mutation, while whole blood samples from 219 HCC and 194 healthy control 
cases were used for analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in liver 
cancer. The expression and amplification of NF2/Merlin and its downstream gene 
in the Hippo pathway, Yes-associated protein (YAP), were also analyzed. Missense 
NF2 mutations were identified in 2 of 106 (1.9%) HCCs and 2 of 38 (5.3%) ICCs. 
Allele frequency of NF2 IVS4-39 A/A was significantly higher in the HCCs than 
that in the healthy controls. Noteworthy, NF2/Merlin showed a dual role as a 
tumorigenic gene and tumor-suppressor gene; Merlin was expressed at higher 
levels in tumors than in adjacent non-tumor tissues of HCC; while the rate of 
Merlin upregulation was significantly lower in poorly differentiated ICCs. In 
addition, a significant negative correlation between Merlin and YAP expression 
was observed in ICC. In conclusion, we provide initial evidence of human primary 
liver cancers characterized by molecular alterations of NF2/Merlin and the 
involvement of the Hippo pathway in the pathogenesis of human liver cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2017.6055
PMID: 29130106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]