1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 26;8(47):82376-82389. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19595. 
eCollection 2017 Oct 10.

Environmental conditions differentially affect neurobehavioral outcomes in a 
mouse model of sepsis-associated encephalopathy.

Ji MH(1), Tang H(2), Luo D(1), Qiu LL(1), Jia M(2), Yuan HM(3), Feng SW(3), Yang 
JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital Affiliated 
to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Brain dysfunction remains a common complication after sepsis development and is 
an independent risk factor for a poorer prognosis and an increased mortality. 
Here we tested the hypothesis that the behavioral outcomes after 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) administration are exacerbated by an impoverished 
environment (IE) and alleviated by an enriched environment (EE), respectively. 
Mice were randomly allocated in a standard environment (SE), an EE, or an IE for 
4 weeks after LPS or normal saline (NS) administration. Neurobehavioral 
alternations were assessed by the open field, novel objective recognition, and 
fear conditioning tests. The expressions of proinflammatory cytokines (tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, IL-10), ionized 
calcium-binding adaptor molecule-1 (IBA1)-positive cells as well as glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive cells, brain derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF), 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus of the 
hippocampus, and the number of dendritic spines in the hippocampal CA1 were 
determined. Our results showed that the some of the neurocognitive abnormalities 
induced by LPS administration can be aggravated by stressful conditions such as 
IE but alleviated by EE. These neurocognitive alternations were accompanied by 
significant changes in biomarkers of immune response and hippocampal synaptic 
plasticity. In summary, our study confirmed the negative impact of IE and the 
positive effects of EE on the cognitive function after LPS administration, with 
potential implications to the basis of sepsis-related cognitive impairments in 
the critically ill patients.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19595
PMCID: PMC5669897
PMID: 29137271

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No authors have any 
financial interests to disclose.