1. Zookeys. 2017 Oct 26;(712):1-27. doi: 10.3897/zookeys.712.13066. eCollection 
2017.

At home at least: the taxonomic position of some north African Xerocrassa 
species (Pulmonata, ).

Ezzine IK(1), Pfarrer B(2), Dimassi N(1), Said K(1), Neubert E(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)LR génétique, biodiversité et valorisation des bio-ressources, Institut 
Supérieur de Biotechnologie de Monastir, Avenue Taher Hadded (B.P 74) Monastir 
5000, Tunisia.
(2)Natural History Museum Bern, Bernastr. 15, CH-3005 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland.

In order to clarify the systematic position of Helix latastei Letourneux in 
Letourneux & Bourguignat, 1887, and Helix latasteopsis Letourneux & Bourguignat, 
1887, a comprehensive approach using morphological and molecular methods is 
presented. The investigation of the genital organs of both species showed that 
they belong to the genus Xerocrassa Monterosato, 1892 with two very small dart 
sacs and a few tubiform glandulae mucosae. In our phylogenetic analysis using 
the mitochondrial markers COI, 16S and the nuclear cluster 5.8-ITS2-28S, the 
results of the anatomical research were confirmed. Thus, the genus Ereminella 
Pallary, 1919, which is based on H. latastei, becomes a junior synonym of 
Xerocrassa. A review of the genus-level taxa Xerobarcana Brandt, 1959, and 
Xeroregima Brandt, 1959, showed that these should also be considered as synonyms 
of Xerocrassa. A third species, Helix lacertara Bourguignat, 1863 from Algeria 
was found to be closely related to X. latastei based on its shell morphology. A 
map showing the distribution of the three species treated is supplied.

Publisher: RésuméUne étude basée sur des approches morphologiques et 
moléculaires a été réalisée dans le but de clarifier la position systématique de 
deux espèces Helix latastei Letourneux 1887 et Helix latasteopsis Letourneux & 
Bourguignat, 1887. L’examen des organes génitaux a montré des critères typiques 
du genre Xerocrassa Monterosato, 1892 avec la présence de deux petits “Dart Sac” 
et des glandes digitiformes à mucus. Les résultats de l’analyse phylogénétique 
de deux gènes mitochondriaux (COI et 16S) et un gène nucléaire 5.8S-ITS2-28S ont 
confirmé les résultats de l’étude anatomique. Par conséquent, le genre 
Ereminella Pallary, 1919, qui a été basé sur Helix latastei est donc un synonyme 
du genre Xerocrassa. La révision de deux genres Xerobarcana Brandt, 1959 et 
Xeroregima Brandt, 1959, suggère que ces deux genres sont aussi des synonymes du 
genre Xerocrassa. L’examen de la coquille de l’espèce Algérienne Helix lacertara 
Bourguignat, 1863 a montré une forte ressemblance avec X. latastei, ce qui nous 
a permis, ainsi, de la classer dans le genre Xerocrassa. Une carte montrant la 
distribution des trois espèces a été fournie.

DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.712.13066
PMCID: PMC5674202
PMID: 29134034