1. Oncotarget. 2017 Jul 20;8(48):83754-83767. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.19410. 
eCollection 2017 Oct 13.

Inhibitors of telomerase and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases synergize to limit the 
lifespan of pancreatic cancer cells.

Burchett KM(1), Etekpo A(2), Batra SK(3), Yan Y(3)(4), Ouellette MM(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska 
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 
Omaha, NE, USA.

Imetelstat (GRN163L) is a potent and selective inhibitor of telomerase. We have 
previously reported that GRN163L could shorten telomeres and limit the lifespan 
of CD18/HPAF and CAPAN1 pancreatic cancer cells. Here, we examined the effects 
of GRN163L on two other pancreatic cancer cell lines: AsPC1 and L3.6pl. In both 
lines, chronic exposure to GRN163L led to an initial shortening of telomeres 
followed by a stabilization of extremely short telomeres. In AsPC1 cells, 
telomere attrition eventually led to the induction of crisis and the loss of the 
treated population. In L3.6pl cells, crisis was transient and followed by the 
emergence of GRN163L-resistant cells, which could grow at increasing 
concentrations of GRN163L. The Shelterin complex is a telomere-associated 
complex that limits the access of telomerase to telomeres. The telomerase 
inhibitory function of this complex can be enhanced by drugs that block the 
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of its TRF1 and/or TRF2 subunits. Combined treatment of 
the GRN163L-resistant L3.6pl cells with GRN163L and 3-aminobenzamide (3AB), a 
general inhibitor of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases, led to additional telomere 
shortening and limited the lifespan of the resistant cells. Results from this 
work suggest that inhibitors of telomerase and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases can 
cooperate to limit the lifespan of pancreatic cancer cells.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.19410
PMCID: PMC5663552
PMID: 29137380

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None.