1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2018 Mar;50(3):573-579. doi: 10.1007/s11250-017-1471-9.
 Epub 2017 Nov 16.

Nucleotide and octapeptide-repeat variations of the prion protein coding gene 
(PRNP) in Anatolian, Murrah, and crossbred water buffaloes.

Yaman Y(1), Ün C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biometry and Genetics, Sheep Research Institute, Çanakkale 
road, 7.km, 10220, Bandirma, Balikesir, Turkey. yalcinyaman@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Ege University, 35040, İzmir, 
Turkey.

Resistance to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) that is significantly 
associated with insertion/deletion (indel) polymorphisms at two loci (putative 
promoter and intron 1) on the prion protein gene (PRNP) in cattle has been well 
documented. Studies suggest that the insertion alleles are related to BSE 
resistance. Until recently, BSE has never been reported in water buffaloes 
(unlike cattle). Previous studies have demonstrated that the PRNP gene in water 
buffalo consists mostly of insertion alleles at both loci; nevertheless, whether 
or not water buffaloes are genetically resistant to BSE and the role of indel 
polymorphisms in their resistance status is not clear. We examined the coding 
region of PRNP to determine the nucleotide and octapeptide-repeat (octarepeats) 
variations of Anatolian, Murrah and Murrah × Anatolian (M × A) water buffaloes. 
Three synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) at positions 126, 234, 
and 285, and a non-synonymous SNP at position 322 (G108S) were detected. Triplet 
G/A/T base substitutions were observed at position 126 and two additional 
genotypes, T/A and T/G, at this position were determined. We also found six 
octarepeats that indicated the presence of the wild-type PRNP6 allele in the 
coding region. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the T/A 
and T/G genotypes in water buffaloes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-017-1471-9
PMID: 29147935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]