1. Sci Rep. 2017 Nov 17;7(1):15805. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16127-5.

Ml proteins from Mesorhizobium loti and MucR from Brucella abortus: an AT-rich 
core DNA-target site and oligomerization ability.

Baglivo I(1), Pirone L(2), Pedone EM(2), Pitzer JE(3), Muscariello L(4), Marino 
MM(4), Malgieri G(4), Freschi A(4), Chambery A(4), Roop Ii RM(3), Pedone PV(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, 81100, Italy. 
ilaria.baglivo@unicampania.it.
(2)Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, C.N.R., Naples, 80134, Italy.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine, East 
Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, 81100, Italy.
(5)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and 
Technologies, University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, 81100, Italy. 
paolov.pedone@unicampania.it.

Mesorhizobium loti contains ten genes coding for proteins sharing high amino 
acid sequence identity with members of the Ros/MucR transcription factor family. 
Five of these Ros/MucR family members from Mesorhizobium loti (Ml proteins) have 
been recently structurally and functionally characterized demonstrating that Ml 
proteins are DNA-binding proteins. However, the DNA-binding studies were 
performed using the Ros DNA-binding site with the Ml proteins. Currently, there 
is no evidence as to when the Ml proteins are expressed during the Mesorhizobium 
lo ti life cycle as well as no information concerning their natural DNA-binding 
site. In this study, we examine the ml genes expression profile in Mesorhizobium 
loti and show that ml1, ml2, ml3 and ml5 are expressed during planktonic growth 
and in biofilms. DNA-binding experiments show that the Ml proteins studied bind 
a conserved AT-rich site in the promoter region of the exoY gene from 
Mesorhizobium loti and that the proteins make important contacts with the minor 
groove of DNA. Moreover, we demonstrate that the Ml proteins studied form 
higher-order oligomers through their N-terminal region and that the same AT-rich 
site is recognized by MucR from Brucella abortus using a similar mechanism 
involving contacts with the minor groove of DNA and oligomerization.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16127-5
PMCID: PMC5693944
PMID: 29150637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.