1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Oct 30;8:2089. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02089.
eCollection  2017.

Colletotrichum gloeosporioides- Contaminated Tea Infusion Blocks Lipids 
Reduction and Induces Kidney Damage in Mice.

Li J(1), Sun K(1), Ma Q(1), Chen J(2), Wang L(1), Yang D(1), Chen X(1), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)Tea Research Institute, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Institute of Soil & Fertilizer and Resources & Environment, Jiangxi Academy 
of Agricultural Science, Nanchang, China.

When the homogenate of fresh tea tree leaves was fermented to produce black tea 
beverage, the Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (main pathogen or endophyte of 
Camellia sinensis) may be mixed into the fermentation liquor. However, it was 
unclear whether C. gloeosporioides-contaminated tea beverage would damage human 
health. Therefore, we investigated the changes of functional components and the 
influences on mice. C. gloeosporioides was added to the green tea infusion. 
After cultivation of 48 h, tea polyphenols, caffeine, and L-theanine decreased 
by 31.0, 26.2, and 8.3%, respectively. The contaminated tea infusion showed 
brown stain, and produced a group of toxic materials named phthalic acid esters. 
The animal study showed that green tea without contamination significantly 
decreased levels of alanine aminotransferase, triglycerides, free fatty acids, 
low-density lipoprotein, and increased insulin level compared with obese mice. 
On the contrary, contaminated tea lost the effects on these indicators. 
Furthermore, the urea nitrogen and serum creatinine levels significantly 
increased in the contaminated tea-drinking mice. Altogether, our results 
indicate that C. gloeosporioides contamination can reduce the amount of 
functional components of green tea. Therefore, it inhibits some health-care 
function of lipid-lowering. In addition, the toxic components in contaminated 
tea infusion might induce renal damage.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02089
PMCID: PMC5670142
PMID: 29163391