1. Toxins (Basel). 2017 Nov 23;9(12):381. doi: 10.3390/toxins9120381.

Interaction of Cholesterol with Perfringolysin O: What Have We Learned from 
Functional Analysis?

Savinov SN(1), Heuck AP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. ssavinov@umass.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, USA. heuck@umass.edu.

Cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDCs) constitute a family of pore-forming 
toxins secreted by Gram-positive bacteria. These toxins form transmembrane pores 
by inserting a large Î²-barrel into cholesterol-containing membranes. Cholesterol 
is absolutely required for pore-formation. For most CDCs, binding to cholesterol 
triggers conformational changes that lead to oligomerization and end in 
pore-formation. Perfringolysin O (PFO), secreted by Clostridium perfringens, is 
the prototype for the CDCs. The molecular mechanisms by which cholesterol 
regulates the cytolytic activity of the CDCs are not fully understood. In 
particular, the location of the binding site for cholesterol has remained 
elusive. We have summarized here the current body of knowledge on the 
CDCs-cholesterol interaction, with focus on PFO. We have employed sterols in 
aqueous solution to identify structural elements in the cholesterol molecule 
that are critical for its interaction with PFO. In the absence of 
high-resolution structural information, site-directed mutagenesis data combined 
with binding studies performed with different sterols, and molecular modeling 
are beginning to shed light on this interaction.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins9120381
PMCID: PMC5744101
PMID: 29168745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
founding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in 
the decision to publish the results.