1. Int J Cancer. 2018 Apr 1;142(7):1490-1502. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31170. Epub 2017
Dec  26.

The arginine metabolome in acute lymphoblastic leukemia can be targeted by the 
pegylated-recombinant arginase I BCT-100.

De Santo C(1), Booth S(1), Vardon A(1), Cousins A(2), Tubb V(1), Perry T(3), 
Noyvert B(3), Beggs A(3), Ng M(4), Halsey C(2), Kearns P(3), Cheng P(5), Mussai 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Cancer Sciences, Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.
(5)Bio-Cancer Treatment International Ltd, Hong Kong.

Arginine is a semi-essential amino acid that plays a key role in cell survival 
and proliferation in normal and malignant cells. BCT-100, a pegylated (PEG) 
recombinant human arginase, can deplete arginine and starve malignant cells of 
the amino acid. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common cancer of 
childhood, yet for patients with high risk or relapsed disease prognosis remains 
poor. We show that BCT-100 is cytotoxic to ALL blasts from patients in vitro by 
necrosis, and is synergistic in combination with dexamethasone. Against ALL 
xenografts, BCT-100 leads to a reduction in ALL engraftment and a prolongation 
of survival. ALL blasts express the arginine transporter CAT-1, yet the majority 
of blasts are arginine auxotrophic due to deficiency in either argininosuccinate 
synthase (ASS) or ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC). Although endogenous 
upregulation or retroviral transduced increases in ASS or OTC may promote ALL 
survival under moderately low arginine conditions, expression of these enzymes 
cannot prevent BCT-100 cytotoxicity at arginine depleting doses. RNA-sequencing 
of ALL blasts and supporting stromal cells treated with BCT-100 identifies a 
number of candidate pathways which are altered in the presence of arginine 
depletion. Therefore, BCT-100 provides a new clinically relevant therapeutic 
approach to target arginine metabolism in ALL.

Â© 2017 The Authors International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31170
PMCID: PMC5849425
PMID: 29168171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]