1. Front Microbiol. 2017 Nov 10;8:2197. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02197.
eCollection  2017.

Induction of Tyrosine Phosphorylation of UV-Activated EGFR by the Beta-Human 
Papillomavirus Type 8 E6 Leads to Papillomatosis.

Taute S(1), Pfister HJ(1), Steger G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Epidemiological evidence is accumulating that beta-human papillomaviruses (HPV) 
synergize with UV-light in the development of precancerous actinic keratosis, 
and cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (cSCC), one of the most common cancers in 
the Caucasian population. We previously demonstrated the tumorigenic activity of 
beta-HPV type 8 (HPV8) in the skin of transgenic mice and its cooperation with 
UV-light. Analysis of underlying mechanisms now showed that in keratinocytes 
expressing the HPV8E6 protein a transient increase of tyrosine phosphorylated 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in response to UV-irradiation occurred, 
while EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation, i.e., receptor tyrosine kinase 
(RTK)-activity was hardly affected in empty vector control cells. FACS and 
immunofluorescences revealed that the EGFR was internalized into early endosomes 
in response to UV-exposure in both, HPV8E6 positive and in control cells, yet 
with a higher rate in the presence of HPV8E6. Moreover, only in HPV8E6 
expressing keratinocytes the EGFR was further sorted into CD63+ intraluminal 
vesicles, indicative for trafficking to late endosomes. The latter requires the 
ubiquitination of the EGFR, and in correlation, we could show that only in 
HPV8E6 positive keratinocytes the EGFR was ubiquitinated upon UV-exposure. 
HPV8E6 and tyrosine phosphorylated EGFR directly interacted which was enhanced 
by UV-irradiation. The treatment of K14-HPV8E6 transgenic mice with Canertinib, 
an inhibitor of the RTK-activity of the EGFR, suppressed skin papilloma growth 
in response to UV-irradiation. This confirms the crucial role of the 
RTK-activity of the EGFR in HPV8E6 and UV-mediated papillomatosis in transgenic 
mice. Taken together, our results demonstrate that HPV8E6 alters the signaling 
of the UV-activated EGFR and this is a critical step in papilloma formation in 
response to UV-light in transgenic mice. Our results provide a molecular basis 
how a beta-HPV type may support early steps of skin tumor formation in 
cooperation with UV-light.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02197
PMCID: PMC5686093
PMID: 29176966