1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Jan 25;62(2):e02232-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.02232-17. Print 2018 Feb.

Antibacterial and Sterilizing Effect of Benzylpenicillin in Tuberculosis.

Deshpande D(1), Srivastava S(1), Bendet P(1), Martin KR(1), Cirrincione KN(1), 
Lee PS(1), Pasipanodya JG(1), Dheda K(2), Gumbo T(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases Research and Experimental Therapeutics, Baylor 
Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Lung Infection and Immunity Unit, Division of Pulmonology and UCT Lung 
Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(3)Center for Infectious Diseases Research and Experimental Therapeutics, Baylor 
Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA 
tawanda.gumbo@BSWHealth.org.

The modern chemotherapy era started with Fleming's discovery of 
benzylpenicillin. He demonstrated that benzylpenicillin did not kill 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis In this study, we found that >64 mg/liter of static 
benzylpenicillin concentrations killed 1.16 to 1.43 log10 CFU/ml below starting 
inoculum of extracellular and intracellular M. tuberculosis over 7 days. When we 
added the β-lactamase inhibitor avibactam, benzylpenicillin maximal kill (Emax) 
of extracellular log-phase-growth M. tuberculosis was 6.80 ± 0.45 log10 CFU/ml 
at a 50% effective concentration (EC50) of 15.11 ± 2.31 mg/liter, while for 
intracellular M. tuberculosis it was 2.42 ± 0.14 log10 CFU/ml at an EC50 of 6.70 
± 0.56 mg/liter. The median penicillin (plus avibactam) MIC against South 
African clinical M. tuberculosis strains (80% either multidrug or extensively 
drug resistant) was 2 mg/liter. We mimicked human-like benzylpenicillin and 
avibactam concentration-time profiles in the hollow-fiber model of tuberculosis 
(HFS-TB). The percent time above the MIC was linked to effect, with an optimal 
exposure of ≥65%. At optimal exposure in the HFS-TB, the bactericidal activity 
in log-phase-growth M. tuberculosis was 1.44 log10 CFU/ml/day, while 3.28 log10 
CFU/ml of intracellular M. tuberculosis was killed over 3 weeks. In an 8-week 
HFS-TB study of nonreplicating persistent M. tuberculosis, penicillin-avibactam 
alone and the drug combination of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide both 
killed >7.0 log10 CFU/ml. Monte Carlo simulations of 10,000 preterm infants with 
disseminated disease identified an optimal dose of 10,000 U/kg (of body 
weight)/h, while for pregnant women or nonpregnant adults with pulmonary 
tuberculosis the optimal dose was 25,000 U/kg/h, by continuous intravenous 
infusion. Penicillin-avibactam should be examined for effect in pregnant women 
and infants with drug-resistant tuberculosis, to replace injectable ototoxic and 
teratogenic second-line drugs.

Copyright © 2018 Deshpande et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02232-17
PMCID: PMC5786797
PMID: 29180526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]