1. FEBS J. 2018 Jan;285(2):244-260. doi: 10.1111/febs.14348. Epub 2017 Dec 26.

Protection of macrophages from intracellular pathogens by miR-182-5p mimic-a 
gene expression meta-analysis approach.

Gregory DJ(1), Kramnik I(2), Kobzik L(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Physiological Sciences Program, Department of Environmental 
Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, National Emerging Infectious 
Diseases Laboratories, Boston University School of Medicine, MA, USA.

The goals of this study were to (a) define which host genes are of particular 
importance during the interactions between macrophages and intracellular 
pathogens, and (b) use this knowledge to gain fresh, experimental understanding 
of how macrophage activities may be manipulated during host defense. We designed 
an in silico method for meta-analysis of microarray gene expression data, and 
used this to combine data from 16 different studies of cells in the 
monocyte-macrophage lineage infected with seven different pathogens. Three 
thousand four hundred ninety-eight genes were identified, which we call the 
macrophage intracellular pathogen response (macIPR) gene set. As expected, the 
macIPR gene set showed a strong bias toward genes previously associated with the 
immune response. Predicted target sites for miR-182-5p (miR-182) were strongly 
over-represented among macIPR genes, indicating an unexpected role for 
miR-182-regulatable genes during intracellular pathogenesis. We therefore 
transfected primary human alveolar macrophage-like monocyte-derived macrophages 
from multiple different donors with synthetic miR-182, and found that miR-182 
overexpression (a) increases proinflammatory gene induction during infection 
with Francisella tularensis live vaccine strain (LVS), (b) primes macrophages 
for increased autophagy, and (c) enhances macrophage control of both gram 
negative F. tularensisLVS and gram positive Bacillus anthracisANR-1 spores. 
These data therefore suggest a new application for miR-182 in promoting 
resistance to intracellular pathogens.

© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14348
PMCID: PMC5845812
PMID: 29197182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]