1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 1;12(12):e0188912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188912. 
eCollection 2017.

Characterisation of the pathogenic effects of the in vivo expression of an 
ALS-linked mutation in D-amino acid oxidase: Phenotype and loss of spinal cord 
motor neurons.

Kondori NR(1)(2), Paul P(1), Robbins JP(1), Liu K(2), Hildyard JCW(2), Wells 
DJ(2), de Belleroche JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Group, Division of Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Neuromuscular Diseases Group, Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, 
Royal Veterinary College, London, United Kingdom.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult-onset neuromuscular 
disorder characterised by selective loss of motor neurons leading to fatal 
paralysis. Current therapeutic approaches are limited in their effectiveness. 
Substantial advances in understanding ALS disease mechanisms has come from the 
identification of pathogenic mutations in dominantly inherited familial ALS 
(FALS). We previously reported a coding mutation in D-amino acid oxidase 
(DAOR199W) associated with FALS. DAO metabolises D-serine, an essential 
co-agonist at the N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid glutamate receptor subtype (NMDAR). 
Using primary motor neuron cultures or motor neuron cell lines we demonstrated 
that expression of DAOR199W, promoted the formation of ubiquitinated protein 
aggregates, activated autophagy and increased apoptosis. The aim of this study 
was to characterise the effects of DAOR199W in vivo, using transgenic mice 
overexpressing DAOR199W. Marked abnormal motor features, e.g. kyphosis, were 
evident in mice expressing DAOR199W, which were associated with a significant 
loss (19%) of lumbar spinal cord motor neurons, analysed at 14 months. When 
separated by gender, this effect was greater in females (26%; p< 0.0132). In 
addition, we crossed the DAOR199W transgenic mouse line with the SOD1G93A mouse 
model of ALS to determine whether the effects of SOD1G93A were potentiated in 
the double transgenic line (DAOR199W/SOD1G93A). Although overall survival was 
not affected, onset of neurological signs was significantly earlier in female 
double transgenic animals than their female SOD1G93A littermates (125 days vs 
131 days, P = 0.0239). In summary, some significant in vivo effects of DAOR199W 
on motor neuron function (i.e. kyphosis and loss of motor neurons) were detected 
which were most marked in females and could contribute to the earlier onset of 
neurological signs in double transgenic females compared to SOD1G93A 
littermates, highlighting the importance of recognizing gender effects present 
in animal models of ALS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0188912
PMCID: PMC5711026
PMID: 29194436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.