1. J Reprod Dev. 2018 Feb 27;64(1):83-88. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2017-145. Epub 2017
Dec  7.

Effects of insulin-like growth factor-1 on the in vitro maturation of canine 
oocytes.

Sato A(1)(2), Sarentonglaga B(1), Ogata K(1)(3), Yamaguchi M(1)(4), Hara 
A(1)(2), Atchalalt K(1)(2), Sugane N(5), Fukumori R(1)(6), Nagao Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Farm, Faculty of Agriculture, Utsunomiya University, Tochigi 
321-4415, Japan.
(2)Department of Animal Production Science, United Graduate School of 
Agricultural Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo 
183-0054, Japan.
(3)Present: National Livestock Breeding Center, Fukushima 961-8061, Japan.
(4)Present: Local Independent Administrative Agency Hokkaido Research 
Organization, Hokkaido 081-0038, Japan.
(5)East Japan Guide Dog Association, Tochigi 321-0342, Japan.
(6)Present: Rakuno Gakuen University, Hokkaido 069-0836, Japan.

The maturation rate of canine oocytes during in vitro maturation (IVM) needs to 
be improved. The present study was designed to evaluate the effects of 
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) on the IVM of canine oocytes. Ovaries were 
obtained by ovariohysterectomy and were sliced to release cumulus-oocyte 
complexes (COCs). In Experiment 1, the effects of different concentrations of 
IGF-1 on the nuclear maturation of oocytes was investigated. The COCs were 
cultured in a modified medium (mTCM199) with IGF-1 (0, 0.5, 5, 10, and 50 
µg/ml). At the end of the 48 h culture, oocytes were fixed and stained to 
evaluate their nuclear stage. Supplementation with 50 µg/ml IGF-1 induced a 
significantly higher metaphase II (MII) rate (P < 0.05) compared to the 0 and 
0.5 μg/ml IGF-1 groups. In Experiment 2, the expression levels of insulin 
receptor (INSR), IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R), and IGF-2 receptor (IGF-2R) genes, 
localized to canine oocytes and cumulus cells, were investigated before and 
after IVM. The expression level of IGF-1R in cumulus cells after IVM was higher 
than that before IVM (P < 0.05). In Experiment 3, it was investigated whether an 
inhibitor of PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog), bpV, affects the nuclear 
maturation of oocytes. Regardless of bpV supplementation at a concentration of 
0.2 to 200 µmol/l, there was no significant difference in the proportion of 
oocytes that reached the MII stage. These results indicated that IGF-1 has a 
favorable effect on the IVM of canine oocytes, possibly through the stimulation 
of the Ras/MAPK pathway via IGF-1R expressed in cumulus cells.

DOI: 10.1262/jrd.2017-145
PMCID: PMC5830362
PMID: 29212962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]