1. J Phys Chem B. 2018 Jan 11;122(1):144-153. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b10765. Epub
 2017 Dec 27.

Spectroscopic Signature for Stable β-Amyloid Fibrils versus β-Sheet-Rich 
Oligomers.

Lomont JP(1), Rich KL(1), Maj M(1), Ho JJ(1), Ostrander JS(1), Zanni MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison , Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, United States.

We use two-dimensional IR (2D IR) spectroscopy to explore fibril formation for 
the two predominant isoforms of the β-amyloid (Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42) protein 
associated with Alzheimer's disease. Two-dimensional IR spectra resolve a 
transition at 1610 cm-1 in Aβ fibrils that does not appear in other Aβ 
aggregates, even those with predominantly β-sheet-structure-like oligomers. This 
transition is not resolved in linear IR spectroscopy because it lies under the 
broad band centered at 1625 cm-1, which is the traditional infrared signature 
for amyloid fibrils. The feature is prominent in 2D IR spectra because 2D 
lineshapes are narrower and scale nonlinearly with transition dipole strengths. 
Transmission electron microscopy measurements demonstrate that the 1610 cm-1 
band is a positive identification of amyloid fibrils. Sodium dodecyl sulfate 
micelles that solubilize and disaggregate preaggregated Aβ samples deplete the 
1625 cm-1 band but do not affect the 1610 cm-1 band, demonstrating that the 1610 
cm-1 band is due to very stable fibrils. We demonstrate that the 1610 cm-1 
transition arises from amide I modes by mutating out the only side-chain residue 
that could give rise to this transition, and we explore the potential structural 
origins of the transition by simulating 2D IR spectra based on Aβ crystal 
structures. It was not previously possible to distinguish stable Aβ fibrils from 
the less stable β-sheet-rich oligomers with infrared light. This 2D IR signature 
will be useful for Alzheimer's research on Aβ aggregation, fibril formation, and 
toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b10765
PMCID: PMC5969533
PMID: 29220175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Notes The authors declare the following 
competing financial interest(s): M.T.Z. is co-owner of PhaseTech Spectroscopy, 
Inc., which sells mid-IR and visible pulse shapers and 2D spectrometers.