1. Front Physiol. 2017 Nov 28;8:947. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00947. eCollection 
2017.

Identification of Biomarkers Correlated with the TNM Staging and Overall 
Survival of Patients with Bladder Cancer.

Li S(1)(2)(3), Liu X(3), Liu T(1), Meng X(3), Yin X(3), Fang C(3), Huang D(3), 
Cao Y(3), Weng H(1), Zeng X(1)(3), Wang X(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Biological Repositories, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(3)Center for Evidence-Based and Translational Medicine, Zhongnan Hospital of 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Objective: To identify candidate biomarkers correlated with clinical prognosis 
of patients with bladder cancer (BC). Methods: Weighted gene co-expression 
network analysis was applied to build a co-expression network to identify hub 
genes correlated with tumor node metastasis (TNM) staging of BC patients. 
Functional enrichment analysis was conducted to functionally annotate the hub 
genes. Protein-protein interaction network analysis of hub genes was performed 
to identify the interactions among the hub genes. Survival analyses were 
conducted to characterize the role of hub genes on the survival of BC patients. 
Gene set enrichment analyses were conducted to find the potential mechanisms 
involved in the tumor proliferation promoted by hub genes. Results: Based on the 
results of topological overlap measure based clustering and the inclusion 
criteria, top 50 hub genes were identified. Hub genes were enriched in cell 
proliferation associated gene ontology terms (mitotic sister chromatid 
segregation, mitotic cell cycle and, cell cycle, etc.) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways (cell cycle, Oocyte meiosis, etc.). 17 hub 
genes were found to interact with â‰¥5 of the hub genes. Survival analysis of hub 
genes suggested that lower expression of MMP11, COL5A2, CDC25B, TOP2A, CENPF, 
CDCA3, TK1, TPX2, CDCA8, AEBP1, and FOXM1were associated with better overall 
survival of BC patients. BC samples with higher expression of hub genes were 
enriched in gene sets associated with P53 pathway, apical junction, mitotic 
spindle, G2M checkpoint, and myogenesis, etc. Conclusions: We identified several 
candidate biomarkers correlated with the TNM staging and overall survival of BC 
patients. Accordingly, they might be used as potential diagnostic biomarkers and 
therapeutic targets with clinical utility.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00947
PMCID: PMC5712410
PMID: 29234286