1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017 Dec 16;18(1):563. doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1990-4.

MetaGenyo: a web tool for meta-analysis of genetic association studies.

Martorell-Marugan J(1), Toro-Dominguez D(1)(2), Alarcon-Riquelme ME(2)(3), 
Carmona-Saez P(4).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Unit, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), 
Granada, Spain.
(2)Medical Genomics, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), 
Granada, Spain.
(3)Institute for Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Bioinformatics Unit, Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), 
Granada, Spain. pedro.carmona@genyo.es.

BACKGROUND: Genetic association studies (GAS) aims to evaluate the association 
between genetic variants and phenotypes. In the last few years, the number of 
this type of study has increased exponentially, but the results are not always 
reproducible due to experimental designs, low sample sizes and other 
methodological errors. In this field, meta-analysis techniques are becoming very 
popular tools to combine results across studies to increase statistical power 
and to resolve discrepancies in genetic association studies. A meta-analysis 
summarizes research findings, increases statistical power and enables the 
identification of genuine associations between genotypes and phenotypes. 
Meta-analysis techniques are increasingly used in GAS, but it is also increasing 
the amount of published meta-analysis containing different errors. Although 
there are several software packages that implement meta-analysis, none of them 
are specifically designed for genetic association studies and in most cases 
their use requires advanced programming or scripting expertise.
RESULTS: We have developed MetaGenyo, a web tool for meta-analysis in GAS. 
MetaGenyo implements a complete and comprehensive workflow that can be executed 
in an easy-to-use environment without programming knowledge. MetaGenyo has been 
developed to guide users through the main steps of a GAS meta-analysis, covering 
Hardy-Weinberg test, statistical association for different genetic models, 
analysis of heterogeneity, testing for publication bias, subgroup analysis and 
robustness testing of the results.
CONCLUSIONS: MetaGenyo is a useful tool to conduct comprehensive genetic 
association meta-analysis. The application is freely available at 
http://bioinfo.genyo.es/metagenyo/ .

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-017-1990-4
PMCID: PMC5732412
PMID: 29246109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.