1. Mol Med Rep. 2018 Feb;17(2):3014-3020. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.8213. Epub 2017
Dec  7.

Exploring of the molecular mechanism of rhinitis via bioinformatics methods.

Song Y(1), Yan Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The Third Central Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin 
300170, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to analyze gene expression profiles for exploring the 
function and regulatory network of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in 
pathogenesis of rhinitis by a bioinformatics method. The gene expression profile 
of GSE43523 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. The 
dataset contained 7 seasonal allergic rhinitis samples and 5 non‑allergic normal 
samples. DEGs between rhinitis samples and normal samples were identified via 
the limma package of R. The webGestal database was used to identify enriched 
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways of the DEGs. The 
differentially co‑expressed pairs of the DEGs were identified via the DCGL 
package in R, and the differential co‑expression network was constructed based 
on these pairs. A protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was 
constructed based on the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes 
database. A total of 263 DEGs were identified in rhinitis samples compared with 
normal samples, including 125 downregulated ones and 138 upregulated ones. The 
DEGs were enriched in 7 KEGG pathways. 308 differential co‑expression gene pairs 
were obtained. A differential co‑expression network was constructed, containing 
212 nodes. In total, 148 PPI pairs of the DEGs were identified, and a PPI 
network was constructed based on these pairs. Bioinformatics methods could help 
us identify significant genes and pathways related to the pathogenesis of 
rhinitis. Steroid biosynthesis pathway and metabolic pathways might play 
important roles in the development of allergic rhinitis (AR). Genes such as 
CDC42 effector protein 5, solute carrier family 39 member A11 and PR/SET domain 
10 might be also associated with the pathogenesis of AR, which provided 
references for the molecular mechanisms of AR.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.8213
PMCID: PMC5783521
PMID: 29257233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]