1. ACS Omega. 2017 Sep 30;2(9):5529-5537. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00769. Epub
2017  Sep 6.

Spellbinding Effects of the Acidic COOH-Terminus of Factor Va Heavy Chain on 
Prothrombinase Activity and Function.

Hirbawi J(1), Kalafatis M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease 
(GRHD), Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio 44115, United States.
(2)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, United States.

Human factor Va (hfVa) is the important regulatory subunit of prothrombinase. 
Recent modeling data have suggested a critical role for amino acid Arg701 of 
hfVa for human prothrombin (hPro) activation by prothrombinase. Furthermore, it 
has also been demonstrated that hfVa has a different effect than that of bovine 
fVa on prethrombin-1 activation by prothrombinase. The difference between the 
two cofactor molecules was also found within the Asn700-Arg701 dipeptide in the 
human factor V (hfV) molecule, which is replaced by the Asp-Glu sequence in bfV. 
As a consequence, we produced a recombinant hfV (rhfV) molecule with the 
substitution 700NR701→DE. rhfVNR→DE together with the wild-type molecule 
(rhfVWT) were expressed in COS7 cells, purified, and tested for their capability 
to function within prothrombinase. Kinetic studies showed that the Kd of 
rhfVaNR→DE for human fXa as well as the kcat and Km of prothrombinase made with 
rhfVaNR→DE for hPro activation were similar to the values obtained following 
hPro activation by prothrombinase made with rhfVaWT. Remarkably, sodium dodecyl 
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analyses of hPro activation time 
courses demonstrated that the rate of cleavage of hPro by prothrombinase 
reconstituted with rhfVaNR→DE was significantly delayed with substantial 
accumulation of meizothrombin, and delayed thrombin generation, when compared to 
activation of hPro by prothrombinase made with rhfVaWT. These unanticipated 
results provide significant insights on the role of the carboxyl-terminal end of 
the heavy chain of hfVa for hPro cleavage and activation by prothrombinase and 
show that residues 700NR701 regulate at least in part the 
enzyme-substrate/product interaction during fibrin clot formation.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00769
PMCID: PMC5725915
PMID: 29250609

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.