1. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 19;12(12):e0189546. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189546. 
eCollection 2017.

Using thermal scanning assays to test protein-protein interactions of inner-ear 
cadherins.

Choudhary D(1), Kumar A(1), Magliery TJ(1), Sotomayor M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

Protein-protein interactions play a crucial role in biological processes such as 
cell-cell adhesion, immune system-pathogen interactions, and sensory perception. 
Understanding the structural determinants of protein-protein complex formation 
and obtaining quantitative estimates of their dissociation constant (KD) are 
essential for the study of these interactions and for the discovery of new 
therapeutics. At the same time, it is equally important to characterize 
protein-protein interactions in a high-throughput fashion. Here, we use a 
modified thermal scanning assay to test interactions of wild type (WT) and 
mutant variants of N-terminal fragments (EC1+2) of cadherin-23 and 
protocadherin-15, two proteins essential for inner-ear mechanotransduction. An 
environmentally sensitive fluorescent dye (SYPRO orange) is used to monitor 
melting temperature (Tm) shifts of protocadherin-15 EC1+2 (pcdh15) in the 
presence of increasing concentrations of cadherin-23 EC1+2 (cdh23). These Tm 
shifts are absent when we use proteins containing deafness-related missense 
mutations known to disrupt cdh23 binding to pcdh15, and are increased for some 
rationally designed mutants expected to enhance binding. In addition, surface 
plasmon resonance binding experiments were used to test if the Tm shifts 
correlated with changes in binding affinity. We used this approach to find a 
double mutation (cdh23(T15E)- pcdh15(G16D)) that enhances binding affinity of 
the cadherin complex by 1.98 kJ/mol, roughly two-fold that of the WT complex. We 
suggest that the thermal scanning methodology can be used in high-throughput 
format to quickly compare binding affinities (KD from nM up to 100 Î¼M) for some 
heterodimeric protein complexes and to screen small molecule libraries to find 
protein-protein interaction inhibitors and enhancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189546
PMCID: PMC5736220
PMID: 29261728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.