1. J Virol. 2018 Feb 26;92(6):e02132-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02132-17. Print 2018
Mar  15.

Simultaneous Insertion of Two Ligands in gD for Cultivation of Oncolytic Herpes 
Simplex Viruses in Noncancer Cells and Retargeting to Cancer Receptors.

Leoni V(#)(1), Petrovic B(#)(1)(2), Gianni T(1), Gatta V(3), Campadelli-Fiume 
G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Nouscom SRL, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy valentina.gatta6@unibo.it gabriella.campadelli@unibo.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02122-17.

Insertion of a single-chain variable-fragment antibody (scFv) to HER2 (human 
epidermal growth factor receptor 2) in gD, gH, or gB gives rise to herpes 
simplex viruses (HSVs) specifically retargeted to HER2-positive cancer cells, 
hence to highly specific nonattenuated oncolytic agents. Clinical-grade virus 
production cannot rely on cancer cells. Recently, we developed a 
double-retargeting strategy whereby gH carries the GCN4 peptide for retargeting 
to the noncancer producer Vero-GCN4R cell line and gD carries the scFv to HER2 
for cancer retargeting. Here, we engineered double-retargeted recombinants, 
which carry both the GCN4 peptide and the scFv to HER2 in gD. Novel, 
more-advantageous detargeting strategies were devised so as to optimize the 
cultivation of the double-retargeted recombinants. Nectin1 detargeting was 
achieved by deletion of amino acids (aa) 35 to 39, 214 to 223, or 219 to 223 and 
replacement of the deleted sequences with one of the two ligands. The last two 
deletions were not attempted before. All recombinants exhibited the double 
retargeting to HER2 and to the Vero-GCN4R cells, as well as detargeting from the 
natural receptors HVEM and nectin1. Of note, some recombinants grew to higher 
yields than others. The best-performing recombinants carried a gD deletion as 
small as 5 amino acids and grew to titers similar to those exhibited by the 
singly retargeted R-LM113 and by the nonretargeted R-LM5. This study shows that 
double retargeting through insertion of two ligands in gD is feasible and, when 
combined with appropriate detargeting modifications, can result in recombinants 
highly effective in vitro and in vivoIMPORTANCE There is increasing interest in 
oncolytic viruses following the FDA and European Medicines Agency (EMA) approval 
of the oncolytic HSV OncovexGM-CSF and, mainly, because they greatly boost the 
immune response to the tumor and can be combined with immunotherapeutic agents, 
particularly immune checkpoint inhibitors. A strategy to gain high cancer 
specificity and avoid virus attenuation is to retarget the virus tropism to 
cancer-specific receptors of choice. However, cultivation of retargeted 
oncolytics in cells expressing the cancer receptor may not be approvable by 
regulatory agencies. We devised a strategy for their cultivation in noncancer 
cells. Here, we describe a double-retargeting strategy, based on the 
simultaneous insertion of two ligands in gD, one for retargeting to a producer, 
universal Vero cell derivative and one for retargeting to the HER2 cancer 
receptor. These insertions were combined with novel, minimally disadvantageous 
detargeting modifications. The current and accompanying studies indicate how to 
best achieve the clinical-grade cultivation of retargeted oncolytics.

Copyright Â© 2018 Leoni et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02132-17
PMCID: PMC5827369
PMID: 29263255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]