1. Biophys J. 2017 Dec 19;113(12):2706-2712. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2017.10.015.

Phosphorylation of the IDP KID Modulates Affinity for KIX by Increasing the 
Lifetime of the Complex.

Dahal L(1), Shammas SL(2), Clarke J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: sarah.shammas@bioch.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: jc162@cam.ac.uk.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are known to undergo a range of 
posttranslational modifications, but by what mechanism do such modifications 
affect the binding of an IDP to its partner protein? We investigate this 
question using one such IDP, the kinase inducible domain (KID) of the 
transcription factor CREB, which interacts with the KIX domain of CREB-binding 
protein upon phosphorylation. As with many other IDPs, KID undergoes coupled 
folding and binding to form α-helical structure upon interacting with KIX. This 
single site phosphorylation plays an important role in the control of 
transcriptional activation in vivo. Here we show that, contrary to expectation, 
phosphorylation has no effect on association rates-unphosphorylated KID binds 
just as rapidly as pKID, the phosphorylated form-but rather, acts by increasing 
the lifetime of the complex. We propose that by controlling the lifetime of the 
bound complex of pKID:KIX via altering the dissociation rate, phosphorylation 
can facilitate effective control of transcription regulation.

Copyright © 2017 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpj.2017.10.015
PMCID: PMC5770967
PMID: 29262363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]