1. PLoS Genet. 2017 Dec 21;13(12):e1007102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007102. 
eCollection 2017 Dec.

Binding of high mobility group A proteins to the mammalian genome occurs as a 
function of AT-content.

Colombo DF(1)(2), Burger L(1)(3), Baubec T(1), Sch√ºbeler D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland.

Genomic location can inform on potential function and recruitment signals for 
chromatin-associated proteins. High mobility group (Hmg) proteins are of similar 
size as histones with Hmga1 and Hmga2 being particularly abundant in replicating 
normal tissues and in cancerous cells. While several roles for Hmga proteins 
have been proposed we lack a comprehensive description of their genomic location 
as a function of chromatin, DNA sequence and functional domains. Here we report 
such a characterization in mouse embryonic stem cells in which we introduce 
biotin-tagged constructs of wild-type and DNA-binding domain mutants. 
Comparative analysis of the genome-wide distribution of Hmga proteins reveals 
pervasive binding, a feature that critically depends on a functional DNA-binding 
domain and which is shared by both Hmga proteins. Assessment of the underlying 
queues instructive for this binding modality identifies AT richness, defined as 
high frequency of A or T bases, as the major criterion for local binding. 
Additionally, we show that other chromatin states such as those linked to 
cis-regulatory regions have little impact on Hmga binding both in stem and 
differentiated cells. As a consequence, Hmga proteins are preferentially found 
at AT-rich regions such as constitutively heterochromatic regions but are absent 
from enhancers and promoters arguing for a limited role in regulating individual 
genes. In line with this model, we show that genetic deletion of Hmga proteins 
in stem cells causes limited transcriptional effects and that binding is 
conserved in neuronal progenitors. Overall our comparative study describing the 
in vivo binding modality of Hmga1 and Hmga2 identifies the proteins' preference 
for AT-rich DNA genome-wide and argues against a suggested function of Hmga at 
regulatory regions. Instead we discover pervasive binding with enrichment at 
regions of higher AT content irrespective of local variation in chromatin 
modifications.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007102
PMCID: PMC5756049
PMID: 29267285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.