1. Cancer Sci. 2018 Mar;109(3):821-831. doi: 10.1111/cas.13477. Epub 2018 Jan 30.

Acquired resistance of phosphatase and tensin homolog-deficient cells to 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor and Ara-C mediated by 53BP1 loss and 
SAMHD1 overexpression.

Wang YT(1)(2), Yuan B(1)(2), Chen HD(1)(2), Xu L(1)(2), Tian YN(1)(2), Zhang 
A(3), He JX(1), Miao ZH(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Anti-Tumor Pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, 
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, 
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 
China.

With increasing uses of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) 
for cancer therapy, understanding their resistance is becoming urgent. However, 
acquired PARPi resistance in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-deficient 
background is poorly understood. We generated 3 PARPi-resistant PTEN-deficient 
glioblastoma U251 variants separately with olaparib (U251/OP), talazoparib 
(U251/TP) and simmiparib (U251/SP). These variants displayed consistent 
resistance (2.46-71.78-fold) to all 5 PARPi, including niraparib and rucaparib, 
and showed higher degrees of resistance to the PARPi to which the parental cells 
were more sensitive. The resistance was characteristic of fast emergence and 
high stability. However, the resistance acquirement did not cause an 
increasingly aggressive phenotype. The resistance was not correlated to various 
factors, including PTEN mutations. The PARPi-treated variants produced less 
γH2AX and G2/M arrest. Consistently, loss of 53BP1 occurred in all variants and 
its compensation enhanced their sensitivity to PARPi by approximately 76%. The 
variants revealed slightly different cross-resistance profiles to 13 non-PARPi 
anticancer drugs. All were resistant to Ara-C (6-8-fold) but showed differential 
resistance to 5-fluorouracil, gemcitabine and paclitaxel. Almost no resistance 
was observed to the rest drugs, including cisplatin. SAMHD1 was overexpressed in 
all the variants and its knockout completely restored their sensitivity to Ara-C 
but did not affect their PARPi sensitivity. The present study demonstrates a 
consistent resistance profile to PARPi and a unique cross-resistance profile to 
non-PARPi drugs in different PARPi-resistant U251 cells and reveals 53BP1 loss 
and SAMHD1 overexpression as the primary mechanisms responsible for their 
resistance to PARPi and Ara-C, respectively. These effects probably result from 
heritable gene change(s) caused by persistent PARPi exposure.

© 2017 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13477
PMCID: PMC5834817
PMID: 29274141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]