1. Intern Med. 2018 May 1;57(9):1219-1227. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.9479-17.
 Epub 2017 Dec 27.

Differences in the Serum 4β-hydroxycholesterol Levels of Patients with Chronic 
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Infection: A Possible Impact on the Efficacy and Safety 
of Interferon (IFN)-free Treatment.

Hirayama T(1), Ikegami T(1), Honda A(1)(2), Miyazaki T(2), Yara SI(1), Kohjima 
M(3), Nakamuta M(4), Matsuzaki Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tokyo Medical University Ibaraki 
Medical Center, Japan.
(2)Joint Research Center, Tokyo Medical University Ibaraki Medical Center, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization Kyushu Medical 
Center, Japan.

Objective Since the majority of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) that are used in 
the treatment of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are mainly metabolized by 
CYP3A4, it is hypothesized that inter-individual differences in CYP3A4 activity 
may be associated with the bioavailability of these agents. Methods The level of 
serum 4β-hydroxycholesterol (4βHC), a surrogate marker of CYP3A4 activity, was 
determined by LC-MS/MS in samples obtained from patients with HCV infection 
(CHCs) as well as healthy control subjects (CTLs). Serum samples obtained from 
patients treated with either asunaprevir/daclatasvir (ASV/DCV) or 
ombitasvir/paritaprevir/ritonavir (OTV/PTV/r) were used for additional assays. 
Results The serum 4βHC level in CHCs was significantly higher than that in CTLs, 
and a gender difference was seen among CHCs. In patients treated with OTV/PTV/r, 
the serum 4βHC level was observed to gradually decrease during the treatment 
period. In the cohort treated with ASV/DCV, 4 of 83 patients showed virological 
treatment failure. In pretreatment testing, an Invader assay detected a low 
prevalence of resistance-associated variants in these four patients. The average 
serum concentration of DCV/ASV in the treatment-failed group tended to be lower 
than that in the sustained virological response (SVR) group. The pretreatment 
serum 4βHC level in patients with treatment failure was significantly higher 
than that in patients with an SVR but in whom the prevalence of 
resistance-associated variants was low in the pretreatment setting. Conclusion 
The evaluation of CYP3A4 activity by measuring 4βHC before treatment may provide 
additional information that can potentially be used to select cost- and 
efficacy-optimized treatment of HCV.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.9479-17
PMCID: PMC5980801
PMID: 29279486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]