1. FEBS Lett. 2018 Mar;592(5):703-717. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12962. Epub 2018
Feb  1.

The role of tRNA synthetases in neurological and neuromuscular disorders.

Boczonadi V(1), Jennings MJ(1), Horvath R(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) are ubiquitously expressed enzymes responsible 
for charging tRNAs with their cognate amino acids, therefore essential for the 
first step in protein synthesis. Although the majority of protein synthesis 
happens in the cytosol, an additional translation apparatus is required to 
translate the 13 mitochondrial DNA-encoded proteins important for oxidative 
phosphorylation. Most ARS genes in these cellular compartments are distinct, but 
two genes are common, encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases of glycine (GARS) and 
lysine (KARS) in both mitochondria and the cytosol. Mutations in the majority of 
the 37 nuclear-encoded human ARS genes have been linked to a variety of 
recessive and dominant tissue-specific disorders. Current data indicate that 
impaired enzyme function could explain the pathogenicity, however not all 
pathogenic ARSs mutations result in deficient catalytic function; thus, the 
consequences of mutations may arise from other molecular mechanisms. The 
peripheral nerves are frequently affected, as illustrated by the high number of 
mutations in cytosolic and bifunctional tRNA synthetases causing 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). Here we provide insights on the 
pathomechanisms of CMT-causing tRNA synthetases with specific focus on the two 
bifunctional tRNA synthetases (GARS, KARS).

Â© 2017 The Authors. FEBS Letters published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12962
PMCID: PMC5873386
PMID: 29288497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]