1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2017 Dec 28;36(1):194. doi: 10.1186/s13046-017-0666-2.

LncRNA AK023391 promotes tumorigenesis and invasion of gastric cancer through 
activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway.

Huang Y(1), Zhang J(2), Hou L(3), Wang G(1), Liu H(1), Zhang R(1), Chen X(1), 
Zhu J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China. 
jing5522724@vip.163.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated 
Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai, 200233, China. 
zhujs1803@163.com.

Erratum in
    J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2020 Aug 12;39(1):155. doi: 
10.1186/s13046-020-01656-1.

BACKGROUND: Patients with gastric cancer commonly have a poor prognosis, owing 
to its invasiveness and distant metastasis. Recent studies have confirmed the 
pivotal role of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) in tumorigenesis and the 
progression of malignant tumors, including gastric cancer. However, little is 
known about the molecular mechanism by which lncRNA AK023391 contributes to 
gastric cancer.
METHODS: A lncRNA microarray was used to identify the differentially expressed 
lncRNA AK023391 in gastric cancer and adjacent normal tissues. In addition, RNA 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to investigate the 
association between AK023391 expression and the clinicopathological 
characteristics and prognosis of patients with gastric cancer. Subsequently, a 
series of in vitro assays and a xenograft tumor model were used to observe the 
functions of lncRNA AK023391 in gastric cancer cells. A cancer pathway 
microarray, bioinformatic analysis, western blotting, and immunochemistry were 
carried out to verify the regulation of AK023391 and its downstream PI3K/Akt 
signaling pathway.
RESULTS: Expression of lncRNA AK023391 was significantly upregulated in gastric 
cancer samples and cell lines in comparison to adjacent normal tissues, and was 
positively correlated with poor survival in patients with gastric cancer. The 
multivariate Cox regression model revealed that AK023391 expression acted as an 
independent prognostic factor for survival in patients with gastric cancer. 
Knockdown of AK023391 inhibited cell growth and invasion both in vitro and in 
vivo, and induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in gastric cancer cells, 
whereas its overexpression reversed these effects. Mechanistically, PI3K/Akt 
signaling mediated the NF-κB, FOXO3a, and p53 pathways. Moreover, downstream 
transcription factors, such as c-myb, cyclinB1/G2, and BCL-6 might be involved 
in AK023391-induced tumorigenesis in gastric cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel oncogenic lncRNA AK023391 in gastric cancer exerts its 
effects through activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, and may act as a 
potential biomarker for survival in patients with gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-017-0666-2
PMCID: PMC5745957
PMID: 29282102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
present study was approved by the Hospital’s Protection of HumanSubjects 
Committee. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.