1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2018 Jan 3;6(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s40478-017-0505-x.

Pyroglutamate and Isoaspartate modified Amyloid-Beta in ageing and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Moro ML(1), Phillips AS(2), Gaimster K(2), Paul C(2), Mudher A(3), Nicoll 
JAR(2), Boche D(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical and Experimental Sciences Academic Unit, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
mluisamoro@yahoo.it.
(2)Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical and Experimental Sciences Academic Unit, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(3)Centre for Biological Sciences, Faculty of Natural & Environmental Sciences, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(4)Clinical Neurosciences, Clinical and Experimental Sciences Academic Unit, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
d.boche@soton.ac.uk.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia among older 
adults. Accumulation of amyloid-β (Aβ) in the brain is considered central in AD 
pathogenesis and its understanding crucial for developing new diagnostic and 
therapeutic approaches. Recent literature suggests that ageing may induce post 
translational modifications in Aβ, in the form of spontaneous amino acid 
modifications, which enhance its pathogenic properties, contributing to its 
aggregation.In this study, we have investigated whether the isoaspartate 
(IsoD-Aβ) and pyroglutamate (pE3-Aβ) modified forms of Aβ are significantly 
associated with AD pathology or represent markers of ageing. Cerebral neocortex 
of 27 AD cases, 32 old controls (OC) and 11 young controls (YC) was 
immunostained for pE3-Aβ and IsoD-Aβ, quantified as protein load and correlated 
with other Aβ forms and p-TAU. IsoD-Aβ and pE3-Aβ were detected at low levels in 
non-demented controls, and significantly increased in AD (p ≤ 0.001), with a 
characteristic deposition of IsoD-Aβ in blood vessel walls and pE3-Aβ within 
neurons. Both AD and OC showed positive associations between IsoD-Aβ and Aβ 
(p = 0.003 in AD and p = 0.001 in OC) and between IsoD-Aβ and pE3-Aβ (p = 0.001 
in AD and OC). This last association was the only significant pE3-Aβ correlation 
identified in AD, whereas in the control cohorts pE3-Aβ also correlated with Aβ 
and AβPP (p = 0.001 in OC and p = 0.010 in YC).Our analyses suggest that IsoD-Aβ 
accumulation starts with ageing; whereas pE3-Aβ deposition is more closely 
linked to AD. Our findings support the importance of age-related modifications 
of Aβ in AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-017-0505-x
PMCID: PMC5753481
PMID: 29298722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was covered by the ethical approval from the Brain banks that provided the 
tissue. The YC cohort was sourced from BRAIN UK (NRES Committee South Central 
Hampshire B, REC reference: 14/SC/0098), OC and AD cases from the South West 
Dementia Brain bank (NRES Committee South West Central Bristol, REC reference: 
08/H0106/28 + 5). All donors have given informed consent for autopsy and use of 
their brain tissue for research purposes. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.