1. Theranostics. 2018 Jan 1;8(1):156-168. doi: 10.7150/thno.19703. eCollection 
2018.

Early Assessment of Tumor Response to Radiation Therapy using High-Resolution 
Quantitative Microvascular Ultrasound Imaging.

Kasoji SK(1), Rivera JN(1), Gessner RC(1)(2), Chang SX(1)(3), Dayton PA(1).

Author information:
(1)UNC/NCSU Joint Dept. of Biomedical Engineering.
(2)Sonovol, Inc. (current affiliation).
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of North Carolina.

Erratum in
    Theranostics. 2018 Aug 18;8(17):4601-4603. doi: 10.7150/thno.28837.

Measuring changes in tumor volume using anatomical imaging weeks to months post 
radiation therapy (RT) is currently the clinical standard for indicating 
treatment response to RT. For patients whose tumors do not respond successfully 
to treatment, this approach is suboptimal as timely modification of the 
treatment approach may lead to better clinical outcomes. We propose to use tumor 
microvasculature as a biomarker for early assessment of tumor response to RT. 
Acoustic angiography is a novel contrast ultrasound imaging technique that 
enables high-resolution microvascular imaging and has been shown to detect 
changes in microvascular structure due to cancer growth. Data suggest that 
acoustic angiography can detect longitudinal changes in the tumor microvascular 
environment that correlate with RT response. Methods: Three cohorts of Fisher 
344 rats were implanted with rat fibrosarcoma tumors and were treated with a 
single fraction of RT at three dose levels (15 Gy, 20 Gy, and 25 Gy) at a dose 
rate of 300 MU/min. A simple treatment condition was chosen for testing the 
feasibility of our imaging technique. All tumors were longitudinally imaged 
immediately prior to and after treatment and then every 3 days after treatment 
for a total of 30 days. Both acoustic angiography (using in-house produced 
microbubble contrast agents) and standard b-mode imaging was performed at each 
imaging time point using a pre-clinical Vevo770 scanner and a custom modified 
dual-frequency transducer. Results: Results show that all treated tumors in each 
dose group initially responded to treatment between days 3-15 as indicated by 
decreased tumor growth accompanied with decreased vascular density. Untreated 
tumors continued to increase in both volume and vascular density until they 
reached the maximum allowable size of 2 cm in diameter. Tumors that displayed 
complete control (no tumor recurrence) continued to decrease in size and 
vascular density, while tumors that progressed after the initial response 
presented an increase in tumor volume and volumetric vascular density. The 
increase in tumor volumetric vascular density in recurring tumors can be 
detected 10.25 ± 1.5 days, 6 ± 0 days, and 4 ± 1.4 days earlier than the 
measurable increase in tumor volume in the 15, 20, and 25 Gy dose groups, 
respectively. A dose-dependent growth rate for tumor recurrence was also 
observed. Conclusions: In this feasibility study we have demonstrated the 
ability of acoustic angiography to detect longitudinal changes in vascular 
density, which was shown to be a potential biomarker for tumor response to RT.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.19703
PMCID: PMC5743466
PMID: 29290799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Authors Paul A. Dayton and 
Ryan C. Gessner of this publication are co-inventors on the dual-frequency 
imaging approach described here and have equity ownership in Sonovol, Inc., a 
company that has licensed this patent. Other authors have declared that no 
competing interest exists.