1. Microbiome. 2018 Jan 4;6(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0384-1.

Host contributes to longitudinal diversity of fecal microbiota in swine selected 
for lean growth.

Lu D(1), Tiezzi F(2), Schillebeeckx C(3), McNulty NP(3), Schwab C(4), Shull 
C(4), Maltecca C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
27606, NC, USA. bdlu@ncsu.edu.
(2)Department of Animal Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
27606, NC, USA.
(3)Matatu Inc., 4320 Forest Park Ave., Suite 321, Saint Louis, 63108, MO, USA.
(4)The Maschhoffs LLC., Carlyle, 62231, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Animal Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
27606, NC, USA. christian_maltecca@ncsu.edu.

BACKGROUND: In pigs, gut bacteria have been shown to play important roles in 
nutritional, physiological, and immunological processes in the host. However, 
the contribution of their metagenomes or part of them, which are normally 
reflected by fragments of 16S rRNA-encoding genes, has yet to be fully 
investigated.
RESULTS: Fecal samples, collected from a population of crossbred pigs at three 
time points, including weaning, week 15 post weaning (hereafter "week 15"), and 
end-of-feeding test (hereafter "off-test"), were used to evaluate changes in the 
composition of the fecal microbiome of each animal over time. This study used 
1205, 1295, and 1283 samples collected at weaning, week 15, and off-test, 
respectively. There were 1039 animals that had samples collected at all three 
time points and also had phenotypic records on back fat thickness (BF) and 
average daily body weight gain (ADG). Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were the most 
abundant phyla at all three time points. The most abundant genera at all three 
time points included Clostridium, Escherichia, Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Ruminococcus, Fusobacterium, Campylobacter, Eubacterium, and Lactobacillus. Two 
enterotypes were identified at each time point. However, only enterotypes at 
week 15 and off-test were significantly associated with BF. We report herein two 
novel findings: (i) alpha diversity and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) 
richness were moderately heritable at week 15, h2 of 0.15 ± 0.06 to 0.16 ± 0.07 
and 0.23 ± 0.09 to 0.26 ± 0.08, respectively, as well as at off-test, h2 of 
0.20 ± 0.09 to 0.33 ± 0.10 and 0.17 ± 0.08 to 0.24 ± 0.08, respectively, whereas 
very low heritability estimates for both measures were detected at weaning; and 
(ii) alpha diversity at week 15 had strong and negative genetic correlations 
with BF, - 0.53 ± 0.23 to - 0.45 ± 0.25, as well as with ADG, - 0.53 ± 0.32 to 
- 0.53 ± 0.29.
CONCLUSIONS: These results are important for efforts to genetically improve the 
domesticated pig because they suggest fecal microbiota diversity can be used as 
an indicator trait to improve traits that are expensive to measure.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-017-0384-1
PMCID: PMC5755158
PMID: 29301569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: Phenotypic records presented in 
this study came from field data. Procedures for fecal sample collection adhered 
to the guidelines of Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, North Carolina 
State University, and National Pork Board. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.