1. In Silico Pharmacol. 2017 Nov 20;5(1):16. doi: 10.1007/s40203-017-0037-x. 
eCollection 2017.

Impact of protein-ligand solvation and desolvation on transition state 
thermodynamic properties of adenosine A(2A) ligand binding kinetics.

Deganutti G(1), Zhukov A(2), Deflorian F(2), Federico S(3), Spalluto G(3), Cooke 
RM(2), Moro S(1), Mason JS(2), Bortolato A(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Modeling Section (MMS), Department of Pharmaceutical and 
Pharmacological Sciences, University of Padova, Via Marzolo 5, Padua, Italy.
(2)Heptares Therapeutics Ltd., BioPark, Broadwater Road, Welwyn Garden City, 
Herts AL7 3AX UK.
(3)Department of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Trieste, 
Piazzale Europa, 34127 Trieste, Italy.

Ligand-protein binding kinetic rates are growing in importance as parameters to 
consider in drug discovery and lead optimization. In this study we analysed 
using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) the transition state (TS) properties of a 
set of six adenosine A2A receptor inhibitors, belonging to both the xanthine and 
the triazolo-triazine scaffolds. SPR highlighted interesting differences among 
the ligands in the enthalpic and entropic components of the TS energy barriers 
for the binding and unbinding events. To better understand at a molecular level 
these differences, we developed suMetaD, a novel molecular dynamics (MD)-based 
approach combining supervised MD and metadynamics. This method allows simulation 
of the ligand unbinding and binding events. It also provides the system 
conformation corresponding to the highest energy barrier the ligand is required 
to overcome to reach the final state. For the six ligands evaluated in this 
study their TS thermodynamic properties were linked in particular to the role of 
water molecules in solvating/desolvating the pocket and the small molecules. 
suMetaD identified kinetic bottleneck conformations near the bound state 
position or in the vestibule area. In the first case the barrier is mainly 
enthalpic, requiring the breaking of strong interactions with the protein. In 
the vestibule TS location the kinetic bottleneck is instead mainly of entropic 
nature, linked to the solvent behaviour.

DOI: 10.1007/s40203-017-0037-x
PMCID: PMC5755719
PMID: 29308352