1. Chem Sci. 2015 May 1;6(5):2979-2988. doi: 10.1039/c5sc00477b. Epub 2015 Mar 5.

A well-defined, versatile photoinitiator (salen)Co-CO(2)CH(3) for visible 
light-initiated living/controlled radical polymerization.

Zhao Y(1), Yu M(1), Zhang S(1), Wu Z(1), Liu Y(1), Peng CH(2), Fu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences , State Key Lab of Rare 
Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications , College of Chemistry and Molecular 
Engineering , Peking University , Beijing , 100871 , China . Email: 
fuxf@pku.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Frontier Research Center on Fundamental and 
Applied Sciences of Matters , National Tsing-Hua University , Hsinchu , 30013 , 
Taiwan.

The control of the polymerization of a wide range of monomers under mild 
conditions by a single catalyst remains a major challenge in polymer science. We 
report a versatile, well-defined organocobalt salen complex to control living 
radical polymerization of different categories of monomers, including acrylates, 
acrylamides and vinyl acetate, under visible light irradiation at ambient 
temperature. Both household light and sunlight were effectively applied in the 
synthesis of polymers with controlled molecular weights and narrow 
polydispersities. Narrowly dispersed block copolymers (Mw/Mn < 1.2) were 
obtained under various conditions. The structures of the polymers were analyzed 
by 1H NMR, 2D NMR, 13C NMR, GPC, MALDI-TOF-MS and isotopic labeling experiments, 
which showed that the ω and α ends of the polymer chains were capped with 
(salen)Co and -CO2CH3 segments, respectively, from the photoinitiator 
(salen)Co-CO2CH3. The ω end was easily functionalized through oxygen insertion 
followed by hydrolysis from 18O2 to -18OH. This robust system can proceed 
without any additives, and offers a versatile and green way to produce 
well-defined homo and block copolymers.

DOI: 10.1039/c5sc00477b
PMCID: PMC5656039
PMID: 29308172