1. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2018 Mar;52(2):293-297. doi:
10.1016/j.pjnns.2017.12.004.  Epub 2017 Dec 14.

A missense mutation in DYNC1H1 gene causing spinal muscular atrophy - Lower 
extremity, dominant.

Das J(1), Lilleker JB(2), Jabbal K(3), Ealing J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield Teaching 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2JF, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: j.das@doctors.org.uk.
(2)Greater Manchester Neurosciences Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, 
Stott Lane, Salford M6 8HD, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
james.lilleker@srft.nhs.uk.
(3)Greater Manchester Neurosciences Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, 
Stott Lane, Salford M6 8HD, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
kavaldeep.jabbal@doctors.org.uk.
(4)Greater Manchester Neurosciences Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, 
Stott Lane, Salford M6 8HD, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
john.ealing@srft.nhs.uk.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a hereditary neuromuscular disorder, which 
causes progressive muscle weakness and in severe cases respiratory failure and 
death. Although the majority of the SMA cases are autosomal recessive, there is 
an autosomal dominant variant of SMA that primarily affects the lower 
extremities, known as 'spinal muscular atrophy - lower extremity, dominant' 
(SMALED). Mutations in the Dynein Cytoplasmic 1 Heavy Chain 1 (DYNC1H1) gene 
were the first to be associated with SMALED. Here we report a family with SMALED 
caused by a pathogenic heterozygous missense c.1809 A>T, p.glu603Asp mutation in 
DYNC1H1. The main clinical features were congenital hip displacement, talipes, 
delayed motor development, wasting and weakness in lower limbs with relative 
sparing of upper extremities and very slow disease progression. SMALED is 
extremely rare and only a handful of families have been reported. Over the years 
other phenotypes including Charcot Marie Tooth type 2 and hereditary mental 
retardation with cortical neural migration defects have also been reported to be 
caused by DYNC1H1 mutations. This report aims to increase our awareness of 
SMALED and various other phenotypes associated with mutations in this gene.

Copyright Â© 2017 Polish Neurological Society. Published by Elsevier Urban & 
Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2017.12.004
PMID: 29306600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]