1. Methods Enzymol. 2018;598:101-135. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.06.009. Epub 2017 
Aug 7.

Methods for the Detection, Study, and Dynamic Profiling of O-GlcNAc 
Glycosylation.

Thompson JW(1), Griffin ME(1), Hsieh-Wilson LC(2).

Author information:
(1)California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(2)California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States. Electronic 
address: lhw@caltech.edu.

The addition of O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) to serine/threonine 
residues of proteins is a ubiquitous posttranslational modification found in all 
multicellular organisms. Like phosphorylation, O-GlcNAc glycosylation 
(O-GlcNAcylation) is inducible and regulates a myriad of physiological and 
pathological processes. However, understanding the diverse functions of 
O-GlcNAcylation is often challenging due to the difficulty of detecting and 
quantifying the modification. Thus, robust methods to study O-GlcNAcylation are 
essential to elucidate its key roles in the regulation of individual proteins, 
complex cellular processes, and disease. In this chapter, we describe a set of 
chemoenzymatic labeling methods to (1) detect O-GlcNAcylation on proteins of 
interest, (2) monitor changes in both the total levels of O-GlcNAcylation and 
its stoichiometry on proteins of interest, and (3) enable mapping of O-GlcNAc to 
specific serine/threonine residues within proteins to facilitate functional 
studies. First, we outline a procedure for the expression and purification of a 
multiuse mutant galactosyltransferase enzyme (Y289L GalT). We then describe the 
use of Y289L GalT to modify O-GlcNAc residues with a functional handle, 
N-azidoacetylgalactosamine (GalNAz). Finally, we discuss several applications of 
the copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition "click" reaction to attach 
various alkyne-containing chemical probes to GalNAz and demonstrate how this 
functionalization of O-GlcNAc-modified proteins can be used to realize (1)-(3) 
above. Overall, these methods, which utilize commercially available reagents and 
standard protein analytical tools, will serve to advance our understanding of 
the diverse and important functions of O-GlcNAcylation.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2017.06.009
PMCID: PMC5886303
PMID: 29306432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]