1. Front Physiol. 2017 Dec 14;8:993. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00993. eCollection 
2017.

The Metabolic Response of Skeletal Muscle to Endurance Exercise Is Modified by 
the ACE-I/D Gene Polymorphism and Training State.

Valdivieso P(1), Vaughan D(2), Laczko E(3), Brogioli M(2), Waldron S(2), 
Rittweger J(2)(4)(5), Flück M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Muscle Plasticity, Department of Orthopedics, Balgrist 
University Hospital, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)The Institute for Biomedical Research into Human Movement and Health, 
Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(3)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, ETH, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Aerospace Medicine, German Aerospace Center, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.

The insertion/deletion polymorphism in the gene for the regulator of vascular 
tone, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), is the prototype of a genetic 
influence on physical fitness and this involves an influence on capillary supply 
lines and dependent aerobic metabolism in skeletal muscle. The respective 
interaction of ACE-I/D genotype and training status on local metabolic and 
angiogenic reactions in exercised muscle is not known. Toward this end we 
characterized the metabolomic and angiogenic response in knee extensor muscle, 
m. vastus lateralis, in 18 untrained and 34 endurance-trained (physically 
active, [Formula: see text]O2max > 50 mL min-1 kg-1) white British men to an 
exhaustive bout of one-legged cycling exercise. We hypothesized that training 
status and ACE-I/D genotype affect supply-related muscle characteristics of 
exercise performance in correspondence to ACE expression and angiotensin 2 
levels. ACE-I/D genotype and training status developed an interaction effect on 
the cross-sectional area (CSA) of m. vastus lateralis and mean CSA of slow type 
fibers, which correlated with peak power output (r ≥ 0.44). Genotype × training 
interactions in muscle also resolved for exercise-induced alterations of 22 
metabolites, 8 lipids, glycogen concentration (p = 0.016), ACE transcript levels 
(p = 0.037), and by trend for the pro-angiogenic factor tenascin-C post exercise 
(p = 0.064). Capillary density (p = 0.001), capillary-to-fiber ratio (p = 
0.010), systolic blood pressure (p = 0.014), and exercise-induced alterations in 
the pro-angiogenic protein VEGF (p = 0.043) depended on the ACE-I/D genotype 
alone. Our observations indicate that variability in aerobic performance in the 
studied subjects was in part reflected by an ACE-I/D-genotype-modulated 
metabolic phenotype of a major locomotor muscle. Repeated endurance exercise 
appeared to override this genetic influence in skeletal muscle by altering the 
ACE-related metabolic response and molecular aspects of the angiogenic response 
to endurance exercise.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2017.00993
PMCID: PMC5735290
PMID: 29311951