1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 10;8(1):289. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18448-x.

Probing the molecular basis of hERG drug block with unnatural amino acids.

Macdonald LC(1), Kim RY(2), Kurata HT(2), Fedida D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 
2H7, Canada.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada. 
david.fedida@ubc.ca.

Repolarization of the cardiac action potential is primarily mediated by two 
voltage-dependent potassium currents: I Kr and I Ks . The voltage-gated 
potassium channel that gives rise to I Kr, Kv11.1 (hERG), is uniquely 
susceptible to high-affinity block by a wide range of drug classes. Pore 
residues Tyr652 and Phe656 are critical to potent drug interaction with hERG. It 
is considered that the molecular basis of this broad-spectrum drug block 
phenomenon occurs through interactions specific to the aromatic nature of the 
side chains at Tyr652 and Phe656. In this study, we used nonsense suppression to 
incorporate singly and doubly fluorinated phenylalanine residues at Tyr652 and 
Phe656 to assess cation-π interactions in hERG terfenadine, quinidine, and 
dofetilide block. Incorporation of these unnatural amino acids was achieved with 
minimal alteration to channel activation or inactivation gating. Our assessment 
of terfenadine, quinidine, and dofetilide block did not reveal evidence of a 
cation-π interaction at either aromatic residue, but, interestingly, shows that 
certain fluoro-Phe substitutions at position 652 result in weaker  drug potency.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18448-x
PMCID: PMC5762913
PMID: 29321549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.