1. Nutrients. 2018 Jan 11;10(1):72. doi: 10.3390/nu10010072.

Influence of Chitosan Treatment on Surrogate Serum Markers of Cholesterol 
Metabolism in Obese Subjects.

Lütjohann D(1), Marinova M(2), Wolter K(3), Willinek W(4)(5), Bitterlich N(6), 
Coenen M(7), Coch C(8), Stellaard F(9).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University 
Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. dieter.luetjohann@ukbonn.de.
(2)Department of Radiology, University Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. 
milka.marinova@ukb.uni-bonn.de.
(3)Department of Radiology, University Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. 
karsten.wolter@ukb.uni-bonn.de.
(4)Department of Radiology, University Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. 
w.willinek@bk-trier.de.
(5)Department of Radiology, Neuroradiology, Sonography and Nuclear Medicine, 
Krankenhaus der Barmherzigen Brüder Trier, D-54292 Trier, Germany. 
w.willinek@bk-trier.de.
(6)Medizin & Service GmbH, Abt. Biostatistik, Boettcherstraße 10, D-09117 
Chemnitz, Germany. bitterlich@medizinservice-sachsen.de.
(7)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University 
Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. martin.coenen@ukb.uni-bonn.de.
(8)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University 
Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. ccoch@uni-bonn.de.
(9)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University 
Clinics of Bonn, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. fstellaard@hotmail.com.

Chitosan treatment results in significantly lower serum low density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol concentrations. To assess the working mechanisms of chitosan, 
we measured serum surrogate markers of cholesterol absorption (campesterol, 
sitosterol, cholestanol), synthesis (lathosterol, lanosterol, desmosterol), and 
degradation to bile acids (7α-hydroxy-cholesterol, 27-hydroxy-cholesterol), 
corrected for cholesterol concentration (R_sterols). Over 12 weeks, 116 obese 
subjects (Body Mass Index, BMI 31.7, range 28.1-38.9 kg/m²) were studied under 
chitosan (n = 61) and placebo treatments (n = 55). The participants were briefly 
educated regarding improvement of nutrition quality and energy expenditure. 
Daily chitosan intake was 3200 mg. Serum LDL cholesterol concentration decreased 
significantly more (p = 0.0252) under chitosan (-8.67 ± 18.18 mg/dL, 5.6%) than 
under placebo treatment (-1.00 ± 24.22 mg/dL, 0.9%). This reduction was not 
associated with the expected greater decreases in markers of cholesterol 
absorption under chitosan treatment. Also, increases in markers of cholesterol 
synthesis and bile acid synthesis under chitosan treatment were not any greater 
than under placebo treatment. In conclusion, a significant selective reduction 
of serum LDL cholesterol under chitosan treatment is neither associated with a 
reduction of serum surrogate markers of cholesterol absorption, nor with 
increases of markers for cholesterol and bile acid synthesis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10010072
PMCID: PMC5793300
PMID: 29324705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest. The founding sponsor played no role in the design of the study, in 
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of the data, in the writing of the 
manuscript, and in the decision to publish the results.