1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2017;153(3):125-130. doi: 10.1159/000485644. Epub 2018
Jan  11.

A de novo 50-bp GNAS Intragenic Duplication in a Patient with 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type 1a.

Suzuki E(1), Bo R, Sue K, Awano H, Ogata T, Narumi S, Kagami M, Sano S, Fukami 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Child 
Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

Germline intragenic mutations in the GNAS locus result in 
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a (PHP1a) and related conditions. Nearly half of 
the previously reported GNAS intragenic mutations were structural variants, 
including 3 tandem duplications of 12-25 bp. However, the precise mutation 
spectrum and the genomic basis of GNAS structural variants remain to be 
clarified. Here, we report a de novo 50-bp tandem duplication in GNAS 
(c.723_772dup50, p.Glu259Leufs*29) identified in a patient with typical clinical 
features of PHP1a. The mutant transcript was predicted to undergo mRNA decay or 
encode a nonfunctional protein. The 2 breakpoints of the duplication shared a 
1-bp microhomology but were not associated with long homology or nucleotide 
stretches. We also examined the breakpoint structures of 3 previously reported 
GNAS duplications and found that 1 had a structure similar to that of our case, 
while the remaining 2 had blunt-ended breakpoints without microhomologies. In 
silico analyses revealed that the GNAS-flanking region was not enriched with 
repeats, palindromes, noncanonical DNA motifs, or GC content. This study expands 
the mutation spectrum of GNAS and provides the first indication that GNAS 
intragenic structural variants are induced by multiple processes, including 
nonhomologous end-joining and/or microhomology-mediated break-induced 
replication, independently of known rearrangement-inducing DNA features.

Â© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000485644
PMID: 29320763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]