1. J Cell Mol Med. 2018 Mar;22(3):1909-1922. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.13475. Epub 2018
Jan  12.

Hyper-acetylation contributes to the sensitivity of chemo-resistant prostate 
cancer cells to histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A.

Xu Q(1), Liu X(1), Zhu S(1), Hu X(1), Niu H(1), Zhang X(1), Zhu D(1), Nesa 
EU(1), Tian K(1), Yuan H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shandong University School 
of Medicine, Jinan, China.

Therapeutic agents are urgently needed for treating metastatic 
castration-refractory prostate cancer (mCRPC) that is unresponsive to androgen 
deprivation and chemotherapy. Our screening assays demonstrated that 
chemotherapy-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) cells are more sensitive to HDAC 
inhibitors than paired sensitive PCa cells, as demonstrated by cell 
proliferation and apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Kinetic study revealed that 
TSA-induced apoptosis was significantly dependent on enhanced transcription and 
protein synthesis in an early stage, which subsequently caused ER stress and 
apoptosis. ChIP analysis indicated that TSA increased H4K16 acetylation, 
promoting ER stress gene transcription. The changes in Ac-H4K16, ATF3 and ATF4 
were also validated in TSA-treated animals. Further study revealed the higher 
enzyme activity of HDACs and an increase in acetylated proteins in resistant 
cells. The higher nucleocytoplasmic acetyl-CoA in resistant cells was 
responsible for elevated acetylation status of protein and a more vigorous 
growth state. These results strongly support the pre-clinical application of 
HDAC inhibitors for treating chemotherapy-resistant mCRPC.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.13475
PMCID: PMC5824406
PMID: 29327812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]