1. Stem Cell Reports. 2018 Jan 9;10(1):73-86. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.12.011.

Expandable Arterial Endothelial Precursors from Human CD34(+) Cells Differ in 
Their Proclivity to Undergo an Endothelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition.

Miller AZ(1), Satchie A(1), Tannenbaum AP(1), Nihal A(1), Thomson JA(2), Vereide 
DT(3).

Author information:
(1)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA.
(2)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA; Department of Cell 
and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and 
Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.
(3)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA. Electronic address: 
dvereide@morgridge.org.

Arterial diseases continue to pose a major health concern but in vitro studies 
are limited because explanted cells can exhibit poor proliferative capacity and 
a loss of specificity. Here, we find that two transcription factors, MYCN and 
SOX17, induce and indefinitely expand in culture precursors of human arterial 
endothelial cells (expandable arterial endothelial precursors [eAEPs]). The 
eAEPs are derived from CD34+ cells found in umbilical cord blood or adult bone 
marrow. Independent eAEP lines differ in their proclivity to undergo an 
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT), a hallmark event in a broad 
array of vascular diseases and disorders. Some cell lines spontaneously become 
mesenchymal over time in culture, an effect exacerbated by inhibition of the 
fibroblast growth factor receptor, while others do not readily convert. These 
distinctions were exploited to identify genes that correlate with resistance to 
an EndoMT and to elucidate transcriptional changes that underpin the transition.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2017.12.011
PMCID: PMC5769011
PMID: 29320761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]