1. Int J Mol Med. 2018 Mar;41(3):1595-1607. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3373. Epub
2018  Jan 9.

miR‑203‑3p participates in the suppression of diabetes‑associated osteogenesis 
in the jaw bone through targeting Smad1.

Tang Y(1), Zheng L(2), Zhou J(2), Chen Y(2), Yang L(2), Deng F(2), Hu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endodontics, The Affiliated Stomatology Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 401147, P.R. China.
(2)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Biomedical Sciences, The 
Affiliated Stomatology Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 401147, 
P.R. China.

Certain microRNAs (miRs) have important roles in the maintenance of bone 
development and metabolism, and a variety of miRs are known to be deregulated in 
diabetes. The present study investigated the role of miR‑203‑3p in the 
regulation of bone loss by assessing jaw bones of a rat model of type 2 
diabetes. The results indicated that miR‑203‑3p inhibited osteogenesis in the 
jaws of diabetic rats and in rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells cultured in 
high‑glucose medium. A luciferase re-porter assay was used to verify the 
bioinformatics prediction that miR‑203‑3p targets the 3'‑untranslated region of 
Smad1, which is an important mediator of the bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP)/Smad pathway. Overexpression of Smad1 attenuated the miR‑203‑3p‑mediated 
suppres-sion of osteogenic differentiation. It was therefore indicated that the 
BMP/Smad pathway is attenuated and the transforming growth factor‑β/activin 
pathway is promoted by Smad1 reduction. Taken together, it was indicated that 
miR‑203‑3p inhibits osteogenesis in jaw bones of diabetic rats by targeting 
Smad1 to inhibit the BMP/Smad pathway.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2018.3373
PMCID: PMC5819914
PMID: 29328402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.