1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jan 18;8(1):1036. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18393-9.

Specific cyclic ADP-ribose phosphohydrolase obtained by mutagenic engineering of 
Mn(2+)-dependent ADP-ribose/CDP-alcohol diphosphatase.

Ribeiro JM(1), Canales J(1), Cabezas A(1), Rodrigues JR(2), Pinto RM(1), 
López-Villamizar I(1)(3), Costas MJ(1), Cameselle JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Enzimología, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y 
Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain.
(2)Escola Superior de Tecnologia e Gestão, Instituto Politécnico de Leiria, 
Leiria, Portugal.
(3)Clínica Docente los Jarales, Av. El Parque c/c Arterial 31, San Diego, 2006, 
Estado Carabobo, Venezuela.
(4)Grupo de Enzimología, Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y 
Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain. 
camselle@unex.es.

Cyclic ADP-ribose (cADPR) is a messenger for Ca2+ mobilization. Its turnover is 
believed to occur by glycohydrolysis to ADP-ribose. However, 
ADP-ribose/CDP-alcohol diphosphatase (ADPRibase-Mn) acts as cADPR 
phosphohydrolase with much lower efficiency than on its major substrates. 
Recently, we showed that mutagenesis of human ADPRibase-Mn at Phe37, Leu196 and 
Cys253 alters its specificity: the best substrate of the mutant 
F37A + L196F + C253A is cADPR by a short difference, Cys253 mutation being 
essential for cADPR preference. Its proximity to the 'northern' ribose of cADPR 
in docking models indicates Cys253 is a steric constraint for cADPR positioning. 
Aiming to obtain a specific cADPR phosphohydrolase, new mutations were tested at 
Asp250, Val252, Cys253 and Thr279, all near the 'northern' ribose. First, the 
mutant F37A + L196F + C253G, with a smaller residue 253 (Ala > Gly), showed 
increased cADPR specificity. Then, the mutant F37A + L196F + V252A + C253G, with 
another residue made smaller (Val > Ala), displayed the desired specificity, 
with cADPR kcat/KM ≈20-200-fold larger than for any other substrate. When tested 
in nucleotide mixtures, cADPR was exhausted while others remained unaltered. We 
suggest that the specific cADPR phosphohydrolase, by cell or organism 
transgenesis, or the designed mutations, by genome editing, provide 
opportunities to study the effect of cADPR depletion on the many systems where 
it intervenes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-18393-9
PMCID: PMC5773619
PMID: 29348648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.