1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Jan 5;8:2216. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2017.02216. eCollection 
2017.

Variation in the Abundance of OsHAK1 Transcript Underlies the Differential 
Salinity Tolerance of an indica and a japonica Rice Cultivar.

Chen G(1)(2), Liu C(1), Gao Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang A(1), Zhu L(1), Hu J(1), Ren 
D(1), Yu L(2), Xu G(2), Qian Q(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, China National Rice Research Institute, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, MOA Key 
Laboratory of Plant Nutrition and Fertilization in Lower-Middle Reaches of the 
Yangtze River, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Salinity imposes a major constraint over the productivity of rice. A set of 
chromosome segment substitution lines (CSSLs), derived from a cross between the 
japonica type cultivar (cv.) Nipponbare (salinity sensitive) and the indica type 
cv. 9311 (moderately tolerant), was scored using a hydroponics system for their 
salinity tolerance at the seedling stage. Two of the CSSLs, which share a âˆ¼1.2 
Mbp stretch of chromosome 4 derived from cv. Nipponbare, were as sensitive to 
the stress as cv. Nipponbare itself. Fine mapping based on an F2 population bred 
from a backcross between one of these CSSLs and cv. 9311 narrowed this region to 
95 Kbp, within which only one gene (OsHAK1) exhibited a differential (lower) 
transcript abundance in cv. Nipponbare and the two CSSLs compared to in cv. 
9311. The gene was up-regulated by exposure to salinity stress both in the root 
and the shoot, while a knockout mutant proved to be more salinity sensitive than 
its wild type with respect to its growth at both the vegetative and reproductive 
stages. Seedlings over-expressing OsHAK1 were more tolerant than wild type, 
displaying a superior photosynthetic rate, a higher leaf chlorophyll content, an 
enhanced accumulation of proline and a reduced level of lipid peroxidation. At 
the transcriptome level, the over-expression of OsHAK1 stimulated a number of 
stress-responsive genes as well as four genes known to be involved in Na+ 
homeostasis and the salinity response (OsHKT1;5, OsSOS1, OsLti6a and OsLti6b). 
When the stress was applied at booting through to maturity, the OsHAK1 
over-expressors out-yielded wild type by 25%, and no negative pleiotropic 
effects were expressed in plants gown under non-saline conditions. The level of 
expression of OsHAK1 was correlated with Na+/K+ homeostasis, which implies that 
the gene should be explored a target for molecular approaches to the improvement 
of salinity tolerance in rice.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2017.02216
PMCID: PMC5760540
PMID: 29354152