1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2018 Apr 1;314(4):L635-L641. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00198.2017. Epub 2017 Dec 20.

Vx-809/Vx-770 treatment reduces inflammatory response to Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
in primary differentiated cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells.

Ruffin M(1)(2), Roussel L(3)(4), Maillé É(1), Rousseau S(3)(4), Brochiero 
E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche du centre hospitalier de l'université de Montréal 
(CRCHUM) , Montréal, Québec , Canada.
(2)Département de Médecine, Université de Montréal , Montréal, Québec , Canada.
(3)The Meakins-Christie Laboratories at the Research Institute of the McGill 
University Health Center, McGill University , Montréal, Québec , Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, McGill University , Montréal, Québec , Canada.

Cystic fibrosis patients exhibit chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa respiratory 
infections and sustained proinflammatory state favoring lung tissue damage and 
remodeling, ultimately leading to respiratory failure. Loss of cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) function is associated with MAPK 
hyperactivation and increased cytokines expression, such as interleukin-8 
[chemoattractant chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 8 (CXCL8)]. Recently, new 
therapeutic strategies directly targeting the basic CFTR defect have been 
developed, and ORKAMBI (Vx-809/Vx-770 combination) is the only Food and Drug 
Administration-approved treatment for CF patients homozygous for the F508del 
mutation. Here we aimed to determine the effect of the Vx-809/Vx-770 combination 
on the induction of the inflammatory response by fully differentiated primary 
bronchial epithelial cell cultures from CF patients carrying F508del mutations, 
following exposure to P. aeruginosa exoproducts. Our data unveiled that CFTR 
functional rescue with Vx-809/Vx-770 drastically reduces CXCL8 (as well as CXCL1 
and CXCL2) transcripts and p38 MAPK phosphorylation in response to P. aeruginosa 
exposure through a CFTR-dependent mechanism. These results suggest that ORKAMBI 
has anti-inflammatory properties that could decrease lung inflammation and 
contribute to the observed beneficial impact of this treatment in CF patients.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00198.2017
PMID: 29351441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]