1. Genome. 2018 Mar;61(3):217-222. doi: 10.1139/gen-2017-0158. Epub 2018 Jan 24.

Comparative genome analysis to identify SNPs associated with high oleic acid and 
elevated protein content in soybean.

Kulkarni KP(1), Patil G(2), Valliyodan B(2), Vuong TD(2), Shannon JG(2), Nguyen 
HT(2), Lee JD(1).

Author information:
(1)a School of Applied Biosciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)b Division of Plant Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, 
USA.

The objective of this study was to determine the genetic relationship between 
the oleic acid and protein content. The genotypes having high oleic acid and 
elevated protein (HOEP) content were crossed with five elite lines having normal 
oleic acid and average protein (NOAP) content. The selected accessions were 
grown at six environments in three different locations and phenotyped for 
protein, oil, and fatty acid components. The mean protein content of parents, 
HOEP, and NOAP lines was 34.6%, 38%, and 34.9%, respectively. The oleic acid 
concentration of parents, HOEP, and NOAP lines was 21.7%, 80.5%, and 20.8%, 
respectively. The HOEP plants carried both FAD2-1A (S117N) and FAD2-1B (P137R) 
mutant alleles contributing to the high oleic acid phenotype. Comparative genome 
analysis using whole-genome resequencing data identified six genes having single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) significantly associated with the traits analyzed. 
A single SNP in the putative gene Glyma.10G275800 was associated with the 
elevated protein content, and palmitic, oleic, and linoleic acids. The genes 
from the marker intervals of previously identified QTL did not carry SNPs 
associated with protein content and fatty acid composition in the lines used in 
this study, indicating that all the genes except Glyma.10G278000 may be the new 
genes associated with the respective traits.

DOI: 10.1139/gen-2017-0158
PMID: 29365289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]