1. Hypertension. 1986 Mar;8(3):211-6. doi: 10.1161/01.hyp.8.3.211.

A comparison of synthetic rat and human atrial natriuretic factor in conscious 
dogs.

Seymour AA, Smith SG, Mazack EK, Blaine EH.

The renal and hypotensive responses to intravenous infusions of 10, 50, 100, and 
200 pmol/kg/min of synthetic rat atrial natriuretic factor 
(Arg101-Arg-Ser-Ser-Cys-Phe-Gly-Gly-Arg-Ile110-Asp-Arg-Ile-G ly-Ala-Gln-Ser-Gly 
-Leu-Gly120-Cys-Asn-Ser-Phe-Arg-Tyr; disulfide bond between cysteines) were 
compared with those produced by synthetic human atrial natriuretic factor 
(Met110) in five conscious dogs. Increasing doses of rat or human atrial 
natriuretic factor lowered mean arterial pressure in a dose-related manner. At 
200 pmol/kg/min, the maximally effective dose for both peptides, mean arterial 
pressure was reduced from 116 +/- 4 to 96 +/- 5 mm Hg and from 117 +/- 5 to 100 
+/- 3 mm Hg (p less than 0.01), respectively. Neither peptide affected heart 
rate. Fractional sodium excretion increased from 0.69 +/- 0.22 to 3.95 +/- 1.23% 
and from 0.69 +/- 0.16 to 4.62 +/- 0.72% during infusions of 200 pmol/kg/min of 
rat and human atrial natriuretic factor, respectively. Urine volume and 
fractional chloride excretion rose during infusions of rat or human atrial 
natriuretic factor in a manner that resembled the elevation in sodium excretion. 
The stimulation of fractional potassium excretion by both rat and human peptides 
was more variable and not as clearly dose-dependent. Glomerular filtration rate 
was enhanced by both rat and human atrial natriuretic factor, while neither 
peptide significantly changed renal plasma flow.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1161/01.hyp.8.3.211
PMID: 2936682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]