1. Dis Model Mech. 2018 Feb 26;11(2):dmm032896. doi: 10.1242/dmm.032896.

Divergent effects of adrenaline in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes obtained from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Prajapati C(1), Ojala M(1), Aalto-Setälä K(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, 33014 Tampere, Finland.
(2)BioMediTech, University of Tampere, 33014 Tampere, Finland 
katriina.aalto-setala@uta.fi.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Life Science, University of Tampere, 33014 Tampere, 
Finland.
(4)Heart Hospital, Tampere University Hospital, 33521 Tampere, Finland.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common inherited cardiac disease that 
affects the heart muscle with diverse clinical outcomes. HCM can cause sudden 
cardiac death (SCD) during or immediately after mild to rigorous physical 
activity in young patients. However, the mechanism causing SCD as a result of 
exercise remains unknown, but exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias are 
thought to be responsible for this fatal consequence. To understand the disease 
mechanism behind HCM in a better way, we generated patient-specific induced 
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) from HCM patients 
carrying either the MYBPC3-Gln1061X or TPM1-Asp175Asn mutation. We extensively 
investigated the effects of low to high concentrations of adrenaline on action 
potential characteristics, and the occurrence of arrhythmias in the presence of 
various concentrations of adrenaline and in wash-out condition. We classified 
and quantified different types of arrhythmias observed in hiPSC-CMs, and found 
that the occurrence of arrhythmias was dependent on concentrations of adrenaline 
and positions of mutations in genes causing HCM. In addition, we observed 
ventricular tachycardia types of arrhythmias in hiPSC-CMs carrying the 
TPM1-Asp175Asn mutation. We additionally examined the antiarrhythmic potency of 
bisoprolol in HCM-specific hiPSC-CMs. However, bisoprolol could not reduce the 
occurrence of arrhythmias during administration or during the wash-out condition 
of adrenaline in HCM-specific hiPSC-CMs. Our study demonstrates hiPSC-CMs as a 
promising tool for studying HCM. The experimental design used in this study 
could be suitable and beneficial for studying other components and drugs related 
to cardiac disease in general.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.032896
PMCID: PMC5894949
PMID: 29361520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.