1. FEBS Lett. 2018 Mar;592(5):793-811. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12989. Epub 2018
Feb  15.

The mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM in neurodegeneration: emerging 
evidence and mechanisms.

Kang I(1)(2), Chu CT(3), Kaufman BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Jeju National University, Korea.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Center for Metabolic and 
Mitochondrial Medicine (C3M), Vascular Medicine Institute, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Center for Neuroscience, Pittsburgh Institute for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Conformational Protein Diseases Center, McGowan 
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A, or TFAM, is a mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA)-binding protein essential for genome maintenance. TFAM functions in 
determining the abundance of the mitochondrial genome by regulating packaging, 
stability, and replication. More recently, TFAM has been shown to play a central 
role in the mtDNA stress-mediated inflammatory response. Emerging evidence 
indicates that decreased mtDNA copy number is associated with several 
aging-related pathologies; however, little is known about the association of 
TFAM abundance and disease. In this Review, we evaluate the potential 
associations of altered TFAM levels or mtDNA copy number with neurodegeneration. 
We also describe potential mechanisms by which mtDNA replication, transcription 
initiation, and TFAM-mediated endogenous danger signals may impact mitochondrial 
homeostasis in Alzheimer, Huntington, Parkinson, and other neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Â© 2018 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12989
PMCID: PMC5851836
PMID: 29364506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflicts of interest: 
Inhae Kang No conflicts of interest: Charleen T. Chu No conflicts of interest: 
Brett A. Kaufman