1. Gen Physiol Biophys. 2017 Dec;36(5):539-547. doi: 10.4149/gpb_2017030.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 2 inhibitor SU9516 increases sensitivity of colorectal 
carcinoma cells Caco-2 but not HT29 to BH3 mimetic ABT-737.

Štefaniková A(1), Klačanová K, Pilchová I, Hatok J, Račay P.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medical Biochemistry Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, 
Comenius University in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia. racay@jfmed.uniba.sk.

Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) that represents one of the major causes for 
cancer-related death in humans is often associated with over-expression of 
anti-apoptotic proteins of Bcl-2 family. The aim of presented study was to 
determine the effect of ABT-737 inhibitor of anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2, 
Bcl-XL and Bcl-w as well as cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) inhibitor SU9516 
alone and in combination with ABT-737 on survival of colorectal cell lines HT29 
and Caco-2. We have shown that both Caco-2 and HT29 cells that are relatively 
resistant to ABT-737 are also partially sensitive to SU9516, which increased 
sensitivity of Caco-2 but not HT29 cells to ABT-737. Increased sensitivity of 
Caco-2 cells to ABT-737 after addition of SU9516 correlated well with 
SU9516-induced decrease of Mcl-1 expression while we have not observed 
downregulation of Mcl-1 after the treatment of HT29 cells with SU9516. Instead 
of this, we have shown that treatment of HT29 cells with SU9516 is associated 
with decreased expression of tumour suppressor protein p53. Our findings provide 
a rationale for clinical use of Bcl-2 family inhibitors in combination with CDK2 
inhibitors for treatment of Mcl-1-dependent colorectal tumours associated with 
expression of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and Bcl-w proteins. In addition, we have shown 
potential of CDK2 inhibitors for treatment of tumours expressing R273H mutant 
p53.

DOI: 10.4149/gpb_2017030
PMID: 29372687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]