1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018 Jan 9;11:433. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2017.00433. 
eCollection 2017.

Preserved Function of Afferent Parvalbumin-Positive Perisomatic Inhibitory 
Synapses of Dentate Granule Cells in Rapidly Kindled Mice.

Hansen MG(1), Ledri LN(1), Kirik D(2), Kokaia M(1), Ledri M(1).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Brain Repair and Imaging in Neural Systems (BRAINS) Unit, Department of 
Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Parvalbumin- (PV-) containing basket cells constitute perisomatic GABAergic 
inhibitory interneurons innervating principal cells at perisomatic area, a 
strategic location that allows them to efficiently control the output and 
synchronize oscillatory activity at gamma frequency (30-90 Hz) oscillations. 
This oscillatory activity can convert into higher frequency epileptiform 
activity, and therefore could play an important role in the generation of 
seizures. However, the role of endogenous modulators of seizure activity, such 
as Neuropeptide Y (NPY), has not been fully explored in at PV input and output 
synapses. Here, using selective optogenetic activation of PV cells in the 
hippocampus, we show that seizures, induced by rapid kindling (RK) stimulations, 
enhance gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) release from PV cells onto dentate gyrus 
(DG) granule cells (GC). However, PV-GC synapses did not differ between controls 
and kindled animals in terms of GABA release probability, short-term plasticity 
and sensitivity to NPY. Kinetics of gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABA-A) mediated 
currents in postsynaptic GC were also unaffected. When challenged by repetitive 
high-frequency optogenetic stimulations, PV synapses in kindled animals 
responded with enhanced GABA release onto GC. These results unveil a mechanism 
that might possibly contribute to the generation of abnormal synchrony and 
maintenance of epileptic seizures.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2017.00433
PMCID: PMC5767181
PMID: 29375319