1. J Cell Physiol. 2018 Sep;233(9):6888-6901. doi: 10.1002/jcp.26452. Epub 2018
Mar  25.

Effect of l-caldesmon on osteoclastogenesis in RANKL-induced RAW264.7 cells.

Liou YM(1)(2), Chan CL(1), Huang R(3), Wang CA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(2)Rong Hsing Research Center for Translational Medicine, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, Watertown, Massachusetts.

Non-muscle caldesmon (l-CaD) is involved in the regulation of actin cytoskeletal 
remodeling in the podosome formation, but its function in osteoclastogenesis 
remains to be determined. In this study, RANKL-induced differentiation of 
RAW264.7 murine macrophages to osteoclast-like cells (OCs) was used as a model 
to determine the physiological role of l-CaD and its phosphorylation in 
osteoclastogenesis. Upon RANKL treatment, RAW264.7 cells undergo cell-cell 
fusion into multinucleate, and TRAP-positive large OCs with a concomitant 
increase of l-CaD expression. Using gain- and loss-of-function in OC precursor 
cells followed by RANKL induction, we showed that the expression of l-CaD in 
response to RANKL activation is an important event for osteoclastogenesis, and 
bone resorption. To determine the effect of l-CaD phosphorylation in 
osteoclastogenesis, three decoy peptides of l-CaD were used with, respectively, 
Ser-to-Ala mutations at the Erk- and Pak1-mediated phosphorylation sites, and 
Ser-to-Asp mutation at the Erk-mediated phosphorylation sites. Both the former 
two peptides competed with the C-terminal segment of l-CaD for F-actin binding 
and accelerated formation of podosome-like structures in RANKL-induced OCs, 
while the third peptide did not significantly affect the F-actin binding of 
l-CaD, and decreased the formation of podosome-like structures in OCs. With the 
experiments using dephosphorylated and phosphorylated l-CaD mutants, we further 
showed that dephosphorylated l-CaD mutant facilitated RANKL-induced TRAP 
activity with an increased cell fusion index, whereas phosphorylated l-CaD 
decreased the TRAP activity and cell fusion. Our findings suggested that both 
the level of l-CaD expression and the extent of l-CaD phosphorylation play a 
role in RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.26452
PMCID: PMC5993584
PMID: 29377122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest.