1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Jan 29;19(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0527-7.

A novel compound heterozygous variant of the SLC12A3 gene in Gitelman syndrome 
pedigree.

Chen Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Lin X(1), Pan Q(1), Zheng F(1), Li H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine Sir Run 
Run Shaw Hospital, 3 East Qing Chun Road, Zhejiang, Hangzhou, 310016, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine Sir Run 
Run Shaw Hospital, 3 East Qing Chun Road, Zhejiang, Hangzhou, 310016, China. 
srrshnfm@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Gitelman syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by 
genic mutations of SLC12A3 (Solute carrier family 12 member 3), which encodes 
the Na-Cl cotransporter (NCC), and presents with characteristic metabolic 
abnormalities, including hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and 
hypocalciuria. In this study, we report a case of a GS pedigree, including 
analysis of GS-associated gene mutations.
METHODS: We performed next-generation sequencing analysis and Sanger sequencing 
to explore the SLC12A3 mutations in a GS pedigree that included a 35-year-old 
female patient with GS and five family members within three generations. 
Furthermore, we summarized their clinical manifestations and analyzed laboratory 
parameters related to GS.
RESULTS: The female proband (the patient with GS) presented with intermittent 
fatigue and transient periods of tetany, along with significant hypokalemia, 
hypomagnesemia, and hypocalciuria. All other members of the pedigree had normal 
laboratory results without obvious GS-related symptoms. Genetic analysis of the 
SLC12A3 gene identified two novel missense mutations (c.1919A > G, p.N640S in 
exon 15; c.2522A > G, p.D841G in exon 21) in the patient with GS. Moreover, we 
demonstrated that her mother, younger maternal uncle, and cousin were carriers 
of one mutation (c.1919A > G), and her father was the carrier of the other 
(c.2522A > G).
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of these two novel pathogenic variants of 
SLC12A3 and their contribution to GS. Further functional studies are 
particularly warranted to explore the underlying molecular mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0527-7
PMCID: PMC5789536
PMID: 29378538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
study was approved by the institutional Ethical Committee of Sir Run Run Shaw 
Hospital (Tel: 86,571 86,006,811) and written informed consent was obtained from 
all subjects. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent for publication 
was obtained from all participants. What participants consented to be published 
included the medical information and gene detection results. The patient and her 
parents consented for the inclusion of the information of the deceased 
participant. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.