1. Exp Ther Med. 2018 Jan;15(1):152-158. doi: 10.3892/etm.2017.5416. Epub 2017
Nov  1.

Effect of butylphthalide intervention on experimental autoimmune myositis in 
guinea pigs.

Chen J(1)(2), Wang J(1), Zhang J(3), Pu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chinese PLA Medical School, Beijing 100853, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The 309th Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100091, P.R. 
China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 
100850, P.R. China.

Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies are a group of rare muscular diseases that 
are characterized by acute, subacute or chronic proximal and symmetric muscle 
weakness, muscle fiber necrosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells, 
particularly activated CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and phagocytes. 3-n-butylphthalide 
(NBP) protects mitochondria and reduces the inflammatory response in multiple 
disease models. In myositis, it has remained elusive whether NBP can protect 
muscle cells from muscle fiber injury. Experimental autoimmune myositis (EAM) 
was induced in a total of 40 guinea pigs by myosin immunization. After 4 weeks, 
low- or high-dose NBP solution was intraperitoneally injected. Saline solution 
was used as a negative control. After 10 days, the clinical manifestations were 
assessed by determining rodent grasping power, histopathological changes, 
Ca2+-adenosinetriphosphatase (ATPase) activity by an ATPase kit, and mRNA 
expression of interferon (IFN)-γ, retinoic acid receptor-related orphan nuclear 
receptor (ROR)γt and forkhead box (Fox) p3 in muscle tissue by 
reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis. It was 
demonstrated that NBP improved the myodynamia of guinea pigs with EAM and 
reduced the pathological inflammatory cell infiltration in a dose-dependent 
manner. NBP improved the Ca2+-ATPase activity of the muscle mitochondrial 
membrane and muscle plasma membrane in animals with EAM. It also reduced the 
mRNA expression of IFN-γ and RORγt, and significantly increased the mRNA 
expression of Foxp3 in muscle tissue. These results provided a basis for the 
consideration of NBP as a novel agent for the treatment of myositis and other 
muscular diseases associated with autoimmunity and inflammation.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2017.5416
PMCID: PMC5768128
PMID: 29387187