1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2018 Jan 15;12:149-158. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S149973. 
eCollection 2018.

Biological activity, quantitative structure-activity relationship analysis, and 
molecular docking of xanthone derivatives as anticancer drugs.

Miladiyah I(1)(2), Jumina J(3), Haryana SM(4), Mustofa M(5).

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Islamic University of 
Indonesia.
(2)Doctorate Program of Medical Science and Health, Faculty of Medicine.
(3)Chemistry Department, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences.
(4)Histology and Cell Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine.
(5)Pharmacology and Therapeutic Department, Faculty of Medicine, Gadjah Mada 
University, Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

BACKGROUND: Xanthone derivatives have a wide range of pharmacological 
activities, such as those involving antibacterial, antiviral, antimalarial, 
anthelmintic, anti-inflammatory, antiprotozoal, and anticancer properties. Among 
these, we investigated the anticancer properties of xanthone. This research 
aimed to analyze the biological activity of ten novel xanthone derivatives, to 
investigate the most contributing-descriptors for their cytotoxic activities, 
and to examine the possible mechanism of actions of xanthone compound through 
molecular docking.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The cytotoxic tests were carried out on WiDR and Vero 
cell lines, by a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide 
(MTT) assay method. The structural features required for xanthone's anticancer 
activity were conducted by using the semi-empirical Austin Model-1 method, and 
continued with quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis 
using BuildQSAR program. The study of the possible mechanism of actions of the 
selected xanthone compound was done through molecular docking with PLANTS.
RESULTS: The three novel xanthone derivatives (compounds 5, 7, and 8) exhibited 
cytotoxic activity with compound 5 showed the highest degree of cytotoxicity at 
concentration 9.23 µg/mL (37.8 µM). The following best equation model was 
obtained from the BuildQSAR calculation: log 1/IC50 = -8.124 qC1 -35.088 qC2 
-6.008 qC3 + 1.831 u + 0.540 logP -9.115 (n = 10, r = 0.976, s = 0.144, F = 
15.920, Q2 = 0.651, SPRESS = 0.390). This equation model generated 15 proposed 
new xanthone compounds with better-predicted anticancer activities. A molecular 
docking study of compound 5 showed that xanthone formed binding interactions 
with some receptors involved in cancer pathology, including telomerase, 
tumor-promoting inflammation (COX-2), and cyclin-dependent kinase-2 (CDK2) 
inhibitor.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that compound 5 showed the best cytotoxic 
activity among the xanthone derivatives tested. QSAR analysis showed that the 
descriptors contributed to xanthone's cytotoxic activity were the net atomic 
charge at qC1, qC2, and qC3 positions, also dipole moment and logP. Compound 5 
was suspected to be cytotoxic by its inhibition of telomerase, COX-2, and CDK2 
receptors.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S149973
PMCID: PMC5774476
PMID: 29391779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.