1. Chonnam Med J. 2018 Jan;54(1):31-35. doi: 10.4068/cmj.2018.54.1.31. Epub 2018 
Jan 25.

Detection of Familial Hypercholesterolemia Using Next Generation Sequencing in 
Two Population-Based Cohorts.

Kim HN(1), Kweon SS(1), Shin MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical 
School, Gwangju, Korea.

We aimed to evaluate the prevalence of familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) in a 
subject with hypercholesterolaemia from two population-based cohorts in South 
Korea. A total of 283 subjects with total cholesterol levels of 290 mg/dL (7.5 
mmol/L) or higher were selected from the Namwon and Dong-gu Studies. We used 
next generation sequencing (NGS) to detect mutations in low-density lipoprotein 
receptors (LDLR), apolipoprotein B (APOB) and proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) genes. We have confirmed 17 different mutations 
of the LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 in 23 subjects (8.1%). Eleven LDLR variants and one 
APOB variant have been previously reported. One LDLR and two PCSK9 rare variants 
were identified in the variants database, but not in the FH mutation database. 
Two novel LDLR variants were found, p.Leu680Val, and p.Thr734Phe. No LDLR, APOB 
or PCSK9 deletions nor insertions were found. When the subjects were restricted 
to 110 subjects with a total cholesterol â‰¥310 mg/dL, only 10 variants were found 
in the 10 subjects (9.1%). These results suggest that given the low prevalence 
of FH mutations in subjects with high total cholesterol levels, NGS-based 
testing for a population-based approach to FH detection may not be 
cost-effective.

DOI: 10.4068/cmj.2018.54.1.31
PMCID: PMC5794476
PMID: 29399563

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: None declared.