1. BMC Evol Biol. 2018 Feb 2;18(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12862-018-1118-0.

Wnt signaling and polarity in freshwater sponges.

Windsor Reid PJ(1)(2), Matveev E(3), McClymont A(3), Posfai D(4)(5), Hill AL(4), 
Leys SP(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada. reidp22@macewan.ca.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, MacEwan University, Edmonton, AB, Canada. 
reidp22@macewan.ca.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada. sleys@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: The Wnt signaling pathway is uniquely metazoan and used in many 
processes during development, including the formation of polarity and body axes. 
In sponges, one of the earliest diverging animal groups, Wnt pathway genes have 
diverse expression patterns in different groups including along the 
anterior-posterior axis of two sponge larvae, and in the osculum and ostia of 
others. We studied the function of Wnt signaling and body polarity formation 
through expression, knockdown, and larval manipulation in several freshwater 
sponge species.
RESULTS: Sponge Wnts fall into sponge-specific and sponge-class specific 
subfamilies of Wnt proteins. Notably Wnt genes were not found in transcriptomes 
of the glass sponge Aphrocallistes vastus. Wnt and its signaling genes were 
expressed in archaeocytes of the mesohyl throughout developing freshwater 
sponges. Osculum formation was enhanced by GSK3 knockdown, and Wnt antagonists 
inhibited both osculum development and regeneration. Using dye tracking we found 
that the posterior poles of freshwater sponge larvae give rise to tissue that 
will form the osculum following metamorphosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Together the data indicate that while components of canonical Wnt 
signaling may be used in development and maintenance of osculum tissue, it is 
likely that Wnt signaling itself occurs between individual cells rather than 
whole tissues or structures in freshwater sponges.

DOI: 10.1186/s12862-018-1118-0
PMCID: PMC5797367
PMID: 29394881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
protocols were performed according to the guidelines stated by the Canadian 
Council for Animal Care and the protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use 
Committee of the University of Alberta (Animal Use Number: AUP00000840). CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.