1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2018 Aug 15;9(8):1872-1883. doi: 
10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00456. Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Drosophila as a Model System for Neurotransmitter Measurements.

Shin M(1), Copeland JM(1)(2), Venton BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Neuroscience Graduate Program , University of 
Virginia , Charlottesville , Virginia 22901 , United States.
(2)Department of Biology , Eastern Mennonite University , Harrisonburg , 
Virginia 22802 , United States.

Drosophila melanogaster, the fruit fly, is an important, simple model organism 
for studying the effects of genetic mutations on neuronal activity and behavior. 
Biologists use Drosophila for neuroscience studies because of its genetic 
tractability, complex behaviors, well-known and simple neuroanatomy, and many 
orthologues to human genes. Neurochemical measurements in Drosophila are 
challenging due to the small size of the central nervous system. Recently, 
methods have been developed to measure real-time neurotransmitter release and 
clearance in both larvae and adults using electrochemistry. These studies have 
characterized dopamine, serotonin, and octopamine release in both wild type and 
genetic mutant flies. Tissue content measurements are also important, and 
separations are predominantly used. Capillary electrophoresis, with either 
electrochemical, laser-induced fluorescence, or mass spectrometry detection, 
facilitates tissue content measurements from single, isolated Drosophila brains 
or small samples of hemolymph. Neurochemical studies in Drosophila have revealed 
that flies have functioning transporters and autoreceptors, that their 
metabolism is different than in mammals, and that flies have regional, life 
stage, and sex differences in neurotransmission. Future studies will develop 
smaller electrodes, expand optical imaging techniques, explore physiological 
stimulations, and use advanced genetics to target single neuron release or study 
neurochemical changes in models of human diseases.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.7b00456
PMCID: PMC6093779
PMID: 29411967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]