1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Apr 15;27(8):1353-1365. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy046.

Self-assembly of FUS through its low-complexity domain contributes to 
neurodegeneration.

Matsumoto T(1), Matsukawa K(2), Watanabe N(2), Kishino Y(2), Kunugi H(1), Ihara 
R(2), Wakabayashi T(2), Hashimoto T(2), Iwatsubo T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology and Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Department of Neuropathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Aggregation of fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein, and mutations in FUS gene, are 
causative to a range of neurodegenerative disorders including amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia. To gain insights into the 
molecular mechanism whereby FUS causes neurodegeneration, we generated 
transgenic Drosophila melanogaster overexpressing human FUS in the photoreceptor 
neurons, which exhibited mild retinal degeneration. Expression of familial 
ALS-mutant FUS aggravated the degeneration, which was associated with an 
increase in cytoplasmic localization of FUS. A carboxy-terminally truncated 
R495X mutant FUS also was localized in cytoplasm, whereas the degenerative 
phenotype was diminished. Double expression of R495X and wild-type FUS 
dramatically exacerbated degeneration, sequestrating wild-type FUS into 
cytoplasmic aggregates. Notably, replacement of all tyrosine residues within the 
low-complexity domain, which abolished self-assembly of FUS, completely 
eliminated the degenerative phenotypes. Taken together, we propose that 
self-assembly of FUS through its low-complexity domain contributes to 
FUS-induced neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy046
PMID: 29425337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]