1. Molecules. 2018 Feb 13;23(2):411. doi: 10.3390/molecules23020411.

Small Molecules: Therapeutic Application in Neuropsychiatric and 
Neurodegenerative Disorders.

Schiavone S(1), Trabace L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Via 
Napoli, 20, 71122 Foggia, Italy. stefania.schiavone@unifg.it.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, Via 
Napoli, 20, 71122 Foggia, Italy. luigia.trabace@unifg.it.

In recent years, an increasing number of studies have been published, focusing 
on the potential therapeutic use of small catalytic agents with strong 
biological properties. So far, most of these works have only regarded specific 
clinical fields, such as oncology, infectivology and general pathology, in 
particular with respect to the treatment of significant inflammatory processes. 
However, interesting data on possible therapeutic applications of small 
molecules for the treatment of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative illnesses 
are emerging, especially with respect to the possibility to modulate the 
cellular redox state. Indeed, a crucial role of redox dysregulation in the 
pathogenesis of these disorders has been widely demonstrated by both 
pre-clinical and clinical studies, being the reduction of the total amount of 
free radicals a promising novel therapeutic approach for these diseases. In this 
review, we focused our interest on studies published during the last ten years 
reporting therapeutic potential of small molecules for the treatment of 
neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, also based on the biological 
efficiency of these compounds in detecting intracellular disturbances induced by 
increased production of reactive oxygen species.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules23020411
PMCID: PMC6017408
PMID: 29438357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.