1. Biol Open. 2018 Mar 12;7(3):bio031575. doi: 10.1242/bio.031575.

ZFP36L2 is a cell cycle-regulated CCCH protein necessary for DNA lesion-induced 
S-phase arrest.

Noguchi A(1), Adachi S(2), Yokota N(1), Hatta T(2), Natsume T(2), Kawahara H(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan.
(2)Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug Discovery, National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan hkawa@tmu.ac.jp.

ZFP36L2 promotes the destruction of AU-rich element-containing transcripts, 
while its regulation and functional significance in cell cycle control are 
scarcely identified. We show that ZFP36L2 is a cell cycle-regulated CCCH 
protein, the abundance of which is regulated post-translationally at the 
respective stages of the cell cycle. Indeed, ZFP36L2 protein was eliminated 
after release from M phase, and ZYG11B-based E3 ligase plays a role in its 
polyubiquitination in interphase. Although ZFP36L2 is dispensable for normal 
cell cycle progression, we found that endogenous ZFP36L2 played a key role in 
cisplatin-induced S-phase arrest, a process in which the suppression of G1/S 
cyclins is necessary. The accumulation of ZFP36L2 was stimulated under DNA 
replication stresses and altered interactions with a subset of RNA-binding 
proteins. Notably, silencing endogenous ZFP36L2 led to impaired cell viability 
in the presence of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions. Thus, we propose that ZFP36L2 
is a key protein that controls S-phase progression in the case of genome 
instability.

Â© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.031575
PMCID: PMC5898266
PMID: 29449217

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.