1. J Med Chem. 2019 Jan 10;62(1):3-23. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01640. Epub
2018  Mar 5.

Positive and Negative Allosteric Modulators of N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
Receptors: Structure-Activity Relationships and Mechanisms of Action.

Burnell ES(1)(2), Irvine M(1), Fang G(1), Sapkota K(3), Jane DE(1), Monaghan 
DT(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Synaptic Plasticity, School of Physiology, Pharmacology and 
Neuroscience , University of Bristol , Bristol BS8 1TD , U.K.
(2)School of Chemistry , National University of Ireland Galway , Galway H91TK33 
, Ireland.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience , University of 
Nebraska Medical Center , Omaha , Nebraska 68198 , United States.

Excitatory activity in the CNS is predominately mediated by l-glutamate through 
several families of l-glutamate neurotransmitter receptors. Of these, the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) family has many critical roles in CNS 
function and in various neuropathological and psychiatric conditions. Until 
recently, the types of compounds available to regulate NMDAR function have been 
quite limited in terms of mechanism of action, subtype selectivity, and 
biological effect. However, several new classes of NMDAR agents have now been 
identified that are positive or negative allosteric modulators (PAMs and NAMs, 
respectively) with various patterns of NMDAR subtype selectivity. These new 
agents act at several newly recognized binding sites on the NMDAR complex and 
offer significantly greater pharmacological control over NMDAR activity than 
previously available agents. The purpose of this review is to summarize the 
structure-activity relationships for these new NMDAR modulator drug classes and 
to describe the current understanding of their mechanisms of action.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b01640
PMCID: PMC6368479
PMID: 29446949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]