1. RNA. 2018 May;24(5):749-758. doi: 10.1261/rna.065581.118. Epub 2018 Feb 13.

Monitoring the 5-methoxycarbonylmethyl-2-thiouridine (mcm5s2U) modification in 
eukaryotic tRNAs via the γ-toxin endonuclease.

Lentini JM(1), Ramos J(1), Fu D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Center for RNA Biology, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, New York 14627, USA.

The post-transcriptional modification of tRNA at the wobble position is a 
universal process occurring in all domains of life. In eukaryotes, the wobble 
uridine of particular tRNAs is transformed to the 
5-methoxycarbonylmethyl-2-thiouridine (mcm5s2U) modification which is critical 
for proper mRNA decoding and protein translation. However, current methods to 
detect mcm5s2U are technically challenging and/or require specialized 
instrumental expertise. Here, we show that γ-toxin endonuclease from the yeast 
Kluyveromyces lactis can be used as a probe for assaying mcm5s2U status in the 
tRNA of diverse eukaryotic organisms ranging from protozoans to mammalian cells. 
The assay couples the mcm5s2U-dependent cleavage of tRNA by γ-toxin with 
standard molecular biology techniques such as northern blot analysis or 
quantitative PCR to monitor mcm5s2U levels in multiple tRNA isoacceptors. The 
results gained from the γ-toxin assay reveals the evolutionary conservation of 
the mcm5s2U modification across eukaryotic species. Moreover, we have used the 
γ-toxin assay to verify uncharacterized eukaryotic Trm9 and Trm112 homologs that 
catalyze the formation of mcm5s2U. These findings demonstrate the use of γ-toxin 
as a detection method to monitor mcm5s2U status in diverse eukaryotic cell types 
for cellular, genetic, and biochemical studies.

© 2018 Lentini et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.065581.118
PMCID: PMC5900570
PMID: 29440318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]