1. J Virol. 2018 Apr 13;92(9):e01989-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01989-17. Print 2018
May  1.

The 38K-Mediated Specific Dephosphorylation of the Viral Core Protein P6.9 Plays 
an Important Role in the Nucleocapsid Assembly of Autographa californica 
Multiple Nucleopolyhedrovirus.

Lai Q(1), Wu W(1), Li A(1), Wang W(1), Yuan M(1), Yang K(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Lab of Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China 
yangkai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Encapsidation of the viral genomes, leading to the assembly of the nucleocapsids 
to form infectious progeny virions, is a key step in many virus life cycles. 
Baculovirus nucleocapsid assembly is a complex process that involves many 
proteins. Our previous studies showed that the deletion of the core gene 38K 
(ac98) interrupted the nucleocapsid assembly by producing capsid sheaths devoid 
of viral genomes by an unknown mechanism. All homologs of 38K contain conserved 
motifs of the haloacid dehalogenase superfamily, which are involved in 
phosphoryl transfer. The requirements of these motifs for nucleocapsid assembly, 
confirmed in the present study, suggest that 38K may be a functioning haloacid 
dehalogenase. P6.9 is also encoded by a core gene (ac100) and is required for 
viral genome encapsidation. It has been reported that multiple phosphorylated 
species of P6.9 are present in virus-infected cells, while only an 
unphosphorylated species is detected in the budded virus. Therefore, whether 38K 
mediates the dephosphorylation of P6.9 was investigated. An additional 
phosphorylated species of P6.9 in 38K-deleted or -mutated virus-transfected 
cells was detected, and the dephosphorylated sites mediated by 38K were 
determined by mass spectrometry. To assess the effects of dephosphorylation of 
P6.9 mediated by 38K on virus replication, these sites were mutated to glutamic 
acids (phosphorylation-mimic mutant) or to alanines (phosphorylation-deficient 
mutant). Studies showed that the nucleocapsid assembly was interrupted in 
phosphorylation-mimic mutant virus-transfected cells. Taken together, our 
findings demonstrate that 38K mediates the dephosphorylation of specific sites 
at the C terminus of P6.9, which is essential for viral genome 
encapsidation.IMPORTANCE Genome packaging is a fundamental process in the virus 
life cycle, and viruses have different strategies to perform this step. For 
several double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses, the procapsid is formed before 
genome encapsidation, which may require basic proteins that help to neutralize 
the nucleic acid charge repulsion to facilitate the compaction of the genome 
within the confined capsid space. Baculovirus encodes a small basic protein, 
P6.9, which is required for a variety of processes in the virus infection cycle. 
The phosphorylation of P6.9 is thought to result in nucleocapsid uncoating, 
while the dephosphorylation of P6.9 is involved in viral DNA encapsidation 
during nucleocapsid assembly. Here, we demonstrate that a haloacid dehalogenase 
homolog encoded by baculovirus core gene 38K is involved in nucleocapsid 
assembly by mediating the dephosphorylation of 5 specific sites at the C 
terminus of P6.9. This finding contributes to the understanding of the 
mechanisms of virus nucleocapsid assembly.

Copyright Â© 2018 Lai et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01989-17
PMCID: PMC5899202
PMID: 29444944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]