1. Lipids Health Dis. 2018 Feb 17;17(1):30. doi: 10.1186/s12944-018-0677-9.

DOCK7-ANGPTL3 SNPs and their haplotypes with serum lipid levels and the risk of 
coronary artery disease and ischemic stroke.

Li WJ(1), Yin RX(2), Cao XL(3), Chen WX(1), Huang F(1), Wu JZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, 22 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 
530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical University, 22 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, 
530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of China. yinruixing@163.com.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the association of the dedicator of 
cytokinesis 7 (DOCK7 rs1748195) and angiopoietin like 3 (ANGPTL3 rs12563308) 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their haplotypes with serum lipid 
levels and the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) and ischemic stroke (IS) in 
the Chinese populations. This study aimed to detect such association in a 
Southern Chinese Han population.
METHODS: This study included 1728 subjects (CAD, 568; IS, 539; and controls, 
621). Genotypes of the two SNPs were determined by the Snapshot technology.
RESULTS: The genotypic and allelic frequencies of the rs1748195 SNP were 
different between CAD patients and controls (P < 0.05 for each), the rs1748195G 
allele frequency was higher in CAD patients than in controls (27.6% vs. 23.6%, 
P = 0.024). The genotypic frequencies of the rs12563308 SNP were also different 
between CAD patients and controls (P = 0.021). The rs1748195 SNP was associated 
with an increased risk of CAD after controlling for potential confounders and 
Bonferroni correction (P < 0.025 considered statistically significant; 
Recessive: OR = 1.79, 95% CI = 1.04-3.06, P = 0.017; Log-additive: OR = 1.27, 
95% CI = 1.02-1.57, P = 0.014), whereas the rs12563308 SNP was associated with a 
decreased risk of CAD (Dominant: OR = 0.69, 95% CI = 0.45-0.94, P = 0.011; 
Log-additive: OR = 0.73, 95% CI = 0.49-0.89, P = 0.009). The rs1748195 SNP was 
also associated with an increased risk of severity to coronary artery 
atherosclerosis (Dominant: OR = 1.45, 95% CI = 1.07-2.11, P = 0.017; 
Log-additive: OR = 1.35, 95% CI = 1.09-1.82, P = 0.013). The interactions of 
SNP-environment on serum lipid levels and the risk of severity to coronary 
artery atherosclerosis, CAD and IS were noted. The rs1748195G-rs12563308T 
haplotype was associated with an increased angiographic severity to coronary 
artery atherosclerosis (OR = 1.46, 95% CI = 1.05-2.03), and the risk of CAD 
(OR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.08-1.74). The interactions of haplotype-hypertension on 
the risk of CAD and haplotype-drinking on the risk of CAD/IS were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the DOCK-ANGPTL3 SNPs and their 
haplotypes were associated with the angiographic severity to coronary artery 
atherosclerosis and the risk of CAD and IS in the Southern Chinese Han 
population.

DOI: 10.1186/s12944-018-0677-9
PMCID: PMC5816384
PMID: 29454388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
procedures of the investigation were carried out following the rules of the 
Declaration of Helsinki of 1975 
(http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/), revised in 2008. The 
study design was approved by the Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated 
Hospital, Guangxi Medical University (No. Lunshen 2009-Guike-018; Jan. 7, 2009). 
Informed consent was obtained from all participants. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no 
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.