1. Med Res Arch. 2017 Sep;5(9):10.18103/mra.v5i9.1526. doi:
10.18103/mra.v5i9.1526.  Epub 2017 Sep 18.

Keeping an Eye on Bardet-Biedl Syndrome: A Comprehensive Review of the Role of 
Bardet-Biedl Syndrome Genes in the Eye.

Weihbrecht K(1)(2)(3), Goar WA(1)(2)(3), Pak T(1)(3), Garrison JE(1)(3), DeLuca 
AP(2)(3), Stone EM(2)(3), Scheetz TE(2)(3), Sheffield VC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa; Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa; Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.
(3)Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research, University of Iowa; Iowa City, 
IA 52242, USA.

Upwards of 90% of individuals with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) display rod-cone 
dystrophy with early macular involvement. BBS is an autosomal recessive, 
genetically heterogeneous, pleiotropic ciliopathy for which 21 causative genes 
have been discovered to date. In addition to retinal degeneration, the cardinal 
features of BBS include obesity, cognitive impairment, renal anomalies, 
polydactyly, and hypogonadism. Here, we review the genes, proteins, and protein 
complexes involved in BBS and the BBS model organisms available for the study of 
retinal degeneration. We include comprehensive lists for all known BBS genes, 
their known phenotypes, and the model organisms available. We also review the 
molecular mechanisms believed to lead to retinal degeneration. We provide an 
overview of the mode of inheritance and describe the relationships between BBS 
genes and Joubert syndrome, Leber Congenital Amaurosis, Senior-LÃ¸ken syndrome, 
and non-syndromic retinitis pigmentosa. Finally, we propose ways that new 
advances in technology will allow us to better understand the role of different 
BBS genes in retinal formation and function.

DOI: 10.18103/mra.v5i9.1526
PMCID: PMC5814251
PMID: 29457131