1. Biochim Open. 2017 Apr 30;4:119-126. doi: 10.1016/j.biopen.2017.04.002. 
eCollection 2017 Jun.

Human and mouse microarrays-guided expression analysis of membrane protein 
trafficking-related genes in MDCK cells, a canine epithelial model for apical 
and basolateral differential protein targeting.

Xu X(1), Pan M(1), Gasiewicz AE(2), Li R(1), Kuo SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214, 
USA.

MDCK cells are widely used to study the differential targeting of membrane 
transporters to apical and basolateral membrane but its canine origin limited 
the commercial tools available for the analysis of protein trafficking 
machinery. Because apical and basolateral membranes are only found in 
differentiated epithelial cells, genes critical for differential targeting may 
be specifically up-regulated upon MDCK cell differentiation. To search for these 
genes, a cross-species screening strategy was used. We first analyzed the human 
microarray data for protein trafficking-related genes that were up-regulated in 
colon carcinoma Caco2 cells upon differentiation. The results of mouse 44K gene 
expression microarray analysis were then used to extract additional candidate 
genes that showed higher expression in normal colon epithelium compared to 
primary embryonic fibroblasts. Finally, NCBI genomic sequence information was 
used to design RT-PCR primers for 13 candidate and 10 negative control genes and 
used to analyze MDCK cells at 2, 13 and 17 days after seeding. To determine 
whether the gene up-regulation was specific in epithelial differentiation, we 
also performed RT-PCR on rat non-differentiating intestinal IEC-6 cells and 
mouse C2C12 cells, a differentiating myoblast model. Of the 13 candidate genes, 
3 genes, SDCBP2, KIF12, KIF27, met all criteria of specific up-regulation in 
differentiated MDCK cells. In addition, KIF13A showed up-regulation in 
differentiated MDCK and C2C12 cells but not in IEC-6 cells cultured for the same 
duration. The functions of these genes need to be analyzed in the future. This 
cross-species screening strategy may be useful for other non-human, non-rodent 
cell models.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopen.2017.04.002
PMCID: PMC5801818
PMID: 29450149