1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Mar 6;115(10):2371-2376. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1710617115. Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Irreversible inactivation of ISG15 by a viral leader protease enables 
alternative infection detection strategies.

Swatek KN(1), Aumayr M(2), Pruneda JN(1), Visser LJ(3), Berryman S(4), Kueck 
AF(1), Geurink PP(5), Ovaa H(5), van Kuppeveld FJM(3), Tuthill TJ(4), Skern 
T(2), Komander D(6).

Author information:
(1)Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry Division, Medical Research Council 
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CB2 0QH Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Vienna 
Biocenter, Medical University of Vienna, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunology, Virology Division, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, 3584CL Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)The Pirbright Institute, GU24 0NF Pirbright, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Chemical Immunology, Leiden University Medical Centre, 2333 ZC 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry Division, Medical Research Council 
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CB2 0QH Cambridge, United Kingdom; 
dk@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

In response to viral infection, cells mount a potent inflammatory response that 
relies on ISG15 and ubiquitin posttranslational modifications. Many viruses use 
deubiquitinases and deISGylases that reverse these modifications and antagonize 
host signaling processes. We here reveal that the leader protease, Lbpro, from 
foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) targets ISG15 and to a lesser extent, 
ubiquitin in an unprecedented manner. Unlike canonical deISGylases that 
hydrolyze the isopeptide linkage after the C-terminal GlyGly motif, Lbpro 
cleaves the peptide bond preceding the GlyGly motif. Consequently, the GlyGly 
dipeptide remains attached to the substrate Lys, and cleaved ISG15 is rendered 
incompetent for reconjugation. A crystal structure of Lbpro bound to an 
engineered ISG15 suicide probe revealed the molecular basis for ISG15 
proteolysis. Importantly, anti-GlyGly antibodies, developed for ubiquitin 
proteomics, are able to detect Lbpro cleavage products during viral infection. 
This opens avenues for infection detection of FMDV based on an immutable, 
host-derived epitope.

Copyright Â© 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1710617115
PMCID: PMC5877979
PMID: 29463763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: D.K. is part of 
the DUB Alliance, which includes Cancer Research Technology and FORMA 
Therapeutics.