1. PLoS One. 2018 Feb 21;13(2):e0193138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193138. 
eCollection 2018.

Family history and obesity in youth, their effect on acylcarnitine/aminoacids 
metabolomics and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Structural equation 
modeling approach.

Romero-Ibarguengoitia ME(1), Vadillo-Ortega F(2), Caballero AE(3), 
Ibarra-González I(4), Herrera-Rosas A(1), Serratos-Canales MF(1), León-Hernández 
M(1), González-Chávez A(5), Mummidi S(6), Duggirala R(6), López-Alvarenga 
JC(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Divison, Hospital General de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(2)Vinculation Unit Faculty of Medicine UNAM, Instituto Nacional de Medicina 
Genomica (INMEGEN), Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Inborn errors of Metabolism Unit, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(5)Internal Medicine Department, Hospital General de México, Mexico City, 
Mexico.
(6)South Texas Diabetes and Obesity Institute, University of Texas Rio Grande 
Valley, Edinburg, TX, United States of America.
(7)Research department, Universidad Mexico Americana del Norte, Reynosa, 
Tamaulipas, Mexico.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2018 May 24;13(5):e0198379. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0198379.

BACKGROUND: Structural equation modeling (SEM) can help understanding complex 
functional relationships among obesity, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), family history of obesity, targeted metabolomics and pro-inflammatory 
markers. We tested two hypotheses: 1) If obesity precedes an excess of free 
fatty acids that increase oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, there 
would be an increase of serum acylcarnitines, amino acids and cytokines in obese 
subjects. Acylcarnitines would be related to non-alcoholic fatty disease that 
will induce insulin resistance. 2) If a positive family history of obesity and 
type 2 diabetes are the major determinants of the metabolomic profile, there 
would be higher concentration of amino acids and acylcarnitines in patients with 
this background that will induce obesity and NAFLD which in turn will induce 
insulin resistance.
METHODS/RESULTS: 137 normoglycemic subjects, mean age (SD) of 30.61 (8.6) years 
divided in three groups: BMI<25 with absence of NAFLD (G1), n = 82; BMI>30 with 
absence of NAFLD (G2), n = 24; and BMI>30 with NAFLD (G3), n = 31. Family 
history of obesity (any) was present in 53%. Both models were adjusted in SEM. 
Family history of obesity predicted obesity but could not predict acylcarnitines 
and amino acid concentrations (effect size <0.2), but did predict obesity 
phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Family history of obesity is the major predictor of obesity, and the 
metabolic abnormalities on amino acids, acylcarnitines, inflammation, insulin 
resistance, and NAFLD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193138
PMCID: PMC5821462
PMID: 29466466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.