1. J Clin Med. 2018 Feb 20;7(2):34. doi: 10.3390/jcm7020034.

Influence of Iron Deficiency on HbA1c Levels in Pregnant Women: Comparison with 
Non-Pregnant Women.

Hashimoto K(1), Koga M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, NTT 
West Osaka Hospital, Osaka 543-8922, Japan. kunijin@zeus.eonet.ne.jp.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hakuhokai Central Hospital, Amagasaki, Hyogo 
661-0953, Japan. m-koga@kawanishi-city-hospital.com.

Although HbA1c is widely used as a glycemic control indicator, HbA1c is known to 
show falsely high levels in patients in an iron deficient state (IDS). We 
compared the influence of IDS on HbA1c levels between pregnant women, due to 
mainly an increase in demand for iron without bleeding, and non-pregnant women, 
due to mainly bleeding (menstruation). We studied 42 non-diabetic pregnant women 
(pregnant group) and 42 age-matched non-pregnant women with normal glucose 
tolerance (non-pregnant group). We compared HbA1c and glycated albumin (GA) 
levels between IDS and normal iron state (NIS) in both groups. Furthermore, we 
analyzed the correlation between indicators of glycemic control and iron-related 
parameters [mean corpuscular hemoglobin, serum transferrin saturation (%Tf), and 
serum ferritin] in both groups. Compared with non-pregnant women, pregnant women 
had significantly lower %Tf and serum ferritin levels and significantly higher 
morbidity of IDS. HbA1c, but not GA, had significantly higher levels in pregnant 
women with IDS compared with NIS; however, HbA1c in non-pregnant women showed no 
significant difference for both IDS and NIS. In pregnant women, significant 
negative correlations were observed between HbA1c and iron-related parameters. 
In non-pregnant women, negative correlations were observed between HbA1c and 
these parameters, but they were not significant. No significant correlations 
were observed between GA and iron-related parameters in both groups. HbA1c 
levels in pregnant women were found to be largely affected by iron deficiency 
compared with non-pregnant women. For this reason, GA, which is not affected by 
iron deficiency, is desirable for use in the assessment of glycemic control 
during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm7020034
PMCID: PMC5852450
PMID: 29461483

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.