1. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2017 Dec;22(4):251-261. doi: 
10.1007/s10911-018-9388-0. Epub 2018 Feb 20.

Milk Proteins Are Predigested Within the Human Mammary Gland.

Nielsen SD(1), Beverly RL(1), Dallas DC(2).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Program, School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, 
College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University, 118G Milam 
Hall, Corvallis, OR, 97331, USA.
(2)Nutrition Program, School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, 
College of Public Health and Human Sciences, Oregon State University, 118G Milam 
Hall, Corvallis, OR, 97331, USA. dave.dallas@oregonstate.edu.

Previous work demonstrates that proteases present in human milk release hundreds 
of peptides derived from milk proteins. However, the question of whether human 
milk protein digestion begins within the mammary gland remains incompletely 
answered. The primary objective of this study was to determine whether 
proteolytic degradation of human milk proteins into peptides begins within the 
mammary gland. The secondary objectives were to determine which milk proteases 
participate in the proteolysis and to predict which released peptides have 
bioactivity. Lactating mothers (n = 4) expressed their milk directly into a 
mixture of antiproteases on ice followed by immediate freezing of the milk to 
limit post-expression protease activity. Samples were analyzed for their peptide 
profiles via mass spectrometry and database searching. Peptidomics-based 
protease prediction and bioactivity prediction were each performed with several 
different approaches. The findings demonstrate that human milk contains more 
than 1,100 unique peptides derived from milk protein hydrolysis within the 
mammary gland. These peptides derived from 42 milk proteins and included 306 
potential bioactive peptides. Based on the peptidomics data, plasmin was 
predicted to be the milk protease most active in the hydrolysis of human milk 
proteins within the mammary gland. Milk proteases actively cleave milk proteins 
within the mammary gland, initiating the release of functional peptides. Thus, 
the directly breastfed infant receives partially pre-digested proteins and 
numerous bioactive peptides.

DOI: 10.1007/s10911-018-9388-0
PMCID: PMC5856648
PMID: 29464498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]