1. Biomol Ther (Seoul). 2018 Mar 1;26(2):130-138. doi:
10.4062/biomolther.2017.254.

Anti-Diabetic Effect of Cotreatment with Quercetin and Resveratrol in 
Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats.

Yang DK(1), Kang HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Biosafety Research Institute and Korea Zoonosis Research Institute, 
Center for Poultry Diseases Control, Chonbuk National University, Iksan 54596, 
Republic of Korea.

Quercetin and resveratrol are known to have beneficial effects on the diabetes 
and diabetic complication, however, the effects of combined treatment of these 
compounds on diabetes are not fully revealed. Therefore, the present study was 
designed to investigate the combined antidiabetic action of quercetin (QE) and 
resveratrol (RS) in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats. To test the 
effects of co-treated with these compounds on diabetes, serum glucose, insulin, 
lipid profiles, oxidative stress biomarkers, and ions were determined. 
Additionally, the activities of hepatic glucose metabolic enzymes and 
histological analyses of pancreatic tissues were evaluated. 50 male 
Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into five groups; normal control, 50 mg/kg 
STZ-induced diabetic, and three (30 mg/kg QE, 10 mg/kg RS, and combined) 
compound-treated diabetic groups. The elevated serum blood glucose levels, 
insulin levels, and dyslipidemia in diabetic rats were significantly improved by 
QE, RS, and combined treatments. Oxidative stress and tissue injury biomarkers 
were dramatically inhibited by these compounds. They also shown to improve the 
hematological parameters which were shown to the hyperlactatemia and 
ketoacidosis as main causes of diabetic complications. The compounds treatment 
maintained the activities of hepatic glucose metabolic enzymes and structure of 
pancreatic Î²-cells from the diabetes, and it is noteworthy that cotreatment with 
QE and RS showed the most preventive effect on the diabetic rats. Therefore, our 
study suggests that cotreatment with QE and RS has beneficial effects against 
diabetes. We further suggest that cotreatment with QE and RS has the potential 
for use as an alternative therapeutic strategy for diabetes.

DOI: 10.4062/biomolther.2017.254
PMCID: PMC5839491
PMID: 29462848

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have declared 
that there are no conflicts of interest associated with this manuscript.