1. Genetics. 2018 Apr;208(4):1553-1564. doi: 10.1534/genetics.118.300834. Epub
2018  Feb 23.

Regulation of Glutamate Signaling in the Sensorimotor Circuit by 
CASY-1A/Calsyntenin in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Thapliyal S(1), Ravindranath S(1), Babu K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER), Manauli, Mohali 140306, Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER), Manauli, Mohali 140306, Punjab, India 
kavitababu@iisermohali.ac.in kavita.babu@babulab.org.

Locomotion is one of the most prominent behaviors in the nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans Neuronal circuits that ultimately produce coordinated dorso-ventral 
sinusoidal bends mediate this behavior. Synchronized locomotion requires an 
intricate balance between excitation and inhibition at the neuromuscular 
junctions (NMJ), the complex cellular and molecular mechanisms of which are not 
fully understood. Here, we describe the role of a cell adhesion molecule CASY-1, 
which functions to maintain this balance at the NMJ. In this study, we dissect 
out mechanisms by which the longer CASY-1A isoform could be affecting the 
excitatory cholinergic signaling at the NMJ by modulating the activity of 
sensory neurons. Mutants in casy-1 appear to have hyperactive sensory neurons, 
resulting in accelerated locomotion and motor circuit activity. These sensory 
neurons mediate increased motor activity via enhanced glutamate release. Using 
genetic, pharmacological, and optogenetic manipulations, we establish that 
CASY-1A is required to monitor the activity of these neurons. Our study 
illustrates a novel neuromodulatory role of CASY-1-mediated signaling in 
regulating the excitation-inhibition balance of the motor circuit.

Copyright Â© 2018 Thapliyal et al.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.118.300834
PMCID: PMC5887148
PMID: 29475851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]