1. Int J Neurosci. 2018 Oct;128(10):920-927. doi: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1436544.

Tissue inhibitor of the metalloproteinases-3 gene polymorphisms and carotid 
plaque susceptibility in the Han Chinese population.

Zheng Z(1), He X(1), Zhu M(2), Jin X(1), Li C(1), Zhu F(1), Lv C(1), Li W(1), Hu 
X(1), Wang W(1), Wang F(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology, Taizhou Hospital , Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou 
Medical College, Taizhou , Zhejiang , China.
(2)b Taizhou Hospital , Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical College , Medical 
Research Center , Taizhou , Zhejiang , China.

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are endogenous inhibitors of 
matrix metalloproteinases that are involved in normal cellular processes and in 
the development and progression of atherosclerosis. Our purpose was to evaluate 
the polymorphisms of the TIMP-3 genes for their associations with carotid 
plaques or with serum protein levels in the Han Chinese population. Two promoter 
variants, -915A/G (rs2234921) and -1296T/C (rs9619311), were genotyped in 548 
subjects with no plaques, 462 subjects with echogenic plaques, and 427 subjects 
with mixture plaques. The serum TIMP-3 levels were measured using an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). There was a strong linkage 
disequilibrium between -1296T/C and -915A/G (D' = 1.0, r2 = 0.991). The 
individuals with the genotype (TC+CC) were 1.8Â times more likely to have mixture 
plaques than the individuals with the TT genotype (P = 0.001, OR: 1.836, 95%CI: 
1.269-2.665). The frequency of the C allele in the mixture plaque group was 
significantly higher than in the no plaque group (P = 0.009, CI: 1.119-2.187). 
We observed a significant elevation of the TIMP-3 levels in the serum of 
patients affected with mixture plaques compared to those with no plaques (P = 
0.013). The current data suggest that genetic variation in the TIMP-3 genes may 
contribute to individual differences in mixture plaque susceptibility in the Han 
Chinese population.

DOI: 10.1080/00207454.2018.1436544
PMID: 29498555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]