1. Sci Adv. 2018 Feb 21;4(2):e1701729. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1701729. eCollection 
2018 Feb.

Allele-specific long-distance regulation dictates IL-32 isoform switching and 
mediates susceptibility to HIV-1.

Palstra RJ(1), de Crignis E(1), Röling MD(1), van Staveren T(1), Kan TW(1), van 
Ijcken W(2), Mueller YM(3), Katsikis PD(3), Mahmoudi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Erasmus University Medical Center, Ee-634, PO Box 
2040, 3000CA Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Erasmus Center for Biomics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Ee-671, PO Box 
2040, 3000CA Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Immunology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Na-1218, PO Box 
2040, 3000CA Rotterdam, Netherlands.

We integrated data obtained from HIV-1 genome-wide association studies with T 
cell-derived epigenome data and found that the noncoding intergenic variant 
rs4349147, which is statistically associated with HIV-1 acquisition, is located 
in a CD4+ T cell-specific deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive region, suggesting 
regulatory potential for this variant. Deletion of the rs4349147 element in 
Jurkat cells strongly reduced expression of interleukin-32 (IL-32), 
approximately 10-kb upstream, and chromosome conformation capture assays 
identified a chromatin loop between rs4349147 and the IL-32 promoter validating 
its function as a long-distance enhancer. We generated single rs4349147-A or 
rs4349147-G allele clones and demonstrated that IL-32 enhancer activity and 
interaction with the IL-32 promoter are strongly allele dependent; rs4349147 -/A 
cells display reduced IL-32 expression and altered chromatin conformation as 
compared to rs4349147 G/- cells. Moreover, RNA sequencing demonstrated that 
rs4349147 G/- cells express a lower relative ratio of IL-32α to non-α isoforms 
than rs4349147 -/A cells and display increased expression of lymphocyte 
activation factors rendering them more prone to infection with HIV-1. In 
agreement, in primary CD4+ T cells, both treatment with recombinant IL-32γ 
(rIL-32γ) but not rIL-32α, and exogenous lentiviral overexpression of IL-32γ or 
IL-32β but not IL-32α resulted in a proinflammatory T cell cytokine environment 
concomitant with increased susceptibility to HIV infection. Our data demonstrate 
that rs4349147-G promotes transcription of non-IL-32α isoforms, generating a 
proinflammatory environment more conducive to HIV infection. This study provides 
a mechanistic link between a HIV-associated noncoding DNA variant and the 
expression of different IL-32 isoforms that display discrete anti-HIV 
properties.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.1701729
PMCID: PMC5833994
PMID: 29507875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]