1. Int J Epidemiol. 2018 Jun 1;47(3):899-907. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyy025.

Apolipoprotein E DNA methylation and late-life disease.

Karlsson IK(1), Ploner A(1), Wang Y(1), Gatz M(1)(2), Pedersen NL(1)(2), Hägg 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to investigate if DNA methylation of the 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) locus affects the risks of dementia, Alzheimeŕs disease 
(AD) or cardiovascular disease (CVD).
METHODS: DNA methylation across the APOE gene has previously been categorized 
into three distinct regions: a hypermethylated region in the promoter, a 
hypomethylated region in the first two introns and exons and a hypermethylated 
region in the 3'exon that also harbours the APOE ε2 and ε4 alleles. DNA 
methylation levels in leukocytes were measured using the Illumina 450K array in 
447 Swedish twins (mean age 78.1 years). We used logistic regression to 
investigate whether methylation levels in those regions affect the odds of 
disease.
RESULTS: We found that methylation levels in the promoter region were associated 
with dementia and AD after adjusting for sex, age at blood draw, education, 
smoking and relatedness among twins [odds ratio (OR) 1.32 per standard deviation 
increase in methylation levels, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.08-1.62 for 
dementia; OR 1.38, 95% CI 1.07-1.78 for AD). We did not detect any difference in 
methylation levels between CVD cases and controls. Results were similar when 
comparing within discordant twin pairs, and did not differ as a function of APOE 
genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that higher DNA methylation levels in the promoter region 
of APOE increase the odds of dementia and AD, but not CVD. The effect was 
independent of APOE genotype, indicating that allelic variation and methylation 
variation in APOE may act independently to increase the risk of dementia.

© The Author(s) 2018; all rights reserved. Published by Oxford University Press 
on behalf of the International Epidemiological Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyy025
PMCID: PMC7263750
PMID: 29509901