1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Mar 5;14(3):e1006024. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006024.  eCollection 2018 Mar.

Free energy profiles for unwrapping the outer superhelical turn of nucleosomal 
DNA.

Kono H(1), Sakuraba S(2), Ishida H(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Modeling and Simulation Group, Department of Quantum Beam Life 
Science, National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and 
Technology, Umemidai, Kizugawa, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwanoha, 
Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 Oct 9;15(10):e1007439. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007439.

The eukaryotic genome is packaged into a nucleus in the form of chromatin. The 
fundamental structural unit of chromatin is a protein-DNA complex, the 
nucleosome, where 146 or 147 base pairs of DNA wrap 1.75 times around a histone 
core. To function in cellular processes, however, nucleosomal DNA must be 
unwrapped. Although this unwrapping has been experimentally investigated, 
details of the process at an atomic level are not yet well understood. Here, we 
used molecular dynamics simulation with an enhanced sampling method to calculate 
the free energy profiles for unwrapping the outer superhelical turn of 
nucleosomal DNA. A free energy change of about 11.5 kcal/mol for the unwrapping 
agrees well with values obtained in single molecule experiments. This simulation 
revealed a variety of conformational states, indicating there are many potential 
paths to outer superhelicdal turn unwrapping, but the dominant path is likely 
asymmetric. At one end of the DNA, the first five bps unwrap, after which a 
second five bps unwrap at the same end with no increase in free energy. The 
unwrapping then starts at the other end of the DNA, where 10 bps are unwrapped. 
During further unwrapping of 15 bps, the unwrapping advances at one of the ends, 
after which the other end of the DNA unwraps to complete the unwrapping of the 
outer superhelical turn. These results provide insight into the construction, 
disruption, and repositioning of nucleosomes, which are continuously ongoing 
during cellular processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006024
PMCID: PMC5854429
PMID: 29505570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.