1. Front Neurosci. 2018 Feb 20;12:85. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00085. eCollection 
2018.

Epitranscriptomics: A New Regulatory Mechanism of Brain Development and 
Function.

Noack F(1), Calegari F(1).

Author information:
(1)DFG-Research Center and Cluster of Excellence for Regenerative Therapies, 
Dresden, Germany.

Epigenetic modifications of DNA and chromatin are long known to control stem 
cell differentiation and organ function but the role of similar modifications at 
the level or regulatory RNAs is just beginning to emerge. Over 160 RNA 
modifications have been identified but their abundance, distribution and 
functional significance are not known. The few available maps of RNA 
modifications indicated their dynamic regulation during somatic stem cell 
differentiation, brain development and function in adulthood suggesting a 
hitherto unsuspected layer of regulation both at the level of RNA metabolism and 
post-transcriptional control of gene expression. The advent of programmable, 
RNA-specific CRISPR-Cas editing platforms together with the identification of 
RNA modifying enzymes now offers the opportunity to investigate the functional 
role of these elusive epitranscriptome changes. Here, we discuss recent insights 
in studying the most abundant modifications in functional mRNAs and lncRNAs, 
N6-methyladenosine and 5-(hydroxy-)methylcytosine, and their role in regulating 
somatic stem cell differentiation with particular attention to neural stem cells 
during mammalian corticogenesis. An outlook on novel CRISPR-Cas based systems 
that allow stem cell reprogramming by epitranscriptome-editing will also be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00085
PMCID: PMC5826231
PMID: 29515357