1. Sensors (Basel). 2018 Mar 3;18(3):770. doi: 10.3390/s18030770.

Forward Behavioral Modeling of a Three-Way Amplitude Modulator-Based Transmitter 
Using an Augmented Memory Polynomial.

Chatrath J(1), Aziz M(2), Helaoui M(3).

Author information:
(1)iRadio Lab, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Calgary, 2500 University Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada. 
jatin.chatrath2@ucalgary.ca.
(2)iRadio Lab, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Calgary, 2500 University Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada. azizm@ucalgary.ca.
(3)iRadio Lab, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Calgary, 2500 University Dr. NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada. 
mhelaoui@ucalgary.ca.

Reconfigurable and multi-standard RF front-ends for wireless communication and 
sensor networks have gained importance as building blocks for the Internet of 
Things. Simpler and highly-efficient transmitter architectures, which can 
transmit better quality signals with reduced impairments, are an important step 
in this direction. In this regard, mixer-less transmitter architecture, namely, 
the three-way amplitude modulator-based transmitter, avoids the use of imperfect 
mixers and frequency up-converters, and their resulting distortions, leading to 
an improved signal quality. In this work, an augmented memory polynomial-based 
model for the behavioral modeling of such mixer-less transmitter architecture is 
proposed. Extensive simulations and measurements have been carried out in order 
to validate the accuracy of the proposed modeling strategy. The performance of 
the proposed model is evaluated using normalized mean square error (NMSE) for 
long-term evolution (LTE) signals. NMSE for a LTE signal of 1.4 MHz bandwidth 
with 100,000 samples for digital combining and analog combining are recorded as 
-36.41 dB and -36.9 dB, respectively. Similarly, for a 5 MHz signal the proposed 
models achieves -31.93 dB and -32.08 dB NMSE using digital and analog combining, 
respectively. For further validation of the proposed model, 
amplitude-to-amplitude (AM-AM), amplitude-to-phase (AM-PM), and the spectral 
response of the modeled and measured data are plotted, reasonably meeting the 
desired modeling criteria.

DOI: 10.3390/s18030770
PMCID: PMC5876732
PMID: 29510501

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.