1. Sci Signal. 2018 Mar 6;11(520):eaao1818. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aao1818.

Splenic leukocytes define the resolution of inflammation in heart failure.

Halade GV(1), Norris PC(2), Kain V(3), Serhan CN(2), Ingle KA(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. ganeshhalade@uabmc.edu.
(2)Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Department of 
Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Inflammation promotes healing in myocardial infarction but, if unresolved, leads 
to heart failure. To define the inflammatory and resolving responses, we 
quantified leukocyte trafficking and specialized proresolving mediators (SPMs) 
in the infarcted left ventricle and spleen after myocardial infarction, with the 
goal of distinguishing inflammation from its resolution. Our data suggest that 
the spleen not only served as a leukocyte reservoir but also was the site where 
SPMs were actively generated after coronary ligation in mice. Before myocardial 
infarction, SPMs were more abundant in the spleen than in the left ventricle. At 
day 1 after coronary ligation, the spleen was depleted of leukocytes, a 
phenomenon that was associated with greater numbers of leukocytes in the 
infarcted left ventricle and increased generation of SPMs at the same site, 
particularly resolvins, maresin, lipoxins, and protectin. In addition, the 
infarcted left ventricle showed increased expression of genes encoding 
lipoxygenases and enhanced production of SPMs generated by these enzymes. We 
found that macrophages were necessary for SPM generation. The abundance of SPMs 
in the spleen before myocardial infarction and increased SPM concentrations in 
the infarcted left ventricle within 24 hours after myocardial infarction were 
temporally correlated with the resolution of inflammation. Thus, the acute 
inflammatory response coincided with the active resolving phase in 
post-myocardial infarction and suggests that further investigation into 
macrophage-derived SPMs in heart failure is warranted.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aao1818
PMCID: PMC6145858
PMID: 29511119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.