1. Cancer Gene Ther. 2018 Jun;25(5-6):117-128. doi: 10.1038/s41417-018-0012-7.
Epub  2018 Mar 7.

T-bet promotes potent antitumor activity of CD4(+) CAR T cells.

Gacerez AT(1), Sentman CL(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Synthetic Immunity and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, 03756, USA.
(2)Center for Synthetic Immunity and the Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, 03756, USA. 
Charles.L.Sentman@dartmouth.edu.

Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) therapy has shown promise against B cell 
malignancies in the clinic. However, limited success in patients with solid 
tumors has prompted the development of new CAR strategies. In this study, a 
B7H6-specific CAR was combined with different variants of T-bet, a transcription 
factor that acts as the master regulator to induce a Th1 phenotype in CD4+ T 
cells, to create more effective CAR T cells. Skewing CD4+ CAR T cells into a Th1 
improved CAR T cell functional activity while promoting a robust proinflammatory 
response against B7H6-expressing tumors. The expression of T-bet with the 
B7H6-specific CAR in CD4+ T cells conferred higher expression of the CAR, 
elevated secretion of Th1 and proinflammatory cytokines, and improved cellular 
cytotoxicity against B7H6-expressing tumor cells. In vivo, CD4+ T cells 
co-expressing a B7H6-specific CAR and T-bet improved the survival of RMA-B7H6 
lymphoma-bearing mice. Thus, CD4+ CAR T cells with increased T-bet expression 
have the potential to modify the tumor microenvironment and the immune response 
to better treat solid and hematologic cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/s41417-018-0012-7
PMCID: PMC6021366
PMID: 29515240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ATG and CLS have patent applications in CAR 
therapies and cell engineering. These conflicts are managed under the policies 
of Dartmouth College.