1. Br J Biomed Sci. 2018 Apr;75(2):76-81. doi: 10.1080/09674845.2017.1399572.
Epub  2018 Mar 9.

Effects of miR-27a, miR-196a2 and miR-146a polymorphisms on the risk of breast 
cancer.

Mashayekhi S(1), Saeidi Saedi H(2), Salehi Z(3), Soltanipour S(4), Mirzajani 
E(5).

Author information:
(1)a Student Research Committee , Guilan University of Medical Sciences , Rasht 
, Iran.
(2)b Department of Radiation Oncology, Cancer Research Center , Guilan 
University of Medical Sciences (GUMS) , Rasht , Iran.
(3)c Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences , University of Guilan , Rasht , 
Iran.
(4)d Department of Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine , Guilan University 
of Medical Sciences , Rasht , Iran.
(5)e Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Faculty of Medicine , Guilan 
University of Medical Sciences , Rasht , Iran.

Background microRNAs (miRNAs) are potentially involved in many 
physiopathological processes, including regulation of cell growth, 
differentiation, apoptosis and cancer. Single nucleotide polymorphisms of the 
genes encoding miRNAs can alter their expression and may influence cancer risks. 
This case-control study explored the relationship between three microRNA 
polymorphisms (miR-27a, miR-196a2 and miR -146a) and breast cancer (BC). Methods 
A total of 353 breast cancer cases and 353 controls were genotyped for miR-27a 
(rs895819), miR-196a2 (rs11614913) and miR -146a (rs2910164). The miR-27a and 
miR-146a variants were discriminated using a PCR-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism method, while miR-196a2 were analysed by tetra-primers 
amplification refractory mutation system PCR. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% 
confidence intervals (95% CIs) were used to estimate associations. Results The 
CC homozygous genotype of miR-146a (rs2910164) was seen in 45(12.7%) patients 
with breast cancer and 18(5.1%) controls (OR 4.09 [95%CI 2.19-7.67] p < 0.001). 
The minor allele G of miR-27a was associated with a decreased risk of breast 
cancer (OR 0.24 [95% CI 0.14-0.42] p < 0.001). The miR-196a2 (rs11614913) was 
not related to breast cancer (p > 0.05). Conclusion Our data indicate that 
miR-146a (rs2910164) and miR-27a (rs895819) variants contribute to breast 
cancer. Further studies in larger populations including other genetic and 
environmental factors are required to achieve a definitive conclusion.

DOI: 10.1080/09674845.2017.1399572
PMID: 29521182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]