1. Lipids Health Dis. 2018 Mar 9;17(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s12944-018-0693-9.

Omega-6/omega-3 fatty acid intake of children and older adults in the U.S.: 
dietary intake in comparison to current dietary recommendations and the Healthy 
Eating Index.

Sheppard KW(1), Cheatham CL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biobehavioral Health, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, OH, 43205, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, 235 E. Cameron Ave, Chapel Hill, NC, 27514, USA. 
carol_cheatham@unc.edu.
(3)Nutrition Research Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
500 Laureate Way Rm 1101, Kannapolis, NC, 28081, USA. carol_cheatham@unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids (FAs) and their ratio have been 
shown to affect cognitive function in children and older adults. With these 
analyses, we aimed to describe omega-6 and omega-3 FA intake among children and 
older adults in light of FA intake recommendations and with consideration of 
overall diet.
METHODS: Data were merged from two cross-sectional studies with 219 children 7 
to 12 years old and one longitudinal study with 133 adults 65 to 79 years old. 
Demographic data, anthropometric data, and Healthy Eating Index scores were used 
to study relations among the omega-6 to omega-3 FA ratio and age, education, 
body mass index, and diet quality. FA intake, demographic, and anthropometric 
data were examined using partial correlations, t-tests, and analysis of 
variance.
RESULTS: Most children and adults consumed at least the recommended amount of 
alpha-linolenic acid (LNA; omega-3) for their age and gender without consuming 
high amounts of linoleic acid (LA; omega-6), but did not consume sufficient 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA; omega-) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA; omega-3). The 
average omega-6 to omega-3 ratios in both groups were lower than previously 
reported. Eating lower ratios was associated with healthier diets and consuming 
adequate amounts of several other nutrients. No demographic or anthropometric 
variables were related to FA intake in children. Adults with a college degree 
had significantly lower ratios than those without a college degree.
CONCLUSIONS: American children and older adults are able to consume more 
balanced omega-6 to omega-3 ratios than has been indicated by commodity data. 
However, very few American children met even the lowest recommendations for EPA 
and DHA intake. Research is needed to clarify recommendations for the optimal 
ratio across development, which may aid in increasing EPA and DHA intake and 
improving health outcomes in the United States.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02199808 13 July 2014, NCT01823419 
(retrospectively registered) 20 March 2013, and NCT01515098 18 January 2012.

DOI: 10.1186/s12944-018-0693-9
PMCID: PMC5845148
PMID: 29523147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ INFORMATION: ORCID IDs: Cheatham: 
0000–0002–8841-0105; Sheppard: 0000–0002–3412-8649. ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT 
TO PARTICIPATE: The trials that contributed data to these analyses were approved 
by the University of North Carolina Institutional Review Board, and were 
conducted in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later 
amendments. All adult participants provided written informed consent, and all 
children provided written assent and had a parent or legal guardian provide 
written parental permission. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.