1. Neuropathology. 2018 Jun;38(3):218-227. doi: 10.1111/neup.12459. Epub 2018 Mar
 13.

Clinicopathological and genetic association between epithelioid glioblastoma and 
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma.

Furuta T(1), Miyoshi H(1), Komaki S(1)(2), Arakawa F(1), Morioka M(2), Ohshima 
K(1), Nakada M(3), Sugita Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Division of Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.

Epithelioid glioblastoma (eGBM) is a rare variant of GBM which was adopted in 
the 2016 WHO classification. eGBM and pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) 
sometimes show overlapping features histologically and genetically, such as 
epithelioid pattern and a highly frequent V600E mutation in the gene for vRAF 
murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF), respectively. Accurate 
diagnosis of these rare tumors is challenging according to the new criteria in 
the revised 2016 WHO classification. It is an urgent task to elucidate the 
biological properties of the tumors and to select appropriate treatment. Twenty 
consecutive cases diagnosed as PXA or eGBM histologically were investigated. 
Twelve of the 20 cases were PXAs and eight were eGBMs. Morphologically, mitotic 
activity, necrosis and degenerative changes such as intracellular lipid 
accumulation, eosinophilic granular bodies and reticulin fiber deposits were 
scored. Immunohistochemical and molecular biological assessment for isocitrate 
dehydrogenases 1 and 2 (IDH1/2), 
α-thalassemia/mental-retardation-syndrome-X-linked gene (ATRX), p53, BRAF, 
telomere reverse transcriptase promoter (TERT-p), H3F3A, and integrase 
interactor 1 (INI1) were performed. eGBM tended to lack the degenerative changes 
characteristic for PXA. Of the 20 cases tested, Sanger technique showed no 
mutation in IDH1/2. BRAF mutation at T1799 > A (V600E) was detected in 4/12 
(33.3%) PXA and 4/8 (50.0%) eGBM, while TERT-p mutation was detected at C228 > T 
in 2/12 (16.7%) PXA and at C250 > T in 1/8 (12.5%) eGBM. Retained nuclear ATRX 
was observed in 12/12 (100%) PXA and 6/7 (85.7%) eGBM while p53 mutation was 
observed in 2/10 (20%) PXA and 7/7 (100%) eGBM. All tumors retained INI1 
expression in their nuclei. None of the tumors harbored H3F3A mutation. One PXA 
without BRAF mutation acquired TERT-p mutation at recurrence and one eGBM 
harbored both BRAF and TERT-p mutation. Molecular biological similarity between 
eGBM and PXA was suggested in our series, while degenerative changes reflected 
the features of PXA. It was speculated that the common genetic alterations for 
development and progression of eGBM and PXA might include BRAF and TERT-p 
mutations.

© 2018 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12459
PMID: 29532523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]