1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Feb 27;9:348. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00348. eCollection
 2018.

RovM and CsrA Negatively Regulate Urease Expression in Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis.

Dai Q(1), Xu L(2)(3), Xiao L(1), Zhu K(1), Song Y(2), Li C(1), Zhu L(2), Shen 
X(2)(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas and College of 
Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.
(3)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Agricultural and Environmental Microbiology, 
College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, China.

Urease acts as an important acid resistance system and virulence factor that is 
widespread among microorganisms. RovM is a global regulator that regulates a 
series of genes and pathways including acid survival systems in the enteric 
bacterium Yersinia pseudotuberculosis (Yptb). However, whether RovM regulates 
the urease activity in Yptb was still unknown. In this study, by using 
qualitative and quantitative urease assays, we show that the urease expression 
responds to nutrient conditions and the RovM protein represses urease expression 
by binding to its promoter. A previously reported positive regulator OmpR 
activates urease activity but RovM plays a dominant role in different nutrient 
conditions. In addition, carbon storage regulator system A (CsrA), the upstream 
regulator of RovM, dramatically down-regulates urease activity possibly by its 
binding to the Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence of the mRNA encoding the urease. In 
conclusion, this study demonstrates that urease activity is strictly controlled 
by nutrient conditions and is down-regulated by the CsrA-RovM pathway.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00348
PMCID: PMC5835112
PMID: 29535702