1. J Immunol. 2018 Apr 15;200(8):2563-2570. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701200. Epub 
2018 Mar 12.

Biotin Deficiency Induces Th1- and Th17-Mediated Proinflammatory Responses in 
Human CD4(+) T Lymphocytes via Activation of the mTOR Signaling Pathway.

Elahi A(1)(2)(3), Sabui S(1)(2)(3), Narasappa NN(2), Agrawal S(2), Lambrecht 
NW(1), Agrawal A(4), Said HM(5)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long Beach, 
CA 90822.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697; 
and.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, 
Irvine, CA 92697.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697; 
and hmsaid@uci.edu aagrawal@uci.edu.
(5)Department of Medical Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long Beach, 
CA 90822; hmsaid@uci.edu aagrawal@uci.edu.

Biotin (vitamin B7) is essential for human health because of its involvement, as 
a cofactor, in a variety of critical cellular metabolic reactions. Previous 
studies have shown that biotin deficiency enhances inflammation, and certain 
chronic inflammatory diseases are associated with biotin deficiency; however, 
the mechanisms that mediate the association between biotin status and 
inflammation are not well understood. In this study, we examined the effect of 
biotin deficiency on human CD4+ T cell responses to determine their role in 
biotin deficiency-associated inflammation. Our investigations revealed that 
anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated CD4+ T cells cultured in biotin-deficient medium 
secreted significantly enhanced levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IFN-γ, 
TNF, and IL-17. Expression of the transcription factors T-bet and RORγt was 
increased, whereas Foxp3 expression was decreased, in biotin-deficient CD4+ T 
cells. The percentage of T regulatory cells was also decreased under 
biotin-deficient condition. A similar increase in T-bet, RORγt, and 
proinflammatory cytokine levels, as well as a decrease in Foxp3, was observed in 
inguinal lymph nodes of mice fed a biotin-deficient diet relative to pair-fed 
controls. Furthermore, differentiation of CD4+ T cells toward Th1 and Th17 cells 
was also enhanced. In vitro and in vivo investigations indicated that the 
increased inflammatory response was due to enhanced activation of the mammalian 
target of rapamycin signaling pathway in biotin-deficient CD4+ T cells. In 
summary, these results demonstrate that biotin deficiency enhances the 
inflammatory responses in CD4+ T cells, which may contribute to inflammation 
associated with biotin deficiency.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1701200
PMCID: PMC5893381
PMID: 29531163

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no financial 
conflicts of interest.