1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 14;13(3):e0194206. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194206. 
eCollection 2018.

Tis21-gene therapy inhibits medulloblastoma growth in a murine allograft model.

Presutti D(1), Ceccarelli M(2), Micheli L(2), Papoff G(1), Santini S(1), 
Samperna S(1), Lalli C(1), Zentilin L(3), Ruberti G(1), Tirone F(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, National Research Council 
(IBCN-CNR), Monterotondo, Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, National Research Council 
(IBCN-CNR), Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
(3)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), 
Padriciano, Trieste, Italy.

Medulloblastoma (MB), the tumor of the cerebellum, is the most frequent brain 
cancer in childhood and a major cause of pediatric mortality. Based on gene 
profiling, four MB subgroups have been identified, i.e., Wnt or Sonic Hedgehog 
(Shh) types, and subgroup 3 or 4. The Shh-type MB has been shown to arise from 
the cerebellar precursors of granule neurons (GCPs), where a hyperactivation of 
the Shh pathway leads to their neoplastic transformation. We have previously 
shown that the gene Tis21 (PC3/Btg2) inhibits the proliferation and promotes the 
differentiation and migration of GCPs. Moreover, the overexpression or the 
deletion of Tis21 in Patched1 heterozygous mice, a model of spontaneous Shh-type 
MB, highly reduces or increases, respectively, the frequency of MB. Here we 
tested whether Tis21 can inhibit MB allografts. Athymic nude mice were 
subcutaneously grafted with MB cells explanted from Patched1 heterozygous mice. 
MB allografts were then injected with adeno-associated viruses either carrying 
Tis21 (AAV-Tis21) or empty (AAV-CBA). We observed that the treatment with 
AAV-Tis21 significantly inhibited the growth of tumor nodules, as judged by 
their volume, and reduced the number of proliferating tumor cells (labeled with 
Ki67 or BrdU), relative to AAV-CBA-treated control mice. In parallel, AAV-Tis21 
increased significantly tumor cells labeled with early and late neural 
differentiation markers. Overall the results suggest that Tis21-gene therapy 
slows down MB tumor growth through inhibition of proliferation and enhancement 
of neural differentiation. These results validate Tis21 as a relevant target for 
MB therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194206
PMCID: PMC5851620
PMID: 29538458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.