1. PLoS One. 2018 Mar 16;13(3):e0194399. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194399. 
eCollection 2018.

Multi-color fluorescent reporter dengue viruses with improved stability for 
analysis of a multi-virus infection.

Suphatrakul A(1), Duangchinda T(1), Jupatanakul N(1), Prasittisa K(1), Onnome 
S(1), Pengon J(1), Siridechadilok B(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Klong Luang, 
Pathumthani, Thailand.

Reporter virus is a versatile tool to visualize and to analyze virus infections. 
However, for flaviviruses, it is difficult to maintain the inserted reporter 
genes on the viral genome, limiting its use in several studies that require 
homogeneous virus particles and several rounds of virus replication. Here, we 
showed that flanking inserted GFP genes on both sides with ribosome-skipping 2A 
sequences improved the stability and the consistency of their fluorescent 
signals for dengue-virus-serotype 2 (DENV2) reporter viruses. The reporter 
viruses can infect known susceptible mammalian cell lines and primary CD14+ 
human monocytes. This design can accommodate several fluorescent protein genes, 
enabling the generation of multi-color DENV2-16681 reporter viruses with 
comparable replication capabilities, as demonstrated by their abilities to 
maintain their fluorescent intensities during co-infections and to exclude 
superinfections regardless of the fluorescent tags. The reported design of 
multi-color DENV2 should be useful for high-throughput analyses, single-cell 
analysis, and characterizations of interference and superinfection in animal 
models.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0194399
PMCID: PMC5856417
PMID: 29547653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: We have submitted a patent 
application based on this report. The patent title is “Multi-color fluorescent 
reporter system for flaviviruses.” The patent application number is 1701005614. 
The patent application has been filed in Thailand. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.