1. Cancer Res. 2018 Apr 15;78(8):2081-2095. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-2254. 
Epub 2018 Mar 20.

Age-Dependent Cellular and Behavioral Deficits Induced by Molecularly Targeted 
Drugs Are Reversible.

Scafidi J(1)(2), Ritter J(2), Talbot BM(2), Edwards J(2), Chew LJ(2), Gallo 
V(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Children's National Health System, Washington, D.C. 
jscafidi@childrensnational.org.
(2)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's 
National Health System, Washington, D.C.

Newly developed targeted anticancer drugs inhibit signaling pathways commonly 
altered in adult and pediatric cancers. However, as these pathways are also 
essential for normal brain development, concerns have emerged of neurologic 
sequelae resulting specifically from their application in pediatric cancers. The 
neural substrates and age dependency of these drug-induced effects in vivo are 
unknown, and their long-term behavioral consequences have not been 
characterized. This study defines the age-dependent cellular and behavioral 
effects of these drugs on normally developing brains and determines their 
reversibility with post-drug intervention. Mice at different postnatal ages 
received short courses of molecularly targeted drugs in regimens analagous to 
clinical treatment. Analysis of rapidly developing brain structures important 
for sensorimotor and cognitive function showed that, while adult administration 
was without effect, earlier neonatal administration of targeted therapies 
attenuated white matter oligodendroglia and hippocampal neuronal development 
more profoundly than later administration, leading to long-lasting behavioral 
deficits. This functional impairment was reversed by rehabilitation with 
physical and cognitive enrichment. Our findings demonstrate age-dependent, 
reversible effects of these drugs on brain development, which are important 
considerations as treatment options expand for pediatric cancers.Significance: 
Targeted therapeutics elicit age-dependent long-term consequences on the 
developing brain that can be ameliorated with environmental enrichment. Cancer 
Res; 78(8); 2081-95. ©2018 AACR.

©2018 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-2254
PMCID: PMC5899652
PMID: 29559476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have no 
conflict of interests.