1. Thromb Haemost. 2018 Apr;118(4):709-722. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1637749. Epub
2018  Mar 19.

Genetic and Functional Characterization of ADAMTS13 Variants in a Patient Cohort 
with Upshaw-Schulman Syndrome Investigated in Germany.

Hassenpflug WA(1), Obser T(1), Bode J(1), Oyen F(1), Budde U(2), Schneppenheim 
S(2), Schneppenheim R(1), Brehm MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Centre 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Haemostaseology, MEDILYS Laborgesellschaft mbH, Hamburg, 
Germany.

Upshaw-Schulman syndrome (USS) is caused by severe ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and 
metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) deficiency due 
to homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ADAMTS13 gene. Previous 
studies suggest three possible disease mechanisms: (1) reduced secretion of 
ADAMTS13 variants, (2) impaired proteolytic activity, (3) defective biosynthesis 
due to nonsense-mediated decay. Expression studies have failed to establish a 
clear genotype/phenotype correlation that could explain the significant 
variability in the age of onset and patients' clinical courses. In this study, 
we investigated ADAMTS13 sequence variations in 30 USS patients and identified 
31 disease-causing mutations; among them 10 novel variants. While none of the 
recombinant proteins exhibited significant retention in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, secretion and activity analysis revealed defective release for all 
but one missense mutant. The latter exhibited normal secretion but impaired 
activity due to inactivation of the catalytic domain. Truncated mutants showed 
secretion and residual activity even though the patients suffered from a severe 
phenotype. The expression systems which we used may not be appropriate here, as 
they do not assess nonsense-mediated decay causing degradation of mRNA. In some 
patients, phenotypic severity could be explained by the combined effects of two 
mutations. Genetic screening in combination with in vitro characterization of 
ADAMTS13 variants from both alleles is a valuable tool to predict the phenotypic 
severity of USS. When necessary, supplementary methods, such as kinetics under 
flow conditions and mRNA processing assays, can be included. Such data are 
helpful to identify patients who are at high risk for severe attacks and 
therefore might benefit from prophylactic treatment.

Schattauer GmbH Stuttgart.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1637749
PMID: 29554699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.