1. Elife. 2018 Mar 22;7:e35574. doi: 10.7554/eLife.35574.

A gene-specific T2A-GAL4 library for Drosophila.

Lee PT(1), Zirin J(2), Kanca O(1), Lin WW(1), Schulze KL(1)(3), Li-Kroeger D(1), 
Tao R(2), Devereaux C(2), Hu Y(2), Chung V(2), Fang Y(1), He Y(1)(3), Pan 
H(1)(3), Ge M(1), Zuo Z(1)(4), Housden BE(2), Mohr SE(2)(5), Yamamoto 
S(1)(4)(6)(7), Levis RW(8), Spradling AC(8), Perrimon N(2)(5), Bellen 
HJ(1)(3)(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, United States.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, United 
States.
(4)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, United States.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United 
States.
(6)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, United 
States.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, United 
States.
(8)Department of Embryology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Carnegie 
Institution for Science, Baltimore, United States.

We generated a library of ~1000 Drosophila stocks in which we inserted a 
construct in the intron of genes allowing expression of GAL4 under control of 
endogenous promoters while arresting transcription with a polyadenylation signal 
3' of the GAL4. This allows numerous applications. First, ~90% of insertions in 
essential genes cause a severe loss-of-function phenotype, an effective way to 
mutagenize genes. Interestingly, 12/14 chromosomes engineered through CRISPR do 
not carry second-site lethal mutations. Second, 26/36 (70%) of lethal insertions 
tested are rescued with a single UAS-cDNA construct. Third, loss-of-function 
phenotypes associated with many GAL4 insertions can be reverted by excision with 
UAS-flippase. Fourth, GAL4 driven UAS-GFP/RFP reports tissue and cell-type 
specificity of gene expression with high sensitivity. We report the expression 
of hundreds of genes not previously reported. Finally, inserted cassettes can be 
replaced with GFP or any DNA. These stocks comprise a powerful resource for 
assessing gene function.

Â© 2018, Lee et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.35574
PMCID: PMC5898912
PMID: 29565247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: PL, JZ, OK, WL, KS, DL, RT, CD, YH, VC, YF, YH, 
HP, MG, ZZ, BH, SM, SY, RL, NP No competing interests declared, AS, HB Reviewing 
editor, eLife