1. Redox Biol. 2018 Jun;16:314-321. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.03.009. Epub 2018
Mar  14.

Peroxidasin-mediated crosslinking of collagen IV is independent of NADPH 
oxidases.

Sirokmány G(1), Kovács HA(1), Lázár E(1), Kónya K(1), Donkó Á(1), Enyedi B(2), 
Grasberger H(3), Geiszt M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, PO Box 
259, H-1444 Budapest, Hungary; "Momentum" Peroxidase Enzyme Research Group of 
the Semmelweis University and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(2)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, PO Box 
259, H-1444 Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, PO Box 
259, H-1444 Budapest, Hungary; "Momentum" Peroxidase Enzyme Research Group of 
the Semmelweis University and the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary. Electronic address: geiszt.miklos@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.

Collagen IV is a major component of the basement membrane in epithelial tissues. 
The NC1 domains of collagen IV protomers are covalently linked together through 
sulfilimine bonds, the formation of which is catalyzed by peroxidasin. Although 
hydrogen peroxide is essential for this reaction, the exact source of the 
oxidant remains elusive. Members of the NOX/DUOX NADPH oxidase family are 
specifically devoted to the production of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. Our 
aim in this study was to find out if NADPH oxidases contribute in vivo to the 
formation of collagen IV sulfilimine crosslinks. We used multiple genetically 
modified in vivo model systems to provide a detailed assessment of this 
question. Our data indicate that in various peroxidasin-expressing tissues 
sulfilimine crosslinks between the NC1 domains of collagen IV can be readily 
detected in the absence of functioning NADPH oxidases. We also analyzed how 
subatmospheric oxygen levels influence the collagen IV network in 
collagen-producing cultured cells with rapid matrix turnover. We showed that 
collagen IV crosslinks remain intact even under strongly hypoxic conditions. Our 
hypothesis is that during collagen IV network formation PXDN cooperates with a 
NOX/DUOX-independent H2O2 source that is functional also at very low ambient 
oxygen levels.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.03.009
PMCID: PMC5952998
PMID: 29573705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]