1. J Bacteriol. 2018 May 24;200(12):e00092-18. doi: 10.1128/JB.00092-18. Print
2018  Jun 15.

One Intact Transmembrane Substrate Binding Site Is Sufficient for the Function 
of the Homodimeric Type I ATP-Binding Cassette Importer for Positively Charged 
Amino Acids Art(MP)(2) of Geobacillus stearothermophilus.

Heuveling J(1), Landmesser H(1), Schneider E(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biologie, Physiologie der Mikroorganismen, Humboldt-Universität 
zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institut für Biologie, Physiologie der Mikroorganismen, Humboldt-Universität 
zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany erwin.schneider@rz.hu-berlin.de.

ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transport systems comprise two transmembrane 
domains/subunits that form a translocation path and two nucleotide-binding 
domains/subunits that bind and hydrolyze ATP. Prokaryotic canonical ABC import 
systems require an extracellular substrate-binding protein for function. 
Knowledge of substrate-binding sites within the transmembrane subunits is 
scarce. Recent crystal structures of the ABC importer Art(QN)2 for positively 
charged amino acids of Thermoanerobacter tengcongensis revealed the presence of 
one substrate molecule in a defined binding pocket in each of the transmembrane 
subunits, ArtQ (J. Yu, J. Ge, J. Heuveling, E. Schneider, and M. Yang, Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 112:5243-5248, 2015, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1415037112). 
This finding raised the question of whether both sites must be loaded with 
substrate prior to initiation of the transport cycle. To address this matter, we 
first explored the role of key residues that form the binding pocket in the 
closely related Art(MP)2 transporter of Geobacillus stearothermophilus, by 
monitoring consequences of mutations in ArtM on ATPase and transport activity at 
the level of purified proteins embedded in liposomes. Our results emphasize that 
two negatively charged residues (E153 and D160) are crucial for wild-type 
function. Furthermore, the variant Art[M(L67D)P]2 exhibited strongly impaired 
activities, which is why it was considered for construction of a hybrid complex 
containing one intact and one impaired substrate-binding site. Activity assays 
clearly revealed that one intact binding site was sufficient for function. To 
our knowledge, our study provides the first biochemical evidence on 
transmembrane substrate-binding sites of an ABC importer.IMPORTANCE Canonical 
prokaryotic ATP-binding cassette importers mediate the uptake of a large variety 
of chemicals, including nutrients, osmoprotectants, growth factors, and trace 
elements. Some also play a role in bacterial pathogenesis, which is why full 
understanding of their mode of action is of the utmost importance. One of the 
unsolved problems refers to the chemical nature and number of substrate binding 
sites formed by the transmembrane subunits. Here, we report that a hybrid amino 
acid transporter of G. stearothermophilus, encompassing one intact and one 
impaired transmembrane binding site, is fully competent in transport, suggesting 
that the binding of one substrate molecule is sufficient to trigger the 
translocation process.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00092-18
PMCID: PMC5971484
PMID: 29581409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]