1. Oncotarget. 2018 Feb 20;9(19):14993-15000. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24538. 
eCollection 2018 Mar 13.

Molecular dissection of engraftment in a xenograft model of myelodysplastic 
syndromes.

Meunier M(1)(2), Dussiau C(3), Mauz N(1)(2), Alary AS(3), Lefebvre C(4), 
Szymanski G(4), Pezet M(5), Blanquet F(6), Kosmider O(3), Park S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University Clinic of Hematology, CHU Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.
(2)TIMC-Therex, UMR 5525 CNRS, Grenoble Alpes University, Grenoble, France.
(3)Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux De 
Paris, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratory of Hematology, Onco-Genetic and Immunology, Biology and Pathology 
Institute, Grenoble, France.
(5)Optical Microscopy and Flow cytometry Core, Institute for Advanced 
Biosciences, Inserm U 1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, 
France.
(6)Plate-Forme De Haute Technologie Animale, UMR5525, Grenoble Alpes University, 
Grenoble, France.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are oligoclonal disorders of the hematopoietic 
stem cells (HSC). Recurrent gene mutations are involved in the MDS 
physiopathology along with the medullar microenvironment. To better study the 
heterogeneity of MDS, it is necessary to create patient derived xenograft (PDX). 
We have reproduced a PDX model by xenografting HSC (CD34+) and mesenchymal 
stromal cells (MSC) in NOD/SCID/IL2rγ-/- mice with primary samples from one 
RAEB2, two RAEB1 and one RARS patients harboring karyotype abnormalities and 
gene mutations. The average human chimerisms ranged from 59.7% to 0.0175% for 
the 4 patients. Secondary grafts (G2) were only performed for mice derived from 
the RAEB2 patient and the average human chimerism was 53.33%. G1 mice 1 and 2, 
and their derived G2 mice showed less than 20% of medullar blasts whereas mouse 
3 and the resulting G2 mice transformed to AML. Clonal architecture was 
dissected in the different hematopoietic progenitors (HP) harvested from G1 and 
G2 mice. By direct Sanger sequencing, we found the 4 initial mutations in each 
HP subpopulation and those mutations had the same variant allele frequency in 
the CD34+ CD38- HSC from G1 and G2 mice by next generation sequencing (NGS). 
Targeted NGS analysis done in HSC of mouse 3 did not show any additional driver 
gene mutations explaining the transformation to AML. To conclude, we have 
generated a PDX mouse model that perfectly reproduces the MDS founder clone 
which is stable over time, allowing us to consider this system as a powerful 
tool to test therapeutic approaches.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24538
PMCID: PMC5871091
PMID: 29599920

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
major conflicts of interest.