1. Oncotarget. 2018 Feb 20;9(19):15111-15121. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24534. 
eCollection 2018 Mar 13.

Association between the Glutathione-S-transferase T1 null genotype and 
esophageal cancer susceptibility: a meta-analysis involving 11,163 subjects.

He F(1), Liu C(1), Zhang R(1), Hao Z(1), Li Y(1), Zhang N(1), Zheng L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Changzhou 213003, China.

BACKGROUND: Glutathione-S-Transferase T1 (GSTT1) null genotype has been shown to 
be associated with the risk of esophageal cancer. However, the results remain 
inconsistent. Thus a comprehensive meta-analysis was conducted to assess the 
strength of association between GSTT1 null genotype and the risk of esophageal 
cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search of PubMed, Embase, China National 
Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) and Wanfang databases up to March 31, 2017 was 
conducted and 30 eligible articles with 4482 cases and 6681 controls were 
finally recruited. The strength of correlation between GSTT1 polymorphism and 
the susceptibility of esophageal cancer was assessed by the crude odds ratios 
(ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Subgroup analyses and sensitivity 
analyses were performed to further identify the association.
RESULTS: GSTT1 null genotype significantly increased the risk of esophageal 
cancer (OR = 1.20; 95% CI 1.04-1.40; P < 0.05). In a subgroup analysis by 
ethnicity, GSTT1 null genotype was correlated with a significantly increased 
risk of esophageal cancer among Asians (OR = 1.33; 95% CI 1.12-1.58; P < 0.05), 
instead of Caucasians or Africans (OR = 0.91; 95% CI 0.65-1.26; P > 0.05 for 
Caucasians and OR = 1.32; 95% CI 0.98-1.77; P > 0.05 for Africans). In the 
analysis by histological type, GSTT1 null genotype was correlated with a 
significantly increased risk of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OR = 1.34; 
95% CI 1.12-1.61; P < 0.05), particularly among Asians (OR = 1.54; 95% CI 
1.30-1.82; P < 0.05), but not among Caucasians or Africans (OR = 0.87; 95% CI 
0.48-1.57; P > 0.05 for Caucasians and OR = 1.32; 95% CI 0.98-1.77; P > 0.05 for 
Africans). In addition, there is no significant correlation between GSTT1 null 
genotype and the risk of esophageal adenocarcinoma (OR = 0.98; 95% CI 0.71-1.35; 
P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that GSTT1 null genotype significantly 
increases esophageal cancer risk, particularly in Asians.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24534
PMCID: PMC5871102
PMID: 29599931

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.