1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Mar;97(13):e0160. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000010160.

Childhood trauma interacted with BDNF Val66Met influence schizophrenic symptoms.

Bi XJ(1), Lv XM, Ai XY, Sun MM, Cui KY, Yang LM, Wang LN, Yin AH, Liu LF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Shandong Mental Health Center, Jinan, Shandong 
Province, P.R. China.

The gene - environment (G × E) interaction effect is involved in severe mental 
disorders. However, whether the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
Val66Met polymorphism participates in the childhood-abuse influenced 
schizophrenic symptoms remains unclear. We examined the interaction between BDNF 
Val66Met, and childhood trauma (ChT) on psychotic symptoms in a Chinese Han 
population.To estimate the G × E interaction, psychiatric interviews, 
self-report questionnaires for ChT, and genotyping for BDNF Val66Met were 
carried out on 201 schizophrenic patients. G × E interactions were analyzed by 
generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction (GMDR).Among all patients, 
11.9%, 19.4%, 23.4%, 26.4%, and 73.6% reported emotional abuses, physical abuses 
(PA), sexual abuses (SA), emotional neglects (EN), and physical neglects (PN), 
respectively. Significant negative correlations were observed between 
anxiety/depression factors, and ChT total scores. Patients with 3 different BDNF 
genotypes showed significant differences in anxiety/depression scores. 
Significant 2-way interactions were found for Val66Met × PN, 3-way interactions 
were found for Val66Met × PN × PA, and four-way interactions were found for 
Val66Met × PN × PA × EN with regard to the excitement scores.Our findings 
suggested an involvement of BDNF Val66Met polymorphism after ChT in terms of 
risk for schizophrenia symptoms.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000010160
PMCID: PMC5895403
PMID: 29595641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.