1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Mar;97(13):e9832. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000009832.

Identification of key genes and miRNAs associated with carotid atherosclerosis 
based on mRNA-seq data.

Mao Z(1), Wu F, Shan Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Yiwu Central Hospital, Yiwu, Zhejing, China, 
Yiwu Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Yiwu Central Hospital, Yiwu, Zhejiang, 
China.

This study was aimed to explore the crucial genes and microRNAs (miRNAs) 
associated with the carotid atherosclerosis (CA).Two public datasets GSE28829 
and GSE43292 were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus databases to analyze the 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between primary and advanced 
atherosclerotic plaque tissues. The Gene Ontology (GO) terms, pathways, and 
protein-protein interactions (PPIs) of these DEGs were analyzed. miRNAs and 
transcription factor (TF) were predicted.A total of 112 upregulated and 179 
downregulated intersection DEGs were identified between 2 datasets. In the PPI 
network, HSP90AB1 (degree = 19), RAP1A (degree = 14), and integrin subunit beta 
1 (ITGB1) had higher degrees. A total of 23 miRNAs were predicted, such as 
miR-126, miR-155, miR-19A, and miR-19B. Four TFs were associated with 
upregulated DEGs, while 10 TFs were identified to be associated with 
downregulated genes.Our study suggests the important roles of HSP90AB1, RAP1A, 
and integrins proteins of ITGB1, ITGA11, ITGA9, and ITGB2 in the progression of 
CA plaque. Additionally, miR-126, miR-155, miR-19B, and miR-19A may be 
considered as biomarkers of CA.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000009832
PMCID: PMC5895374
PMID: 29595698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.