1. Int J Biopharm Sci. 2018 Jan;1(1):102. Epub 2018 Jan 2.

Therapeutic Effect of Blueberry Extracts for Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

McGill CM(1), Brown TJ(2), Cheng YY(2), Fisher LN(2), Shanmugavelandy SS(3), 
Gustafson SJ(4)(5), Dunlap KL(4), Lila MA(5), Kester M(3)(6), Toran PT(7), 
Claxton DF(2), Barth BM(2)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Alaska-Anchorage, Anchorage, AK 99508 
USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Penn State 
Hershey Cancer Institute, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033 USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033 
USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Alaska-Fairbanks, 
Fairbanks, AK 99775 USA.
(5)Plants for Human Health Institute, North Carolina State University, North 
Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, NC 28081 USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908 
USA.
(7)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of New 
Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824 USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hematological malignancy with high 
incidence in the aging population. In addition, AML is one of the more common 
pediatric malignancies. Unfortunately, both of these patient groups are quite 
sensitive to chemotherapy toxicities. Investigation of blueberries specifically 
as an anti-AML agent has been limited, despite being a prominent natural product 
with no reported toxicity. In this study, blueberry extracts are reported for 
the first time to exert a dietary therapeutic effect in animal models of AML. 
Furthermore, in vitro studies revealed that blueberry extracts exerted anti-AML 
efficacy against myeloid leukemia cell lines as well as against primary AML, and 
specifically provoked Erk and Akt regulation within the leukemia stem cell 
subpopulation. This study provides evidence that blueberries may be unique 
sources for anti-AML biopharmaceutical compound discovery, further warranting 
fractionation of this natural product. More so, blueberries themselves may 
provide an intriguing dietary option to enhance the anti-AML efficacy of 
traditional therapy for subsets of patients that otherwise may not tolerate 
rigorous combinations of therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC5875929
PMID: 29607443