1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 May 25;62(6):e00267-18. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00267-18. Print 2018 Jun.

EfrEF and the Transcription Regulator ChlR Are Required for Chlorhexidine Stress 
Response in Enterococcus faecalis V583.

Li FJ(1), Palmer KL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, 
Richardson, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at Dallas, 
Richardson, Texas, USA kelli.palmer@utdallas.edu.

Enterococcus faecalis is an opportunistic pathogen and leading cause of health 
care-associated infections. Daily chlorhexidine gluconate (CHG) bathing of 
patients is generally regarded as an effective strategy to reduce the occurrence 
of health care-associated infections. It is likely that E. faecalis is 
frequently exposed to inhibitory and subinhibitory concentrations of CHG in 
clinical settings. The goal of this study was to investigate how the 
vancomycin-resistant strain E. faecalis V583 transcriptionally responds to and 
tolerates stress from CHG. We used transcriptome (microarray) analysis to 
identify genes upregulated by E. faecalis V583 in response to CHG. The genes 
efrE (EF2226) and efrF (EF2227), encoding a heterodimeric ABC transport system, 
were the most highly upregulated genes. efrEF expression was induced by CHG at 
concentrations several 2-fold dilutions below the MIC. Deletion of efrEF 
increased E. faecalis V583 susceptibility to CHG. We found that ChlR, a 
MerR-like regulator encoded by a sequence upstream of efrEF, mediated the 
CHG-dependent upregulation of efrEF, and deletion of chlR also increased 
chlorhexidine susceptibility. Overall, our study gives insight into E. faecalis 
stress responses to a commonly used antiseptic.

Copyright Â© 2018 Li and Palmer.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00267-18
PMCID: PMC5971576
PMID: 29610200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]