1. Front Integr Neurosci. 2018 Mar 23;12:12. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00012. 
eCollection 2018.

Source Reconstruction of Brain Potentials Using Bayesian Model Averaging to 
Analyze Face Intra-Domain vs. Face-Occupation Cross-Domain Processing.

Olivares EI(1), Lage-Castellanos A(2)(3)(4), Bobes MA(2)(5), Iglesias J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Health Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, 
Universidad Aut√≥noma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Department, Cuban Neuroscience Center, Havana, Cuba.
(3)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(4)Maastricht Brain Imaging Center, Maastricht University, Maastricht, 
Netherlands.
(5)The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Lab for 
Neuroinformation, Chinese University of Electronic Science and Technology, 
Chengdu, China.

We investigated the neural correlates of the access to and retrieval of face 
structure information in contrast to those concerning the access to and 
retrieval of person-related verbal information, triggered by faces. We 
experimentally induced stimulus familiarity via a systematic learning procedure 
including faces with and without associated verbal information. Then, we 
recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) in both intra-domain (face-feature) and 
cross-domain (face-occupation) matching tasks while N400-like responses were 
elicited by incorrect eyes-eyebrows completions and occupations, respectively. A 
novel Bayesian source reconstruction approach plus conjunction analysis of group 
effects revealed that in both cases the generated N170s were of similar 
amplitude but had different neural origin. Thus, whereas the N170 of faces was 
associated predominantly to right fusiform and occipital regions (the so-called 
"Fusiform Face Area", "FFA" and "Occipital Face Area", "OFA", respectively), the 
N170 of occupations was associated to a bilateral very posterior activity, 
suggestive of basic perceptual processes. Importantly, the right-sided 
perceptual P200 and the face-related N250 were evoked exclusively in the 
intra-domain task, with sources in OFA and extensively in the fusiform region, 
respectively. Regarding later latencies, the intra-domain N400 seemed to be 
generated in right posterior brain regions encompassing mainly OFA and, to some 
extent, the FFA, likely reflecting neural operations triggered by structural 
incongruities. In turn, the cross-domain N400 was related to more anterior 
left-sided fusiform and temporal inferior sources, paralleling those described 
previously for the classic verbal N400. These results support the existence of 
differentiated neural streams for face structure and person-related verbal 
processing triggered by faces, which can be activated differentially according 
to specific task demands.

DOI: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00012
PMCID: PMC5876247
PMID: 29628877