1. Horm Behav. 2018 Aug;104:146-155. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2018.04.001. Epub 2018 
Apr 21.

Diverse actions of estradiol on anorexigenic and orexigenic hypothalamic arcuate 
neurons.

Stincic TL(1), RÃ¸nnekleiv OK(2), Kelly MJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Department of Anesthesiology and 
Perioperative Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, 
USA; Division of Neuroscience, Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA; Division of Neuroscience, Oregon Regional 
Primate Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University, Beaverton, OR 
97006, USA. Electronic address: kellym@ohsu.edu.

Contribution to Special Issue on Fast effects of steroids. There is now 
compelling evidence for membrane-associated estrogen receptors in hypothalamic 
neurons that are critical for the hypothalamic control of homeostatic functions. 
It has been known for some time that estradiol (E2) can rapidly alter 
hypothalamic neuronal activity within seconds, indicating that some cellular 
effects can occur via membrane initiated events. However, our understanding of 
how E2 signals via membrane-associated receptors and how these signals impact 
physiological functions is only just emerging. Thus, E2 can affect second 
messenger systems including calcium mobilization and a plethora of kinases to 
alter cell excitability and even gene transcription in hypothalamic neurons. One 
population of hypothalamic neurons, the anorexigenic proopiomelanocortin (POMC) 
neurons, has long been considered to be a target of E2's actions based on gene 
(Pomc) expression studies. However, we now know that E2 can rapidly alter POMC 
neuronal activity within seconds and activate several intracellular signaling 
cascades that ultimately affect gene expression, actions which are critical for 
maintaining sensitivity to insulin in metabolically stressed states. E2 also 
affects the orexigenic Neuropeptide Y/Agouti-related Peptide (NPY/AgRP) neurons 
in similarly rapid but antagonistic manner. Therefore, this review will 
summarize our current state of knowledge of how E2 signals via rapid 
membrane-initiated and intracellular signaling cascades in POMC and NPY/AgRP 
neurons to regulate energy homeostasis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2018.04.001
PMCID: PMC6196116
PMID: 29626486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]