1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2018 Mar 1;59(3):1503-1511. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.17-22900.

Visual Cortex Activation in Patients With Stargardt Disease.

Melillo P(1), Prinster A(2), Di Iorio V(1), Olivo G(3), D'Alterio FM(1), Cocozza 
S(3), Orrico A(1), Quarantelli M(2), Testa F(1), Brunetti A(3), Simonelli F(1).

Author information:
(1)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biostructure and Bioimaging, National Research Council, Naples, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, University Federico II, Naples, 
Italy.

PURPOSE: Primary visual cortex (PVC) contains a retinotopic map in which the 
central visual field (CVF) is highly magnified compared to the peripheral field. 
Several studies have used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in 
patients with macular degeneration to assess the reorganization of visual 
processing in relationship with the development of extrafoveal preferred retinal 
locus (PRL). We evaluated the functional response in PVC and its correlation 
with retinal parameters in patients with Stargardt disease due to ABCA4 
mutations (STGD1).
METHODS: Twenty-four STGD1 patients underwent best-corrected visual acuity, 
full-field standard electroretinogram (ERG), optical coherence tomography, and 
microperimetry. Furthermore, patients underwent fMRI to assess cerebral 
activation during visual stimulation by a flickering checkerboard in four PVC 
subdivisions, corresponding to 0° to 5° (V1), 5° to 10° (V2), 10° to 15° (V3), 
and 15° to 40° (V4) of CVF.
RESULTS: Higher ERG responses were significantly (P < 0.0125) associated with 
larger functional cerebral response in V1, V2, and V3 subdivisions. Moreover, 
larger retinal pigment epithelium atrophy area was significantly (P < 0.0125) 
associated with smaller PVC activation in V2 and V3 subdivisions. Larger 
activation in V1 subdivision was significantly (P = 0.001) associated with 
higher mean macular sensitivity and smaller dense scotoma size. Finally, our 
results showed reduced activation in V2 and V3 with increased PRL eccentricity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study, for the first time in the literature, showed stronger 
PVC activation in STGD1 patients with a more preserved retinal function and 
macular structure. Furthermore, our study data strongly suggest that the 
evaluation of neuronal reorganization could be performed by considering only 
retinal parameters, particularly ERG responses.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.17-22900
PMID: 29625472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]