1. Front Neurol. 2018 Mar 26;9:181. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00181. eCollection 
2018.

Evaluation of Microglial Activation in Multiple Sclerosis Patients Using 
Positron Emission Tomography.

Airas L(1)(2), Nylund M(1)(2), Rissanen E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, Turku University Hospital and University 
of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(2)Turku PET Centre, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.

Understanding the mechanisms underlying progression in multiple sclerosis (MS) 
is one of the key elements contributing to the identification of appropriate 
therapeutic targets for this under-managed condition. In addition to 
plaque-related focal inflammatory pathology typical for relapsing remitting MS 
there are, in progressive MS, widespread diffuse alterations in brain areas 
outside the focal lesions. This diffuse pathology is tightly related to 
microglial activation and is co-localized with signs of neurodegeneration. 
Microglia are brain-resident cells of the innate immune system and 
overactivation of microglia is associated with several neurodegenerative 
diseases. Understanding the role of microglial activation in relation to 
developing neurodegeneration and disease progression may provide a key to 
developing therapies to target progressive MS. 18-kDa translocator protein 
(TSPO) is a mitochondrial molecule upregulated in microglia upon their 
activation. Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging using TSPO-binding 
radioligands provides a method to assess microglial activation in patients in 
vivo. In this mini-review, we summarize the current status of TSPO imaging in 
the field of MS. In addition, the review discusses new insights into the 
potential use of this method in treatment trials and in clinical assessment of 
progressive MS.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00181
PMCID: PMC5879102
PMID: 29632509