1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 10;13(4):e0193790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193790. 
eCollection 2018.

Ribosome profiling uncovers selective mRNA translation associated with eIF2 
phosphorylation in erythroid progenitors.

Paolini NA(1), Moore KS(1), di Summa FM(1), Fokkema IFAC(2), 't Hoen PAC(2)(3), 
von Lindern M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis, Sanquin Research, and Landsteiner Laboratory 
AMC/UvA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for 
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

The regulation of translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2) is important for 
erythroid survival and differentiation. Lack of iron, a critical component of 
heme and hemoglobin, activates Heme Regulated Inhibitor (HRI). This results in 
phosphorylation of eIF2 and reduced eIF2 availability, which inhibits protein 
synthesis. Translation of specific transcripts such as Atf4, however, is 
enhanced. Upstream open reading frames (uORFs) are key to this regulation. The 
aim of this study is to investigate how tunicamycin treatment, that induces eIF2 
phosphorylation, affects mRNA translation in erythroblasts. Ribosome profiling 
combined with RNA sequencing was used to determine translation initiation sites 
and ribosome density on individual transcripts. Treatment of erythroblasts with 
Tunicamycin (Tm) increased phosphorylation of eIF2 2-fold. At a false discovery 
rate of 1%, ribosome density was increased for 147 transcripts, among which 
transcriptional regulators such as Atf4, Tis7/Ifrd1, Pnrc2, Gtf2h, Mbd3, JunB 
and Kmt2e. Translation of 337 transcripts decreased more than average, among 
which Dym and Csde1. Ribosome profiling following Harringtonine treatment 
uncovered novel translation initiation sites and uORFs. Surprisingly, translated 
uORFs did not predict the sensitivity of transcripts to altered ribosome 
recruitment in presence or absence of Tm. The regulation of transcription and 
translation factors in reponse to eIF2 phosphorylation may explain the large 
overall response to iron deficiency in erythroblasts.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193790
PMCID: PMC5892948
PMID: 29634759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.