1. J Virol. 2018 Jun 13;92(13):e00037-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00037-18. Print 2018
Jul  1.

HIV Protease-Generated Casp8p41, When Bound and Inactivated by Bcl2, Is Degraded 
by the Proteasome.

Natesampillai S(#)(1), Cummins NW(#)(1), Nie Z(1), Sampath R(1), Baker JV(2)(3), 
Henry K(3), Pinzone M(4), O'Doherty U(4), Polley EC(5), Bren GD(1), Katzmann 
DJ(6), Badley AD(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(3)HIV Program, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Therapeutic Pathology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA 
badley.andrew@mayo.edu.
(8)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

HIV protease is known to cause cell death, which is dependent upon cleavage of 
procaspase 8. HIV protease cleavage of procaspase 8 generates Casp8p41, which 
directly binds Bak with nanomolar affinity, causing Bak activation and 
consequent cell death. Casp8p41 can also bind Bcl2 with nanomolar affinity, in 
which case cell death is averted. Central memory CD4 T cells express high levels 
of Bcl2, possibly explaining why those cells do not die when they reactivate 
HIV. Here, we determine that the Casp8p41-Bcl2 complex is polyubiquitinated and 
degraded by the proteasome. Ixazomib, a proteasome inhibitor in clinical use, 
blocks this pathway, increasing the abundance of Casp8p41 and causing more cells 
to die in a Casp8p41-dependent manner.IMPORTANCE The Casp8p41 pathway of cell 
death is unique to HIV-infected cells yet is blocked by Bcl2. Once bound by 
Bcl2, Casp8p41 is polyubiquitinated and degraded by the proteasome. Proteasome 
inhibition blocks degradation of Casp8p41, increasing Casp8p41 levels and 
causing more HIV-infected cells to die.

Copyright Â© 2018 Natesampillai et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00037-18
PMCID: PMC6002723
PMID: 29643240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]