1. NPJ Genom Med. 2018 Apr 4;3:10. doi: 10.1038/s41525-018-0049-4. eCollection 
2018.

Rapid whole-genome sequencing decreases infant morbidity and cost of 
hospitalization.

Farnaes L(#)(1)(2), Hildreth A(#)(1)(2), Sweeney NM(#)(1)(2), Clark MM(1), 
Chowdhury S(1), Nahas S(1), Cakici JA(1), Benson W(1), Kaplan RH(3), Kronick 
R(4), Bainbridge MN(1), Friedman J(1)(2)(5), Gold JJ(1)(5), Ding Y(1), 
Veeraraghavan N(1), Dimmock D(1), Kingsmore SF(1).

Author information:
(1)Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA USA.
(2)2Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 
USA.
(3)Torrey Pines Health Group Inc., San Diego, CA USA.
(4)4Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, University of California 
San Diego, San Diego, CA USA.
(5)5Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Genetic disorders are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in infants. 
Rapid whole-genome sequencing (rWGS) can diagnose genetic disorders in time to 
change acute medical or surgical management (clinical utility) and improve 
outcomes in acutely ill infants. We report a retrospective cohort study of 
acutely ill inpatient infants in a regional children's hospital from July 
2016-March 2017. Forty-two families received rWGS for etiologic diagnosis of 
genetic disorders. Probands also received standard genetic testing as clinically 
indicated. Primary end-points were rate of diagnosis, clinical utility, and 
healthcare utilization. The latter was modelled in six infants by comparing 
actual utilization with matched historical controls and/or counterfactual 
utilization had rWGS been performed at different time points. The diagnostic 
sensitivity of rWGS was 43% (eighteen of 42 infants) and 10% (four of 42 
infants) for standard genetic tests (P = .0005). The rate of clinical utility of 
rWGS (31%, thirteen of 42 infants) was significantly greater than for standard 
genetic tests (2%, one of 42; P = .0015). Eleven (26%) infants with diagnostic 
rWGS avoided morbidity, one had a 43% reduction in likelihood of mortality, and 
one started palliative care. In six of the eleven infants, the changes in 
management reduced inpatient cost by $800,000-$2,000,000. These findings 
replicate a prior study of the clinical utility of rWGS in acutely ill inpatient 
infants, and demonstrate improved outcomes and net healthcare savings. rWGS 
merits consideration as a first tier test in this setting.

DOI: 10.1038/s41525-018-0049-4
PMCID: PMC5884823
PMID: 29644095

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Dimmock declares the following potential 
conflicts of interest: Biomarin (Consultant for Pegvaliase trials) Audentes 
Therapeutics (Scientific Advisory Board).