1. J Biol Chem. 2018 May 25;293(21):8089-8102. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001739.
Epub  2018 Apr 11.

Smooth muscle cells differentiated from mesenchymal stem cells are regulated by 
microRNAs and suitable for vascular tissue grafts.

Gu W(1), Hong X(1), Le Bras A(1), Nowak WN(1), Issa Bhaloo S(1), Deng J(1), Xie 
Y(1), Hu Y(1), Ruan XZ(2), Xu Q(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Cardiovascular Medicine & Science, King's College London, British 
Heart Foundation Centre, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Lipid Research, Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious 
Diseases (Ministry of Education), Department of Infectious Diseases, the Second 
Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Centre for Nephrology, 
University College London, Rowland Hill Street, London NW3 2PF, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: x.ruan@ucl.ac.uk.
(3)School of Cardiovascular Medicine & Science, King's College London, British 
Heart Foundation Centre, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
qingbo.xu@kcl.ac.uk.

Tissue-engineered vascular grafts with long-term patency are greatly needed in 
the clinical settings, and smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are a critical graft 
component. Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are used for generating SMCs, and 
understanding the underlying regulatory mechanisms of the MSC-to-SMC 
differentiation process could improve SMC generation in the clinic. Here, we 
found that in response to stimulation of transforming growth factor-β1 (TGFβ1), 
human umbilical cord-derived MSCs abundantly express the SMC markers α-smooth 
muscle actin (αSMA), smooth muscle protein 22 (SM22), calponin, and smooth 
muscle myosin heavy chain (SMMHC) at both gene and protein levels. Functionally, 
MSC-derived SMCs displayed contracting capacity in vitro and supported vascular 
structure formation in the Matrigel plug assay in vivo More importantly, SMCs 
differentiated from human MSCs could migrate into decellularized mouse aorta and 
give rise to the smooth muscle layer of vascular grafts, indicating the 
potential of utilizing human MSC-derived SMCs to generate vascular grafts. Of 
note, microRNA (miR) array analysis and TaqMan microRNA assays identified 
miR-503 and miR-222-5p as potential regulators of MSC differentiation into SMCs 
at early time points. Mechanistically, miR-503 promoted SMC differentiation by 
directly targeting SMAD7, a suppressor of SMAD-related, TGFβ1-mediated signaling 
pathways. Moreover, miR-503 expression was SMAD4-dependent. SMAD4 was enriched 
at the miR-503 promoter. Furthermore, miR-222-5p inhibited SMC differentiation 
by targeting and down-regulating ROCK2 and αSMA. In conclusion, MSC 
differentiation into SMCs is regulated by miR-503 and miR-222-5p and yields 
functional SMCs for use in vascular grafts.

© 2018 Gu et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.001739
PMCID: PMC5971462
PMID: 29643181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article