1. Cancer Sci. 2018 Jun;109(6):1876-1888. doi: 10.1111/cas.13612. Epub 2018 May
23.

Plakoglobin restores tumor suppressor activity of p53(R175H) mutant by 
sequestering the oncogenic potential of β-catenin.

Alaee M(1), Nool K(1), Pasdar M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Tumor suppressor/transcription factor p53 is mutated in over 50% of all cancers. 
Some mutant p53 proteins have not only lost tumor suppressor activities but they 
also gain oncogenic functions (GOF). One of the most frequently expressed GOF 
p53 mutants is Arg175His (p53R175H ) with well-documented roles in cancer 
development and progression. Plakoglobin is a cell adhesion and signaling 
protein and a paralog of β-catenin. Unlike β-catenin that has oncogenic function 
through its role in the Wnt pathway, plakoglobin generally acts as a 
tumor/metastasis suppressor. We have shown that plakoglobin interacted with wild 
type and a number of p53 mutants in various carcinoma cell lines. Plakoglobin 
and mutant p53 interacted with the promoter and regulated the expression of 
several p53 target genes. Furthermore, plakoglobin interactions with p53 mutants 
restored their tumor suppressor/metastasis activities in vitro. GOF p53 mutants 
induce accumulation and oncogenic activation of β-catenin. Previously, we showed 
that one mechanism by which plakoglobin may suppress tumorigenesis is by 
sequestering β-catenin's oncogenic activity. Here, we examined the effects of 
p53R175H expression on β-catenin accumulation and transcriptional activation and 
their modifications by plakoglobin coexpression. We showed that p53R175H 
expression in plakoglobin null cells increased total and nuclear levels of 
β-catenin and its transcriptional activity. Coexpression of plakoglobin in these 
cells promoted β-catenin's proteasomal degradation, and decreased its nuclear 
levels and transactivation. Wnt/β-catenin targets, c-MYC and S100A4 were 
upregulated in p53R175H cells and were downregulated when plakoglobin was 
coexpressed. Plakoglobin-p53R175H cells also showed significant reduction in 
their migration and invasion in vitro.

© 2018 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13612
PMCID: PMC5989865
PMID: 29660231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]