1. Oncotarget. 2018 Mar 23;9(22):15883-15894. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.24633. 
eCollection 2018 Mar 23.

Transcriptional orchestration of mitochondrial homeostasis in a cellular model 
of PGC-1-related coactivator-dependent thyroid tumor.

Dumont S(#)(1), Le Pennec S(#)(2), Donnart A(1), Teusan R(1), Steenman M(1), 
Chevalier C(3), Houlgatte R(4), Savagner F(2).

Author information:
(1)L'institut du Thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, BP 70721, 44007 NANTES Cedex 
1, France.
(2)Inserm UMR 1048, I2MC, 31432 TOULOUSE Cedex 4, France.
(3)UMS 016, SFR Santé, IRS UN, BP 70721, 44007 NANTES Cedex 1, France.
(4)Inserm UMR 954, Faculté de Médecine, BP 184, 54505 VANDOEUVRE-LÈS-NANCY 
Cedex, France.
(#)Contributed equally

The PGC-1 (Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor Gamma Coactivator-1) 
family of coactivators (PGC-1α, PGC-1β, and PRC) plays a central role in the 
transcriptional control of mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative 
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) processes. These coactivators integrate mitochondrial 
energy production into cell metabolism using complementary pathways. The XTC.UC1 
cell line is a mitochondria-rich model of thyroid tumors whose biogenesis is 
almost exclusively dependent on PRC. Here we aim to propose an integrative view 
of the cellular pathways regulated by PRC through integration of cDNA and miRNA 
microarray data and chromatin immunoprecipitation results obtained from XTC.UC1 
cells invalidated for PRC. This study showes that PRC induces a complex network 
of cellular functions interacting with at least one to five of the studied 
transcription factors (Estrogen Related Receptor alpha, ERR1; 
Nuclear-Respiratory Factors, NRF1 and NRF2; cAMP Response Element Binding, CREB; 
and Ying Yang, YY1). Our data confirm that ERR1 is a key partner of PRC in the 
regulation of mitochondrial functions and suggest a potential role of this 
complex in RNA processing. PRC is also involved in transcriptional regulatory 
complexes targeting 12 miRNAs, five of which are involved in the control of the 
OXPHOS process. Our findings demonstrate that the PRC coactivator can act in 
complex with several transcription factors and regulate miRNA expression to 
control the fine regulation of main metabolic functions in the cell. Therefore, 
in PGC-1α/β-associated pathologies, PRC, as a metabolic sensor, may ensure 
mitochondrial homeostasis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.24633
PMCID: PMC5882305
PMID: 29662614

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.