1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2018 Aug;57(8):379-386. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22540.

Correlation of TET2 SNP rs2454206 with improved survival in children with acute 
myeloid leukemia featuring intermediate-risk cytogenetics.

Wang X(1), Chen X(1), Yang Z(1), Dou H(2), Lu L(3), Bi J(1), Zou L(1), Yu J(4), 
Bao L(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Clinical Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory 
of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, 
Chongqing International Science and Technology Cooperation Center for Child 
Development and Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may influence the disease course and 
outcome of hematologic neoplasms. SNP rs2454206 is common in the TET2 gene, 
which plays a role in epigenetic regulation of myelopoiesis. Few investigations 
examined the role of TET2 SNP rs2454206 in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and none 
of those studies was performed in Chinese populations. Here, we report the 
prevalence and clinical relevance of TET2 SNP rs2454206 in 254 Chinese patients 
with childhood AML. Our data demonstrate that TET2 SNP rs2454206AG/GG is 
associated with improved overall survival and event-free survival in AML 
patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetics features. The prognostic impact of 
TET2 SNP rs2454206AG/GG was independent of other common AML risk factors, such 
as age, white blood cell count, and FLT3-ITD. No difference in TET2 expression 
levels in AML with TET2 SNP rs2454206AA and TET2 SNP rs2454206AG/GG was 
detected, indicating that TET2 SNP rs2454206 status does not affect TET2 
expression in pediatric AML.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.22540
PMID: 29664232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]