1. PLoS One. 2018 Apr 20;13(4):e0195883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195883. 
eCollection 2018.

Catechol-O-Methyltransferase moderates effect of stress mindset on affect and 
cognition.

Crum AJ(1), Akinola M(2), Turnwald BP(1), Kaptchuk TJ(3)(4), Hall KT(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States of 
America.
(2)Columbia Business School, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States of 
America.
(3)Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(4)Program in Placebo Studies, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(5)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 May 2;14(5):e0216305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216305.

There is evidence that altering stress mindset-the belief that stress is 
enhancing vs. debilitating-can change cognitive, affective and physiological 
responses to stress. However individual differences in responsiveness to stress 
mindset manipulations have not been explored. Given the previously established 
role of catecholamines in both placebo effects and stress, we hypothesized that 
genetic variation in catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme that 
metabolizes catecholamines, would moderate responses to an intervention intended 
to alter participants' mindsets about stress. Participants (N = 107) were 
exposed to a stress mindset manipulation (videos highlighting either the 
enhancing or debilitating effects of stress) prior to engaging in a Trier Social 
Stress task and subsequent cognitive tasks. The associations of the COMT rs4680 
polymorphism with the effect of stress mindset video manipulations on cognitive 
and affective responses were examined. Genetic variation at rs4680 modified the 
effects of stress mindset on affective and cognitive responses to stress. 
Individuals homozygous for rs4680 low-activity allele (met/met) were responsive 
to the stress-is-enhancing mindset manipulation as indicated by greater 
increases in positive affect, improved cognitive functioning, and happiness bias 
in response to stress. Conversely, individuals homozygous for the high-activity 
allele (val/val) were not as responsive to the stress mindset manipulation. 
These results suggest that responses to stress mindset intervention may vary 
with COMT genotype. These findings contribute to the understanding of gene by 
environment interactions for mindset interventions and stress reactivity and 
therefore warrant further investigations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195883
PMCID: PMC5909917
PMID: 29677196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.