1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 May 18;46(9):4677-4688. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky264.

Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 with improved proof-reading enhances 
homology-directed repair.

Kato-Inui T(1), Takahashi G(1), Hsu S(1), Miyaoka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Regenerative Medicine Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Genome editing using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) predominantly induces non-homologous 
end joining (NHEJ), which generates random insertions or deletions, whereas 
homology-directed repair (HDR), which generates precise recombination products, 
is useful for wider applications. However, the factors that determine the ratio 
of HDR to NHEJ products after CRISPR/Cas9 editing remain unclear, and methods by 
which the proportion of HDR products can be increased have not yet been fully 
established. We systematically analyzed the HDR and NHEJ products after genome 
editing using various modified guide RNAs (gRNAs) and Cas9 variants with an 
enhanced conformational checkpoint to improve the fidelity at endogenous gene 
loci in HEK293T cells and HeLa cells. We found that these modified gRNAs and 
Cas9 variants were able to enhance HDR in both single-nucleotide substitutions 
and a multi-kb DNA fragment insertion. Our results suggest that the original 
CRISPR/Cas9 system from the bacterial immune system is not necessarily the best 
option for the induction of HDR in genome editing and indicate that the 
modulation of the kinetics of conformational checkpoints of Cas9 can optimize 
the HDR/NHEJ ratio.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky264
PMCID: PMC5961419
PMID: 29672770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]