1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2018 Apr 5;11:111. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2018.00111. 
eCollection 2018.

The Communication Between the Immune and Nervous Systems: The Role of IL-1β in 
Synaptopathies.

Pozzi D(1)(2), Menna E(2)(3), Canzi A(1), Desiato G(2)(4), Mantovani C(2), 
Matteoli M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Rozzano, Italy.
(2)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Neuroscienze, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Milan, Italy.
(4)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.

In the last 15 years, groundbreaking genetic progress has underlined a 
convergence onto coherent synaptic pathways for most psychiatric and 
neurodevelopmental disorders, which are now collectively called 
"synaptopathies." However, the modest size of inheritance detected so far 
indicates a multifactorial etiology for these disorders, underlining the key 
contribution of environmental effects to them. Inflammation is known to 
influence the risk and/or severity of a variety of synaptopathies. In 
particular, pro-inflammatory cytokines, produced and released in the brain by 
activated astrocytes and microglia, may play a pivotal role in these 
pathologies. Although the link between immune system activation and defects in 
cognitive processes is nowadays clearly established, the knowledge of the 
molecular mechanisms by which inflammatory mediators specifically hit synaptic 
components implicated in synaptopathies is still in its infancy. This review 
summarizes recent evidence showing that the pro-inflammatory cytokine 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) specifically targets synaptopathy molecular substrate, 
leading to memory defects and pathological processes. In particular, we describe 
three specific pathways through which IL-1β affects (1) synaptic 
maintenance/dendritic complexity, (2) spine morphology, and (3) the 
excitatory/inhibitory balance. We coin the term immune synaptopathies to 
identify this class of diseases.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2018.00111
PMCID: PMC5895746
PMID: 29674955