1. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2018 Jan;10(1):40-44. doi: 10.15171/mejdd.2017.89. Epub
 2018 Jan 10.

The X-ray Repair Cross-Complementing Group 1 Arg399Gln Genetic Polymorphism and 
Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in an Iranian Population.

Bazgir A(1)(2), Agha Gholizadeh M(1)(2), Khosravi A(2)(3), Mansour Samaei N(1).

Author information:
(1)Depaetment of Human Genetics, Faculty of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, 
Iran.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.

BACKGROUND The association between X-ray repair cross-complementing group 1 
(XRCC1) Arg399Gln gene polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been 
investigated in several populations. However, the findings are controversial. 
The aim of this study was to address the association between XRCC1 Arg399Gln 
polymorphism and HCC in an Iranian population. METHODS We have evaluated the 
association between XRCC1 Arg399Gln gene polymorphism and HCC in 151 Iranian 
individuals (50 patients with HCC and 101 healthy matched controls) using 
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) 
method. RESULTS Significant association was found for the XRCC1 A allele and HCC 
[OR = 1.93, 95% CI (1.16 - 3.25), P = 0.0099]. Also, genotype analysis by 
SNPStats online software showed a significant association between XRCC1 gene 
polymorphisms and HCC under co-dominant, dominant, and recessive genetic models. 
CONCLUSION Our study provides evidence that the XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism may 
be associated with the risk of HCC development in Iranian population.

DOI: 10.15171/mejdd.2017.89
PMCID: PMC5903926
PMID: 29682247

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflict of interest related to this work.