1. Compr Physiol. 2018 Mar 26;8(2):555-583. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c170027.

SLC9 Gene Family: Function, Expression, and Regulation.

Xu H(1), Ghishan FK(1), Kiela PR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Steele Children's Research Center, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.

The Slc9 family of Na+ /H+ exchangers (NHEs) plays a critical role in 
electroneutral exchange of Na+ and H+ in the mammalian intestine as well as 
other absorptive and secretory epithelia of digestive organs. These transport 
proteins contribute to the transepithelial Na+ and water absorption, 
intracellular pH and cellular volume regulation as well as the electrolyte, 
acid-base, and fluid volume homeostasis at the systemic level. They also 
influence the function of other membrane transport mechanisms, affect cellular 
proliferation and apoptosis as well as cell migration, adherence to the 
extracellular matrix, and tissue repair. Additionally, they modulate the 
extracellular milieu to facilitate other nutrient absorption and to regulate the 
intestinal microbial microenvironment. Na+ /H+ exchange is inhibited in selected 
gastrointestinal diseases, either by intrinsic factors (e.g., bile acids, 
inflammatory mediators) or infectious agents and associated bacterial toxins. 
Disrupted NHE activity may contribute not only to local and systemic electrolyte 
imbalance but also to the disease severity via multiple mechanisms. In this 
review, we describe the cation proton antiporter superfamily of Na+ /H+ 
exchangers with a particular emphasis on the eight SLC9A isoforms found in the 
digestive tract, followed by a more integrative description in their roles in 
each of the digestive organs. We discuss regulatory mechanisms that determine 
the function of Na+ /H+ exchangers as pertinent to the digestive tract, their 
regulation in pathological states of the digestive organs, and reciprocally, the 
contribution of dysregulated Na+ /H+ exchange to the disease pathogenesis and 
progression. © 2018 American Physiological Society. Compr Physiol 8:555-583, 
2018.

Copyright © 2018 American Physiological Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c170027
PMCID: PMC6354930
PMID: 29687889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]