1. Case Rep Genet. 2018 Feb 22;2018:6968395. doi: 10.1155/2018/6968395.
eCollection  2018.

Whole Exome Sequencing and Molecular Modeling of a Missense Variant in TNFAIP3 
That Segregates with Disease in a Family with Chronic Urticaria and Angioedema.

Harris AL(1), Blackburn PR(2)(3), Richter JE Jr(2)(4), Gass JM(2), Caulfield 
TR(5), Mohammad AN(2)(4), Atwal PS(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Chronic urticaria is a common condition characterized by recurrent hives lasting 
several weeks or months and is usually idiopathic. Approximately half of the 
individuals with chronic urticaria will present with episodes of angioedema that 
can be severe and debilitating. In this report, we describe a 47-year-old 
Hispanic male who presented initially for an evaluation of chronic hives 
following hospitalization due to hive-induced anaphylaxis. The individual had a 
history significant for urticaria and angioedema beginning in his early 30s. 
Interestingly, both the individual's 41-year-old sister and 12-year-old daughter 
were also affected with chronic urticaria and severe angioedema. Whole exome 
sequencing of the proband and several family members revealed a heterozygous 
variant of uncertain significance in exon 2 of TNFAIP3, denoted as c.65G>A 
(p.R22Q), in all affected members. Variants in TNFAIP3 have been associated with 
multiple autoimmune diseases, susceptibility to allergy and asthma, and periodic 
fever syndromes, suggesting that this variant could potentially play a role in 
disease.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6968395
PMCID: PMC5842716
PMID: 29682366