1. Acta Biochim Pol. 2018;65(2):241-250. doi: 10.18388/abp.2017_2361. Epub 2018
Apr  25.

Clinical, biochemical and genetic risk factors for 30-day and 5-year mortality 
in 518 adult patients subjected to cardiopulmonary bypass during cardiac surgery 
- the INFLACOR study.

Kowalik MM(1), Lango R(1), Siondalski P(2), Chmara M(3), Brzeziński M(2), 
Lewandowski K(4), Jagielak D(2), Klapkowski A(2), Rogowski J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Anesthesiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Cardiac and Vascular Surgery, Medical University of Gdansk, 
Gdańsk, Poland.
(3)Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University of 
Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland.

There is increasing evidence that genetic variability influences patients' early 
morbidity after cardiac surgery performed using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). 
The use of mortality as an outcome measure in cardiac surgical genetic 
association studies is rare. We publish the 30-day and 5-year survival analyses 
with focus on pre-, intra-, postoperative variables, biochemical parameters, and 
genetic variants in the INFLACOR (INFLAmmation in Cardiac OpeRations) cohort. In 
a prospectively recruited cohort of 518 adult Polish Caucasians, who underwent 
cardiac surgery in which CPB was used, the clinical data, biochemical 
parameters, IL-6, soluble ICAM-1, TNFα, soluble E-selectin, and 10 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms were evaluated for their association with 30-day and 
5-year mortality. The 30-day mortality was associated with: pre-operative 
prothrombin international normalized ratio, intra-operative blood lactate, 
postoperative serum creatine phosphokinase, and acute kidney injury requiring 
renal replacement therapy (AKI-RRT) in logistic regression. Factors that 
determined the 5-year survival included: pre-operative NYHA class, history of 
peripheral artery disease and severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
intra-operative blood transfusion; and postoperative peripheral hypothermia, 
myocardial infarction, infection, and AKI-RRT in Cox regression. Serum levels of 
IL-6 and ICAM-1 measured three hours after the operation were associated with 
30-day and 5-year mortality, respectively. The ICAM1 rs5498 was associated with 
30-day and 5-year survival with borderline significance. Different risk factors 
determined the early (30-day) and late (5-year) survival after adult cardiac 
surgery in which cardiopulmonary bypass was used. Future genetic association 
studies in cardiac surgical patients should account for the identified chronic 
and perioperative risk factors.

DOI: 10.18388/abp.2017_2361
PMID: 29694446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]