1. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 24;8(1):6431. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24741-0.

Reversal of memory and neuropsychiatric symptoms and reduced tau pathology by 
selenium in 3xTg-AD mice.

Van der Jeugd A(1), Parra-Damas A(2), Baeta-Corral R(3), Soto-Faguás CM(2), 
Ahmed T(1)(4), LaFerla FM(5), Giménez-Llort L(3), D'Hooge R(1), Saura CA(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biological Psychology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 
3000, Belgium.
(2)Institut de Neurociències, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain.
(3)Institut de Neurociències, Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal, 
Unitat de Psicologia Mèdica, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 
08193, Spain.
(4)Neurological Disorders Research Center, Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, 
Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar.
(5)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Institute for Memory Impairments and 
Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine, 92697, CA, USA.
(6)Institut de Neurociències, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain. 
carlos.saura@uab.es.

Accumulation of amyloid-β plaques and tau contribute to the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), but it is unclear whether targeting tau pathology by 
antioxidants independently of amyloid-β causes beneficial effects on memory and 
neuropsychiatric symptoms. Selenium, an essential antioxidant element reduced in 
the aging brain, prevents development of neuropathology in AD transgenic mice at 
early disease stages. The therapeutic potential of selenium for ameliorating or 
reversing neuropsychiatric and cognitive behavioral symptoms at late AD stages 
is largely unknown. Here, we evaluated the effects of chronic dietary sodium 
selenate supplementation for 4 months in female 3xTg-AD mice at 12-14 months of 
age. Chronic sodium selenate treatment efficiently reversed 
hippocampal-dependent learning and memory impairments, and behavior- and 
neuropsychiatric-like symptoms in old female 3xTg-AD mice. Selenium 
significantly decreased the number of aggregated tau-positive neurons and 
astrogliosis, without globally affecting amyloid plaques, in the hippocampus of 
3xTg-AD mice. These results indicate that selenium treatment reverses AD-like 
memory and neuropsychiatric symptoms by a mechanism involving reduction of 
aggregated tau and/or reactive astrocytes but not amyloid pathology. These 
results suggest that sodium selenate could be part of a combined therapeutic 
approach for the treatment of memory and neuropsychiatric symptoms in advanced 
AD stages.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-24741-0
PMCID: PMC5915484
PMID: 29691439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.