1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2018 Jul;25(7):747-759. doi: 10.1530/ERC-18-0184. Epub
2018  Apr 26.

Cellular kinetics of MED12-mutant uterine leiomyoma growth and regression in 
vivo.

Serna VA(1), Wu X(1), Qiang W(2)(3), Thomas J(1), Blumenfeld ML(4), Kurita T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and GeneticsThe Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Center for Developmental TherapeuticsChemistry of Life Processes Institute, 
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, USA.
(3)Division of Reproductive Science in MedicineDepartment of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyOhio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology and GeneticsThe Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA takeshi.kurita@osumc.edu.

Cellular mechanisms of uterine leiomyoma (LM) formation have been studied 
primarily utilizing in vitro models. However, recent studies established that 
the cells growing in the primary cultures of MED12-mutant LM (MED12-LM) do not 
carry causal mutations. To improve the accuracy of LM research, we addressed the 
cellular mechanisms of LM growth and regression utilizing a patient-derived 
xenograft (PDX) model, which faithfully replicates the patient tumors in situ 
The growth and maintenance of MED12-LMs depend on 17β-estradiol (E2) and 
progesterone (P4). We determined E2 and P4-activated MAPK and PI3K pathways in 
PDXs with upregulation of IGF1 and IGF2, suggesting that the hormone actions on 
MED12-LM are mediated by the IGF pathway. When hormones were removed, MED12-LM 
PDXs lost approximately 60% of volume within 3 days through reduction in cell 
size. However, in contrast to general belief, the survival of LM cells was 
independent of E2 and/or P4, and apoptosis was not involved in the tumor 
regression. Furthermore, it was postulated that abnormal collagen fibers promote 
the growth of LMs. However, collagen fibers of actively growing PDXs were well 
aligned. The disruption of collagen fibers, as found in human LM specimens, 
occurred only when the volume of PDXs had grown to over 20 times the volume of 
unstimulated PDXs, indicating disruption is the result of growth not the cause. 
Hence, this study revises generally accepted theories on the growth and 
regression of LMs.

© 2018 Society for Endocrinology.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-18-0184
PMCID: PMC6032993
PMID: 29700012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the 
impartiality of the research reported.