1. Virol J. 2018 May 2;15(1):80. doi: 10.1186/s12985-018-0984-9.

Stability of the HTLV-1 glycoprotein 46 (gp46) gene in an endemic region of the 
Brazilian Amazon and the presence of a significant mutation (N93D) in 
symptomatic patients.

Socorro de Almeida Viana MND(1), Santos Nobre AF(2), Costa E Jr(3), Silva IC(2), 
Pinheiro BT(2), Pereira CCC(2), de Souza Canto Ferreira L(2), de Almeida DS(2), 
de Araújo MWL(4), da Silva Borges M(5), da Costa CA(2), Ishikawa EAY(2), Ferrari 
SF(6), Silva de Sousa M(2).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program in Tropical Diseases, Núcleo de Medicina Tropical, 
Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém, Pará, Brazil. maryvyana@hotmail.com.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Tropical Diseases, Núcleo de Medicina Tropical, 
Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(3)Virology Section, Instituto Evandro Chagas, Health Surveillance Secretariat, 
Brazilian Ministry of Health, Ananindeua, Pará, Brazil.
(4)Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(5)Faculty of Nursing, Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém, Pará, Brazil.
(6)Department of Ecology, Universidade Federal de Sergipe, São Cristóvão, 
Sergipe, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) affects 2-5 million 
people worldwide, and is associated with a number of degenerative and infectious 
diseases. The Envelope glycoproteins (gp) are highly conserved among the 
different HTLV-1 isolates, although nucleotide substitutions in the region that 
codifies these proteins may influence both the infectivity and the replication 
of the virus. The gp46 gene has functional domains which have been associated 
with the inhibition of the formation of the syncytium, cell-cell transmission, 
and the production of antibodies. The present study investigated the genetic 
stability of the gp46 gene of HTLV-1 in an endemic region of Brazilian Amazonia.
METHODS: Index case (IC - a sample of a given family group) carriers of HTLV-1 
were investigated in the metropolitan region of Belém (Pará, Brazil) between 
January 2010 (registered retrospectively) and December 2015. The sequences that 
codify the gp46 were amplified by PCR, purified and sequenced 
(MF084788-MF084825). The gene was characterized using bioinformatics and 
Bayesian Inference.
RESULTS: The 40 patients analyzed had a mean age of 45.2 years and 70% presented 
some type of symptom, with a predominance of pain and sensitivity, dysautonomia, 
and motor disorders. All patients presented the aA (Transcontinental 
Cosmopolitan) genotype, with an extremely low mutation rate, which is 
characteristic of the codifying region (aA - 1.83 × 10-4 mutations per site per 
year). The gp46 gene had a nucleotide diversity of between 0.00% and 2.0%. Amino 
acid mutations were present in 66.6% of the samples of individuals with 
signs/symptoms or diseases associated with HTLV-1 (p = 0.0091). Of the three 
most frequent mutations, the previously undescribed N93D mutant was invariably 
associated with symptomatic cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The aA HTLV-1 subtype is predominant in the metropolitan region of 
Belém and presented a high degree of genetic stability in the codifying region. 
The rare N93D amino acid mutation may be associated with the clinical 
manifestations of this viral infection.
IMPORTANCE: Little is known of the phylogeny of HTLV-1 in the endemic region of 
Brazilian Amazonia, and few complete gene sequences are available for the gp46 
glycoprotein from the local population. The nucleotide sequences of the viral 
gp46 gene recorded in the present study confirmed the genetic stability of the 
region, and pointed to a homogeneous viral group, with local geographic 
characteristics. Further research will be necessary to more fully understand the 
molecular diversity of this protein, given the potential of this codifying 
region as a model for an effective HTLV-1 vaccine. The identification of a rare 
mutation (N93D), present only in symptomatic patients, should also be 
investigated further as a potential clinical marker.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ISRCTN 12345678, registered 28 September 2014.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-018-0984-9
PMCID: PMC5930498
PMID: 29716616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: The 
present study is part of the project “Genetic diversity of the type 1 Human 
T-cell Lymphotropic Virus in the metropolitan region of Belém”, which has been 
approved by the committee for ethics in human research of the NTM/UFPA through 
the Brazil Platform, and adheres to resolution 466/2012 of the Brazilian 
National Council for Ethics in Research (CONEP), CAAE:31014114.2.0000.5172, 
through protocol number 992.573 of 20/03/2015. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: I, Maria 
de Nazaré do Socorro de Almeida Viana, as the main author of this article, I 
consent to the publication in this journal, of this manuscript with the 
description of the data and results bring my full responsibility. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: None of the authors have any conflict of interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.