1. Nanoscale. 2018 May 17;10(19):8998-9011. doi: 10.1039/c8nr01664j.

Sulfonate-ended carbosilane dendrimers with a flexible scaffold cause 
inactivation of HIV-1 virions and gp120 shedding.

Sepúlveda-Crespo D (1), de la Mata FJ , Gómez R , Muñoz-Fernández MA .

Author information:
(1)Sección Inmunología, Laboratorio InmunoBiología Molecular, Hospital General 
Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid 28007, Spain. mmunoz.hgugm@gmail.com 
mmunoz.hgugm@salud.madrid.org.

Infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) continues to be a 
global public health issue, especially in low-resource countries. Sexual 
transmission is responsible for the majority of HIV-1 infections worldwide. 
Women are more susceptible to HIV-1 acquisition than men and represent nearly 
50% of the HIV-infected population. Topical vaginal microbicides that act at the 
earlier stages of infection offer a prevention strategy to reduce the 
acquisition of HIV-1. Dendrimers are nano-sized, radially symmetric molecules 
with a well-defined and monodisperse structure consisting of tree-like arms or 
branches. We perform a TZM.bl cell line-based screening of two families of 
carbosilane dendrimers (6 nanocompounds: G1-S12P, G2-S24P, G3-S48P, G1-C12P, 
G2-C24P and G3-C48P) that we have previously synthesized, containing 12, 24 or 
48 sulfonate (or carboxylate) end-groups and a polyphenolic core. This work 
shows that second- and third-generation sulfonate-ended carbosilane dendrimers 
with a polyphenolic core (G2-S24P and G3-S48P, respectively) display low 
cytotoxicity (CC50 > 300 μM) with virucidal anti-R5-HIV-1 activity (EC50 < 50 
nM; therapeutic index >6000) causing irreversible HIV-1 inactivation (80-90%) by 
loss of HIV-1 RNA (40%), gp120 shedding (70-80%) and p24 capsid protein release 
(45-60%). Herein, we demonstrate that sulfonate end-groups and a flexible 
scaffold from carbosilane dendrimers strongly influence their properties acting 
as potent virucides.

DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01664j
PMID: 29726564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]