1. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2018 Oct;123(4):474-485. doi:
10.1111/bcpt.13031.  Epub 2018 Jun 13.

Effect of ABCB1 C3435T Polymorphism on Pharmacokinetics of Antipsychotics and 
Antidepressants.

Saiz-Rodríguez M(1), Belmonte C(1)(2), Román M(1)(2), Ochoa D(1)(2), Jiang-Zheng 
C(1), Koller D(1), Mejía G(1)(2), Zubiaur P(1), Wojnicz A(1), Abad-Santos 
F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Department, Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, 
Instituto Teofilo Hernando, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria Princesa (IP), 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)UICEC Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Plataforma SCReN (Spanish 
Clinical Reseach Network), Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria la Princesa 
(IP), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Center for Biomedical Research Network Hepatic and Liver diseases (CIBERedh) 
- Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

P-glycoprotein, encoded by ABCB1, is an ATP-dependent drug efflux pump which 
exports substances outside the cell. Some studies described connections between 
C3435T polymorphism T allele and lower P-glycoprotein expression; therefore, 
homozygous T/T could show higher plasma levels. Our aim was to evaluate the 
effect of C3435T on pharmacokinetics of 4 antipsychotics (olanzapine, 
quetiapine, risperidone and aripiprazole) and 4 antidepressants (trazodone, 
sertraline, agomelatine and citalopram). The study included 473 healthy 
volunteers receiving a single oral dose of one of these drugs, genotyped by 
real-time PCR. Multivariate analysis was performed to adjust the effect of sex 
and genotype of the main cytochrome P450 enzymes. C3435T polymorphism had an 
effect on olanzapine pharmacokinetics, as T/T individuals showed lower clearance 
and volume of distribution. T/T individuals showed lower T1/2 of 
9-OH-risperidone, but this difference disappeared after multivariate correction. 
T/T homozygous individuals showed lower dehydro-aripiprazole and trazodone area 
under the concentration-time curve, along with lower half-life and higher 
clearance of trazodone. C/T genotype was associated to higher citalopram maximum 
concentration. C3435T had no effect on quetiapine, sertraline or agomelatine 
pharmacokinetics. C3435T can affect the elimination of some drugs in different 
ways. Regarding risperidone, trazodone and dehydro-aripiprazole, we observed 
enhanced elimination while it was reduced in olanzapine and citalopram. However, 
in quetiapine, aripiprazole, sertraline and agomelatine, no changes were 
detected. These results suggest that P-glycoprotein polymorphisms could affect 
CNS drugs disposition, but the genetic factor that alters its activity is still 
unknown. This fact leads to consider the analysis of ABCB1 haplotypes instead of 
individual variants.

© 2018 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society).

DOI: 10.1111/bcpt.13031
PMID: 29723928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]