1. Oncol Lett. 2018 May;15(5):7132-7138. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.8236. Epub 2018 Mar
 12.

Outcome of patient with high-risk chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, treated with 
decitabine prior to transformation to acute myeloid leukemia: A case report.

Liu H(1), Cheng J(2), Zhao L(2), Xu Q(1), Xue M(1), Zhang S(1), Liu B(2).

Author information:
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 
730000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R. China.

The present study describes a patient with high-risk chronic myelomonocytic 
leukemia (CMML), for whom decitabine therapy achieved partial remission, prior 
to a sudden transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and an inferior 
outcome. The 53-year-old male reported easily bruising for 5 months. Examination 
indicated a diagnosis of CMML. Chromosome analysis identified a 48, XY, +8, +21 
karyotype, classifying the patient as high-risk, according to a 
clinical/molecular CPSS (CPSS-Mol) model. Gene sequencing detected a mutation in 
DNA methyltransferase 3Î±, which is relatively rarely identified in CMML and has 
recently been reported to have an independent prognostic impact on overall 
survival time. Partial remission was achieved with decitabine treatment, and 
hematologic improvement was observed subsequent to 2 cycles of treatment. 
However, a sudden transformation to AML led to fatality of the patient. This 
case suggests that decitabine may be an effective therapeutic for high-risk 
CMML; however, the response may be temporary, and the ultimate outcome may be 
extremely poor. Therefore, novel treatment strategies of CMML, including 
combination therapies with decitabine, or targeted drugs, including Janus kinase 
inhibitors or granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor monoclonal 
antibodies, require investigation.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.8236
PMCID: PMC5921036
PMID: 29731877