1. Turk J Pediatr. 2017;59(5):610-613. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2017.05.019.

Novel NKX2-5 germline mutation in a Moroccan child with transitional 
atrio-ventricular septal defect (tAVSD).

El-Bouchikhi I, Belhassan K(1), Moufid FZ, Houssaini MI(2), Ouldim K(1), Atmani 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics and Oncogenetics Laboratory, Hassan II University Hospital, 
Fez, Morocco.
(2)Laboratory of Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, 
University of Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah, Fez, Morocco.
(3)Medico-Surgical Unit of Cardio-pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Hassan 
II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco.

Atrioventricular septal defect is a complex congenital heart defects (CHD) with 
a prevalence of approximately 4% of all CHDs. Transitional form of 
atrio-ventricular septal defect (tAVSD) associates ostium primum atrial septal 
defect, common atrioventricular annulus with distinct atrioventricular valvar 
orifices in addition of restrictive ventricular septal defect. We describe in 
this report clinical and molecular features of a Moroccan boy that carries a 
novel NK2 homeobox 5 (NKX2-5) germline mutation (Pro141Ala), and exhibits a 
transitional atrio-ventricular septal defect. This phenotype has never been 
reported in association with NKX2-5 germline mutations. Pro141Ala is a 
non-reported pathogenic mutation that alters the nuclear localization signal 
sequence, leading to disruption of NKX2-5 nuclear translocation mechanism. Such 
alteration would decrease nuclear transcriptional activity of NKX2-5 and impair 
cardiogenesis process. The present report comes to widen the phenotypic spectrum 
of congenital heart disease caused by NKX2-5 germline mutations, and highlights 
as well the importance of the nuclear localization system in NKX2-5 activity.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2017.05.019
PMID: 29745128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]