1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 May 1;9(5):541. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0576-z.

Prion protein is essential for the RE1 silencing transcription factor 
(REST)-dependent developmental switch in synaptic NMDA receptors.

Song Z(1)(2), Yang W(1)(3), Cheng G(1), Zhou X(1), Yang L(1), Zhao D(4).

Author information:
(1)The State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, Key Lab of Animal 
Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture, National Animal 
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy Laboratory, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, China Agricultural University, 100193, Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Laboratory Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
(CAMS) and Comparative Medicine Center, Peking Union Medical Collage (PUMC), Key 
Laboratory of Human Disease Comparative Medicine, Ministry of Health, 100021, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Hebei Institute of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, 071000, Baoding, 
China.
(4)The State Key Laboratories for Agrobiotechnology, Key Lab of Animal 
Epidemiology and Zoonosis, Ministry of Agriculture, National Animal 
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathy Laboratory, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, China Agricultural University, 100193, Beijing, China. 
zhaodm@cau.edu.cn.

It is important that the correct amounts of GluN2 subunits are maintained, as 
they determine NMDAR functional properties, which are crucial to neuronal 
communication, synaptogenesis and cognitive function. The transcriptional 
repressor RE1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is critical for the 
postnatal developmental switch in NMDARs. However, the mechanisms triggering 
REST and the link between NMDARs and REST are unclear. Here we show a new 
physiological essential role for cellular prion protein (PrPC) in REST-dependent 
homeostasis and the developmental switch of NMDARs. REST and REST-associated 
proteins were overactivated in the hippocampi of Prnp knockout mice (Prnp 0/0 ) 
compared with wild-type Prnp (Prnp +/+ ) mice. This coincided with the 
disruption of the normal developmental switch from GluN2B-to-GluN2A in vivo. 
PrPC co-located with REST under physiological environments and mediated the 
translocation of REST in conditioners of NMDARs in vitro in Prnp +/+ hippocampal 
neurons. Regardless of whether REST was knocked down or overexpressed, deletion 
of PrPC not only disrupted REST-mediated distribution of mitochondria, but also 
prevented REST-regulated expression of GluN2B and GluN2A in Prnp 0/0 . 
Importantly, these effects were rescued after overexpression of full-length PrPC 
through restoration of NMDAR2 subunits and their distributions in dendritic 
processes in Prnp 0/0 . Consistently, knockdown of PrPC in Prnp +/+ had a 
similar effect on Prnp 0/0 . Furthermore, PrPC colocalized with both GluN2B and 
GluN2A in Prnp +/+ . For the first time, we demonstrate that PrPC is essential 
for REST-regulated NMDARs. Confirming the regulation of NMDAR-modulating 
mechanisms could provide novel therapeutic targets against dysfunctions of 
glutamatergic transmission in the nervous system.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0576-z
PMCID: PMC5945644
PMID: 29748616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.