1. ACS Omega. 2017 Oct 31;2(10):6691-6702. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01025. Epub
2017  Oct 12.

Mechanistic Insights into the Differential Catalysis by RheB and Its Mutants: 
Y35A and Y35A-D65A.

Kotyada C(1), Maulik A(1), Srivastava A(1), Singh M(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit and NMR Research Centre, Indian Institute of 
Science, Bengaluru 560012, India.

RheB GTPase is a Ras-related molecular switch, which regulates the mTOR 
signaling pathway by cycling between the active [guanosine triphosphate (GTP)] 
state and inactive [guanine diphosphate (GDP)] state. Impairment of GTPase 
activity because of mutations in several small GTPases is known to be associated 
with several cancers. The conventional GTPase mechanism such as in H-Ras 
requires a conserved glutamine (Q64) in the switch-II region of RheB to align 
the catalytic water molecule for efficient GTP hydrolysis. The conformation of 
this conserved glutamine is different in RheB, resulting in an altered 
conformation of the entire switch-II region. Studies on the atypical switch-II 
conformation in RheB revealed a distinct, noncanonical mode of GTP hydrolysis. 
An RheB mutant Y35A was previously shown to exclusively enhance the intrinsic 
GTPase activity of RheB, whereas the Y35A-D65A double mutant was shown to reduce 
the elevated GTPase activity. Here, we have used all-atom molecular dynamics 
(MD) simulations for comprehensive understanding of the conformational dynamics 
associated with the fast (Y35A) and slow (Y35A-D65A) hydrolyzing mutants of 
RheB. Using a combination of starting models from PDB structures and in-silico 
generated mutant structures, we discuss the observed conformational deviations 
in wild type (WT) versus mutants. Our results show that a number of interactions 
of RheB with phosphates of GTP as well as Mg2+ are destabilized in Y35A mutant 
in the switch-I region. We report distinct water dynamics at the active site of 
WT and mutants. Furthermore, principal component analysis showed significant 
differences in the conformational space sampled by the WT and mutants. Our 
observations provide improved understanding of the noncanonical GTP hydrolysis 
mechanism adopted by RheB and its modulation by Y35A and Y35A-D65A mutants.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01025
PMCID: PMC5937686
PMID: 29750207

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.