1. Per Med. 2014 May;11(3):259-262. doi: 10.2217/pme.14.9. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

Predictive testing for DPD deficiency in a patient with familial history of 
fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity.

Falvella FS(1), Cheli S(1), de Braud F(2), Clementi E(3)(4), Pietrantonio F(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical & Clinical Sciences 
L. Sacco, "Luigi Sacco" University Hospital, Università di Milano, 20157 Milan, 
Italy. falvella.stefania@hsacco.it.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Scientific Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, 23842 Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.
(4)Unit of Clinical Pharmacology, CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Department of 
Biomedical & Clinical Sciences L. Sacco, "Luigi Sacco" University Hospital, 
Università di Milano, 20157 Milan, Italy.

Reduced activity of DPD leads to severe toxicity in cancer patients receiving 
standard doses of fluoropyrimidines, particularly in the case of combination 
regimens. We describe a 38-year-old man with a resectable metastasis from 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, with indication of neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy and a family history of fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity. We 
tested our patient for functional DPYD variants, before any choice of the 
neoadjuvant regimen, including for the c.496A>G, already described in his 
mother, and a deep intronic variant c.1129-5923C>G recently reported associated 
to severe toxicity. Our patient was found to be heterozygous for both c.469A>G 
and c.1129-5923C>G DPYD variants. We thus offered the most active perioperative 
regimen, capecitabine, oxaliplatin, irinotecan plus bevacizumab by which we 
reduced the dosing of capecitabine to 50%. Treatment was well tolerated, with 
grade 2 diarrhea as the most significant adverse event, and led to a complete 
pathological response after liver resection. We provide a rationale approach to 
improve the safety of fluoropirimidine-based therapy in a patient with family 
history of fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity.

DOI: 10.2217/pme.14.9
PMID: 29764069