1. Neurobiol Aging. 2018 Aug;68:102-113. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.04.006.  Epub 2018 Apr 19.

Age affects reinforcement learning through dopamine-based learning imbalance and 
high decision noise-not through Parkinsonian mechanisms.

Sojitra RB(1), Lerner I(2), Petok JR(3), Gluck MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
Newark, NJ, USA; Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Rutgers 
University, Newark, Newark, NJ, USA. Electronic address: ravisoji@gmail.com.
(2)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
Newark, NJ, USA. Electronic address: itamar.lerner@gmail.com.
(3)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
Newark, NJ, USA; Department of Psychology, St. Olaf-College, Northfield, MN, 
USA.
(4)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
Newark, NJ, USA. Electronic address: gluck@newark.rutgers.edu.

Comment in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2018 Nov 12;10(12):3630-3631. doi: 10.18632/aging.101649.

Probabilistic reinforcement learning declines in healthy cognitive aging. While 
some findings suggest impairments are especially conspicuous in learning from 
rewards, resembling deficits in Parkinson's disease, others also show 
impairments in learning from punishments. To reconcile these findings, we tested 
252 adults from 3 age groups on a probabilistic reinforcement learning task, 
analyzed trial-by-trial performance with a Q-reinforcement learning model, and 
correlated both fitted model parameters and behavior to polymorphisms in 
dopamine-related genes. Analyses revealed that learning from both positive and 
negative feedback declines with age but through different mechanisms: when 
learning from negative feedback, older adults were slower due to noisy 
decision-making; when learning from positive feedback, they tended to settle for 
a nonoptimal solution due to an imbalance in learning from positive and negative 
prediction errors. The imbalance was associated with polymorphisms in the 
DARPP-32 gene and appeared to arise from mechanisms different from those 
previously attributed to Parkinson's disease. Moreover, this imbalance predicted 
previous findings on aging using the Probabilistic Selection Task, which were 
misattributed to Parkinsonian mechanisms.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2018.04.006
PMCID: PMC5993631
PMID: 29778803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement The authors confirm that 
there are no known conflicts of interest associated with the publication of this 
manuscript.