1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Jun 20;46(11):5678-5691. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky284.

Methylation guide RNA evolution in archaea: structure, function and genomic 
organization of 110 C/D box sRNA families across six Pyrobaculum species.

Lui LM(1), Uzilov AV(1), Bernick DL(1), Corredor A(1), Lowe TM(1), Dennis PP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Whitman College, Walla Walla, WA 99362, USA.

Archaeal homologs of eukaryotic C/D box small nucleolar RNAs (C/D box sRNAs) 
guide precise 2'-O-methyl modification of ribosomal and transfer RNAs. Although 
C/D box sRNA genes constitute one of the largest RNA gene families in archaeal 
thermophiles, most genomes have incomplete sRNA gene annotation because 
reliable, fully automated detection methods are not available. We expanded and 
curated a comprehensive gene set across six species of the crenarchaeal genus 
Pyrobaculum, particularly rich in C/D box sRNA genes. Using high-throughput 
small RNA sequencing, specialized computational searches and comparative 
genomics, we analyzed 526 Pyrobaculum C/D box sRNAs, organizing them into 110 
families based on synteny and conservation of guide sequences which determine 
methylation targets. We examined gene duplications and rearrangements, including 
one family that has expanded in a pattern similar to retrotransposed repetitive 
elements in eukaryotes. New training data and inclusion of kink-turn secondary 
structural features enabled creation of an improved search model. Our analyses 
provide the most comprehensive, dynamic view of C/D box sRNA evolutionary 
history within a genus, in terms of modification function, feature plasticity, 
and gene mobility.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky284
PMCID: PMC6009581
PMID: 29771354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]