1. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2018 Jul;48:52-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jtemb.2018.03.005.
Epub  2018 Mar 7.

Boron intake, osteocalcin polymorphism and serum level in postmenopausal 
osteoporosis.

Boyacioglu O(1), Orenay-Boyacioglu S(2), Yildirim H(3), Korkmaz M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Adnan Menderes 
University, Aydin, Turkey.
(2)Adnan Menderes University, Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Aydin, Turkey. Electronic address: sorenay@adu.edu.tr.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Celal Bayar University, 
Manisa, Turkey.

The relationship between daily boron intake and osteocalcin-mediated 
osteoporosis was studied in boron-exposed postmenopausal women. It is known that 
boron and osteocalcin are important in bone metabolism, however the effect of 
boron in bone metabolism has not been fully discovered. The study was performed 
on 53 postmenopausal women aged 55-60 living in parts of Balikesir, Turkey, 
where the subjects are naturally exposed to high (≥1 mg/L) or low (<1 mg/L) 
boron concentration in drinking water. 24-h urine samples were collected from 
all participants and creatinine clearance was detected. Boron intake levels of 
the subjects whose clearance levels were between 80-124 mL/min were measured by 
inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) in urine 
samples. Serum osteocalcin levels of the subjects were measured by osteocalcin 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit. Osteocalcin polymorphism 
rs1800247 was detected using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Serum osteocalcin levels in boron-exposed 
postmenopausal women were significantly higher than that of control group 
(P ≤ 0.05) and the correlation between the serum osteocalcin level and rs1800247 
polymorphism was not significant in both groups (P > 0.05). The differences in 
the distribution of osteocalcin genotypes and alleles in postmenopausal women 
were not significant between the boron exposed and the control groups 
(P > 0.05). Serum osteocalcin level in the CC genotype was significantly higher 
compared to the TC genotype in boron-exposed group (P ≤ 0.05). Our study 
suggests that daily boron intake of 1 mg/L may affect bone metabolism in 
postmenopausal women positively.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtemb.2018.03.005
PMID: 29773193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]