1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Jun 1;27(11):1941-1954. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy102.

Genetic variants in autism-related CNTNAP2 impair axonal growth of cortical 
neurons.

Canali G(1)(2)(3), Garcia M(1)(2)(3), Hivert B(4), Pinatel D(4), Goullancourt 
A(1)(2)(3), Oguievetskaia K(1)(2)(3), Saint-Martin M(5), Girault JA(1)(2)(3), 
Faivre-Sarrailh C(4), Goutebroze L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Inserm, UMR-S 839, F-75005 Paris, France.
(2)Faculté des Sciences et Ingénierie, Sorbonne Université, F-75005 Paris, 
France.
(3)Institut du Fer à Moulin, F-75005 Paris, France.
(4)Aix Marseille Université - CNRS, UMR 7286 CRN2M, F-13344 Marseille, France.
(5)CNRS UMR-5310, INSERM U-1217, Institut NeuroMyoGène, Université Claude 
Bernard Lyon 1, F-69003 Lyon, France.

Comment in
    J Exp Neurosci. 2018 Nov 09;12:1179069518809666. doi: 
10.1177/1179069518809666.
    J Exp Neurosci. 2018 Dec 04;12:1179069518815445. doi: 
10.1177/1179069518815445.

The CNTNAP2 gene, coding for the cell adhesion glycoprotein Caspr2, is thought 
to be one of the major susceptibility genes for autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 
A large number of rare heterozygous missense CNTNAP2 variants have been 
identified in ASD patients. However, most of them are inherited from an 
unaffected parent, questioning their clinical significance. In the present 
study, we evaluate their impact on neurodevelopmental functions of Caspr2 in a 
heterozygous genetic background. Performing cortical neuron cultures from mouse 
embryos, we demonstrate that Caspr2 plays a dose-dependent role in axon growth 
in vitro. Loss of one Cntnap2 allele is sufficient to elicit axonal growth 
alteration, revealing a situation that may be relevant for CNTNAP2 
heterozygosity in ASD patients. Then, we show that the two ASD variants I869T 
and G731S, which present impaired binding to Contactin2/TAG-1, do not rescue 
axonal growth deficits. We find that the variant R1119H leading to protein 
trafficking defects and retention in the endoplasmic reticulum has a 
dominant-negative effect on heterozygous Cntnap2 cortical neuron axon growth, 
through oligomerization with wild-type Caspr2. Finally, we identify an 
additional variant (N407S) with a dominant-negative effect on axon growth 
although it is well-localized at the membrane and properly binds to Contactin2. 
Thus, our data identify a new neurodevelopmental function for Caspr2, the 
dysregulation of which may contribute to clinical manifestations of ASD, and 
provide evidence that CNTNAP2 heterozygous missense variants may contribute to 
pathogenicity in ASD, through selective mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy102
PMID: 29788201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]