1. mBio. 2018 May 22;9(3):e00869-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00869-18.

Bat Caliciviruses and Human Noroviruses Are Antigenically Similar and Have 
Overlapping Histo-Blood Group Antigen Binding Profiles.

Kocher JF(1), Lindesmith LC(1), Debbink K(2), Beall A(3), Mallory ML(1), Yount 
BL(1), Graham RL(1), Huynh J(1), Gates JE(4), Donaldson EF(1), Baric RS(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, the University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(4)University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Frostburg, Maryland, 
USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA rbaric@email.unc.edu.

Emerging zoonotic viral diseases remain a challenge to global public health. 
Recent surveillance studies have implicated bats as potential reservoirs for a 
number of viral pathogens, including coronaviruses and Ebola viruses. 
Caliciviridae represent a major viral family contributing to emerging diseases 
in both human and animal populations and have been recently identified in bats. 
In this study, we blended metagenomics, phylogenetics, homology modeling, and in 
vitro assays to characterize two novel bat calicivirus (BtCalV) capsid 
sequences, corresponding to strain BtCalV/A10/USA/2009, identified in Perimyotis 
subflavus near Little Orleans, MD, and bat norovirus. We observed that bat 
norovirus formed virus-like particles and had epitopes and receptor-binding 
patterns similar to those of human noroviruses. To determine whether these 
observations stretch across multiple bat caliciviruses, we characterized a novel 
bat calicivirus, BtCalV/A10/USA/2009. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that 
BtCalV/A10/USA/2009 likely represents a novel Caliciviridae genus and is most 
closely related to "recoviruses." Homology modeling revealed that the capsid 
sequences of BtCalV/A10/USA/2009 and bat norovirus resembled human norovirus 
capsid sequences and retained host ligand binding within the receptor-binding 
domains similar to that seen with human noroviruses. Both caliciviruses bound 
histo-blood group antigens in patterns that overlapped those seen with human and 
animal noroviruses. Taken together, our results indicate the potential for bat 
caliciviruses to bind histo-blood group antigens and overcome a significant 
barrier to cross-species transmission. Additionally, we have shown that bat 
norovirus maintains antigenic epitopes similar to those seen with human 
noroviruses, providing further evidence of evolutionary descent. Our results 
reiterate the importance of surveillance of wild-animal populations, especially 
of bats, for novel viral pathogens.IMPORTANCE Caliciviruses are rapidly evolving 
viruses that cause pandemic outbreaks associated with significant morbidity and 
mortality globally. The animal reservoirs for human caliciviruses are unknown; 
bats represent critical reservoir species for several emerging and zoonotic 
diseases. Recent reports have identified several bat caliciviruses but have not 
characterized biological functions associated with disease risk, including their 
potential emergence in other mammalian populations. In this report, we 
identified a novel bat calicivirus that is most closely related to nonhuman 
primate caliciviruses. Using this new bat calicivirus and a second 
norovirus-like bat calicivirus capsid gene sequence, we generated virus-like 
particles that have host carbohydrate ligand binding patterns similar to those 
of human and animal noroviruses and that share antigens with human noroviruses. 
The similarities to human noroviruses with respect to binding patterns and 
antigenic epitopes illustrate the potential for bat caliciviruses to emerge in 
other species and the importance of pathogen surveillance in wild-animal 
populations.

Copyright Â© 2018 Kocher et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00869-18
PMCID: PMC5964351
PMID: 29789360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]