1. Chem Sci. 2018 Mar 27;9(16):3964-3969. doi: 10.1039/c8sc01154k. eCollection
2018  Apr 28.

Pd(ii)-catalyzed synthesis of bifunctionalized carboranes via cage B-H 
activation of 1-CH(2)NH(2)-o-carboranes.

Zhang X(1), Yan H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Jiangnan University , Wuxi , Jiangsu 
214122 , P. R. China . Email: xlzhang@jiangnan.edu.cn.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Coordination Chemistry , School of Chemistry and 
Chemical Engineering , Nanjing University , Nanjing , Jiangsu 210093 , P. R. 
China . Email: hyan1965@nju.edu.cn.

Aminoalkyl carboranes are anticipated to be valuable synthons toward the 
synthesis of bifunctionalized carboranes. However, direct cage boron derivation 
of these carborane derivatives has not been solved. Herein, the reversible 
conversion of catalytically infeasible o-carboranyl methylamines 
(1-CH2NH2-o-carboranes) into bidentate imines initiates Pd-mediated cage B-H 
activation. As a result, an amine coordinated bicyclic Pd(ii) complex (3) has 
been isolated and proven to be the catalytically active intermediate for highly 
site-selective B-H diarylation of o-carboranyl methylamines. Using glyoxylic 
acid as an inexpensive and commercially available transient directing reagent, a 
wide range of cage B(4,5)-diarylated free primary o-carboranyl methylamines were 
prepared in good to excellent yields with the avoidance of the pre-installation 
and removal of a directing group. This method provides easy access to cage boron 
functionalized o-carboranyl methylamines with potential for application in 
pharmaceuticals.

DOI: 10.1039/c8sc01154k
PMCID: PMC5941203
PMID: 29780529