1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Jun;15(6):8470-8476. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.8416. Epub 2018 Apr
 3.

Tunicamycin inhibits progression of glioma cells through downregulation of the 
MEG-3-regulated wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.

Li X(1), Xue L(2), Peng Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Jinshazhou Hospital of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510000, 
P.R. China.
(2)Clinical Skills Training Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510182, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510000, P.R. China.

Glioma is derived from the oncogenic transformation of brain and spinal cord 
glial cells, and is one of the most common primary brain tumors. Tunicamycin 
(TUN) can significantly inhibit glioma growth and aggressiveness by promoting 
apoptosis in glioma cells. The purpose of the present study was to investigate 
the effects of TUN on growth of glioma cells and examine the TUN-mediated 
signaling pathway. The inhibitory effects of TUN on apoptosis, growth, 
aggressiveness and cell cycle arrest of glioma tumor cells were determined by 
western blotting, reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction, 
apoptotic assays and immunofluorescence. The results demonstrated that treatment 
with TUN suppressed growth, migration and invasion of glioma carcinoma cells. In 
addition, TUN treatment induced apoptosis of glioma cells through downregulation 
of Bcl-2 and P53 expression levels. Findings also indicated that TUN suppressed 
proliferation and arrested the glioma cells in the S phase of the cell cycle. 
Further analysis of the mechanisms of TUN demonstrated that TUN treatment 
upregulated the expression levels of maternally expressed gene (MEG)-3, wnt and 
β-catenin in glioma cells. Furthermore, knockdown of MEG-3 expression reversed 
the TUN-decreased wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, which subsequently also 
reversed the TUN-inhibited growth and aggressiveness of glioma cells. In 
conclusion, the findings in the present study indicated that TUN treatment 
inhibited growth and aggressiveness through MEG-3-mediated wnt/β-catenin 
signaling, suggesting that TUN may be an efficient anticancer agent for the 
treatment of glioma.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.8416
PMCID: PMC5950543
PMID: 29805584