1. Metallomics. 2018 Jun 20;10(6):802-817. doi: 10.1039/c8mt00055g.

Low-molecular-mass iron in healthy blood plasma is not predominately ferric 
citrate.

Dziuba N(1), Hardy J, Lindahl PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77843, USA.

Blood contains a poorly characterized pool of labile iron called 
non-transferrin-bound iron (NTBI). In patients with iron-overload diseases such 
as hemochromatosis, NTBI accumulates in the liver, heart, and other organs. This 
material is probably nonproteinaceous and low molecular mass (LMM). However, the 
number, concentration, mass, and chemical composition of NTBI species remain 
unknown despite decades of effort. Here, solutions of plasma from humans, pigs, 
horses, and mice were passed through a 10 kDa cutoff membrane, affording 
flow-through solutions (FTSs) containing ∼1 μM iron. The FTSs were subjected to 
size-exclusion liquid chromatography at pH 8.5, 6.5, and 4.5. Iron was detected 
by an online inductively-coupled-plasma mass spectrometer. LC-ICP-MS 
chromatograms of the FTSs exhibited 2-6 iron-containing species with apparent 
masses between 400 and 2500 Da. Their approximate concentrations in plasma were 
10-8-10-7 M. Not every FTS sample contained every LMM iron species, indicating 
individual variations. The most reproducible iron species had apparent masses of 
400 and 500 Da. Chromatograms of the FTSs from established hemochromatosis 
patients exhibited no significant differences relative to controls. The peak 
positions and intensities depended on column pH. Some FTS iron adsorbed onto the 
column, especially at higher pH. Column-adsorbing-iron coordinated 
apo-transferrin whereas the more tightly coordinated iron species did not. 
Ferric citrate standards exhibited LMM iron peaks that were similar to but not 
the same as those obtained in FTSs. The results indicate that the LMM iron 
species in healthy blood plasma is not primarily ferric citrate; however, this 
may be one of many contributing complexes.

DOI: 10.1039/c8mt00055g
PMCID: PMC6037485
PMID: 29808889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to 
declare.