1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2018 Apr 23;2018:6567578. doi: 10.1155/2018/6567578. 
eCollection 2018.

Cigarette Smoke-Induced Acquired Dysfunction of Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane 
Conductance Regulator in the Pathogenesis of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Disease.

Shi J(1)(2), Li H(1)(2)(3), Yuan C(4), Luo M(1)(4), Wei J(1)(2)(3), Liu 
X(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Clinical Medicine, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 
750004, China.
(2)Ningxia Key Laboratory of Clinical and Pathological Microbiology, General 
Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750004, China.
(3)Ningxia Institute for Stem Cell Research, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical 
University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750004, China.
(4)College of Life Science, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a disease state characterized by 
airflow limitation that is not fully reversible. Cigarette smoke and oxidative 
stress are main etiological risks in COPD. Interestingly, recent studies suggest 
a considerable overlap between chronic bronchitis (CB) phenotypic COPD and 
cystic fibrosis (CF), a common fatal hereditary lung disease caused by genetic 
mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
gene. Phenotypically, CF and COPD are associated with an impaired mucociliary 
clearance and mucus hypersecretion, although they are two distinct entities of 
unrelated origin. Mechanistically, the cigarette smoke-increased oxidative 
stress-induced CFTR dysfunction is implicated in COPD. This underscores CFTR in 
understanding and improving therapies for COPD by altering CFTR function with 
antioxidant agents and CFTR modulators as a great promising strategy for COPD 
treatments. Indeed, treatments that restore CFTR function, including mucolytic 
therapy, antioxidant ROS scavenger, CFTR stimulator (roflumilast), and CFTR 
potentiator (ivacaftor), have been tested in COPD. This review article is aimed 
at summarizing the molecular, cellular, and clinical evidence of oxidative 
stress, particularly the cigarette smoke-increased oxidative stress-impaired 
CFTR function, as well as signaling pathways of CFTR involved in the 
pathogenesis of COPD, with a highlight on the therapeutic potential of targeting 
CFTR for COPD treatment.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/6567578
PMCID: PMC5937428
PMID: 29849907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]