1. Brain Res Bull. 2018 Jun;140:299-310. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.05.019.
 Epub 2018 May 26.

α-Lipoic acid attenuates oxidative stress and neurotoxicity via the 
ERK/Akt-dependent pathway in the mutant hSOD1 related Drosophila model and the 
NSC34 cell line of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Wang T(1), Cheng J(1), Wang S(1), Wang X(1), Jiang H(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Y(1), 
Zhang C(1), Liang W(2), Feng H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(2)Department of Neurology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, PR China. Electronic address: 
fenghonglin186@sina.com.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a degenerative disease with a progressive 
loss of motor neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). However, there are 
unsolved problems with the therapies for this disease. α-Lipoic acid (LA) is a 
natural, universal antioxidant capable of scavenging hydroxyl radicals as well 
as regenerating a series of antioxidant enzymes that has been widely used in 
clinical settings. This study aimed to evaluate the antioxidant and 
neuroprotective effects of LA in ALS cell and Drosophila models with mutant G85R 
and G93A hSOD1 genes. The biological effects of LA and the protein levels of 
several antioxidant factors were examined, as were those of phospho-Akt and 
phospho-ERK. Furthermore, specific inhibitors of the PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK 
signaling pathways were used to analyze their effects on LA-induced antioxidant 
expression in vivo and in vitro. Evidences showed that the mutant hSOD1 resulted 
in the increased oxidative stress, abnormal antioxidant signaling and 
pathological behaviors in motor performance and survival compared with 
non-mutant hSOD1 models, treatment with LA improved motor activity and survival 
in transgenic flies, prevented NSC34 cells from mutant hSOD1 or H2O2 induced 
decreased antioxidant enzymes as well as increased ROS levels. In addition, LA 
regulated the expression levels of antioxidant proteins in a dose- and 
periodical time-dependent manner, which might be mediated by ERK/Akt pathway 
activation and independent from the mutant hSOD1 gene. Our observations suggest 
that LA exerts strong and positive antioxidant and neuroprotective effects 
through the activation of the ERK-Akt pathway in hSOD1 ALS models.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.05.019
PMID: 29842900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]