1. J Nucl Med. 2018 Dec;59(12):1885-1891. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.118.213140. Epub
2018  May 31.

Antibody-Based In Vivo PET Imaging Detects Amyloid-β Reduction in Alzheimer 
Transgenic Mice After BACE-1 Inhibition.

Meier SR(1), Syvänen S(1), Hultqvist G(2), Fang XT(1), Roshanbin S(1), Lannfelt 
L(1)(3), Neumann U(4), Sehlin D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences/Geriatrics, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(3)BioArctic AB, Stockholm, Sweden; and.
(4)Neuroscience Research, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(5)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences/Geriatrics, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden dag.sehlin@pubcare.uu.se.

Visualization of amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology with PET has become an important tool 
for making a specific clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease (AD). However, the 
available amyloid PET radioligands, such as 11C-Pittsburgh compound B, reflect 
levels of insoluble Aβ plaques but do not capture soluble and protofibrillar Aβ 
forms. Furthermore, the plaque load appears to be fairly static during clinical 
stages of AD and may not be affected by Aβ-reducing treatments. The aim of the 
present study was to investigate whether a novel PET radioligand based on an 
antibody directed toward soluble aggregates of Aβ can be used to detect changes 
in Aβ levels during disease progression and after treatment with a β-secretase 
(BACE-1) inhibitor. Methods: One set of transgenic mice (tg-ArcSwe, a model of 
Aβ pathology) aged between 7 and 16 mo underwent PET with the Aβ 
protofibril-selective radioligand 124I-RmAb158-scFv8D3 (where RmAb is 
recombinant mouse monoclonal antibody and scFv is single-chain variable 
fragment) to follow progression of Aβ pathology in the brain. A second set of 
tg-ArcSwe mice, aged 10 mo, were treated with the BACE-1 inhibitor NB-360 for 3 
mo and compared with an untreated control group. A third set of tg-ArcSwe mice, 
also aged 10 mo, underwent PET as a baseline group. Brain tissue was isolated 
after PET to determine levels of Aβ by ELISA and immunohistochemistry. Results: 
The concentration of 124I-RmAb158-scFv8D3, as measured in vivo with PET, 
increased with age and corresponded well with the ex vivo autoradiography and Aβ 
immunohistochemistry results. Mice treated with NB-360 showed significantly 
lower in vivo PET signals than untreated animals and were similar to the 
baseline animals. The decreased 124I-RmAb158-scFv8D3 concentrations in 
NB-360-treated mice, as quantified with PET, corresponded well with the 
decreased Aβ levels measured in postmortem brain. Conclusion: Several treatments 
for AD are in phase 2 and 3 clinical trials, but the possibility of studying 
treatment effects in vivo on the important, nonfibrillar, forms of Aβ is 
limited. This study demonstrated the ability of the Aβ protofibril-selective 
radioligand 124I-RmAb158-scFv8D3 to follow disease progression and detect 
treatment effects with PET imaging in tg-ArcSwe mice.

© 2018 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.118.213140
PMCID: PMC6278900
PMID: 29853653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]