1. Cell Transplant. 2018 Apr;27(4):637-647. doi: 10.1177/0963689718766460. Epub 
2018 Jun 5.

Stem Cell Factor in Combination with Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor 
reduces Cerebral Capillary Thrombosis in a Mouse Model of CADASIL.

Ping S(1), Qiu X(1), Gonzalez-Toledo ME(2), Liu X(2), Zhao LR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurosurgery, State University of New York, Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, New York, NY, USA.
(2)2 Departments of Neurology, Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Louisiana State 
University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA.

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and 
leucoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is a cerebral small vascular disease caused by 
NOTCH3 mutation-induced vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) degeneration, leading 
to ischemic stroke and vascular dementia. Our previous study has demonstrated 
that repeated treatment with a combination of stem cell factor (SCF) and 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) reduces VSMC degeneration and 
cerebral endothelial cell (EC) damage and improves cognitive function in a mouse 
model of CADASIL (TgNotch3R90C). This study aimed to determine whether cerebral 
thrombosis occurs in TgNotch3R90C mice and whether repeated SCF+G-CSF treatment 
reduces cerebral thrombosis in TgNotch3R90C mice. Using the approaches of bone 
marrow transplantation to track bone marrow-derived cells and confocal imaging, 
we observed bone marrow-derived blood cell occlusion in cerebral small vessels 
and capillaries (thrombosis). Most thrombosis occurred in the cerebral 
capillaries (93% of total occluded vessels), and the thrombosis showed an 
increased frequency in the regions of capillary bifurcation. Degenerated 
capillary ECs were seen inside and surrounding the thrombosis, and the bone 
marrow-derived ECs were also found next to the thrombosis. IgG extravasation was 
seen in and next to the areas of thrombosis. SCF+G-CSF treatment significantly 
reduced cerebral capillary thrombosis and IgG extravasation. These data suggest 
that the EC damage is associated with thrombosis and blood-brain barrier leakage 
in the cerebral capillaries under the CADASIL-like condition, whereas SCF+G-CSF 
treatment diminishes these pathological alterations. This study provides new 
insight into the involvement of cerebral capillary thrombosis in the development 
of CADASIL and potential approaches to reduce the thrombosis, which may restrict 
the pathological progression of CADASIL.

DOI: 10.1177/0963689718766460
PMCID: PMC6041883
PMID: 29871518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.