1. Lin Chuang Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2017 Jan 20;31(2):91-95. doi:
 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.02.003.

[Analysis of tumor necrosis factor-α and zinc finger protein 36 gene 
polymorphism for patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang L(1), Yan N(2), Xu BS(3), Zhu YL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Henan Province People's Hospital, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, 450003, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Henan Province People's Hospital, Zhengzhou 
University.
(3)Department of Laboratory, Henan Province People's Hospital, Zhengzhou 
University.

Objective:To investigate the association between obstructive sleep apnea 
hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) and tumor necrosis factor(TNF) -α and zinc finger 
protein 36 (ZFP36) gene polymorphisms.Method:Two hundred and four patients with 
OSAHS were enrolled as study group. Meanwhile, 97 healthy subjects were selected 
as control group. Three sites of ZFP36 gene (rs17879933, rs3746083 and rs251864) 
were detected by TaqMan-PCR method. The levels of TNF-α and other biochemical 
markers were detected by radioimmunoassay, and relevant indicators of breathing 
during sleep at night of all the subjects were recorded by Monet32 system. 
Result:The levels of TNF-α, total cholesterol, uric acid, diastolic blood 
pressure, systolic blood pressure, body mass index, abdominal circumference and 
neck circumference were significantly higher in the study group than those in 
the control group (all P< 0.05). The genotype and allele frequencies of rs251864 
and rs17879933 were significantly different between the study group and the 
control group (all P< 0.05). The levels of abdominal circumference, BMI, TNF-α 
and TG in patients with rs251864 GG and rs17879933 Ⅱ genotypes were 
significantly higher than those with the other two genotypes (all P< 0.05). 
There was no significant difference in all the sleep respiration indexes between 
the three genotypes of ZFP36 (all P< 0.05). Logistic regression analysis showed 
that there was no correlation between three polymorphisms of ZFP36 and OSAHS 
after controlling a series of factors such as gender and age.Conclusion:ZFP36 
may be involved in the pathogenesis of OSAHS by modulating inflammatory factors 
such as TNF-α and interfering with metabolism. ZFP36 mutation at three sites is 
not an independent risk factor for OSAHS.

Copyright© by the Editorial Department of Journal of Clinical 
Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery.

DOI: 10.13201/j.issn.1001-1781.2017.02.003
PMID: 29871194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning 
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with 
commercial interests to disclose.