1. Biomed Res Int. 2018 May 17;2018:3870508. doi: 10.1155/2018/3870508.
eCollection  2018.

Pandemic Avian Influenza and Intra/Interhaemagglutinin Subtype Electrostatic 
Variation among Viruses Isolated from Avian, Mammalian, and Human Hosts.

Righetto I(1), Filippini F(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics (MOLBINFO) Laboratory, Department of 
Biology, University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi 58/B, 35131 Padova, Italy.

Host jump can result in deadly pandemic events when avian influenza A viruses 
broaden their host specificity and become able to infect mammals, including 
humans. Haemagglutinin-the major capsid protein in influenza A viruses-is 
subjected to high rate mutations, of which several occur at its "head": the 
receptor-binding domain that mediates specific binding to host cell receptors. 
Such surface-changing mutations may lead to antigenically novel influenza A 
viruses hence in pandemics by host jump and in vaccine escape by antigenic 
drift. Changes in haemagglutinin surface electrostatics have been recently 
associated with antigenic drift and with clades evolution and spreading in H5N1 
and H9N2 viruses. We performed a comparative analysis of haemagglutinin surface 
electrostatics to investigate clustering and eventual fingerprints among 
representative pandemic (H5 and H7) and nonpandemic (H4 and H6) avian influenza 
viral subtypes. We observed preferential sorting of viruses isolated from 
mammalian/human hosts among these electrostatic clusters of a subtype; however, 
sorting was not "100% specific" to the different clusters. Therefore, 
electrostatic fingerprints can help in understanding, but they cannot explain 
alone the host jumping mechanism.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/3870508
PMCID: PMC5985083
PMID: 29888260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]