1. Sci Adv. 2018 Jun 8;4(6):eaar6782. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aar6782. eCollection
2018  Jun.

Parity-time-symmetric optoelectronic oscillator.

Zhang J(1), Yao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Microwave Photonics Research Laboratory, School of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada.

An optoelectronic oscillator (OEO) is a hybrid microwave and photonic system 
incorporating an amplified positive feedback loop to enable microwave 
oscillation to generate a high-frequency and low-phase noise microwave signal. 
The low phase noise is ensured by the high Q factor of the feedback loop enabled 
by the use of a long and low-loss optical fiber. However, an OEO with a long 
fiber loop would have a small free spectral range, leading to a large number of 
closely spaced oscillation modes. To ensure single-mode oscillation, an 
ultranarrowband optical filter must be used, but such an optical filter is hard 
to implement and the stability is poor. Here, we use a novel concept to achieve 
single-mode oscillation without using an ultranarrowband optical filter. The 
single-mode operation is achieved based on parity-time (PT) symmetry by using 
two identical feedback loops, with one having a gain and the other having a loss 
of the same magnitude. The operation is analyzed theoretically and verified by 
an experiment. Stable single-mode oscillation at an ultralow phase noise is 
achieved without the use of an ultranarrowband optical filter. The use of PT 
symmetry in an OEO overcomes the long-existing mode-selection challenge that 
would greatly simplify the implementation of OEOs for ultralow-phase noise 
microwave generation.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aar6782
PMCID: PMC5993476
PMID: 29888325