1. Front Microbiol. 2018 May 25;9:1093. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01093.
eCollection  2018.

Differentially Expressed Genes in Osteomyelitis Induced by Staphylococcus aureus 
Infection.

Chen P(1)(2), Yao Z(1)(2), Deng G(1)(2), Hou Y(1)(2), Chen S(1)(2), Hu Y(1), Yu 
B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Bone and Cartilage Regenerative 
Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Osteomyelitis (OM) is a complicated and serious disease and its underlying 
molecular signatures of disease initiation and progression remain unclear. 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the most common causative agent of OM. 
Previous study of Banchereau et al. has established a link between whole blood 
transcription profiles and clinical manifestations in patients infected with S. 
aureus. However, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in OM induced by S. 
aureus infection have not been intensively investigated. In this study, we 
downloaded the gene expression profile dataset GSE30119 from Gene Expression 
Omnibus, and performed bioinformatic analysis to identify DEGs in S. aureus 
infection induced OM from the transcriptional level. The study consisted of 143 
whole blood samples, including 44 healthy controls, 42 OM-free, and 57 OM 
infection patients. A total of 209 S. aureus infection-related genes (SARGs) and 
377 OM-related genes (OMRGs) were identified. The SARGs were primarily involved 
in the immune response by GO functional and pathway enrichment analysis. Several 
proteins adhere to neutrophil extracellular traps may be critical for the immune 
response to the process of S. aureus infection. By contrast, the OMRGs differ 
from the SARGs. The OMRGs were enriched in transmembrane signaling receptor and 
calcium channel activity, cilium morphogenesis, chromatin silencing, even 
multicellular organism development. Several key proteins, including PHLPP2 and 
EGF, were hub nodes in protein-protein interaction network of the OMRGs. In 
addition, alcoholism, systemic lupus erythematosus and proteoglycans in cancer 
were the top pathways influenced by the OMRGs associated with OM. Thus, this 
study has further explored the DEGs and their biological functions associated 
with S. aureus infection and OM, comparing with the previous study, and may 
light the further insight into the underlying molecular mechanisms and the 
potential critical biomarkers in OM development.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01093
PMCID: PMC5982613
PMID: 29887852