1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2018 Oct;17(10):2197-2205. doi:
10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-1269.  Epub 2018 Jun 11.

Intra versus Inter Cross-resistance Determines Treatment Sequence between Taxane 
and AR-Targeting Therapies in Advanced Prostate Cancer.

Lombard AP(1), Liu L(1)(2), Cucchiara V(1), Liu C(1), Armstrong CM(1), Zhao 
R(1)(3), Yang JC(1), Lou W(1), Evans CP(1)(4), Gao AC(5)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, Davis, California.
(2)Department of Urology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.
(3)Department of Urology, General Hospital of NingXia Medical University, 
Ningxia Huizuzizhiqu, China.
(4)UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Davis, 
California.
(5)Department of Urology, University of California, Davis, California. 
acgao@ucdavis.edu.
(6)VA Northern California Health Care System, Sacramento, California.

Current treatments for castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) largely fall 
into two classes: androgen receptor (AR)-targeted therapies such as the 
next-generation antiandrogen therapies (NGAT), enzalutamide and abiraterone, and 
taxanes such as docetaxel and cabazitaxel. Despite improvements in outcomes, 
patients still succumb to the disease due to the development of resistance. 
Further complicating the situation is lack of a well-defined treatment sequence 
and potential for cross-resistance between therapies. We have developed several 
models representing CRPC with acquired therapeutic resistance. Here, we utilized 
these models to assess putative cross-resistance between treatments. We find 
that resistance to enzalutamide induces resistance to abiraterone and vice 
versa, but resistance to neither alters sensitivity to taxanes. Acquired 
resistance to docetaxel induces cross-resistance to cabazitaxel but not to 
enzalutamide or abiraterone. Correlating responses with known mechanisms of 
resistance indicates that AR variants are associated with resistance to NGATs, 
whereas the membrane efflux protein ABCB1 is associated with taxane resistance. 
Mechanistic studies show that AR variant-7 (AR-v7) is involved in NGAT 
resistance but not resistance to taxanes. Our findings suggest the existence of 
intra cross-resistance within a drug class (i.e., within NGATs or within 
taxanes), whereas inter cross-resistance between drug classes does not develop. 
Furthermore, our data suggest that resistance mechanisms differ between drug 
classes. These results may have clinical implications by showing that treatments 
of one class can be sequenced with those of another, but caution should be taken 
when sequencing similar classed drugs. In addition, the development and use of 
biomarkers indicating resistance will improve patient stratification for 
treatment. Mol Cancer Ther; 17(10); 2197-205. ©2018 AACR.

©2018 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-1269
PMCID: PMC6168406
PMID: 29891490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest – C.P. Evans has received 
speakers bureau honoraria from Astellas, Jansen, and Sanofi. No potential 
conflicts of interest were disclosed by the other authors.