1. J Cancer. 2018 Apr 30;9(11):2024-2029. doi: 10.7150/jca.24714. eCollection
2018.

Higher Plasma Fibrinogen Levels are Associated with Malignant Phenotype and 
Worse Survival in Patients with Glioblastomas.

Wang PF(1), Meng Z(1), Song HW(1), Yao K(2), Duan ZJ(2), Li SW(1), Yan CX(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
China.

Preoperative plasma fibrinogen levels were associated with poor clinical 
outcomes in malignancies. There were few data about the prognostic value of 
plasma fibrinogen in glioblastomas (GBMs). The objective of our study was to 
investigate the association between fibrinogen and patients' clinicopathological 
factors and overall survival (OS). From 2008 to 2016, 315 patients with GBMs who 
had a surgical treatment at our institute, were retrospectively involved in this 
study. IDH (isocitrate dehydrogenase) mutations and ATRX (alpha 
thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked) loss were detected with IHC 
(Immunohistochemistry). The preoperative plasma fibrinogen levels ranged from 
1.00 to 5.22 g/L, with a mean of were 2.57 g/L. There were increased levels of 
plasma fibrinogen in patients aged â‰¥ 65 years, secondary GBMs, IDH mutation (p = 
0.033) and ATRX loss (p = 0.040). Moreover, the plasma fibrinogen level was the 
highest in the subtype of IDH-1R132H wildtype - ATRX expression, which showed a 
shorter OS compared to the group of IDH-1R132H mut and IDH-1R132H wildtype - 
ATRX loss (p = 0.001, log-rank test). ROC curves for fibrinogen and IDH-1R132H 
wildtype - ATRX expression was also plotted, and indicated a potential 
diagnostic value of fibrinogen in molecular pathology. Univariate analysis found 
that younger age, higher KPS (Karnofsky Performance Score), gross total 
resection, complete chemoradiotherapy, IDH-1R132H mutations and lower levels of 
fibrinogen were associated with favorable outcomes. Multivariate analysis proved 
that chemoradiotherapy, IDH-1R132H and fibrinogen were independent prognostic 
factors. In conclusion, plasma fibrinogen could predict clinical outcome and 
molecular subtype in GBMs.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.24714
PMCID: PMC5995933
PMID: 29896287

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.