1. New Phytol. 2018 Sep;219(4):1388-1405. doi: 10.1111/nph.15249. Epub 2018 Jun
13.

The Arabidopsis USL1 controls multiple aspects of development by affecting late 
endosome morphology.

Yuan R(1)(2), Lan J(1), Fang Y(1), Yu H(1), Zhang J(1), Huang J(1), Qin G(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life 
Sciences, School of Advanced Agricultural Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 
100871, China.
(2)The Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.

The polar transport of auxin controls many aspects of plant development. 
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying auxin tranport regulation remain to 
be further elucidated. We identified a mutant named as usl1 (unflattened and 
small leaves) in a genetic screen in Arabidopsis thaliana. The usl1 displayed 
multiple aspects of developmental defects in leaves, embryogenesis, cotyledons, 
silique phyllotaxy and lateral roots in addition to abnormal leaves. USL1 
encodes a protein orthologous to the yeast vacuolar protein sorting (Vps) 38p 
and human UV RADIATION RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED GENE (UVRAG). Cell biology, 
Co-IP/MS and yeast two-hybrid were used to identify the function of USL1. USL1 
colocalizes at the subcellular level with VPS29, a key factor of the retromer 
complex that controls auxin transport. The morphology of the VPS29-associated 
late endosomes (LE) is altered from small dots in the wild-type to aberrant 
enlarged circles in the usl1 mutants. The usl1 mutant synergistically interacts 
with vps29. We also found that USL1 forms a complex with AtVPS30 and AtVPS34. We 
propose that USL1 controls multiple aspects of plant development by affecting 
late endosome morphology and by regulating the PIN1 polarity. Our findings 
provide a new layer of the understanding on the mechanisms of plant development 
regulation.

© 2018 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2018 New Phytologist Trust.

DOI: 10.1111/nph.15249
PMCID: PMC6099276
PMID: 29897620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]