1. Mol Med Rep. 2018 Aug;18(2):1531-1537. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9141. Epub 2018
Jun  6.

A novel method to detect the Mexican founder mutation BRCA1 ex9‑12del associated 
with breast and ovarian cancer using quantitative polymerase chain reaction and 
TaqMan® probes.

Martínez-Treviño DA(1), León-Cachón RBR(1), Villarreal-Garza C(2), Aguilar Y 
Méndez D(2), Aguilar-Martínez E(3), Barrera-Saldaña HA(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Molecular Diagnostics and Personalized Medicine, Department of 
Basic Sciences, Division of Health Sciences, University of Monterrey, San Pedro 
Garza Garcia, Nuevo Leon 66238, Mexico.
(2)Breast Cancer Center, Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, 
Monterrey, Nuevo Leon 64710, Mexico.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, M13 9PT 
Manchester, UK.
(4)TecSalud, Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, Monterrey, 
Nuevo Leon 64710, Mexico.

In 2015, according to the National Institute of Statistics and Geography 
(INEGI), malignant breast tumors were the first cause of cancer fatality in 
women (6,273 fatalities) in Mexico, whereas 2,793 fatalities in women were due 
to ovarian cancer. A total of 5‑10% of breast cancer and 10‑15% of ovarian 
cancer cases are caused by a hereditary breast‑ovarian cancer syndrome, with 
mutations predominantly identified in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Recently, the 
Mexican founder mutation BRCA1 ex9‑12del was identified (deletion of exons 9‑12 
with recombination between introns 8‑12). This is the most frequently reported 
mutation in hereditary breast/ovarian cancer in Mexico. Current detection 
methods include end‑point polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Multiplex 
Ligation‑dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). In the present study a cheap, 
sensitive and fast detection method was developed based on quantitative PCR and 
two TaqMan® probes, one to detect the deletion (recombination region between 
introns 8 and 12), and the other one a region from exon 11. With this assay, 
90 samples were able to be analyzed in 2 h using 2.5 ng of DNA/reaction at a 
cost of ~2‑3 USD. This method is capable of detecting positive samples for DNA 
deletion and excluding negative ones. Therefore, the method proposed may be a 
useful high‑throughput diagnostic option that could be useful in future 
association or prevalence studies that use large populations.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2018.9141
PMCID: PMC6072190
PMID: 29901183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]