1. Microb Genom. 2018 Jul;4(7):e000188. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000188. Epub 2018 Jun
 15.

A complete high-quality MinION nanopore assembly of an extensively 
drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing lineage strain identifies 
novel variation in repetitive PE/PPE gene regions.

Bainomugisa A(1)(2), Duarte T(1), Lavu E(3), Pandey S(4), Coulter C(4), Marais 
BJ(5), Coin LM(1).

Author information:
(1)1​Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(2)2​Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(3)3​Central Public Health Laboratory, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea.
(4)4​Queensland Mycobacteria Reference Laboratory, Brisbane, Australia.
(5)5​Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases and Biosecurity, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

A better understanding of the genomic changes that facilitate the emergence and 
spread of drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains is currently 
required. Here, we report the use of the MinION nanopore sequencer (Oxford 
Nanopore Technologies) to sequence and assemble an extensively drug-resistant 
(XDR) isolate, which is part of a modern Beijing sub-lineage strain, prevalent 
in Western Province, Papua New Guinea. Using 238-fold coverage obtained from a 
single flow-cell, de novo assembly of nanopore reads resulted into one 
contiguous assembly with 99.92 % assembly accuracy. Incorporation of 
complementary short read sequences (Illumina) as part of consensus error 
correction resulted in a 4 404 064 bp genome with 99.98 % assembly accuracy. 
This assembly had an average nucleotide identity of 99.7 % relative to the 
reference genome, H37Rv. We assembled nearly all GC-rich repetitive PE/PPE 
family genes (166/168) and identified variants within these genes. With an 
estimated genotypic error rate of 5.3 % from MinION data, we demonstrated 
identification of variants to include the conventional drug resistance 
mutations, and those that contribute to the resistance phenotype (efflux 
pumps/transporter) and virulence. Reference-based alignment of the assembly 
allowed detection of deletions and insertions. MinION sequencing provided a 
fully annotated assembly of a transmissible XDR strain from an endemic setting 
and showed its utility to provide further understanding of genomic processes 
within Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000188
PMCID: PMC6113869
PMID: 29906261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there was no conflict 
of interest.