1. Anal Chim Acta. 2018 Oct 31;1029:86-96. doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2018.04.049. Epub 
2018 Apr 21.

Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy based immunosensor for ultrasensitive and 
selective detection of wild type p53 and mutant p53(R175H).

Bizzarri AR(1), Moscetti I(2), Cannistraro S(2).

Author information:
(1)Biophysics & Nanoscience Centre, DEB, Università della Tuscia, Viterbo, 
Italy. Electronic address: bizzarri@unitus.it.
(2)Biophysics & Nanoscience Centre, DEB, Università della Tuscia, Viterbo, 
Italy.

p53 is a powerful transcription factor playing a pivotal role in the prevention 
of cancer development and in maintaining genome integrity. This oncosuppressor 
is found to be functionally inactivated by mutations in many human tumors. 
Accordingly, wild type p53 and its oncogenic mutants represent valuable cancer 
biomarkers for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. We developed a highly 
sensitive biosensor, based on Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy, for detection 
of wild type p53 and of p53R175H, which is one of the most frequent 
tumor-associated mutants of p53. Our approach combines the huge Raman signal 
enhancement, mainly arising from the plasmonic resonance effect on molecules 
close to gold nanoparticles, with the antigen-antibody biorecognition 
specificity. By following the enhanced signal of a specific Raman marker, 
intrinsic to the nanoparticle-antibody bioconjugation, we were able to push the 
antigen detection level down to the attomolar range in buffer and to the 
femtomolar range in spiked human serum. The method demonstrated a high 
reproducibility and a remarkable selectivity in discriminating between wild type 
p53 and p53R175H mutant, in both buffer and serum. A calibration plot was built 
and validated by ELISA for a reliable quantification of p53. These findings 
entitle our SERS-based immunosensor as a powerful and reliable tool for a 
non-invasive screening in human serum targeting p53 network. The approach could 
be easily extended to ultrasensitive detection of other markers of general 
interest, with feasible implementations into multiplex assays, functioning as 
lab-on-chip devices for several applications.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aca.2018.04.049
PMID: 29907296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]