1. J Mol Biol. 2018 Aug 17;430(17):2760-2783. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.06.019.
Epub  2018 Jun 15.

A Highly Proliferative Group IIC Intron from Geobacillus stearothermophilus 
Reveals New Features of Group II Intron Mobility and Splicing.

Mohr G(1), Kang SY(1), Park SK(1), Qin Y(1), Grohman J(1), Yao J(1), Stamos 
JL(1), Lambowitz AM(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(2)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas 
at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. Electronic address: 
lambowitz@austin.utexas.edu.

The thermostable Geobacillus stearothermophilus GsI-IIC intron is among the few 
bacterial group II introns found to proliferate to high copy number in its host 
genome. Here, we developed a bacterial genetic assay for retrohoming and 
biochemical assays for protein-dependent and self-splicing of GsI-IIC. We found 
that GsI-IIC, like other group IIC introns, retrohomes into sites having a 
5'-exon DNA hairpin, typically from a bacterial transcription terminator, 
followed by short intron-binding sequences (IBSs) recognized by base pairing of 
exon-binding sequences (EBSs) in the intron RNA. Intron RNA insertion occurs 
preferentially but not exclusively into the parental lagging strand at DNA 
replication forks, using a nascent lagging strand DNA as a primer for reverse 
transcription. In vivo mobility assays, selections, and mutagenesis indicated 
that a variety of GC-rich DNA hairpins of 7-19 bp with continuous base pairs or 
internal elbow regions support efficient intron mobility and identified a 
critically recognized nucleotide (T-5) between the hairpin and IBS1, a feature 
not reported previously for group IIC introns. Neither the hairpin nor T-5 is 
required for intron excision or lariat formation during RNA splicing, but the 
5'-exon sequence can affect the efficiency of exon ligation. Structural modeling 
suggests that the 5'-exon DNA hairpin and T-5 bind to the thumb and DNA-binding 
domains of GsI-IIC reverse transcriptase. This mode of DNA target site 
recognition enables the intron to proliferate to high copy number by recognizing 
numerous transcription terminators and then finding the best match for the 
EBS/IBS interactions within a short distance downstream.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.06.019
PMCID: PMC6082379
PMID: 29913158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]