1. J Immunother Cancer. 2018 Jun 18;6(1):57. doi: 10.1186/s40425-018-0360-8.

Targeting adenosine for cancer immunotherapy.

Leone RD(1), Emens LA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Bloomberg~Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Sidney-Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA.
(2)Bloomberg~Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Sidney-Kimmel 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA. emensle@jhmi.edu.
(3)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, Room 409, 
Cancer Research Building 1, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA. emensle@jhmi.edu.

Immune checkpoint antagonists (CTLA-4 and PD-1/PD-L1) and CAR T-cell therapies 
generate unparalleled durable responses in several cancers and have firmly 
established immunotherapy as a new pillar of cancer therapy. To extend the 
impact of immunotherapy to more patients and a broader range of cancers, 
targeting additional mechanisms of tumor immune evasion will be critical. 
Adenosine signaling has emerged as a key metabolic pathway that regulates tumor 
immunity. Adenosine is an immunosuppressive metabolite produced at high levels 
within the tumor microenvironment. Hypoxia, high cell turnover, and expression 
of CD39 and CD73 are important factors in adenosine production. Adenosine 
signaling through the A2a receptor expressed on immune cells potently dampens 
immune responses in inflamed tissues. In this article, we will describe the role 
of adenosine signaling in regulating tumor immunity, highlighting potential 
therapeutic targets in the pathway. We will also review preclinical data for 
each target and provide an update of current clinical activity within the field. 
Together, current data suggest that rational combination immunotherapy 
strategies that incorporate inhibitors of the hypoxia-CD39-CD73-A2aR pathway 
have great promise for further improving clinical outcomes in cancer patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s40425-018-0360-8
PMCID: PMC6006764
PMID: 29914571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: N/A. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: L.A.E. is a paid consultant for Vaccinex, Celgene, Bristol 
Meyers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Amgen, Syndax, Molecuvax, eTHeRNA, Peregrine, Bayer, 
Gritstone, MedImmune, Abbvie, and Replimune, and has received grant/research 
support from Genetech/Roche, EMD Serono, Maxcyte, Merck, AstraZeneca, Aduro, 
Corvus. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.