1. Sci Adv. 2018 Jun 13;4(6):eaat1161. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aat1161. eCollection 
2018 Jun.

Viscoelastic properties of vimentin originate from nonequilibrium conformational 
changes.

Block J(1), Witt H(2), Candelli A(3)(4), Danes JC(3)(4), Peterman EJG(3), Wuite 
GJL(3), Janshoff A(2), Köster S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for X-Ray Physics, University of Goettingen, 37077 Göttingen, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Goettingen, 37077 Göttingen, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Physics and Astronomy and LaserLab, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)LUMICKS B.V., 1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Structure and dynamics of living matter rely on design principles fundamentally 
different from concepts of traditional material science. Specialized 
intracellular filaments in the cytoskeleton permit living systems to divide, 
migrate, and grow with a high degree of variability and durability. Among the 
three filament systems, microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments 
(IFs), the physical properties of IFs and their role in cellular mechanics are 
the least well understood. We use optical trapping of individual vimentin 
filaments to investigate energy dissipation, strain history dependence, and 
creep behavior of stretched filaments. By stochastic and numerical modeling, we 
link our experimental observations to the peculiar molecular architecture of 
IFs. We find that individual vimentin filaments display tensile memory and are 
able to dissipate more than 70% of the input energy. We attribute these 
phenomena to distinct nonequilibrium folding and unfolding of α helices in the 
vimentin monomers constituting the filaments.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aat1161
PMCID: PMC6007166
PMID: 29928696