1. Cytokine. 2019 Jan;113:99-104. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.06.014. Epub 2018 Jun 
20.

Significant association between IL10-1082/-819 and TNF-308 haplotypes and the 
susceptibility to cervical carcinogenesis in women infected by Human 
papillomavirus.

Chagas BS(1), Lima RCP(1), Paiva Júnior SSL(2), Silva RCO(1), Cordeiro MN(1), 
Silva Neto JDC(3), Batista MVA(4), Silva AJD(1), Gurgel APAD(5), Freitas AC(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Studies and Experimental Therapy, Department of 
Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(2)Academic Unit of Serra Talhada - Federal Rural University of Pernambuco, 
Pernambuco, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular and Cytological Research, Department of Histology, 
Federal University of Pernambuco, Pernambuco, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biology, Federal University of Sergipe, Sergipe, Brazil.
(5)Department of Engineering and Environment, Federal University of Paraiba, 
Paraiba, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Molecular Studies and Experimental Therapy, Department of 
Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco, Pernambuco, Brazil. Electronic 
address: acf_ufpe@yahoo.com.br.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is responsible for high-grade cervical lesions and 
cervical cancer. The inflammation plays a key role in cervical cancer 
progression. In this context, studies propose an association between TNFα and 
IL10 SNPs and susceptibility to HPV infection. The present work aimed to 
investigate the possible association between IL10 and TNFα promoter 
polymorphisms and HPV infection in the cervical carcinogenesis risk in women 
from Brazil. A total of 654 samples was evaluated in this study. HPV detection 
was performed by PCR and HPV genotyping was performed by PCR and sequencing of 
positive MY09/11 PCR product. Genotyping of IL10 SNPs (rs1800871 and rs1800896) 
was performed by High Resolution Melt analysis. Genotyping of TNFα SNP 
(rs1800629) was performed by fluorogenic allele-specific probes. The 
distribution of TNF-308 (rs1800629) allelic (p = 0.03) and genotype (p = 0.03) 
frequencies and HPV-58 infection has showed a statistically significant 
difference between case and control groups for the assessed TNFα polymorphism. 
When it comes to TNFα (rs1800629) allelic and genotypic distribution and HPVs 18 
and 31 infections, no statistically significant differences between case and 
control groups were observed for the studied TNFα polymorphism. The allelic and 
genotypic distribution of IL10-819 (rs1800871) and IL10-1082 (rs1800896) and HPV 
infection (HPVs 58, 18 and 31) has showed no statistically significant 
differences between case and control groups for the assessed IL10 polymorphisms. 
Furthermore, it was observed that haplotypes were associated with an increased 
cervical cancer risk in HPVs 16, 18 and 58-positive women. It was observed that 
women carrying the GTA and ATG haplotypes had 3.85 and 17.99-fold, respectively, 
increased cervical cancer susceptibility when infected by HPV-58. In women 
infected with HPV-16 and HPV-18, statistically significant results in women 
carrying the GTA and ATA haplotypes was observed. They had a 2.32 and 3.67-fold, 
respectively, increased cervical cancer susceptibility when infected by these 
two HPV types. The analysis of the haplotypes distribution in women infected 
with HPV-31 has showed no statistically significant results. Our study indicates 
that the association of genetic polymorphism in inflammation-related genes 
represents a risk to the susceptibility in the development of cervical cancer in 
women infected by HPVs 16, 18 and 58.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2018.06.014
PMID: 29935877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]