1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2018 Aug 1;28(14):2382-2390. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2018.06.028. Epub 2018 Jun 15.

Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of pyrazole derivatives containing 
acetamide bond as potential BRAF(V600E) inhibitors.

Wang CR(1), Wang ZF(1), Shi L(1), Wang ZC(1), Zhu HL(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing 210023, People's Republic of China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing 210023, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
zhuhl@nju.edu.cn.

With the increasingly acquired resistance, relapse and side effects of known 
marketed BRAFV600E inhibitors, it's significant to design the more effective and 
novel drugs. In this study, a series of novel pyrazole derivatives containing 
acetamide bond had been designed and synthesized on the basis of analysis of the 
endogenous ligands extracted from the known B-Raf co-crystals in the PDB 
database. Then, the compounds were evaluated for biological activities as 
potential BRAFV600E inhibitors. The bioassay results in vitro against three 
human tumor cell lines revealed that some of the compounds showed very impressed 
antiproliferative property. Among them, the compound 5r with IC50 values of 
0.10 ± 0.01 μM against BRAFV600E and 0.96 ± 0.10 μM against A375 cell line, 
showed the most potent inhibitory effect, compared with the positive-controlled 
agents vemurafenib (IC50 = 0.04 ± 0.004 μM for BRAFV600E, IC50 = 1.05 ± 0.10 μM 
against A375). Further investigation confirmed that the compound 5r could induce 
A375 cell apoptosis, induce A375 cell death through changing mitochondrial 
membrane potential, and result in A375 cell arrest at the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle. Docking simulations results indicated that the compound 5r could bind 
tightly at the BRAFV600E active site. Meanwhile, 3D-QSAR model suggested that 
these compounds may be potential anticancer inhibitors. Overall, the article 
provided some new molecular scaffolds for the further BRAFV600E inhibitors.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2018.06.028
PMID: 29934244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]