1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2018 Jun 25;19(6):1457-1464. doi: 
10.22034/APJCP.2018.19.6.1457.

Calotroposid A: a Glycosides Terpenoids from Calotropis gigantea Induces 
Apoptosis of Colon Cancer WiDr Cells through Cell Cycle Arrest G2/M and Caspase 
8 Expression.

Mutiah R(1), Widyawaruyanti A, Sukardiman S.

Author information:
(1)Departement of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, Maulana 
Malik Ibrahim State Islamic University of Malang, Indonesia. Email: 
Sukardiman@ff.unair.ac.id

Objective: This study aims to isolate the active anticancer compound from ethyl 
acetate fraction extracted from the roots of Calotropis gigantea and to 
determine the operating mechanism of the isolates towards WiDr colon cancer 
cells. Methods: the isolation was conducted by using bioassay guided isolation 
approach method. The cytotoxic potential was determined by using MTT method. The 
chemical structure was identified by using UPLCMS/MS and NMR-1H spectroscopy. 
The cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction were determined by flow cytometry 
method. The expression of caspase-8 was determined by immunocytochemistry 
method. Results: The results showed that the active compounds are obtained 
calotroposid A compound which is glycosides terpenoids. Calotroposide A is 
capable of inhibiting the growth of WiDr colon cancer cells at IC50 17.23Î¼g/ml. 
Cell apoptosis induction took place and was indicated by cell apoptosis 
increase, S and G2/M accumulation and by caspase-8 expression. Conclusion: 
Calotroposide A induces anticancer activity against WiDr colon cancer cells by 
means of apoptosis induction mechanism through extrinsic pathway with increased 
expression of caspase-8.

Creative Commons Attribution License

DOI: 10.22034/APJCP.2018.19.6.1457
PMCID: PMC6103559
PMID: 29936715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]