1. Theranostics. 2018 May 11;8(12):3256-3267. doi: 10.7150/thno.23964.
eCollection  2018.

A tightly controlled Src-YAP signaling axis determines therapeutic response to 
dasatinib in renal cell carcinoma.

Sun J(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Tang B(3), Liu H(1)(2), Zhang M(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), 
Ping F(1)(2), Ding J(1)(2), Shen A(1)(2), Geng M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Anti-tumor Pharmacology, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, 
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
201203, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Gene Company Ltd, Shanghai 200233, China.

Over the past decade, therapies targeting the VEGF/VEGFR and mTOR pathways have 
served as the standard of care for the clinical management of renal cell 
carcinoma (RCC) patients. Albeit promising, these targeted drugs have attained 
only modest clinical benefits with limited prolonged progression-free survival. 
Therefore, alternative reasonable and applicable therapeutic approaches should 
be introduced to improve the clinical outcome of RCC patients. Methods: FDA 
approved kinase inhibitors were screened to evaluate their abilities to suppress 
the proliferation of RCC cells. Then, the downstream effector, therapeutic 
target and signaling pathway of the selected drug were identified by gene 
expression array, RNAi, kinase profile and rescue verification. Finally, the in 
vivo effectiveness of the drug was assessed in cell line-based xenograft models 
and patient-derived xenograft models. Results: In this study, we discovered that 
dasatinib is a potent agent that can impair RCC cell viability in vitro and 
decrease tumor growth in vivo. Mechanistically, we improved the understanding of 
the precise mechanistic role of YAP as a pivotal effector of dasatinib-induced 
anti-proliferation through Src-JNK-LIMD1-LATS signaling cascade in RCC cells. 
Meanwhile, our results indicated that the alteration of p-YAP is closely 
correlated to the growth inhibition caused by dasatinib in sensitive RCC models. 
Conclusion: Our findings provide evidence that dasatinib may serve as a powerful 
drug candidate to treat subgroups of RCC patients with hyper-activated Src-YAP 
signaling axis, and the alteration of p-YAP could serve as a functional response 
biomarker of dasatinib in RCC.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.23964
PMCID: PMC6010995
PMID: 29930727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.