1. Curr Biol. 2018 Jul 9;28(13):2136-2144.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.05.014.
Epub  2018 Jun 21.

An Immune-Responsive Cytoskeletal-Plasma Membrane Feedback Loop in Plants.

Sassmann S(1), Rodrigues C(1), Milne SW(1), Nenninger A(1), Allwood E(2), 
Littlejohn GR(1), Talbot NJ(1), Soeller C(3), Davies B(4), Hussey PJ(5), Deeks 
MJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK.
(3)Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QL, 
UK.
(4)School of Biology, University of Leeds, Miall Building, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.
(5)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK. 
Electronic address: p.j.hussey@durham.ac.uk.
(6)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter EX4 4QD, UK; 
Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, UK. 
Electronic address: m.deeks@exeter.ac.uk.

Cell wall appositions (CWAs) are produced reactively by the plant immune system 
to arrest microbial invasion through the local inversion of plant cell growth. 
This process requires the controlled invagination of the plasma membrane (PM) in 
coordination with the export of barrier material to the volume between the plant 
PM and cell wall. Plant actin dynamics are essential to this response, but it 
remains unclear how exocytosis and the cytoskeleton are linked in space and time 
to form functional CWAs. Here, we show that actin-dependent trafficking to 
immune response sites of Arabidopsis thaliana delivers membrane-integrated 
FORMIN4, which in turn contributes to local cytoskeletal dynamics. Total 
internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy combined with controlled 
induction of FORMIN4-GFP expression reveals a dynamic population of vesicular 
bodies that accumulate to form clusters at the PM through an actin-dependent 
process. Deactivation of FORMIN4 and its close homologs partially compromises 
subsequent defense and alters filamentous actin (F-actin) distribution at mature 
CWAs. The localization of FORMIN4 is stable and segregated from the dynamic 
traffic of the endosomal network. Moreover, the tessellation of FORMIN4 at the 
PM with meso-domains of PEN3 reveals a fine spatial segregation of destinations 
for actin-dependent immunity cargo. Together, our data suggest a model where 
FORMIN4 is a spatial feedback element in a multi-layered, temporally defined 
sequence of cytoskeletal response. This positional feedback makes a significant 
contribution to the distribution of actin filaments at the dynamic CWA boundary 
and to the outcomes of pre-invasion defense.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2018.05.014
PMCID: PMC6041470
PMID: 29937351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]