1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jun 25;8(1):9631. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-27790-7.

Full rescue of an inactive olfactory receptor mutant by elimination of an 
allosteric ligand-gating site.

Sharma K(1), Balfanz S(2), Baumann A(2), Korsching S(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, Biocenter, University at Cologne, Z端lpicherstrasse 
47a, 50674, Cologne, Germany. ksharma997@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Complex Systems (ICS-4), Research Center J端lich, 52428, J端lich, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Genetics, Biocenter, University at Cologne, Z端lpicherstrasse 
47a, 50674, Cologne, Germany. sigrun.korsching@uni-koeln.de.

Ligand-gating has recently been proposed as a novel mechanism to regulate 
olfactory receptor sensitivity. TAAR13c, the zebrafish olfactory receptor 
activated by the death-associated odor cadaverine, appears to possess an 
allosteric binding site for cadaverine, which was assumed to block progress of 
the ligand towards the internal orthosteric binding-and-activation site. Here we 
have challenged the suggested gating mechanism by modeling the entry tunnel for 
the ligand as well as the ligand path inside the receptor. We report an entry 
tunnel, whose opening is blocked by occupation of the external binding site by 
cadaverine, confirming the hypothesized gating mechanism. A multistep docking 
algorithm suggested a plausible path for cadaverine from the allosteric to the 
orthosteric binding-and-activation site. Furthermore we have combined a 
gain-of-function gating site mutation and a loss-of-function internal binding 
site mutation in one recombinant receptor. This receptor had almost wildtype 
ligand affinities, consistent with modeling results that showed localized 
effects for each mutation. A novel mutation of the suggested gating site 
resulted in increased receptor ligand affinity. In summary both the experimental 
and the modeling results provide further evidence for the proposed gating 
mechanism, which surprisingly exhibits pronounced similarity to processes 
described for some metabotropic neurotransmitter receptors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-27790-7
PMCID: PMC6018111
PMID: 29941999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.