1. Biochemistry. 2018 Jul 24;57(29):4276-4288. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00520. 
Epub 2018 Jul 11.

Naturally Occurring Disease-Related Mutations in the 40-57 Ω-Loop of Human 
Cytochrome c Control Triggering of the Alkaline Isomerization.

Deacon OM(1), Svistunenko DA(1), Moore GR(2), Wilson MT(1), Worrall JAR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences , University of Essex , Wivenhoe Park , 
Colchester CO4 3SQ , U.K.
(2)School of Chemistry , University of East Anglia , Norwich Research Park , 
Norwich NR4 7TJ , U.K.

Naturally occurring mutations found in one of the two Ω-loop substructures in 
human cytochrome c are associated with low blood platelet count 
(thrombocytopenia). Both Ω-loops participate in the formation of conformers 
associated with cytochrome c peroxidase activity and apoptotic function. At 
alkaline pH values, the Met80 ligand to the ferric heme iron dissociates, and a 
lysine residue in the 71-85 Ω-loop coordinates to the iron. The alkaline 
isomerization has been the focus of extensive kinetic studies, and it is 
established that a deprotonation triggers the release of the Met80 ligand (p 
Ktrigger). A second deprotonation stabilizes a pentacoordinate heme form (p 
Ka2). In this study, site-directed variants at the 41 and 48 positions in the 
40-57 Ω-loop and at the 81 and 83 positions in the 71-85 Ω-loop reveal that 
conformational transitions in the 71-85 Ω-loop, leading to the alkaline or 
peroxidatic conformers, are controlled by the 40-57 Ω-loop. We find that the 
variants causing thrombocytopenia, G41S and Y48H, lower the p Ktrigger and 
increase p Ka2. Our results are presented in a mechanistic framework, depicted 
by a cube, that accounts for the pH dependencies of the equilibrium and kinetic 
parameters governing the alkaline transition of the native protein and Ω-loop 
variants. The data are most consistent with the trigger for Met80 replacement by 
a lysine being a deprotonation within a hydrogen bonded unit that links the two 
Ω-loops rather than an individual group. Such a proposal aligns with the entatic 
contribution made by the same unit in controlling the Met80-Fe(III) bond 
strength.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00520
PMID: 29949346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]