1. Exp Eye Res. 2018 Nov;176:29-39. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.06.026. Epub 2018
Jun  26.

Essential function of NHE8 in mouse retina demonstrated by AAV-mediated 
CRISPR/Cas9 knockdown.

Xia CH(1), Ferguson I(1), Li M(1), Kim A(1), Onishi A(1), Li L(1), Su B(1), Gong 
X(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Optometry and Vision Science Program, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)School of Optometry and Vision Science Program, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. Electronic address: xgong@berkeley.edu.

We studied the role of sodium/proton exchanger 8 (NHE8) in retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptor cells of adult mouse retina by using the 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-associated 
endonuclease (Cas)9 from Neisseria meningitidis (Nm). Specific single guide RNAs 
(sgRNAs) were designed to knockdown the Slc9a8 gene, which encodes the NHE8. 
Nuclease null NmCas9 and sgRNAs were packaged respectively using 
adeno-associated viral vector (AAV), and delivered into mouse eyes in vivo by 
subretinal injection on wild-type mice of about four-week-old when mouse retina 
is fully developed. Eye samples were collected four weeks after injection for 
phenotype examination. Real-time PCR analysis demonstrated ∼38% reduction of 
NHE8 transcripts in retinas injected with AAV-knockdown sgRNA and AAV-Cas9. Loss 
of photoreceptor cells was found in eyes injected with AAV-knockdown sgRNA and 
AAV-Cas9 under either the human rhodopsin promoter or the minimal chicken 
β-actin promoter, while normal morphology was observed in control eyes injected 
with AAV-Cas9 and AAV-control sgRNA; immunostaining data showed degenerating 
photoreceptor cells and RPE cells in eyes injected with knockdown sgRNA and Cas9 
AAVs. We further determined that mutant M120K-NHE8 displayed altered 
intracellular pH regulation in human RPE and primary mouse RPE cells using 
genetically encoded pH sensor pHluorin and that primary cultured NHE8 mutant RPE 
cells showed different pH titration curves. These results indicate that NHE8 
plays essential function in both RPE and photoreceptor cells. NHE8 dysfunction 
either in photoreceptor or RPE is sufficient to cause retinal degeneration in 
adult mice at any age.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.06.026
PMCID: PMC9236278
PMID: 29958869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.