1. J Pathog. 2018 May 22;2018:2897581. doi: 10.1155/2018/2897581. eCollection
2018.

Differential Regulation of Escherichia coli fim Genes following Binding to 
Mannose Receptors.

Schwan WR(1), Beck MT(1), Hung CS(2), Hultgren SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, La Crosse, WI 54601, USA.
(2)Center for Women's Infectious Disease Research, Washington University, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Regulation of the uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) fimB and fimE genes was 
examined following type 1 pili binding to mannose-coated Sepharose beads. Within 
25â€‰min after mannose attachment, fimE expression dropped eightfold, whereas fimB 
transcription increased about two- to fourfold. Because both fim genes encode 
site-specific recombinases that affect the position of the fimS element 
containing the fimA promoter, the positioning of fimS was also examined. The 
fimS element changed to slightly more Phase-OFF in bacteria mixed with plain 
beads, whereas UPEC cells interacting with mannose-coated beads had 
significantly less Phase-OFF orientation of fimS under pH 7 conditions. On the 
other hand, Phase-OFF oriented fimS increased fourfold when UPEC cells were 
mixed with plain beads in a pH 5.5 environment. Positioning of fimS was also 
affected by fimH mutations, demonstrating that the FimH ligand binding to its 
receptor facilitates the changes. Moreover, enzyme immunoassays showed that UPEC 
cells had greater type 1 pili expression when mixed with mannose-coated beads 
versus plain beads. These results indicate that, after type 1 pilus binding to 
tethered mannose receptors, the physiology of the E. coli cells changes to 
maintain the expression of type 1 pili even when awash in an acidic environment.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/2897581
PMCID: PMC5987248
PMID: 29951317