1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 18;9:1396. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01396. eCollection 
2018.

Conformational Flexibility in the CD81-Binding Site of the Hepatitis C Virus 
Glycoprotein E2.

Ströh LJ(1), Nagarathinam K(1), Krey T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Numerous antibodies have been described that potently neutralize a broad range 
of hepatitis C virus (HCV) isolates and the majority of these antibodies target 
the binding site for the cellular receptor CD81 within the major HCV 
glycoprotein E2. A detailed understanding of the major antigenic determinants is 
crucial for the design of an efficient vaccine that elicits high levels of such 
antibodies. In the past 6 years, structural studies have shed additional light 
on the way the host's humoral immune system recognizes neutralization epitopes 
within the HCV glycoproteins. One of the most striking findings from these 
studies is that the same segments of the E2 polypeptide chain induce antibodies 
targeting distinct antigen conformations. This was demonstrated by several 
crystal structures of identical polypeptide segments bound to different 
antibodies, highlighting an unanticipated intrinsic structural flexibility that 
allows binding of antibodies with distinct paratope shapes following an 
"induced-fit" mechanism. This unprecedented flexibility extends to the entire 
binding site for the cellular receptor CD81, underlining the importance of 
dynamic analyses to understand (1) the interplay between HCV and the humoral 
immune system and (2) the relevance of this structural flexibility for virus 
entry. This review summarizes the current understanding how neutralizing 
antibodies target structurally flexible epitopes. We focus on differences and 
common features of the reported structures and discuss the implications of the 
observed structural flexibility for the viral replication cycle, the full scope 
of the interplay between the virus and the host immune system and-most 
importantly-informed vaccine design.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01396
PMCID: PMC6015841
PMID: 29967619