1. Contrast Media Mol Imaging. 2018 Jun 3;2018:5849047. doi:
10.1155/2018/5849047.  eCollection 2018.

Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Modelling with Dynamic PET Data to Study 
the In Vivo Effects of Transporter Inhibition on Hepatobiliary Clearance in 
Mice.

Taddio MF(1), Mu L(2), Keller C(1), Schibli R(1), Krämer SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Radiopharmaceutical Science and Biopharmacy, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.

Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modelling (PBPK) is a powerful tool to 
predict in vivo pharmacokinetics based on physiological parameters and data from 
in vivo studies and in vitro assays. In vivo PBPK modelling in laboratory 
animals by noninvasive imaging could help to improve the in vivo-in vivo 
translation towards human pharmacokinetics modelling. We evaluated the 
feasibility of PBPK modelling with PET data from mice. We used data from two of 
our PET tracers under development, [11C]AM7 and [11C]MT107. PET images suggested 
hepatobiliary excretion which was reduced after cyclosporine administration. We 
fitted the time-activity curves of blood, liver, gallbladder/intestine, kidney, 
and peripheral tissue to a compartment model and compared the resulting 
pharmacokinetic parameters under control conditions ([11C]AM7 n = 2; [11C]MT107, 
n = 4) and after administration of cyclosporine ([11C]MT107, n = 4). The 
modelling revealed a significant reduction in [11C]MT107 hepatobiliary clearance 
from 35.2 ± 10.9 to 17.1 ± 5.6 μl/min after cyclosporine administration. The 
excretion profile of [11C]MT107 was shifted from predominantly hepatobiliary 
(CLH/CLR = 3.8 ± 3.0) to equal hepatobiliary and renal clearance (CLH/CLR = 0.9 
± 0.2). Our results show the potential of PBPK modelling for characterizing the 
in vivo effects of transporter inhibition on whole-body and organ-specific 
pharmacokinetics.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/5849047
PMCID: PMC6008768
PMID: 29967572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]