1. Oncotarget. 2018 Jun 15;9(46):28042-28068. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25556. 
eCollection 2018 Jun 15.

Antiproliferative effects of two gold(I)-N-heterocyclic carbene complexes in 
A2780 human ovarian cancer cells: a comparative proteomic study.

Magherini F(1), Fiaschi T(1), Valocchia E(1), Becatti M(1), Pratesi A(2), Marzo 
T(2)(3), Massai L(2), Gabbiani C(3), Landini I(4), Nobili S(5), Mini E(5), 
Messori L(2), Modesti A(1), Gamberi T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio", 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, Florence, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Industrial Chemistry, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

Au(NHC) and Au(NHC)2, i.e. a monocarbene gold(I) complex and the corresponding 
bis(carbene) complex, are two structurally related compounds, endowed with 
cytotoxic properties against several cancer cell lines. Herein, we explore the 
molecular and cellular mechanisms at the basis of their cytotoxicity in A2780 
human ovarian cancer cells. Through a comparative proteomic analysis, we 
demonstrated that the number of modulated proteins is far larger in 
Au(NHC)2-treated than in Au(NHC)-treated A2780 cells. Both gold compounds mainly 
affected proteins belonging to the following functional classes: protein 
synthesis, metabolism, cytoskeleton and stress response and chaperones. 
Particularly, Au(NHC)2 gave rise to an evident upregulation of several 
glycolytic enzymes. Moreover, only Au(NHC)2 triggered a net impairment of 
respiration and a metabolic shift towards glycolysis, suggesting that 
mitochondria are relevant cellular targets. We also found that both carbenes, 
similarly to the gold(I) compound auranofin, caused a strong inhibition of the 
seleno-enzyme thioredoxin reductase (TrxR). In conclusion, we highlighted that 
coordination of two carbene ligands to the same gold(I) center greatly enhances 
the antiproliferative effects of the resulting compound in comparison to the 
monocarbene derivative. Moreover, TrxR inhibition and metabolic impairment seem 
to play a major role in the Au(NHC)2 cytotoxicity. Overall, these 
antiproliferative effects were also confirmed on other two human ovarian cancer 
cell lines (i.e. SKOV3 and IGROV1).

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.25556
PMCID: PMC6021324
PMID: 29963261

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts to disclose.