1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Jul;16(1):956-962. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.8753. Epub 2018 May
21.

Effect of postoperative systemic antipsychotic therapy on psychiatric recurrence 
in patients with meningiomas.

Yang P(1), Li L(2)(3), Li MS(1), Zhou B(1), Kuang WP(1), Huang HY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatrics, Hunan Brain Hospital, Changsha, Hunan 410007, 
P.R. China.
(2)Provincial Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Diagnostics, Hunan 
University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan 410208, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan 
410208, P.R. China.

A number of patients with meningiomas and psychiatric disorders will suffer 
psychiatric symptom recurrence following tumorectomies. The present study 
reported a retrospective analysis regarding 42 cases of patients with 
meningiomas using complete clinical follow-up data from June 2005 to June 2013. 
The patients were divided into the systemic antipsychotic (SP) group (n=20) 
following 6months of postoperative SP therapy and the none-SP (NSP) group 
(n=22), who did not receive postoperative antipsychotic treatment. Patients were 
assessed using the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and Brief 
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) at the time points of prior to surgery, 
immediately following surgery, and 6 months, 12 months and 3 years following 
surgery. The effective rate, recurrence rate, rehospitalization rate and 
survival analysis were calculated. The BPRS score and PANSS scores (including 
PANSS positive, PANSS negative, PANSS general psychopathology and PANSS overall) 
in the SP group at 6 months, 12 months and 3 years following surgery were 
significantly decreased compared with the NSP group (P<0.05). The effective rate 
was 95, 90 and 90% at 6 months, 12 months and 3 years, respectively, in the SP 
group, whilst it was 68.2, 63.6 and 59%, respectively, in the NSP group, which 
was statistically significant (χ2=4.89, χ2=4.01 and χ2=5.12; P<0.05). The 
recurrence rate of the SP group was 0, 5 and 10% at 6 months, 12 months and 3 
years, respectively, whilst in the NSP group it was 22.7, 31.8 and 54.5%, 
respectively, which was statistically significant (χ2=5.16, χ2=4.89 and χ2=9.34; 
P<0.05). The rehospitalization rate of the SP group was 0, 0 and 5% at 6 months, 
12 months and 3 years, respectively, whilst in the NSP group it was 13.6, 22.7 
and 36.4%, respectively, and the data at 12 months and 3 years was statistically 
significant (χ2=5.16 and χ2=6.12; P<0.05). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis 
indicated that the accumulative survival rates of recurrence and 
rehospitalization in the SP group were improved compared with the NSP group. The 
log-rank of recurrence was χ2=9.369 (P=0.002) and the log-rank of 
rehospitalization was χ2=6.330 (P=0.012). In conclusion, postoperative SP 
therapy is of great importance to the consolidation of mental symptoms in 
patients with meningiomas and psychiatric symptoms, and it may significantly 
reduce the recurrence and rehospitalization rates.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.8753
PMCID: PMC6019958
PMID: 29963169