1. Front Immunol. 2018 Jun 20;9:1293. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01293. eCollection 
2018.

Progesterone Modulation of Pregnancy-Related Immune Responses.

Shah NM(1), Imami N(2), Johnson MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Chelsea and 
Westminster Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, Chelsea and Westminster 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Progesterone (P4) is an important steroid hormone for the establishment and 
maintenance of pregnancy and its functional withdrawal in reproductive tissue is 
linked with the onset of parturition. However, the effects of P4 on adaptive 
immune responses are poorly understood. In this study, we took a novel approach 
by comparing the effects of P4 supplementation longitudinally, with treatment 
using a P4 antagonist mifepristone (RU486) in mid-trimester pregnancies. Thus, 
we were able to demonstrate the immune-modulatory functions of P4. We show that, 
in pregnancy, the immune system is increasingly activated (CD38, CCR6) with 
greater antigen-specific cytotoxic T cell responses (granzyme B). 
Simultaneously, pregnancy promotes a tolerant immune environment (IL-10 and 
regulatory-T cells) that gradually reverses prior to the onset of labor. P4 
suppresses and RU486 enhances antigen-specific CD4 and CD8 T cell inflammatory 
cytokine (IFN-Î³) and cytotoxic molecule release (granzyme B). P4 and RU486 
effectively modulate immune cell-mediated interactions, by regulating 
differentiated memory T cell subset sensitivity to antigen stimulation. Our 
results indicate that P4 and RU486, as immune modulators, share a reciprocal 
relationship. These data unveil key contributions of P4 to the modulation of the 
maternal immune system and suggests targets for future modulation of maternal 
immune function during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01293
PMCID: PMC6020784
PMID: 29973928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]