1. Sci Rep. 2018 Jul 9;8(1):10353. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-28649-7.

β-barrel Oligomers as Common Intermediates of Peptides Self-Assembling into 
Cross-β Aggregates.

Sun Y(1), Ge X(1), Xing Y(1), Wang B(1), Ding F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, 29634, 
USA.
(2)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, 29634, 
USA. fding@clemson.edu.

Oligomers populated during the early amyloid aggregation process are more toxic 
than mature fibrils, but pinpointing the exact toxic species among highly 
dynamic and heterogeneous aggregation intermediates remains a major challenge. 
β-barrel oligomers, structurally-determined recently for a slow-aggregating 
peptide derived from αB crystallin, are attractive candidates for exerting 
amyloid toxicity due to their well-defined structures as therapeutic targets and 
compatibility to the "amyloid-pore" hypothesis of toxicity. To assess whether 
β-barrel oligomers are common intermediates to amyloid peptides - a necessary 
step toward associating β-barrel oligomers with general amyloid cytotoxicity, we 
computationally studied the oligomerization and fibrillization dynamics of seven 
well-studied fragments of amyloidogenic proteins with different 
experimentally-determined aggregation morphologies and cytotoxicity. In our 
molecular dynamics simulations, β-barrel oligomers were only observed in five 
peptides self-assembling into the characteristic cross-β aggregates, but not the 
other two that formed polymorphic β-rich aggregates as reported experimentally. 
Interestingly, the latter two peptides were previously found nontoxic. Hence, 
the observed correlation between β-barrel oligomers formation and cytotoxicity 
supports the hypothesis of β-barrel oligomers as the common toxic intermediates 
of amyloid aggregation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-28649-7
PMCID: PMC6037789
PMID: 29985420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.