1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2018 Jun 26;11:180. doi: 10.1186/s13068-018-1176-y. 
eCollection 2018.

A pyruvate carbon flux tugging strategy for increasing 2,3-butanediol production 
and reducing ethanol subgeneration in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Ishii J(1), Morita K(2), Ida K(3), Kato H(1)(2), Kinoshita S(2), Hataya S(1), 
Shimizu H(2), Kondo A(1)(3)(4), Matsuda F(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)1Graduate School of Science, Technology and Innovation, Kobe University, 1-1 
Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501 Japan.
(2)2Department of Bioinformatic Engineering, Graduate School of Information 
Science and Technology, Osaka University, 1-5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871 
Japan.
(3)3Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Graduate School of 
Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodai, Nada, Kobe, 657-8501 Japan.
(4)4RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi, 
Yokohama, 230-0045 Japan.

BACKGROUND: The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a promising host cell for 
producing a wide range of chemicals. However, attempts to metabolically engineer 
Crabtree-positive S. cerevisiae invariably face a common issue: how to reduce 
dominant ethanol production. Here, we propose a yeast metabolic engineering 
strategy for decreasing ethanol subgeneration involving tugging the carbon flux 
at an important hub branching point (e.g., pyruvate). Tugging flux at a central 
glycolytic overflow metabolism point arising from high glycolytic activity may 
substantially increase higher alcohol production in S. cerevisiae. We validated 
this possibility by testing 2,3-butanediol (2,3-BDO) production, which is routed 
via pyruvate as the important hub compound.
RESULTS: By searching for high-activity acetolactate synthase (ALS) enzymes that 
catalyze the important first-step reaction in 2,3-BDO biosynthesis, and tuning 
several fermentation conditions, we demonstrated that a stronger pyruvate 
pulling effect (tugging of pyruvate carbon flux) is very effective for 
increasing 2,3-BDO production and reducing ethanol subgeneration by S. 
cerevisiae. To further confirm the validity of the pyruvate carbon flux tugging 
strategy, we constructed an evolved pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC)-deficient yeast 
(PDCΔ) strain that lacked three isozymes of PDC. In parallel with re-sequencing 
to identify genomic mutations, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry 
analysis of intermediate metabolites revealed significant accumulation of 
pyruvate and NADH in the evolved PDCΔ strain. Harnessing the high-activity ALS 
and additional downstream enzymes in the evolved PDCΔ strain resulted in a high 
yield of 2,3-BDO (a maximum of 0.41 g g-1 glucose consumed) and no ethanol 
subgeneration, thereby confirming the utility of our strategy. Using this 
engineered strain, we demonstrated a high 2,3-BDO titer (81.0 g L-1) in a 
fed-batch fermentation using a high concentration of glucose as the sole carbon 
source.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that the pyruvate carbon flux tugging strategy is 
very effective for increasing 2,3-BDO production and decreasing ethanol 
subgeneration in Crabtree-positive S. cerevisiae. High activity of the common 
first-step enzyme for the conversion of pyruvate, which links to both the TCA 
cycle and amino acid biosynthesis, is likely important for the production of 
various chemicals by S. cerevisiae.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-018-1176-y
PMCID: PMC6020211
PMID: 29983743