1. J Oral Microbiol. 2018 Jul 3;10(1):1487741. doi:
10.1080/20002297.2018.1487741.  eCollection 2018.

Defining the gut microbiota in individuals with periodontal diseases: an 
exploratory study.

Lourenςo TGB(1), Spencer SJ(2), Alm EJ(3)(4), Colombo APV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Computational and Systems Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Background: This exploratory study aimed to characterize the gut microbiome of 
individuals with different periodontal conditions, and correlate it with 
periodontal inflammation and tissue destruction. Methods: Stool samples were 
obtained from individuals presenting periodontal health (PH = 7), gingivitis 
(G = 14) and chronic periodontitis (CP = 23). The intestinal microbiome 
composition was determined by Illumina MiSeq sequencing. Results: A lower 
alpha-diversity in the gut microbiome of individuals with CP was observed, 
although no significant difference among groups was found (p > 0.01). 
Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Euryarchaeota were increased, 
whereas Bacteroidetes were decreased in abundance in patients with periodontitis 
compared to PH. Prevotella (genus), Comamonadaceae (family) and Lactobacillales 
(order) were detected in higher numbers in G, while Bacteroidales (order) was 
predominant in PH (p < 0.01). Significant correlations (rho = 0.337-0.468, 
p < 0.01) were found between OTUs representative of periodontal pathogens and 
attachment loss. Mogibacteriaceae, Ruminococcaceae and Prevotella were able to 
discriminate individuals with periodontal diseases from PH (overall 
accuracy = 84%). Oral taxa were detected in high numbers in all stool samples. 
Conclusions: Individuals with periodontal diseases present a less diverse gut 
microbiome consistent with other systemic inflammatory diseases. High numbers of 
oral taxa related to periodontal destruction and inflammation were detected in 
the gut microbiome of individuals regardless of periodontal status.

DOI: 10.1080/20002297.2018.1487741
PMCID: PMC6032013
PMID: 29988721