1. Food Sci Nutr. 2018 Apr 17;6(4):1100-1108. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.649. eCollection 
2018 Jun.

Effect of Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbit) rennet on the texture, rheology, and 
sensory properties of white cheese.

Alihanoğlu S(1), Ektiren D(1), Akbulut Çakır Ç(1), Vardin H(1), Karaaslan A(2), 
Karaaslan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Food Engineering Department Engineering Faculty Harran University Sanliurfa 
Turkey.
(2)Technical Sciences Vocational School Food Technology Program Harran 
University Sanliurfa Turkey.

Calf rennet has long been used in cheese-making. Because of calf rennet shortage 
and high cost, novel proteases were needed to meet industry's increasing enzyme 
demand. Recombinant chymosins and camel chymosin were started to be used in the 
industry. There is no study in the literature subjecting use of rabbit rennet in 
cheese production. Chemical, rheological, and sensorial characteristics of white 
cheese made with rabbit rennet were investigated in this study. Quality 
characteristics of rabbit rennet cheese (RC) were compared to cheeses produced 
with commercial calf (CC) and camel chymosins (CLC). RC and CLC exhibited higher 
hardness and dynamic moduli values throughout the storage as compared to CC. 
Although moisture levels of cheese samples were similar at day 60, CC had much 
lower hardness and dynamic moduli values than CLC and RC. While the appearance 
and structure were better for CLC, the highest odor and taste scores were 
obtained by RC during 60 days of storage. The results of this investigation 
proposed that rabbit rennet could be a suitable milk coagulant for white cheese 
production. Our results showed that rabbit rennet has comparable cheese-making 
performance with camel chymosin and could be a good alternative for calf 
chymosin.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.649
PMCID: PMC6021729
PMID: 29983974