1. Exp Eye Res. 2018 Nov;176:98-102. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.07.005. Epub 2018
Jul  4.

miR15a regulates NLRP3 inflammasome proteins in the retinal vasculature.

Curtiss E(1), Liu L(1), Steinle JJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Visual and Anatomical Sciences, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Visual and Anatomical Sciences, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: 
jsteinle@med.wayne.edu.

We have previously published that miR15a can reduce inflammatory cytokines, 
which could be key to diabetic retinal pathology. In this work, we wanted to 
investigate whether miR15a altered NLR pyrin domain 3 (NLRP3) proteins. Whole 
retinal lysates from both miR15a overexpressing mice and endothelial cell 
specific miR15a/16 knockout mice were used to investigate protein levels of 
forkhead box protein O1 (Foxo1), NLRP3, cleaved caspase 1 and interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1β). Primary human retinal endothelial cells (REC) were cultured in normal 
and high glucose followed by transfection with a miR15a mimic for protein 
analyses. miR15a expression was verified by quantitative PCR, and a luciferase 
binding assay was used to examine whether miR15a directly bound Foxo1. In mouse 
retinal lysates, loss of miR15a increased Foxo1, IL-1β, NLRP3, and cleaved 
caspase 1 levels. REC grown in high glucose transfected with the miR15a mimic 
had decreased levels of Foxo1 and NLRP3. miR15a directly binds to Foxo1. miR15a 
regulates NLRP3 actions in the retinal vasculature. Work in mice showed that 
loss of miR15a increased NLRP3 pathway signaling and Foxo1. miR15a mimics 
decreased levels of Foxo1 and NLRP3. Taken together, miR15a reduced inflammasome 
proteins and Foxo1 levels in the retinal vasculature.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2018.07.005
PMCID: PMC6215730
PMID: 29981343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]