1. Menopause. 2019 Jan;26(1):45-65. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001171.

The many menopauses: searching the cognitive research literature for menopause 
types.

Edwards H(1), Duchesne A(2), Au AS(1), Einstein G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince 
George, BC, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Recent evidence suggests that early or induced menopause increases 
the risk for cognitive impairment and dementia. Given the potential for 
different cognitive outcomes due to menopause types, it is important that 
present research on menopause and cognition distinguishes between types. The aim 
of this project was to determine to what extent research looking at cognition in 
postmenopausal women published in one year, 2016, accounted for menopausal type.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, and PsychINFO using keywords and MeSH 
terms for menopause and cognition. We included any research paper reporting a 
cognitive outcome measure in a menopausal human population. Differentiation 
between the types of menopause was defined by four categories: undifferentiated, 
demographic differentiation (menopause type reported but not analyzed), partial 
differentiation (some but not all types analyzed), and full differentiation 
(menopause types factored into analysis, or recruitment of only one type).
RESULTS: Fifty research articles were found and analyzed. Differentiation was 
distributed as follows: undifferentiated, 38% (19 articles); demographic 
differentiation, 16% (8); partial differentiation, 28% (14); and full 
differentiation, 18% (9).
CONCLUSIONS: This review revealed that although some clinical studies 
differentiated between the many menopauses, most did not. This may limit their 
relevance to clinical practice. We found that when menopause types are 
distinguished, the differing cognitive outcomes of each type are clarified, 
yielding the strongest evidence, which in turn will be able to inform best 
clinical practice for treating all women.

DOI: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001171
PMCID: PMC6314513
PMID: 29994973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]