1. Int J Cancer. 2018 Nov 15;143(10):2470-2478. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31756. Epub 2018
 Sep 19.

Triptolide inhibits Wnt signaling in NSCLC through upregulation of multiple Wnt 
inhibitory factors via epigenetic modifications to Histone H3.

Nardi I(1), Reno T(1), Yun X(1), Sztain T(1), Wang J(1), Dai H(2), Zheng L(2), 
Shen B(2), Kim J(1), Raz D(1).

Author information:
(1)City of Hope Medical Center, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Baum Family 
Thoracic Oncology laboratory; Beckman Research Institute.
(2)Department of Cancer Genetics and Epigenetics, Duarte, California.

In the last decade, it has become clear that epigenetic changes act together 
with genetic mutations to promote virtually every stage of tumorigenesis and 
cancer progression. This knowledge has triggered searches for "epigenetic drugs" 
that can be developed into new cancer therapies. Here we report that triptolide 
reduced lung cancer incidence from 70% to 10% in a Fen1 E160D transgenic mouse 
model and effectively inhibited cancer growth and metastasis in A549 and H460 
mouse xenografts. We found that triptolide induced lung cancer cell apoptosis 
that was associated with global epigenetic changes to histone 3 (H3). These 
global epigenetic changes in H3 are correlated with an increase in protein 
expression of five Wnt inhibitory factors that include WIF1, FRZB, SFRP1, ENY2, 
and DKK1. Triptolide had no effect on DNA methylation status at any of the CpG 
islands located in the promoter regions of all five Wnt inhibitory factors. Wnt 
expression is implicated in promoting the development and progression of many 
lung cancers. Because of this, the potential to target Wnt signaling with drugs 
that induce epigenetic modifications provides a new avenue for developing novel 
therapies for patients with these tumor types.

Â© 2018 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31756
PMCID: PMC6483070
PMID: 30006924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Potential of Conflicts of 
Interest: DR: Cireca, consultant; Merck, grant funding.