1. Hypertension. 2018 Sep;72(3):765-775. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.11147.

Impaired Trafficking of β1 Subunits Inhibits BK Channels in Cerebral Arteries of 
Hypertensive Rats.

Leo MD(1), Zhai X(1), Yin W(1), Jaggar JH(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Physiology, University of Tennessee Health Science 
Center, Memphis.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2018 Sep;72(3):585-587. doi: 
10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.11237.

Hypertension is a risk factor for cerebrovascular diseases, including stroke and 
dementia. During hypertension, arteries become constricted and are less 
responsive to vasodilators, including nitric oxide (NO). The regulation of 
arterial contractility by smooth muscle cell (myocyte) large-conductance calcium 
(Ca2+)-activated potassium (BK) channels is altered during hypertension, 
although mechanisms involved are unclear. We tested the hypothesis that 
dysfunctional trafficking of pore-forming BK channel (BKα) and auxiliary β1 
subunits contributes to changes in cerebral artery contractility of stroke-prone 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SP-SHRs). Our data indicate that the amounts of 
total and surface BKα and β1 proteins are similar in unstimulated arteries of 
age-matched SP-SHRs and normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats. In contrast, stimulated 
surface-trafficking of β1 subunits by NO or membrane depolarization is inhibited 
in SP-SHR myocytes. PKCα (protein kinase C α) and PKCβII total protein and 
activity were both higher in SP-SHR than in Wistar-Kyoto rat arteries. NO or 
depolarization robustly activated Rab11, a small trafficking GTPase, in 
Wistar-Kyoto rat arteries but weakly activated Rab11 in SP-SHRs. 
Bisindolylmaleimide, a PKC inhibitor, and overexpression of a PKC 
phosphorylation-deficient Rab11A mutant (Rab11A S177A) restored stimulated β1 
subunit surface-trafficking in SP-SHR myocytes. BK channel activation by NO was 
inhibited in SP-SHR myocytes and restored by Rab11A S177A expression. 
Vasodilation to NO and lithocholate, a BKα/β1 channel activator, was inhibited 
in pressurized SP-SHR arteries and reestablished by bisindolylmaleimide. In 
summary, data indicate that spontaneously active PKC inhibits Rab11A-mediated β1 
subunit trafficking in arterial myocytes of SP-SHRs, leading to dysfunctional 
NO-induced BK channel activation and vasodilation.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.118.11147
PMCID: PMC6202242
PMID: 30012867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]