1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Nov 1;27(21):3761-3771. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy260.

Loss of Sarm1 does not suppress motor neuron degeneration in the SOD1G93A mouse 
model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Peters OM(1)(2), Lewis EA(1), Osterloh JM(1), Weiss A(2), Salameh JS(2), 
Metterville J(2), Brown RH(2), Freeman MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.

Axon degeneration occurs in all neurodegenerative diseases, but the molecular 
pathways regulating axon destruction during neurodegeneration are poorly 
understood. Sterile Alpha and TIR Motif Containing 1 (Sarm1) is an essential 
component of the prodegenerative pathway driving axon degeneration after axotomy 
and represents an appealing target for therapeutic intervention in neurological 
conditions involving axon loss. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is 
characterized by rapid, progressive motor neuron degeneration and muscle 
atrophy, causing paralysis and death. Patient tissue and animal models of ALS 
show destruction of upper and lower motor neuron cell bodies and loss of their 
associated axons. Here, we investigate whether loss of Sarm1 can mitigate motor 
neuron degeneration in the SOD1G93A mouse model of ALS. We found no change in 
survival, behavioral, electrophysiogical or histopathological outcomes in 
SOD1G93A mice null for Sarm1. Blocking Sarm1-mediated axon destruction alone is 
therefore not sufficient to suppress SOD1G93A-induced neurodegeneration. Our 
data suggest the molecular pathways driving axon loss in ALS may be 
Sarm1-independent or involve genetic pathways that act in a redundant fashion 
with Sarm1.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy260
PMCID: PMC6196650
PMID: 30010873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]