1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 2;46(19):e117. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky627.

Fluorescence spectroscopic detection and measurement of single telomere 
molecules.

Beh CW(1), Zhang Y(1), Zheng YL(2), Sun B(2), Wang TH(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.
(2)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown 
University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
(3)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.
(4)Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 
21218, USA.

Telomeres are the end-caps of chromosomes that serve to protect the integrity of 
the genome. Below certain critical lengths, the telomeres can no longer fulfill 
their protective function, and chromosomal instability ensues. Telomeres shorten 
during normal cell division due to the end replication problem and are 
implicated in the development of various aging-associated diseases, including 
cancer. Telomere length has the potential to serve as a useful biomarker in the 
field of aging and cancer. However, existing methods of telomere measurement are 
either too laborious, unable to provide absolute measurement of individual 
telomere lengths, or limited to certain chromosomes or cell types. Here, we 
describe an easy single-molecule, fluorescence spectroscopic method for 
measuring the length of telomeres that permits the profiling of absolute 
telomere lengths in any DNA sample. We have demonstrated the accurate detection 
of telomeres as short as 100 bp using cloned telomere standards, and have 
profiled telomere lengths in human cancer cell lines and primary cells. Since 
this method allows direct comparison between samples, it could greatly improve 
the clinical utility of telomere biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky627
PMCID: PMC6212783
PMID: 30010842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]