1. Can J Vet Res. 2018 Jul;82(3):236-238.

ACTN3 gene variants as potential phenotype and performance biomarkers in 
Brazilian sport horses training for eventing in a tropical climate.

Padilha FGF(1), El-Jaick KB(1), de Castro L(1), Dos Santos Moreira A(1), de 
Almeida FQ(1), Ferreira AMR(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Medicina Veterinária (Clínica e Reprodução 
Animal), Universidade Federal Fluminense, Rua Vital Brasil Filho, 64-Vital 
Brasil, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 24230-340 (Padilha, Ferreira); 
Departamento de Genética e Biologia Molecular, Instituto Biomédico, Universidade 
Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (El-Jaick); 
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Farmacogenética, Instituto Nacional de Infectologia 
Evandro Chagas, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (de Castro); 
Plataforma Genômica-Sequenciamento de DNA, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação 
Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Moreira); Laboratório de Avaliação do 
Desempenho de Equinos, Escola de Equitação do Exército, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
(Padilha, de Almeida, Ferreira); Departamento de Medicina e Cirurgia 
Veterinária, Instituto de Veterinária, Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de 
Janeiro, Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (de Almeida); Laboratório de 
Biologia Molecular do Banco de Tecidos e Material Genético de Animais Silvestres 
e Domésticos, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
(Padilha, Ferreira); Departamento de Patologia e Clínica Veterinária, 
Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (Ferreira).

The aim of this study was to look for mutations in the equine ACTN3 gene and to 
identify sequence variants that might be associated with the phenotype and 
performance of Brazilian sport horses training for events in a tropical climate. 
Among 17 such horses direct DNA sequencing and mutation analysis of the exon 15 
and the intron-exon boundaries of ACTN3 revealed 2 new sequence variants in the 
ACTN3 intron 14-15, designated c.1681-86G > A and c.1681-129delA. 
Wild-type/deletion heterozygotes (A/del) had a lower mean subcutaneous fat layer 
in the region of the gluteus medius, as measured by ultrasonography, than the 
del/del homozygotes; the correlation was significant (P = 0.017). This single 
base-pair deletion in ACTN3 intron 14-15 may have resulted in metabolic changes 
that led to increased deposition of body fat in the homozygous state. However, 
neither sequence variant was correlated with the time to fatigue in a test on a 
high-speed treadmill with an incremental-speed protocol.

Publisher: Le but de la présente étude était de vérifier pour la présence de 
mutations dans le gène ACTN3 équin et d’identifier des variants de séquence qui 
pourraient être associés avec le phénotype et la performance de chevaux de sport 
brésiliens qui s’entraînent pour des concours dans un climat tropical. Parmi 17 
chevaux qui correspondent à ces critères, le séquençage direct de l’ADN et 
l’analyse de mutation de l’exon 15 et des frontières de l’intron-exon d’ACTN3 a 
révélé deux nouveaux variants de séquence dans l’intron 14–15 d’ACTN3, désigné 
c.1681–86G > A et c.1681–129delA. Chez les hétérozygotes type-sauvage/délétion 
(A/del) la moyenne de l’épaisseur de la couche de gras sous-cutané dans la 
région du gluteus medius était plus petite, telle que mesurée par échographie, 
que celle des homozygotes del/del; la corrélation était significative (P = 
0,017). Cette délétion unique de paire de bases dans l’intron 14–15 d’ACTN3 
pourrait avoir résulté dans des changements métaboliques qui auraient mené à une 
augmentation du dépôt de gras chez les homozygotes. Toutefois, aucun des 
variants de séquence n’était corrélé avec le temps de fatigue dans un test sur 
un tapis-roulant à haute vitesse avec un protocole d’augmentation de 
vitesse.(Traduit par Docteur Serge Messier).

PMCID: PMC6040019
PMID: 30026649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]