1. Exp Neurobiol. 2018 Jun;27(3):226-237. doi: 10.5607/en.2018.27.3.226. Epub
2018  Jun 30.

Morin Prevents Granule Cell Dispersion and Neurotoxicity via Suppression of 
mTORC1 in a Kainic Acid-induced Seizure Model.

Lee JM(1), Hong J(2), Moon GJ(1), Jung UJ(3), Won SY(4), Kim SR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, BK21 plus KNU Creative BioResearch Group, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu 41566, Korea.
(2)Brain Science and Engineering Institute, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 
41944, Korea.
(3)Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Pukyong National University, Busan 
48513, Korea.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Research Center, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju 28644, Korea.

An abnormal reorganization of the dentate gyrus and neurotoxic events are 
important phenotypes in the hippocampus of patients with temporal lobe epilepsy 
(TLE). The effects of morin, a bioflavonoid constituent of many herbs and 
fruits, on epileptic seizures have not yet been elucidated, though its 
beneficial effects, such as its anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective 
properties, are well-described in various neurodegenerative diseases. In the 
present study, we investigated whether treatment with morin hydrate (MH) can 
reduce the susceptibility to seizures, granule cell dispersion (GCD), mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activity, and the increases in the levels 
of apoptotic molecules and inflammatory cytokines in the kainic acid 
(KA)-induced seizure mouse model. Our results showed that oral administration of 
MH could reduce susceptibility to seizures and lead to the inhibition of GCD and 
mTORC1 activity in the KA-treated hippocampus. Moreover, treatment with MH 
significantly reduced the increased levels of apoptotic signaling molecules and 
pro-inflammatory mediators in the KA-treated hippocampus compared with control 
mice, suggesting a neuroprotective role. Therefore, these results suggest that 
morin has a therapeutic potential against epilepsy through its abilities to 
inhibit GCD and neurotoxic events in the in vivo hippocampus.

DOI: 10.5607/en.2018.27.3.226
PMCID: PMC6050420
PMID: 30022874