1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2018 Jan 12;15:11-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2017.12.005. 
eCollection 2018 Jun.

Type 1 sialidosis presenting with ataxia, seizures and myoclonus with no visual 
involvement.

Mohammad AN(1)(2), Bruno KA(3), Hines S(2), Atwal PS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United States.
(2)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United 
States.
(3)Dept. of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, United 
States.

Sialidosis is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by 
pathogenic variants in NEU1 which encodes lysosomal sialidase (neuraminidase 1). 
Lysosomal neuraminidase catalyzes the removal of terminal sialic acid molecules 
from glycolipids, glycoproteins and oligosaccharides. Sialidosis is classified 
into two types, based on phenotype and age of onset. Patients with the milder 
type 1 typically present late, usually in the second or third decade, with 
myoclonus, ataxia and visual defects. Type 2 is more severe and presents earlier 
with coarse facial features, developmental delay, hepatosplenomegaly and 
dysostosis multiplex. Presentation and severity of the disease are related to 
whether lysosomal sialidase is inactive or there is some residual activity. 
Diagnosis is suspected based on clinical features and increased urinary bound 
sialic acid excretion and confirmed by genetic testing showing pathogenic 
variants in NEU1. We report a patient with type 1 sialidosis who presented 
mainly with ataxia and both generalized and myoclonic seizures but no visual 
involvement. Whole exome sequencing of the proband detected compound 
heterozygous likely pathogenic variants (S182G and G227R) in NEU1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2017.12.005
PMCID: PMC6047061
PMID: 30023283