1. Vitam Horm. 2018;108:75-123. doi: 10.1016/bs.vh.2018.05.002. Epub 2018 Jun 30.

Mutation of HSD3B2 Gene and Fate of Dehydroepiandrosterone.

Baquedano MS(1), Guercio G(1), Costanzo M(2), Marino R(2), Rivarola MA(1), 
Belgorosky A(3).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Department, Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research Council, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(2)Endocrine Department, Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(3)Endocrine Department, Hospital de Pediatría Garrahan, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina; National Scientific and Technical Research Council, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. Electronic address: abelgo12345@gmail.com.

3βHSD2 enzyme is crucial for adrenal and gonad steroid biosynthesis. In enzyme 
deficiency states, due to recessive loss-of-function HSD3B2 mutations, steroid 
flux is altered and clinical manifestations result. Deficiency of 3βHSD2 
activity in the adrenals precludes normal aldosterone and cortisol synthesis and 
the alternative backdoor and 11-oxygenated C19 steroid pathways and the flooding 
of cortisol precursors along the Δ5 pathway with a marked rise in DHEA and DHEAS 
production. In gonads, it precludes normal T and estrogen synthesis. Here, we 
review androgen-dependent male differentiation of the external genitalia in 
humans and link this to female development and steroidogenesis in the developing 
adrenal cortex. The molecular mechanisms governing postnatal adrenal cortex 
zonation and ZR development were also revised. This chapter will review relevant 
clinical, hormonal, and genetic aspects of 3βHSD2 deficiency with emphasis on 
the significance of alternate fates encountered by steroid hormone precursors in 
the adrenal gland and gonads. Our current knowledge of the process of 
steroidogenesis and steroid action is derived from pathological conditions. In 
humans the 3βHSD2 deficiency represents a model of nature that reinforces our 
knowledge about the role of the steroidogenic alternative pathway in sex 
differentiation in both sexes. However, the physiological role of the high serum 
DHEAS levels in fetal life as well as after adrenarche remains to be elucidated.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.vh.2018.05.002
PMID: 30029738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]