1. Hepatol Commun. 2018 May 21;2(7):821-835. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1193. eCollection 
2018 Jul.

Molecular magnetic resonance imaging accurately measures the antifibrotic effect 
of EDP-305, a novel farnesoid X receptor agonist.

Erstad DJ(1), Farrar CT(2), Ghoshal S(1), Masia R(3), Ferreira DS(2), Chen 
YI(2), Choi JK(2), Wei L(1), Waghorn PA(2), Rotile NJ(2), Tu C(2), 
Graham-O'Regan KA(2), Sojoodi M(1), Li S(1), Li Y(4), Wang G(4), Corey KE(5), Or 
YS(4), Jiang L(4), Tanabe KK(1), Caravan P(2)(6), Fuchs BC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical 
School Boston MA.
(2)Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital 
Harvard Medical School Charlestown MA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical 
School Boston MA.
(4)Enanta Pharmaceuticals Watertown MA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital Harvard Medical School 
Boston MA.
(6)Institute for Innovation in Imaging Massachusetts General Hospital Boston MA.

We examined a novel farnesoid X receptor agonist, EDP-305, for its antifibrotic 
effect in bile duct ligation (BDL) and choline-deficient, L-amino acid-defined, 
high-fat diet (CDAHFD) models of hepatic injury. We used molecular magnetic 
resonance imaging with the type 1 collagen-binding probe EP-3533 and the 
oxidized collagen-specific probe gadolinium hydrazide to noninvasively measure 
treatment response. BDL rats (n = 8 for each group) were treated with either low 
or high doses of EDP-305 starting on day 4 after BDL and were imaged on day 18. 
CDAHFD mice (n = 8 for each group) were treated starting at 6 weeks after the 
diet and were imaged at 12 weeks. Liver tissue was subjected to pathologic and 
morphometric scoring of fibrosis, hydroxyproline quantitation, and determination 
of fibrogenic messenger RNA expression. High-dose EDP-305 (30 mg/kg) reduced 
liver fibrosis in both the BDL and CDAHFD models as measured by collagen 
proportional area, hydroxyproline analysis, and fibrogenic gene expression (all 
P < 0.05). Magnetic resonance signal intensity with both EP-3533 in the BDL 
model and gadolinium hydrazide in the CDAHFD model was reduced with EDP-305 30 
mg/kg treatment (P < 0.01). Histologically, EDP-305 30 mg/kg halted fibrosis 
progression in the CDAHFD model. Conclusion: EDP-305 reduced fibrosis 
progression in rat BDL and mouse CDAHFD models. Molecular imaging of collagen 
and oxidized collagen is sensitive to changes in fibrosis and could be used to 
noninvasively measure treatment response in clinical trials. (Hepatology 
Communications 2018;2:821-835).

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1193
PMCID: PMC6049071
PMID: 30027140