1. ACS Omega. 2017 Oct 31;2(10):6514-6524. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00577. Epub
2017  Oct 9.

Unraveling the Stability of Plasma Proteins upon Interaction of Synthesized 
Androstenedione and Its Derivatives-A Biophysical and Computational Approach.

Nerusu A(1), Reddy PS(2), Ramachary DB(2), Subramanyam R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Science, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana 500046, India.
(2)Catalysis Laboratory, School of Chemistry, University of Hyderabad, 
Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana 500046, India.

4-Androstene-3-17-dione (4A), also known as androstenedione, is the key 
intermediate of steroid metabolism. 5β-Androstane-3-17-dione (5A) and 
(+)-6-methyl-5β-androstane-3-17-dione (6M) are the steroid derivatives of 
androstenedione. The interactions of androstenedione and its derivatives with 
plasma proteins are important in understanding the distribution and 
bioavailability of these molecules. In our present study, we have studied the 
binding affinity of androstenedione and its derivatives with plasma proteins 
such as human serum albumin (HSA) and α1-acid glycoprotein (AGP). Our results 
showed that the 4A, 5A, and 6M steroid molecules can form stable complexes with 
HSA and AGP. The affinity of the studied steroid molecules with HSA is high 
compared to that with AGP, and the binding constants obtained for 4A, 5A, and 6M 
with HSA are 5.3 ± 2 × 104, 5.3 ± 1 × 104, and 9.5 ± 0.2 × 104 M-1, 
respectively. Further, binding sites of these steroid molecules in HSA are 
identified using molecular displacement and docking studies: it is found that 4A 
and 5A bind to domain III while 6M binds to domain II of HSA. Furthermore, the 
circular dichroism data revealed that there is a partial unfolding of the 
protein while interacting with androstenedione and its derivatives. Also, 
molecular dynamics simulations were carried out for HSA-androstenedione and its 
derivative complexes to understand their stability; hence, these results yielded 
that HSA-androstenedione and its derivative complexes were stabilized after 15 
ns and maintained their stable structures.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b00577
PMCID: PMC6045264
PMID: 30023521

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.