1. Curr Med Chem. 2019;26(25):4832-4851. doi: 10.2174/0929867325666180719121142.

Genetic Polymorphisms within Interferon-λ Region and Interferon-λ3 in the Human 
Pathophysiology: Their Contribution to Outcome, Treatment, and Prevention of 
Infections with Hepatotropic Viruses.

Grzegorzewska AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Nephrology, Transplantology and Internal Diseases, 
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Genetic polymorphisms within the interferon λ (IFN-λ) chromosomal region, mainly 
rs12979860 of IFN-λ4 gene (IFNL4), are known as associated with spontaneous 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) resolution and sustained viral response to therapy with 
pegylated interferon- α and ribavirin. Strong linkage disequilibrium of IFNL4 
rs12979860 with IFNL4 rs368234815, which is casually associated with HCV 
spontaneous and therapeutical eradication, at least partially explains favorable 
HCV outcomes attributed to major homozygosity in rs12979860. Effects of 
IFN-based antiviral treatment are associated with pretreatment expression of the 
IFN-λ1 receptor, expression of hepatic IFN-stimulated genes, production of IFN- 
λ4, and preactivation of the JAK-STAT signaling. Nowadays direct-acting 
antivirals (DAAs) became a potent tool in the treatment of hepatitis C, but 
IFN-λs are still under investigation as potential antivirals and might be an 
option in HCV infection (DAA resistance, recurrent viremia, adverse effects). 
Patients with altered immunocompetence are especially prone to infections. In 
uremic subjects, polymorphisms within the IFN-λ chromosomal region associate 
with spontaneous HCV clearance, similarly like in the non-uremic population. 
Circulating IFN-λ3 shows a positive correlation with plasma titers of antibodies 
to surface antigen of hepatitis B virus (anti-HBs), which are crucial for 
protection against hepatitis B virus. More efficient anti-HBs production in the 
presence of higher IFN-λ3 levels might occur due to IFN-λ3-induced regulation of 
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) expression. IFN-stimulated response element is 
a part of IDO gene promoter. It is worth further investigation whether IDO gene, 
circulating IDO, genetic polymorphisms within the IFN-λ region, and circulating 
IFN-λ3 act in concordance in immunological response to hepatotropic viruses.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867325666180719121142
PMID: 30027841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]