1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Jul 9;10:199. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00199. 
eCollection 2018.

Ca(2+), Astrocyte Activation and Calcineurin/NFAT Signaling in Age-Related 
Neurodegenerative Diseases.

Sompol P(1), Norris CM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, 
Lexington, KY, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky 
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY, United States.

Mounting evidence supports a fundamental role for Ca2+ dysregulation in 
astrocyte activation. Though the activated astrocyte phenotype is complex, 
cell-type targeting approaches have revealed a number of detrimental roles of 
activated astrocytes involving neuroinflammation, release of synaptotoxic 
factors and loss of glutamate regulation. Work from our lab and others has 
suggested that the Ca2+/calmodulin dependent protein phosphatase, calcineurin 
(CN), provides a critical link between Ca2+ dysregulation and the activated 
astrocyte phenotype. A proteolyzed, hyperactivated form of CN appears at high 
levels in activated astrocytes in both human tissue and rodent tissue around 
regions of amyloid and vascular pathology. Similar upregulation of the 
CN-dependent transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT4) 
also appears in activated astrocytes in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease 
(ADs) and traumatic brain injury (TBI). Major consequences of hyperactivated 
CN/NFAT4 signaling in astrocytes are neuroinflammation, synapse dysfunction and 
glutamate dysregulation/excitotoxicity, which will be covered in this review 
article.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00199
PMCID: PMC6046440
PMID: 30038565