1. Hum Pathol. 2018 Dec;82:61-67. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.07.017. Epub 2018
Jul  21.

Genotype-phenotype correlation of patients with tuberous sclerosis 
complex-associated renal angiomyolipoma: a descriptive study.

Li S(1), Zhang Y(2), Wang Z(3), Yang Y(3), Gao W(3), Li D(3), Wei J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, PR China. Electronic address: lishuqiang235@163.com.
(2)Department of Urology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, PR China.
(3)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, PR China.

TSC2 gene mutation was repeatedly reported to be associated with a more severe 
phenotype in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). Our current study 
aims to further explore whether there is such a correlation in patients with 
TSC-associated renal angiomyolipoma (TSC-RAML). TSC1/TSC2 gene mutation was 
screened by high-throughput sequencing in 25 TSC-RAML patients from 2 medical 
centers. Clinical data were also carefully collected. Linear regression analysis 
and Student t-test were conducted by IBM SPSS Statistics Version 21.0 to analyze 
the genotypic-phenotypic relationship. The results indicated a high level of TSC 
gene mutation (80%; 20/25) in TSC-RAML patients, with higher frequency of TSC2 
mutation (68%; 17/25) than TSC1 mutation (12%; 3/25). Seven novel mutation sites 
were detected in this study. In general, there were no significant correlations 
between tumor size and age (r = 0.134, P = .522), hemoglobin (r = 0.255, P = 
.219), and serum creatinine (r = 0.043, P = .839). Patients with larger tumor 
size have higher risk of bleeding. Specially, it was higher hemoglobin level in 
patients with TSC1 mutation than ones with TSC2 mutation and without TSC 
mutation (P < .05). However, no difference was found in either tumor size or 
serum creatinine by TSC mutation genes (P > .05). Furthermore, no difference was 
found in tumor size, hemoglobin, and serum creatinine by TSC mutation types (P > 
.05). In conclusion, TSC-RAML is TSC2 mutation dominant, with the individual 
differences varying greatly. No definite genotype-phenotype correlation exists 
in patients with TSC-RAML, and it needs to be further explored.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.07.017
PMID: 30036593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]