1. Genet Mol Biol. 2018 Jul/Sept.;41(3):570-577. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0287. Epub 2018 Jul 23.

Decreased serum PON1 arylesterase activity in familial hypercholesterolemia 
patients with a mutated LDLR gene.

Idrees M(1), Siddiq AR(1), Ajmal M(1), Akram M(1), Khalid RR(1), Hussain A(1), 
Qamar R(1), Bokhari H(1).

Author information:
(1)COMSAT Institute of Information Tecnology, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Erratum in
    Genet Mol Biol. 2019 Apr-Jun;42(2):494. doi: 
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0287er.

Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a serum enzyme associated with high density lipoprotein 
(HDL) regulation through its paraoxonase and arylesterase activity. PON1 
inhibits the oxidation of HDL and low density lipoprotein (LDL), and is involved 
in the pathogenesis of a variety of diseases including atherosclerosis. 
Conversely, mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) result in 
failure of receptor mediated endocytosis of LDL leading to its elevated plasma 
levels and onset of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). In the current study we 
investigated the role of PON1 polymorphisms rs662; c.575A > G (p.Gln192Arg) and 
rs854560; c.163T > A (p.Leu55Met) in a large family having FH patients harboring 
a functional mutation in LDLR. Genotypes were revealed by RFLP, followed by 
confirmation through Sanger sequencing. PON1 activity was measure by 
spectrophotometry. Our results show significantly reduced serum paraoxonase and 
arylesterase activities in FH patients compared with the healthy individuals of 
the family (p < 0.05). PON1 QQ192 genotype showed a significantly higher 
association with FH (p=0.0002). PON1 Q192 isoform was associated with reduced 
serum paraoxonase activity by in silico analysis and PON1 R192 exhibited higher 
serum paraoxonase and arylesterase activity than the other polymorphs. Our 
results highlight that the combination of LDLR mutations and PON1 MMQQ genotypes 
may lead to severe cardiac events.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0287
PMCID: PMC6136370
PMID: 30044465