1. Nutrients. 2018 Jul 26;10(8):970. doi: 10.3390/nu10080970.

VKORC1L1, An Enzyme Mediating the Effect of Vitamin K in Liver and Extrahepatic 
Tissues.

Lacombe J(1), Ferron M(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Integrative and Molecular Physiology research unit, Institut de Recherches 
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada. julie.lacombe@ircm.qc.ca.
(2)Integrative and Molecular Physiology research unit, Institut de Recherches 
Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada. mathieu.ferron@ircm.qc.ca.
(3)Department of Medicine and Molecular Biology Programs of the Faculty of 
Medicine, Université de Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada. mathieu.ferron@ircm.qc.ca.
(4)Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, QC H4A 3J1, 
Canada. mathieu.ferron@ircm.qc.ca.

Vitamin K is an essential nutrient involved in the regulation of blood clotting 
and tissue mineralization. Vitamin K oxidoreductase (VKORC1) converts vitamin K 
epoxide into reduced vitamin K, which acts as the co-factor for the 
γ-carboxylation of several proteins, including coagulation factors produced by 
the liver. VKORC1 is also the pharmacological target of warfarin, a widely used 
anticoagulant. Vertebrates possess a VKORC1 paralog, VKORC1-like 1 (VKORC1L1), 
but until very recently, the importance of VKORC1L1 for protein γ-carboxylation 
and hemostasis in vivo was not clear. Here, we first review the current 
knowledge on the structure, function and expression pattern of VKORC1L1, 
including recent data establishing that, in the absence of VKORC1, VKORC1L1 can 
support vitamin K-dependent carboxylation in the liver during the pre- and 
perinatal periods in vivo. We then provide original data showing that the 
partial redundancy between VKORC1 and VKORC1L1 also exists in bone around birth. 
Recent studies indicate that, in vitro and in cell culture models, VKORC1L1 is 
less sensitive to warfarin than VKORC1. Genetic evidence is presented here, 
which supports the notion that VKORC1L1 is not the warfarin-resistant vitamin K 
quinone reductase present in the liver. In summary, although the exact 
physiological function of VKORC1L1 remains elusive, the latest findings clearly 
established that this enzyme is a vitamin K oxidoreductase, which can support 
γ-carboxylation in vivo.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10080970
PMCID: PMC6116193
PMID: 30050002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ferron serves as a guest editor for the Special 
Issue entitled “Vitamin K in Human Health and Disease” in Nutrients.