1. Mol Inform. 2018 Dec;37(12):e1800053. doi: 10.1002/minf.201800053. Epub 2018
Jul  26.

Flap-site Fragment Restores Back Wild-type Behaviour in Resistant Form of HIV 
Protease.

Luchi A(1), Angelina E(1), Bogado L(1), Forli S(2), Olson A(2), Peruchena N(1).

Author information:
(1)Lab. Estructura Molecular y Propiedades, IQUIBA-NEA, Universidad Nacional del 
Nordeste, CONICET, FACENA, Av. Libertad 5470, Corrientes, 3400, Argentina.
(2)Molecular Graphics Lab, Department of Integrative Structural and 
Computational Biology, MB-112, the Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California, 92037-1000.

HIV-1 protease (HIV-PR) performs a vital step in the virus life cycle which 
makes it an excellent target for drug therapy. However, due to the error-prone 
of HIV reverse transcriptase, mutations in HIV-PR often occur, inducing 
drug-resistance to inhibitors. Some HIV-PR mutations can make the flaps of the 
enzyme more flexible thus increasing the flaps opening rate and inhibitor 
releasing. It has been shown that by targeting novel binding sites on HIV-PR 
with small molecules, it is possible to alter the equilibrium of flap 
conformational states. A previous fragment-based crystallographic screen have 
found two novel binding sites for small fragments in the inhibited, closed form 
of HIV-PR, termed flap and exo sites. While these experiments were performed in 
wild type HIV-PR, it still remains to be proven whether these small fragments 
can stabilize the closed conformation of flaps in resistant forms of the enzyme. 
Here we performed Molecular Dynamics simulations of wild type and mutant form of 
HIV-PR bound to inhibitor TL-3. Simulations show that on going from wild type to 
6X mutant the equilibrium shifts from closed to semi-open conformation of flaps. 
However, when fragment Br6 is placed at flap site of mutant form, the enzyme is 
restored back to closed conformation. This finding supports the hypothesis that 
allosteric inhibitors, together with active site inhibitors could increase the 
number of point mutations necessary for appreciable clinical resistance to AIDS 
therapy.

Â© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/minf.201800053
PMCID: PMC6501176
PMID: 30051611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]