1. PLoS One. 2018 Jul 31;13(7):e0201133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201133. 
eCollection 2018.

Oat beta-glucan as a dietary supplement for dogs.

Ferreira LG(1), Endrighi M(1), Lisenko KG(2), de Oliveira MRD(2), Damasceno 
MR(2), Claudino JA(2), Gutierres PG(2), Peconick AP(1), Saad FMOB(2), 
Zangeronimo MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Medicine Department, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Animal Science Department, Federal University of Lavras, Lavras, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of oat beta-glucan 
supplementation on metabolic, physiological, immunological and nutritional 
variables in adult dogs. Fourteen dogs were fed a control diet or a diet 
supplemented with 1% beta-glucan during 71 days. Serum concentrations of 
glucose, total cholesterol and lipoprotein fractions, as well as plasma 
concentrations of peptide YY and ghrelin, were determined. In addition, 
coefficient of total tract apparent macronutrient digestibility (CTTAD), food 
intake and fecal output, score, and pH were evaluated. For evaluation of 
immunological variables, serum concentrations of interleukin-4 and interferon 
gamma were determined on days 0, 57 and 71, which corresponded to blood 
collection prior to beta-glucan supplementation, and at 7 and 14 days post first 
and second dose of vaccination (Pneumodog®, Merial, Campinas, Brazil), 
respectively. Animals fed the supplemented diet showed (P<0.05) lower serum 
concentrations of total cholesterol and low and very low density lipoproteins, 
lower coefficients of total tract apparent digestibility of dry matter, organic 
matter, mineral matter and ether extract, higher fecal output and lower fecal 
consistency, as well as a tendency (P = 0.07) of decreasing the coefficient of 
total tract apparent digestibility of crude protein. Moreover, the supplemented 
diet resulted in lower number of red blood cells, hematocrit percentage and 
hemoglobin concentration 21 days post-vaccination as well as lower serum 
concentration of interleukin-4 seven days post-vaccination (P<0.05). It is 
concluded that oat beta-glucan extract can be used as a dietary supplement for 
dogs at a dose of 10 g/kg of food, being effective in reducing blood 
concentrations of total cholesterol, LDL-c and VLDL-c as well as CTTAD of 
nutrients, demonstrating a potential to be used in the feeding of obese animals. 
In addition, by reducing the predominance of a Th2 response, oat beta-glucan can 
positively modulate the vaccine response of animals.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201133
PMCID: PMC6067736
PMID: 30063762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have read the journal's policy and 
have the following conflicts: This study was supported by supplies (experimental 
diets) from Hercosul Pet Food. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to all 
the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.