1. Virol J. 2018 Jul 31;15(1):116. doi: 10.1186/s12985-018-1023-6.

Inhibition of enterovirus 71 replication and viral 3C protease by quercetin.

Yao C(1), Xi C(1), Hu K(1), Gao W(1), Cai X(2), Qin J(1), Lv S(1), Du C(1), Wei 
Y(3).

Author information:
(1)National "111" Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, 
Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Sino-German Biomedical Center, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China.
(2)Merck Stiftungsprofessur Molekulare BiotechnologieInstitut für Molekulare 
Biowissenschaften Goethe Universität Frankfurt, 60438, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(3)National "111" Center for Cellular Regulation and Molecular Pharmaceutics, 
Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei 
Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of Industrial Fermentation, Hubei Key 
Laboratory of Industrial Microbiology, Sino-German Biomedical Center, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, 430068, China. weiyanhong925@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is one of the major causative agents of hand, 
foot, and mouth disease (HFMD), which is sometimes associated with severe 
central nervous system disease in children. There is currently no specific 
medication for EV71 infection. Quercetin, one of the most widely distributed 
flavonoids in plants, has been demonstrated to inhibit various viral infections. 
However, investigation of the anti-EV71 mechanism has not been reported to date.
METHODS: The anti-EV71 activity of quercetin was evaluated by phenotype 
screening, determining the cytopathic effect (CPE) and EV71-induced cells 
apoptosis. The effects on EV71 replication were evaluated further by determining 
virus yield, viral RNA synthesis and protein expression, respectively. The 
mechanism of action against EV71 was determined from the effective stage and 
time-of-addition assays. The possible inhibitory functions of quercetin via 
viral 2Apro, 3Cpro or 3Dpol were tested. The interaction between EV71 3Cpro and 
quercetin was predicted and calculated by molecular docking.
RESULTS: Quercetin inhibited EV71-mediated cytopathogenic effects, reduced EV71 
progeny yields, and prevented EV71-induced apoptosis with low cytotoxicity. 
Investigation of the underlying mechanism of action revealed that quercetin 
exhibited a preventive effect against EV71 infection and inhibited viral 
adsorption. Moreover, quercetin mediated its powerful therapeutic effects 
primarily by blocking the early post-attachment stage of viral infection. 
Further experiments demonstrated that quercetin potently inhibited the activity 
of the EV71 protease, 3Cpro, blocking viral replication, but not the activity of 
the protease, 2Apro, or the RNA polymerase, 3Dpol. Modeling of the molecular 
binding of the 3Cpro-quercetin complex revealed that quercetin was predicted to 
insert into the substrate-binding pocket of EV71 3Cpro, blocking substrate 
recognition and thereby inhibiting EV71 3Cpro activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Quercetin can effectively prevent EV71-induced cell injury with low 
toxicity to host cells. Quercetin may act in more than one way to deter viral 
infection, exhibiting some preventive and a powerful therapeutic effect against 
EV71. Further, quercetin potently inhibits EV71 3Cpro activity, thereby blocking 
EV71 replication.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-018-1023-6
PMCID: PMC6069798
PMID: 30064445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.