1. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Jul 16;9:760. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00760. eCollection
 2018.

Antidiabetic Activity of a Flavonoid-Rich Extract From Sophora davidii (Franch.) 
Skeels in KK-Ay Mice via Activation of AMP-Activated Protein Kinase.

Huang Y(1), Hao J(1), Tian D(2), Wen Y(1), Zhao P(2), Chen H(1)(3), Lv Y(1), 
Yang X(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, South-Central University for 
Nationalities, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine, Nanning, China.

The present study was undertaken to investigate the hypoglycemic activity and 
potential mechanisms of action of a flavonoid-rich extract from Sophora davidii 
(Franch.) Skeels (SD-FRE) through in vitro and in vivo studies. Four main 
flavonoids of SD-FRE namely apigenin, maackiain, leachianone A and leachianone B 
were purified and identified. In vitro, SD-FRE significantly promoted the 
translocation and expression of glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) in L6 cells, which 
was significantly inhibited by Compound C (AMPK inhibitor), but not by 
Wortmannin (PI3K inhibitor) or Gö6983 (PKC inhibitor). These results indicated 
that SD-FRE enhanced GLUT4 expression and translocation to the plasma membrane 
via the AMPK pathway and finally resulted in an increase of glucose uptake. In 
vivo, using a spontaneously type 2 diabetic model, KK-Ay mice received 
intragastric administration of SD-FRE for 4 weeks. As a consequence, SD-FRE 
significantly alleviated the hyperglycemia, glucose intolerance, insulin 
resistance and hyperlipidemia in these mice. Hepatic steatosis, islet 
hypertrophy and larger adipocyte size were observed in KK-Ay mice. However, 
these pathological changes were effectively relieved by SD-FRE treatment. SD-FRE 
promoted GLUT4 expression and activated AMPK phosphorylation in insulin target 
tissues (muscle, adipose tissue and liver) of KK-Ay mice, thus facilitating 
glucose utilization to ameliorate insulin resistance. Regulation of ACC 
phosphorylation and PPARγ were also involved in the antidiabetic effects of 
SD-FRE. Taken together, these findings indicated that SD-FRE has the potential 
to alleviate type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00760
PMCID: PMC6055046
PMID: 30061831