1. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 1;13(8):e0201387. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201387. 
eCollection 2018.

Regulation of protein-coding gene and long noncoding RNA pairs in liver of 
conventional and germ-free mice following oral PBDE exposure.

Li CY(1), Cui JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

Gut microbiome communicates with the host liver to modify hepatic xenobiotic 
biotransformation and nutrient homeostasis. Polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
(PBDEs) are persistent environmental contaminants that are detected in fatty 
food, household dust, and human breast milk at worrisome levels. Recently, long 
noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been recognized as novel biomarkers for 
toxicological responses and may regulate the transcriptional/translational 
output of protein-coding genes (PCGs). However, very little is known regarding 
to what extent the interactions between PBDEs and gut microbiome modulate 
hepatic lncRNAs and PCGs, and what critical signaling pathways are impacted at 
the transcriptomic scale. In this study, we performed RNA-Seq in livers of 
nine-week-old male conventional (CV) and germ-free (GF) mice orally exposed to 
the most prevalent PBDE congeners BDE-47 and BDE-99 (100 Î¼mol/kg once daily for 
4-days; vehicle: corn oil, 10 ml/kg), and unveiled key molecular pathways and 
PCG-lncRNA pairs targeted by PBDE-gut microbiome interactions. Lack of gut 
microbiome profoundly altered the PBDE-mediated transcriptomic response in 
liver, with the most prominent effect observed in BDE-99-exposed GF mice. The 
top pathways up-regulated by PBDEs were related to xenobiotic metabolism, 
whereas the top pathways down-regulated by PBDEs were in lipid metabolism and 
protein synthesis in both enterotypes. Genomic annotation of the differentially 
regulated lncRNAs revealed that majority of these lncRNAs overlapped with 
introns and 3'-UTRs of PCGs. Lack of gut microbiome profoundly increased the 
percentage of PBDE-regulated lncRNAs mapped to the 3'-UTRs of PCGs, suggesting 
the potential involvement of lncRNAs in increasing the translational efficiency 
of PCGs by preventing miRNA-3'-UTR binding, as a compensatory mechanism 
following toxic exposure to PBDEs. Pathway analysis of PCGs paired with lncRNAs 
revealed that in CV mice, BDE-47 regulated nucleic acid and retinol metabolism, 
as well as circadian rhythm; whereas BDE-99 regulated fatty acid metabolism. In 
GF mice, BDE-47 differentially regulated 19 lncRNA-PCG pairs that were 
associated with glutathione conjugation and transcriptional regulation. In 
contrast, BDE-99 up-regulated the xenobiotic-metabolizing Cyp3a genes, but 
down-regulated the fatty acid-metabolizing Cyp4 genes. Taken together, the 
present study reveals common and unique lncRNAs and PCG targets of PBDEs in 
mouse liver, and is among the first to show that lack of gut microbiome 
sensitizes the liver to toxic exposure of BDE-99 but not BDE-47. Therefore, 
lncRNAs may serve as specific biomarkers that differentiate various PBDE 
congeners as well as environmental chemical-mediated dysbiosis. Coordinate 
regulation of PCG-lncRNA pairs may serve as a more efficient molecular mechanism 
to combat against xenobiotic insult, and especially during dysbiosis-induced 
increase in the internal dose of toxicants.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201387
PMCID: PMC6070246
PMID: 30067809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.