1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Nov;176(11):2460-2465. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40489. Epub 
2018 Aug 6.

Mutations in WDR4 as a new cause of Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

Braun DA(1), Shril S(1), Sinha A(2), Schneider R(1), Tan W(1), Ashraf S(1), 
Hermle T(1), Jobst-Schwan T(1), Widmeier E(1), Majmundar AJ(1), Daga A(1), 
Warejko JK(1), Nakayama M(1), Schapiro D(1), Chen J(1), Airik M(1), Rao J(1), 
Schmidt JM(1), Hoogstraten CA(1), Hugo H(1), Meena J(2), Lek M(3), Laricchia 
KM(3), Bagga A(2), Hildebrandt F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(3)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a phenotypically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by neurodevelopmental defects combined with renal-glomerular 
disease, manifesting with proteinuria. To identify additional monogenic disease 
causes, we here performed whole exome sequencing (WES), linkage analysis, and 
homozygosity mapping in three affected siblings of an Indian family with GAMOS. 
Applying established criteria for variant filtering, we identify a novel 
homozygous splice site mutation in the gene WDR4 as the likely disease-causing 
mutation in this family. In line with previous reports, we observe growth 
deficiency, microcephaly, developmental delay, and intellectual disability as 
phenotypic features resulting from WDR4 mutations. However, the newly identified 
allele additionally gives rise to proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome, a 
phenotype that was never reported in patients with WDR4 mutations. Our data thus 
expand the phenotypic spectrum of WDR4 mutations by demonstrating that, 
depending on the specific mutated allele, a renal phenotype may be present. This 
finding suggests that GAMOS may occupy a phenotypic spectrum with other 
microcephalic diseases. Furthermore, WDR4 is an additional example of a gene 
that encodes a tRNA modifying enzyme and gives rise to GAMOS, if mutated. Our 
findings thereby support the recent observation that, like neurons, podocytes of 
the renal glomerulus are particularly vulnerable to cellular defects resulting 
from altered tRNA modifications.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.40489
PMCID: PMC6289609
PMID: 30079490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosure/Conflict of Interest 
Statement Friedhelm Hildebrandt is a co-founder of Goldfinch Biopharma Inc. The 
other authors have no financial relationships or conflicts of interest relevant 
to this article to disclose.