1. Immunol Res. 2018 Aug;66(4):543-547. doi: 10.1007/s12026-018-9017-4.

Interaction of MTHFR gene with smoking and alcohol use and haplotype combination 
susceptibility to psoriasis in Chinese population.

Luo Q(1), Zeng J(1), Li W(1), Lin L(1), Zhou X(1), Tian X(1), Liu W(1), Zhang 
L(1), Zhang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Guangzhou Institute of Dermatology, NO. 56 Hengfu 
Road, Guangzhou, 510095, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Guangzhou Institute of Dermatology, NO. 56 Hengfu 
Road, Guangzhou, 510095, China. zhangxibb28@163.com.

To investigate the association of MTHFR gene polymorphism and additional 
gene-gene interaction with psoriasis risk. GMDR model was used to screen the 
best gene-smoking and gene-drinking interaction combinations. Logistic 
regression was performed to investigate association between two SNPs and 
psoriasis. For psoriasis patient-control haplotype analyses, the SHEsis online 
haplotype analysis software ( http://analysis.bio-x.cn ) was employed. We found 
that carriers of homozygous mutant of rs1801133 polymorphism and heterozygous of 
rs1801131 are associated with increased psoriasis risk than those with wild-type 
homozygotes, OR (95%CI) were 2.01 (1.48-2.79), and 2.08 (1.56-2.86), 
respectively. We also found a significant gene-environment interaction between 
C677T and alcohol drinking. In all samples, the haplotype 1298A-677C was 
observed most frequently in two groups, with 49.43 and 55.71% for the patients 
and controls, respectively. The results also indicated that the haplotype 
containing 1298C and 677T alleles were associated with a statistically increased 
psoriasis risk, OR (95%CI) = 1.73 (1.12-2.46), P = 0.0002. Our study found that 
rs1801133, rs1801131 within MTHFR gene, and interaction between C677T and 
alcohol drinking and haplotype containing the 1298C and 677T alleles were all 
associated with increased psoriasis risk.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-018-9017-4
PMID: 30084051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]