1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2018 Nov;40(8):e516-e518. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000001276.

Weekly Rituximab Followed by Monthly Rituximab Treatment for Autoimmune Disease 
Associated With RAS-associated Autoimmune Leukoproliferative Disease.

Toyoda H(1), Deguchi T, Iwamoto S, Kihira K, Hori H, Komada Y, Hirayama M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mie University, School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan.

Recently, a new disease of lymphocyte homeostasis caused by somatic mosaicism 
for the RAS mutation has been discovered (known as RALD, RAS-associated 
leukoproliferative disorder). Since few cases have been reported in literature, 
the prognosis and standard treatment for autoimmune diseases associated with 
RALD remain poorly understood. Standard rituximab therapy (375 mg/m for 4 wk) is 
effective in patients with autoimmune diseases, but early recurrences are 
common. We highlight the potential for monthly administration of rituximab in a 
patient with autoimmune thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia associated with 
RALD. RALD was diagnosed in an 11-year-old girl following a 9-year history of 
severe hepatosplenomegaly and autoimmune cytopenias. Genetic analyses confirmed 
somatic mosaicism for the G13C KRAS mutation without an autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome-related gene mutation. Rituximab therapy was used 
because of the refractory character of the autoimmune cytopenias which failed to 
respond to steroids and other immunosuppressive agents. Her treatment consisted 
of weekly infusions of rituximab for 4 weeks followed by monthly rituximab for 
11 months. She maintained her response in hematologic parameters for 2 years 
after monthly rituximab was ceased and her scores representing quality of life 
were improved. Rituximab could improve clinical responses and quality of life of 
the patients with RALD.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000001276
PMID: 30080751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]