1. PLoS One. 2018 Aug 8;13(8):e0201858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201858. 
eCollection 2018.

Proteasome inhibition induces IKK-dependent interleukin-8 expression in triple 
negative breast cancer cells: Opportunity for combination therapy.

Uddin MM(1), Zou Y(1), Sharma T(1), Gatla HR(1), Vancurova I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, St. John's University, New York, New York, 
United States of America.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells express increased levels of the 
pro-inflammatory and pro-angiogenic chemokine interleukin-8 (IL-8, CXCL8), which 
promotes their proliferation and migration. Because TNBC patients are 
unresponsive to current targeted therapies, new therapeutic strategies are 
urgently needed. While proteasome inhibition by bortezomib (BZ) or carfilzomib 
(CZ) has been effective in treating hematological malignancies, it has been less 
effective in solid tumors, including TNBC, but the mechanisms are incompletely 
understood. Here we report that proteasome inhibition significantly increases 
expression of IL-8, and its receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2, in TNBC cells. 
Suppression or neutralization of the BZ-induced IL-8 potentiates the BZ 
cytotoxic and anti-proliferative effect in TNBC cells. The IL-8 expression 
induced by proteasome inhibition in TNBC cells is mediated by IκB kinase (IKK), 
increased nuclear accumulation of p65 NFκB, and by IKK-dependent p65 recruitment 
to IL-8 promoter. Importantly, inhibition of IKK activity significantly 
decreases proliferation, migration, and invasion of BZ-treated TNBC cells. These 
data provide the first evidence demonstrating that proteasome inhibition 
increases the IL-8 signaling in TNBC cells, and suggesting that IKK inhibitors 
may increase effectiveness of proteasome inhibitors in treating TNBC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201858
PMCID: PMC6082561
PMID: 30089134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.