1. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2018 Aug 3;10:62. doi: 10.1186/s13098-018-0363-0. 
eCollection 2018.

Association between the expression of vascular endothelial growth factors and 
metabolic syndrome or its components: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zafar MI(1), Mills K(2), Ye X(1), Blakely B(3), Min J(1), Kong W(1), Zhang N(1), 
Gou L(1), Regmi A(1), Hu SQ(1), Zheng J(1), Chen LL(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)2Health Research Institute, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia.
(3)3Centre for Healthcare Resilience and Implementation Science (CHRIS), 
Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have linked vascular endothelial growth factors 
(VEGFs) with metabolic syndrome or its components. However, there has been no 
systematic appraisal of the findings of these studies to date. The current 
systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted to explore this association.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane library, and clinical trials registries 
were used to retrieve peer-reviewed clinical studies that had evaluated the 
association of VEGFs with metabolic syndrome or its components without applying 
language and date restrictions. The final search was performed on 29 September 
2017.
RESULTS: We included 32 studies in this systematic review and meta-analysis, of 
which 16 studies (19 study arms) were included in the meta-analysis and 
remaining studies were qualitatively assessed. Overall, VEGF-A, VEGF-B and 
VEGF-C were strongly associated with metabolic syndrome or its components. The 
components of metabolic syndrome varied in their association. Obesity was not 
correlated with increased VEGF-A expression (p = 0.12), whereas VEGF-B and 
VEGF-C expression was significantly higher in those with obesity. In contrast, 
hyperglycemia in type 1 diabetes was strongly associated with increased VEGF-A 
levels (p < 0.00001), as was type 2 diabetes (p = 0.0006). The studies included 
in the qualitative analysis similarly showed an increase in VEGF family 
expression in people with metabolic syndrome, and with its components.
CONCLUSION: The increased concentrations of vascular endothelial growth factors 
are variably associated with metabolic syndrome or its components. Each VEGF 
protein has a unique set of associations with the disease state.

DOI: 10.1186/s13098-018-0363-0
PMCID: PMC6076391
PMID: 30087698