1. G3 (Bethesda). 2018 Oct 3;8(10):3221-3230. doi: 10.1534/g3.118.200405.

Null Mutation of the Fascin2 Gene by TALEN Leading to Progressive Hearing Loss 
and Retinal Degeneration in C57BL/6J Mice.

Liu X(1)(2), Zhao M(1)(3), Xie Y(1)(3), Li P(1), Wang O(1), Zhou B(1)(3), Yang 
L(1)(4), Nie Y(1), Cheng L(1), Song X(1)(4), Jin C(5)(2), Han F(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Genetic Hearing Disorders in Shandong, Binzhou Medical, 
University, 346 Guanhai Road, Yantai 264003, Shandong, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Human Anatomy and Histology and Embryology, Binzhou Medical 
University, 346 Guanhai Road, Yantai 264003, Shandong, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Binzhou Medical, 
University, 346 Guanhai Road, Yantai 264003, Shandong, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Yuhuangding 
Hospital, 20 East Yuhuangding Road, Yantai 264000, Shandong, P.R. China.
(5)Key Laboratory for Genetic Hearing Disorders in Shandong, Binzhou Medical, 
University, 346 Guanhai Road, Yantai 264003, Shandong, P. R. China 
hanfengchan@gmail.com Jincz63@hotmail.com.

Fascin2 (FSCN2) is an actin cross-linking protein that is mainly localized in 
retinas and in the stereocilia of hair cells. Earlier studies showed that a 
deletion mutation in human FASCIN2 (FSCN2) gene could cause autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa. Recent studies have indicated that a missense mutation in 
mouse Fscn2 gene (R109H) can contribute to the early onset of hearing loss in 
DBA/2J mice. To explore the function of the gene, Fscn2 was knocked out using 
TALEN (transcription activator-like effector nucleases) on the C57BL/6J 
background. Four mouse strains with deletions of 1, 4, 5, and 41 nucleotides in 
the target region of Fscn2 were developed. F1 heterozygous (Fscn2+/- ) mice 
carrying the same deletion of 41 nucleotides were mated to generate the Fscn2-/- 
mice. As a result, the Fscn2-/- mice showed progressive hearing loss, as 
measured in the elevation of auditory brainstem-response thresholds. The hearing 
impairment began at age 3 weeks at high-stimulus frequencies and became most 
severe at age 24 weeks. Moreover, degeneration of hair cells and loss of 
stereocilia were remarkable in Fscn2-/- mice, as revealed by F-actin staining 
and scanning electron microscopy. Furthermore, compared to the controls, the 
Fscn2-/- mice displayed significantly lower electroretinogram amplitudes and 
thinner retinas at 8, 16, and 24 weeks. These results demonstrate that, in 
C57BL/6Jmice, Fscn2 is essential for maintaining ear and eye function and that a 
null mutation of Fscn2 leads to progressive hearing loss and retinal 
degeneration.

Copyright Â© 2018 Liu et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.118.200405
PMCID: PMC6169377
PMID: 30082328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]