1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Aug 5;19(8):2295. doi: 10.3390/ijms19082295.

AAV-Syn-BDNF-EGFP Virus Construct Exerts Neuroprotective Action on the 
Hippocampal Neural Network during Hypoxia In Vitro.

Mitroshina ЕV(1)(2), Mishchenko TA(3)(4), Usenko AV(5), Epifanova EA(6), Yarkov 
RS(7), Gavrish MS(8), Babaev AA(9), Vedunova MV(10).

Author information:
(1)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. helenmitroshina@gmail.com.
(2)Privolzhskiy Research Medical University, 10/1 Minin and Pozharsky Square, 
603005 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. helenmitroshina@gmail.com.
(3)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. saHarnova87@mail.ru.
(4)Privolzhskiy Research Medical University, 10/1 Minin and Pozharsky Square, 
603005 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. saHarnova87@mail.ru.
(5)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. sas7342415@mail.ru.
(6)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. epifa888@mail.ru.
(7)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. roman.sultanov.96@mail.ru.
(8)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. gavrish@neuro.nnov.ru.
(9)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. alexisbabaev@list.ru.
(10)Lobachevsky State University of Nizhni Novgorod, Institute of Neuroscience, 
23 Prospekt Gagarina, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. MVedunova@yandex.ru.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is one of the key signaling molecules 
that supports the viability of neural cells in various brain pathologies, and 
can be considered a potential therapeutic agent. However, several methodological 
difficulties, such as overcoming the blood⁻brain barrier and the short half-life 
period, challenge the potential use of BDNF in clinical practice. Gene therapy 
could overcome these limitations. Investigating the influence of viral vectors 
on the neural network level is of particular interest because viral 
overexpression affects different aspects of cell metabolism and interactions 
between neurons. The present work aimed to investigate the influence of the 
adeno-associated virus (AAV)-Syn-BDNF-EGFP virus construct on neural network 
activity parameters in an acute hypobaric hypoxia model in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An adeno-associated virus vector carrying the BDNF gene 
was constructed using the following plasmids: AAV-Syn-EGFP, pDP5, DJvector, and 
pHelper. The developed virus vector was then tested on primary hippocampal 
cultures obtained from C57BL/6 mouse embryos (E18). Acute hypobaric hypoxia was 
induced on day 21 in vitro. Spontaneous bioelectrical and calcium activity of 
neural networks in primary cultures and viability tests were analysed during 
normoxia and during the posthypoxic period.
RESULTS: BDNF overexpression by AAV-Syn-BDNF-EGFP does not affect cell viability 
or the main parameters of spontaneous bioelectrical activity in normoxia. 
Application of the developed virus construct partially eliminates the negative 
hypoxic consequences by preserving cell viability and maintaining spontaneous 
bioelectrical activity in the cultures. Moreover, the internal functional 
structure, including the activation pattern of network bursts, the number of 
hubs, and the number of connections within network elements, is also partially 
preserved. BDNF overexpression prevents a decrease in the number of cells 
exhibiting calcium activity and maintains the frequency of calcium oscillations.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed the pronounced antihypoxic and neuroprotective 
effects of AAV-Syn-BDNF-EGFP virus transduction in an acute normobaric hypoxia 
model.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19082295
PMCID: PMC6121472
PMID: 30081596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.