1. An Pediatr (Engl Ed). 2019 Mar;90(3):148-156. doi:
10.1016/j.anpedi.2018.05.022.  Epub 2018 Aug 6.

[Real-world effectiveness of ivacaftor in children with cystic fibrosis and the 
G551D mutation].

[Article in Spanish]

Gomez-Pastrana D(1), Nwokoro C(2), McLean M(2), Brown S(2), Christiansen N(2), 
Pao CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neumología Infantil, Hospital de Jerez, Jerez de la Frontera, 
Cádiz, España; Paediatric Cystic Fibrosis Centre, The Children's Hospital at the 
Royal London, Barts Health NHS Trust, Londres, Reino Unido. Electronic address: 
dgpastranad@gmail.com.
(2)Paediatric Cystic Fibrosis Centre, The Children's Hospital at the Royal 
London, Barts Health NHS Trust, Londres, Reino Unido.

INTRODUCTION: Ivacaftor is a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) potentiator that has been shown to improve the nutritional status and 
lung function of cystic fibrosis patients with the G551D mutation in clinical 
trials. The objective of this study was to describe the real-world progress of 
children receiving ivacaftor.
METHODS: We describe the real-world progress of four children with cystic 
fibrosis and the F508del/G551D genotype comparing data during ivacaftor 
treatment with baseline and with the year before commencing treatment.
RESULTS: Our sample comprised 4 children aged between 6 and 14 years and 
including one with a recent diagnosis of CF and other with persistent 
Mycobacterium abscessus (M. abscessus) and recurrent allergic bronchopulmonary 
aspergillosis. The baseline FEV1 was 58.5% to 81.8% of the predicted value, and 
ivacaftor was taken for a mean 24 months (range, 12-30 months). All patients 
experienced a significant and sustained improvement in lung function. Compared 
to baseline, the weight z-score improved by 1.53 points, and the BMI z-score by 
1.6 points. Compared to the year before starting ivacaftor, the frequency of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) isolates decreased (-0.4/patient/year), 
as did the number of respiratory exacerbations (-1.8/patient/year). The 
weight-adjusted dose of lipase per kilogram decreased progressively in all 
patients. In 1 patient, a previously persistent M. abscessus infection and 
recurrent allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis resolved during treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with cystic fibrosis and the F508del/G551D genotype 
receiving treatment with ivacaftor experienced a real-world improvement in lung 
function, nutritional status, respiratory exacerbations, isolation of P. 
aeruginosa, and dose of pancreatic enzymes.

Copyright © 2017 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Publicado por Elsevier 
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2018.05.022
PMID: 30093322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]