1. Elife. 2018 Aug 9;7:e38506. doi: 10.7554/eLife.38506.

Targeting light-gated chloride channels to neuronal somatodendritic domain 
reduces their excitatory effect in the axon.

Messier JE(1)(2), Chen H(1)(2), Cai ZL(1)(2), Xue M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
United States.
(2)The Cain Foundation Laboratories, Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research 
Institute at Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States.

Light-gated chloride channels are emerging as promising optogenetic tools for 
inhibition of neural activity. However, their effects depend on the 
transmembrane chloride electrochemical gradient and may be complex due to the 
heterogeneity of this gradient in different developmental stages, neuronal 
types, and subcellular compartments. Here we characterized a light-gated 
chloride channel, GtACR2, in mouse cortical neurons. We found that GtACR2 
activation inhibited the soma, but unexpectedly depolarized the presynaptic 
terminals resulting in neurotransmitter release. Other light-gated chloride 
channels had similar effects. Reducing the chloride concentrations in the axon 
and presynaptic terminals diminished the GtACR2-induced neurotransmitter 
release, indicating an excitatory effect of chloride channels in these 
compartments. A novel hybrid somatodendritic targeting motif reduced the 
GtACR2-induced neurotransmitter release while enhancing the somatic 
photocurrents. Our results highlight the necessity of precisely determining the 
effects of light-gated chloride channels under specific experimental conditions 
and provide a much-improved light-gated chloride channel for optogenetic 
inhibition.

Â© 2018, Messier et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.38506
PMCID: PMC6130974
PMID: 30091701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JM, HC, ZC, MX No competing interests declared