1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2018 Oct;367(1):119-128. doi: 10.1124/jpet.118.248179. 
Epub 2018 Aug 14.

Tamoxifen Directly Interacts with the Dopamine Transporter.

Mikelman SR(1), Guptaroy B(1), Schmitt KC(1), Jones KT(1), Zhen J(1), Reith 
MEA(1), Gnegy ME(2).

Author information:
(1)Gnegy Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan School 
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan (S.R.M., B.G., M.E.G.); and Reith Laboratory, 
Department of Psychiatry, University of New York School of Medicine, New York, 
New York (K.C.S., K.T.J., J.Z., M.E.A.R.).
(2)Gnegy Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan School 
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan (S.R.M., B.G., M.E.G.); and Reith Laboratory, 
Department of Psychiatry, University of New York School of Medicine, New York, 
New York (K.C.S., K.T.J., J.Z., M.E.A.R.) pgnegy@umich.edu.

The selective estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen increases extracellular 
dopamine in vivo and acts as a neuroprotectant in models of dopamine 
neurotoxicity. We investigated the effect of tamoxifen on dopamine transporter 
(DAT)-mediated dopamine uptake, dopamine efflux, and [3H]WIN 35,428 
[(-)-2-β-carbomethoxy-3-β-(4-fluorophenyl)tropane] binding in rat striatal 
tissue. Tamoxifen dose-dependently blocked dopamine uptake (54% reduction at 10 
μM) and amphetamine-stimulated efflux (59% reduction at 10 μM) in synaptosomes. 
It also produced a small but significant reduction in [3H]WIN 35,428 binding in 
striatal membranes, indicating a weak interaction with the substrate binding 
site in the DAT. Biotinylation and cysteine accessibility studies indicated that 
tamoxifen stabilizes the outward-facing conformation of the DAT in a 
cocaine-like manner and does not affect surface expression of the DAT. 
Additional studies with mutant DAT constructs D476A and I159A suggested a direct 
interaction between tamoxifen and a secondary substrate binding site of the 
transporter. Locomotor studies revealed that tamoxifen attenuates 
amphetamine-stimulated hyperactivity in rats but has no depressant or stimulant 
activity in the absence of amphetamine. These results suggest a complex 
mechanism of action for tamoxifen as a regulator of the DAT. Due to its 
effectiveness against amphetamine actions and its central nervous system 
permeant activity, the tamoxifen structure represents an excellent starting 
point for a structure-based drug-design program to develop a pharmacological 
therapeutic for psychostimulant abuse.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.118.248179
PMCID: PMC7250473
PMID: 30108161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]