1. Oncotarget. 2018 Jul 13;9(54):30324-30339. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25718. 
eCollection 2018 Jul 13.

Doxorubicin-induced elevated oxidative stress and neurochemical alterations in 
brain and cognitive decline: protection by MESNA and insights into mechanisms of 
chemotherapy-induced cognitive impairment ("chemobrain").

Keeney JTR(1), Ren X(1), Warrier G(1), Noel T(2), Powell DK(3), Brelsfoard 
JM(4), Sultana R(1), Saatman KE(4), Clair DKS(2)(5)(6), Butterfield DA(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
(2)Department of Toxicology and Cancer Biology, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(3)Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Center, University of Kentucky 
Medical Center, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(4)Spinal Cord and Brain Injury Research Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40502, USA.
(6)Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40502, USA.
(7)Sanders Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, 
USA.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2018 Aug 21;9(65):32404-32405. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25968.

Chemotherapy-induced cognitive impairment (CICI) is now widely recognized as a 
real and too common complication of cancer chemotherapy experienced by an 
ever-growing number of cancer survivors. Previously, we reported that 
doxorubicin (Dox), a prototypical reactive oxygen species (ROS)-producing 
anti-cancer drug, results in oxidation of plasma proteins, including 
apolipoprotein A-I (ApoA-I) leading to tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-α)-mediated oxidative stress in plasma and brain. We also reported that 
co-administration of the antioxidant drug, 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate sodium 
(MESNA), prevents Dox-induced protein oxidation and subsequent TNF-α elevation 
in plasma. In this study, we measured oxidative stress in both brain and plasma 
of Dox-treated mice both with and without MESNA. MESNA ameliorated Dox-induced 
oxidative protein damage in plasma, confirming our prior studies, and in a new 
finding led to decreased oxidative stress in brain. This study also provides 
further functional and biochemical evidence of the mechanisms of CICI. Using 
novel object recognition (NOR), we demonstrated the Dox administration resulted 
in memory deficits, an effect that was rescued by MESNA. Using hydrogen magnetic 
resonance imaging spectroscopy (H1-MRS) techniques, we demonstrated that Dox 
administration led to a dramatic decrease in choline-containing compounds 
assessed by (Cho)/creatine ratios in the hippocampus in mice. To better 
elucidate a potential mechanism for this MRS observation, we tested the 
activities of the phospholipase enzymes known to act on phosphatidylcholine 
(PtdCho), a key component of phospholipid membranes and a source of choline for 
the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine (ACh). The activities of both 
phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C (PC-PLC) and phospholipase D were 
severely diminished following Dox administration. The activity of PC-PLC was 
preserved when MESNA was co-administered with Dox; however, PLD activity was not 
protected. This study is the first to demonstrate the protective effects of 
MESNA on Dox-related protein oxidation, cognitive decline, phosphocholine (PCho) 
levels, and PC-PLC activity in brain and suggests novel potential therapeutic 
targets and strategies to mitigate CICI.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.25718
PMCID: PMC6084398
PMID: 30100992

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST None of the authors have 
any conflicts of interest with respect to the contents of this manuscript.