1. Genome Biol. 2018 Aug 15;19(1):116. doi: 10.1186/s13059-018-1472-7.

Evolutionarily conserved partial gene duplication in the Triticeae tribe of 
grasses confers pathogen resistance.

Rajaraman J(1), Douchkov D(2), Lück S(3), Hensel G(3), Nowara D(3), Pogoda M(3), 
Rutten T(3), Meitzel T(3), Brassac J(3), Höfle C(4), Hückelhoven R(4), 
Klinkenberg J(5), Trujillo M(5)(6), Bauer E(7), Schmutzer T(3), Himmelbach A(3), 
Mascher M(3), Lazzari B(8), Stein N(3), Kumlehn J(3), Schweizer P(3).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung (IPK 
Gatersleben), Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466, Stadt Seeland, Germany. 
rajaraman@ipk-gatersleben.de.
(2)Leibniz Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung (IPK 
Gatersleben), Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466, Stadt Seeland, Germany. 
dushkov@ipk-gatersleben.de.
(3)Leibniz Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung (IPK 
Gatersleben), Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466, Stadt Seeland, Germany.
(4)Technische Universität München, Emil-Ramann-Straße 2, D-85354, Freising, 
Germany.
(5)Leibniz Institut für Pflanzenbiochemie, Weinberg 3, D-06120, Halle (Saale), 
Germany.
(6)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie II, Zellbiologie, 
D-79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Technische Universität München, Liesel-Beckmann-Straße 2, D-85354, Freising, 
Germany.
(8)Parco Technologico Padano, Via Einstein, Loc. Cascina Codazza, 26900, Lodi, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: The large and highly repetitive genomes of the cultivated species 
Hordeum vulgare (barley), Triticum aestivum (wheat), and Secale cereale (rye) 
belonging to the Triticeae tribe of grasses appear to be particularly rich in 
gene-like sequences including partial duplicates. Most of them have been 
classified as putative pseudogenes. In this study we employ transient and stable 
gene silencing- and over-expression systems in barley to study the function of 
HvARM1 (for H. vulgare Armadillo 1), a partial gene duplicate of the 
U-box/armadillo-repeat E3 ligase HvPUB15 (for H. vulgare Plant U-Box 15).
RESULTS: The partial ARM1 gene is derived from a gene-duplication event in a 
common ancestor of the Triticeae and contributes to quantitative host as well as 
nonhost resistance to the biotrophic powdery mildew fungus Blumeria graminis. In 
barley, allelic variants of HvARM1 but not of HvPUB15 are significantly 
associated with levels of powdery mildew infection. Both HvPUB15 and HvARM1 
proteins interact in yeast and plant cells with the susceptibility-related, 
plastid-localized barley homologs of THF1 (for Thylakoid formation 1) and of 
ClpS1 (for Clp-protease adaptor S1) of Arabidopsis thaliana. A genome-wide scan 
for partial gene duplicates reveals further events in barley resulting in 
stress-regulated, potentially neo-functionalized, genes.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest neo-functionalization of the partial gene copy 
HvARM1 increases resistance against powdery mildew infection. It further links 
plastid function with susceptibility to biotrophic pathogen attack. These 
findings shed new light on a novel mechanism to employ partial duplication of 
protein-protein interaction domains to facilitate the expansion of immune 
signaling networks.

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-018-1472-7
PMCID: PMC6092874
PMID: 30111359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.