1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Aug;97(33):e11636. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000011636.

Novel frame shift mutation in ERCC6 leads to a severe form of Cockayne syndrome 
with postnatal growth failure and early death: A case report and brief 
literature review.

Kou Y(1), Shboul M, Wang Z, Shersheer Q, Lyu Z, Liu P, Zhao X, Tian J.

Author information:
(1)Key laboratory of Resource Biology and Biotechnology in Western China, 
College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, China Department of Medical 
Laboratory Sciences, Jordan University of Science and Technology AL-Zarqa 
Government Hospital-Pediatric Department, Jordan Shanghai Center for Systems 
Biomedicine, State Key Laboratory on Oncogene and Bio-ID Center, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, China.

INTRODUCTION: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare multisystemic autosomal recessive 
disease. The primary manifestations of which are developmental delay, 
neurological impairment, abnormal skin sensitivity to sunlight and unique facial 
appearance as sunken eyes, large ears, and thin large nose. The disorders of the 
nucleotide excision repair system significantly are caused by mutations of 
Excision repair cross-complementing group 6 (ERCC6) and Excision repair 
cross-complementing group 8 (ERCC8) genes, and the ERCC6 gene mutations are 
present in approximately 65% of cases.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we described a girl in a consanguineous Jordanian family 
with abnormal facial appearance and postnatal growth delay. She was not able to 
gain weight. Her condition deteriorated progressively and she developed 
difficulty of swallowing even to water. The patient was diagnosed as CS based on 
her facial appearance and neurologic dysfunction. The patient was examined at 3 
years old, and died at 4 years old.
CONCLUSION: Genetic analysis and sequencing revealed homozygosity for a novel 
frame shift mutation c.2911_2915del5ins9 (p.Lys971TryfsX14) in the ERCC6. The 
mutation is predicted to delete 5 nucleotides and add 9 nucleotides with a 
premature termination, resulting in approximately 34% length reduction of the 
wild-type transcript. The multisystem malformations of CS are clinically 
heterogeneous. The frame shift mutation of ERCC6 found in this patient is a 
novel one, which caused postnatal growth failure and early death. Our findings 
indicate truncated mutation in CS lead to more severe CS phenotype and add to 
the genotype-phenotype correlations in CS.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000011636
PMCID: PMC6112894
PMID: 30113454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.