1. J Immunol. 2018 Oct 1;201(7):2082-2093. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800726. Epub
2018  Aug 15.

Crystal Structure of the Labile Complex of IL-24 with the Extracellular Domains 
of IL-22R1 and IL-20R2.

Lubkowski J(1), Sonmez C(2), Smirnov SV(3), Anishkin A(4), Kotenko SV(3), 
Wlodawer A(2).

Author information:
(1)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702; lubkowsj@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Center for 
Immunity and Inflammation, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey at University 
Hospital, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07103; and.
(4)Biology Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742.

Crystal structure of the ternary complex of human IL-24 with two receptors, 
IL-22R1 and IL-20R2, has been determined at 2.15 Å resolution. A crystallizable 
complex was created by a novel approach involving fusing the ligand with a 
flexible linker to the presumed low-affinity receptor, and coexpression of this 
construct in Drosophila S2 cells together with the presumed high-affinity 
receptor. This approach, which may be generally applicable to other multiprotein 
complexes with low-affinity components, was necessitated by the instability of 
IL-24 expressed by itself in either bacteria or insect cells. Although IL-24 
expressed in Escherichia coli was unstable and precipitated almost immediately 
upon its refolding and purification, a small fraction of IL-24 remaining in the 
folded state was shown to be active in a cell-based assay. In the crystal 
structure presented here, we found that two cysteine residues in IL-24 do not 
form a predicted disulfide bond. Lack of structural restraint by disulfides, 
present in other related cytokines, is most likely reason for the low stability 
of IL-24. Although the contact area between IL-24 and IL-22R1 is larger than 
between the cytokine and IL-20R2, calculations show the latter interaction to be 
slightly more stable, suggesting that the shared receptor (IL-20R2) might be the 
higher-affinity receptor.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800726
PMCID: PMC6143405
PMID: 30111632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]