1. Elife. 2018 Aug 17;7:e38327. doi: 10.7554/eLife.38327.

Fizzy-Related dictates A cell cycle switch during organ repair and tissue growth 
responses in the Drosophila hindgut.

Cohen E(1), Allen SR(1), Sawyer JK(2), Fox DT(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Cancer Biology, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham, United States.
(3)Regeneration Next Initiative, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
United States.

Ploidy-increasing cell cycles drive tissue growth in many developing organs. 
Such cycles, including endocycles, are increasingly appreciated to drive tissue 
growth following injury or activated growth signaling in mature organs. In these 
organs, the regulation and distinct roles of different cell cycles remains 
unclear. Here, we uncover a programmed switch between cell cycles in the 
Drosophila hindgut pylorus. Using an acute injury model, we identify mitosis as 
the response in larval pyloric cells, whereas endocycles occur in adult pyloric 
cells. By developing a novel genetic method, DEMISE 
(Dual-Expression-Method-for-Induced-Site-specific-Eradication), we show the cell 
cycle regulator Fizzy-related dictates the decision between mitosis and 
endocycles. After injury, both cycles accurately restore tissue mass and genome 
content. However, in response to sustained growth signaling, only endocycles 
preserve epithelial architecture. Our data reveal distinct cell cycle 
programming in response to similar stimuli in mature vs. developmental states 
and reveal a tissue-protective role of endocycles.

Â© 2018, Cohen et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.38327
PMCID: PMC6130973
PMID: 30117808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EC, SA, JS, DF No competing interests declared