1. Neural Regen Res. 2018 Sep;13(9):1493-1506. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.237108.

Neuroprotection by immunomodulatory agents in animal models of Parkinson's 
disease.

Martinez B(1), Peplow PV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, University of California, Merced, 
CA; Department of Medicine, St. Georges University School of Medicine, Grenada; 
Department of Physics and Engineering, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disease for which 
the characteristic motor symptoms emerge after an extensive loss of dopamine 
containing neurons. The cell bodies of these neurons are present in the 
substantia nigra, with the nerve terminals being in the striatum. Both innate 
and adaptive immune responses may contribute to dopaminergic neurodegeneration 
and disease progression is potentially linked to these. Studies in the last 
twenty years have indicated an important role for neuroinflammation in PD 
through degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway. Characteristic 
of neuroinflammation is the activation of brain glial cells, principally 
microglia and astrocytes that release various soluble factors. Many of these 
factors are proinflammatory and neurotoxic and harmful to nigral dopaminergic 
neurons. Recent studies have identified several different agents with 
immunomodulatory properties that protected dopaminergic neurons from 
degeneration and death in animal models of PD. All of the agents were effective 
in reducing the motor deficit and alleviating dopaminergic neurotoxicity and, 
when measured, preventing the decrease of dopamine upon being administered 
therapeutically after 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, 
6-hydroxydopamine, rotenone-lesioning or delivery of adeno-associated 
virus-Î±-synuclein to the ventral midbrain of animals. Some of these agents were 
shown to exert an anti-inflammatory action, decrease oxidative stress, and 
reduce lipid peroxidation products. Activation of microglia and astrocytes was 
also decreased, as well as infiltration of T cells into the substantia nigra. 
Pretreatment with fingolimod, tanshinoine I, dimethyl fumarate, thalidomide, or 
cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript peptide as a preventive strategy 
ameliorated motor deficits and nigral dopaminergic neurotoxicity in 
brain-lesioned animals. Immunomodulatory agents could be used to treat patients 
with early clinical signs of the disease or potentially even prior to disease 
onset in those identified as having pre-disposing risk, including genetic 
factors.

DOI: 10.4103/1673-5374.237108
PMCID: PMC6126123
PMID: 30127102

Conflict of interest statement: None declared