1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 20;8(1):12441. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30272-5.

Metabolic profiles of cysteine, methionine, glutamate, glutamine, arginine, 
aspartate, asparagine, alanine and glutathione in Streptococcus thermophilus 
during pH-controlled batch fermentations.

Qiao Y(1), Liu G(1), Leng C(1), Zhang Y(1), Lv X(1), Chen H(1), Sun J(1), Feng 
Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, College of Food 
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, No.600, Changjiang Road, Harbin, 
150030, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Dairy Science, Ministry of Education, College of Food 
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, No.600, Changjiang Road, Harbin, 
150030, China. NEAU_FengZhen@163.com.

Elucidating the amino acid (AA) metabolism patterns of Streptococcus 
thermophilus has important effects on the precise design of nitrogen sources for 
high-cell-density culture. Transcriptomics and metabolomics were combined to 
reveal the cysteine, methionine, glutamate, glutamine, arginine, aspartate, 
asparagine and alanine metabolic pathways in S. thermophilus MN-ZLW-002, 
including glutathione. The changes in the synthesis, consumption and 
concentration of AAs and their metabolites, as well as regulatory genes with 
time were revealed. The metabolism of L-cysteine, L-glutamate, L-aspartate and 
L-alanine generated some potential functional metabolites. The metabolism of 
methionine and glutamate generated potential harmful metabolites. S. 
thermophilus MN-ZLW-002 can synthesize glutathione. Some potential functional 
metabolites have similar biological functions, indicating that S. thermophilus 
can resist environmental stresses through multiple mechanisms. The expression of 
some key genes in synthesis pathway of AA indicated that cysteine, methionine, 
asparagine, aspartate, arginine and lysine were insufficient or imbalance 
between nutrient components. The accumulation of large amounts of AA metabolites 
might be the primary cause of the overconsumption of AAs and influence the 
growth of S. thermophilus. The present study revealed the metabolic profiles of 
abovementioned AAs as well as those of regulatory genes and metabolites. These 
results were beneficial to the precise design of nitrogen sources and regulation 
of functional metabolites for the high-cell-density culture of S. thermophilus.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-30272-5
PMCID: PMC6102215
PMID: 30127376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.