1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Aug 20;14(8):e1007238. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007238. 
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Diverse pathways of escape from all well-characterized VRC01-class broadly 
neutralizing HIV-1 antibodies.

Otsuka Y(1), Schmitt K(1), Quinlan BD(1), Gardner MR(1), Alfant B(1), Reich 
A(2), Farzan M(1), Choe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, 
Jupiter, Florida, United States of America.
(2)Informatics Core, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, United 
States of America.

Many broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) against human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1) were shown effective in animal models, and are currently 
evaluated in clinical trials. However, use of these antibodies in humans is 
hampered by the rapid emergence of resistant viruses. Here we show that 
soft-randomization can be used to accelerate the parallel identification of 
viral escape pathways. As a proof of principle, we soft-randomized the epitope 
regions of VRC01-class bNAbs in replication-competent HIV-1 and selected for 
resistant variants. After only a few passages, a surprisingly diverse population 
of antibody-resistant viruses emerged, bearing both novel and previously 
described escape mutations. We observed that the escape variants resistant to 
some VRC01-class bNAbs are resistant to most other bNAbs in the same class, and 
that a subset of variants was completely resistant to every well characterized 
VRC01-class bNAB, including VRC01, NIH45-46, 3BNC117, VRC07, N6, VRC-CH31, and 
VRC-PG04. Thus, our data demonstrate that soft randomization is a suitable 
approach for accelerated detection of viral escape, and highlight the challenges 
inherent in administering or attempting to elicit VRC01-class antibodies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007238
PMCID: PMC6117093
PMID: 30125330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.