1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2018;85(3):178-182. doi: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2018_85-26.

The Reality of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2B Diagnosis: Awareness of 
Unique Physical Appearance Is Important.

Nagaoka R(1), Sugitani I(1), Sanada M(1), Jikuzono T(1), Okamura R(1), Igarashi 
T(1), Akasu H(1), Shimizu K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrine Surgery, Nippon Medical School.

BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) is an extremely rare 
syndrome mainly caused by RET918 germline mutations. MEN2B typically causes 
medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma, and unique physical 
characteristics including mucosal neuroma, distinctive facial appearance, and 
Marfanoid habitus. Most patients have abdominal symptoms such as bloating, 
intermittent constipation, and diarrhea. MTC is the most important determinant 
of mortality in patients with MEN2B. Establishing the diagnosis of MEN2B at a 
curative stage of MTC is crucial.
CASE PRESENTATION: We have encountered four patients with MEN2B. Two were 
hereditary cases from the same family, and two were considered de novo cases 
with phenotypically normal parents. Mean age at diagnosis was 25.5 years (range, 
13-39 years). Although all patients had shown mucosal neuroma on the lips and 
tongue, in addition to gastrointestinal symptoms from infancy, diagnoses were 
made from symptomatic MTC even for the hereditary patients (our index case was a 
14-year-old girl, whose mother was subsequently diagnosed with advanced MTC). 
Genetic tests for RET mutations revealed the M918T mutation in all patients. Two 
patients developed pheochromocytoma, two died from distant metastases of MTC, 
and two received treatment for multiple metastases of MTC (one with vandetanib).
CONCLUSIONS: In our patients with MEN2B, prophylactic or early thyroidectomy 
could not be performed. The characteristic phenotype associated with MEN2B is 
almost always seen prior to detection of MTC or pheochromocytoma. Knowledge 
about the non-endocrine manifestations of MEN2B needs to be shared among 
pediatricians and gastroenterologists.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.JNMS.2018_85-26
PMID: 30135345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]