1. J Neuroinflammation. 2018 Aug 27;15(1):240. doi: 10.1186/s12974-018-1284-4.

The role of neutrophil granule proteins in neuroinflammation and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Stock AJ(1)(2), Kasus-Jacobi A(2)(3), Pereira HA(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Blvd., BRC Rm 06B121, Baltimore, MD, 
21224, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, 1110 N. Stonewall Ave., CPB 255, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, USA.
(3)Oklahoma Center for Neuroscience, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, 1110 N. Stonewall Ave., CPB 255, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, 1110 N. Stonewall Ave., CPB 255, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, USA. 
Anne-Pereira@ouhsc.edu.
(5)Oklahoma Center for Neuroscience, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, 1110 N. Stonewall Ave., CPB 255, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, USA. 
Anne-Pereira@ouhsc.edu.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
1105 N. Stonewall, Robert M. Bird Library, Rm 258, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, 
USA. Anne-Pereira@ouhsc.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 1105 
N. Stonewall, Robert M. Bird Library, Rm 258, Oklahoma City, OK, 73117, USA. 
Anne-Pereira@ouhsc.edu.

Neutrophils are the innate immune system's first line of defense. Neutrophils 
play a critical role in protecting the host against infectious pathogens, 
resolving sterile injuries, and mediating inflammatory responses. The granules 
of neutrophils and their constituent proteins are central to these functions. 
Although neutrophils may exert a protective role upon acute inflammatory 
conditions or insults, continued activity of neutrophils in chronic inflammatory 
diseases can contribute to tissue damage. Neutrophil granule proteins are 
involved in a number of chronic inflammatory conditions and diseases. However, 
the functions of these proteins in neuroinflammation and chronic 
neuroinflammatory diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), remain to be 
elucidated. In this review, we discuss recent findings from our lab and others 
that suggest possible functions for neutrophils and the neutrophil granule 
proteins, CAP37, neutrophil elastase, and cathepsin G, in neuroinflammation, 
with an emphasis on AD. These findings reveal that neutrophil granule proteins 
may exert both neuroprotective and neurotoxic effects. Further research should 
determine whether neutrophil granule proteins are valid targets for therapeutic 
interventions in chronic neuroinflammatory diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-018-1284-4
PMCID: PMC6112130
PMID: 30149799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
studies performed by our laboratory involving human brain tissues were exempt 
from review by the Institutional Review Board. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not 
applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: Author AJS has declared that no competing 
interests exist. Author AKJ has received funding from the Oklahoma Center for 
Advancement of Science and Technology and National Eye Institute. Author HAP has 
declared equity in Biolytx Pharmaceuticals Corp and funding obtained through the 
National Eye Institute, National Institute of General Medical Sciences, and the 
Oklahoma Center for the Advancement of Science and Technology for support of 
this study. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.