1. Ann Hematol. 2019 Jan;98(1):185-193. doi: 10.1007/s00277-018-3482-7. Epub 2018
 Aug 24.

Donor lymphocyte infusion for prevention of relapse after unmanipulated 
haploidentical PBSCT for very high-risk hematologic malignancies.

Gao XN(1), Lin J(2), Wang SH(1), Huang WR(1), Li F(1), Li HH(1), Chen J(1), Wang 
LJ(1), Gao CJ(1), Yu L(1), Liu DH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Medical School of 
Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
(2)Institute of Basic Medicine, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Medical School of 
Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
(3)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Medical School of 
Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. daihongrm@163.com.

Unmanipulated haploidentical peripheral blood stem cell transplantation 
(haplo-PBSCT) has been an established treatment to cure high-risk 
leukemia/lymphoma. Relapse is the main cause of treatment failure for patients 
with relapsed/refractory disease or with very high-risk gene mutations such as 
TP53, TET2, and DNMT3a. In this study, we aimed to establish the tolerance and 
efficacy of prophylactic donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI) with G-CSF-primed 
peripheral blood progenitors for prevention of relapse in these very high-risk 
patients after haplo-PBSCT. The prophylactic DLI was given at a median of 
77 days after transplantation in 31 of 45 consecutive patients with very 
high-risk leukemia/lymphoma. The median dose of CD3+ cells for infusion was 
1.8 × 107/kg. The 100-day incidences of acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) 
grades 2-4 and 3-4 after DLI were 55.3% and 10.2%. The 2-year incidences of 
chronic GVHD and severe chronic GVHD were 52.0% and 18.2%. The 2-year incidences 
of non-relapse mortality and relapse were 33.1% and 32.5%. The 2-year 
probabilities of overall survival and relapse-free survival were 40.1% and 
31.9%. Poor-risk gene mutations (p = 0.029), disease in non-remission status 
prior to transplantation (p = 0.005), and donors older than 40 years of age 
(p = 0.043) were associated with relapse after DLI. In multivariate analysis, 
disease in non-remission status prior to transplantation was an independent risk 
factor of relapse (hazard ratio = 4.079; p = 0.035). These data showed the 
feasibility of the prophylactic DLI in the haplo-PBSCT setting and the 
anti-leukemic efficacy in very high-risk leukemia/lymphoma.

DOI: 10.1007/s00277-018-3482-7
PMCID: PMC6334751
PMID: 30143831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.