1. J Dairy Sci. 2018 Nov;101(11):9978-9986. doi: 10.3168/jds.2018-14914. Epub
2018  Aug 23.

Association between the GHR, GHRHR, and IGF1 gene polymorphisms and milk yield 
and quality traits in Sarda sheep.

Dettori ML(1), Pazzola M(2), Paschino P(1), Amills M(3), Vacca GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Sassari, Via Vienna 2, 07100 
Sassari, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Sassari, Via Vienna 2, 07100 
Sassari, Italy. Electronic address: pazzola@uniss.it.
(3)Department of Animal Genetics, Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics 
(CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB), Campus Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra 08193, 
Spain.

The growth hormone receptor (GHR), the growth hormone releasing hormone receptor 
(GHRHR), and the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) genes are known to modulate 
growth, reproduction, and lactation traits in livestock. The aim of the current 
work was to investigate if the variation of the sheep GHR, GHRHR, and IGF1 genes 
is associated with milk yield and quality traits. Three hundred eighty dairy 
Sarda sheep were genotyped for 36 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) mapping 
to these 3 loci, and records for milk yield and daily fat and protein yield, as 
well as for fat, protein, casein, lactose, and milk urea contents, pH, somatic 
cell score, logarithmic bacterial count, and milk energy were obtained. The 
linkage disequilibrium analysis was performed only for GHR, as both GHRHR and 
IGF1 had only 1 polymorphic SNP. Haplotype analysis revealed the existence of 7 
haplotype blocks in GHR. Two haplotype blocks, including part of the intron 1 
and the upstream region, were clearly separated from the remaining 5 blocks by 
SNP rs412986330, which may be a recombination hotspot. The latter 5 blocks were 
contiguous, spanning from intron 2 to exon 10. Statistical analysis revealed 
that the GHR polymorphism is significantly associated with milk traits for daily 
fat and protein yield and fat, milk urea, and lactose content. Moreover, 
variation in IGF1 was associated with milk protein and casein content. Data 
generated in this research provide new insights into the allelic effects of the 
ovine GHRHR, GHR, and IGF1 genes on milk production and quality traits, 
information that may be useful in gene-assisted selection programs.

Copyright © 2018 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2018-14914
PMID: 30146276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]