1. Mol Pain. 2018 Jan-Dec;14:1744806918795793. doi: 10.1177/1744806918795793.

Intrathecal delivery of a palmitoylated peptide targeting Y382-384 within the 
P2X7 receptor alleviates neuropathic pain.

Dalgarno R(1)(2)(3), Leduc-Pessah H(1)(2)(3), Pilapil A(1)(2)(3), Kwok 
CH(1)(2)(3), Trang T(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Comparative Biology & Experimental Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)2 Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(3)3 Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Pain hypersensitivity resulting from peripheral nerve injury depends on 
pathological microglial activation in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. This 
microglial activity is critically modulated by P2X7 receptors (P2X7R) and ATP 
stimulation of these receptors produces mechanical allodynia, a defining feature 
of neuropathic pain. Peripheral nerve injury increases P2X7R expression and 
potentiates its cation channel function in spinal microglia. Here, we report a 
means to preferentially block the potentiation of P2X7R function by delivering a 
membrane permeant small interfering peptide that targets Y382-384, a putative 
tyrosine phosphorylation site within the P2X7R intracellular C-terminal domain. 
Intrathecal administration of this palmitoylated peptide (P2X7R379-389) 
transiently reversed mechanical allodynia caused by peripheral nerve injury in 
both male and female rats. Furthermore, targeting Y382-384 suppressed 
P2X7R-mediated release of cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha and blocked the 
adoptive transfer of mechanical allodynia caused by intrathecal injection of 
P2X7R-stimulated microglia. Thus, Y382-384 site-specific modulation of P2X7R is 
an important microglial mechanism in neuropathic pain.

DOI: 10.1177/1744806918795793
PMCID: PMC6111392
PMID: 30146934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]