1. Sci Rep. 2018 Aug 24;8(1):12749. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31158-2.

Collaboration of tRNA modifications and elongation factor eEF1A in decoding and 
nonsense suppression.

Klassen R(1), Schaffrath R(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut f체r Biologie, Fachgebiet Mikrobiologie, Universit채t Kassel, 
Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, D-34132, Kassel, Germany. roland.klassen@uni-kassel.de.
(2)Institut f체r Biologie, Fachgebiet Mikrobiologie, Universit채t Kassel, 
Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, D-34132, Kassel, Germany.

Transfer RNA (tRNA) from all domains of life contains multiple modified 
nucleosides, the functions of which remain incompletely understood. Genetic 
interactions between tRNA modification genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae suggest 
that different tRNA modifications collaborate to maintain translational 
efficiency. Here we characterize such collaborative functions in the ochre 
suppressor tRNA SUP4. We quantified ochre read-through efficiency in mutants 
lacking either of the 7 known modifications in the extended anticodon stem loop 
(G26-C48). Absence of U34, U35, A37, U47 and C48 modifications partially 
impaired SUP4 function. We systematically combined modification defects and 
scored additive or synergistic negative effects on SUP4 performance. Our data 
reveal different degrees of functional redundancy between specific 
modifications, the strongest of which was demonstrated for those occurring at 
positions U34 and A37. SUP4 activity in the absence of critical modifications, 
however, can be rescued in a gene dosage dependent fashion by TEF1 which encodes 
elongation factor eEF1A required for tRNA delivery to the ribosome. Strikingly, 
the rescue ability of higher-than-normal eEF1A levels extends to tRNA 
modification defects in natural non-suppressor tRNAs suggesting that elevated 
eEF1A abundance can partially compensate for functional defects induced by loss 
of tRNA modifications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-31158-2
PMCID: PMC6109124
PMID: 30143741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.