1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Oct 12;46(18):9550-9562. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky772.

A mating-type mutagenesis screen identifies a zinc-finger protein required for 
specific DNA excision events in Paramecium.

Bhullar S(1)(2), Denby Wilkes C(3), Arnaiz O(3), Nowacki M(2), Sperling L(3), 
Meyer E(1).

Author information:
(1)IBENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS, Inserm, PSL University, F-75005 Paris, 
France.
(2)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. 
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

In the ciliate Paramecium tetraurelia, functional genes are reconstituted during 
development of the somatic macronucleus through the precise excision of ∼45 000 
single-copy Internal Eliminated Sequences (IESs), thought to be the degenerate 
remnants of ancient transposon insertions. Like introns, IESs are marked only by 
a weak consensus at their ends. How such a diverse set of sequences is 
faithfully recognized and precisely excised remains unclear: specialized small 
RNAs have been implicated, but in their absence up to ∼60% of IESs are still 
correctly excised. To get further insight, we designed a mutagenesis screen 
based on the hypersensitivity of a specific excision event in the mtA gene, 
which determines mating types. Unlike most IES-containing genes, the active form 
of mtA is the unexcised one, allowing the recovery of hypomorphic alleles of 
essential IES recognition/excision factors. Such is the case of one mutation 
recovered in the Piwi gene PTIWI09, a key player in small RNA-mediated IES 
recognition. Another mutation identified a novel protein with a C2H2 zinc 
finger, mtGa, which is required for excision of a small subset of IESs 
characterized by enrichment in a 5-bp motif. The unexpected implication of a 
sequence-specific factor establishes a new paradigm for IES recognition and/or 
excision.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky772
PMCID: PMC6182129
PMID: 30165457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]