1. Oncotarget. 2018 Aug 3;9(60):31682-31696. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25849. 
eCollection 2018 Aug 3.

Paradoxical counteraction by imatinib against cell death in myeloid progenitor 
32D cells expressing p210BCR-ABL.

Takita M(#)(1), Tsukahara F(#)(1), Mishima T(1), Ieguchi K(1), Yamada M(1)(2), 
Honda H(3), Maru Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Center for Medical Education, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Institute of Laboratory Animals, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is believed to be caused by the tyrosine kinase 
p210BCR-ABL, which exhibits growth-promoting and anti-apoptotic activities. 
However, mechanisms that allow cell differentiation in CML still remain elusive. 
Here we established tetracycline (Tet)-regulatable p210BCR-ABL-expressing murine 
32D myeloid progenitor (32D/TetOff-p210) cells to explore p210BCR-ABL-induced 
cell death and differentiation. Tet-regulatable overexpression of p210BCR-ABL 
induced cell death due to the activation of both caspase-1 and caspase-3, 
coincident with the differentiation from myeloid progenitors into 
CD11b+Ly6C+Ly6G+ cells with segmented nuclei, exemplified as granulocytic 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (G-MDSC), and the ability to secrete IL-1β, 
TNF-α, and S100A8/A9 into the culture supernatant. Treatment with imatinib 
almost completely abrogated all these phenotypes. Moreover, overexpression of a 
sensor of activated caspase-1 based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) probe enabled us to detect activation of caspase-1 in a human CML cell 
line, K562. Furthermore, increased numbers of splenic G-MDSC associated with 
enhancement of S100A8/A9 production were observed in transgenic mice expressing 
p210BCR-ABL compared with that in wild-type mice. We also propose the novel mode 
of cell death in this 32D/TetOff-p210 system termed as myeloptosis.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.25849
PMCID: PMC6114964
PMID: 30167087

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST All authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.