1. Mol Cells. 2018 Sep 30;41(9):853-867. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2018.0103. Epub 
2018 Aug 31.

SDC4 Gene Silencing Favors Human Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Cell Apoptosis and 
Inhibits Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition via Wnt/β-Catenin Pathway.

Chen LL(1), Gao GX(2), Shen FX(3), Chen X(3), Gong XH(3), Wu WJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Ningbo No.2 Hospital, Ningbo 315010, P.R. 
China.
(2)School of Nursing, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Wenzhou 325015, P.R. China.

As the most common type of endocrine malignancy, papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) 
accounts for 85-90% of all thyroid cancers. In this study, we presented the 
hypothesis that SDC4 gene silencing could effectively attenuate epithelial 
mesenchymal transition (EMT), and promote cell apoptosis via the Wnt/β-catenin 
signaling pathway in human PTC cells. Bioinformatics methods were employed to 
screen the determined differential expression levels of SDC4 in PTC and adjacent 
normal samples. PTC tissues and adjacent normal tissues were prepared and their 
respective levels of SDC4 protein positive expression, in addition to the mRNA 
and protein levels of SDC4, Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, EMT and apoptosis 
related genes were all detected accordingly. Flow cytometry was applied in order 
to detect cell cycle entry and apoptosis. Finally, analyses of PTC migration and 
invasion abilities were assessed by using a Transwell assay and scratch test. In 
PTC tissues, activated Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway, increased EMT and 
repressed cell apoptosis were determined. Moreover, the PTC K1 and TPC-1 cell 
lines exhibiting the highest SDC4 expression were selected for further 
experiments. In vitro experiments revealed that SDC4 gene silencing could 
suppress cell migration, invasion and EMT, while acting to promote the apoptosis 
of PTC cells by inhibiting the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling 
pathway. Besides, si-β-catenin was observed to inhibit the promotion of PTC cell 
migration and invasion caused by SDC4 overexpression. Our study revealed that 
SDC4 gene silencing represses EMT, and enhances cell apoptosis by suppressing 
the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway in human PTC.

DOI: 10.14348/molcells.2018.0103
PMCID: PMC6182223
PMID: 30165731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]