1. Immunobiology. 2018 Nov;223(11):627-633. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2018.07.008.
Epub  2018 Jul 6.

Effects of caffeine and phosphodiesterase inhibitors on activation of neonatal T 
lymphocytes.

Orbán C(1), Vásárhelyi Z(1), Bajnok A(1), Sava F(1), Toldi G(2).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(2)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary. Electronic address: toldi.gergely@noi1.sote.hu.

Caffeine and selective PDE inhibitors are widely used in clinical management of 
preterm and term neonates. However, little is known about how these compounds 
interact with the neonatal adaptive immune system. We aimed to describe the 
effects of caffeine, milrinone and sildenafil on the activation and cytokine 
production of T cells from umbilical cord blood (UCB) compared to adult 
peripheral blood (APB). We isolated mononuclear cells from 10 APB and 6 UCB 
samples. We assessed intracellular cytokine production (IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, 
IL-17) of stimulated CD4 cells and parameters of calcium influx and ROS 
production following treatment with caffeine, milrinone, sildenafil, dbcAMP or a 
specific A2A receptor antagonist, ZM241385 using flow cytometry. In ABP, only 
ZM241385 caused a 1.14-fold increase in calcium influx, while all compounds 
increased calcium influx in UCB. This effect was more pronounced in case of 
caffeine (1.41-fold) and dbcAMP (1.3-fold) compared to milrinone (1.22-fold), 
sildenafil (1.23-fold) or ZM241385 (1.23-fold). Intracellular levels of the 
studied cytokines were unaffected by the applied compounds in both APB and UCB 
samples. Caffeine increases calcium influx upon activation in neonatal T 
lymphocytes to a larger extent than milrinone or sildenafil. This effect appears 
to be mediated primarily via increased cAMP levels rather than A2A receptor 
inhibition. Overall, the application of caffeine, sildenafil or milrinone does 
not appear to have immunosuppressive effects on neonatal T cells.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2018.07.008
PMID: 30177027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]