1. Redox Biol. 2018 Oct;19:200-209. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.08.015. Epub 2018
Aug  25.

Homocysteine-lowering gene therapy rescues signaling pathways in brain of mice 
with intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia.

Baloula V(1), Fructuoso M(2), Kassis N(1), Gueddouri D(1), Paul JL(3), Janel 
N(4).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Biologie Fonctionnelle et 
Adaptative (BFA), UMR 8251, F-75205 Paris, France.
(2)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Biologie Fonctionnelle et 
Adaptative (BFA), UMR 8251, F-75205 Paris, France; Cellular & Systems 
Neurobiology, Systems Biologyl Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The 
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, 
Spain.
(3)AP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Service de Biochimie, 75015 Paris, 
France.
(4)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Biologie Fonctionnelle et 
Adaptative (BFA), UMR 8251, F-75205 Paris, France. Electronic address: 
janel@univ-paris-diderot.fr.

Hyperhomocysteinemia due to cystathionine beta synthase (CBS) deficiency is 
associated with diverse cognitive dysfunction. Considering the role of the 
serine/threonine kinase DYRK1A, not only in developmental defects with life-long 
structural and functional consequences, but also in multiple neurodegenerative 
diseases, its protein expression and kinase activity has been analyzed in brain 
of heterozygous CBS deficient mice and found to be increased. We previously 
demonstrated that specific liver treatment with an adenovirus expressing Dyrk1A 
normalizes hepatic DYRK1A level and decreases hyperhomocysteinemia in mice with 
moderate to intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia. We here use a hepatocyte-specific 
recombinant adeno-associated viral (AAV) serotype 8-mediated DYRK1A gene therapy 
(AAV2/8-DYRK1A) to analyze the effect of hepatic Dyrk1A gene transfer on some 
altered molecular mechanisms in brain of mice with intermediate 
hyperhomocysteinemia. Our selective hepatic treatment alleviates altered DYRK1A 
protein level and signaling pathways in brain of mice, the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt 
pathways initiated by receptor tyrosine kinase, the BDNF dependent TrkB pathway, 
and NFkB pathway. These results demonstrate the positive effect of AAV2/8-DYRK1A 
gene transfer on neuropathological and inflammatory processes in brain of mice 
with intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2018.08.015
PMCID: PMC6122394
PMID: 30172984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]