1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2018 Dec;175:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2018.07.012.
Epub  2018 Aug 29.

Late aging alters behavioral sensitivity to ethanol in a sex-specific manner in 
Fischer 344 rats.

Perkins AE(1), Vore AS(1), Lovelock D(1), Varlinskaya E(1), Deak T(2).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Exposure to Alcohol Research Center (DEARC), Behavioral 
Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychology, Binghamton University-SUNY, 
Binghamton, NY 13902-6000, United States of America.
(2)Developmental Exposure to Alcohol Research Center (DEARC), Behavioral 
Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychology, Binghamton University-SUNY, 
Binghamton, NY 13902-6000, United States of America. Electronic address: 
tdeak@binghamton.edu.

Responsiveness to ethanol (EtOH) differs as a function of age. Adolescent 
rodents are less sensitive than adults to the sedative effects of EtOH, whereas 
they show enhanced sensitivity to EtOH-induced social facilitation. Late aging 
is associated with a natural decline in social behavior and aging-related 
peculiarities in sensitivity to EtOH have been largely unexplored. Whether there 
are sex differences in the behavioral response to EtOH during late aging remains 
unknown. Thus, behavioral responses to EtOH in male and female Fischer (F) 344 
rats aged 4-5 months (adult) and 19-20 months (aging) were examined. First, the 
effects of saline and EtOH (0.5 and 0.75 g/kg) on social interaction were 
assessed. Social investigation and contact behavior were lower in aging animals 
and higher in females. Interestingly, in aged females, social contact behavior 
was increased following a 0.5 g/kg EtOH dose, whereas the same dose suppressed 
social contact in aged males. Behavioral sensitivity to the sedative effects of 
3.0 and 3.5 g/kg EtOH was assessed with the loss of righting reflex (LORR) test. 
Although latency to LORR did not differ as a function of age or sex, aged rats 
showed significantly greater LORR duration and significantly lower blood ethanol 
concentrations (BECs) at regaining of the righting reflex relative to adults. In 
addition, females had a lower LORR duration, regardless of age; no sex 
differences were evident in BECs at awakening. In a second experiment, blood 
ethanol concentrations (BECs) over time were assessed following 0.75, 1.5, and 
3.0 g/kg EtOH in 3-, 12-, and 18-month-old male and female F344 rats. Aged rats 
had higher peak BECs following 3.0 g/kg EtOH, whereas few age or sex differences 
were apparent at lower doses. Taken together, these data indicate that late 
aging is associated with altered sensitivity to the social facilitating effects 
and sedative effects of EtOH.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2018.07.012
PMCID: PMC6240477
PMID: 30171932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]