1. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2018 Sep;22(5):577-584. doi: 
10.4196/kjpp.2018.22.5.577. Epub 2018 Aug 27.

The change of signaling pathway on the electrical stimulated contraction in 
streptozotocin-induced bladder dysfunction of rats.

Han JS(1), Min YS(2), Kim GH(1), Chae SH(1), Nam Y(1), Lee J(3), Lee SY(4), Sohn 
UD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 
06974, Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, College of Convergence Science and 
Technology, Jung Won University, Goesan 28054, Korea.
(3)Pharmaceutical Formulation Design Laboratory, College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang 
University , Seoul 06974, Korea.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, 
Suwon 16419, Korea.

Bladder dysfunction is a common complication of diabetes mellitus (DM). However, 
there have been a few studies evaluating bladder smooth muscle contraction in DM 
in the presence of pharmacological inhibitors. In the present study, we compared 
the contractility of bladder smooth muscle from normal rats and DM rats. 
Furthermore, we utilized pharmacological inhibitors to delineate the mechanisms 
underlying bladder muscle differences between normal and DM rats. DM was 
established in 14 days after using a single injection of streptozotocin (65 
mg/kg, intraperitoneal) in Sprague-Dawley rats. Bladder smooth muscle 
contraction was induced electrically using electrical field stimulation 
consisting of pulse trains at an amplitude of 40 V and pulse duration of 1 ms at 
frequencies of 2-10 Hz. In this study, the pharmacological inhibitors atropine 
(muscarinic receptor antagonist), U73122 (phospholipase C inhibitor), DPCPX 
(adenosine A1 receptor antagonist), udenafil (PDE5 inhibitor), prazosin 
(Î±1-receptor antagonist), verapamil (calcium channel blocker), and chelerythrine 
(protein kinase C inhibitor) were used to pretreat bladder smooth muscles. It 
was found that the contractility of bladder smooth muscles from DM rats was 
lower than that of normal rats. In addition, there were significant differences 
in percent change of contractility between normal and DM rats following 
pretreatment with prazosin, udenafil, verapamil, and U73122. In conclusion, we 
suggest that the decreased bladder muscle contractility in DM rats was a result 
of perturbations in PLC/IP3-mediated intracellular Ca2+ release and PDE5 
activity.

DOI: 10.4196/kjpp.2018.22.5.577
PMCID: PMC6115354
PMID: 30181704

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.