1. Infect Immun. 2018 Oct 25;86(11):e00631-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00631-18. Print 
2018 Nov.

Staphylococcus pseudintermedius Surface Protein L (SpsL) Is Required for Abscess 
Formation in a Murine Model of Cutaneous Infection.

Richards AC(1), O'Shea M(1), Beard PM(1), Goncheva MI(1), Tuffs SW(1), 
Fitzgerald JR(2), Lengeling A(2).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)The Roslin Institute, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom ross.fitzgerald@roslin.ed.ac.uk 
andreas.lengeling@gv.mpg.de.

Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is the leading cause of pyoderma in dogs and is 
often associated with recurrent skin infections that require prolonged 
antibiotic therapy. High levels of antibiotic use have led to multidrug 
resistance, including the emergence of epidemic methicillin-resistant clones. 
Our understanding of the pathogenesis of S. pseudintermedius skin infection is 
very limited, and the identification of the key host-pathogen interactions 
underpinning infection could lead to the design of novel therapeutic or 
vaccine-based approaches for controlling disease. Here, we employ a novel murine 
cutaneous-infection model of S. pseudintermedius and investigate the role of the 
two cell wall-associated proteins (SpsD and SpsL) in skin disease pathogenesis. 
Experimental infection with wild-type S. pseudintermedius strain ED99 or a 
gene-deletion derivative deficient in expression of SpsD led to a focal 
accumulation of neutrophils and necrotic debris in the dermis and deeper tissues 
of the skin characteristic of a classical cutaneous abscess. In contrast, mice 
infected with mutants deficient in SpsL or both SpsD and SpsL developed larger 
cutaneous lesions with distinct histopathological features of regionally 
extensive cellulitis rather than focal abscessation. Furthermore, comparison of 
the bacterial loads in S. pseudintermedius-induced cutaneous lesions revealed a 
significantly increased burden of bacteria in the mice infected with 
SpsL-deficient mutants. These findings reveal a key role for SpsL in murine skin 
abscess formation and highlight a novel function for a bacterial surface protein 
in determining the clinical outcome and pathology of infection caused by a major 
canine pathogen.

Copyright Â© 2018 Richards et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00631-18
PMCID: PMC6204706
PMID: 30181348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]