1. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2018;59(8):1086-1094. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.59.1086.

[Impact of mismatched HLA on graft-versus-host disease in unrelated stem cell 
transplantation].

[Article in Japanese]

Morishima S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Hematology, Rheumatology 
(Second Department of Internal Medicine), Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of the Ryukyus.

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) caused by patient and donor human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) mismatch is a complication of unrelated hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (UR-HSCT) that leads to reduced success rates. To date, studies 
on HLA alleles in transplant have provided important information on unrelated 
donor selection. In this study on the effects of specific HLA alleles on acute 
GVHD in UR-HSCT, HLA-C＊14:02 was found to be significantly associated with an 
increased risk of acute GVHD. Patient HLA-C＊14:02 and donor HLA-C＊15:02 mismatch 
was usually KIR2DL-ligand mismatch in the GVH direction in Japanese UR-HSCT 
cohort, and the higher risk of severe acute GVHD for KIR2DL-ligand mismatch in 
GVH direction demonstrated in previous Japanese UR-HSCT study was attributable 
to this particular mismatch combination. Recently, the risk of acute GVHD after 
UR-HSCT was reported to be associated with the HLA-DP expression level, which is 
associated with the variant rs9277534 located in the 3'untranslated region (UTR) 
of the HLA-DPB1 gene. We constructed phylogenetic trees of HLA-DPB1 alleles 
using next-generation sequencing (NGS) HLA typing data that included introns and 
3'UTRs. Results reported that rs9277534 represented a highly conserved region 
from exon 3 to the 3'UTR, which may lead to acute GVHD via a mechanism different 
from that observed using T-cell epitope mismatching algorithms, perhaps 
reflecting exon 2 polymorphisms. The usage of innovative technologies such as 
NGS in genetic analysis and HLA typing thus has profound implications in this 
field.

DOI: 10.11406/rinketsu.59.1086
PMID: 30185710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]