1. Nature. 2018 Sep;561(7722):195-200. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0482-7. Epub 2018 
Sep 5.

Coupling of bone resorption and formation by RANKL reverse signalling.

Ikebuchi Y(#)(1), Aoki S(#)(1), Honma M(#)(2), Hayashi M(1), Sugamori Y(3), Khan 
M(3), Kariya Y(1), Kato G(4), Tabata Y(5), Penninger JM(6), Udagawa N(7), Aoki 
K(3), Suzuki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, the University of Tokyo Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, the University of Tokyo Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. mhonma-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Basic Oral Health Engineering, Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Bio-Matrix (Pharmacology), Graduate School of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Biomaterials, Department of Regeneration Science and 
Engineering, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 
Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Matsumoto Dental University, Shiojiri, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nature. 2018 Sep;561(7722):180-181. doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-05960-x.
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2018 Nov;14(11):627. doi: 10.1038/s41574-018-0094-1.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2018 Nov;14(11):623. doi: 10.1038/s41584-018-0093-6.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B (RANK) ligand (RANKL) binds RANK on 
the surface of osteoclast precursors to trigger osteoclastogenesis. Recent 
studies have indicated that osteocytic RANKL has an important role in 
osteoclastogenesis during bone remodelling; however, the role of osteoblastic 
RANKL remains unclear. Here we show that vesicular RANK, which is secreted from 
the maturing osteoclasts, binds osteoblastic RANKL and promotes bone formation 
by triggering RANKL reverse signalling, which activates Runt-related 
transcription factor 2 (Runx2). The proline-rich motif in the RANKL cytoplasmic 
tail is required for reverse signalling, and aÂ RANKL(Pro29Ala) point mutation 
reduces activation of the reverse signalling pathway. The coupling of bone 
resorption and formation is disrupted in RANKL(Pro29Ala) mutant mice, indicating 
that osteoblastic RANKL functions as a coupling signal acceptor that recognizes 
vesicular RANK. RANKL reverse signalling is therefore a potential 
pharmacological target for avoiding the reduced bone formation associated with 
inhibition of osteoclastogenesis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0482-7
PMID: 30185903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]