1. Clin Lung Cancer. 2018 Nov;19(6):531-543. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2018.08.011.
Epub  2018 Aug 22.

First-line Chemotherapy Responsiveness and Patterns of Metastatic Spread 
Identify Clinical Syndromes Present Within Advanced KRAS Mutant Non-Small-cell 
Lung Cancer With Different Prognostic Significance.

Iams WT(1), Yu H(2), Shyr Y(3), Patil T(4), Horn L(5), McCoach C(6), Kelly K(7), 
Doebele RC(4), Camidge DR(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
(3)Department of Statistics, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, TN.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, 
Denver, CO.
(5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram 
Cancer Center, Nashville, TN.
(6)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, 
CA.
(8)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, 
Denver, CO. Electronic address: ross.camidge@ucdenver.edu.

BACKGROUND: Unsuccessful KRAS-specific treatment approaches in non-small-cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) might reflect underlying disease heterogeneity. We sought to 
define clinical "syndromes" within advanced KRAS mutant NSCLC to improve future 
clinical trials and create a clinical framework for future molecular 
development.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: To test a series of a priori hypotheses regarding 
KRAS-mutant NSCLC clinical syndromes, we conducted a multi-institutional 
retrospective medical record review. Survival probabilities were estimated using 
the Kaplan-Meier model. Between-group differences were assessed using the 
log-rank test. Multivariate Cox regression analyses and Wilcoxon rank sum 
testing were used to assess progression-free survival and overall survival (OS) 
differences.
RESULTS: Among 218 patients with advanced KRAS-mutant NSCLC, OS and 
progression-free survival with first-line chemotherapy did not differ by 
intrathoracic versus extrathoracic spread, smoking intensity, or the specific 
KRAS mutation. Metastatic disease at diagnosis resulted in significantly worse 
OS than recurrent, unresectable disease (median OS, 14.6 vs. 40.9 months; P = 
.001). Among the patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis, nonscalp, soft 
tissue metastases (syndrome X; 6% of cases; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
2.5%-10.1%) signified a poor prognosis (median OS, 7.5 vs. 15.9 months for the 
controls; P = .021). The response to first-line chemotherapy (syndrome Y; 41% of 
cases; 95% CI, 32.3%-50.6%) signified a good prognosis (median OS, 26.7 vs. 11.9 
months; P = .002). The overlap between these 2 syndromes was minimal (2 of 111). 
Multivariate analysis confirmed these observations. The hazard ratio for death 
for syndromes X and Y was 2.64 (95% CI, 1.13-6.14) and 0.45 (95% CI, 0.28-0.76), 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Chemotherapy-responsive disease and nonscalp, soft tissue spread 
might represent distinct clinical syndromes within KRAS-mutant NSCLC. The 
molecular biology underlying this heterogeneity warrants future studies.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cllc.2018.08.011
PMCID: PMC6204301
PMID: 30197261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]