1. Int J Cancer. 2019 Feb 15;144(4):767-776. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31859. Epub 2018
Dec  4.

PDEδ inhibition impedes the proliferation and survival of human colorectal 
cancer cell lines harboring oncogenic KRas.

Klein CH(1), Truxius DC(1), Vogel HA(1), Harizanova J(1)(2), Murarka S(3), 
Martín-Gago P(3), Bastiaens PIH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systemic Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Physiology, Dortmund, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, TU Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany.
(3)Department of Chemical Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular 
Physiology, Dortmund, Germany.

Ras proteins, most notably KRas, are prevalent oncogenes in human cancer. Plasma 
membrane localization and thereby signaling of KRas is regulated by the 
prenyl-binding protein PDEδ. Recently, we have reported the specific 
anti-proliferative effects of PDEδ inhibition in KRas-dependent human pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines. Here, we investigated the proliferative 
dependence on the solubilizing activity of PDEδ of human colorectal cancer (CRC) 
cell lines with or without oncogenic KRas mutations. Our results show that 
genetic and pharmacologic interference with PDEδ specifically inhibits 
proliferation and survival of CRC cell lines harboring oncogenic KRas mutations 
whereas isogenic cell lines in which the KRas oncogene has been removed, or cell 
lines with oncogenic BRaf mutations or EGFR overexpression are not dependent on 
PDEδ. Pharmacological PDEδ inhibition is therefore a possible new avenue to 
target oncogenic KRas bearing CRC.

© 2018 The Authors. International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31859
PMCID: PMC6519276
PMID: 30194764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]