1. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2018 Sep 7;12:568-577. doi:
10.1016/j.omtn.2018.06.013.  Epub 2018 Jul 6.

Hepatocyte Growth Factor Regulates the miR-206-HDAC4 Cascade to Control 
Neurogenic Muscle Atrophy following Surgical Denervation in Mice.

Choi W(1), Lee J(2), Lee J(1), Ko KR(3), Kim S(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(2)ViroMed Co., Ltd., Bldg. 203, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea; 
ViroMed Co., Ltd., Bldg. 203, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea; 
ViroMed Co., Ltd., Bldg. 203, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. 
Electronic address: sunyoung@snu.ac.kr.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) has been well characterized for its roles in the 
migration of muscle progenitors during embryogenesis and the differentiation of 
muscle stem cells, but its function in adult neurogenic muscle atrophic 
conditions is poorly understood. Here we investigated whether HGF/c-met 
signaling has any effects on muscle-atrophic conditions. It was found that HGF 
expression was upregulated in skeletal muscle tissue following surgical 
denervation and in hSOD1-G93A transgenic mice showing severe muscle loss. 
Pharmacological inhibition of the c-met receptor decreased the expression level 
of pri-miR-206, enhanced that of HDAC4 and atrogenes, and resulted in increased 
muscle atrophy. In C2C12 cells, HGF inhibited phosphorylation of Smad3 and 
relieved TGF-β-mediated suppression of miR-206 expression via JNK. When extra 
HGF was exogenously provided through intramuscular injection of plasmid DNA 
expressing HGF, the extent of muscle atrophy was reduced, and the levels of all 
affected biochemical markers were changed accordingly, including those of 
primary and mature miR-206, HDAC4, and various atrogenes. Taken together, our 
finding suggested that HGF might play an important role in regard to neurogenic 
muscle atrophy and that HGF might be used as a platform to develop therapeutic 
agents for neuromuscular disorders.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtn.2018.06.013
PMCID: PMC6077135
PMID: 30195792