1. Cell Death Dis. 2018 Sep 11;9(9):917. doi: 10.1038/s41419-018-0966-2.

The MYB/miR-130a/NDRG2 axis modulates tumor proliferation and metastatic 
potential in salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Wang Y(1), Zhang CY(1), Xia RH(1), Han J(1), Sun B(1), Sun SY(2), Li J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & 
Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & 
Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai, China. 
shuyangs@shsmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of 
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Clinical 
Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & 
Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai, China. 
LIJ1042@sh9hospital.org.

Increasing evidence has emerged to suggest that N-myc downstream-regulated gene 
2 (NDRG2) dysregulation participates in a number of tumor biological processes. 
However, the role of NDRG2 and miRNA-mediated NDRG2 regulation in salivary 
adenoid cystic carcinoma (SACC) progression remain unknown. Here, we determined 
that SACC tissues exhibited decreased level of NDRG2, which was associated with 
poorer rates of overall survival and distant metastasis-free survival. Silencing 
NDRG2 promoted SACC cell proliferation and metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. 
MiRNAs have been reported as vital regulators of NDRG2 expression. Based on 
micronome sequencing of three paired samples of SACC and normal salivary gland 
tissue and on an online database analysis, miR-130a was identified as a 
candidate miRNA that potentially regulates NDRG2. We demonstrated that the 
expression level of NDRG2 was dramatically reduced by exogenous miR-130a. 
Moreover, a luciferase assay further validated that miR-130a could degrade NDRG2 
mRNA by targeting sites in the NDRG2 3'UTR. A rescue experiment suggested that 
NDRG2 expression could reverse the miR-130a-mediated promotion of cell 
proliferation and invasion. The expression of miR-130a has been reported to be 
regulated by certain transcription factors. In the preset study, we verified 
that the transcription factor MYB acted as the critical driver in 
SACC-upregulated miR-130a expression directly and induced NDRG2 downregulation 
in SACC tissues. Additionally, MYB/miR-130a activated the STAT3 and AKT pathways 
by downregulating NDRG2. These observations suggest that the MYB/miR-130a/NDRG2 
axis, which modulates proliferation and metastasis in SACC, provides promising 
targets for the treatment of SACC.

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-018-0966-2
PMCID: PMC6134089
PMID: 30206227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.