1. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2018 Dec;53:12-19. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.004. Epub 
2018 Sep 8.

Differential regulation of cytokine and chemokine expression by MK2 and MK3 in 
airway smooth muscle cells.

Ba M(1), Rawat S(1), Lao R(1), Grous M(2), Salmon M(2), Halayko AJ(3), 
Gerthoffer WT(1), Singer CA(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Nevada School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA.
(2)GlaxoSmithKline, Respiratory, Inflammation & Respiratory Pathogens, King of 
Prussia, PA, USA.
(3)University of Manitoba, Department of Physiology and Section of Respiratory 
Diseases, Winnipeg, MB, R3A 1R8, Canada.
(4)University of Nevada School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA. Electronic address: csinger@med.unr.edu.

BACKGROUND: Airway smooth muscle (ASM) contributes to local inflammation and 
plays an immunomodulatory role in airway diseases. This is partially regulated 
by p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), which further activates two 
closely related isoforms of the MAPK-activated protein kinases (MKs), MK2 and 
MK3. The MKs have similar substrate specificities but less is known about 
differences in their functional responses. This study was undertaken to identify 
differential downstream inflammatory targets of MK2 and MK3 signaling and assess 
cross-talk between the MAPK pathway and NF-κB signaling relevant to ASM 
function.
METHODS: Wild-type and kinase-deficient MK2 (MK2WT, MK2KR) and MK3 (MK3WT, 
MK33A) were expressed in human ASM cells stimulated for 20 h with 10 ng/ml each 
interleukin (IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interferon (IFN)-γ. 
Inflammatory mediator secretion was assessed by Luminex assays and ELISA. 
Signaling pathway activation was monitored by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Expression of these MKs and stimulation with 10 ng/ml IL-1β, TNFα and 
IFNγ for 20 h did not affect secretion of multiple cytokines including IL-4, 
IL-5, IL-13 and monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1/CCL2 but did differentially 
affect the secretion of regulated upon activation, normal T cell expressed and 
secreted (RANTES)/CCL5, IL-6 and granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF). RANTES/CCL5 secretion was decreased by MK2WT or MK3WT and 
stimulated by inhibition of MK2 or MK3 activity with expression of the 
kinase-deficient enzymes MK2KR or MK33A. IL-6 and GM-CSF secretion was decreased 
by inhibition of MK2 activity with MK2KR and while MK3WT had no effect, the 
kinase-deficient MK33A further decreased secretion of these mediators. 
Cross-talk of the MKs with other signaling pathways was investigated by 
examining NF-κB activation, which was inhibited by expression of MK3 but not 
affected by MK2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest an inhibitory role for MK2 and MK3 activity 
in RANTES/CCL5 secretion and cross-talk of MK3 with NF-κB to regulate IL-6 and 
GM-CSF. These findings differentiate MK2 and MK3 function in ASM cells and 
provide insight that may enable selective targeting of MKs in ASM to modulate 
local inflammation in airway disease.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2018.09.004
PMCID: PMC9036849
PMID: 30205157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests related to this work.