1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Nov 2;293(44):17166-17187. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004767.
Epub  2018 Sep 14.

Two distinct conformations of factor H regulate discrete complement-binding 
functions in the fluid phase and at cell surfaces.

Osborne AJ(1), Nan R(1), Miller A(1), Bhatt JS(1), Gor J(1), Perkins SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, Darwin Building, 
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.
(2)From the Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, Darwin Building, 
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom 
s.perkins@ucl.ac.uk.

Factor H (FH) is the major regulator of C3b in the alternative pathway of the 
complement system in immunity. FH comprises 20 short complement regulator (SCR) 
domains, including eight glycans, and its Y402H polymorphism predisposes those 
who carry it to age-related macular degeneration. To better understand FH 
complement binding and self-association, we have studied the solution structures 
of both the His-402 and Tyr-402 FH allotypes. Analytical ultracentrifugation 
revealed that up to 12% of both FH allotypes self-associate, and this was 
confirmed by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), MS, and surface plasmon 
resonance analyses. SAXS showed that monomeric FH has a radius of gyration (Rg ) 
of 7.2-7.8 nm and a length of 25 nm. Starting from known structures for the SCR 
domains and glycans, the SAXS data were fitted using Monte Carlo methods to 
determine atomistic structures of monomeric FH. The analysis of 29,715 
physically realistic but randomized FH conformations resulted in 100 similar 
best-fit FH structures for each allotype. Two distinct molecular structures 
resulted that showed either an extended N-terminal domain arrangement with a 
folded-back C terminus or an extended C terminus and a folded-back N terminus. 
These two structures are the most accurate to date for glycosylated full-length 
FH. To clarify FH functional roles in host protection, crystal structures for 
the FH complexes with C3b and C3dg revealed that the extended N-terminal 
conformation accounted for C3b fluid-phase regulation, the extended C-terminal 
conformation accounted for C3d binding, and both conformations accounted for 
bivalent FH binding to glycosaminoglycans on the target cell surface.

Â© 2018 Osborne et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004767
PMCID: PMC6222095
PMID: 30217822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article