1. Oncol Lett. 2018 Oct;16(4):4361-4366. doi: 10.3892/ol.2018.9195. Epub 2018 Jul
 23.

The expression level of CSDAP1 in lung cancer and its clinical significance.

Xu T(1), Li D(1), He Y(1), Zhang F(1), Qiao M(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tianjin Nankai Hospital, Tianjin 300100, 
P.R. China.

Expression level of messenger RNA (mRNA) of cold shock domain protein A 
intronless pseudogene (CSDAP1) in lung cancer tissues was studied. Fresh 
pathological specimens collected from 317 patients with primary lung cancer 
through surgical resection from January 2007 to January 2012 were selected. 
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot 
analysis were used to detect the transcription and translation of CSDAP1 in lung 
cancer tissues and cancer-adjacent normal tissues, and the results were analyzed 
in combination with clinicopathological features and prognosis of lung cancer. 
Among 317 lung cancer specimens, 105 cases (33.1%) had high expression of 
CSDAP1. Among 138 cases of pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 59 cases had high 
expression of CSDAP1, and the high expression rate was 42.8%. Among 170 cases of 
lung squamous cell carcinoma, 46 cases had high expression of CSDAP1, and the 
high expression rate was 27.5% (P<0.05). Three cases of large cell carcinoma and 
9 cases of small cell carcinoma had extremely low expression or had no 
expression of CSDAP1. Among the 127 lung cancer patients with regional lymph 
node metastasis, 53 cases (41.7%) had high expression of CSDAP1, while among the 
190 lung cancer patients without regional lymph node metastasis, 52 cases 
(27.4%) had high expression of CSDAP1 (P<0.05). The results also revealed that 
the expression of CSDAP1 was also related to tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) staging 
of lung cancer. One-year, three-year and five-year survival rates of lung cancer 
patients who had no expression of CSDAP1 were relatively high (P<0.05). The 
results suggested that CSDAP1 may play an important role in the occurrence, 
development and judgement of prognosis of lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2018.9195
PMCID: PMC6126166
PMID: 30214570