1. Exp Ther Med. 2018 Oct;16(4):2938-2948. doi: 10.3892/etm.2018.6563. Epub 2018 
Aug 2.

Thiazolidinedione induces a therapeutic effect on hepatosteatosis by regulating 
stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1, lipase activity, leptin and resistin.

Al-Muzafar HM(1), Amin KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Science, Imam 
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam 31441, Saudi Arabia.

Hepatosteatosis is a disease present worldwide, which presents a number of 
health problems. Recently, thiazolidinedione (TZD) has been used as a therapy 
for lipid disorders. The present study demonstrates the potential of TZD as a 
treatment for hepatosteatosis and its mechanism of action, particularly focusing 
on its role in lipid metabolism. A total of 60 (80-90 g) rats were divided into 
three groups: A normal group with a standard diet, a high-fat, high-carbohydrate 
diet (HFCD) group or a HFCD+TZD group (n=20/group). The HFCD induced 
hepatosteatosis over a period of 12 weeks and the HFCD+TZD group were 
administered TZD in weeks 13-16. Blood and tissue samples were collected to 
measure hepatic function, the lipid profile, metabolism and hormone biomarkers, 
including serum triglyceride (TG), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase (SCD-1), leptin and resistin. The HFCD-fed rats exhibited a 
significant increase in serum TG, total cholesterol, low-density lipoproteins, 
alanine transaminase and bilirubin compared with the normal group as well as a 
significant decrease in high-density lipoprotein. In addition, serum leptin and 
resistin were significantly elevated in the HFCD group compared with the normal 
group. The administration of TZD significantly increased SCD-1 activity and 
significantly inhibited LPL activity. It also attenuated the changes in the 
lipid profiles and normalized serum leptin and resistin levels. The results of 
the present study indicated that HFCD induced lipid abnormalities associated 
with hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia and hepatosteatosis. These 
changes resulted from disruption to leptin and resistin, which may be due to 
alterations in LPL and SCD-1 activity. TZD mitigated the effects of HFCD-induced 
hepatosteatosis, indicating a possible regulatory effect of TZD in the 
development of hepatosteatosis. The authors suggest that the manipulation of 
SCD-1 and lipase by TZD may be useful as a treatment for hepatosteatosis.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2018.6563
PMCID: PMC6125847
PMID: 30214514