1. Bone. 2018 Dec;117:149-160. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.09.008. Epub 2018 Sep 13.

Demethylation of ITGAV accelerates osteogenic differentiation in a blast-induced 
heterotopic ossification in vitro cell culture model.

Logan NJ(1), Camman M(2), Williams G(3), Higgins CA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United 
Kingdom,. Electronic address: n.logan@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Farjo Hair Institute, London, W1G 7LH, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
dr.greg@farjo.com.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United 
Kingdom,. Electronic address: c.higgins@imperial.ac.uk.

Trauma-induced heterotopic ossification is an intriguing phenomenon involving 
the inappropriate ossification of soft tissues within the body such as the 
muscle and ligaments. This inappropriate formation of bone is highly prevalent 
in those affected by blast injuries. Here, we developed a simplified cell 
culture model to evaluate the molecular events involved in heterotopic 
ossification onset that arise from the shock wave component of the disease. We 
exposed three subtypes of human mesenchymal cells in vitro to a single, 
high-energy shock wave and observed increased transcription in the osteogenic 
master regulators, Runx2 and Dlx5, and significantly accelerated cell 
mineralisation. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing revealed that the 
shock wave altered methylation of gene promoters, leading to opposing changes in 
gene expression. Using a drug to target ITGAV, whose expression was perturbed by 
the shock wave, we found that we could abrogate the deposition of mineral in our 
model. These findings show how new therapeutics for the treatment of heterotopic 
ossification can be identified using cell culture models.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.09.008
PMCID: PMC6218666
PMID: 30219480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]