1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2018 Sep 7;5(6):e500. doi: 
10.1212/NXI.0000000000000500. eCollection 2018 Nov.

Varicella-zoster virus CNS vasculitis and RNA polymerase III gene mutation in 
identical twins.

Carter-Timofte ME(1), Hansen AF(1), Mardahl M(1), Fribourg S(1), Rapaport F(1), 
Zhang SY(1), Casanova JL(1), Paludan SR(1), Christiansen M(1), Larsen CS(1), 
Mogensen TH(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Infectious Diseases (M.E.C-T., A.F.H., M.M., C.S.L., T.H.M), 
Clinical Immunology (M.C.), and Clinical Medicine (T.H.M), Aarhus University 
Hospital, Denmark; Universit√© de Bordeaux (S.F.), INSERM U1212, CNRS 5320, 
France; St.Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases (F.R., 
S.-Y.Z., J.-L.C.), Rockefeller Branch, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY; 
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases (S.-Y.Z., J.-L.C.), Necker 
Branch, INSERM UMR 1163; Paris Descartes University (S.-Y.Z, J.-L.C.), Imagine 
Institute, France; and Department of Biomedicine (M.E.C-T., S.R.P., T.H.M.), 
Aarhus University (AU).

OBJECTIVE: Deficiency in the cytosolic DNA sensor RNA Polymerase III (POL III) 
was recently described in children with severe varicella-zoster virus (VZV) 
infection in the CNS or lungs. Here, we describe a pair of monozygotic female 
twins, who both experienced severe recurrent CNS vasculitis caused by VZV 
reactivation. The clinical presentation and findings included recurrent episodes 
of headache, dizziness, and neurologic deficits, CSF with pleocytosis and 
intrathecal VZV antibody production, and MRI of the brain showing ischemic 
lesions.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing and identified a rare mutation in 
the POL III subunit POLR3F. Subsequently, antiviral responses in patient 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were examined and compared with 
healthy controls.
RESULTS: The identified R50W POLR3F mutation is predicted by bioinformatics to 
be damaging, and when tested in functional assays, patient PBMCs exhibited 
impaired antiviral and inflammatory responses to the POL III agonist poly(dA:dT) 
and increased viral replication compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these cases add genetic and immunologic evidence to the 
novel association between defects in sensing of AT-rich DNA present in the VZV 
genome and increased susceptibility to severe manifestations of VZV infection in 
the CNS in humans.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000500
PMCID: PMC6131052
PMID: 30211253