1. PLoS Biol. 2018 Sep 17;16(9):e3000008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000008. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Destabilized adaptive influenza variants critical for innate immune system 
escape are potentiated by host chaperones.

Phillips AM(1), Ponomarenko AI(1), Chen K(1), Ashenberg O(2), Miao J(3), McHugh 
SM(3), Butty VL(4), Whittaker CA(4), Moore CL(1), Bloom JD(2), Lin YS(3), 
Shoulders MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
(4)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The threat of viral pandemics demands a comprehensive understanding of evolution 
at the host-pathogen interface. Here, we show that the accessibility of adaptive 
mutations in influenza nucleoprotein at fever-like temperatures is mediated by 
host chaperones. Particularly noteworthy, we observe that the Pro283 
nucleoprotein variant, which (1) is conserved across human influenza strains, 
(2) confers resistance to the Myxovirus resistance protein A (MxA) restriction 
factor, and (3) critically contributed to adaptation to humans in the 1918 
pandemic influenza strain, is rendered unfit by heat shock factor 1 
inhibition-mediated host chaperone depletion at febrile temperatures. This 
fitness loss is due to biophysical defects that chaperones are unavailable to 
address when heat shock factor 1 is inhibited. Thus, influenza subverts host 
chaperones to uncouple the biophysically deleterious consequences of viral 
protein variants from the benefits of immune escape. In summary, host 
proteostasis plays a central role in shaping influenza adaptation, with 
implications for the evolution of other viruses, for viral host switching, and 
for antiviral drug development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000008
PMCID: PMC6160216
PMID: 30222731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.