1. ACS Omega. 2018 May 31;3(5):4959-4967. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00719. Epub
2018  May 7.

Surface Engineering of Gold Nanorods for Cytochrome c Bioconjugation: An 
Effective Strategy To Preserve the Protein Structure.

Placido T(1), Tognaccini L(2), Howes BD(2), Montrone A(3), Laquintana V(4), 
Comparelli R(1), Curri ML(1), Smulevich G(2), Agostiano A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CNR-IPCF Istituto per I Processi Chimico-Fisici, S.S. Bari, c/o Dip. Chimica, 
Via Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Chimica "Ugo Schiff", Università di Firenze, Via della 
Lastruccia 3-13, Sesto Fiorentino, 50019 Florence, Italy.
(3)Università degli Studi di Bari-Dip. di Chimica, Via Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, 
Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Farmacia-Scienze del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di Bari, 
Via Orabona 4, 70126 Bari, Italy.

The surface of gold nanorods (Au NRs) has been appropriately engineered to 
achieve a suitable interface for bioconjugation with horse heart cytochrome c 
(HCc). HCc, an extensively studied and well-characterized protein, represents an 
ideal model for nanoparticle (NP)-protein conjugation studies because of its 
small size, high stability, and commercial availability. Here, the native state 
of the protein has been demonstrated for the first time, by means of Raman 
spectroscopy, to be retained upon conjugation with the anisotropic Au 
nanostructures, thus validating the proposed protocol as specifically suited to 
mostly preserve the plasmonic properties of the NRs and to retain the structure 
of the protein. The successful creation of such bioconjugates with the retention 
of the protein structure and function along with the preservation of the NP 
properties represents a challenging but essential task, as it provides the only 
way to access functional hybrid systems with potential applications in 
biotechnology, medicine, and catalysis. In this perspective, the organic capping 
surrounding the Au NRs plays a key role, as it represents the functional 
interface for the conjugation step. Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide-coated Au 
NRs, prepared by using a seed-mediated synthetic route, have been wrapped with 
polyacrylic acid (PAA) by means of electrostatic interactions following a 
layer-by-layer approach. The resulting water-dispersible negatively charged 
AuNRs@PAA NPs have then been electrostatically bound to the positively charged 
HCc. The bioconjugation procedure has been thoroughly monitored by the combined 
analysis of UV-vis absorption, resonance Raman and Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopies, transmission electron microscopy microscopy, and ζ-potential, 
which verified the successful conjugation of the protein to the nanorods.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b00719
PMCID: PMC6130780
PMID: 30221229

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.