1. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2019 Apr;35(2):161-177. doi: 10.1007/s10565-018-9444-y.
Epub  2018 Sep 15.

Identification of cancer-type specific expression patterns for active aldehyde 
dehydrogenase (ALDH) isoforms in ALDEFLUOR assay.

Zhou L(1), Sheng D(1), Wang D(1)(2), Ma W(2), Deng Q(2), Deng L(1)(2), Liu 
S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life 
Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, 
230027, Anhui, China.
(2)Shanghai Cancer Center & Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Cancer Institute, 
Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Key Laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics and Metabolism, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(3)Shanghai Cancer Center & Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Cancer Institute, 
Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Key Laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics and Metabolism, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China. 
suling@fudan.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Cancer Institute, Fudan 
University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, 200032, China. suling@fudan.edu.cn.

Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) defend intracellular homeostasis by catalyzing 
the conversion of toxic aldehydes into non-toxic carboxylic acids, which is of 
particular importance to the self-renewal of stem cells and cancer stem cells. 
The widely used ALDEFLUOR assay was initially designed to indicate the activity 
of ALDH1A1 in leukemia and has been demonstrated to detect the enzyme activity 
of several other ALDH isoforms in various cancer types in recent years. However, 
it is still elusive which isoforms, among the 19 ALDH isoforms in human genome, 
are the potential contributors in catalyzing ALDEFLUOR assay in different 
cancers. In the current study, we performed a screening via overexpressing each 
ALDH isoform to assess their ability of catalyzing ALDEFLUOR assay. Our results 
demonstrate that nine isoforms are active in ALDEFLUOR assay, whose 
overexpression significantly increases ALDH-positive (ALDH+) population. Further 
analysis of the expression of these active isoforms in various cancers reveals 
cancer-type specific expression patterns, suggesting that different cancer types 
may exhibit ALDEFLUOR activity through expression of specific active ALDH 
isoforms. This study strongly indicates that a detailed elucidation of the 
functions for each active ALDH isoform in CSCs is necessary and important for a 
profound understanding of the underlying mechanisms of ALDH-associated stemness.

DOI: 10.1007/s10565-018-9444-y
PMCID: PMC6424948
PMID: 30220009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.