1. J Biol Chem. 2018 Nov 9;293(45):17362-17374. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.003857.
Epub  2018 Sep 18.

The structure of the deubiquitinase USP15 reveals a misaligned catalytic triad 
and an open ubiquitin-binding channel.

Ward SJ(1), Gratton HE(1), Indrayudha P(1), Michavila C(1), Mukhopadhyay R(1), 
Maurer SK(1), Caulton SG(1), Emsley J(1), Dreveny I(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom.
(2)From the Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom ingrid.dreveny@nottingham.ac.uk.

Ubiquitin-specific protease 15 (USP15) regulates important cellular processes, 
including transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) signaling, mitophagy, mRNA 
processing, and innate immune responses; however, structural information on 
USP15's catalytic domain is currently unavailable. Here, we determined crystal 
structures of the USP15 catalytic core domain, revealing a canonical USP fold, 
including a finger, palm, and thumb region. Unlike for the structure of paralog 
USP4, the catalytic triad is in an inactive configuration with the catalytic 
cysteine ∼10 Å apart from the catalytic histidine. This conformation is 
atypical, and a similar misaligned catalytic triad has so far been observed only 
for USP7, although USP15 and USP7 are differently regulated. Moreover, we found 
that the active-site loops are flexible, resulting in a largely open ubiquitin 
tail-binding channel. Comparison of the USP15 and USP4 structures points to a 
possible activation mechanism. Sequence differences between these two USPs 
mainly map to the S1' region likely to confer specificity, whereas the S1 
ubiquitin-binding pocket is highly conserved. Isothermal titration calorimetry 
monoubiquitin- and linear diubiquitin-binding experiments showed significant 
differences in their thermodynamic profiles, with USP15 displaying a lower 
affinity for monoubiquitin than USP4. Moreover, we report that USP15 is weakly 
inhibited by the antineoplastic agent mitoxantrone in vitro A USP15-mitoxantrone 
complex structure disclosed that the anthracenedione interacts with the S1' 
binding site. Our results reveal first insights into USP15's catalytic domain 
structure, conformational changes, differences between paralogs, and 
small-molecule interactions and establish a framework for cellular probe and 
inhibitor development.

© 2018 Ward et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.003857
PMCID: PMC6231127
PMID: 30228188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article