1. Front Immunol. 2018 Sep 6;9:1960. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01960. eCollection 
2018.

Dietary Supplementation With ω6 LC-PUFA-Rich Algae Modulates Zebrafish Immune 
Function and Improves Resistance to Streptococcal Infection.

Nayak S(1), Khozin-Goldberg I(1), Cohen G(2), Zilberg D(1).

Author information:
(1)The French Associates Institute for Agriculture and Biotechnology for 
Drylands, The Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(2)The Skin Research Institute, Dead Sea and Arava Science Center, Masada, 
Israel.

Arachidonic acid (ARA, 20:4n-6) and dihomo-γ-linolenic acid (DGLA, 20:3n-6) are 
omega-6 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA), which are key 
precursors for lipid mediators of the immune system and inflammatory response. 
The microalga Lobosphaera incisa (WT) and its Δ5-desaturase mutant P127 (MUT) 
are unique photosynthetic sources for ARA and DGLA, respectively. This study 
explores the effect of dietary supplementation with L. incisa and P127 biomass 
on tissue fatty acid composition, immune function, and disease resistance in 
zebrafish (Danio rerio). The broken microalgal biomass was added to commercial 
fish feed at 7.5 and 15% (w/w), providing 21.8 mg/g feed ARA for the 
WT-supplemented group and 13.6 mg/g feed DGLA for the MUT-supplemented group at 
the 15% inclusion levels. An unsupplemented group was used as the control. After 
1 month of feeding, fish were challenged with Streptococcus iniae. Fish were 
sampled before the challenge and 1 week after the challenge for various 
analyses. Tissue ARA and DGLA levels significantly increased in the liver, 
corresponding to microalgal supplementation levels. The elevated expression of 
specific immune-related genes was evident in the kidneys in all treatment groups 
after 1 month of feeding, including genes related to eicosanoid synthesis, 
lysozyme, and NF-κB. In the liver, microalgal supplementation led to the 
upregulation of genes related to immune function and antioxidant defense while 
the expression of examined genes involved in ARA metabolism was downregulated. 
Importantly, fish fed with 15% of both WT- and MUT-supplemented feed showed 
significantly (p < 0.05) higher survival percentages (78 and 68%, respectively, 
as compared to only 46% in the control group). The elevated expression of genes 
related to inflammatory and immune responses was evident post-challenge. 
Collectively, the results of the current study demonstrate the potential of 
microalgae-derived dietary ARA and DGLA in improving immune competence and 
resistance to bacterial infection in zebrafish as a model organism.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01960
PMCID: PMC6135890
PMID: 30237797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]