1. Nature. 2018 Oct;562(7728):578-582. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0543-y. Epub 2018 
Sep 19.

Clearance of senescent glial cells prevents tau-dependent pathology and 
cognitive decline.

Bussian TJ(1), Aziz A(2), Meyer CF(2), Swenson BL(2), van Deursen JM(1)(2), 
Baker DJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA. baker.darren@mayo.edu.
(4)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA. baker.darren@mayo.edu.

Comment in
    Nature. 2018 Oct;562(7728):503-504. doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-06677-7.

Cellular senescence, which is characterized by an irreversible cell-cycle 
arrest1 accompanied by a distinctive secretory phenotype2, can be induced 
through various intracellular and extracellular factors. Senescent cells that 
express the cell cycle inhibitory protein p16INK4A have been found to actively 
drive naturally occurring age-related tissue deterioration3,4 and contribute to 
several diseases associated with ageing, including atherosclerosis5 and 
osteoarthritis6. Various markers of senescence have been observed in patients 
with neurodegenerative diseases7-9; however, a role for senescent cells in the 
aetiology of these pathologies is unknown. Here we show a causal link between 
the accumulation of senescent cells and cognition-associated neuronal loss. We 
found that the MAPTP301SPS19 mouse model of tau-dependent neurodegenerative 
disease10 accumulates p16INK4A-positive senescent astrocytes and microglia. 
Clearance of these cells as they arise using INK-ATTAC transgenic mice prevents 
gliosis, hyperphosphorylation of both soluble and insoluble tau leading to 
neurofibrillary tangle deposition, and degeneration of cortical and hippocampal 
neurons, thus preserving cognitive function. Pharmacological intervention with a 
first-generation senolytic modulates tau aggregation. Collectively, these 
results show that senescent cells have a role in the initiation and progression 
of tau-mediated disease, and suggest that targeting senescent cells may provide 
a therapeutic avenue for the treatment of these pathologies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0543-y
PMCID: PMC6206507
PMID: 30232451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]