1. PLoS Curr. 2018 Aug 8;10:ecurrents.outbreaks.519e170f2740fabd4ccd1642ff533364.
 doi: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.519e170f2740fabd4ccd1642ff533364.

The 2015 Outbreak of Severe Influenza in Kashmir, North India: Emergence of a 
New Clade of A/H1n1 Influenza Virus.

Koul P(1), Potdar V(2), Mir H(1), Chadha M(2).

Author information:
(1)Internal & Pulmonary Medicine, Sheri Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Srinagar, J&K, India.
(2)National Institute of Virology, Pune, India.

INTRODUCTION: Following the initial outbreak of A/H1N1pdm09, periodic 
resurgences of the virus, with variable morbidity and mortality, have been 
reported from various parts of India including the temperate Kashmir region of 
northern India. An outbreak of A/H1N1 was reported in early 2015 across India 
with a high morbidity and mortality. We studied patients during the outbreak in 
Kashmir.
METHODS: Patients (n=1780, age 1 month to 90 years, median 35 years) presenting 
with acute respiratory illness to a tertiary care hospital in Srinagar, Kashmir 
from October 2014 to April 2015 were recruited. After clinical data recording, 
combined throat and nasal swabs were collected in viral transport medium and 
tested by real-time RT-PCR for influenza viruses. All influenza A positive 
samples were further subtyped using primers and probes for A/H1N1pdm09 and A/H3 
whereas influenza B samples were further subtyped into B/Yamagata and B/Victoria 
lineages. Virus isolation, hemagglutination inhibition testing, sequencing and 
phylogenetic analysis was carried out using standard procedures. Testing for 
H275Y mutation was done to determine sensitivity to oseltamivir. All patients 
received symptomatic therapy and influenza positive patients were administered 
oseltamivir.
RESULTS: Of the 1780 patients, 540 (30%) required hospitalization and 533 tested 
positive for influenza [influenza A=517(A/H1N1pdm09=437, A/H3N2=78 with 
co-infection of both in 2 cases); influenza B=16 (B/Yamgata=15)]. About 14% 
(n=254) had been vaccinated against influenza, having received the NH 2014-15 
vaccine, 27 (11.3%) of these testing positive for influenza.Â  Sixteen patients, 
including 4 pregnant females, died due to multi-organ failure. HA sequencing 
depicted that 2015 isolates belonged to Clade 6B.1. No H275Y mutation was 
reported from A/H1N1 positives.
CONCLUSION: Resurgent outbreak of A/H1N1pdm09, with emergence of clade 6B.1, in 
2014-15 resulted in high rate of hospitalizations, morbidity and mortality. 
Periodic resurgences and appearance of mutants emphasize continued surveillance 
so as to identify newer mutations with potential for outbreaks and severe 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1371/currents.outbreaks.519e170f2740fabd4ccd1642ff533364
PMCID: PMC6122875
PMID: 30245911