1. iScience. 2018 Jun 29;4:20-35. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2018.05.003. Epub 2018 May
9.

Human Organ-Specific Endothelial Cell Heterogeneity.

Marcu R(1), Choi YJ(1), Xue J(1), Fortin CL(2), Wang Y(3), Nagao RJ(1), Xu J(1), 
MacDonald JW(4), Bammler TK(4), Murry CE(5), Muczynski K(6), Stevens KR(7), 
Himmelfarb J(8), Schwartz SM(2), Zheng Y(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA; Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 
Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Institute 
for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA; Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 
Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Institute 
for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Kidney 
Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 
Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA; Kidney Research Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA. Electronic address: yingzy@uw.edu.

The endothelium first forms in the blood islands in the extra-embryonic yolk sac 
and then throughout the embryo to establish circulatory networks that further 
acquire organ-specific properties during development to support diverse organ 
functions. Here, we investigated the properties of endothelial cells (ECs), 
isolated from four human major organs-the heart, lung, liver, and kidneys-in 
individual fetal tissues at three months' gestation, at gene expression, and at 
cellular function levels. We showed that organ-specific ECs have distinct 
expression patterns of gene clusters, which support their specific organ 
development and functions. These ECs displayed distinct barrier properties, 
angiogenic potential, and metabolic rate and support specific organ functions. 
Our findings showed the link between human EC heterogeneity and organ 
development and can be exploited therapeutically to contribute in organ 
regeneration, disease modeling, as well as guiding differentiation of 
tissue-specific ECs from human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2018.05.003
PMCID: PMC6147238
PMID: 30240741