1. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2018 Jan 1;17:1533033818801362. doi: 
10.1177/1533033818801362.

Efficacy of Percutaneous Thermal Ablation Combined With Transarterial 
Embolization for Recurrent Hepatocellular Carcinoma After Hepatectomy and a 
Prognostic Nomogram to Predict Survival.

Yuan Z(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Hu C(1)(2), Gao W(1), Zheng J(1), Li W(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Center of Interventional Oncology and Liver Diseases, Beijing You'an 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Zhuhui Yuan, Yang Wang, and Caixia Hu contributed equally to this work.

AIM: This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of percutaneous thermal ablation 
combined with transarterial embolization for recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma 
after hepatectomy and establish a prognostic nomogram to predict survival.
METHODS: One hundred seventeen patients with recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma 
receiving ablation from 2009 to 2014 were included in primary cohort to 
establish a prognostic nomogram. Between 2014 and 2016, 51 patients with 
recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma treated by ablation were enrolled in the 
validation cohort to validate the predictive accuracy of the nomogram. All 
patients underwent locoregional ablation. Overall survival was the primary end 
point, and progression-free survival was the second end point. The performance 
of the nomogram was assessed through concordance index and calibration curve and 
compared with 5 conventional hepatocellular carcinoma staging systems.
RESULTS: The 1-, 3-, and 5-year overall survival rates of primary cohort were 
88.4%, 70.7%, and 64.1%, respectively. The 1-, 3-, and 5-year progression-free 
survival rates of primary cohort were 44%, 14%, and 8.7%, respectively. The 
results of multivariate analysis showed that tumor size ( P = .0469; hazard 
ratio, 1.020; 95% confidence interval, 1.0004-1.040), preoperative extrahepatic 
disease ( P = .0675; hazard ratio, 2.604; 95% confidence interval, 0.933-7.264), 
and close to hepatic hilum <2 cm ( P = .0053; hazard ratio, 3.691; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.474-9.240) were predictive factors for overall survival. 
The study established a nomogram to predict survival (concordance index, 0.752; 
95% confidence interval, 0.656-0.849). According to the predicted overall 
survival, patients with recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma were divided into 3 
risk classes ( P < .05): low-risk group (total score <55; predicted 5-year 
overall survival rate, 82.9%), intermediate-risk group (55 ≤ total score < 99; 
predicted 5-year overall survival rate, 52.8%), and high-risk group (hazard 
ratio, total score ≥99; predicted 5-year overall survival rate, not available).
CONCLUSION: Percutaneous thermal ablation appears to be an effective procedure 
for the treatment of recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy. The 
proposed nomogram provides a mechanism to accurately predict survival and could 
stratify risk among patients with recurrent hepatocellular carcinoma treated by 
ablation therapy.

DOI: 10.1177/1533033818801362
PMCID: PMC6153531
PMID: 30244651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.