1. PLoS One. 2018 Sep 21;13(9):e0204447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204447. 
eCollection 2018.

Gi/o-coupled muscarinic receptors co-localize with GIRK channel for efficient 
channel activation.

Tateyama M(1)(2), Kubo Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biophysics and Neurobiology, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Physiology, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Japan.
(2)Department of Physiological Sciences, School of Life Science, SOKENDAI (The 
Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Hayama, Japan.

G protein-gated inwardly rectifying K+ (GIRK) channel regulates cellular 
excitability upon activation of Gi/o-coupled receptors. In Gi/o-coupled 
muscarinic M2R, the intracellular third loop (i3) is known as a key domain for 
Gi/o coupling, because replacement of i3 of Gq-coupled muscarinic M1R with that 
of M2R enables the chimeric receptor (MC9) to activate the GIRK channel. In the 
present study, we showed that MC9, but not M1R, co-localizes with the GIRK 
channel and Gαi1 by Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis. When M1R 
was forced to stay adjacent to the channel through ligation with short linkers, 
M1R activated the GIRK channel. FRET analysis further suggested that the 
efficacy of channel activation is correlated with the linker length between M1R 
and the GIRK channel. The results show that co-localization is an important 
factor for activating the GIRK channel. In contrast, for MC9 and M2R, the GIRK 
channel was activated even when they were connected by long linkers, suggesting 
the formation of a molecular complex even in the absence of a linker. We also 
observed that replacement of 13 amino acid residues at the N-terminal end of i3 
of MC9 with those of M1R impaired the co-localization with the GIRK channel as 
well as channel activation. These results show that localization of the receptor 
near the GIRK channel is a key factor in efficiently activating the channel and 
that the N-terminal end of i3 of M2R plays an important role in co-localization.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0204447
PMCID: PMC6150519
PMID: 30240440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.