1. Curr Top Membr. 2018;81:3-52. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctm.2018.08.001. Epub 2018 Aug
27.

Water Homeostasis and Cell Volume Maintenance and Regulation.

Delpire E(1), Gagnon KB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, KY, United States.

From early unicellular organisms that formed in salty water environments to 
complex organisms that live on land away from water, cells have had to protect a 
homeostatic internal environment favorable to the biochemical reactions 
necessary for life. In this chapter, we will outline what steps were necessary 
to conserve the water within our cells and how mechanisms have evolved to 
maintain and regulate our cellular and organismal volume. We will first examine 
whole body water homeostasis and the relationship between kidney function, 
regulation of blood pressure, and blood filtration in the process of producing 
urine. We will then discuss how the composition of the lipid-rich bilayer 
affects its permeability to water and salts, and how the cell uses this 
differential to drive physiological and biochemical cellular functions. The 
capacity to maintain cell volume is vital to epithelial transport, 
neurotransmission, cell cycle, apoptosis, and cell migration. Finally, we will 
wrap up the chapter by discussing in some detail specific channels, 
cotransporters, and exchangers that have evolved to facilitate the movement of 
cations and anions otherwise unable to cross the lipid-rich bilayer and that are 
involved in maintaining or regulating cell volume.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ctm.2018.08.001
PMCID: PMC6457474
PMID: 30243436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]