1. Front Physiol. 2018 Aug 22;9:1136. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01136. eCollection 
2018.

Circulating Small Non-coding RNAs as Biomarkers for Recovery After Exhaustive or 
Repetitive Exercise.

HÃ¥kansson KEJ(1)(2), Sollie O(3), Simons KH(1)(2), Quax PHA(1)(2), Jensen J(3), 
Nossent AY(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
Netherlands.
(2)Einthoven Laboratory for Experimental Vascular Medicine, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Physical Performance, Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo, 
Norway.
(4)Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.

Circulating microRNAs have proven to be reliable biomarkers, due to their high 
stability, both in vivo in the circulation, and ex vivo during sample 
preparation and storage. Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are a different type of 
small non-coding RNAs that can also be reliably measured in plasma, but have 
only been studied sporadically. In this study, we aimed to identify 
RNA-biomarkers that can distinguish between different exercise regimes and that 
entail clues about muscle repair and recovery after prolonged exhaustive 
endurance exercise. We compared plasma microRNA profiles between two cohorts of 
elite cyclists, subjected to two different types of exercise regimes, as well as 
a cohort of patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD) that were scheduled to 
undergo lower limb amputation, due to critical limb ischemia. In elite athletes, 
muscle tissue recovers quickly even after exhaustive exercise, whereas in PAD 
patients, recovery is completely impaired. Furthermore, we measured levels of a 
specific group of snoRNAs in the plasma of both elite cyclists and PAD patients. 
Using a multiplex qPCR screening, we detected a total of 179 microRNAs overall, 
of which, on average, 161 microRNAs were detected per sample. However, only 30 
microRNAs were consistently expressed in all samples. Of these, two microRNAs, 
miR-29a-3p and miR193a-5p, that responded differently two different types of 
exercise, namely exhaustive exercise and non-exhaustive endurance exercise. 
Using individual rt/qPCR, we also identified a snoRNA, SNORD114.1, which was 
significantly upregulated in plasma in response to endurance exercise. 
Furthermore, two microRNAs, miR-29a-3p and miR-495-3p, were significantly 
differentially expressed in athletes compared to PAD patients, but only 
following exercise. We suggest that these two microRNAs could function as 
markers of impaired muscle repair and recovery. In conclusion, microRNAs 
miR-29a-3p and miR-193a-5p may help us distinguish between repeated exhaustive 
and non-exhaustive endurance exercise. MicroRNA miR-29a-3p, as well as 
miR-495-3p, may further mark impaired muscle recovery in patients with severe 
critical limb ischemia. Furthermore, we showed for the first time that a 
circulating snoRNA, SNORD114.1, is regulated in response to exercise and may be 
used as biomarker.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2018.01136
PMCID: PMC6113669
PMID: 30246800