1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2019 Mar;73(3):400-403. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.034. Epub
 2018 Sep 18.

Nephrotic Syndrome With Mutations in NPHS2: The Role of R229Q and Implications 
for Genetic Counseling.

Rood IM(1), Deegens JKJ(2), Lugtenberg D(3), Bongers EMHF(3), Wetzels JFM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
ilse.rood@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2019 Apr;73(4):576. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.11.013.
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2019 Apr;73(4):576-577. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.12.031.

Mutations in the NPHS2 gene, which encodes the podocyte slit diaphragm protein 
podocin, cause autosomal recessive steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (Online 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man [OMIM] #600995). Basic research and clinical 
studies have provided important insights about genotype-phenotype correlations. 
This knowledge allows personalized genetic (risk) counseling and should lead to 
changes in the advice given to patients. A patient who carries the R229Q variant 
(which has a high allele frequency of 3.7% in the European population) in 
combination with a pathogenic variant in exon 7 or 8 is at high risk for 
developing nephrotic syndrome that may not manifest before adulthood, whereas a 
patient with 2 pathogenic variants will develop congenital or childhood-onset 
nephrotic syndrome. In contrast, a patient who carries the R229Q variant in 
combination with a pathogenic variant in exons 1 to 6 is unlikely to develop 
nephrotic syndrome. In this article, we review the emerging knowledge about the 
NPHS2 gene and translate these findings from the bench to practical advice for 
the clinical bedside.

Copyright Â© 2018 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2018.06.034
PMID: 30241959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]