1. Macromol Biosci. 2018 Nov;18(11):e1800224. doi: 10.1002/mabi.201800224. Epub 
2018 Sep 27.

Human Serum Albumin-Based Drug-Free Macromolecular Therapeutics: Apoptosis 
Induction by Coiled-Coil-Mediated Cross-Linking of CD20 Antigens on Lymphoma B 
Cell Surface.

Zhang L(1), Fang Y(1), Li L(1), Yang J(1), Radford DC(2), Kopeček J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry/CCCD, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, 
USA.

A therapeutic platform-drug-free macromolecular therapeutics (DFMT)-that induces 
apoptosis in B cells by cross-linking of CD20 receptors, without the need for 
low molecular weight cytotoxic drug, is developed. In this report, a DFMT system 
is synthesized and evaluated based on human serum albumin (HSA) and two 
complementary coiled-coil forming peptides, CCE and CCK. Fab' fragment of 
anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab is attached to CCE (Fab'-CCE); multiple 
grafts of CCK are conjugated to HSA (HSA-(CCK)7 ). The colocalization of both 
nanoconjugates at the surface of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) Raji cells is 
demonstrated by confocal fluorescence microscopy. The colocalization leads to 
coiled-coil formation, CD20 cross-linking, and apoptosis induction. The 
apoptotic levels are evaluated by Annexin V, Caspase 3, and terminal 
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling assays. Selective surface 
binding of DFMT to CD20+ cells is validated in experiments on a coculture of 
CD20+ (Raji) and CD20-(DG-75) cells. It is found that DFMT can trigger calcium 
influx only in Raji cells, but not in DG-75 cells. A highly specific treatment 
for NHL and other B cell malignancies with considerable translational potential 
is presented by HSA-based DFMT system.

© 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/mabi.201800224
PMCID: PMC6392022
PMID: 30259654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. J.Y. and J.K. are 
co-inventors on a pending US patent application (PCT/US2017/37736; assigned to 
the University of Utah) related to this work.