1. Cell Rep. 2018 Sep 25;24(13):3393-3403.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.08.089.

Precision Targeting of BFL-1/A1 and an ATM Co-dependency in Human Cancer.

Guerra RM(1), Bird GH(1), Harvey EP(1), Dharia NV(2), Korshavn KJ(1), Prew 
MS(1), Stegmaier K(2), Walensky LD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Linde Program in Cancer Chemical Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Broad Institute, 415 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Linde Program in Cancer Chemical Biology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 
Electronic address: loren_walensky@dfci.harvard.edu.

Cancer cells overexpress a diversity of anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins, 
such as BCL-2, MCL-1, and BFL-1/A1, to enforce cellular immortality. Thus, 
intensive drug development efforts have focused on targeting this class of 
oncogenic proteins to overcome treatment resistance. Whereas a selective BCL-2 
inhibitor has been FDA approved and several small molecule inhibitors of MCL-1 
have recently entered phase I clinical testing, BFL-1/A1 remains undrugged. 
Here, we developed a series of stapled peptide design principles to engineer a 
functionally selective and cell-permeable BFL-1/A1 inhibitor that is 
specifically cytotoxic to BFL-1/A1-dependent human cancer cells. Because cancers 
harbor a diversity of resistance mechanisms and typically require multi-agent 
treatment, we further investigated BFL-1/A1 co-dependencies by mining a 
genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screen. We identified ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated 
(ATM) kinase as a BFL-1/A1 co-dependency in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), which 
informed the validation of BFL-1/A1 and ATM inhibitor co-treatment as a 
synergistic approach to subverting apoptotic resistance in cancer.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.08.089
PMCID: PMC6365304
PMID: 30257201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS L.D.W. is a scientific 
advisory board member of and consultant for Aileron Therapeutics. A patent 
application has been filed on the reported compositions and their methods of 
use.