1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018 Nov;107:957-966. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.08.060. 
Epub 2018 Aug 23.

Garcinol exerts anti-cancer effect in human cervical cancer cells through 
upregulation of T-cadherin.

Zhao J(1), Yang T(1), Ji J(1), Li C(1), Li Z(1), Li L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, 710061, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xi'an Jiaotong University, 710061, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. Electronic 
address: lilong_doc@163.com.

Garcinol, a polyisoprenylated benzophenone, has been demonstrated to exert 
anti-cancer effects in various tumor cells. However, the effect of garcinol on 
cervical cancer (CC) cell progression and the related molecular mechanism 
remains poorly understood. Accumulating evidence has verified that 
downregualtion of T-cadherin is closely associated with tumorigenesis, 
suggesting that T-cadherin might be a potential therapeutic target for cancer 
treatment. In the present study, Hela and SiHa cells were treated with different 
concentrations of garcinol (0, 5, 10, and 25 u M), and T-cadherin siRNA was 
synthesized and transfected into Hela and SiHa cells combined with garcinol 
(25 u M) treatment. We found that garcinol dose-dependently suppressed cell 
viability, colony formation, invasion, migration, cell cycle progression, and 
promoted cell apoptosis in CC cell lines, as well as inhibited tumor growth in 
xenograft model. Importantly, our results showed that garcinol treatment 
increased the expression of T-cadherin both in vitro and in vivo, and knockdown 
of T-cahderin partially reversed garcinol-induced inhibition of CC development 
via activating P13 K/AKT signaling pathway in CC cell lines. Thus, these 
findings demonstrated the tumor suppressive function of garcinol on CC 
progression, and emphasized that the T-cadherin/P13 K/AKT was a potential 
mechanism involved in the antumor effects of garcinol.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.08.060
PMID: 30257408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]