1. BMC Proc. 2018 Sep 17;12(Suppl 9):45. doi: 10.1186/s12919-018-0150-9. 
eCollection 2018.

Homozygosity disequilibrium associated with treatment response and its 
methylation regulation.

Yang HC(1), Chen CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica, No 128, Sec 2, Academia 
Rd, Nankang 115, Taipei, Taiwan.

Homozygosity disequilibrium (HD), indicating a nonrandom pattern of sizable runs 
of homozygosity that deviates from a random allocation of homozygous and 
heterozygous genotypes in the genome, is an important phenomenon in population 
genomics and medical genomics. We performed the first genome-wide study 
investigating the roles of HD in pharmacogenomics and pharmacoepigenomics by 
analyzing GAW20 data. We inferred whole-genome profiles of homozygosity 
intensities and performed genome-wide homozygosity association analyses to 
identify regions of HD associated with triglyceride (TG) response to fenofibrate 
by using LOHAS (Loss-of-Heterozygosity Analysis Suite) software. The analysis 
identified a region of HD contained in MACROD2 at 20p12 to be significantly 
associated with TG response to fenofibrate. We also examined the common genetic 
component in TG and methylation responses to fenofibrate. The methylation 
response to fenofibrate was regarded as a methylation quantitative trait, and 
our methylation quantitative trait locus analysis identified a cis-acting 
regulation association with marginal significance between the homozygosity 
intensity of MACROD2 and the methylation response to fenofibrate. These findings 
may help delineate the genetic basis of pharmacogenomic and pharmacoepigenomic 
responses to fenofibrate intervention.

DOI: 10.1186/s12919-018-0150-9
PMCID: PMC6156896
PMID: 30263048

Conflict of interest statement: Not applicable.Not applicable.The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature remains neutral 
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.