1. Nat Commun. 2018 Sep 28;9(1):3986. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06507-4.

Mechanism-based rescue of Munc18-1 dysfunction in varied encephalopathies by 
chemical chaperones.

Guiberson NGL(1), Pineda A(1), Abramov D(1), Kharel P(1), Carnazza KE(1), Wragg 
RT(2), Dittman JS(2), Burr√© J(3).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Mind Research Institute & Appel Institute for Alzheimer's Disease 
Research, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, 10021, USA.
(3)Brain and Mind Research Institute & Appel Institute for Alzheimer's Disease 
Research, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, 10021, USA. 
jab2058@med.cornell.edu.

Heterozygous de novo mutations in the neuronal protein Munc18-1 are linked to 
epilepsies, intellectual disability, movement disorders, and neurodegeneration. 
These devastating diseases have a poor prognosis and no known cure, due to lack 
of understanding of the underlying disease mechanism. To determine how mutations 
in Munc18-1 cause disease, we use newly generated S. cerevisiae strains, C. 
elegans models, and conditional Munc18-1 knockout mouse neurons expressing 
wild-type or mutant Munc18-1, as well as in vitro studies. We find that at least 
five disease-linked missense mutations of Munc18-1 result in destabilization and 
aggregation of the mutant protein. Aggregates of mutant Munc18-1 incorporate 
wild-type Munc18-1, depleting functional Munc18-1 levels beyond hemizygous 
levels. We demonstrate that the three chemical chaperones 4-phenylbutyrate, 
sorbitol, and trehalose reverse the deficits caused by mutations in Munc18-1 in 
vitro and in vivo in multiple models, offering a novel strategy for the 
treatment of varied encephalopathies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06507-4
PMCID: PMC6162227
PMID: 30266908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.