1. Biochem Genet. 2019 Apr;57(2):273-288. doi: 10.1007/s10528-018-9890-5. Epub
2018  Sep 29.

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Augments Plasma Triglycerides in TT Homozygotes of 
rs495225 at Growth Hormone Secretagogue Receptor Gene.

Su M(1), Si YJ(1), Guo QW(1), Yang M(1), Chen X(1), Lin J(1), Fang DZ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of Basic 
Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, 
China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of Basic 
Medical Sciences & Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, 
China. dzfang@scu.edu.cn.

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and growth hormone secretagogue receptor 
(GHSR) were reported to be associated with plasma lipid and glucose levels. 
However, interplays of PTSD with GHSR on plasma lipid and glucose levels have 
not been explored yet. This study was to investigate the interplays of PTSD and 
GHSR rs495225 on plasma glucose and lipid profiles. A total of 709 high school 
students were recruited at 6 months after the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake. Variants 
of GHSR rs495225 were identified by polymerase chain reaction-restriction 
fragment length polymorphism analyses and verified by DNA sequencing. The PTSD 
Checklist Civilian Version (PCL-C) was used to assess PTSD. There was no 
significant difference of PTSD prevalence between the TT homozygotes and the C 
allele carriers. However, the students with PTSD had significantly lower levels 
of glucose, insulin and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR) than the students without PTSD in the C allele carriers of GHSR 
rs495225 after the adjustment for age, gender and body mass index (BMI), but 
higher levels of TG and TG/HDL-C in the TT homozygotes. Meanwhile, the TT 
homozygotes had lower levels of HDL-C than the C allele carriers in the students 
without PTSD, but higher levels of insulin and HOMA-IR in the subjects with 
PTSD. After the adjustment of age and gender, and additional adjustment for BMI, 
the results were not changed except the difference of insulin was only a 
tendency (p = 0.054) after the additional adjustment for BMI. PTSD may augment 
TG levels and the related lipid ratio TG/HDL-C in the TT homozygotes of GHSR 
rs495225 but decrease the levels of glucose, insulin and HOMA-IR in the C allele 
carriers.

DOI: 10.1007/s10528-018-9890-5
PMID: 30269201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]