1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2019 Mar;236(3):1031-1041. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-018-5046-x. Epub 2018 Sep 29.

Behavioral economic analysis of the reinforcing effects of "bath salts" 
mixtures: studies with MDPV, methylone, and caffeine in male Sprague-Dawley 
rats.

Gannon BM(1), Mesmin MP(1), Sulima A(2), Rice KC(2), Collins GT(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Dr - MC# 7764, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA.
(2)Molecular Targets and Medications Discovery Branch, NIDA and NIAAA, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Dr - MC# 7764, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA. 
CollinsG@uthscsa.edu.
(4)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX, USA. 
CollinsG@uthscsa.edu.

RATIONALE: "Bath salts" preparations often contain combinations of synthetic 
cathinones (e.g., 3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone [methylone], 
3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone [MDPV]), and caffeine, and evidence suggests that 
mixtures of synthetic cathinones and caffeine (e.g., MDPV + caffeine or 
methylone + caffeine) can be more potent and/or effective reinforcers than 
predicted for an additive interaction.
OBJECTIVE: To use demand curve analyses to compare the reinforcing effectiveness 
of MDPV and methylone to mixtures of MDPV + caffeine and methylone + caffeine.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats acquired methylone self-administration 
(0.32 mg/kg/inf) under a fixed ratio (FR) 1 schedule of reinforcement and 
generated full dose-response curves for methylone (0.01-1 mg/kg/inf) under an 
FR5 schedule of reinforcement. Demand curves were then obtained for methylone, 
MDPV, caffeine, and methylone + caffeine and MDPV + caffeine mixtures by 
increasing the FR across sessions according to the following series: 3, 10, 18, 
32, 56, 100, 178, etc. RESULTS: Self-administration of methylone was rapidly 
acquired by 87.5% of rats and was maintained across a range of doses, producing 
an inverted U-shaped dose-response curve. Rank order demand for the individual 
constituents was MDPV > methylone > caffeine. Demand for the 3:1 (but not 10:1) 
methylone + caffeine mixture was greater than that for methylone alone, and 
demand for MDPV alone was similar to both MDPV + caffeine mixtures evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide additional evidence that although methylone 
is an effective reinforcer, combining methylone with caffeine results in an 
enhanced reinforcing effectiveness compared to methylone alone. Thus, abused 
"bath salts" preparations containing synthetic cathinones and caffeine may have 
higher abuse liability than preparations containing only synthetic cathinones.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-018-5046-x
PMCID: PMC6440875
PMID: 30267131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: On behalf of all authors, 
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.