1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 2;13(10):e0202552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202552. 
eCollection 2018.

Enhanced neutralizing antibody response induced by inactivated enterovirus 71 in 
cynomolgus monkeys.

In HJ(1)(2), Lim H(1)(2), Lee JA(1), Lee SR(3), Jin YB(3), Jeong KJ(3), Hyeon 
JY(1), Yoo JS(1), Lee JW(1), Choi YK(2), Lee SW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vaccine Research, National Research Institute of Health, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Osong-eup, CheongJu, Chungcheongbuk-do, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Medicine and Medical Research Institute, Chungbuk National 
University, CheongJu, Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic of Korea.
(3)The National Primate Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, Ochang-eup, CheongJu, Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic of Korea.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a major etiological agent of various public health 
issues, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. EV71 causes hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease (HFMD) and is associated with serious neurological disorders in young 
children. A formalin-inactivated EV71 candidate vaccine (KCDC-HFMDV1-EV71) based 
on the C4 subgenotype was previously developed and confirmed to be a potential 
candidate vaccine for prevention of EV71 infection in mice. In this study, an 
inactivated EV71 vaccine was used for analysis of long-term immunogenicity and 
efficacy in cynomolgus monkeys, a common nonhuman primate model. The vaccine was 
immunized three times at 0, 4, and 8 weeks with either 20-Î¼g doses of EV71 
candidate vaccine formulated with aluminum hydroxide gel adjuvant or 
phosphate-buffered saline as a control. The group immunized with the inactivated 
EV71 showed significantly increased EV71-specific antibody and serum 
neutralizing antibody titers at 3 weeks after vaccination and maintained these 
elevated titers until the end of the experiment (54 weeks after vaccination). 
The sera from vaccinated cynomolgus monkeys showed a crossreactive neutralizing 
antibody response to the heterologous subtype of EV71 (B1-4, C1, and C2). These 
findings suggest that the inactivated EV71 candidate vaccine may be a potential 
vaccine candidate and valuable tool for the control of HFMD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0202552
PMCID: PMC6168120
PMID: 30278051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.