1. Commun Biol. 2018 Sep 6;1:136. doi: 10.1038/s42003-018-0139-y. eCollection
2018.

Streamlining volumetric multi-channel image cytometry using 
hue-saturation-brightness-based surface creation.

Tan Y(1)(2), Li JLY(3), Goh CC(4), Lee BTK(4), Kwok IWH(4), Ng WJ(5), Evrard 
M(4), Poidinger M(4), Tey HL(6), Ng LG(7).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology 
and Research), Biopolis, 138648, Singapore, Singapore. 
tan_yingrou@immunol.a-star.edu.sg.
(2)National Skin Centre, 1 Mandalay Road, 308205, Singapore, Singapore. 
tan_yingrou@immunol.a-star.edu.sg.
(3)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology 
and Research), Biopolis, 138648, Singapore, Singapore. 
Jackson_li@immunol.a-star.edu.sg.
(4)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology 
and Research), Biopolis, 138648, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)National University of Singapore, 21 Lower Kent Ridge Rd, Singapore, 
Singapore, 119077.
(6)National Skin Centre, 1 Mandalay Road, 308205, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology 
and Research), Biopolis, 138648, Singapore, Singapore. 
Ng_Lai_Guan@immunol.a-star.edu.sg.

Image cytometry is the process of converting image data to flow cytometry-style 
plots, and it usually requires computer-aided surface creation to extract out 
statistics for cells or structures. One way of dealing with structures stained 
with multiple markers in three-dimensional images, is carrying out multiple 
rounds of channel co-localization and image masking before surface creation, 
which is cumbersome and laborious. We propose the application of the 
hue-saturation-brightness color space to streamline this process, which produces 
complete surfaces, and allows the user to have a global view of the data before 
flexibly defining cell subsets. Spectral compensation can also be performed 
after surface creation to accurately resolve different signals. We demonstrate 
the utility of this workflow in static and dynamic imaging datasets of a 
needlestick injury on the mouse ear, and we believe this scalable and intuitive 
approach will improve the ease of performing histocytometry on biological 
samples.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-018-0139-y
PMCID: PMC6127105
PMID: 30272015

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.