1. J Transl Med. 2018 Oct 1;16(1):270. doi: 10.1186/s12967-018-1634-0.

Subtype-specific associations between breast cancer risk polymorphisms and the 
survival of early-stage breast cancer.

Fu F(1), Guo W(1), Lin Y(1), Zeng B(2), Qiu W(1), Huang M(3), Wang C(4).

Author information:
(1)Breast Surgery Ward, Department of General Surgery, Fujian Medical University 
Union Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China.
(2)Nosocomial Infection Control Branch, Fujian Medical University Union 
Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China.
(3)Fujian Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian 
Province, China.
(4)Breast Surgery Ward, Department of General Surgery, Fujian Medical University 
Union Hospital, Fuzhou, 350001, Fujian Province, China. chuanwang1968@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Limited evidence suggests that inherited predisposing risk variants 
might affect the disease outcome. In this study, we analyzed the effect of 
genome-wide association studies-identified breast cancer-risk single nucleotide 
polymorphisms on survival of early-stage breast cancer patients in a Chinese 
population.
METHODS: This retrospective study investigated the relationship between 21 
GWAS-identified breast cancer-risk single nucleotide polymorphisms and the 
outcome of 1177 early stage breast cancer patients with a long median follow-up 
time of 174Â months. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to 
estimate the hazard ratios and their 95% confidence intervals. Primary endpoints 
were breast cancer special survival and overall survival while secondary 
endpoints were invasive disease free survival and distant disease free survival.
RESULTS: Multivariate survival analysis showed only the rs2046210 GA genotype 
significantly decreased the risk of recurrence and death for early stage breast 
cancer. After grouping breast cancer subtypes, significantly reduced survival 
was associated with the variant alleles of rs9485372 for luminal A and rs4415084 
for triple negative breast cancer. Importantly, all three single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms, rs889312, rs4951011 and rs9485372 had remarkable effects on 
survival of luminal B EBC, either individually or synergistically. Furthermore, 
statistically significant multiplicative interactions were found between 
rs4415084 and age at diagnosis and between rs3803662 and tumor grade.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that breast cancer risk susceptibility loci 
identified by GWAS may influence the outcome of early stage breast cancer 
patients' depending on intrinsic tumor subtypes in Chinese women.

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-018-1634-0
PMCID: PMC6167771
PMID: 30285756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]