1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2018 Nov;235(11):3083-3091. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-018-5042-1. Epub 2018 Oct 5.

The neuropharmacology of sleep paralysis hallucinations: serotonin 2A activation 
and a novel therapeutic drug.

Jalal B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. bj272@cam.ac.uk.

Sleep paralysis is a state of involuntary immobility occurring at sleep onset or 
offset, often accompanied by uncanny "ghost-like" hallucinations and extreme 
fear reactions. I provide here a neuropharmacological account for these 
hallucinatory experiences by evoking the role of the serotonin 2A receptor 
(5-HT2AR). Research has shown that 5-HT2AR activation can induce visual 
hallucinations, "mystical" subjective states, and out-of-body experiences 
(OBEs), and modulate fear circuits. Hallucinatory experiences triggered by 
serotonin-serotonergic ("pseudo") hallucinations, induced by hallucinogenic 
drugs-tend to be "dream-like" with the experiencer having insight 
("meta-awareness") that he is hallucinating, unlike dopaminergic ("psychotic" 
and "life-like") hallucinations where such insight is lost. Indeed, 
hallucinatory experiences during sleep paralysis have the classic features of 
serotonergic hallucinations, and are strikingly similar to perceptual and 
subjective states induced by hallucinogenic drugs (e.g., lysergic acid 
diethylamide [LSD] and psilocybin), i.e., they entail visual hallucinations, 
mystical experiences, OBEs, and extreme fear reactions. I propose a possible 
mechanism whereby serotonin could be functionally implicated in generating sleep 
paralysis hallucinations and fear reactions through 5-HT2AR activity. Moreover, 
I speculate on the role of 5-HT2C receptors vis-Ã -vis anxiety and panic during 
sleep paralysis, and the orbitofrontal cortex-rich with 5-HT2A receptors-in 
influencing visual pathways during sleep paralysis, and, in effect, 
hallucinations. Finally, I propose, for the first time, a drug to target sleep 
paralysis hallucinations and fear reactions, namely the selective 5-HT2AR 
inverse agonist, pimavanserin. This account implicates gene HTR2A on chromosome 
13q as the underlying cause of sleep paralysis hallucinations and could be 
explored using positron emission tomography.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-018-5042-1
PMCID: PMC6208952
PMID: 30288594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.