1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2019 May;1867(5):483-491. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2018.09.012. Epub 2018 Oct 2.

Interplay between α-synuclein amyloid formation and membrane structure.

O'Leary EI(1), Lee JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Protein Conformation and Dynamics, Biochemistry and Biophysics 
Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
(2)Laboratory of Protein Conformation and Dynamics, Biochemistry and Biophysics 
Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Electronic address: 
leej4@mail.nih.gov.

Amyloid formation is a pathological hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases, 
including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's. While it is unknown how 
these disorders are initiated, in vitro and cellular experiments confirm the 
importance of membranes. Ubiquitous in vivo, membranes induce conformational 
changes in amyloidogenic proteins and in some cases, facilitate aggregation. 
Reciprocally, perturbations in the bilayer structure can be induced by amyloid 
formation. Here, we review studies in the last 10 years describing α-synuclein 
(α-syn) and its interactions with membranes, detailing the roles of anionic and 
zwitterionic lipids in aggregation, and their contribution to Parkinson's 
disease. We summarize the impact of α-syn - comparing monomeric, oligomeric, and 
fibrillar forms - on membrane structure, and the effect of membrane remodeling 
on amyloid formation. Finally, perspective on future studies investigating the 
interplay between α-syn aggregation and membranes is discussed. This article is 
part of a Special Issue entitled: Amyloids.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2018.09.012
PMCID: PMC6445794
PMID: 30287222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]