1. Biochemistry. 2018 Oct 30;57(43):6247-6255. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00796. 
Epub 2018 Oct 16.

Role of the Conserved DECH-Box Cysteine in Coupling Hepatitis C Virus 
Helicase-Catalyzed ATP Hydrolysis to RNA Unwinding.

Yerukhimovich MM(1), Marohnic CC(2), Frick DN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry , University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee , 
Milwaukee , Wisconsin 53211 , United States.
(2)Abbott Laboratories , 100 Abbott Park Road , Abbott Park , Illinois 60064 , 
United States.

DECH-box proteins are a subset of DExH/D-box superfamily 2 helicases possessing 
a conserved Asp-Glu-Cys-His motif in their ATP binding site. The conserved His 
helps position the Asp and Glu residues, which coordinate the divalent metal 
cation that connects the protein to ATP and activate the water molecule needed 
for ATP hydrolysis, but the role of the Cys is still unclear. This study uses 
site-directed mutants of the model DECH-box helicase encoded by the hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) to examine the role of the Cys in helicase action. Proteins lacking 
a Cys unwound DNA less efficiently than wild-type proteins did. For example, at 
low protein concentrations, a helicase harboring a Gly instead of the DECH-box 
Cys unwound DNA more slowly than the wild-type helicase did, but at higher 
protein concentrations, the two proteins unwound DNA at similar rates. All HCV 
proteins analyzed had similar affinities for ATP and nucleic acids and 
hydrolyzed ATP in the presence of RNA at similar rates. However, in the absence 
of RNA, all proteins lacking a DECH-box cysteine hydrolyzed ATP 10-15 times 
faster with higher Km values, and lower apparent affinities for metal ions, 
compared to those observed with wild-type proteins. These differences were 
observed with proteins isolated from HCV genotypes 2a and 1b, suggesting that 
this role is conserved. These data suggest the helicase needs Cys292 to bind ATP 
in a state where ATP is not hydrolyzed until RNA binds.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00796
PMCID: PMC8532174
PMID: 30281972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.