1. Front Microbiol. 2018 Sep 19;9:2215. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02215.
eCollection  2018.

Occurrence, Antibiotic Resistance, and Population Diversity of Listeria 
monocytogenes Isolated From Fresh Aquatic Products in China.

Chen M(1), Cheng J(1), Wu Q(1), Zhang J(1), Chen Y(1)(2), Xue L(1), Lei T(1), 
Zeng H(1), Wu S(1), Ye Q(1), Bai J(1), Wang J(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Microbiology Southern China, Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Culture Collection and Application, 
Guangdong Open Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, Guangdong Institute of 
Microbiology, Guangzhou, China.
(2)College of Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 
China.

Listeria monocytogenes is an important Gram-positive foodborne pathogen. 
However, limited information is available on the comprehensive investigation and 
potential risk of L. monocytogenes in fresh aquatic products, which are popular 
to consumers in China. This study aimed to determine the occurrence, virulence 
profiles, and population diversity of L. monocytogenes isolated from aquatic 
products in China. In total, 846 aquatic product samples were collected between 
July 2011 and April 2016 from 43 cities in China. Approximately 7.92% (67/846) 
aquatic product samples were positive for L. monocytogenes, 86.57% positive 
samples ranged from 0.3 to 10 MPN/g, whereas 5.97% showed over 110 MPN/g by the 
Most Probable Number method, which included two samples of products intended to 
be eaten raw. Serogroups I.1 (serotype 1/2a), I.2 (serotype 1/2b), and III 
(serotype 4c) were the predominant serogroups isolated, whereas serogroup II.1 
(serotype 4b) was detected at much lower frequencies. Examination of 
antibacterial resistance showed that nine antibacterial resistance profiles were 
exhibited in 72 isolates, a high level susceptibility of 16 tested antibiotics 
against L. monocytogenes were observed, indicating these common antibacterial 
agents are still effective for treating L. monocytogenes infection. Multilocus 
sequence typing revealed that ST299, ST87, and ST8 are predominant in aquatic 
products, indicating that the rare ST299 (serotype 4c) may have a special 
ecological niche in aquatic products and associated environments. Except llsX 
and ptsA, the 72 isolates harbor nine virulence genes (prfA, actA, hly, plcA, 
plcB, iap, mpl, inlA, and inlB), premature stop codons (PMSCs) in inlA were 
found in four isolates, three of which belonged to ST9. A novel PMSC was found 
in 2929-1LM with a nonsense mutation at position 1605 (TGGâ†’TGA). All ST87 
isolates harbored the ptsA gene, whereas 8 isolates (11.11%) carried the llsX 
gene, and mainly belonged to ST1, ST3, ST308, ST323, ST330, and ST619. Taken 
together, these results first reported potential virulent L. monocytogenes 
isolates (ST8 and ST87) were predominant in aquatic products which may have 
implications for public health in China. It is thus necessary to perform 
continuous surveillance for L. monocytogenes in aquatic products in China.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02215
PMCID: PMC6157410
PMID: 30283429