1. Microbiologyopen. 2019 May;8(5):e00732. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.732. Epub 2018 Oct
8.

W361R mutation in GaaR, the regulator of D-galacturonic acid-responsive genes, 
leads to constitutive production of pectinases in Aspergillus niger.

Alazi E(1), Niu J(1), Otto SB(1), Arentshorst M(1), Pham TTM(2), Tsang A(2), Ram 
AFJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Structural and Functional Genomics, Concordia University, 
Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Polysaccharides present in plant biomass, such as pectin, are the main carbon 
source for filamentous fungi. Aspergillus niger naturally secretes pectinases to 
degrade pectin and utilize the released monomers, mainly D-galacturonic acid. 
The transcriptional activator GaaR, the repressor of D-galacturonic acid 
utilization GaaX, and the physiological inducer 2-keto-3-deoxy-L-galactonate 
play important roles in the transcriptional regulation of D-galacturonic 
acid-responsive genes, which include the genes encoding pectinases. In this 
study, we described the mutations found in gaaX and gaaR that enabled 
constitutive (i.e., inducer-independent) expression of pectinases by A. niger. 
Using promoter-reporter strains (PpgaX-amdS) and polygalacturonic acid plate 
assays, we showed that W361R mutation in GaaR results in constitutive production 
of pectinases. Analysis of subcellular localization of C-terminally eGFP-tagged 
GaaR/GaaRW361R revealed important differences in nuclear accumulation of N- 
versus C-terminally eGFP-tagged GaaR.

© 2018 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.732
PMCID: PMC6528562
PMID: 30298571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.