1. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 11;13(10):e0205212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205212. 
eCollection 2018.

Receding horizon control strategy for an electric vehicle with dual-motor 
coupling system in consideration of stochastic vehicle mass.

Guo H(1), Shangguan J(1), Tang J(1), Sun Q(1), Wu H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of School of Mechanical & Automotive Engineering, Liaocheng 
University, Liaocheng, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Department of Zhongtong Bus Holding Co., Ltd, Liaocheng, Shandong Province, 
China.

Additional degrees of freedom existed in dual-motor coupling system bring 
considerable challenge to the optimal control of electric vehicles. Moreover, 
the stochastic characteristic of vehicle mass can further increase this 
challenge. A receding horizon control (RHC) strategy in consideration of 
stochastic vehicle mass is proposed in this study to respond to this challenge. 
Aiming at an electric vehicle with dual-motor coupling, a Markov chain is 
firstly deployed to predict future driving conditions by a formulated state 
transition probability matrix, based on historical driving cycles in real-world. 
Then, future required power is predicted by the predicted driving conditions, 
stochastic vehicle mass and road gradient, where the stochastic vehicle mass is 
formulated as stochastic variables in different bus stops. Finally, dynamic 
programming is employed to calculate the optimal vector of the vehicle within 
the defined prediction horizon, and only the first control values extracted from 
the optimal control vector are used to execute real-time power distribution 
control. The simulation results show that the proposed strategy is reasonable 
and can at least reduce electric consumption by 4.64%, compared with rule-based 
strategy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205212
PMCID: PMC6181328
PMID: 30308000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.