1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Oct 11;379(15):1443-1451. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1801540.

Allogeneic BK Virus-Specific T Cells for Progressive Multifocal 
Leukoencephalopathy.

Muftuoglu M(1), Olson A(1), Marin D(1), Ahmed S(1), Mulanovich V(1), Tummala 
S(1), Chi TL(1), Ferrajoli A(1), Kaur I(1), Li L(1), Champlin R(1), Shpall 
EJ(1), Rezvani K(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy (M.M., 
A.O., D.M., S.A., I.K., L.L., R.C., E.J.S., K.R.), Infectious Diseases (V.M.), 
Neuro-Oncology (S.T.), Diagnostic Radiology (T.L.C.), and Leukemia (A.F.), M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Jan 3;380(1):105. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1815050.
    J Neurol. 2019 Oct;266(10):2587-2589. doi: 10.1007/s00415-019-09501-y.

JC virus, the cause of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), and the 
BK virus are genetically similar and share sequence homology in immunogenic 
proteins. We treated three immunosuppressed patients with PML with ex 
vivo-expanded, partially HLA-matched, third-party-produced, cryopreserved BK 
virus-specific T cells. The immunosuppression in these patients was due to the 
conditioning regimen for cord-blood transplantation in one patient, a 
myeloproliferative neoplasm treated with ruxolitinib in another, and acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome in the third. After T-cell infusion in two of the 
patients, alleviation of the clinical signs and imaging features of PML was seen 
and JC virus in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cleared. The other patient had a 
reduction in JC viral load and stabilization of symptoms that persisted until 
her death 8 months after the first infusion. Two of the patients had immune 
reconstitution syndrome. Donor-derived T cells were detected in the CSF after 
infusion. (Funded by the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center Moon Shots Program and the 
National Institutes of Health; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02479698 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1801540
PMCID: PMC6283403
PMID: 30304652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]