1. Nutrients. 2018 Oct 6;10(10):1447. doi: 10.3390/nu10101447.

Further Evidence on Efficacy of Diet Supplementation with Fatty Acids in Ocular 
Pathologies: Insights from the EAE Model of Optic Neuritis.

Locri F(1), Cammalleri M(2)(3), Pini A(4), Dal Monte M(5)(6), Rusciano D(7), 
Bagnoli P(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, via San Zeno 31, 56127 Pisa, 
Italy. filippo.locri1@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, via San Zeno 31, 56127 Pisa, 
Italy. maurizio.cammalleri@unipi.it.
(3)Interdepartmental Research Center Nutrafood ''Nutraceuticals and Food for 
Health'', University of Pisa, via del Borghetto 80, 56124 Pisa, Italy. 
maurizio.cammalleri@unipi.it.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, 
Viale Pieraccini 6, 50139 Firenze, Italy. alessandro.pini@unifi.it.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, via San Zeno 31, 56127 Pisa, 
Italy. massimo.dalmonte@unipi.it.
(6)Interdepartmental Research Center Nutrafood ''Nutraceuticals and Food for 
Health'', University of Pisa, via del Borghetto 80, 56124 Pisa, Italy. 
massimo.dalmonte@unipi.it.
(7)Sooft Italia SpA, Contrada Molino 17, 63833 Montegiorgio (FM), Italy. 
dario.rusciano@sooft.it.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, via San Zeno 31, 56127 Pisa, 
Italy. paola.bagnoli@unipi.it.

In the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model of optic 
neuritis, we recently demonstrated that diet supplementation with a balanced 
mixture of fatty acids (FAs), including omega 3 and omega 6, efficiently limited 
inflammatory events in the retina and prevented retinal ganglion cell (RGC) 
death, although mechanisms underlying the efficacy of FAs were to be elucidated. 
Whether FAs effectiveness was accompanied by efficient rescue of demyelinating 
events in the optic nerve was also unresolved. Finally, the possibility that RGC 
rescue might result in ameliorated visual performance remained to be 
investigated. Here, the EAE model of optic neuritis was used to investigate 
mechanisms underlying the anti-inflammatory effects of FAs, including their 
potential efficacy on macrophage polarization. In addition, we determined how 
FAs-induced rescue of RGC degeneration was related to optic nerve histopathology 
by performing ultrastructural morphometric analysis with transmission electron 
microscopy. Finally, RGC rescue was correlated with visual performance by 
recording photopic electroretinogram, an efficient methodology to unravel the 
role of RGCs in the generation of electroretinographic waves. We conclude that 
the ameliorative effects of FAs were dependent on a predominant 
anti-inflammatory action including a role on promoting the shift of macrophages 
from the inflammatory M1 phenotype towards the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype. 
This would finally result in restored optic nerve histopathology and ameliorated 
visual performance. These findings can now offer new perspectives for 
implementing our knowledge on the effectiveness of diet supplementation in 
counteracting optic neuritis and suggest the importance of FAs as possible 
adjuvants in therapies against inflammatory diseases of the eye.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10101447
PMCID: PMC6213612
PMID: 30301197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.C. received a study grant from Sooft Italia 
SpA. D.R. is an employee of Sooft Italia SpA, although the company had no direct 
role in the design of the study, in the collection, analyses, or interpretation 
of data, in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to publish the 
results.