1. Brain Sci. 2018 Oct 11;8(10):185. doi: 10.3390/brainsci8100185.

N-Acetyl Cysteine Supplement Minimize Tau Expression and Neuronal Loss in Animal 
Model of Alzheimer's Disease.

Joy T(1)(2), Rao MS(3), Madhyastha S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore 576104, India. 
teresa.joy@manipal.edu.
(2)Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Mangalore 576104, India. 
teresa.joy@manipal.edu.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City 
13110, Kuwait. muddanna@HSC.EDU.KW.
(4)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait City 
13110, Kuwait. sampath.m@hsc.edu.kw.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the accumulation of neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFT), deposition of beta amyloid plaques, and consequent neuronal loss 
in the brain tissue. Oxidative stress to the neurons is often attributed to AD, 
but its link to NFT and Î²-amyloid protein (BAP) still remains unclear. In an 
animal model of AD, we boosted the oxidative defense by N-Acetyl cysteine (NAC), 
a precursor of glutathione, a powerful antioxidant and free radical scavenger, 
to understand the link between oxidative stress and NFT. In mimicking AD, 
intracerebroventricular (ICV) colchicine, a microtubule disrupting agent also 
known to cause oxidative stress was administered to the rats. The animal groups 
consisted of an age-matched control, sham operated, AD, and NAC treated in AD 
models of rats. Cognitive function was evaluated in a passive avoidance test; 
neuronal degeneration was quantified using Nissl staining. NFT in the form of 
abnormal tau expression in different regions of the brain were evaluated through 
immunohistochemistry using rabbit anti-tau antibody. ICV has resulted in 
significant cognitive and neuronal loss in medial prefrontal cortex (MFC) and 
all the regions of the hippocampus. It has also resulted in increased 
accumulation of intraneuronal tau in the hippocampus and MFC. NAC treatment in 
AD model rats has reversed the cognitive loss and neuronal degeneration. The 
intraneuronal tau expression also minimized with NAC treatment in AD model rats. 
Thus, our findings suggest that an antioxidant supplement during the progression 
of AD is likely to prevent neuronal degeneration by minimizing the 
neurofibrillary degeneration in the form of tau accumulation.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci8100185
PMCID: PMC6210309
PMID: 30314380

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.