1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Feb 1;122:45-57. doi:
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.10.040.  Epub 2018 Oct 11.

Functional annotation of putative fadE9 of Mycobacterium tuberculosis as 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase involved in valine catabolism.

Rani N(1), Hazra S(1), Singh A(2), Surolia A(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India.
(2)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India. Electronic address: amrita@iisc.ac.in.
(3)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India. Electronic address: surolia@iisc.ac.in.

Members of the Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADs) family of enzymes play a crucial 
role in cholesterol and steroid catabolism and are widely studied in the oldest 
known human pathogen, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). However, there is a 
paucity of information on ACADs involved in branched chain amino acid 
catabolism. Here we characterized one of the putative ACAD enzyme, fadE9, as 
"Isobutyryl CoA Dehydrogenase (IBDH)" using a combined computational and 
experimental approach, guided by homology modeled structural information, 
affirming its role in valine catabolism. Multiple sequence alignment and 
phylogenetic analysis place it in a separate cluster from a recently identified 
family of α2β2-heterotetramer ACADs in Mtb, based on the position of the 
conserved Arg247 and catalytic Glu368 residues. The conserved Arg247 was 
predicted to play an essential role at the center of H-bonding network of 
reaction center and was confirmed by the reduced activity of R247K mutant. Thus, 
in addition to the finding of an architecturally distinct α2β2-heterotetramer 
among ACADs, these studies also highlight the differences between MtIBDH, fadE9 
from the other ACADs that are involved in cholesterol and steroid catabolism of 
Mtb.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.10.040
PMID: 30316772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]