1. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1869:207-230. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8805-1_18.

Engineering Inducible Knock-In Mice to Model Oncogenic Brain Tumor Mutations 
from Endogenous Loci.

Larson JD(1), Baker SJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. Suzanne.Baker@StJude.org.

To maximize the physiological relevance of in vivo brain tumor mouse models 
designed to study the downstream effects of oncogenic mutations, it is important 
to express the mutated genes at appropriate levels, in relevant cell types, and 
in the proper developmental context. For recurrent mutations found in the 
heterozygous state in tumors, expression of the mutation from the endogenous 
locus is a more physiologically relevant recapitulation of the brain tumor 
genome. Here, we describe an approach to generate knock-in mice with an 
inducible mutation recombined into the endogenous locus. In these engineered 
mice, the mutated allele is designed for expression controlled by the endogenous 
promoter and regulatory elements after Cre recombinase-mediated deletion of a 
loxP-STOP-loxP cassette inserted upstream of the translational start site. To 
preserve the structure of the endogenous locus, mutations or additional elements 
may need to be inserted at a considerable distance from the loxP-STOP-loxP 
cassette. We used recombineering to build a construct with two selectable 
markers and multiple genetic alterations that can be introduced into the 
endogenous allele in cis with a single ES cell targeting.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-8805-1_18
PMCID: PMC6432641
PMID: 30324526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]