1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2018 Nov;38(11):469-479. doi:
10.1089/jir.2018.0066.  Epub 2018 Oct 18.

Species Specificity of Type III Interferon Activity and Development of a 
Sensitive Luciferase-Based Bioassay for Quantitation of Mouse Interferon-λ.

Jacobs S(1), Wavreil F(1), Schepens B(2)(3), Gad HH(4), Hartmann R(4), 
Rocha-Pereira J(5), Neyts J(5), Saelens X(2)(3), Michiels T(1).

Author information:
(1)1 de Duve Institute , Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium .
(2)2 VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology , VIB, Ghent, Belgium .
(3)3 Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University , Ghent, 
Belgium .
(4)4 Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University , Aarhus, 
Denmark .
(5)5 Laboratory of Virology and Chemotherapy, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, KU Leuven, Rega Institute for Medical Research , Leuven, Belgium .

The type III interferon (IFN-λ) family includes 4 IFN-λ subtypes in man. In the 
mouse, only the genes coding for IFN-λ2 and -λ3 are present. Unlike mouse and 
human type I IFNs (IFN-α/β), which exhibit strong species specificity, type III 
IFNs were reported to act in a cross-specific manner. We reexamined the 
cross-specificity and observed that mouse and human IFN-λ exhibit some species 
specificity, although much less than type I IFNs. Mouse IFN-λ3 displayed clear 
species specificity, being 25-fold less active in human cells than the closely 
related mouse IFN-λ2. This specificity likely depends on amino acids in α 
helices A and F that diverged from other IFN-λ sequences. Human IFN-λ4, in 
contrast, retained high activity in mouse cells. We next developed a firefly 
luciferase-based reporter cell line, named Fawa-λ-luc, to detect IFN-λ in 
biological fluids with high specificity and sensitivity. Fawa-λ-luc cells, 
derived from mouse epithelial cells that are responsive to IFN-λ, were made 
nonresponsive to type I IFNs by inactivation of the Ifnar2 gene and strongly 
responsive to IFN-λ by overexpression of the mouse IFNLR1. This bioassay was as 
sensitive as a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 
detecting mouse IFN-λ in cell culture supernatant, as well as in serum and 
bronchoalveolar lavage samples of virus-infected mice. The assay also enabled 
the sensitive detection of human IFN-λ activity, including that of the divergent 
IFN-λ4 with a bias, however, due to variable activity of IFN-λ subtypes.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2018.0066
PMCID: PMC6249671
PMID: 30335553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing financial interests exist.