1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2018 Oct;97(42):e12754. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000012754.

Correlation between CTLA4 genetic polymorphisms, its serum protein level and the 
susceptibility to recurrent spontaneous abortion: A case-control study.

Li L(1), Liu J(1), Qin S(2), Li R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliate Hospital of Jinan 
University.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou, China.

Present study was aimed to detect the influence of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte 
associated protein 4 (CTLA4) gene polymorphisms for the risk of recurrent 
spontaneous abortion (RSA), as well as the serum level of CTLA4 protein in RSA 
patients.One hundred thirty-three RSA patients and 146 healthy persons were 
recruited in this case-control study. PCR-RFLP was used to genotype the CTLA4 
gene polymorphisms both in case and control groups. Serum level of CTLA4 was 
detected by ELISA kit. Quantitative variables were compared by t test or 
Mann-Whitney U test between groups. Qualitative variables were evaluated by χ 
test or Fisher exact test. Association strength was expressed by odds ratios 
(ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).G allele of rs4553808 (P = .027, 
OR = 0.570, 95% CI = 0.345-0.942) and T allele of rs5742909 (P = .027, 
OR = 0.570, 95% CI = 0.345-0.942) were distinctly associated with reduced 
susceptibility of RSA. Distinctly negative association has been discovered 
between rs231775 AA genotype and RSA susceptibility (P = .040, OR = 0.427, 95% 
CI = 0.188-0.973). CTLA4 protein had significantly higher serum level in RSA 
patients than in healthy controls (P = .028). In RSA patients, AA genotype 
carriers had higher CTLA4 serum level than that GG genotype carriers 
(17.83 ± 6.35 ng/mL vs 10.41 ± 7.28 ng/mL, P = .039).Minor alleles of CTLA4 
polymorphisms might inhibit the RSA susceptibility via upregulated the protein 
expression level.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000012754
PMCID: PMC6211885
PMID: 30334961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.