1. Comput Biol Chem. 2018 Dec;77:207-213. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2018.10.001.  Epub 2018 Oct 12.

The potential peptides against angiotensin-I converting enzyme through a virtual 
tripeptide-constructing library.

Panyayai T(1), Sangsawad P(2), Pacharawongsakda E(3), Sawatdichaikul O(4), 
Tongsima S(5), Choowongkomon K(6).

Author information:
(1)Genetic Engineering Interdisciplinary Program, Graduate School, Kasetsart 
University, 50 Ngam Wong Wan Rd, Bangkok, Chatuchak 10900, Thailand; Department 
of Research and Development, Betagro Science Center Co. Ltd., 136 Moo 9, Klong 
Nueng, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Betagro Science Center Co. Ltd., 136 
Moo 9, Klong Nueng, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand.
(3)Big Data Engineering Program, College of Innovative Technology and 
Engineering, Dhurakij Pundit University, 110/1-4 Prachachuen Road, Laksi, 
Bangkok 10210, Thailand.
(4)Functional Food Unit, Department of Nutrition and Health, Institute of Food 
Research and Product Development, Kasetsart University, Thailand.
(5)Biostatistic and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Genome Technology Research Unit, 
National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), 113 Thailand 
Science Park, Phahonyothin Road Khlong Nueng, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, 
121205, Thailand.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University, 50 
Ngam, Wong Wan Rd, Bangkok, Chatuchak 10900, Thailand; Center for Advanced 
Studies in Nanotechnology for Chemical, Food and Agricultural Industries, KU 
Institute for Advanced Studies, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Electronic address: fsciktc@ku.ac.th.

Peptides derived from food proteins are promising bioactive source for 
inhibiting Angiotensin-I converting enzyme (ACE) activity. Bioactive peptides 
(BP) have received much attention, particularly from the pharmaceutical 
industry. As they not only own potent properties but also possess less 
side-effects than synthetic drugs. In this work, an 8000 possible tripeptides 
library was constructed to predict the potential ACE inhibitory peptides by 
using in silico tools. GOLD molecular docking was then applied to determine the 
binding mode of action between ACE and each of tripeptide from this in-house 
library. The first 662 high-ranking tripeptides by ChemScore were chosen to 
create association rules of tripeptides-ACE complexes. An orientation pattern of 
amino acid in the binding tunnel of ACE has been examined by frequency analysis. 
The association rules (confident values over 90%) illustrated that hydrophobic 
factor has been displayed as main components in the ACE tripeptides inhibitor 
from four factors in equation, hydrophobic, aromatic, polar, charged. According 
to in silico output, five tripeptides were chosen to test in vitro study of 
ACE-inhibitory activity. The half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 
these selective five peptides, WCW, IWW, WWW, WWI and WLW for inhibiting ACE 
were 49.50 ± 3.88 μM, 489.14 ± 8.84 μM, 536.02 ± 38.57 μM, 752.91 ± 41.89 μM and 
1783 ± 0.113 μM, respectively. Molecular dynamics simulations approach was 
applied to study the interaction of WCW (Trp-Cys-Trp) within ACE pocket site. 
This ligand was stabilized by strong hydrogen bonding interactions with ACE 
active site, Tyr523-Trp'1 (99.76%) and His353-Trp'1 (95.68%). Our computational 
protocol could be considered as a new tool for identifying active peptide 
against ACE from hydrolysated peptides of natural sources.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2018.10.001
PMID: 30347317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]