1. BMC Genomics. 2018 Oct 19;19(1):759. doi: 10.1186/s12864-018-5123-x.

Big data analysis of human mitochondrial DNA substitution models: a regression 
approach.

Levinstein Hallak K(1), Tzur S(2), Rosset S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, School of Mathematical 
Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, 6997801, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Braun School of Public Health and Community Medicine, The Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, 9112102, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, School of Mathematical 
Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, 6997801, Tel-Aviv, Israel. 
saharon@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: We study Phylotree, a comprehensive representation of the phylogeny 
of global human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variations, to better understand the 
mtDNA substitution mechanism and its most influential factors. We consider a 
substitution model, where a set of genetic features may predict the rate at 
which mtDNA substitutions occur. To find an appropriate model, an exhaustive 
analysis on the effect of multiple factors on the substitution rate is performed 
through Negative Binomial and Poisson regressions. We examine three different 
inclusion options for each categorical factor: omission, inclusion as an 
explanatory variable, and by-value partitioning. The examined factors include 
genes, codon position, a CpG indicator, directionality, nucleotide, amino acid, 
codon, and context (neighboring nucleotides), in addition to other site based 
factors. Partitioning a model by a factor's value results in several sub-models 
(one for each value), where the likelihoods of the sub-models can be combined to 
form a score for the entire model. Eventually, the leading models are considered 
as viable candidates for explaining mtDNA substitution rates.
RESULTS: Initially, we introduce a novel clustering technique on genes, based on 
three similarity tests between pairs of genes, supporting previous results 
regarding gene functionalities in the mtDNA. These clusters are then used as a 
factor in our models. We present leading models for the protein coding genes, 
rRNA and tRNA genes and the control region, showing it is disadvantageous to 
separate the models of transitions/transversions, or synonymous/non-synonymous 
substitutions. We identify a context effect that cannot be attributed solely to 
protein level constraints or CpG pairs. For protein-coding genes, we show that 
the substitution model should be partitioned into sub-models according to the 
codon position and input codon; additionally we confirm that gene identity and 
cluster have no significant effect once the above factors are accounted for.
CONCLUSIONS: We leverage the large, high-confidence Phylotree mtDNA phylogeny to 
develop a new statistical approach. We model the substitution rates using 
regressions, allowing consideration of many factors simultaneously. This admits 
the use of model selection tools helping to identify the set of factors best 
explaining the mutational dynamics when considered in tandem.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-018-5123-x
PMCID: PMC6195736
PMID: 30340456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.