1. J Adenocarcinoma. 2016;1(2):9.

EGFR-Signaling and Autophagy: How they Fit in the Cancer Landscape.

Singh AB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fred and Pamela Buffett 
Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center and VA Nebraska-Western 
Iowa Health Care System, Omaha, NE, USA.

Key significance of an overachieving Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 
(EGFR)-signaling in cancer aggressiveness and poor prognosis is well recognized. 
In accordance, EGFR is either amplified or mutated in majority of the cancers of 
epithelial origin, and therefore has been recognized as a principal target for 
anticancer therapy. However, despite initial clinical efficacy of the anti-EGFR 
therapy in cancer treatment, long-term attempt to mute the cancer boosting 
effects of EGFR-dependent signaling meets resistance in cancer cells. Notably, 
effects of EGFR activation are pleotropic. Also, under conditions of anti-EGFR 
therapy in cancer cells, feedback activation of the pro-survival signaling by 
activation of other growth factor receptors can occur. However, a critical role 
of autophagy in the resistance against anti-EGFR therapy is fast emerging. 
Interestingly, EGFR regulates autophagy in a context-dependent manner. 
Furthermore, EGFR deregulated tumors demonstrate differential dependence upon 
autophagy for their survival and growth. Also, inhibiting EGFR-signaling 
promotes autophagy. These intriguing considerations are complicated further by 
findings that EGFR regulates autophagy in kinase-dependent or independent 
manner. Thus, for effective clinical cancer treatment using anti-EGFR regimen, 
it is critical that we understand molecular details of the nexus between the 
EGFR-signaling and autophagy.

PMCID: PMC6202024
PMID: 30370422