1. Cerebellum Ataxias. 2018 Oct 20;5:12. doi: 10.1186/s40673-018-0091-0. 
eCollection 2018.

Successful treatment of a genetic childhood ataxia due to riboflavin transporter 
deficiency.

Fan J(1), Fogel BL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA.
(2)2Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, 695 Charles E. Young Drive South, Gonda Room 1206, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095 USA.

BACKGROUND: Riboflavin transporter deficiency (Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere 
syndrome) is a rare recessive neurodegenerative disorder that can present with 
gait ataxia, primarily due to sensory neuropathy as well as cerebellar 
involvement. Although sensorineural hearing loss, bulbar palsy, and optic 
atrophy are typical, presentation may be variable and an atypical condition may 
be difficult to recognize clinically.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we report a patient presenting at age 8 with progressive 
ataxia since the age of 2.5Â years with cerebellar atrophy and peripheral 
polyneuropathy. Whole exome sequencing identified a known pathogenic mutation in 
the SLC52A2 gene consistent with a diagnosis of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere 
syndrome despite the absence of common symptoms including motor neuropathy, 
bulbar palsy, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss. High-dose 
riboflavin therapy was initiated, symptoms stabilized, metabolic abnormalities 
resolved, and the patient is doing well with a near-normal examination at age 
15.
CONCLUSIONS: Riboflavin transporter deficiency can be fatal if left untreated. 
The excellent outcome of this case illustrates the importance of identifying 
this potentially treatable neurologic condition. In this patient, clinical 
diagnosis was limited by an atypical presentation lacking several common 
features which was overcome through the use of genomic sequencing identifying 
the pathogenic mutation enabling correct diagnosis and subsequent treatment. 
Riboflavin transporter deficiency should be considered early in the diagnostic 
evaluation as a treatable form of ataxia in children, even if patients lack 
typical features.

DOI: 10.1186/s40673-018-0091-0
PMCID: PMC6196015
PMID: 30377535

Conflict of interest statement: The parents of the patient enrolled in this 
study provided written informed consent. All methods in this study were approved 
by the institutional review board of the University of California at Los 
Angeles.The parents of the patient enrolled in this study provided written 
consent for anonymous/de-identified presentation and/or publication of her 
case.The authors declare that they have no competing interests.Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.