1. Pain. 2019 Feb;160(2):501-507. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001426.

What is the effect of alcohol consumption on the risk of chronic widespread 
pain? A Mendelian randomisation study using UK Biobank.

Beasley M(1)(2), Freidin MB(3), Basu N(1)(2), Williams FMK(3), Macfarlane 
GJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Group, School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, 
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
(2)Aberdeen Centre for Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Health, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, School of Life Course 
Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Studies have shown that moderate alcohol consumption is strongly associated with 
reduced reporting of chronic widespread pain (CWP). The study designs used, 
however, are prone to confounding and are not able to establish the direction of 
causality. The current study overcomes these problems using the Mendelian 
randomisation design to determine the effect of alcohol consumption on the 
likelihood of reporting CWP. The UK Biobank recruited 500,000 participants aged 
between 40 and 69 years. Data collected included questions on chronic pain and 
alcohol consumption, and biological samples providing genotypic information. 
Alcohol consumption was categorised as "weekly consumption" or "nonfrequent or 
infrequent." Participants were classified by genotype according to alleles of 
the rs1229984 single-nucleotide polymorphism, either "GG" or "AA/AG." Chronic 
widespread pain was defined as pain all over the body for more than 3 months 
that interfered with activities. Associations between genotype, CWP, and alcohol 
consumption were tested by logistic regression. Instrumental variable analysis 
was used to calculate the causal effect of weekly alcohol consumption on CWP. 
Persons with "GG" genotype had an increased risk of CWP (odds ratio [OR] 1.17, 
99% confidence interval 1.01-1.35) and were more likely to consume alcohol 
weekly (OR 1.76, 1.70-1.81) compared to those with "AA/AG" genotype. Weekly 
consumption of alcohol was associated with reduced risk of CWP (OR 0.33, 
0.31-0.35), but instrumental variable analysis did not show a causal effect of 
alcohol consumption on reducing CWP (OR 1.29, 0.96-1.74). An interpretation of 
observational population studies as showing a protective effect of alcohol on 
CWP is not supported.

DOI: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001426
PMID: 30371560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]