1. Front Immunol. 2018 Oct 15;9:2348. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02348. eCollection 
2018.

2D Kinetic Analysis of TCR and CD8 Coreceptor for LCMV GP33 Epitopes.

Kolawole EM(1), Andargachew R(2), Liu B(1), Jacobs JR(1), Evavold BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
United States.

The LCMV GP33 CD8 epitope has long been one of the most widely used antigens in 
viral immunology. Of note, almost all of the in vitro analyses of CD8 T cell 
responses to this epitope make use of an altered peptide ligand (APL) in which 
the cysteine from the original 9-mer peptide (KAVYNFATC) is substituted by a 
methionine at position 41 (KAVYNFATM). In addition, it is possible that the 
antigen processed during natural LCMV infection is an 11-mer peptide 
(KAVYNFATCGI) rather than the widely used 9-mer. Although previous affinity 
measurements using purified proteins for these antigen variants revealed minimal 
differences, we applied highly sensitive two dimensional (2D) biophysical based 
techniques to further dissect TCR interaction with these closely related GP33 
variants. The kinetic analyses of affinity provided by the 2D micropipette 
adhesion frequency assay (2D-MP) and bond lifetime under force analyzed using a 
biomembrane force probe (BFP) revealed significant differences between 41M, 41C 
and the 11-mer 41CGI antigen. We found a hierarchy in 2D affinity as 41M peptide 
displayed augmented TCR 2D affinity compared to 41C and 41CGI. These differences 
were also maintained in the presence of CD8 coreceptor and when analysis of 
total TCR:pMHC and CD8:pMHC bonds were considered. Moreover, the three ligands 
displayed dramatic differences in the bond lifetimes generated under force, in 
particular the 41CGI variant with the lowest 2D affinity demonstrated a 15-fold 
synergistic contribution of the CD8 coreceptor to overall bond lifetime. Our 
analyses emphasize the sensitivity of single cell and single bond 2D kinetic 
measurements in distinguishing between related agonist peptides.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02348
PMCID: PMC6197077
PMID: 30374353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]