1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 Nov 13;115(46):11802-11807. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1814446115. Epub 2018 Oct 29.

Humanized cereblon mice revealed two distinct therapeutic pathways of 
immunomodulatory drugs.

Gemechu Y(1), Millrine D(2), Hashimoto S(1), Prakash J(1), Sanchenkova K(1), 
Metwally H(1), Gyanu P(1), Kang S(1), Kishimoto T(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, World Premier International Research Center 
Initiative (WPI) Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan.
(2)Division of Infection and Immunity, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Wales CF14 4XN, United Kingdom.
(3)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, World Premier International Research Center 
Initiative (WPI) Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan; kishimoto@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs), including thalidomide derivatives such as 
lenalidomide and pomalidomide, offer therapeutic benefit in several 
hematopoietic malignancies and autoimmune/inflammatory diseases. However, it is 
difficult to study the IMiD mechanism of action in murine disease models because 
murine cereblon (CRBN), the substrate receptor for IMiD action, is resistant to 
some of IMiDs therapeutic effects. To overcome this difficulty, we generated 
humanized cereblon (CRBNI391V) mice thereby providing an animal model to unravel 
complex mechanisms of action in a murine physiological setup. In our current 
study, we investigated the degradative effect toward IKZF1 and CK-1α, a target 
substrate of IMiDs. Unlike WT mice which were resistant to lenalidomide and 
pomalidomide, T lymphocytes from CRBNI391V mice responded with a higher degree 
of IKZF1 and CK-1α protein degradation. Furthermore, IMiDs resulted in an 
increase in IL-2 among CRBNI391V mice but not in the WT group. We have also 
tested a thalidomide derivative, FPFT-2216, which showed an inhibitory effect 
toward IKZF1 protein level. As opposed to pomalidomide, FPFT-2216 and 
lenalidomide degrades CK-1α. Additionally, we assessed the potential therapeutic 
effects of IMiDs in dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis. In both WT and 
humanized mice, lenalidomide showed a significant therapeutic effect in the DSS 
model of colitis, while the effect of pomalidomide was less pronounced. Thus, 
while IMiDs' degradative effect on IKZF1 and CK-1α, and up-regulation of IL-2, 
is dependent on CRBN, the therapeutic benefit of IMiDs in a mouse model of 
inflammatory bowel disease occurs through a CRBN-IMiD binding region independent 
pathway.

Copyright © 2018 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1814446115
PMCID: PMC6243262
PMID: 30373817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.