1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

EBioMedicine. 2018 Nov;37:188-204. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.10.044. Epub 2018 
Oct 30.

The antineoplastic drug metformin downregulates YAP by interfering with IRF-1 
binding to the YAP promoter in NSCLC.

Jin D(1), Guo J(2), Wang D(1), Wu Y(3), Wang X(4), Gao Y(1), Shao C(1), Xu X(1), 
Tan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pain, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou 256603, PR 
China.
(2)Cancer research institute, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou 
256603, PR China. Electronic address: guojiwei0510@163.com.
(3)Cancer research institute, Binzhou Medical University Hospital, Binzhou 
256603, PR China.
(4)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Binzhou Medical University 
Hospital, Binzhou 256603, PR China.

Retraction in
    EBioMedicine. 2021 Jan;63:103169. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.103169.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the oncogene YAP has been shown to be related to lung 
cancer progression and associates with poor prognosis and metastasis. Metformin 
is a drug commonly used in the treatment of diabetes and with anticancer 
activity. However, the mechanism through which metformin inhibits tumorigenesis 
via YAP is poorly understood.
METHODS: The mRNA and protein expressions were analyzed by RT-PCR and western 
blot. The cellular proliferation was detected by CCK8 and MTT. The cell 
migration and invasion growth were analyzed by wound healing assay and transwell 
assay. The activities of promoter were analyzed by luciferase reporter assay. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation detected the combining ability of IRF-1 and 
5'UTR-YAP.
FINDINGS: Our immunohistochemistry staining and RT-PCR assays showed that the 
expression of YAP was higher in lung carcinoma samples. Interestingly, metformin 
was able to downregulate YAP mRNA and protein expression in lung cancer cells. 
Mechanistically, we found that metformin depressed YAP promoter by competing 
with the binding of the transcription factor IRF-1 in lung cancer cells. 
Moreover, combination of metformin and verteporfin synergistically inhibits cell 
proliferation, promotes apoptosis and suppresses cell migration/invasion by 
downregulating YAP, therefore reduces the side effects caused by their single 
use and improve the quality of life for patients with lung cancer.
INTERPRETATION: we concluded that metformin depresses YAP promoter by 
interfering with the binding of the transcription factor IRF-1. Importantly, 
verteporfin sensitizes metformin-induced the depression of YAP and inhibition of 
cell growth and invasion in lung cancer cells. FUND: This work was supported by 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.31801085), the Science and 
Technology Development Foundation of Yantai (2015ZH082), Natural Science 
Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2018QH004, ZR2016HB55, ZR2017PH067 and 
ZR2017MH125), and Research Foundation of Binzhou Medical University 
(BY2015KYQD29 and BY2015KJ14).

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.10.044
PMCID: PMC6284514
PMID: 30389502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]