1. Biochem J. 1987 Apr 1;243(1):75-8. doi: 10.1042/bj2430075.

The effect of disodium ethane-1-hydroxy-1,1-diphosphonate on the metabolism of 
calcitriol in chicks.

Lidor C, Meyer MS, Wasserman RH, Edelstein S.

Decreased intestinal absorption of Ca2+ occurs in response to treatment with 
disodium ethane-1-hydroxy-1,1-diphosphonate (EHDP). The effect is due to 
decreased 1-hydroxylation of calcidiol (25-hydroxycholecalciferol) in the 
kidney. In an attempt to establish whether impairment of vitamin D metabolism at 
steps beyond kidney hydroxylation occurs due to treatment with EHDP, chicks were 
depleted of vitamin D and were treated with calcitriol 
(1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol) as their sole source of the vitamin. The chicks 
were then divided into two groups, one being treated with EHDP while the second 
group served as control. Intestinal absorption of Ca2+ in the EHDP-treated group 
was found to be impaired, along with decreases in concentrations of calbindin 
D28K (the 28,000-Mr vitamin D-dependent Ca2+-binding protein). When the chicks 
were dosed with [3H]calcitriol, significantly lower concentrations of the sterol 
were detected in the duodena of EHDP-treated birds. Measurement of levels of 
receptors for calcitriol in duodena showed no difference between groups, but 
levels of calcitriol in sera were considerably lower in the EHDP-treated group 
along with the elevated biliary and urinary excretion of glucuronidated 
conjugates. It is therefore concluded that treatment with EHDP results in 
increased catabolism of calcitriol in addition to the known suppression of the 
renal production of the hormone.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2430075
PMCID: PMC1147816
PMID: 3038087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]