1. Oncoimmunology. 2018 Aug 23;7(11):e1500107. doi:
10.1080/2162402X.2018.1500107.  eCollection 2018.

Adipose PD-L1 Modulates PD-1/PD-L1 Checkpoint Blockade Immunotherapy Efficacy in 
Breast Cancer.

Wu B(1), Sun X(1), Gupta HB(2), Yuan B(1), Li J(1), Ge F(1), Chiang HC(1), Zhang 
X(1), Zhang C(1), Zhang D(2), Yang J(1), Hu Y(1), Curiel TJ(2), Li R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San 
Antonio, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health San Antonio, San Antonio, 
USA.

Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) and its receptor programmed cell death protein 
1 (PD-1) modulate antitumor immunity and are major targets of checkpoint 
blockade immunotherapy. However, clinical trials of anti-PD-L1 and anti-PD-1 
antibodies in breast cancer demonstrate only modest efficacy. Furthermore, 
specific PD-L1 contributions in various tissue and cell compartments to 
antitumor immunity remain incompletely elucidated. Here we show that PD-L1 
expression is markedly elevated in mature adipocytes versus preadipocytes. 
Adipocyte PD-L1 prevents anti-PD-L1 antibody from activating important antitumor 
functions of CD8+ T cells in vitro. Adipocyte PD-L1 ablation obliterates, 
whereas forced preadipocyte PD-L1 expression confers, these inhibitory effects. 
Pharmacologic inhibition of adipogenesis selectively reduces PD-L1 expression in 
mouse adipose tissue and enhances the antitumor efficacy of anti-PD-L1 or 
anti-PD-1 antibodies in syngeneic mammary tumor models. Our findings provide a 
previously unappreciated approach to bolster anticancer immunotherapy efficacy 
and suggest a mechanism for the role of adipose tissue in breast cancer 
progression.

DOI: 10.1080/2162402X.2018.1500107
PMCID: PMC6209395
PMID: 30393583