1. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 6;13(11):e0206751. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206751. 
eCollection 2018.

Loss of charge mutations in solvent exposed Lys residues of superoxide dismutase 
1 do not induce inclusion formation in cultured cell models.

Crosby K(1), Crown AM(2), Roberts BL(2), Brown H(1)(3), Ayers JI(1), Borchelt 
DR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Translational Research in 
Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United 
States of America.
(2)College of Arts and Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
United States of America.
(3)SantaFe HealthCare Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, McKnight Brain 
Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of 
America.

Mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) associated with familial amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (fALS) induce the protein to misfold and aggregate. Missense 
mutations at more than 80 different amino acid positions have been associated 
with disease. How these mutations heighten the propensity of SOD1 to misfold and 
aggregate is unclear. With so many mutations, it is possible that more than one 
mechanism of aggregation may be involved. Of many possible mechanisms to explain 
heightened aggregation, one that has been suggested is that mutations that 
eliminate charged amino acids could diminish repulsive forces that would inhibit 
aberrant protein:protein interactions. Mutations at twenty-one charged residues 
in SOD1 have been associated with fALS, but of the 11 Lys residues in the 
protein, only 1 has been identified as mutated in ALS patients. Here, we 
examined whether loss of positively charged surface Lys residues in SOD1 would 
induce misfolding and formation of intracellular inclusions. We mutated four 
different Lys residues (K30, K36, K75, K91) in SOD1 that are not particularly 
well conserved, and expressed these variants as fusion proteins with yellow 
fluorescent protein (YFP) to assess inclusion formation. We also assessed 
whether these mutations induced binding to a conformation-restricted SOD1 
antibody, designated C4F6, which recognizes non-natively folded protein. 
Although we observed some mutations to cause enhanced C4F6 binding, we did not 
observe that mutations that reduce charge at these positions caused the protein 
to form intracellular inclusions. Our findings may have implications for the low 
frequency of mutations at Lys residues SOD1 in ALS patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206751
PMCID: PMC6219784
PMID: 30399166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.