1. Nature. 2018 Nov;563(7731):397-401. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0682-1. Epub 2018 
Nov 7.

Dopamine enhances signal-to-noise ratio in cortical-brainstem encoding of 
aversive stimuli.

Vander Weele CM(#)(1), Siciliano CA(#)(1), Matthews GA(#)(1), Namburi P(1), 
Izadmehr EM(1), Espinel IC(1), Nieh EH(1), Schut EHS(1)(2), Padilla-Coreano 
N(1), Burgos-Robles A(1), Chang CJ(1), Kimchi EY(1), Beyeler A(1), Wichmann 
R(1)(3), Wildes CP(1), Tye KM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and 
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboudumc Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)The Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and 
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
tye@salk.edu.
(5)Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, CA, USA. tye@salk.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2019 Jan;20(1):4. doi: 10.1038/s41583-018-0095-z.

Dopamine modulates medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) activity to mediate diverse 
behavioural functions1,2; however, the precise circuit computations remain 
unknown. One potentially unifying model by which dopamine may underlie a 
diversity of functions is by modulating the signal-to-noise ratio in 
subpopulations of mPFC neurons3-6, where neural activity conveying sensory 
information (signal) is amplified relative to spontaneous firing (noise). Here 
we demonstrate that dopamine increases the signal-to-noise ratio of responses to 
aversive stimuli in mPFC neurons projecting to the dorsal periaqueductal grey 
(dPAG). Using an electrochemical approach, we reveal the precise time course of 
pinch-evoked dopamine release in the mPFC, and show that mPFC dopamine biases 
behavioural responses to aversive stimuli. Activation of mPFC-dPAG neurons is 
sufficient to drive place avoidance and defensive behaviours. mPFC-dPAG neurons 
display robust shock-induced excitations, as visualized by single-cell, 
projection-defined microendoscopic calcium imaging. Finally, photostimulation of 
dopamine terminals in the mPFC reveals an increase in the signal-to-noise ratio 
in mPFC-dPAG responses to aversive stimuli. Together, these data highlight how 
dopamine in the mPFC can selectively route sensory information to specific 
downstream circuits, representing a potential circuit mechanism for valence 
processing.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0682-1
PMCID: PMC6645392
PMID: 30405240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]