1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2018 Nov 8;20(12):83. doi: 10.1007/s11926-018-0792-7.

JAK Inhibitors in Rheumatology: Implications for Paediatric Syndromes?

Kerrigan SA(1), McInnes IB(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UG12 8TA, UK. Sean.Kerrigan@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UG12 8TA, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Given the recent increase in the profile and use of Janus 
kinase inhibitors (JAKinibs) in adult patients with rheumatic diseases, we aimed 
to review the current evidence accruing for use in paediatric rheumatology 
patients.
RECENT FINDINGS: Significant advances have been made in the management of 
rheumatic diseases in the past two decades. The introduction of biologic agents 
in both adults and children has provided significant improvements to patient 
outcomes and led to better quality of life. Moreover, responses to similar 
agents allude to common effector pathways operating across juvenile and adult 
synovitis especially. However, inefficacy and intolerance of these agents leads 
to a subset of children with limited treatment options. Since 2012, Janus kinase 
(JAK) inhibitors (JAKinibs), a novel group of oral small molecule inhibitors, 
have demonstrated their efficacy in several forms of adult inflammatory 
arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and psoriatic arthritis (PsA). 
There are hopes that these successes will be transferable to the paediatric 
population. In the following review, we discuss the development and progress of 
JAKinibs in this regard.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-018-0792-7
PMCID: PMC6223710
PMID: 30406861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. HUMAN AND ANIMAL RIGHTS AND INFORMED CONSENT: 
This article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects 
performed by any of the authors