1. J Am Chem Soc. 2018 Dec 5;140(48):16495-16513. doi: 10.1021/jacs.8b06517. Epub
 2018 Nov 26.

Nuclear Resonance Vibrational Spectroscopy Definition of O(2) Intermediates in 
an Extradiol Dioxygenase: Correlation to Crystallography and Reactivity.

Sutherlin KD(1), Wasada-Tsutsui Y(2), Mbughuni MM(3), Rogers MS(3), Park K(1), 
Liu LV(1), Kwak Y(1), Srnec M(1), BÃ¶ttger LH(1), Frenette M(1), Yoda Y(4), 
Kobayashi Y(5), Kurokuzu M(5), Saito M(5), Seto M(5), Hu M(6), Zhao J(6), Alp 
EE(6), Lipscomb JD(3), Solomon EI(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry , Stanford University , Stanford , California 94305 , 
United States.
(2)Department of Life Science and Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of 
Engineering , Nagoya Institute of Technology , Gokiso-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 
466-8555 , Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, & Biophysics , University of 
Minnesota , Minneapolis , Minnesota 55455 , United States.
(4)Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute , Hyogo 679-5198 , Japan.
(5)Research Reactor Institute, Kyoto University , Osaka 590-0494 , Japan.
(6)Advanced Photon Source , Argonne National Laboratory , Lemont , Illinois 
60439 , United States.
(7)SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory , Menlo Park , California 94025 , United 
States.

The extradiol dioxygenases are a large subclass of mononuclear nonheme Fe 
enzymes that catalyze the oxidative cleavage of catechols distal to their OH 
groups. These enzymes are important in bioremediation, and there has been 
significant interest in understanding how they activate O2. The extradiol 
dioxygenase homoprotocatechuate 2,3-dioxygenase (HPCD) provides an opportunity 
to study this process, as two O2 intermediates have been trapped and 
crystallographically defined using the slow substrate 4-nitrocatechol (4NC): a 
side-on Fe-O2-4NC species and a Fe-O2-4NC peroxy bridged species. Also with 4NC, 
two solution intermediates have been trapped in the H200N variant, where H200 
provides a second-sphere hydrogen bond in the wild-type enzyme. While the 
electronic structure of these solution intermediates has been defined previously 
as FeIII-superoxo-catecholate and FeIII-peroxy-semiquinone, their geometric 
structures are unknown. Nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy (NRVS) is an 
important tool for structural definition of nonheme Fe-O2 intermediates, as all 
normal modes with Fe displacement have intensity in the NRVS spectrum. In this 
study, NRVS is used to define the geometric structure of the H200N-4NC solution 
intermediates in HPCD as an end-on FeIII-superoxo-catecholate and an end-on 
FeIII-hydroperoxo-semiquinone. Parallel calculations are performed to define the 
electronic structures and protonation states of the crystallographically defined 
wild-type HPCD-4NC intermediates, where the side-on intermediate is found to be 
a FeIII-hydroperoxo-semiquinone. The assignment of this crystallographic 
intermediate is validated by correlation to the NRVS data through computational 
removal of H200. While the side-on hydroperoxo semiquinone intermediate is 
computationally found to be nonreactive in peroxide bridge formation, it is 
isoenergetic with a superoxo catecholate species that is competent in performing 
this reaction. This study provides insight into the relative reactivities of 
FeIII-superoxo and FeIII-hydroperoxo intermediates in nonheme Fe enzymes and 
into the role H200 plays in facilitating extradiol catalysis.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.8b06517
PMCID: PMC6470009
PMID: 30418018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]