1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jan 11;294(2):716-725. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006134. Epub 
2018 Nov 13.

Desensitizing plant EPSP synthase to glyphosate: Optimized global sequence 
context accommodates a glycine-to-alanine change in the active site.

Dong Y(1), Ng E(1), Lu J(1), Fenwick T(1), Tao Y(1), Bertain S(1), Sandoval 
M(1), Bermudez E(1), Hou Z(1), Patten P(1), Lassner M(1), Siehl D(2).

Author information:
(1)From Corteva Agriscience, Agriculture Division of DowDuPont, Hayward, 
California 94545.
(2)From Corteva Agriscience, Agriculture Division of DowDuPont, Hayward, 
California 94545 dan.siehl@pioneer.com.

5-Enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase (EPSPS) catalyzes the transfer of a 
carboxyvinyl group from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to shikimate-3-phosphate and 
in plants is the target of the herbicide glyphosate. EPSPSs with high catalytic 
efficiency and insensitivity to glyphosate are of microbial origin, including 
the enzyme from Agrobacterium strain CP4, in which insensitivity is conferred by 
an active site alanine. In the sequence context of plant EPSPSs, alanine in 
place of glycine at the equivalent position interferes with the binding of both 
glyphosate and PEP. We show here that iterative optimization of maize EPSPS 
containing the G101A substitution yielded variants on par with CP4 in terms of 
catalytic activity in the presence of glyphosate. The improvement relative to 
G101A alone was entirely due to reduction in Km for PEP from 333 to 18 μm, 
versus 9.5 μm for native maize EPSPS. A large portion of the reduction in Km was 
conferred by two down-sizing substitutions (L97C and V332A) within 8 Å of 
glyphosate, which together reduced Km for PEP to 43 μm Although the original 
optimization was conducted with maize EPSPS, contextually homologous 
substitutions conferred similar properties to the EPSPSs of other crops. We also 
discovered a variant having the known glyphosate-desensitizing substitution 
P106L plus three additional ones that reduced the Km for PEP from 47 μm, 
observed with P106L alone, to 10.3 μm The improvements obtained with both Ala101 
and Leu106 have implications regarding glyphosate-tolerant crops and weeds.

© 2019 Dong et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.006134
PMCID: PMC6333898
PMID: 30425098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article.