1. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 14;13(11):e0206670. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206670. 
eCollection 2018.

Tucum-do-cerrado (Bactris setosa Mart.) modulates oxidative stress, 
inflammation, and apoptosis-related proteins in rats treated with azoxymethane.

Campos NA(1), da Cunha MSB(1)(2), Arruda SF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Program in Human Nutrition, Faculty of Health Sciences, Campus 
Universitário Darcy Ribeiro, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(2)Biological and Health Sciences Center, Campus Reitor Edgard Santos, 
Universidade Federal do Oeste da Bahia, Barreiras, Bahia, Brazil.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Health Sciences; Campus Universitário 
Darcy Ribeiro, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Distrito Federal, Brazil.

Oxidative and inflammatory responses play an important role in the development 
and prevention of cancer, with both responses being modulated by phytochemical 
compounds. This study investigated the chemopreventive effect of 
tucum-do-cerrado fruit in rats treated with azoxymethane. Wistar rats were 
treated for 12 weeks with: a control diet (CT); a control diet + AOM (CT/DR); a 
control diet + 15% tucum-do-cerrado (TU); or a control diet + 15% 
tucum-do-cerrado + AOM (TU/DR). The association of tucum-do-cerrado and AOM 
(TU/DR) increased glutathione-S-transferase activity, decreased MDA levels, 
increased levels of COX2, TNFα and BAX, and decreased Bcl2/Bax ratio, compared 
to the CT/DR group. Carbonyl levels, IL-1β and IL-6 mRNA levels, and aberrant 
crypt foci showed no difference between the treatments. In conclusion, 
tucum-do-cerrado reduced lipid oxidative damage, induced a pro-inflammatory 
effect, and promoted a pro-apoptotic "environment" in rats treated with AOM; 
however no changes in aberrant crypts were observed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206670
PMCID: PMC6235309
PMID: 30427888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.