1. Neuroreport. 2019 Jan 16;30(2):89-94. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000001165.

Association between interleukin-18 (137G/C and 607C/A) gene polymorphisms and 
risk of ischemic stroke: a meta-analysis.

Zhou L(1), Zhu X(2), Wang J(1), Cheng Y(1), Ma A(1), Pan X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Haici Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong, People's 
Republic of China.

Over the years, numerous researchers have explored the relationship between 
ischemic stroke (IS) and interleukin-18 (IL-18) gene polymorphisms. However, 
those studies reported conflicting and ambiguous results. The effects of IL-18 
(137G/C and 607C/A) genetic variants on IS were investigated in this article. We 
performed a systematic search that was comprehensively executed in online 
databases for studies published up to 30 April 2018. Calculation of pooled odds 
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals was applied to assess the intensity of 
correlation using Stata.12.0. The overall outcome showed that 137G allele 
increased the risk of IS under the homozygous model (OR=1.36, P=0.027). 
Nevertheless, on the basis of ethnicity for the subgroup analysis (Asian and 
Egyptian), it was disclosed that the association was only found in the Egyptian 
population under the allelic model (OR=2.72, P=0.001) and recessive model 
(OR=5.04, P=0.000). In the overall analysis, 607C allele increased the risk of 
IS under all hereditary models (C vs. A: OR=1.26, P=0.002; CC vs. AA: OR=1.67, 
P=0.002; CA vs. AA: OR=1.30, P=0.001; CC+CA vs. AA: OR=1.41, P=0.000; CC vs. 
AA+CA: OR=1.48, P=0.000); a similar trend was observed in the Asian population. 
However, 607C allele was linked to decreased IS risk in the Egyptian population 
under all genetic models except the heterozygous model (C vs. A: OR=0.48, 
P=0.006; CC vs. AA: OR=0.19, P=0.007; CA vs. AA: OR=0.47, P=0.078; CC+CA vs. AA: 
OR=0.39, P=0.020; CC vs. AA+CA:OR=0.30, P=0.030). Although two polymorphisms 
were associated with IS, the association varied significantly in different 
countries. Large epidemiological studies will be required to verify these 
findings in the future.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000001165
PMID: 30431529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]