1. Cell. 2018 Nov 29;175(6):1701-1715.e16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.022. Epub 
2018 Nov 15.

Impact of Genetic Polymorphisms on Human Immune Cell Gene Expression.

Schmiedel BJ(1), Singh D(1), Madrigal A(1), Valdovino-Gonzalez AG(1), White 
BM(1), Zapardiel-Gonzalo J(1), Ha B(1), Altay G(1), Greenbaum JA(1), McVicker 
G(2), Seumois G(1), Rao A(3), Kronenberg M(4), Peters B(5), Vijayanand P(6).

Author information:
(1)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Centre, University of California 
San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.
(5)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, 
USA.
(6)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; 
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, 
USA; University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. 
Electronic address: vijay@lji.org.

While many genetic variants have been associated with risk for human diseases, 
how these variants affect gene expression in various cell types remains largely 
unknown. To address this gap, the DICE (database of immune cell expression, 
expression quantitative trait loci [eQTLs], and epigenomics) project was 
established. Considering all human immune cell types and conditions studied, we 
identified cis-eQTLs for a total of 12,254 unique genes, which represent 61% of 
all protein-coding genes expressed in these cell types. Strikingly, a large 
fraction (41%) of these genes showed a strong cis-association with genotype only 
in a single cell type. We also found that biological sex is associated with 
major differences in immune cell gene expression in a highly cell-specific 
manner. These datasets will help reveal the effects of disease risk-associated 
genetic polymorphisms on specific immune cell types, providing mechanistic 
insights into how they might influence pathogenesis (https://dice-database.org).

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.022
PMCID: PMC6289654
PMID: 30449622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.