1. Neuroscience. 2019 Jan 15;397:107-115. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.11.011.  Epub 2018 Nov 17.

Mecp2 Disruption in Rats Causes Reshaping in Firing Activity and Patterns of 
Brainstem Respiratory Neurons.

Wu Y(1), Cui N(1), Xing H(1), Zhong W(1), Arrowood C(1), Johnson CM(1), Jiang 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, 50 Decatur Street, Atlanta, 
GA 30302, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, 50 Decatur Street, Atlanta, 
GA 30302, United States. Electronic address: cjiang@gsu.edu.

People with Rett Syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by 
mutations in the MECP2 gene, have breathing abnormalities manifested as 
periodical hypoventilation with compensatory hyperventilation, which are 
attributable to a high incidence of sudden death. Similar breathing 
abnormalities have been found in animal models with Mecp2 disruptions. Although 
RTT-type hypoventilation is believed to be due to depressed central inspiratory 
activity, whether this is true remains unknown. Here we show evidence for 
reshaping in firing activity and patterns of medullary respiratory neurons in 
RTT-type hypoventilation without evident depression in inspiratory neuronal 
activity. Experiments were performed in decerebrate rats in vivo. In Mecp2-null 
rats, abnormalities in breathing patterns were apparent in both decerebrate rats 
and awake animals, suggesting that RTT-type breathing abnormalities take place 
in the brainstem without forebrain input. In comparison to their wild-type 
counterparts, both inspiratory and expiratory neurons in Mecp2-null rats 
extended their firing duration, and fired more action potentials during each 
burst. No changes in inspiratory or expiratory neuronal distributions were 
found. Most inspiratory neurons started firing in the middle of expiration and 
changed their firing pattern to a phase-spanning type. The proportion of 
post-inspiratory neurons was reduced in the Mecp2-null rats. With the increased 
firing activity of both inspiratory and expiratory neurons in null rats, phrenic 
discharges shifted to a slow and deep breathing pattern. Thus, the RTT-type 
hypoventilation appears to result from reshaping of firing activity of both 
inspiratory and expiratory neurons without evident depression in central 
inspiratory activity.

Copyright Â© 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.11.011
PMCID: PMC6415544
PMID: 30458221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing financial interests.