1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2018 Nov 8;11:302. doi: 10.1186/s13068-018-1303-9. 
eCollection 2018.

Dye-decolorizing peroxidases in Irpex lacteus combining the catalytic properties 
of heme peroxidases and laccase play important roles in ligninolytic system.

Qin X(1)(2), Luo H(2), Zhang X(1), Yao B(2), Ma F(1), Su X(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Technology, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074 China.
(2)2Key Laboratory for Feed Biotechnology of the Ministry of Agriculture, Feed 
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No. 12 South 
Zhongguancun Street, Beijing, 100081 China.

BACKGROUND: The white rot fungus Irpex lacteus exhibits a great potential in 
biopretreatment of lignocellulose as well as in biodegradation of xenobiotic 
compounds by extracellular ligninolytic enzymes. Among these enzymes, the 
possible involvement of dye-decolorizing peroxidase (DyP) in lignin degradation 
is not clear yet.
RESULTS: Based on the extracellular enzyme activities and secretome analysis, I. 
lacteus CD2 produced DyPs as the main ligninolytic enzymes when grown in Kirk's 
medium supplemented with lignin. Further transcriptome analysis revealed that 
induced transcription of genes encoding DyPs was accompanied by the increased 
expression of transcripts for H2O2-generating enzymes such as alcohol oxidase, 
pyranose 2-oxidase, and glyoxal oxidases. Meanwhile, accumulation of transcripts 
for glycoside hydrolase and protease was observed, in agreement with abundant 
proteins. Moreover, the biochemical analysis of IlDyP2 and IlDyP1 confirmed that 
DyPs were able to catalyze the oxidation of typical peroxidases substrates ABTS, 
phenolic lignin compounds DMP, and guaiacol as well as non-phenolic lignin 
compound, veratryl alcohol. More importantly, IlDyP1 enhanced catalytic activity 
for veratryl alcohol oxidation in the presence of mediator 
1-hydroxybenzotriazole, which was similar to the laccase/1-hydroxybenzotriazole 
system.
CONCLUSIONS: The results proved for the first time that DyPs depolymerized 
lignin individually, combining catalytic features of different peroxidases on 
the functional level. Therefore, DyPs may be considered an important part of 
ligninolytic system in wood-decaying fungi.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-018-1303-9
PMCID: PMC6223037
PMID: 30455731