1. Yonsei Med J. 2018 Dec;59(10):1166-1173. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2018.59.10.1166.

RPS15a Silencing Suppresses Cell Proliferation and Migration of Gastric Cancer.

Shi D(1), Liu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ningbo No. 2 Hospital, Ningbo, China. 
shidingyuhang@163.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Henan University of Chinese Medicine, 
Zhengzhou, China. 1306348522@qq.com.

PURPOSE: Information on the possible role of the ribosomal protein S15a (RPS15a) 
in gastric cancer is scarce. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of 
RPS15a gene expression on the growth and cell cycle of gastric cancer cells in 
vitro and in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RPS15a mRNA expression was examined in cancer tissues and 
their corresponding adjacent normal tissues of 40 gastric adenocarcinoma 
patients. Next, RPS15a was knocked down using a lentivirus-mediated RNA 
interference (short hairpin RNA) system in the gastric cancer cell line BGC823. 
The effect of RPS15a knockdown was examined using CCK-8 assay, cell scratch 
test, colony formation assay, and flow cytometry. Finally, in nude mice, a 
tumorigenicity test was performed, and the tumor volume and weight were 
measured.
RESULTS: RPS15a expression in tumor tissue was significantly greater than that 
in the adjacent normal tissue of gastric cancer patients. After RPS15a 
silencing, the BGC823 cell proliferation rate decreased significantly; most 
cells were arrested in the G0/G1 phase, cell growth was inhibited, and the 
migration rate was decreased. Colony formation assay showed that the number and 
size of clones in the RPS15a-silenced cells were fewer and smaller, compared to 
control cells. The nude mouse tumorigenicity test showed that RPS15a silencing 
had an inhibitory effect on tumor volume and mice weight.
CONCLUSION: The present study found RPS15a expression to be higher in gastric 
tumors and its silencing in gastric cancer cells to inhibit the proliferation, 
growth, and migration thereof. Accordingly, RPS15a may be considered as a 
potential therapeutic target in gastric cancer.

Â© Copyright: Yonsei University College of Medicine 2018.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2018.59.10.1166
PMCID: PMC6240561
PMID: 30450850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.