1. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2019 Feb;35(2):e3100. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.3100. Epub
2018  Dec 20.

Diabetes pharmacotherapy and effects on the musculoskeletal system.

Kalaitzoglou E(1), Fowlkes JL(1), Popescu I(1), Thrailkill KM(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Kentucky Barnstable Brown Diabetes Center Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA.

Persons with type 1 or type 2 diabetes have a significantly higher fracture risk 
than age-matched persons without diabetes, attributed to disease-specific 
deficits in the microarchitecture and material properties of bone tissue. 
Therefore, independent effects of diabetes drugs on skeletal integrity are 
vitally important. Studies of incretin-based therapies have shown divergent 
effects of different agents on fracture risk, including detrimental, beneficial, 
and neutral effects. The sulfonylurea class of drugs, owing to its hypoglycemic 
potential, is thought to amplify the risk of fall-related fractures, 
particularly in the elderly. Other agents such as the biguanides may, in fact, 
be osteo-anabolic. In contrast, despite similarly expected anabolic properties 
of insulin, data suggests that insulin pharmacotherapy itself, particularly in 
type 2 diabetes, may be a risk factor for fracture, negatively associated with 
determinants of bone quality and bone strength. Finally, sodium-dependent 
glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors have been associated with an increased risk 
of atypical fractures in select populations, and possibly with an increase in 
lower extremity amputation with specific SGLT2I drugs. The role of skeletal 
muscle, as a potential mediator and determinant of bone quality, is also a 
relevant area of exploration. Currently, data regarding the impact of glucose 
lowering medications on diabetes-related muscle atrophy is more limited, 
although preclinical studies suggest that various hypoglycemic agents may have 
either aggravating (sulfonylureas, glinides) or repairing (thiazolidinediones, 
biguanides, incretins) effects on skeletal muscle atrophy, thereby influencing 
bone quality. Hence, the therapeutic efficacy of each hypoglycemic agent must 
also be evaluated in light of its impact, alone or in combination, on 
musculoskeletal health, when determining an individualized treatment approach. 
Moreover, the effect of newer medications (potentially seeking expanded clinical 
indication into the pediatric age range) on the growing skeleton is largely 
unknown. Herein, we review the available literature regarding effects of 
diabetes pharmacotherapy, by drug class and/or by clinical indication, on the 
musculoskeletal health of persons with diabetes.

Â© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.3100
PMCID: PMC6358500
PMID: 30467957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors confirm that 
they have no conflicts of interest to declare for this publication.