1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Feb 20;47(3):e15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1169.

T5 exonuclease-dependent assembly offers a low-cost method for efficient cloning 
and site-directed mutagenesis.

Xia Y(1), Li K(1), Li J(1), Wang T(1), Gu L(1), Xun L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, 72 Binhai 
Road, Qingdao 266237, P.R. China.
(2)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 
99164-7520, USA.

The assembly of DNA fragments with homologous arms is becoming popular in 
routine cloning. For an in vitro assembly reaction, a DNA polymerase is often 
used either alone for its 3'-5' exonuclease activity or together with a 5'-3' 
exonuclease for its DNA polymerase activity. Here, we present a 'T5 exonuclease 
DNA assembly' (TEDA) method that only uses a 5'-3' exonuclease. DNA fragments 
with short homologous ends were treated by T5 exonuclease and then transformed 
into Escherichia coli to produce clone colonies. The cloning efficiency was 
similar to that of the commercial In-Fusion method employing a proprietary DNA 
polymerase, but higher than that of the Gibson method utilizing T5 exonuclease, 
Phusion DNA polymerase, and DNA ligase. It also assembled multiple DNA fragments 
and did simultaneous site-directed mutagenesis at multiple sites. The reaction 
mixture was simple, and each reaction used 0.04 U of T5 exonuclease that cost 
0.25 US cents. The simplicity, cost effectiveness, and cloning efficiency should 
promote its routine use, especially for labs with a budget constraint. TEDA may 
trigger further development of DNA assembly methods that employ single 
exonucleases.

Â© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1169
PMCID: PMC6379645
PMID: 30462336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]