1. Neuropharmacology. 2019 Mar 1;146:65-73. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.11.024.  Epub 2018 Nov 19.

Molecular basis involved in the blocking effect of antidepressant metergoline on 
C-type inactivation of Kv1.4 channel.

Bai HW(1), Eom S(2), Yeom HD(2), Nguyen KVA(2), Lee J(2), Sohn SO(3), Lee JH(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Division for Biotechnology, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 
Jeongeup, Jeonbuk, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: hbai@kaeri.re.kr.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)R&D Center, Biokogen Inc., Iksan, Jeonbuk, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic 
of Korea. Electronic address: leejunho@chonnam.ac.kr.

Voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKCs) are transmembrane ion channels specific 
for potassium. Currently there are nine kinds of VGKCs. Kv1.4 is one of 
shaker-related potassium channels. It is a representative alpha subunit of 
potassium channels that can inactivate A type-currents, leading to N pattern 
inactivation. Inactivation of Kv channels plays an important role in shaping 
electrical signaling properties of neuronal and muscular cells. The shape of N 
pattern inactivation can be modified by removing the N-terminal (NT) domain 
which results in non-inactivated currents and C pattern inactivation. In a 
previous work, we have reported the regulatory effect of metergoline on Kv1.4 
and Nav1.2 channel activity. In the present study, we constructed a mutant of 
deleted 61 residues from NT of Kv1.4 channels (Kv1.4 Δ2-61) and found that it 
induced an outward peak and steady-state currents We also studied the modulation 
effect of metergoline on the activity of this Kv1.4 Δ2-61 mutant channel without 
having the N-terminal quick inactivation domain. Our results revealed that 
treatment with metergoline inhibited NT deleted Kv1.4 mutant channel activity in 
a concentration-dependent manner which was reversible. Interestingly, 
metergoline treatment induced little effects on the outward peak current in the 
deleted Kv1.4 mutant channel. However, metergoline treatment conspicuously 
inhibited steady state currents of Kv1.4 Δ2-61 channels with acceleration 
current mode. The acceleration of steady-state current of deleted Kv1.4 mutant 
channel occurred in a concentration-dependent manner. This means that 
metergoline can accelerate C pattern inactivation of Kv1.4 Δ2-61 channel by 
acting as an open state dependent channel blocker. We also performed 
site-directed mutations in V561A and K532Y, also known as C-type inactivation 
sites. V561A, K532Y, and V561A + K532Y substitution mutants significantly 
attenuated the acceleration effect of metergoline on C pattern inactivation of 
hKv1.4 channel currents. In docking modeling study, predicted binding residues 
for metergoline were analyzed for six amino acids. Among them, the K532 residue 
known as the C-type inactivation site was analyzed to be a major site of action. 
Then various mutants were constructed. K532 substitution mutant significantly 
abolished the effect of metergoline on Kv1.4 currents among various mutants 
whereas other changes had slight inhibitory effects. Furthermore, we found that 
metergoline had specificity for Kv1.4, but not for Kv1.5 currents. In addition, 
the A type current in rat neuronal cell was inhibited and accelerated of 
inactivation. This result further shows that metergoline might interact with 
Lys532 residue and then accelerate C pattern inactivation of Kv1.4 channels with 
channel type specificity. Taken together, these results demonstrate the 
molecular basis involved in the effect of metergoline, an ergot alkaloid, on 
human Kv1.4 channel, providing a novel interaction ligand.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.11.024
PMID: 30465811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]