1. Biosci Trends. 2018;12(5):502-506. doi: 10.5582/bst.2018.01260.

Novel compound heterozygous mutations in SLC26A4 gene in a Chinese family with 
enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

Zhao X(1), Cheng X(1), Huang L(1), Wang X(1), Wen C(1), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University; Beijing Institute of 
Otolaryngology; Key Laboratory of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, 
Ministry of Education.

In order to investigate the genetic causes of hearing loss in a Chinese proband 
with nonsyndromic hearing loss and enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), we 
conducted clinical and genetic evaluations in a deaf proband and her parents 
with normal hearing. 20 exons and flanking splice sites of the SLC26A4 gene were 
screened for pathogenic mutations by PCR amplification and bidirectional 
sequencing. As a control, a group of 400 healthy newborns from the same ethnic 
background were subjected to SLC26A4 gene screening using the same method. The 
proband harbored two mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in the form of compound 
heterozygosity. She was found to be heterozygous for a novel mutation c.574delC 
(p.Leu192Ter) in exon 5 and for the known mutation c.919-2A>G(c.IVS7-2A>G). Her 
mother was a heterozygous carrier of the c.919-2A>G mutation, and her father was 
a heterozygous carrier of the c.574delC and therefore co-segregated with the 
genetic disease. The c.574delC mutation was absent in 400 healthy newborns. The 
frameshift mutation causes the leucine (Leu) at amino acid position 192 to 
become a termination codon, leading to termination of protein sequence coding. 
This study demonstrates that the novel frameshift mutation c.574delC 
(p.Leu192Ter) in compound heterozygosity with c.919-2A>G in the SLC26A4 gene is 
the main cause of deafness in a family. Our study will expand the spectrum of 
known SLC26A4 mutations in the Chinese population, providing more information on 
genetic counseling, and diagnosis in hearing loss with EVA.

DOI: 10.5582/bst.2018.01260
PMID: 30473558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]