1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2019 Jan;411(3):777-786. doi: 10.1007/s00216-018-1499-3.
Epub  2018 Nov 23.

Asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation for improved characterization of 
human plasma lipoproteins.

Bria CRM(1), Afshinnia F(2), Skelly PW(1), Rajendiran TM(3)(4), Kayampilly P(2), 
Thomas TP(2), Andreev VP(5), Pennathur S(2)(6), Kim Ratanathanawongs Williams 
S(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Separations Technologies, Department of Chemistry, 
Colorado School of Mines, 1500 Illinois Street, Golden, CO, 80401, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine - Nephrology, University of Michigan, Brehm 
Tower, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Michigan Regional Comprehensive Metabolomics Resource Core, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.
(5)Arbor Research Collaborative for Health, 340 East Huron Street, Suite 300, 
Ann Arbor, MI, 48104, USA.
(6)Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Brehm Tower, 
1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI, 48105, USA.
(7)Laboratory for Advanced Separations Technologies, Department of Chemistry, 
Colorado School of Mines, 1500 Illinois Street, Golden, CO, 80401, USA. 
krwillia@mines.edu.

High- and low-density lipoproteins (HDL and LDL) are attractive targets for 
biomarker discovery. However, ultracentrifugation (UC), the current methodology 
of choice for isolating HDL and LDL, is tedious, requires large sample volume, 
results in sample loss, and does not readily provide information on particle 
size. In this work, human plasma HDL and LDL are separated and collected using 
semi-preparative asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation (SP-AF4) and UC. The 
SP-AF4 and UC separation conditions, sample throughput, and liquid 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) lipidomic results are compared. Over 
600 μg of total proteins is recovered in a single SP-AF4 run, and Western blot 
results confirm apoA1 pure and apoB100 pure fractions, consistent with HDL and 
LDL, respectively. The SP-AF4 separation requires ~ 60 min per sample, thus 
providing a marked improvement over UC which can span hours to days. Lipidome 
analysis of SP-AF4-prepared HDL and LDL fractions is compared to UC-prepared HDL 
and LDL samples. Over 270 lipids in positive MS mode and over 140 lipids in 
negative MS mode are identified by both sample preparation techniques with over 
98% overlap between the lipidome. Additionally, lipoprotein size distributions 
are determined using analytical scale AF4 coupled with multiangle light 
scattering (MALS) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) detectors. These 
developments position SP-AF4 as a sample preparation method of choice for 
lipoprotein biomarker characterization and identification. Graphical abstract ᅟ.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-018-1499-3
PMCID: PMC6451313
PMID: 30470915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS Authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest. This research did not involve 
human participants or animals and therefore obtaining informed consent was not 
required. Human plasma was obtained from the American Red Cross which was a pool 
of over 1000 deidentified plasma donors which were to be discarded due to 
expiration of safe window for transfusion. The study is therefore exempt from 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval.