1. Sci Rep. 2018 Nov 26;8(1):17344. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-35696-7.

Investigation of the phosphorylation of Bacillus subtilis LTA synthases by the 
serine/threonine kinase PrkC.

Pompeo F(1), Rismondo J(2), Gründling A(2), Galinier A(3).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LCB, Marseille, France. fpompeo@imm.cnrs.fr.
(2)Section of Microbiology and MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and 
Infection, Imperial College London, London, SW72AZ, UK.
(3)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LCB, Marseille, France.

Bacillus subtilis possesses four lipoteichoic acid synthases LtaS, YfnI, YvgJ 
and YqgS involved in the synthesis of cell wall. The crystal structure of the 
extracellular domain of LtaS revealed a phosphorylated threonine and YfnI was 
identified in two independent phosphoproteome studies. Here, we show that the 
four LTA synthases can be phosphorylated in vitro by the Ser/Thr kinase PrkC. 
Phosphorylation neither affects the export/release of YfnI nor its substrate 
binding. However, we observed that a phosphomimetic form of YfnI was active 
whereas its phosphoablative form was inactive. The phenotypes of the strains 
deleted for prkC or prpC (coding for a phosphatase) are fairly similar to those 
of the strains producing the phosphoablative or phosphomimetic YfnI proteins. 
Clear evidence proving that PrkC phosphorylates YfnI in vivo is still missing 
but our data suggest that the activity of all LTA synthases may be regulated by 
phosphorylation. Nonetheless, their function is non-redundant in cell. Indeed, 
the deletion of either ltaS or yfnI gene could restore a normal growth and shape 
to a ΔyvcK mutant strain but this was not the case for yvgJ or yqgS. The 
synthesis of cell wall must then be highly regulated to guarantee correct 
morphogenesis whatever the growth conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-35696-7
PMCID: PMC6255753
PMID: 30478337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.