1. Int J Oncol. 2019 Feb;54(2):431-442. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4650. Epub 2018 Nov
 28.

Tunicamycin enhances the suppressive effects of cisplatin on lung cancer growth 
through PTX3 glycosylation via AKT/NF-κB signaling pathway.

Ahmmed B(#)(1), Khan MN(#)(1), Nisar MA(1), Kampo S(1), Zheng Q(1), Li Y(1), Yan 
Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Liaoning Provincial Core 
Laboratory of Glycobiology and Glycoengineering, Dalian Medical University, 
Dalian, Liaoning 116044, P.R. China.
(#)Contributed equally

Long pentraxin‑3 (PTX3) is an inflammatory molecule related to cancer 
proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. Many studies have highlighted the 
significance of glycosylated molecules in immune modulation, inflammation and 
cancer progression. Moreover, aberrant glycosylation of cancer cells is linked 
to chemoresistance. This study aimed to develop effective therapeutic strategies 
for deglycosylation of PTX3 (dePTX3) in order to enhance chemosensitivity to 
cisplatin (Cis) in lung cancer treatment. The A549 and SPCA1 cells were used to 
determine the role of PTX3 glycosylation in lung cancer growth. Our results 
revealed that PTX3 was higher in both human lung cancer tissues and serum in 
comparison with control. Furthermore, we found that deglycosylated PTX3 (dePTX3) 
by tunicamycin (TM), which is N‑glycan precursor biosynthesis blocker, and 
PNGase F significantly reduced the survival and migration of lung cancer cells. 
To further confirm this, we also generated glycosylation‑site mutant of PTX3 
(mPTX3) to characterize the loss of glyco‑function. dePTX3 and TM enhanced the 
suppressive effects of Cis on lung cancer cell growth, migration and invasion 
compared to individual treatment. Treatment with a combination of TM and Cis 
significantly inactivated AKT/NF‑κB signaling pathway and induced apoptosis. In 
conclusion, these findings suggest that PTX3 is an important mediator of lung 
cancer progression, and dePTX3 by TM enhances the anticancer effects of Cis. The 
deglycosylation in chemotherapy may represent a potential novel therapeutic 
strategy against lung cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2018.4650
PMCID: PMC6317655
PMID: 30483742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]