1. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Nov 14;10:338. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00338. 
eCollection 2018.

Blood-Based Kinase Assessments in Alzheimer's Disease.

Hugon J(1)(2), Mouton-Liger F(1)(2), Cognat E(1)(2), Dumurgier J(1)(2), Paquet 
C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Cognitive Neurology, Lariboisiere Fernand-Widal Hospital, APHP, 
University Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(2)INSERM U 942, Paris, France.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is marked by memory disturbances followed by aphasia, 
apraxia and agnosia. Brain lesions include the accumulation of the amyloid 
peptide in extracellular plaques, neurofibrillary tangles with abnormally 
phosphorylated tau protein and synaptic and neuronal loss. New findings have 
suggested that brain lesions could occur one or two decades before the first 
clinical signs. This asymptomatic preclinical phase could be an opportunity to 
put in place a secondary prevention but the detection of these brain lesions can 
only be achieved so far by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation or molecular 
amyloid and tau PET imaging. There is an urgent need to find out simple and 
easily accessible new biomarkers to set up an efficient screening in adult and 
aging population. Neuropathological and biochemical studies have revealed that 
abnormal accumulations of potentially toxic kinases are present in the brains of 
AD patients. Kinase activation leads to abnormal tau phosphorylation, amyloid 
production, apoptosis and neuroinflammation. Increased levels of these kinases 
are present in the CSF of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD patients. Over 
the last years the search for abnormal kinase levels was performed in the blood 
of patients. Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK 3), protein kinase R (PKR), 
mamalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), dual specificity 
tyrosine-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 1A (DIRK1A), c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK), protein 70 kD ribosomal protein S6 kinase (P70S6K), ERK2 and other kinase 
concentrations were evaluated and abnormal levels were found in many studies. 
For example, GSK3 levels are increased in MCI and AD patients. PKR levels are 
also augmented in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of AD patients. In 
the future, the assessment of several blood kinase levels in large cohorts of 
patients will be needed to confirm the usefulness of this test at an early phase 
of the disease.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00338
PMCID: PMC6246745
PMID: 30487744