1. Methods. 2019 Mar 1;156:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2018.11.016. Epub 2018 Nov
 29.

Current strategies for Site-Directed RNA Editing using ADARs.

Montiel-Gonzalez MF(1), Diaz Quiroz JF(1), Rosenthal JJC(2).

Author information:
(1)The Eugene Bell Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.
(2)The Eugene Bell Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: jrosenthal@mbl.edu.

Adenosine Deaminases that Act on RNA (ADARs) are a group of enzymes that 
catalyze the conversion of adenosines (A's) to inosines (I's) in a process known 
as RNA editing. Though ADARs can act on different types of RNA, editing events 
in coding regions of mRNA are of particular interest as I's base pair like 
guanosines (G's). Thus, every A-to-I change catalyzed by ADAR is read as an 
A-to-G change during translation, potentially altering protein sequence and 
function. This ability to re-code makes ADAR an attractive therapeutic tool to 
correct genetic mutations within mRNA. The main challenge in doing so is to 
re-direct ADAR's catalytic activity towards A's that are not naturally edited, a 
process termed Site-Directed RNA Editing (SDRE). Recently, a handful of labs 
have taken up this challenge and two basic strategies have emerged. The first 
involves redirecting endogenous ADAR to new sites by making editable structures 
using antisense RNA oligonucleotides. The second also utilizes antisense RNA 
oligonucleotides, but it uses them as guides to deliver the catalytic domain of 
engineered ADARs to new sites, much as CRISPR guides deliver Cas nucleases. In 
fact, despite the intense current focus on CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing, SDRE 
offers a number of distinct advantages. In the present review we will discuss 
these strategies in greater detail, focusing on the concepts on which they are 
based, how they were developed and tested, and their respective advantages and 
disadvantages. Though the precise and efficient re-direction of ADAR activity 
still remains a challenge, the systems that are being developed lay the 
foundation for SDRE as a powerful tool for transient genome editing.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2018.11.016
PMCID: PMC6814296
PMID: 30502398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest We declare a competing 
financial interest. Maria Montiel-Gonzalez and Joshua Rosenthal hold a patent 
titled: Site-Directed RNA Editing, publication number: US 9,650,627 B1.