1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Dec 3;19(12):3857. doi: 10.3390/ijms19123857.

Genetic and Epigenetic Modifiers of Alcoholic Liver Disease.

Meroni M(1), Longo M(2), Rametta R(3), Dongiovanni P(4).

Author information:
(1)General Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Pad. Granelli, via F Sforza 35, 20122 Milan, Italy. 
maricameroni11@gmail.com.
(2)General Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Pad. Granelli, via F Sforza 35, 20122 Milan, Italy. 
longo.miriam92@gmail.com.
(3)General Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Pad. Granelli, via F Sforza 35, 20122 Milan, Italy. 
raffaela.rametta@policlinico.mi.it.
(4)General Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Pad. Granelli, via F Sforza 35, 20122 Milan, Italy. 
paola.dongiovanni@policlinico.mi.it.

Alcoholic liver disease (ALD), a disorder caused by excessive alcohol 
consumption is a global health issue. More than two billion people consume 
alcohol in the world and about 75 million are classified as having alcohol 
disorders. ALD embraces a wide spectrum of hepatic lesions including steatosis, 
alcoholic steatohepatitis (ASH), fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). ALD is a complex disease where environmental, genetic, and 
epigenetic factors contribute to its pathogenesis and progression. The severity 
of alcohol-induced liver disease depends on the amount, method of usage and 
duration of alcohol consumption as well as on age, gender, presence of obesity, 
and genetic susceptibility. Genome-wide association studies and candidate gene 
studies have identified genetic modifiers of ALD that can be exploited as 
non-invasive biomarkers, but which do not completely explain the phenotypic 
variability. Indeed, ALD development and progression is also modulated by 
epigenetic factors. The premise of this review is to discuss the role of genetic 
variants and epigenetic modifications, with particular attention being paid to 
microRNAs, as pathogenic markers, risk predictors, and therapeutic targets in 
ALD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19123857
PMCID: PMC6320903
PMID: 30513996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.