1. Food Technol Biotechnol. 2018 Sep;56(3):373-380. doi: 
10.17113/ftb.56.03.18.5540.

A Novel Antidiabetic Food Produced via Solid-State Fermentation of Tartary 
Buckwheat by L. plantarum TK9 and L. paracasei TK1501.

Feng L, Xie Y, Peng C(1), Liu Y(1), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety, College of Biotechnology, 
Tianjin University of Science and Technology, No. 29 of 13th Avenue, Tianjin, PR 
China.

Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disease characterized by hyperglycaemia and a 
number of potential complications that significantly reduce the patient's 
quality of life. In this study, we produced an antidiabetic functional food from 
Tartary buckwheat fermented by Lactobacillus plantarum TK9 and L. paracasei 
TK1501. The results of an orthogonal experimental design indicated that the 
three factors with the largest effects on the growth of L. plantarum TK9 and L. 
paracasei TK1501 in solid-state fermentation (SSF) were in the order: water 
ratio>inoculum size>time of fermentation. Under the optimal fermentation 
conditions comprising a 1:1.5 water ratio, 24 h of SSF and a 107 CFU/g inoculum, 
the Tartary buckwheat fermented by L. plantarum TK9 and L. paracasei TK1501 
yielded viable probiotic counts of (2.3±0.7)·109 and (3.3±0.4)·109 CFU/g, 
respectively. The nutritional potential, as well as antioxidant and antidiabetic 
properties of ethanolic extracts from fermented Tartary buckwheat were 
investigated. The highest α-glucosidase inhibitory activity, with an IC50 of 
0.51 mg/mL, was present in Tartary buckwheat fermented by L. plantarum TK9. 
However, Tartary buckwheat fermented by L. paracasei TK1501 had the highest 
dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-IV) inhibition, with an IC50 of 2.47 mg/mL. 
Therefore, fermentation by both L. plantarum TK9 and L. paracasei TK1501 has the 
potential to yield a product that can help regulate the levels of blood glucose 
as part of a diabetic diet.

DOI: 10.17113/ftb.56.03.18.5540
PMCID: PMC6233009
PMID: 30510481