1. Appl Clin Genet. 2018 Nov 8;11:129-134. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S172176. eCollection
 2018.

Potential oligogenic disease of mental retardation, short stature, spastic 
paraparesis, and osteopetrosis.

Alsemari A(1), Alsuhaibani M(2), Alhathlool R(1), Ali BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, alsemari@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Radiology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The interaction of multiple genetic factors, as opposed to monogenic 
inheritance, has been suspected to play a role in many diseases. This 
interaction has been described as an oligogenic inheritance model, which may be 
a useful tool in explaining certain clinical observations. The purpose of this 
study was to search for novel genetic defects among members of a family with 
traits that include mental retardation, short stature, osteopetrosis, 
calcification of basal ganglia, and thinning of the corpus callosum. In the 
index case (111-4), we identified four homozygous mutations: chromosome 8, 
intron2 (c.232+1G>A) at CA2 gene; chromosome 15, exon 32 (c.6100C>T) at the 
SPG11; chromosome 5, exon 11 (c.1015G>A) at the MCCC2; and chromosome 9, exon 9 
(C.1193g>t) at the LARP gene. The mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing, 
and both parents were observed to be heterozygous for the four mutations. A 
moderately affected sister of the index case was homozygous for only three 
mutations in CA2, LARP, and Mccc2, while a nonaffected sister was heterozygous 
for three mutations in CA2, LARP, and MCCC2 and negative for SPG11. The clinical 
features of the two affected sisters can be explained distinctively by each 
homozygous mutation in an oligogenic pattern of inheritance. This family 
represents an example of an oligogenic pattern of inheritance of mental 
retardation, short stature, spastic paraparesis, and osteopetrosis.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S172176
PMCID: PMC6231439
PMID: 30510438

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.