1. Nutrients. 2018 Dec 4;10(12):1915. doi: 10.3390/nu10121915.

Isoamericanoic Acid B from Acer tegmentosum as a Potential Phytoestrogen.

Lee SR(1), Park YJ(2), Han YB(3), Lee JC(4), Lee S(5), Park HJ(6), Lee HJ(7), 
Kim KH(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
davidseoungrak@gmail.com.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
pyj084@msn.com.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
youbin1158@hanmail.net.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
leejc3004@gmail.com.
(5)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
sarahlee0801@gmail.com.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
hyunju85@skku.edu.
(7)Department of Food and Nutrition, Gachon University, Seongnam 13120, Korea. 
skysea@gachon.ac.kr.
(8)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea. 
khkim83@skku.edu.

Phytoestrogens derived from plants have attracted the attention of the general 
public and the medical community due to their potentially beneficial role in 
relieving menopausal symptoms. The deciduous tree Acer tegmentosum Maxim 
(Aceraceae) has long been utilized in Korean folk medicine to alleviate many 
physiological disorders, including abscesses, surgical bleeding, and liver 
diseases. In order to explore structurally and/or biologically new constituents 
from Korean medicinal plants, a comprehensive phytochemical study was carried 
out on the bark of A. tegmentosum. One new phenolic compound with a 
1,4-benzodioxane scaffold, isoamericanoic acid B (1), as well as with nine known 
phenolic compounds (2⁻10), were successfully isolated from the aqueous extracts 
of the bark of A. tegmentosum. A detailed analysis using 1D and 2D NMR 
spectroscopy, electronic circular dichroism (ECD) spectral data, and LC/MS 
afforded the unambiguous structural determination of all isolated compounds, 
including the new compound 1. In addition, compounds 2, 4, 5, and 9 were 
isolated and identified from the bark of A. tegmentosum for the first time. All 
isolated compounds were tested for their estrogenic activities using an MCF-7 
BUS cell proliferation assay, which revealed that compounds 1, 2, and 10 showed 
moderate estrogenic activity. To study the mechanism of this estrogenic effect, 
a docking simulation of compound 1, which showed the best estrogenic activity, 
was conducted with estrogen receptor (ER) -α and ER-β, which revealed that it 
interacts with the key residues of ER-α and ER-β. In addition, compound 1 had 
slightly higher affinity for ER-β than ER-α in the calculated Gibbs free energy 
for 1:ER-α and 1:ER-β. Thus, the present experimental evidence demonstrated that 
active compound 1 from A. tegmentosum could be a promising phytoestrogen for the 
development of natural estrogen supplements.

DOI: 10.3390/nu10121915
PMCID: PMC6315828
PMID: 30518114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.