1. J Immunol. 2019 Jan 1;202(1):239-248. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800681. Epub 2018
 Dec 3.

Different Isoforms of the Neuronal Guidance Molecule Slit2 Directly Cause 
Chemoattraction or Chemorepulsion of Human Neutrophils.

Pilling D(1), Chinea LE(2), Consalvo KM(2), Gomer RH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474 
dpilling@bio.tamu.edu rgomer@tamu.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3474.

The movement of neutrophils between blood and tissues appears to be regulated by 
chemoattractants and chemorepellents. Compared with neutrophil chemoattractants, 
relatively little is known about neutrophil chemorepellents. Slit proteins are 
endogenously cleaved into a variety of N- and C-terminal fragments, and these 
fragments are neuronal chemorepellents and inhibit chemoattraction of many cell 
types, including neutrophils. In this report, we show that the ∼140-kDa 
N-terminal Slit2 fragment (Slit2-N) is a chemoattractant and the ∼110-kDa 
N-terminal Slit2 fragment (Slit2-S) is a chemorepellent for human neutrophils. 
The effects of both Slit2 fragments were blocked by Abs to the Slit2 receptor 
Roundabout homolog 1 or the Slit2 coreceptor Syndecan-4. Slit2-N did not appear 
to activate Ras but increased phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate levels. 
Slit2-N-induced chemoattraction was unaffected by Ras inhibitors, reversed by 
PI3K inhibitors, and blocked by Cdc42 and Rac inhibitors. In contrast, Slit2-S 
activated Ras but did not increase phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate 
levels. Slit2-S-induced chemorepulsion was blocked by Ras and Rac inhibitors, 
not affected by PI3K inhibitors, and reversed by Cdc42 inhibitors. Slit2-N, but 
not Slit2-S, increased neutrophil adhesion, myosin L chain 2 phosphorylation, 
and polarized actin formation and single pseudopods at the leading edge of 
cells. Slit2-S induced multiple pseudopods. These data suggest that Slit2 
isoforms use similar receptors but different intracellular signaling pathways 
and have different effects on the cytoskeleton and pseudopods to induce 
neutrophil chemoattraction or chemorepulsion.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1800681
PMCID: PMC6310129
PMID: 30510066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]