1. Sci Signal. 2018 Dec 4;11(559):eaat6903. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aat6903.

Regulated proteolysis of p62/SQSTM1 enables differential control of autophagy 
and nutrient sensing.

Sanchez-Garrido J(1), Sancho-Shimizu V(2)(3), Shenoy AR(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Microbiology, Medical Research Council Centre for Molecular 
Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
(2)Section of Paediatrics, Imperial College London, London W21 PG, UK.
(3)Section of Virology, Imperial College London, London W21 PG, UK.
(4)Section of Microbiology, Medical Research Council Centre for Molecular 
Bacteriology and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK. 
a.shenoy@imperial.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Sci Signal. 2018 Dec 04;11(559):eaav3530. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aav3530.

The multidomain scaffold protein p62 (also called sequestosome-1) is involved in 
autophagy, antimicrobial immunity, and oncogenesis. Mutations in SQSTM1, which 
encodes p62, are linked to hereditary inflammatory conditions such as Paget's 
disease of the bone, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles. Here, we report that p62 
was proteolytically trimmed by the protease caspase-8 into a stable protein, 
which we called p62TRM We found that p62TRM, but not full-length p62, was 
involved in nutrient sensing and homeostasis through the mechanistic target of 
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). The kinase RIPK1 and caspase-8 controlled p62TRM 
production and thus promoted mTORC1 signaling. An FTD-linked p62 D329G 
polymorphism and a rare D329H variant could not be proteolyzed by caspase-8, and 
these noncleavable variants failed to activate mTORC1, thereby revealing the 
detrimental effect of these mutations. These findings on the role of p62TRM 
provide new insights into SQSTM1-linked diseases and mTORC1 signaling.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scisignal.aat6903
PMID: 30514811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]