1. Hortic Res. 2018 Dec 1;5:61. doi: 10.1038/s41438-018-0069-3. eCollection 2018.

Targeted quantitative profiling of metabolites and gene transcripts associated 
with 4-aminobutyrate (GABA) in apple fruit stored under multiple abiotic 
stresses.

Brikis CJ(#)(1), Zarei A(#)(1), Chiu GZ(1), Deyman KL(1), Liu J(1), Trobacher 
CP(1), Hoover GJ(1), Subedi S(2), DeEll JR(3), Bozzo GG(1), Shelp BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 
2W1 Canada.
(2)2Department of Mathematical Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY 
13902 USA.
(3)Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs, Box 587, 1283 
Blueline Rd. at Highway 3, Simcoe, Ontario N3Y 4N5 Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

4-Aminobutyrate accumulates in plants under abiotic stress. Here, targeted 
quantitative profiling of metabolites and transcripts was conducted to monitor 
glutamate- and polyamine-derived 4-aminobutyrate production and its subsequent 
catabolism to succinate or 4-hydroxybutyrate in apple (Malus x domestica Borkh.) 
fruit stored at 0 °C with 2.5 kPa O2 and 0.03 or 5 kPa CO2 for 16 weeks. 
Low-temperature-induced protein hydrolysis appeared to be responsible for the 
enhanced availability of amino acids during early storage, and the resulting 
higher glutamate level stimulated 4-aminobutyrate levels more than polyamines. 
Elevated CO2 increased the levels of polyamines, as well as succinate and 
4-hydroxybutyrate, during early storage, and 4-aminobutyrate and 
4-hydroxybutyrate over the longer term. Expression of all of the genes likely 
involved in 4-aminobutyrate metabolism from glutamate/polyamines to 
succinate/4-hydroxybutyrate was induced in a co-ordinated manner. CO2-regulated 
expression of apple GLUTAMATE DECARBOXYLASE 2, AMINE OXIDASE 1, ALDEHYDE 
DEHYDROGENASE 10A8 and POLYAMINE OXIDASE 2 was evident with longer term storage. 
Evidence suggested that respiratory activities were restricted by the elevated 
CO2/O2 environment, and that decreasing NAD+ availability and increasing NADPH 
and NADPH/NADP+, respectively, played key roles in the regulation of succinate 
and 4-hydroxybutyate accumulation. Together, these findings suggest that both 
transcriptional and biochemical mechanisms are associated with 4-aminobutyrate 
and 4-hydroxybutyrate metabolism in apple fruit stored under multiple abiotic 
stresses.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-018-0069-3
PMCID: PMC6269452
PMID: 30510768

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.