1. FEBS Open Bio. 2018 Nov 9;8(12):2002-2010. doi: 10.1002/2211-5463.12534. 
eCollection 2018 Dec.

Human nitrobindin: the first example of an all-β-barrel ferric heme-protein that 
catalyzes peroxynitrite detoxification.

De Simone G(1), di Masi A(1), Polticelli F(1)(2), Ascenzi P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sciences Roma Tre University Italy.
(2)National Institute of Nuclear Physics Roma Tre Section Italy.
(3)Interdepartmental Laboratory for Electron Microscopy Roma Tre University 
Italy.

Nitrobindins (Nbs), constituting a heme-protein family spanning from bacteria to 
Homo sapiens, display an all-β-barrel structural organization. Human Nb has been 
described as a domain of the nuclear protein named THAP4, whose physiological 
function is still unknown. We report the first evidence of the 
heme-Fe(III)-based detoxification of peroxynitrite by the all-β-barrel 
C-terminal Nb-like domain of THAP4. Ferric human Nb (Nb(III)) catalyzes the 
conversion of peroxynitrite to NO3- and impairs the nitration of free 
l-tyrosine. The rate of human Nb(III)-mediated scavenging of peroxynitrite is 
similar to those of all-α-helical horse heart and sperm whale myoglobin and 
human hemoglobin, generally taken as the prototypes of all-α-helical 
heme-proteins. The heme-Fe(III) reactivity of all-β-barrel human Nb(III) and 
all-α-helical prototypical heme-proteins possibly reflects the out-to-in-plane 
transition of the heme-Fe(III)-atom preceding peroxynitrite binding. Human 
Nb(III) not only catalyzes the detoxification of peroxynitrite but also binds 
NO, possibly representing a target of reactive nitrogen species.

DOI: 10.1002/2211-5463.12534
PMCID: PMC6275384
PMID: 30524950