1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Feb;126(2):188-195. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.001.
Epub  2018 Dec 3.

Novel mutations in CLN6 cause late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 
without visual impairment in two unrelated patients.

Chin JJ(1), Behnam B(1), Davids M(1), Sharma P(1), Zein WM(2), Wang C(1), 
Chepa-Lotrea X(1), Gallantine WB(3), Toro C(4), Adams DR(4), Tifft CJ(4), Gahl 
WA(4), Malicdan MCV(5).

Author information:
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)National Eye Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, United 
States.
(3)Department of Neurology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States.
(4)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; Office of 
the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(5)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States; Office of 
the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address: 
malicdanm@mail.nih.gov.

CLN6 is a transmembrane protein located in the endoplasmic reticulum that is 
involved in lysosomal acidification. Mutations in CLN6 cause late-infantile 
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (LINCL), and teenage and adult onset NCL without 
visual impairment. Here we describe two pediatric patients with LINCL from 
unrelated families who were evaluated at the National Institutes of Health. Both 
children exhibited typical phenotypes associated with LINCL except that they 
lacked the expected visual impairment. Whole exome sequencing identified novel 
biallelic mutations in CLN6, i.e., c.218-220dupGGT (p.Trp73dup) and c.296A > G 
(p.Lys99Arg) in Proband 1 and homozygous c.723G > T (p.Met241Ile) in Proband 2. 
Expression analysis in dermal fibroblasts showed a small increase in CLN6 
protein levels. Electron micrographs of these fibroblasts demonstrated large 
numbers of small membrane-bound vesicles, in addition to lipofuscin deposits. 
LysoTracker™ Red intensity was increased in fibroblasts from both patients. This 
study supports a role for CLN6 in lysosomal homeostasis, and highlights the 
importance of considering CLN6 mutations in the diagnosis of Batten Disease even 
in patients with normal vision.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.12.001
PMID: 30528883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]