1. J Exp Bot. 2019 Feb 20;70(4):1167-1182. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ery429.

SiSTL1, encoding a large subunit of ribonucleotide reductase, is crucial for 
plant growth, chloroplast biogenesis, and cell cycle progression in Setaria 
italica.

Tang C(1), Tang S(1), Zhang S(1), Luo M(1), Jia G(1), Zhi H(1), Diao X(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.

The activity of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), which catalyses the 
transformation of four ribonucleoside diphosphates (NDPs) to their corresponding 
deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates (dNDPs), is the main determiner of the cellular 
concentration of dNTP pools and should be tightly coordinated with DNA synthesis 
and cell-cycle progression. Constitutively increased or decreased RNR activity 
interferes with DNA replication and leads to arrested cell cycle progression; 
however, the mechanisms underlying these disruptive effects in higher plants 
remain to be uncovered. In this study, we identified a RNR large subunit mutant, 
sistl1, in Setaria italica (foxtail millet), which exhibited growth retardation 
as well as striped leaf phenotype, i.e. irregularly reduced leaf vein distances 
and decreased chloroplast biogenesis. We determined that a Gly737 to Glu 
substitution occurring in the C-terminus of the SiSTL1 protein slightly affected 
its optimal function, leading in turn to the reduced expression of genes 
variously involved in the assembly and activation of the DNA pre-replicative 
complex, elongation of replication forks and S phase entry. Our study provides 
new insights into how SiSTL1 regulates plant growth, chloroplast biogenesis, and 
cell cycle progression in Poaceae crops.

Â© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/ery429
PMCID: PMC6382339
PMID: 30534992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]