1. NPJ Aging Mech Dis. 2018 Dec 1;5:1. doi: 10.1038/s41514-018-0031-5.
eCollection  2019.

Epigenetic silencing of Lgr5 induces senescence of intestinal epithelial 
organoids during the process of aging.

Uchida R(1), Saito Y(1), Nogami K(1), Kajiyama Y(1), Suzuki Y(1), Kawase Y(1), 
Nakaoka T(1), Muramatsu T(1), Kimura M(1), Saito H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapeutics, Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy, 1-5-30 
Shiba-kohen, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8512 Japan.

Erratum in
    NPJ Aging Mech Dis. 2019 Mar 7;5:5. doi: 10.1038/s41514-019-0035-9.

To understand the molecular features underlying stem cell aging, we established 
intestinal epithelial organoids derived from both young and aged mice and 
investigated alterations in their senescence and epigenetic status. 
Senescence-related changes including accumulation of senescence-associated 
Î²-galactosidase and up-regulation of Cdkn1a (p21) by DNA demethylation were 
observed in intestinal epithelial organoids derived from aged mice. We also 
demonstrated that the important stem cell marker Lgr5 was epigenetically 
silenced by trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27, inducing suppression of Wnt 
signaling and a decrease of cell proliferation in organoids from aged mice. We 
further treated intestinal epithelial organoids from aged mice with nicotinamide 
mononucleotide (NMN), a key NAD+ intermediate. As a result, the organoids showed 
a higher NAD+ level, increased cell proliferative ability, activation of Lgr5 
and suppression of senescence-associated genes, indicating that treatment with 
NMN could ameliorate senescence-related changes in intestinal epithelia. These 
findings suggest that organoids derived from aged animals could be a powerful 
research tool for investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying stem cell 
aging and for development of some form of anti-aging intervention, thus 
contributing to prolongation of healthy life expectancy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41514-018-0031-5
PMCID: PMC6279747
PMID: 30534415

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.