1. Drug Healthc Patient Saf. 2018 Nov 21;10:95-101. doi: 10.2147/DHPS.S178394. 
eCollection 2018.

Clinical factors predicting drug-induced liver injury due to flucloxacillin.

Lindh M(1), Hallberg P(1), Yue QY(2), Wadelius M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Pharmacology and Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, mia.wadelius@medsci.uu.se.
(2)Swedish Medical Products Agency, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is a serious adverse reaction due 
to flucloxacillin. The pathogenesis is not fully understood. Female sex, age 
over 60 years, and a longer treatment duration have been suggested to be 
predisposing factors. Carriers of HLA-B*57:01 have an 80-fold increased risk, 
but due to the rarity of the reaction, testing of all patients is not 
cost-effective. We aimed to validate and detect clinical risk factors for 
flucloxacillin DILI.
METHODS: Clinical characteristics of flucloxacillin-treated patients with (n=50) 
and without DILI (n=2,330) were compared in a retrospective case control study. 
Cases were recruited from the Swedish database of spontaneously reported adverse 
drug reactions. Treated controls were selected from the Swedish Twin Registry. 
Statistical comparisons were made using chi-squared test and logistic 
regression. The significance threshold was set to P<0.00357 to correct for 
multiple comparisons. Reliable variables were tested in a multiple regression 
model.
RESULTS: DILI was associated with female sex, OR 2.79, 95% CI 1.50-5.17, 
P=0.0011, and with a history of kidney stones, OR 5.51, 95% CI 2.21-13.72, 
P=0.0003. Cases were younger than controls, OR per increase in years 0.91, 95% 
CI 0.88-0.94, P<0.0001, probably due to selection bias. No difference in 
treatment duration was detected, OR 1.03, 95% CI 0.98-1.08, P=0.1790.
CONCLUSION: We established female sex as a risk factor for 
flucloxacillin-induced DILI, and a history of kidney stones was identified as a 
potential risk factor. Clinical risk factors for flucloxacillin-induced DILI 
could be used to indicate whom to test for HLA-B*57:01 before treatment.

DOI: 10.2147/DHPS.S178394
PMCID: PMC6254585
PMID: 30538582

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.