1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2018 Nov 14;2018:4253928. doi: 10.1155/2018/4253928. 
eCollection 2018.

Computational Prediction of the Combined Effect of CRT and LVAD on Cardiac 
Electromechanical Delay in LBBB and RBBB.

Heikhmakhtiar AK(1), Lim KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of IT Convergence Engineering, Kumoh National Institute of 
Technology, Gumi 39177, Republic of Korea.

Two case reports showed that the combination of CRT and LVAD benefits the 
end-stage heart failure patients with prolonged QRS interval significantly. In 
one of the reports, the patient had the LVAD removed due to the recovery of the 
heart function. However, the quantification of the combined devices has yet to 
be conducted. This study aimed at computationally predicting the effects of 
CRT-only or combined with LVAD on electromechanical behaviour in the failing 
ventricle with left bundle branch blocked (LBBB) and right bundle branch blocked 
(RBBB) conditions. The subjects are normal sinus rhythm, LBBB, RBBB, LBBB with 
CRT-only, RBBB with CRT-only, LBBB with CRT + LVAD, and RBBB with CRT + LVAD. 
The results showed that the CRT-only shortened the total electrical activation 
time (EAT) in the LBBB and RBBB conditions by 20.2% and 17.1%, respectively. The 
CRT-only reduced the total mechanical activation time (MAT) and 
electromechanical delay (EMD) of the ventricle under LBBB by 21.3% and 10.1%, 
respectively. Furthermore, the CRT-only reduced the contractile adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) consumption by 5%, increased left ventricular (LV) pressure 
by 6%, and enhanced cardiac output (CO) by 0.2 L/min under LBBB condition. 
However, CRT-only barely affects the ventricle under RBBB condition. Under the 
LBBB condition, CRT + LVAD increased LV pressure and CO by 10.5% and by 
0.9 L/min, respectively. CRT + LVAD reduced ATP consumption by 15%, shortened 
the MAT by 23.4%, and shortened the EMD by 15.2%. In conclusion, we 
computationally predicted and quantified that the CRT + LVAD implementation is 
superior to CRT-only implementation particularly in HF with LBBB condition.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/4253928
PMCID: PMC6261249
PMID: 30538769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]