1. Med Sci Monit. 2018 Dec 8;24:8891-8898. doi: 10.12659/MSM.909803.

The Association of CEP135 rs4865047 and NPY2R rs1902491 Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms (SNPs) with Rapid Progression of Proliferative Diabetic 
Retinopathy in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus.

Derkac I(1), Januleviciene I(1), Sepetiene R(2), Valiauga R(3), Velickiene 
D(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Eye Clinic of Kaunas Medical 
Academy, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(2)Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(3)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, 
Kaunas, Lithuania.
(5)Institute of Endocrinology, Kaunas, Lithuania.

BACKGROUND Diabetic retinopathy has a varied prevalence, severity, and rate of 
progression. The aim of this study was to determine whether the single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the gene encoding a 135-kD centrosomal 
protein CEP135 rs4865047 and the gene encoding the type 2 NPY protein NPY2R 
rs1902491 were associated with the development of rapidly progressive 
proliferative diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS Patients with rapidly progressive proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy (n=48) were included in the study group. The control group (n=84) 
consisted of diabetes mellitus patients who had no proliferative diabetic 
retinopathy up to 15 years of diabetes duration. The reference group (n=90) 
included non-diabetic individuals who matched the study group by age and gender. 
The SNPs in the three groups were analyzed using real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) amplification. RESULTS The analysis of the distribution of 
genotypes in CEP135 rs4865047 and NPY2R rs1902491 detected significant 
differences only in the single nucleotide polymorphism rs4865047 genotype 
between the case and control group in comparison to the reference group. The 
co-dominant model showed that CEP135 rs4865047 was significantly associated with 
patients with rapidly progressive proliferative diabetic retinopathy (OR 7.2, 
95% CI, 2.28-22.74, p=0.001). No significant association was found for the NPY2R 
SNP rs1902491 genotype. CONCLUSIONS Our study reports a significant association 
of the CEP135 single nucleotide polymorphism rs4865047 genotype with rapidly 
progressive proliferative diabetic retinopathy and the control group. No 
significant association was found of the NPY2R single nucleotide polymorphism 
rs1902491 genotype.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.909803
PMCID: PMC6295137
PMID: 30531682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None.