1. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2018;59(3):747-753.

Morphological features predictive for BRAF(V600E) mutation in papillary thyroid 
microcarcinomas.

Nechifor-Boilă AC(1), Szász EA, Descotes F, Berger N, Zahan AE, Loghin A, 
Ceteraş DM, Borda A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Tîrgu Mureş, 
Romania; szekelyemoke@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The B-Raf proto-oncogene serine∕threonine kinase (BRAF) V600E 
(BRAF(V600E)) mutation represents a very specific marker for papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC), including microcarcinomas (PTMCs). However, assessment of the 
BRAF(V600E) mutational status is expensive and not available in all pathology 
laboratories.
AIM: We aimed to evaluate if we can identify those morphological features that 
could predict the presence of the BRAF(V600E) mutation in a series of PTMCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Nineteen PTMCs with analysis of 25 tumor foci were 
included. The following histological features were evaluated: size of the tumor, 
multifocality, extrathyroidal extension, tumor's border, characteristic PTC 
nuclear features, tumor-associated stromal reaction and histological variant. 
All PTMCs foci were subject to real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
amplification targeting the BRAF gene. BRAF(V600E) mutation was assessed by high 
resolution melting (HRM) analysis and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. 
Morphological features associated with BRAF(V600E) positive and BRAF(V600E) 
negative PTMCs were compared using the two-tailed Fisher's exact test, with α 
set at ≤0.05.
RESULTS: Out of the 25 PTMC foci, 16 (64%) were BRAF(V600E) negative, whereas 
nine (36%) were BRAF(V600E) positive. Our data showed that subcapsular 
localization (p=0.013), conventional histological type (p=0.05) and 
tumor-associated stromal reaction (moderate∕extensive fibrosis) (p=0.032) were 
significantly associated with the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated the value of several morphological features in 
predicting a BRAF(V600E) mutation profile in PTMCs. All these parameters should 
be documented in the histopathological report, as they seem to be associated 
with this mutation and could serve as a risk stratification tool in the 
selection of patients in need for adjuvant post-surgery therapy.

PMID: 30534813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]