1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Feb 28;47(4):1740-1758. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1256.

Functionality and cross-regulation of the four SprG/SprF type I toxin-antitoxin 
systems in Staphylococcus aureus.

Riffaud C(1), Pinel-Marie ML(1), Pascreau G(1), Felden B(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Rennes 1, Inserm, BRM (Bacterial Regulatory RNAs and Medicine) 
UMR_S 1230, 35000 Rennes, France.

Comment in
    10.1093/nar/gky1257.

Toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems are ubiquitous among bacteria, frequently expressed 
in multiple copies, and important for functions such as antibiotic resistance 
and persistence. Type I TA systems are composed of a stable toxic peptide whose 
expression is repressed by an unstable RNA antitoxin. Here, we investigated the 
functionalities, regulation, and possible cross-talk between three core genome 
copies of the pathogenicity island-encoded 'sprG1/sprF1' type I TA system in the 
human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Except for SprG4, all RNA from these 
pairs, sprG2/sprF2, sprG3/sprF3, sprG4/sprF4, are expressed in the HG003 strain. 
SprG2 and SprG3 RNAs encode toxic peptides whose overexpression triggers 
bacteriostasis, which is counteracted at the RNA level by the overexpression of 
SprF2 and SprF3 antitoxins. Complex formation between each toxin and its cognate 
antitoxin involves their overlapping 3' ends, and each SprF antitoxin 
specifically neutralizes the toxicity of its cognate SprG toxin without 
cross-talk. However, overexpression studies suggest cross-regulations occur at 
the RNA level between the SprG/SprF TA systems during growth. When subjected to 
H2O2-induced oxidative stress, almost all antitoxin levels dropped, while only 
SprG1 and SprF1 were reduced during phagocytosis-induced oxidative stress. 
SprG1, SprF1, SprF2, SprG3 and SprF3 levels also decrease during hyperosmotic 
stress. This suggests that novel SprG/SprF TA systems are involved in S. aureus 
persistence.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1256
PMCID: PMC6393307
PMID: 30551143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]