1. Front Plant Sci. 2018 Dec 5;9:1797. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01797. eCollection 
2018.

OsDIRP1, a Putative RING E3 Ligase, Plays an Opposite Role in Drought and Cold 
Stress Responses as a Negative and Positive Factor, Respectively, in Rice (Oryza 
sativa L.).

Cui LH(1)(2), Min HJ(1)(2), Byun MY(3), Oh HG(1)(2), Kim WT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Institute of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul, South 
Korea.
(3)Unit of Polar Genomics, Korea Polar Research Institute, Incheon, South Korea.

As higher plants are sessile organisms, they are unable to move to more 
favorable places; thus, they have developed the ability to survive under 
potentially detrimental conditions. Ubiquitination is a crucial 
post-translational protein modification and participates in abiotic stress 
responses in higher plants. In this study, we identified and characterized 
OsDIRP1 (Oryza sativa Drought-Induced RING Protein 1), a nuclear-localized 
putative RING E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase in rice (Oryza sativa L.). OsDIRP1 
expression was induced by drought, high salinity, and abscisic acid (ABA) 
treatment, but not by low temperature (4°C) stress, suggesting that OsDIRP1 is 
differentially regulated by different abiotic stresses. To investigate its 
possible role in abiotic stress responses, OsDIRP1-overexpressing transgenic 
rice plants (Ubi:OsDIRP1-sGFP) were generated, and their phenotypes were 
analyzed. The T4 Ubi:OsDIRP1-sGFP lines showed decreased tolerance to drought 
and salt stress as compared to wild-type rice plants. Moreover, Ubi:OsDIRP1-sGFP 
progeny were less sensitive to ABA than the wild-type during both germination 
and post-germination growth. In contrast, Ubi:OsDIRP1-sGFP plants exhibited 
markedly higher tolerance to prolonged cold (4°C) treatment. These results 
suggest that OsDIRP1 acts as a negative regulator during drought and salt 
stress, whereas it functions as a positive factor during the cold stress 
response in rice.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2018.01797
PMCID: PMC6290360
PMID: 30568669