1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Mar;179(3):475-479. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61007. Epub
2018  Dec 19.

Recurrent mosaic MTOR c.5930C > T (p.Thr1977Ile) variant causing megalencephaly, 
asymmetric polymicrogyria, and cutaneous pigmentary mosaicism: Case report and 
review of the literature.

Handoko M(1)(2), Emrick LT(1)(2)(3), Rosenfeld JA(3), Wang X(3), Tran AA(3), 
Turner A(3), Belmont JW(3); Undiagnosed Diseases Network; Lee BH(3), Bacino 
CA(3), Chao HT(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology and Developmental 
Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(2)Section of Child Neurology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(4)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, Texas.

Genetic alterations leading to overactivation of mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) signaling result in brain overgrowth syndromes such as focal cortical 
dysplasia (FCD) and megalencephaly. Megalencephaly with cutis tri-color of the 
Blaschko-linear type pigmentary mosaicism and intellectual disability is a rare 
neurodevelopmental disorder attributed to the recurrent mosaic c.5930C > T 
(p.Thr1977Ile) MTOR variant. This variant was previously reported at low to 
intermediate levels of mosaicism in the peripheral blood of three unrelated 
individuals with consistent clinical findings. We report a fourth case of a 
3-year-old female presenting with megalencephaly, obstructive hydrocephalus due 
to cerebral aqueductal stenosis, asymmetric polymicrogyria, dysgenesis of the 
corpus callosum, hypotonia, developmental delay, and cutaneous pigmentary 
mosaicism. Oligonucleotide and SNP chromosomal microarray (CMA), karyotype, and 
trio whole exome sequencing (WES) in the peripheral blood, as well as a targeted 
gene variant panel from fibroblasts derived from hyperpigmented and 
non-hyperpigmented skin did not detect any abnormalities in MTOR or other genes 
associated with brain overgrowth syndromes. Unlike the previously reported 
cases, the de novo c.5930C > T (p.Thr1977Ile) MTOR variant was detected at 32% 
mosaicism in our patient only after WES was performed on fibroblast-derived DNA 
from the hyperpigmented skin. This case demonstrates the tissue variability in 
mosaic expression of the recurrent p.Thr1977Ile MTOR variant, emphasizes the 
need for skin biopsies in the genetic evaluation of patients with skin 
pigmentary mosaicism, and expands the clinical phenotype associated with this 
pathogenic MTOR variant.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61007
PMID: 30569621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]