1. Stat Med. 2019 Apr 30;38(9):1529-1542. doi: 10.1002/sim.8066. Epub 2018 Dec
18.

Assessing the robustness of sisVIVE in a Mendelian randomization study to 
estimate the causal effect of body mass index on income using multiple SNPs from 
understanding society.

Bao Y(1), Clarke PS(1), Smart M(1), Kumari M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Social and Economic Research, University of Essex, Colchester, 
UK.

The "some invalid, some valid instrumental variable estimator" (sisVIVE) is a 
lasso-based method for instrumental variables (IVs) regression of outcome on an 
exposure. In principle, sisVIVE is robust to some of the IVs in the analysis 
being invalid, in the sense of being related to the outcome variable through 
pathways not mediated by the exposure. In this paper, we consider the 
application of sisVIVE to a Mendelian randomization study in which multiple 
genetic variants are used as IVs to estimate the causal effect of body mass 
index on personal income in the presence of unobserved confounding. In addition 
to analyzing data from the large-scale longitudinal household survey 
Understanding Society, we conduct a simulation study to (a) assess the 
performance of sisVIVE in relation to that of competing robust methods like 
"MR-Egger" and "MR-Median" and (b) identify scenarios under which its absolute 
performance is poor. We find that sisVIVE outperforms alternative robust 
methods, in terms of mean-square error, across a wide range of scenarios, but 
that its performance is poor in absolute terms when the presence of indirect 
pleiotropy leads to failure of the "InSIDE" condition, which is not explicitly 
required for identification. We argue that this is because the consistency 
criterion for sisVIVE does not identify the true causal effect when InSIDE 
fails.

© 2018 The Authors. Statistics in Medicine Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/sim.8066
PMCID: PMC6492086
PMID: 30565280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]