1. Aging (Albany NY). 2018 Dec 20;10(12):4000-4023. doi: 10.18632/aging.101690.

The ER-alpha mutation Y537S confers Tamoxifen-resistance via enhanced 
mitochondrial metabolism, glycolysis and Rho-GDI/PTEN signaling: Implicating 
TIGAR in somatic resistance to endocrine therapy.

Fiorillo M(1)(2), Sanchez-Alvarez R(3), Sotgia F(1), Lisanti MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine, School of Environment and Life Sciences, Biomedical 
Research Centre (BRC), University of Salford, Greater Manchester M5 4WT, United 
Kingdom.
(2)The Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, The University 
of Calabria, Cosenza, Italy.
(3)University of Manchester, The Paterson Institute, Manchester M1 39PL, United 
Kingdom.

Naturally-occurring somatic mutations in the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) have 
been previously implicated in the clinical development of resistance to hormonal 
therapies, such as Tamoxifen. For example, the somatic mutation Y537S has been 
specifically associated with acquired endocrine resistance. Briefly, we 
recombinantly-transduced MCF7 cells with a lentiviral vector encoding ESR1 
(Y537S). As a first step, we confirmed that MCF7-Y537S cells are indeed 
functionally resistant to Tamoxifen, as compared with vector alone controls. 
Importantly, further phenotypic characterization of Y537S cells revealed that 
they show increased resistance to Tamoxifen-induced apoptosis, allowing them to 
form mammospheres with higher efficiency, in the presence of Tamoxifen. 
Similarly, Y537S cells had elevated basal levels of ALDH activity, a marker of 
"stemness", which was also Tamoxifen-resistant. Metabolic flux analysis of Y537S 
cells revealed a hyper-metabolic phenotype, with significantly increased 
mitochondrial respiration and high ATP production, as well as enhanced aerobic 
glycolysis. Finally, to understand which molecular signaling pathways that may 
be hyper-activated in Y537S cells, we performed unbiased label-free proteomics 
analysis. Our results indicate that TIGAR over-expression and the Rho-GDI/PTEN 
signaling pathway appear to be selectively activated by the Y537S mutation. 
Remarkably, this profile is nearly identical in MCF7-TAMR cells; these cells 
were independently-generated in vitro, suggesting a highly conserved mechanism 
underlying Tamoxifen-resistance. Importantly, we show that the Y537S mutation is 
specifically associated with the over-expression of a number of protein markers 
of poor clinical outcome (COL6A3, ERBB2, STAT3, AFP, TFF1, CDK4 and CD44). In 
summary, we have uncovered a novel metabolic mechanism leading to endocrine 
resistance, which may have important clinical implications for improving patient 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.101690
PMCID: PMC6326696
PMID: 30573703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: MPL and FS hold a 
minority interest in Lunella Biotech, Inc.