1. Biochem J. 2019 Jan 31;476(2):375-384. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20180692.

Double trouble? Gag in conjunction with double insert in HIV protease 
contributes to reduced DRV susceptibility.

Williams A(1), Basson A(2)(3), Achilonu I(1), Dirr HW(1), Morris L(2), Sayed 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.
(2)Centre for HIV and STIs, National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) 
of the National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS), Johannesburg, South Africa.
(3)HIV Pathogenesis Research Unit, Department of Molecular Medicine and 
Haematology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 7 York 
Road, Parktown, 2193 Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa 
yasien.sayed@wits.ac.za.

HIV protease is essential for processing the Gag polyprotein to produce 
infectious virions and is a major target in antiretroviral therapy. We have 
identified an unusual HIV-1 subtype C variant that contains insertions of 
leucine and asparagine (L38↑N↑L) in the hinge region of protease at position 38. 
This was isolated from a protease inhibitor naïve infant. Isothermal titration 
calorimetry showed that 10% less of L38↑N↑L protease was in the active 
conformation as compared with a reference strain. L38↑N↑L protease displayed a 
±50% reduction in KM and kcat The catalytic efficiency (kcat/KM) of L38↑N↑L 
protease was not significantly different from that of wild type although there 
was a 42% reduction in specific activity for the variant. An in vitro phenotypic 
assay showed the L38↑N↑L protease to be susceptible to lopinavir (LPV), 
atazanavir (ATV) and darunavir in the context of an unrelated Gag. However, in 
the presence of the related Gag, L38↑N↑L showed reduced susceptibility to 
darunavir while remaining susceptible to LPV and ATV. Furthermore, a reduction 
in viral replication capacity (RC) was observed in combination with the related 
Gag. The reduced susceptibility to darunavir and decrease in RC may be due to 
PTAPP duplication in the related Gag. The present study shows the importance of 
considering the Gag region when looking at drug susceptibility of HIV-1 protease 
variants.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20180692
PMID: 30573649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]