1. Insect Biochem Mol Biol. 2019 Jan;104:82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.12.010. 
Epub 2018 Dec 19.

Distinctive regulatory properties of pyruvate kinase 1 from Aedes aegypti 
mosquitoes.

Petchampai N(1), Murillo-Solano C(1), Isoe J(2), Pizarro JC(3), Scaraffia PY(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Medicine, Vector-Borne Infectious Disease Research 
Center, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, 85721, USA.
(3)Department of Tropical Medicine, Vector-Borne Infectious Disease Research 
Center, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. Electronic address: jpizarro@tulane.edu.
(4)Department of Tropical Medicine, Vector-Borne Infectious Disease Research 
Center, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA, 70112, USA. Electronic address: pscaraff@tulane.edu.

Female Aedes aegypti mosquitoes are vectors of arboviruses that cause diseases 
of public health significance. The discovery of new metabolic targets is crucial 
for improving mosquito control strategies. We recently demonstrated that glucose 
oxidation supports ammonia detoxification in A. aegypti. Pyruvate kinase (PK, EC 
2.7.1.40) catalyzes the last step of the glycolytic pathway. In most organisms, 
one or more allosteric effectors control PK activity. However, the kinetic 
properties and structure of PK in mosquitoes have not been previously reported. 
In this study, two alternatively spliced mRNA variants (AaPK1 and AaPK2) that 
code for PKs were identified in the A. aegypti genome. The AaPK1 mRNA variant, 
which encodes a 529 amino acid protein with an estimated molecular weight of 
∼57 kDa, was cloned. The protein was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified. 
The AaPK1 kinetic properties were identified. The recombinant protein was also 
crystallized and its 3D structure determined. We found that alanine, glutamine, 
proline, serine and fructose-1-phosphate displayed a classic allosteric 
activation on AaPK1. Ribulose-5-phosphate acted as an allosteric inhibitor of 
AaPK1 but its inhibitory effect was reversed by alanine, glutamine, proline and 
serine. Additionally, the allosteric activation of AaPK1 by amino acids was 
weakened by fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, whereas the allosteric activation of 
AaPK1 by alanine and serine was diminished by glucose-6-phosphate. The AaPK1 
structure shows the presence of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate in the allosteric 
site. Together, our results reveal that specific amino acids and phosphorylated 
sugars tightly regulate conformational dynamics and catalytic changes of AaPK1. 
The distinctive AaPK1 allosteric properties support a complex role for this 
enzyme within mosquito metabolism.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ibmb.2018.12.010
PMCID: PMC6814295
PMID: 30578824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest The authors declare 
that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.