1. J Inflamm Res. 2018 Dec 11;11:477-502. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S178084. eCollection 
2018.

Inflammasomes: Pandora's box for sepsis.

Kumar V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Children's Health Queensland Clinical Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Mater Research, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia, vij_tox@yahoo.com.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia, vij_tox@yahoo.com.

Sepsis was known to ancient Greeks since the time of great physician Hippocrates 
(460-377 BC) without exact information regarding its pathogenesis. With time and 
medical advances, it is now considered as a condition associated with organ 
dysfunction occurring in the presence of systemic infection as a result of 
dysregulation of the immune response. Still with this advancement, we are 
struggling for the development of target-based therapeutic approach for the 
management of sepsis. The advancement in understanding the immune system and its 
working has led to novel discoveries in the last 50 years, including different 
pattern recognition receptors. Inflammasomes are also part of these novel 
discoveries in the field of immunology which are <20 years old in terms of their 
first identification. They serve as important cytosolic pattern recognition 
receptors required for recognizing cytosolic pathogens, and their 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns play an important role in the 
pathogenesis of sepsis. The activation of both canonical and non-canonical 
inflammasome signaling pathways is involved in mounting a proinflammatory immune 
response via regulating the generation of IL-1Î², IL-18, IL-33 cytokines and 
pyroptosis. In addition to pathogens and their pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns, death/damage-associated molecular patterns and other proinflammatory 
molecules involved in the pathogenesis of sepsis affect inflammasomes and vice 
versa. Thus, the present review is mainly focused on the inflammasomes, their 
role in the regulation of immune response associated with sepsis, and their 
targeting as a novel therapeutic approach.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S178084
PMCID: PMC6294171
PMID: 30588058

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The author reports no conflicts of 
interest in this work.