1. Circulation. 2019 Jun 18;139(25):e1082-e1143. doi:
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625.  Epub 2018 Nov 10.

2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline on the 
Management of Blood Cholesterol: A Report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines.

Grundy SM(1), Stone NJ(1), Bailey AL(1), Beam C(1), Birtcher KK(1), Blumenthal 
RS(1), Braun LT(1), de Ferranti S(1), Faiella-Tommasino J(1), Forman DE(1), 
Goldberg R(1), Heidenreich PA(1), Hlatky MA(1), Jones DW(1), Lloyd-Jones D(1), 
Lopez-Pajares N(1), Ndumele CE(1), Orringer CE(1), Peralta CA(1), Saseen JJ(1), 
Smith SC Jr(1), Sperling L(1), Virani SS(1), Yeboah J(1).

Author information:
(1)ACC/AHA Representative. †AACVPR Representative. ‡ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison. §Prevention Subcommittee Liaison. ‖PCNA 
Representative. ¶AAPA Representative. **AGS Representative. ††ADA 
Representative. ‡‡PM Representative. §§ACPM Representative. ‖‖NLA 
Representative. ¶¶APhA Representative. ***ASPC Representative. †††ABC 
Representative.

Erratum in
    Circulation. 2019 Jun 18;139(25):e1182-e1186. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000698.
    Circulation. 2023 Aug 15;148(7):e5. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001172.

Comment in
    Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2019 Jun 
20;40(1):/j/hmbci.2019.40.issue-1/hmbci-2019-0014/hmbci-2019-0014.xml. doi: 
10.1515/hmbci-2019-0014.
    J Clin Lipidol. 2019 May - Jun;13(3):356-359. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacl.2019.05.009.
    J Clin Lipidol. 2019 May - Jun;13(3):360-366. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacl.2019.05.010.

Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart 
Association (AHA) have translated scientific evidence into clinical practice 
guidelines with recommendations to improve cardiovascular health. These 
guidelines, which are based on systematic methods to evaluate and classify 
evidence, provide a foundation for the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. 
The ACC and AHA sponsor the development and publication of clinical practice 
guidelines without commercial support, and members volunteer their time to the 
writing and review efforts. Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations 
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing cardiovascular disease 
(CVD). The focus is on medical practice in the United States, but these 
guidelines are relevant to patients throughout the world. Although guidelines 
may be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the intent is to improve 
quality of care and align with patients’ interests. Guidelines are intended to 
define practices meeting the needs of patients in most, but not all, 
circumstances, and should not replace clinical judgment. Recommendations for 
guideline-directed management and therapy, which encompasses clinical 
evaluation, diagnostic testing, and both pharmacological and procedural 
treatments, are effective only when followed by both practitioners and patients. 
Adherence to recommendations can be enhanced by shared decision-making between 
clinicians and patients, with patient engagement in selecting interventions on 
the basis of individual values, preferences, and associated conditions and 
comorbidities. The ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines strives to 
ensure that the guideline writing committee both contains requisite expertise 
and is representative of the broader medical community by selecting experts from 
a broad array of backgrounds, representing different geographic regions, sexes, 
races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases, and scopes of clinical 
practice, and by inviting organizations and professional societies with related 
interests and expertise to participate as partners or collaborators. The ACC and 
AHA have rigorous policies and methods to ensure that documents are developed 
without bias or improper influence. The complete policy on relationships with 
industry and other entities (RWI) can be found online. Beginning in 2017, 
numerous modifications to the guidelines have been and continue to be 
implemented to make guidelines shorter and enhance “user friendliness.” 
Guidelines are written and presented in a modular knowledge chunk format, in 
which each chunk includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis, 
recommendation-specific supportive text and, when appropriate, flow diagrams or 
additional tables. Hyperlinked references are provided for each modular 
knowledge chunk to facilitate quick access and review. More structured 
guidelines–including word limits (“targets”) and a web guideline supplement for 
useful but noncritical tables and figures–are 2 such changes. This Preamble is 
an abbreviated version, with the detailed version available online. The reader 
is encouraged to consult the full-text guideline for additional guidance and 
details, since the executive summary contains mainly the recommendations.

1. In all individuals, emphasize a heart-healthy lifestyle across the life 
course. A healthy lifestyle reduces atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease 
(ASCVD) risk at all ages. In younger individuals, healthy lifestyle can reduce 
development of risk factors and is the foundation of ASCVD risk reduction. In 
young adults 20 to 39 years of age, an assessment of lifetime risk facilitates 
the clinician–patient risk discussion (see No. 6) and emphasizes intensive 
lifestyle efforts. In all age groups, lifestyle therapy is the primary 
intervention for metabolic syndrome. 2. In patients with clinical ASCVD, reduce 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) with high-intensity statin therapy 
or maximally tolerated statin therapy. The more LDL-C is reduced on statin 
therapy, the greater will be subsequent risk reduction. Use a maximally 
tolerated statin to lower LDL-C levels by ≥50%. 3. In very high-risk ASCVD, use 
a LDL-C threshold of 70 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L) to consider addition of nonstatins to 
statin therapy. Very high-risk includes a history of multiple major ASCVD events 
or 1 major ASCVD event and multiple high-risk conditions. In very high-risk 
ASCVD patients, it is reasonable to add ezetimibe to maximally tolerated statin 
therapy when the LDL-C level remains ≥70 mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L). In patients at 
very high risk whose LDL-C level remains ≥70 mg/dL(≥1.8 mmol/L) on maximally 
tolerated statin and ezetimibe therapy, adding a PCSK9 inhibitor is reasonable, 
although the long-term safety (>3 years) is uncertain and cost effectiveness is 
low at mid-2018 list prices. 4. In patients with severe primary 
hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C level ≥190 mg/dL [=4.9 mmol/L]), without calculating 
10-year ASCVD risk, begin high-intensity statin therapy. If the LDL-C level 
remains ≥100 mg/dL (≥2.6 mmol/L), adding ezetimibe is reasonable. If the LDL-C 
level on statin plus ezetimibe remains ≥100 mg/dL (≥2.6 mmol/L) and the patient 
has multiple factors that increase subsequent risk of ASCVD events, a PCSK9 
inhibitor may be considered, although the long-term safety (>3 years) is 
uncertain and economic value is low at mid-2018 list prices. 5. In patients 40 
to 75 years of age with diabetes mellitus and LDL-C ≥70 mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), 
start moderate-intensity statin therapy without calculating 10-year ASCVD risk. 
In patients with diabetes mellitus at higher risk, especially those with 
multiple risk factors or those 50 to 75 years of age, it is reasonable to use a 
high-intensity statin to reduce the LDL-C level by ≥50%. 6. In adults 40 to 75 
years of age evaluated for primary ASCVD prevention, have a clinician–patient 
risk discussion before starting statin therapy. Risk discussion should include a 
review of major risk factors (eg, cigarette smoking, elevated blood pressure, 
LDL-C, hemoglobin A1C [if indicated], and calculated 10-year risk of ASCVD); the 
presence of risk-enhancing factors (see No. 8); the potential benefits of 
lifestyle and statin therapies; the potential for adverse effects and drug–drug 
interactions; consideration of costs of statin therapy; and patient preferences 
and values in shared decision-making. 7. In adults 40 to 75 years of age without 
diabetes mellitus and with LDL-C levels ≥70 mg/ dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), at a 10-year 
ASCVD risk of ≥7.5%, start a moderate-intensity statin if a discussion of 
treatment options favors statin therapy. Risk-enhancing factors favor statin 
therapy (see No. 8). If risk status is uncertain, consider using coronary artery 
calcium (CAC) to improve specificity (see No. 9). If statins are indicated, 
reduce LDL-C levels by ≥30%, and if 10-year risk is ≥20%, reduce LDL-C levels by 
≥50%. 8. In adults 40 to 75 years of age without diabetes mellitus and 10-year 
risk of 7.5% to 19.9% (intermediate risk), risk-enhancing factors favor 
initiation of statin therapy (see No. 7). Risk-enhancing factors include family 
history of premature ASCVD; persistently elevated LDL-C levels ≥160 mg/dL (≥4.1 
mmol/L); metabolic syndrome; chronic kidney disease; history of preeclampsia or 
premature menopause (age <40 years); chronic inflammatory disorders (eg, 
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, or chronic HIV); high-risk ethnic groups (eg, 
South Asian); persistent elevations of triglycerides ≥175 mg/dL (≥1.97 mmol/L); 
and, if measured in selected individuals, apolipoprotein B ≥130 mg/dL, 
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein ≥2.0 mg/L, ankle-brachial index (ABI) <0.9 
and lipoprotein (a) ≥50 mg/dL or 125 nmol/L, especially at higher values of 
lipoprotein (a). Risk-enhancing factors may favor statin therapy in patients at 
10-year risk of 5% to 7.5% (borderline risk). 9. In adults 40 to 75 years of age 
without diabetes mellitus and with LDL-C levels ≥70 mg/dL to 189 mg/dL (≥1.8–4.9 
mmol/L), at a 10-year ASCVD risk of ≥7.5% to 19.9%, if a decision about statin 
therapy is uncertain, consider measuring CAC. If CAC is zero, treatment with 
statin therapy may be withheld or delayed, except in cigarette smokers, those 
with diabetes mellitus, and those with a strong family history of premature 
ASCVD. A CAC score of 1 to 99 favors statin therapy, especially in those =55 
years of age. For any patient, if the CAC score is ≥100 Agatston units or ≥75th 
percentile, statin therapy is indicated unless otherwise deferred by the outcome 
of clinician–patient risk discussion. 10. Assess adherence and percentage 
response to LDL-C–lowering medications and lifestyle changes with repeat lipid 
measurement 4 to 12 weeks after statin initiation or dose adjustment, repeated 
every 3 to 12 months as needed. Define responses to lifestyle and statin therapy 
by percentage reductions in LDL-C levels compared with baseline. In ASCVD 
patients at very high-risk, triggers for adding nonstatin drug therapy are 
defined by threshold LDL-C levels ≥70 mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L) on maximal statin 
therapy (see No. 3).

DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625
PMCID: PMC7403606
PMID: 30586774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]