1. Biomed Rep. 2019 Jan;10(1):29-32. doi: 10.3892/br.2018.1170. Epub 2018 Nov 15.

Analysis of BMP4 (rs121912765) polymorphism in Iranian women with history of 
recurrent spontaneous abortion: A case-control study.

Mazdapour M(1), Dehghani Ashkezari M(1), Seifati SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Biotechnology Research Center, Ashkezar Branch, Islamic Azad 
University, Ashkezar, Yazd 2362542566, Iran.

Recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) defines as the consecutive loss of at least 
two pregnancies prior to the 20th week of gestation. A qualitative diagnosis of 
infertility can only be performed by focusing on female and male physical 
abnormalities, endocrine irregularities and genetic conditions. The aim of the 
present study was to evaluate the association between a common polymorphism of 
bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) (rs121912765; 278A>G) with female 
infertility. At present there is a lack of data on the relevance of BMP4 
polymorphism to spontaneous abortion among Iranian subjects. In the present 
case-control study, the BMP4 (rs121912765) polymorphism was investigated in 70 
infertile women and 100 healthy subjects from Iran by polymerase chain 
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. Odds ratios (ORs) 
and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the association between BMP4 
(rs121912765) polymorphism and risk of recurrent abortion risk in Iranian women 
were determined using binary logistic regression, and the genotype and allele 
frequencies were compared using the χ2 test. Results indicated significant 
association between the rs121912765 polymorphism and recurrent spontaneous 
abortion. The χ2 test indicated that the allele frequencies differed (OR=0.071, 
95%CI=0.022-0.181; P<0.0001), with the A allele appearing more prevalent in the 
case samples. Therefore, this polymorphism may be a useful genetic marker for 
diagnosing female infertility in the context of RSA. The study of such a 
polymorphism can provide an important basis for targeting interventions and 
prevention in high-risk individuals. Therefore, further studies are necessary to 
establish the association of BMP4 (rs121912765) polymorphism in larger and more 
diverse populations.

DOI: 10.3892/br.2018.1170
PMCID: PMC6299254
PMID: 30588300