1. Front Immunol. 2018 Dec 7;9:2900. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02900. eCollection 
2018.

CD5, an Undercover Regulator of TCR Signaling.

Voisinne G(1), Gonzalez de Peredo A(2), Roncagalli R(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix Marseille Université, INSERM, 
CNRS, Marseille, France.
(2)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, Département Biologie 
Structural Biophysique, Protéomique Génopole Toulouse Midi Pyrénées CNRS UMR 
5089, Toulouse, France.

T cells are critical components of adaptive immunity. As such, their activation 
is regulated by the T cell receptor (TCR) that constantly scan peptides 
associated with major histocompatibility complexes (MHC). TCR engagement 
initiates a series of molecular events leading to cytokine secretion, 
proliferation, and differentiation of T cells. As a second coincident event, 
activation of co-stimulatory molecules, such as CD28, synergize with the TCR in 
order to prolong and/or amplify intracellular signals. With the recent advances 
in immunotherapies targeting T cells, co-inhibitory receptors are of growing 
interest for immunologists due to their potential modulatory properties on T 
cell functions. However, special attention should be dedicated to avoid unwanted 
clinical outcomes (1). In particular, Manichean categorization of receptors 
based on incomplete functional knowledge can lead to an over-simplistic view of 
complex cellular regulations. Thus, analysis of the functions that characterize 
these receptors in diverse physiological contexts remains essential for their 
rational use in therapeutic protocols. Here we focus on CD5, a transmembrane 
receptor that regulates T cell functions and development but remains poorly 
characterized at the molecular level. We will review its roles in physiological 
conditions and suggest potential molecular effectors that could account for 
CD5-dependent regulation of TCR signaling.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.02900
PMCID: PMC6292949
PMID: 30581443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]