1. Genet Epidemiol. 2019 Apr;43(3):342-351. doi: 10.1002/gepi.22179. Epub 2018
Dec  30.

A novel association of rs13334070 in the RPGRIP1L gene with adiposity factors 
discovered by joint linkage and linkage disequilibrium analysis in Iranian 
pedigrees: Tehran Cardiometabolic Genetic Study (TCGS).

Javanrouh N(1)(2), Soltanian AR(1), Tapak L(1), Azizi F(3), Ott J(4), Daneshpour 
MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Modeling of Non-Communicable 
Diseases Research Center, School of Public Health, Hamadan University of Medical 
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular, Cellular and Molecular Endocrine 
Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Thyroid, Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for 
Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Statistical Genomics Methodology, Laboratory of Statistical 
Genetics, Rockefeller University, New York, New York.

Understanding the genetic and metabolic bases of obesity is helpful in planning 
and developing health strategies. Therefore, the first family-based joint 
linkage and linkage disequilibrium study was conducted in Iranian pedigrees to 
assess the relationship between obesity and single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) located in the 16q12.2 region. In the present study, a total of 13,344 
individuals were included, of whom 12,502 individuals were within 3,109 
pedigrees and 842 were unrelated singletons. To investigate the relationship 
between obesity and genetic variants, a joint model of linkage and linkage 
disequilibrium was applied. Moreover, a sequence kernel association test (SKAT) 
was used to evaluate the association of the SNP set with body size and lipid 
profile measurements. The joint model showed that rs13334070, in the intron 4 of 
the RPGRIP1L gene, has a significant association with obesity. According to the 
4-gamete rule, which is a procedure for constructing SNP sets by considering 
recombination occurrence between SNPs, this polymorphism has a high correlation 
with six nearby SNPs that make an SNP set. SKAT showed that this SNP set has a 
significant association with body size factors, but almost no association with 
most of the lipid profile measurements. In conclusion, from the result of this 
study, it might be reasonable to consider RPGRIP1L as an important gene whose 
variations could be associated with obesity risk factors.

Â© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.22179
PMID: 30597647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]