1. J Hered. 2019 Mar 5;110(2):194-210. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esy071.

Two Proximally Close Priority Candidate Genes for diplopodia-1, an Autosomal 
Inherited Craniofacial-Limb Syndrome in the Chicken: MRE11 and GPR83.

O'Hare EA(1)(2), Antin PB(3), Delany ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis, CA.
(2)Elizabeth A. O'Hare is now at the Department of Biological Sciences, Towson 
University, Towson, MD.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) and expression technologies were utilized to 
investigate the genes and sequence elements in a 586 kb region of chicken 
chromosome 1 associated with the autosomal recessive diplopodia-1 (dp-1) 
mutation. This mutation shows a syndromic phenotype similar to known human 
developmental abnormalities (e.g., cleft palate, polydactyly, omphalocele 
[exposed viscera]). Toward our goal to ascertain the variant responsible, the 
entire 586 kb region was sequenced following utilization of a specifically 
designed capture array and to confirm/validate fine-mapping results. 
Bioinformatic analyses identified a total of 6142 sequence variants, which 
included SNPs, indels, and gaps. Of these, 778 SNPs, 146 micro-indels, and 581 
gaps were unique to the UCD-Dp-1.003 inbred congenic line; those found within 
exons and splice sites were studied for contribution to the mutant phenotype. 
Upon further validation with additional mutant samples, a smaller subset (of 
variants [51]) remains linked to the mutation. Additionally, utilization of 
specific samples in the NGS technology was advantageous in that fine-mapping 
methodologies eliminated an additional 326 kb of sequence information on 
chromosome 1. Predicted and confirmed protein-coding genes within the smaller 
260 kb region were assessed for their developmental expression patterns over 
several stages of early embryogenesis in regions/tissues of interest (e.g., 
digits, craniofacial region). Based on these results and known function in other 
vertebrates, 2 genes within 5 kb of each other, MRE11 and GPR83, are proposed as 
high-priority candidates for the dp-1 mutation.

Â© The American Genetic Association 2018.

DOI: 10.1093/jhered/esy071
PMCID: PMC6399517
PMID: 30597046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]