1. J Mol Cell Biol. 2019 Sep 19;11(9):725-735. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjy085.

DCAF1 (VprBP): emerging physiological roles for a unique dual-service E3 
ubiquitin ligase substrate receptor.

Schabla NM(1), Mondal K(1), Swanson PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University, 2500 
California Plaza, Omaha, NE, USA.

Cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) comprise a large group of modular eukaryotic E3 
ubiquitin ligases. Within this family, the CRL4 ligase (consisting of the 
Cullin4 [CUL4] scaffold protein, the Rbx1 RING finger domain protein, the DNA 
damage-binding protein 1 [DDB1], and one of many DDB1-associated substrate 
receptor proteins) has been intensively studied in recent years due to its 
involvement in regulating various cellular processes, its role in cancer 
development and progression, and its subversion by viral accessory proteins. 
Initially discovered as a target for hijacking by the human immunodeficiency 
virus accessory protein r, the normal targets and function of the CRL4 substrate 
receptor protein DDB1-Cul4-associated factor 1 (DCAF1; also known as VprBP) had 
remained elusive, but newer studies have begun to shed light on these questions. 
Here, we review recent progress in understanding the diverse physiological roles 
of this DCAF1 in supporting various general and cell type-specific cellular 
processes in its context with the CRL4 E3 ligase, as well as another HECT-type 
E3 ligase with which DCAF1 also associates, called EDD/UBR5. We also discuss 
emerging questions and areas of future study to uncover the dynamic roles of 
DCAF1 in normal physiology.

Â© The Author(s) (2019). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Journal of Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS.

DOI: 10.1093/jmcb/mjy085
PMCID: PMC6821201
PMID: 30590706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]