1. J Mol Biol. 2019 Aug 23;431(18):3568-3590. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.12.013.
Epub  2018 Dec 28.

ABCF ATPases Involved in Protein Synthesis, Ribosome Assembly and Antibiotic 
Resistance: Structural and Functional Diversification across the Tree of Life.

Murina V(1), Kasari M(2), Takada H(1), Hinnu M(3), Saha CK(2), Grimshaw JW(4), 
Seki T(5), Reith M(2), Putrinš M(3), Tenson T(3), Strahl H(4), Hauryliuk V(6), 
Atkinson GC(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden; 
Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), Umeå University, 901 
87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Nooruse 1, 50411 Tartu, 
Estonia.
(4)Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and Molecular 
Biosciences Newcastle University, Richardson Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4AX, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Applied Chemistry and Biotechnology, Faculty of Engineering, 
Chiba University, 263-8522 Chiba, Japan.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden; 
Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine Sweden (MIMS), Umeå University, 901 
87 Umeå, Sweden; University of Tartu, Institute of Technology, Nooruse 1, 50411 
Tartu, Estonia.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden. 
Electronic address: gemma.atkinson@umu.se.

Within the larger ABC superfamily of ATPases, ABCF family members eEF3 in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and EttA in Escherichia coli have been found to 
function as ribosomal translation factors. Several other ABCFs including 
biochemically characterized VgaA, LsaA and MsrE confer resistance to antibiotics 
that target the peptidyl transferase center and exit tunnel of the ribosome. 
However, the diversity of ABCF subfamilies, the relationships among subfamilies 
and the evolution of antibiotic resistance (ARE) factors from other ABCFs have 
not been explored. To address this, we analyzed the presence of ABCFs and their 
domain architectures in 4505 genomes across the tree of life. We find 45 
distinct subfamilies of ABCFs that are widespread across bacterial and 
eukaryotic phyla, suggesting that they were present in the last common ancestor 
of both. Surprisingly, currently known ARE ABCFs are not confined to a distinct 
lineage of the ABCF family tree, suggesting that ARE can readily evolve from 
other ABCF functions. Our data suggest that there are a number of previously 
unidentified ARE ABCFs in antibiotic producers and important human pathogens. We 
also find that ATPase-deficient mutants of all four E. coli ABCFs (EttA, YbiT, 
YheS and Uup) inhibit protein synthesis, indicative of their ribosomal function, 
and demonstrate a genetic interaction of ABCFs Uup and YheS with translational 
GTPase BipA involved in assembly of the 50S ribosome subunit. Finally, we show 
that the ribosome-binding resistance factor VmlR from Bacillus subtilis is 
localized to the cytoplasm, ruling out a role in antibiotic efflux.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.12.013
PMCID: PMC6723617
PMID: 30597160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]