1. Mass Spectrom Rev. 2019 Aug;38(4-5):356-379. doi: 10.1002/mas.21586. Epub 2019
 Jan 3.

Global and site-specific analysis of protein glycosylation in complex biological 
systems with Mass Spectrometry.

Xiao H(1), Sun F(1), Suttapitugsakul S(1), Wu R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the Petit Institute for 
Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 30332, 
Georgia.

Protein glycosylation is ubiquitous in biological systems and plays essential 
roles in many cellular events. Global and site-specific analysis of 
glycoproteins in complex biological samples can advance our understanding of 
glycoprotein functions and cellular activities. However, it is extraordinarily 
challenging because of the low abundance of many glycoproteins and the 
heterogeneity of glycan structures. The emergence of mass spectrometry 
(MS)-based proteomics has provided us an excellent opportunity to 
comprehensively study proteins and their modifications, including glycosylation. 
In this review, we first summarize major methods for glycopeptide/glycoprotein 
enrichment, followed by the chemical and enzymatic methods to generate a mass 
tag for glycosylation site identification. We next discuss the systematic and 
quantitative analysis of glycoprotein dynamics. Reversible protein glycosylation 
is dynamic, and systematic study of glycoprotein dynamics helps us gain insight 
into glycoprotein functions. The last part of this review focuses on the 
applications of MS-based proteomics to study glycoproteins in different 
biological systems, including yeasts, plants, mice, human cells, and clinical 
samples. Intact glycopeptide analysis is also included in this section. Because 
of the importance of glycoproteins in complex biological systems, the field of 
glycoproteomics will continue to grow in the next decade. Innovative and 
effective MS-based methods will exponentially advance glycoscience, and enable 
us to identify glycoproteins as effective biomarkers for disease detection and 
drug targets for disease treatment. © 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Mass Spec Rev 
9999: XX-XX, 2019.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mas.21586
PMCID: PMC6610820
PMID: 30605224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]