1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018 Nov 6;7(21):e010085. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.118.010085.

8-Aminoguanine Induces Diuresis, Natriuresis, and Glucosuria by Inhibiting 
Purine Nucleoside Phosphorylase and Reduces Potassium Excretion by Inhibiting 
Rac1.

Jackson EK(1), Mi Z(1), Kleyman TR(2), Cheng D(1).

Author information:
(1)2 Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine Pittsburgh PA.
(2)1 Renal-Electrolyte Division Department of Medicine University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine Pittsburgh PA.

Background 8-Aminoguanosine and 8-aminoguanine are K+-sparing natriuretics that 
increase glucose excretion. Most effects of 8-aminoguanosine are due to its 
metabolism to 8-aminoguanine. However, the mechanism by which 8-aminoguanine 
affects renal function is unknown and is the focus of this investigation. 
Methods and Results Because 8-aminoguanine has structural similarities with 
inhibitors of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), Na+/H+ exchangers, and 
adenosine A1 receptors, we examined the effects of 8-aminoguanine on EN aC 
activity in mouse collecting duct cells, on intracellular pH of human proximal 
tubular epithelial cells, on responses to a selective A1-receptor agonist 
in vivo, and on renal excretory function in A1-receptor knockout rats. These 
experiments showed that 8-aminoguanine did not block EN aC, Na+/H+ exchangers, 
or A1 receptors. Because Rac1 enhances activity of mineralocorticoid receptors 
and some guanosine analogues inhibit Rac1, we examined the effects of 
8-aminoguanine on Rac1 activity in mouse collecting duct cells. Rac1 activity 
was significantly inhibited by 8-aminoguanine. Because in vitro 8-aminoguanine 
is a purine nucleoside phosphorylase ( PNP ase) inhibitor, we examined the 
effects of a natriuretic dose of 8-aminoguanine on urinary excretion of PNP ase 
substrates and products. 8-Aminoguanine increased and decreased, respectively, 
urinary excretion of PNP ase substrates and products. Next we compared in rats 
the renal effects of intravenous doses of 9-deazaguanine ( PNP ase inhibitor) 
versus 8-aminoguanine. 8-Aminoguanine and 9-deazaguanine induced similar 
increases in urinary Na+ and glucose excretion, yet only 8-aminoguanine reduced 
K+ excretion. Nsc23766 (Rac1 inhibitor) mimicked the effects of 8-aminoguanine 
on K+ excretion. Conclusions 8-Aminoguanine increases Na+ and glucose excretion 
by blocking PNP ase and decreases K+ excretion by inhibiting Rac1.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.118.010085
PMCID: PMC6404173
PMID: 30608204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]