1. Am J Case Rep. 2019 Jan 3;20:10-14. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.911854.

A Case of Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Occurring in a Patient Treated for 
Essential Thrombocythemia.

Hassankrishnamurthy S(1), Mody MD(2)(3), Kota VK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, JSS Medical College, Mysore, Karnataka, 
India.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Atlanta Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND Essential thrombocythemia (ET) is one of the BCR-ABL gene fusion 
negative chronic myeloproliferative disorders (MPDs), which also include 
polycythemia vera (PV), and myelofibrosis. Few clinical cases have reported the 
progression of ET to chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) with the expression of 
the BCR-ABL gene. This report describes such a case and includes a review of 
other reported cases of CML co-occurring with BCR-ABL-negative chronic MPDs. 
CASE REPORT A 49-year-old woman was diagnosed with ET in 2007. Cytogenetic 
testing was negative for expression of the JAK2 or BCR-ABL1 genes. Eight years 
later, in January 2015, she presented with excessive fatigue, poor appetite, 
unintentional weight loss, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 24,700 per mL, 
hemoglobin of 9.9 g/dl, and a platelet count of 557,000 per mL, with blasts and 
basophils in the blood film. Cytogenetic analysis with fluorescent in situ 
hybridization (FISH) confirmed a 9: 22 chromosomal translocation (Philadelphia 
chromosome), and quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(qRT-PCR) detected the expression of the BCR-ABL gene, confirming a diagnosis of 
CML. In February 2015, first-line therapy commenced with nilotinib, which was 
changed to imatinib after three months. During the following nine months, 
qRT-PCR confirmed a trend to deep molecular remission (MR5). However, she 
developed early myelofibrosis, and myelosuppressive therapy was resumed. 
CONCLUSIONS This rare case highlights the importance of cytogenetic testing in 
cases of CMPD that transform to CML, not only to confirm the diagnosis but to 
plan treatment, as Philadelphia chromosome-positive and -negative cases differ 
in their management.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.911854
PMCID: PMC6325661
PMID: 30602717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared Conflict of 
interest None.