1. Mol Biol Cell. 2019 Mar 1;30(5):680-690. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E18-05-0292. Epub
2019  Jan 2.

Dual RXR motifs regulate nerve growth factor-mediated intracellular retention of 
the delta opioid receptor.

Shiwarski DJ(1)(2), Crilly SE(3), Dates A(1), Puthenveedu MA(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The Center for the Neural Basis of 
Cognition, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15213.
(3)Cellular and Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109.

The delta opioid receptor (DOR), a physiologically relevant prototype for G 
protein-coupled receptors, is retained in intracellular compartments in neuronal 
cells. This retention is mediated by a nerve growth factor (NGF)-regulated 
checkpoint that delays the export of DOR from the trans-Golgi network. How DOR 
is selectively retained in the Golgi, in the midst of dynamic membrane transport 
and cargo export, is a fundamental unanswered question. Here we address this by 
investigating sequence elements on DOR that regulate DOR surface delivery, 
focusing on the C-terminal tail of DOR that is sufficient for NGF-mediated 
regulation. By systematic mutational analysis, we define conserved dual 
bi-arginine (RXR) motifs that are required for NGF- and 
phosphoinositide-regulated DOR export from intracellular compartments in 
neuroendocrine cells. These motifs were required to bind the coatomer protein I 
(COPI) complex, a vesicle coat complex that mediates primarily retrograde cargo 
traffic in the Golgi. Our results suggest that interactions of DOR with COPI, 
via atypical COPI motifs on the C-terminal tail, retain DOR in the Golgi. These 
interactions could provide a point of regulation of DOR export and delivery by 
extracellular signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E18-05-0292
PMCID: PMC6589700
PMID: 30601694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]