1. ACS Sens. 2019 Feb 22;4(2):294-300. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.8b00465. Epub 2019
 Jan 16.

Genetically Encoded FRET Biosensor for Visualizing EphA4 Activity in Different 
Compartments of the Plasma Membrane.

Pan Y, Lu S, Lei L, Lamberto I(1), Wang Y(2), Pasquale EB(1), Wang Y.

Author information:
(1)Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute , La Jolla , California 
92037 , United States.
(2)Department of Bioengineering , University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , 
Champaign , Illinois 61820 , United States.

The EphA4 receptor tyrosine kinase is well-known for its pivotal role in 
development, cancer progression, and neurological disorders. However, how EphA4 
kinase activity is regulated in time and space still remains unclear. To 
visualize EphA4 activity in different membrane microdomains, we developed a 
sensitive EphA4 biosensor based on FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer (FRET), and 
targeted it in or outside raft-like microdomains in the plasma membrane. We 
showed that our biosensor can produce a robust and specific FRET response upon 
EphA4 activation, both in vitro and in live cells. Interestingly, we observed 
stronger FRET responses for the non-raft targeting biosensor than for the raft 
targeting biosensor, suggesting that stronger EphA4 activation may occur in 
non-raft regions. Further investigations revealed the importance of the actin 
cytoskeleton in suppressing EphA4 activity in raft-like microdomains. Therefore, 
our FRET-based EphA4 biosensor could serve as a powerful tool to visualize and 
investigate EphA4 activation and signaling in specific subcellular compartments 
of single live cells.

DOI: 10.1021/acssensors.8b00465
PMCID: PMC8086899
PMID: 30608127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.