1. Front Pharmacol. 2018 Dec 17;9:1484. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01484.
eCollection  2018.

GRK5 - A Functional Bridge Between Cardiovascular and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders.

Hendrickx JO(1)(2), van Gastel J(1)(2), Leysen H(1)(2), Santos-Otte P(3), 
Premont RT(4), Martin B(5), Maudsley S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp - Flanders Institute 
for Biotechnology (VIB), Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Institute of Biophysics, Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Harrington Discovery Institute, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, 
GA, United States.
(5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

Complex aging-triggered disorders are multifactorial programs that comprise a 
myriad of alterations in interconnected protein networks over a broad range of 
tissues. It is evident that rather than being randomly organized events, 
pathophysiologies that possess a strong aging component such as cardiovascular 
diseases (hypertensions, atherosclerosis, and vascular stiffening) and 
neurodegenerative conditions (dementia, Alzheimer's disease, mild cognitive 
impairment, Parkinson's disease), in essence represent a subtly modified version 
of the intricate molecular programs already in place for normal aging. To 
control such multidimensional activities there are layers of trophic protein 
control across these networks mediated by so-called "keystone" proteins. We 
propose that these "keystones" coordinate and interconnect multiple signaling 
pathways to control whole somatic activities such as aging-related disease 
etiology. Given its ability to control multiple receptor sensitivities and its 
broad protein-protein interactomic nature, we propose that G protein coupled 
receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) represents one of these key network controllers. 
Considerable data has emerged, suggesting that GRK5 acts as a bridging factor, 
allowing signaling regulation in pathophysiological settings to control the 
connectivity between both the cardiovascular and neurophysiological 
complications of aging.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01484
PMCID: PMC6304357
PMID: 30618771