1. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2018 Dec;35(6):587-591. doi: 10.5114/ada.2018.77610.
 Epub 2018 Nov 8.

Type A behavior pattern, risk propensity and empathy in young professionally 
active patients with bronchial asthma.

Witusik A(1), Kuna P(2), Pietras T(3), Mokros L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Institute of Pedagogical Sciences, Faculty of 
Social Science, Piotrk√≥w Trybunalski Branch, Jan Kochanowski University, Kielce, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Asthma and Allergy, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, 
Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Type A behavior pattern is an important risk factor for 
cardiovascular diseases. It is a learned way to respond to stress. The 
capability of empathy and impulsiveness is an important element of functioning 
of the human being.
AIM: To assess the degree of bronchial asthma control in the context of the 
intensity of type A pattern of behavior, Impulsivity, Risk Propensity and 
Empathy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study involved examination of 150 subjects, including 
111 with asthma of different degrees of control, all of whom were young, 
professionally active people. Two validated questionnaires (IVE Impulsivity 
Questionnaire and Type A Scale) were used to assess the correlation between the 
degrees of asthma control and type A behavior pattern, Empathy, Impulsivity and 
Risk Propensity.
RESULTS: The level of type A behavior pattern was significantly higher in the 
subjects with poorly controlled asthma as compared with those with partially 
controlled and well-controlled asthma and with healthy subjects. Impulsivity and 
Risk Propensity were higher in the group with poorly controlled asthma compared 
with the other analyzed groups. Empathy was lower in the group with poorly 
controlled asthma than in the other analyzed groups. There was no difference in 
the intensity of the analyzed mental variables between persons with partially 
controlled and well-controlled asthma and people without bronchial asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: Poor control of asthma may be associated with type A behavior 
pattern and high impulsivity and risk propensity.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2018.77610
PMCID: PMC6320484
PMID: 30618526