1. Nat Commun. 2019 Jan 8;10(1):84. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07964-7.

Transforming insect population control with precision guided sterile males with 
demonstration in flies.

Kandul NP(1), Liu J(1), Sanchez C HM(2), Wu SL(2), Marshall JM(2), Akbari 
OS(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, California, USA.
(2)Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, California, USA.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, California, USA. 
oakbari@ucsd.edu.
(4)Tata Institute for Genetics and Society, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, California, USA. oakbari@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Commun. 2019 Sep 2;10(1):3955. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11617-8.
    Nat Commun. 2019 Sep 2;10(1):3954. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-11616-9.

The sterile insect technique (SIT) is an environmentally safe and proven 
technology to suppress wild populations. To further advance its utility, a novel 
CRISPR-based technology termed precision guided SIT (pgSIT) is described. PgSIT 
mechanistically relies on a dominant genetic technology that enables 
simultaneous sexing and sterilization, facilitating the release of eggs into the 
environment ensuring only sterile adult males emerge. Importantly, for field 
applications, the release of eggs will eliminate burdens of manually sexing and 
sterilizing males, thereby reducing overall effort and increasing scalability. 
Here, to demonstrate efficacy, we systematically engineer multiple pgSIT systems 
in Drosophila which consistently give rise to 100% sterile males. Importantly, 
we demonstrate that pgSIT-generated sterile males are fit and competitive. Using 
mathematical models, we predict pgSIT will induce substantially greater 
population suppression than can be achieved by currently-available self-limiting 
suppression technologies. Taken together, pgSIT offers to potentially transform 
our ability to control insect agricultural pests and disease vectors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-07964-7
PMCID: PMC6325135
PMID: 30622266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.P.K. and O.S.A. have submitted a provisional 
patent application on this technology. Patent information is as follows: 
ENDONUCLEASE SEXING AND STERILIZATION IN INSECTS Patent application under the 
PCT (1618008-WO-UC Ref2018-278-2.-PCT) filled on Nov 19 2018. N.P.K.and O.S.A. 
via the University of California Riverside “Reproducible and 100% consistent 
method to sex and create large number of sterile yet competitive insect males as 
F1 progeny of gRNA and Cas9 lines.” O.S.A. is a co-founder of a new startup 
company named Agragene. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.