1. Int J Epidemiol. 2019 Aug 1;48(4):1367-1376. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyy254.

Reflection on modern methods: years of life lost due to premature mortality-a 
versatile and comprehensive measure for monitoring non-communicable disease 
mortality.

Martinez R(1), Soliz P(2), Caixeta R(1), Ordunez P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Non-Communicable Diseases and Mental Health.
(2)Department of Evidence and Intelligence for Action in Health, Pan American 
Health Organization, Washington, DC, USA.

The analysis of causes impacting on premature mortality is an essential function 
of public health surveillance. Diverse methods have been used for accurately 
assessing and reporting the level and trends of premature mortality; however, 
many have important limitations, particularly in capturing actual early deaths. 
We argue that the framework of years of life lost (YLL), as conceptualized in 
disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs), is a robust and comprehensive measure of 
premature mortality. Global Burden of Disease study is systematically providing 
estimates of YLL; however, it is not widely adopted at country level, among 
other reasons because its conceptual and methodological bases seem to be not 
sufficiently known and understood. In this paper, we provide the concepts and 
the methodology of the YLL framework, including the selection of the loss of 
function that defines the time lost due to premature deaths, and detailed 
methods for calculating YLL metrics. We also illustrate how to use YLL to 
quantify the level and trends of premature non-communicable disease (NCD) 
mortality in the Americas. The tutorial style of the illustrative example is 
intended to educate the public health community and stimulate the use of YLL in 
disease prevention and control programmes at different levels.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Epidemiological Association.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/dyy254
PMCID: PMC6693813
PMID: 30629192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]