1. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2018 Dec 5;2018:3095249. doi: 
10.1155/2018/3095249. eCollection 2018.

Development of New Tools to Detect Colistin-Resistance among Enterobacteriaceae 
Strains.

Bardet L(1), Rolain JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, IRD, AP-HM, MEPHI, IHU-Méditerranée Infection, 
Marseille, France.

Erratum in
    Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol. 2019 May 7;2019:9083980. doi: 
10.1155/2019/9083980.

The recent discovery of the plasmid-mediated mcr-1 gene conferring resistance to 
colistin is of clinical concern. The worldwide screening of this resistance 
mechanism among samples of different origins has highlighted the urgent need to 
improve the detection of colistin-resistant isolates in clinical microbiology 
laboratories. Currently, phenotypic methods used to detect colistin resistance 
are not necessarily suitable as the main characteristic of the mcr genes is the 
low level of resistance that they confer, close to the clinical breakpoint 
recommended jointly by the CLSI and EUCAST expert systems (S ≤ 2 mg/L and 
R > 2 mg/L). In this context, susceptibility testing recommendations for 
polymyxins have evolved and are becoming difficult to implement in routine 
laboratory work. The large number of mechanisms and genes involved in colistin 
resistance limits the access to rapid detection by molecular biology. It is 
therefore necessary to implement well-defined protocols using specific tools to 
detect all colistin-resistant bacteria. This review aims to summarize the 
current clinical microbiology diagnosis techniques and their ability to detect 
all colistin resistance mechanisms and describe new tools specifically developed 
to assess plasmid-mediated colistin resistance. Phenotyping, susceptibility 
testing, and genotyping methods are presented, including an update on recent 
studies related to the development of specific techniques.

DOI: 10.1155/2018/3095249
PMCID: PMC6305056
PMID: 30631384