1. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2019;35(2):83-91. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2018.01448.

BRAFV600E Immunohistochemistry in Papillary Thyroid Carcinomas: Relationship 
Between Clinical and Morphological Parameters.

[Article in English]

Kombak FE(1), Özkan N, Uğurlu MÜ, Kaya H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Marmara University, School of Medicine, İSTANBUL, 
TURKEY.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of the BRAFV600E mutation with 
papillary thyroid carcinoma using clinical, morphological and prognostic 
parameters. We also intend to assess the utility of the BRAFV600E 
immunohistochemistry and compare it with BRAF polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR).
MATERIAL AND METHOD: We applied BRAFV600E immunohistochemistry in a cohort of 
107 papillary carcinomas, 19 adenomas and 13 normal thyroid tissues that was 
chosen retrospectively between 2011 and 2015. Statistical analysis was based on 
semiquantitative immunohistochemistry findings. We also applied BRAF RT-PCR in a 
subgroup of 14 papillary carcinomas, 13 metastatic lymph nodes and 4 adenomas 
that was chosen randomly.
RESULTS: In regard to the comparison of BRAFV600E immunohistochemistry and BRAF 
RT-PCR, a 3+ nuclear and cytoplasmic immunoexpression was considered 'positive'. 
The BRAFV600E mutation was most frequently observed in classic variant cases. No 
mutation was detected in follicular variant cases. The mutational status of the 
primary tumour and the lymph node metastasis was consistent. A significant 
relationship of the BRAFV600E mutation was found with prognostic factors such as 
higher pT stage, classic variant, lymphatic invasion, perineural invasion, lower 
mitotic index, lack of tumour capsule, intrathyroidal spread and extrathyroidal 
extension.
CONCLUSION: Immunohistochemistry, using the VE1 clone, is a reliable technique 
for detection of the BRAFV600E mutation. Our results with immunohistochemistry 
are consistent with a previous effort. In our study, despite the correlation 
between some pathological prognostic parameters and the BRAFV600E mutation; poor 
prognosis was found to be irrelevant overall. Morphological parameters seem to 
be keener than the BRAFV600E mutation. Nevertheless, different series display 
different results, possibly due to environmental factors. Considering this and 
the proven success of targeted therapies against the BRAFV600E mutation a 
thorough assessment would be important.

DOI: 10.5146/tjpath.2018.01448
PMID: 30632125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]