1. Foods. 2019 Jan 10;8(1):22. doi: 10.3390/foods8010022.

Characterization of Sparkling Wines According to Polyphenolic Profiles Obtained 
by HPLC-UV/Vis and Principal Component Analysis.

Izquierdo-Llopart A(1), Saurina J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, University of 
Barcelona,Martí i Franquès 1-11, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. 
anais.izquierdo.llopart@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, University of 
Barcelona,Martí i Franquès 1-11, 08028, Barcelona, Spain. xavi.saurina@ub.edu.

Cava is a sparkling wine obtained by a secondary fermentation in its own bottle. 
Grape skin contains several compounds, such as polyphenols, which act like 
natural protectors and provide flavor and color to the wines. In this paper, a 
previously optimized method based on reversed phase high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) with ultraviolet/visible (UV/Vis) detection has been 
applied to determine polyphenols in cava wines. Compounds have been separated in 
a C18 core-shell column using 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution and methanol as 
the components of the mobile phase. Chromatograms have been recorded at 280, 310 
and 370 nm to gain information on the composition of benzoic acids, 
hidroxycinnamic acids and flavonoids, respectively. HPLC-UV/vis data consisting 
of compositional profiles of relevant analytes has been exploited to 
characterize cava wines produced from different base wine blends using 
chemometrics. Other oenological variables, such as vintage, aging or malolatic 
fermentation, have been fixed over all the samples to avoid their influence on 
the description. Principal component analysis and other statistic methods have 
been used to extract of the underlying information, providing an excellent 
discrimination of samples according to grape varieties and coupages.

DOI: 10.3390/foods8010022
PMCID: PMC6352232
PMID: 30634721

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.