1. Behav Pharmacol. 2019 Apr;30(2 and 3-Spec Issue):151-162. doi: 
10.1097/FBP.0000000000000459.

Serotonin 2A receptors are a stress response system: implications for 
post-traumatic stress disorder.

Murnane KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mercer University College of Pharmacy, 
Mercer University Health Sciences Center, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Serotonin, one of the first neurotransmitters to be identified, is an 
evolutionarily old molecule that is highly conserved across the animal kingdom, 
and widely used throughout the brain. Despite this, ascribing a specific set of 
functions to brain serotonin and its receptors has been difficult and 
controversial. The 2A subtype of serotonin receptors (5-HT2A receptor) is the 
major excitatory serotonin receptor in the brain and has been linked to the 
effects of drugs that produce profound sensory and cognitive changes. Numerous 
studies have shown that this receptor is upregulated by a broad variety of 
stressors, and have related 5-HT2A receptor function to associative learning. 
This review proposes that stress, particularly stress related to danger and 
existential threats, increases the expression and function of 5-HT2A receptors. 
It is argued that this is a neurobiological adaptation to promote learning and 
avoidance of danger in the future. Upregulation of 5-HT2A receptors during 
stressful events forms associations that tune the brain to environmental cues 
that signal danger. It is speculated that life-threatening situations may 
activate this system and contribute to the symptoms associated with 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine, which 
activates 5-HT2A receptors, has been successful in the treatment of PTSD and has 
recently achieved status as a breakthrough therapy. An argument is presented 
that 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine may paradoxically act through these same 
5-HT2A receptors to ameliorate the symptoms of PTSD. The central thematic 
contention is that a key role of serotonin may be to function as a stress 
detection and response system.

DOI: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000459
PMCID: PMC6422730
PMID: 30632995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared