1. Stroke. 2019 Feb;50(2):283-290. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.118.023661.

Encephalopathy in a Large Cohort of British Cerebral Autosomal Dominant 
Arteriopathy With Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy Patients.

Drazyk AM(1), Tan RYY(1), Tay J(1), Traylor M(1), Das T(2), Markus HS(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Stroke Research Group, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom (A.M.D., R.Y.Y.T., J.T., M.T., H.S.M.).
(2)Department of Radiology, Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
United Kingdom (T.D.).

Background and Purpose- Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with 
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most common 
monogenic form of stroke usually presenting with migraine with aura, lacunar 
infarcts, and cognitive impairment. Acute encephalopathy is a less recognized 
presentation of the disease. Methods- Data collected prospectively from 340 
consecutively recruited symptomatic patients with diagnosis of CADASIL seen in a 
British National CADASIL clinic was retrospectively reviewed and original 
clinical records and imaging obtained. An encephalopathic event was defined as 
an acute event of an altered state of consciousness in a patient with CADASIL, 
manifesting with signs of brain dysfunction, which warranted hospital admission 
in the absence of any other cause. Clinical characteristics, risk factors, and 
outcome of encephalopathic presentations were studied. Results- A total of 35 of 
340 (10.3%) participants had a history of 50 encephalopathic events which was 
the first hospital presentation of CADASIL in 33 (94.3%) patients. Most commonly 
reported features during episodes were visual hallucinations (44%), seizures 
(22%), and focal neurological deficits (60%).Complete recovery within 3 months 
was reported in 48(96%) episodes. In 62% of episodes, there was a history of 
migraine or migraine aura directly preceding the encephalopathy. In 2 out of 15 
cases where magnetic resonance imaging during episodes was available, unilateral 
focal cortical swelling was seen. A past history of migraine was independently 
associated with encephalopathy (odds ratio=12.3 [95% CI, 1.6-93.7]; P=0.015). 
Conclusions- In up to 10% of CADASIL patients, a reversible encephalopathy is 
the first presentation leading to diagnosis. The strong association with 
migraine suggests a shared pathogenesis. Focal cortical swelling may be seen on 
magnetic resonance imaging during the acute episode.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.118.023661
PMCID: PMC6358181
PMID: 30636574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]