1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2019 Mar 1;316(3):C424-C433. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00405.2018. Epub 2019 Jan 16.

Smooth muscle cell-specific knockout of neuropilin-1 impairs postnatal lung 
development and pathological vascular smooth muscle cell accumulation.

Mahmoud M(1), Evans IM(1), Mehta V(1), Pellet-Many C(1), Paliashvili K(1), 
Zachary I(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Biology and Medicine, BHF Laboratories, Division of 
Medicine, University College London , London , United Kingdom.

Neuropilin 1 (NRP1) is important for neuronal and cardiovascular development due 
to its role in conveying class 3 semaphorin and vascular endothelial growth 
factor signaling, respectively. NRP1 is expressed in smooth muscle cells (SMCs) 
and mediates their migration and proliferation in cell culture and is implicated 
in pathological SMC remodeling in vivo. To address the importance of Nrp1 for 
SMC function during development, we generated conditional inducible Nrp1 
SMC-specific knockout mice. Induction of early postnatal SMC-specific Nrp1 
knockout led to pulmonary hemorrhage associated with defects in alveogenesis and 
revealed a specific requirement for Nrp1 in myofibroblast recruitment to the 
alveolar septae and PDGF-AA-induced migration in vitro. Furthermore, 
SMC-specific Nrp1 knockout inhibited PDGF-BB-stimulated SMC outgrowth ex vivo in 
aortic ring assays and reduced pathological arterial neointima formation in 
vivo. In contrast, we observed little significant effect of SMC-specific Nrp1 
knockout on neonatal retinal vascularization. Our results point to a requirement 
of Nrp1 in vascular smooth muscle and myofibroblast function in vivo, which may 
have relevance for postnatal lung development and for pathologies characterized 
by excessive SMC and/or myofibroblast proliferation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00405.2018
PMCID: PMC6457104
PMID: 30649916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.