1. Genes (Basel). 2019 Jan 14;10(1):42. doi: 10.3390/genes10010042.

Stress-Tolerant Yeasts: Opportunistic Pathogenicity Versus Biocontrol Potential.

Zajc J(1)(2), Gostinčar C(3)(4), Černoša A(5), Gunde-Cimerman N(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Systems Biology, National Institute of 
Biology, Večna pot 111, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. janja.zajc@nib.si.
(2)Department of Biology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
Jamnikarjeva 101, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. janja.zajc@nib.si.
(3)Department of Biology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
Jamnikarjeva 101, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. anja.cernosa@gmail.com.
(4)Institut 'Jožef Stefan', Jamova cesta 39, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
anja.cernosa@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Systems Biology, National Institute of 
Biology, Večna pot 111, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
cene.gostincar@bf.uni-lj.si.
(6)Department of Biology, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
Jamnikarjeva 101, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. nina.gunde-cimerman@bf.uni-lj.si.

Stress-tolerant fungi that can thrive under various environmental extremes are 
highly desirable for their application to biological control, as an alternative 
to chemicals for pest management. However, in fungi, the mechanisms of stress 
tolerance might also have roles in mammal opportunism. We tested five species 
with high biocontrol potential in agriculture (Aureobasidiumpullulans, 
Debayomyceshansenii, Meyerozymaguilliermondii, Metschnikowiafructicola, 
Rhodotorulamucilaginosa) and two species recognized as emerging opportunistic 
human pathogens (Exophialadermatitidis, Aureobasidiummelanogenum) for growth 
under oligotrophic conditions and at 37 °C, and for tolerance to oxidative 
stress, formation of biofilms, production of hydrolytic enzymes and 
siderophores, and use of hydrocarbons as sole carbon source. The results show 
large overlap between traits desirable for biocontrol and traits linked to 
opportunism (growth under oligotrophic conditions, production of siderophores, 
high oxidative stress tolerance, and specific enzyme activities). Based on 
existing knowledge and these data, we suggest that oligotrophism and 
thermotolerance together with siderophore production at 37 °C, urease activity, 
melanization, and biofilm production are the main traits that increase the 
potential for fungi to cause opportunistic infections in mammals. These traits 
should be carefully considered when assessing safety of potential biocontrol 
agents.

DOI: 10.3390/genes10010042
PMCID: PMC6357073
PMID: 30646593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.