1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Mar 18;47(5):2349-2364. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1317.

Histone demethylase KDM3A is required for enhancer activation of hippo target 
genes in colorectal cancer.

Wang HY(1), Long QY(1), Tang SB(1), Xiao Q(1), Gao C(1), Zhao QY(1), Li QL(1), 
Ye M(2), Zhang L(3), Li LY(1), Wu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, Hubei Key Laboratory of 
Developmentally Originated Disease, Hubei Key Laboratory of Intestinal and 
Colorectal Diseases, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 
430072, China.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Geriatrics, Hubei Clinical Centre 
& Key Laboratory of Intestinal and Colorectal Diseases, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Shanghai Institute 
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

Hippo pathway is involved in tumorigenesis, and its regulation in cytosol has 
been extensively studied, but its regulatory mechanisms in the nuclear are not 
clear. In the current study, using a FBS-inducing model following serum 
starvation, we identified KDM3A, a demethylase of histone H3K9me1/2, as a 
positive regulator for hippo target genes. KDM3A promotes gene expression 
through two mechanisms, one is to upregulate YAP1 expression, and the other is 
to facilitate H3K27ac on the enhancers of hippo target genes. H3K27ac 
upregulation is more relevant with gene activation, but not H3K4me3; and KDM3A 
depletion caused H3K9me2 upregulation mainly on TEAD1-binding enhancers rather 
than gene bodies, further resulting in H3K27ac decrease, less TEAD1 binding on 
enhancers and impaired transcription. Moreover, KDM3A is associated with p300 
and required for p300 recruitment to enhancers. KDM3A deficiency delayed cancer 
cell growth and migration, which was rescued by YAP1 expression. KDM3A 
expression is correlated with YAP1 and hippo target genes in colorectal cancer 
patient tissues, and may serve as a potential prognosis mark. Taken together, 
our study reveals novel mechanisms for hippo signaling and enhancer activation, 
which is critical for tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gky1317
PMCID: PMC6412006
PMID: 30649550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]