1. Exp Ther Med. 2019 Jan;17(1):344-348. doi: 10.3892/etm.2018.6914. Epub 2018
Nov  1.

Correlation of clinical features with hs-CRP in TRD patients.

Qiao J(1), Geng D(2), Qian L(3), Zhu X(1), Zhao H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Dongfang People's Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou 
Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221004, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital to Xuzhou Medical University, 
Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221009, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Psychology, The Mental Hospital of Jining, Jining, Shandong 
272051, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Psychology, Dongfang People's Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou 
Medical University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221004, P.R. China.

Correlation of clinical features with hypersensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) 
in patients with treatment-resistant depression (TRD) was investigated. The 
severity of disease in 103 TRD patients and 103 non-TRD patients was evaluated 
using the Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD)-17. The levels of hs-CRP in both 
groups were detected via immunofluorescence. Clinical features and differences 
in hs-CRP before and after treatment in both groups were analyzed, and 
correlation of baseline hs-CRP level with clinical features of TRD patients was 
also analyzed. Moreover, the relationship between hs-CRP and occurrence of TRD 
was analyzed using logistic regression analysis, and the diagnostic value of 
hs-CRP in TRD was evaluated using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve. The onset age in the TRD group was lower than that in the non-TRD group, 
the education in the TRD group was shorter than that in the non-TRD group, the 
total course of disease in the TRD group was longer than that in the non-TRD 
group, and both baseline and post-treatment hs-CRP level in the TRD group 
(12.05±5.79 and 9.02±3.71 mg/l) were higher than those in the non-TRD group 
(7.85±2.85 and 6.10±2.74 mg/l) (p<0.05). The HAMD score (r=0.338, p=0.031), 
anxiety/somatization factor score (r=0.465, p=0.015) and sleep disorder 
(r=0.387, p=0.029) of TRD patients were positively correlated with the hs-CRP 
level, but the onset age (r=-0.59, p=0.009) was negatively correlated with the 
hs-CRP level. Logistic regression analysis revealed that the baseline hs-CRP was 
included into the TRD regression equation [odds ratio (OR) =2.834, 95% 
confidence interval (CI) =1.723-4.886], and the area under the ROC curve was 
0.893 (p<0.05, 95% CI=0.852-0.933). In the TRD group, the course of TRD in 
patients was longer, the onset of disease was earlier and the educational level 
was lower than that in the non-TRD group. Therefore, the level of hs-CRP can 
serve as a reference for the diagnosis of TRD.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2018.6914
PMCID: PMC6307477
PMID: 30651801