1. J Am Chem Soc. 2019 Jan 30;141(4):1430-1434. doi: 10.1021/jacs.8b11384. Epub 
2019 Jan 22.

Long-Range RNA Structural Information via a Paramagnetically Tagged Reporter 
Protein.

Strickland M(1), Catazaro J, Rajasekaran R(1), Strub MP(1), O'Hern C, Bermejo 
GA(2), Summers MF, Marchant J, Tjandra N(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biophysics, Biochemistry and Biophysics Center, 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , 
Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , United States.
(2)Office of Intramural Research, Center for Information Technology, National 
Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 , United States.

NMR has provided a wealth of structural and dynamical information for RNA 
molecules of up to âˆ¼50 nucleotides, but its application to larger RNAs has been 
hampered in part by difficulties establishing global structural features. A 
potential solution involves measurement of NMR perturbations after site-specific 
paramagnetic labeling. Although the approach works well for proteins, the 
inability to place the label at specific sites has prevented its application to 
larger RNAs transcribed in vitro. Here, we present a strategy in which RNA loop 
residues are modified to promote binding to a paramagnetically tagged reporter 
protein. Lanthanide-induced pseudocontact shifts are demonstrated for a 
232-nucleotide RNA bound to tagged derivatives of the spliceosomal U1A 
RNA-binding domain. Further, the method is validated with a 36-nucleotide RNA 
for which measured NMR values agreed with predictions based on the previously 
known protein and RNA structures. The ability to readily insert U1A binding 
sites into ubiquitous hairpin and/or loop structures should make this approach 
broadly applicable for the atomic-level study of large RNAs.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.8b11384
PMCID: PMC6572783
PMID: 30652860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.