1. Glia. 2019 May;67(5):896-914. doi: 10.1002/glia.23579. Epub 2019 Jan 22.

Blockade of microglial adenosine A(2A) receptor suppresses elevated 
pressure-induced inflammation, oxidative stress, and cell death in retinal 
cells.

Aires ID(1)(2), Boia R(1)(2), Rodrigues-Neves AC(1)(2), Madeira MH(1)(2), 
Marques C(1)(2), Ambrósio AF(1)(2), Santiago AR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Coimbra Institute for Clinical and Biomedical Research (iCBR), Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)CNC.IBILI Consortium, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Association for Innovation and Biomedical Research on Light and Image 
(AIBILI), Coimbra, Portugal.

Glaucoma is a retinal degenerative disease characterized by the loss of retinal 
ganglion cells and damage of the optic nerve. Recently, we demonstrated that 
antagonists of adenosine A2A receptor (A2A R) control retinal inflammation and 
afford protection to rat retinal cells in glaucoma models. However, the precise 
contribution of microglia to retinal injury was not addressed, as well as the 
effect of A2A R blockade directly in microglia. Here we show that blocking 
microglial A2A R prevents microglial cell response to elevated pressure and it 
is sufficient to protect retinal cells from elevated pressure-induced death. The 
A2A R antagonist SCH 58261 or the knockdown of A2A R expression with siRNA in 
microglial cells prevented the increase in microglia response to elevated 
hydrostatic pressure. Furthermore, in retinal neural cell cultures, the A2A R 
antagonist decreased microglia proliferation, as well as the expression and 
release of pro-inflammatory mediators. Microglia ablation prevented neural cell 
death triggered by elevated pressure. The A2A R blockade recapitulated the 
effects of microglia depletion, suggesting that blocking A2A R in microglia is 
able to control neurodegeneration in glaucoma-like conditions. Importantly, in 
human organotypic retinal cultures, A2A R blockade prevented the increase in 
reactive oxygen species and the morphological alterations in microglia triggered 
by elevated pressure. These findings place microglia as the main contributors 
for retinal cell death during elevated pressure and identify microglial A2A R as 
a therapeutic target to control retinal neuroinflammation and prevent neural 
apoptosis elicited by elevated pressure.

© 2019 The Authors. Glia published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/glia.23579
PMCID: PMC6590475
PMID: 30667095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.