1. Epilepsy Res. 2019 Feb;150:66-69. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2019.01.009. Epub 
2019 Jan 14.

Sudden unexpected death in GEFS+ families with sodium channel pathogenic 
variants.

Myers KA(1), Shevell MI(2), Sébire G(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, 2155 Guy Street, 
Montreal, PQ, H3H 2L9, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child 
Neurology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, 1001 
Boulevard Décarie, Montreal, PQ, H4A 3J1, Canada. Electronic address: 
kenneth.myers@mcgill.ca.
(2)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, 2155 Guy Street, 
Montreal, PQ, H3H 2L9, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child 
Neurology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, 1001 
Boulevard Décarie, Montreal, PQ, H4A 3J1, Canada.

We aimed to describe families with genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus 
(GEFS+) in which individuals suffered sudden unexpected death. The Epilepsy 
Pharmacogenomics Research Database was reviewed for GEFS + families in which at 
least one individual had suffered sudden death, and two families were 
identified. In Family A, five males had febrile seizures and one girl had 
febrile seizures plus. The latter died at 22 months of age and was classified as 
definite SUDEP. Molecular genetic testing identified a pathogenic SCN1B variant. 
In Family B, two brothers had recurrent focal status epilepticus with fever, and 
were classified as having atypical multifocal Dravet syndrome. The elder brother 
died suddenly at seven years of age, but was not classified SUDEP because the 
event occurred following status epilepticus. SCN1A sequencing in the surviving 
brother identified a likely pathogenic variant. These two cases of sudden death 
in GEFS + families with likely pathogenic variants in sodium channel genes 
demonstrate that sudden death may occur in GEFS+, even with mild phenotypes. The 
presence of sodium channel variants may have further increased the sudden death 
risk, particularly in the case of SCN1B, a gene which has also been associated 
with cardiac conditions including Brugada syndrome and long QT.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2019.01.009
PMID: 30660056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]