1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2020 Jan;38(1):89-100. doi:
10.1080/07391102.2019.1567390.  Epub 2019 Feb 5.

How does the novel T315L mutation of breakpoint cluster region-abelson (BCR-ABL) 
kinase confer resistance to ponatinib: a comparative molecular dynamics 
simulation study.

Zhang H(1), He X(1), Ni D(1), Mou L(2), Chen X(3), Lu S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and 
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medicinal University, 
Wei fang, Shandong, China.
(3)Department of Medicinal Laboratory, Weifang Medicinal University, Weifang, 
Shandong, China.

Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) is one of the most dangerous types of leukemia, 
and about 40% of them is Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphocytic 
leukemia (Ph + ALL). Ph + ALL is caused by the fusion of the breakpoint cluster 
region (BCR) and the Ableson (ABL) genes, named the BCR-ABL fused gene that 
codes for an autonomously active tyrosine kinase. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) are among the first-line therapeutic agents for the treatment of 
Ph + ALL. Drug resistance are the major obstacle, limiting their clinical 
utility. The latest third-generation TKIs, ponatinib, can tackle most abnormal 
BCR-ABL kinases, including the T315I mutant that is resistant to first- and 
second-generations TKIs such as imatinib. However, drug resistance still emerges 
with the novel T315L mutation and the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. 
Here, using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, we explored into the detailed 
interactions between ponatinib and BCR-ABL in the wild-type (WT), T315I, and 
T315L systems. The simulations revealed the significant conformational changes 
of ponatinib in its binding site due to the T315L mutation and the underlying 
structural mechanisms. Binding free energy analysis unveiled that the affinity 
of ponatinib to BCR-ABL decreased upon T315L mutation, which resulted in its 
unfavorable binding and drug resistance. Key residues responsible for the 
unfavored unbinding were also identified. This study elucidates the detailed 
mechanisms for the resistance of ponatinib in Ph + ALL triggered by the T315L 
mutation and will provide insights for future drug development and optimization.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2019.1567390
PMID: 30661457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]