1. Molecules. 2019 Jan 21;24(2):370. doi: 10.3390/molecules24020370.

Role of Intestinal Microbiota in the Bioavailability and Physiological Functions 
of Dietary Polyphenols.

Kawabata K(1), Yoshioka Y(2), Terao J(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics, Konan Women's University, 6-2-23 
Morikita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe City, Hyogo 658-0001, Japan. 
kyuichi@konan-wu.ac.jp.
(2)Faculty of Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics, Konan Women's University, 6-2-23 
Morikita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe City, Hyogo 658-0001, Japan. 
y-yoshioka@konan-wu.ac.jp.
(3)Faculty of Clinical Nutrition and Dietetics, Konan Women's University, 6-2-23 
Morikita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe City, Hyogo 658-0001, Japan. 
terao@konan-wu.ac.jp.

Polyphenols are categorized as plant secondary metabolites, and they have 
attracted much attention in relation to human health and the prevention of 
chronic diseases. In recent years, a considerable number of studies have been 
published concerning their physiological function in the digestive tract, such 
as their prebiotic properties and their modification of intestinal microbiota. 
It has also been suggested that several hydrolyzed and/or fission products, 
derived from the catabolism of polyphenols by intestinal bacteria, exert their 
physiological functions in target sites after transportation into the body. 
Thus, this review article focuses on the role of intestinal microbiota in the 
bioavailability and physiological function of dietary polyphenols. Monomeric 
polyphenols, such as flavonoids and oligomeric polyphenols, such as 
proanthocyanidins, are usually catabolized to chain fission products by 
intestinal bacteria in the colon. Gallic acid and ellagic acid derived from the 
hydrolysis of gallotannin, and ellagitannin are also subjected to intestinal 
catabolism. These catabolites may play a large role in the physiological 
functions of dietary polyphenols. They may also affect the microbiome, resulting 
in health promotion by the activation of short chain fatty acids (SCFA) 
excretion and intestinal immune function. The intestinal microbiota is a key 
factor in mediating the physiological functions of dietary polyphenols.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24020370
PMCID: PMC6359708
PMID: 30669635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts were disclosed.