1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 24;14(1):e0210217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210217. 
eCollection 2019.

The ezh2(sa1199) mutant zebrafish display no distinct phenotype.

San B(1), Rougeot J(2), Voeltzke K(2), van Vegchel G(2), Aben M(1)(2), Andralojc 
KM(2), Flik G(3), Kamminga LM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life 
Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Radboud University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology, 
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Animal Ecology and Physiology, Radboud University, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are essential regulators of epigenetic gene 
silencing and development. The PcG protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2) is 
a key component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 and is responsible for 
placing the histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) repressive mark on 
the genome through its methyltransferase domain. Ezh2 is highly conserved in 
vertebrates. We studied the role of ezh2 during development of zebrafish with 
the use of a mutant allele (ezh2(sa1199), R18STOP), which has a stop mutation in 
the second exon of the ezh2 gene. Two versions of the same line were used during 
this study. The first and original version of zygotic ezh2(sa1199) mutants 
unexpectedly retained ezh2 expression in brain, gut, branchial arches, and eyes 
at 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), as revealed by in-situ hybridization. 
Moreover, the expression pattern in homozygous mutants was identical to that of 
wild types, indicating that mutant ezh2 mRNA is not subject to nonsense mediated 
decay (NMD) as predicted. Both wild type and ezh2 mutant embryos presented 
edemas at 2 and 3 dpf. The line was renewed by selective breeding to counter 
select the non-specific phenotypes and survival was assessed. In contrast to 
earlier studies on ezh2 mutant zebrafish, ezh2(sa1199) mutants survived until 
adulthood. Interestingly, the ezh2 mRNA and Ezh2 protein were present during 
adulthood (70 dpf) in both wild type and ezh2(sa1199) mutant zebrafish. We 
conclude that the ezh2(sa1199) allele does not exhibit an ezh2 loss-of-function 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210217
PMCID: PMC6345456
PMID: 30677064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.