1. BMB Rep. 2019 Oct;52(10):601-606. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2019.52.10.272.

Deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying the plasma membrane targeting of 
PRMT8.

Park SW(1), Jun YW(1), Choi HE(2), Lee JA(2), Jang DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecological Science, College of Ecology and Environment, 
Kyungpook National University, Sangju 37224, Korea.
(2)Department of Biological Science and Biotechnology, College of Life Science 
and Nano Technology, Hannam University, Daejeon 34054, Korea.

Arginine methylation plays crucial roles in many cellular functions including 
signal transduction, RNA transcription, and regulation of gene expression. 
Protein arginine methyltransferase 8 (PRMT8), a unique brain-specific protein, 
is localized to the plasma membrane. However, the detailed molecular mechanisms 
underlying PRMT8 plasma membrane targeting remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate 
that the N-terminal 20 amino acids of PRMT8 are sufficient for plasma membrane 
localization and that oligomerization enhances membrane localization. The basic 
amino acids, combined with myristoylation within the N-terminal 20 amino acids 
of PRMT8, are critical for plasma membrane targeting. We also found that 
substituting Gly-2 with Ala [PRMT8(G2A)] or Cys-9 with Ser [PRMT8(C9S)] induces 
the formation of punctate structures in the cytosol or patch-like plasma 
membrane localization, respectively. Impairment of PRMT8 
oligomerization/dimerization by Cterminal deletion induces PRMT8 
mis-localization to the mitochondria, prevents the formation of punctate 
structures by PRMT8(G2A), and inhibits PRMT8(C9S) patch-like plasma membrane 
localization. Overall, these results suggest that oligomerization/dimerization 
plays several roles in inducing the efficient and specific plasma membrane 
localization of PRMT8. [BMB Reports 2019; 52(10): 601-606].

DOI: 10.5483/BMBRep.2019.52.10.272
PMCID: PMC6827574
PMID: 30670150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicting interests.