1. Fluids Barriers CNS. 2019 Jan 29;16(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s12987-019-0123-z.

Claudin-5: gatekeeper of neurological function.

Greene C(1), Hanley N(1), Campbell M(2).

Author information:
(1)Trinity College Dublin, Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(2)Trinity College Dublin, Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Dublin 2, Ireland. 
matthew.campbell@tcd.ie.

Tight junction proteins of the blood-brain barrier are vital for maintaining 
integrity of endothelial cells lining brain blood vessels. The presence of these 
protein complexes in the space between endothelial cells creates a dynamic, 
highly regulated and restrictive microenvironment that is vital for neural 
homeostasis. By limiting paracellular diffusion of material between blood and 
brain, tight junction proteins provide a protective barrier preventing the 
passage of unwanted and potentially damaging material. Simultaneously, this 
protective barrier hinders the therapeutic effectiveness of central nervous 
system acting drugs with over 95% of small molecule therapeutics unable to 
bypass the blood-brain barrier. At the blood-brain barrier, claudin-5 is the 
most enriched tight junction protein and its dysfunction has been implicated in 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, neuroinflammatory 
disorders such as multiple sclerosis as well as psychiatric disorders including 
depression and schizophrenia. By regulating levels of claudin-5, it is possible 
to abrogate disease symptoms in many of these disorders. This review will give 
an overview of the blood-brain barrier and the role of tight junction complexes 
in maintaining blood-brain barrier integrity before focusing on the role of 
claudin-5 and its regulation in homeostatic and pathological conditions. We will 
also summarise therapeutic strategies to restore integrity of cerebral vessels 
by targeting tight junction protein complexes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12987-019-0123-z
PMCID: PMC6350359
PMID: 30691500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]