1. Neuroscience. 2019 Mar 15;402:51-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2019.01.012. 
Epub 2019 Jan 27.

Role of Na(V)1.6 and Na(V)β4 Sodium Channel Subunits in a Rat Model of Low Back 
Pain Induced by Compression of the Dorsal Root Ganglia.

Xie W(1), Zhang J(1), Strong JA(1), Zhang JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Pain Research Center, Department of Anesthesiology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, ML0531, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0531, 
USA.
(2)Pain Research Center, Department of Anesthesiology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, ML0531, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0531, 
USA. Electronic address: Jun-Ming.Zhang@uc.edu.

Low back pain is a common cause of chronic pain and disability. It is modeled in 
rodents by chronically compressing the lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) with 
small metal rods, resulting in ipsilateral mechanical and cold hypersensitivity, 
and hyperexcitability of sensory neurons. Sodium channels are implicated in this 
hyperexcitability, but the responsible isoforms are unknown. In this study, we 
used siRNA-mediated knockdown of the pore-forming NaV1.6 and regulatory NaVβ4 
sodium channel isoforms that have been previously implicated in a different 
model of low back pain caused by locally inflaming the L5 DRG. Knockdown of 
either subunit markedly reduced spontaneous pain and mechanical and cold 
hypersensitivity induced by DRG compression, and reduced spontaneous activity 
and hyperexcitability of sensory neurons with action potentials <1.5 msec 
(predominately cells with myelinated axons, based on conduction velocities 
measured in a subset of cells) 4 days after DRG compression. These results were 
similar to those previously obtained in the DRG inflammation model and some 
neuropathic pain models, in which sensory neurons other than nociceptors seem to 
play key roles. The cytokine profiles induced by DRG compression and DRG 
inflammation were also very similar, with upregulation of several type 1 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and downregulation of type 2 anti-inflammatory 
cytokines. Surprisingly, the cytokine profile was largely unaffected by NaVβ4 
knockdown in either model. The NaV1.6 channel, and the NaVβ4 subunit that can 
regulate NaV1.6 to enhance repetitive firing, play key roles in both models of 
low back pain; targeting the abnormal spontaneous activity they generate may 
have therapeutic value.

Copyright © 2019 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2019.01.012
PMCID: PMC6441841
PMID: 30699332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]