1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jan 26;20(3):523. doi: 10.3390/ijms20030523.

Proteomic Analysis of Cyclic Ketamine Compounds Ability to Induce Neural 
Differentiation in Human Adult Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Santos J(1)(2)(3), Milthorpe BK(4), Padula MP(5).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Tissue Regeneration & Drug Delivery Group, School of Life Sciences, 
University of Technology Sydney, P.O. Box 123 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Australia. 
Jerran.Santos@uts.edu.au.
(2)Proteomics Core Facility and School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
University of Technology Sydney, P.O. Box 123 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Australia. 
Jerran.Santos@uts.edu.au.
(3)CIRIMAT, Paul Sabatier, University of Toulouse 3 (INPT), 118 Route de 
Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France. Jerran.Santos@uts.edu.au.
(4)Advanced Tissue Regeneration & Drug Delivery Group, School of Life Sciences, 
University of Technology Sydney, P.O. Box 123 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Australia. 
Bruce.Milthorpe@uts.edu.au.
(5)Proteomics Core Facility and School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, 
University of Technology Sydney, P.O. Box 123 Broadway, Ultimo 2007, Australia. 
Matthew.Padula@uts.edu.au.

Erratum in
    Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jul 19;20(14):E3542. doi: 10.3390/ijms20143542.

Neural regeneration is of great interest due to its potential to treat traumatic 
brain injuries and diseases that impact quality of life. Growth factor mediated 
differentiation can take up to several weeks to months to produce the cell of 
interest whereas chemical stimulation may be as minimal as a few hours. The 
smaller time scale is of great clinical relevance. Adipose derived stem cells 
(ADSCs) were treated for up to 24 h with a novel differentiation media 
containing the cyclic ketamine compounds to direct neurogenic induction. The 
extent of differentiation was investigated by proteome changes occurring during 
the process. The treatments indicated the ADSCs responded favorably to the 
neurogenic induction media by presenting a number of morphological cues of 
neuronal phenotype previously seen and a higher cell population post induction 
compared to previous studies. Furthermore, approximately 3500 proteins were 
analyzed and identified by mass spectrometric iTRAQ analyses. The bioinformatics 
analyses revealed hundreds of proteins whose expression level changes were 
statistically significant and biologically relevant to neurogenesis and 
annotated as being involved in neurogenic development. Complementing this, the 
Bioplex cytokine assay profiles present evidence of decreased panel of stress 
response cytokines and a relative increase in those involved in neurogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20030523
PMCID: PMC6387408
PMID: 30691166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicting financial 
interest.