1. Plant Dis. 2015 Feb;99(2):231-239. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-04-14-0374-RE.

Sensitivity of Alternaria alternata from Citrus to Boscalid and Polymorphism in 
Iron-Sulfur and in Anchored Membrane Subunits of Succinate Dehydrogenase.

Vega B(1), Dewdney MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Citrus Research and Education Center, University of Florida, Lake Alfred 
33850.

Boscalid, a succinate dehydrogenase inhibitor (SDHI), was registered in 2011 to 
control Alternaria brown spot (ABS) of citrus, caused by Alternaria alternata. 
In this study, the effect of boscalid on mycelial growth, conidial germination, 
and resazurin reduction was established in a subset of 16 sensitive isolates 
using three different media. Conidial germination and mycelial growth inhibition 
were not suppressed even at higher concentrations of boscalid, although 
effective concentration to inhibit 50% growth (EC50) values were established 
with each method. Resazurin reduction produced the lowest EC50 values and was 
selected for further sensitivity tests. In total, 419 isolates, never exposed to 
boscalid and collected from Florida tangerine orchards between 1996 to 2012, 
were tested for boscalid sensitivity. The sensitivity distribution was a 
unimodal curve with a mean EC50 value of 0.60 μg/ml and a range of 0.07 to 5.84 
μg/ml. The molecular characterization of the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) genes 
were also determined in a subset of 15 isolates, exhibiting great variability in 
boscalid sensitivity, by cloning and sequencing the sdhB, sdhC, and sdhD genes. 
Sequence comparisons of the SDH complex revealed the presence of mutations in 14 
of 15 isolates. In total, 21 mutations were identified. Double and multiple 
mutations were observed in SDHC and SDHD, respectively. In SDHB, 4 mutations 
were observed while, in SDHC and SDHD, 5 and 12 mutations were detected, 
respectively. No mutations were found in the highly conserved histidine residues 
at positions 277 in SDHB, 134 in SDHC, and 133 in SDHD, typically observed in 
SDHI-resistant isolates. Our findings suggest that A. alternata populations from 
Florida are sensitive to boscalid and it could be used in ABS spray programs. 
Boscalid resistance is currently not a problem, although further monitoring for 
resistance is advisable.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-04-14-0374-RE
PMID: 30699560