1. Med One. 2018;3(6):e180012. doi: 10.20900/mo.20180012. Epub 2018 Dec 5.

Transglutaminase in Receptor and Neurotransmitter-Regulated Functions.

Muma NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas School of 
Pharmacy, 5064 Malott Hall, 1251 Wescoe Hall Drive, Lawrence, Kansas 66045, USA. 
nmuma@ku.edu.

Transglutaminases (TGs) and especially TG2 play important roles in 
neurotransmitter and receptor signaling pathways. Three different mechanisms by 
which TG2 interacts with neurotransmitter and receptor signaling systems will be 
discussed in this review. The first way in which TG2 interacts with receptor 
signaling is via its function as a guanine nucleotide binding protein 
(G-protein) coupling to G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) to activate 
down-stream signaling pathways. TG2 can exist in a least two conformations, a 
closed GTP-bound conformation and an open calcium-bound conformation. In the 
closed GTP-bound conformation, TG2 is capable of functioning as a G-protein for 
GPCRs. In the open calcium-bound conformation, TG2 catalyzes a transamidation 
reaction cross-linking proteins or catalyzing the covalent binding of a mono- or 
polyamine to a protein. The second mechanism is regulation of the transamidation 
reaction catalyzed by TG2 via receptor stimulation which can increase local 
calcium concentrations and thereby increase transamidation reactions. The third 
way in which TG2 plays a role in neurotransmitter and receptor signaling systems 
is via its use of monoamine neurotransmitters as a substrate. Monoamine 
neurotransmitters including serotonin can be substrates for transamidation to a 
protein often a small G-protein (also known as a small GTPase) resulting in 
activation of the small G-protein. The transamidation of a monoamine 
neurotransmitter or serotonin has been designated as monoaminylation or more 
specifically serotonylation, respectively. Other proteins are also targets for 
monoaminylation such as fibronectin and cytoskeletal proteins. These receptor 
and neurotransmitter-regulated reactions by TG2 play roles in physiological and 
key pathophysiological processes.

DOI: 10.20900/mo.20180012
PMCID: PMC6349232
PMID: 30701197

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The author declares that 
there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this paper.