1. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 31;14(1):e0211534. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211534. 
eCollection 2019.

Isolation and characterization of a tandem-repeated cysteine protease from the 
symbiotic dinoflagellate Symbiodinium sp. KB8.

Suzuki Y(1), Suzuki T(2), Awai K(1)(3)(4), Shioi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)Research Institute of Green Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, 
Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Research Institute of Electronics, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(4)PRESTO, JST, Kawaguchi, Japan.

A cysteine protease belonging to peptidase C1A superfamily from the eukaryotic, 
symbiotic dinoflagellate, Symbiodinium sp. strain KB8, was characterized. The 
protease was purified to near homogeneity (566-fold) by (NH4)2SO4 fractionation, 
ultrafiltration, and column chromatography using a fluorescent peptide, 
butyloxycarbonyl-Val-Leu-Lys-4-methylcoumaryl-7-amide (Boc-VLK-MCA), as a 
substrate for assay purposes. The enzyme was termed VLKP (VLK protease), and its 
activity was strongly inhibited by cysteine protease inhibitors and activated by 
reducing agents. Based on the results for the amino acid sequence determined by 
liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry, a cDNA encoding VLKP was 
synthesized. VLKP was classified into the peptidase C1A superfamily of cysteine 
proteases (C1AP). The predicted amino acid sequence of VLKP indicated a tandem 
array of highly conserved precursors of C1AP with a molecular mass of 
approximately 71 kDa. The results of gel-filtration chromatography and SDS-PAGE 
suggested that VLKP exists as a monomer of 31-32 kDa, indicating that the tandem 
array is likely divided into two mass-equivalent halves that undergo equivalent 
posttranslational modifications. The VLKP precursor contains an inhibitor 
prodomain that might become activated after acidic autoprocessing at 
approximately pH 4. Both purified and recombinant VLKPs had a similar substrate 
specificity and kinetic parameters for common C1AP substrates. Most C1APs reside 
in acidic organelles such as the vacuole and lysosomes, and indeed VLKP was most 
active at pH 4.5. Since VLKP exhibited maximum activity during the late 
logarithmic growth phase, these attributes suggest that, VLKP is involved in the 
metabolism of proteins in acidic organelles.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0211534
PMCID: PMC6355014
PMID: 30703144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.