1. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2019 Jan;114:42-46. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2018.11.006.
Epub  2018 Nov 19.

Association of ubiA mutations and high-level of ethambutol resistance among 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Thai clinical isolates.

Tulyaprawat O(1), Chaiprasert A(2), Chongtrakool P(3), Suwannakarn K(4), 
Ngamskulrungroj P(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: orawan.typw@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand; Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis Research Fund, 
Siriraj Foundation, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: 
angkana.cha@mahidol.ac.th.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: piriyaporn.cho@mahidol.ac.th.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: kamol.suw@mahidol.ac.th.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand. Electronic address: popchai.nga@mahidol.ac.th.

Ethambutol (EMB) is the first-line antituberculosis drug and a potential 
supplementary agent for a treatment regimen of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and 
extensively drug-resistant (XDR) tuberculosis (TB). It has long been known that 
mutations in embCAB operon, encoding EMB target, arabinosyltransferase, confer 
resistance to EMB. Recently, ubiA was additionally reported to be specifically 
associated with high-level EMB resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
However, such information on ubiA is very limited. This study aimed to 
investigate correlations between mutations in ubiA and phenotypic EMB resistance 
among EMB-resistant (EMBR) M. tuberculosis Thai clinical isolates. Minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) level of EMB and ubiA sequences were determined 
and analyzed. Of 68 EMBR-MDR isolates, 8.9% harbored mutations in ubiA. However, 
10.0% and 46.6% of EMB-sensitive (EMBS)-MDR and pan-susceptible isolates also 
had ubiA mutations detected, respectively. Most nonsynonymous mutations, L31P, 
A35S, and V55M were only found in the EMBR-MDR isolates except E149D which was 
also found in EMBS-MDR and pan-susceptible isolates. A further phylogenetic 
analysis based on spoligotyping and IS6110-RFLP illustrated that E149D was in 
fact associated to EAI-families rather than EMB resistance. By excluding 
synonymous mutations and the E149D, we found a high correlation between ubiA 
mutations and high-level of EMB resistance with 100.0% specificity. In 
conclusion, despite its rare occurrence, mutations in ubiA can potentially be a 
marker for a detection of high level of EMB resistance at least in the MDR M. 
tuberculosis background.

Copyright Â© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tube.2018.11.006
PMID: 30711156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]