1. Lab Chip. 2019 Feb 26;19(5):778-788. doi: 10.1039/c8lc01200h.

Modular soft robotic microdevices for dexterous biomanipulation.

Özkale B(1), Parreira R, Bekdemir A, Pancaldi L, Özelçi E, Amadio C, Kaynak M, 
Stellacci F, Mooney DJ, Sakar MS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Mechanical Engineering and Institute of Bioengineering, Ecole 
Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
selman.sakar@epfl.ch.

We present a methodology for building biologically inspired, soft 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices. Our strategy combines several 
advanced techniques including programmable colloidal self-assembly, 
light-harvesting with plasmonic nanotransducers, and in situ polymerization of 
compliant hydrogel mechanisms. We synthesize optomechanical microactuators using 
a template-assisted microfluidic approach in which gold nanorods coated with 
thermoresponsive poly(N-isopropylmethacrylamide) (pNIPMAM) polymer function as 
nanoscale building blocks. The resulting microactuators exhibit mechanical 
properties (4.8 ± 2.1 kPa stiffness) and performance metrics (relative stroke up 
to 0.3 and stress up to 10 kPa) that are comparable to that of bioengineered 
muscular constructs. Near-infrared (NIR) laser illumination provides effective 
spatiotemporal control over actuation (sub-micron spatial resolution at 
millisecond temporal resolution). Spatially modulated hydrogel photolithography 
guided by an experimentally validated finite element-based design methodology 
allows construction of compliant poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA) 
mechanisms around the microactuators. We demonstrate the versatility of our 
approach by manufacturing a diverse array of microdevices including lever arms, 
continuum microrobots, and dexterous microgrippers. We present a microscale 
compression device that is developed for mechanical testing of three-dimensional 
biological samples such as spheroids under physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1039/c8lc01200h
PMCID: PMC6394202
PMID: 30714604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]