1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2019 Apr 15;127:657-664. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.01.198. Epub 2019 Jan 30.

In silico identification and wet lab validation of novel cryptic B cell epitopes 
in ZnT8 zinc transporter autoantigen.

Shruthi S(1), Mohan V(2), Maradana MR(3), Aravindhan V(4).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Genetics, Dr ALM PG IBMS, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai, 
India.
(2)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation & Dr. Mohan's Diabetes Specialties 
Centre, WHO Collaborating Centre for Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention and 
Control, International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Centre for Education, Chennai, 
India.
(3)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation & Dr. Mohan's Diabetes Specialties 
Centre, WHO Collaborating Centre for Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention and 
Control, International Diabetes Federation (IDF) Centre for Education, Chennai, 
India; The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK.
(4)Dept of Genetics, Dr ALM PG IBMS, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai, 
India. Electronic address: cvaravindhan@gmail.com.

Zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) is a novel immunodominant autoantigen, associated with 
Type-1 diabetes. A non-synonymous polymorphism (R325W) in its gene is associated 
with Type-2 diabetes. In this study, we performed an in silico B cell epitope 
prediction followed by wetlab validation of ZnT8. Apart from the previously 
characterized polymorphic epitope (BE-5 TAASR*DS), two novel epitopes BE-2 
(N-terminus) and BE-6 (C-terminus) were identified. Wet lab validation of these 
epitopes was carried out by measuring ZnT8 specific isotypes (IgG, IgM and IgA) 
in the sera of Normal Glucose Tolerant (NGT), Type-1 diabetic (T1DM) and Type-2 
diabetic (T2DM) patients by indirect ELISA. Unexpectedly, compared to NGT, 
significantly decreased levels of IgG and IgA isotypes was seen in T1DM subjects 
without complications. IgM levels were reduced in T1DM subjects with 
retinopathy. Newly diagnosed T1DM subjects initiated on insulin therapy showed 
an increase in IgA and decrease in IgM titre. Like T1DM, significantly reduced 
level of IgG, IgM and IgA was seen in T2DM subjects. For the first time, we have 
identified novel cryptic B cell epitopes in ZnT8 autoantigen against which the 
naturally occurring autoantibody levels were found to be reduced in diabetes.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.01.198
PMID: 30710592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]