1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Metabolites. 2019 Feb 1;9(2):25. doi: 10.3390/metabo9020025.

The OMICs Window into Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD).

Carulli L(1), Zanca G(2), Schepis F(3), Villa E(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Specialties, University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. lucia.carulli@unimore.it.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Specialties, University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. 165382@studenti.unimore.it.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Specialties, University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. filippo.schepis@unimore.it.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medical Specialties, University 
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. erica.villa@unimore.it.

Retraction in
    Metabolites. 2019 Apr 11;9(4):E70. doi: 10.3390/metabo9040070.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common cause of hepatic 
abnormalities worldwide. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is part of the 
spectrum of NAFLD and leads to progressive liver disease, such as cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma. In NASH patient, fibrosis represents the major 
predictor of liver-related mortality; therefore, it is important to have an 
early and accurate diagnosis of NASH. The current gold standard for the 
diagnosis of NASH is still liver biopsy. The development of biomarkers able to 
predict disease severity, prognosis, as well as response to therapy without the 
need for a biopsy is the focus of most up-to-date genomic, transcriptomic, 
proteomic, and metabolomic research. In the future, patients might be diagnosed 
and treated according to their molecular signatures. In this short review, we 
discuss how information from genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics contribute 
to the understanding of NAFLD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo9020025
PMCID: PMC6409793
PMID: 30717274

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.