1. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2019 Mar-Apr;25(2):119-125. doi:
10.4103/sjg.SJG_283_18.

Circular RNA ARHGAP26 is over-expressed and its downregulation inhibits cell 
proliferation and promotes cell apoptosis in gastric cancer cells.

Wangxia LV(1), Fang Y(2), Liu Y(3), Zhao Y(1), Shi Z(1), Zhong H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(2)School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, 
Wenzhou, China.
(3)Department of Endoscopy Center, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: This study aimed to explore the effect of circular RNA ARHGAP26 
(circ-ARHGAP26) on cell proliferation and apoptosis in gastric cancer (GC) cell 
lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human GC cell lines including HGC-27, AGS, SGC-7901, 
BGC-823, NCI-N87 and human normal gastric mucosal cells GSE-1 were cultured. The 
circ-ARHGAP26 expression was determined by quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction assay. Blank inhibitor and circ-ARHGAP26 inhibitor plasmids were 
transfected into HGC-27 or AGS cells as NC (-) and circ-ARHGAP26(-) groups. 
Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and Annexin V (AV)/propidium iodide (PI) were conducted 
to evaluate cell proliferation and cell apoptosis, respectively. Western blot 
was performed to determine the expressions of apoptotic markers (C-Caspase3 and 
Bcl-2).
RESULTS: The circ-ARHGAP26 expression was elevated in HGC-27 (P < 0.001), AGS (P 
< 0.001), SGC-7901 (P < 0.01), BGC-823 (P < 0.05) and NCI-N87 (P < 0.05) GC cell 
lines compared to GSE-1 cells. In HGC-27 cells, CCK8 assay revealed that cell 
proliferation was decreased at 48 h (P < 0.05) and 72 h (P < 0.01), while AV/PI 
assay disclosed that cell apoptosis rate was increased at 72 h in circ-ARHGAP26 
(-) group compared to NC (-) group (P < 0.01). Western blot assay also 
illuminated that apoptotic marker C-Caspase 3 was raised, while anti-apoptotic 
marker Bcl-2 was reduced at 72 h in circ-ARHGAP26 (-) group compared to NC (-) 
group. In addition, further validation in AGS cells also exhibited that cells 
proliferation was repressed, while apoptosis was enhanced in circ-ARHGAP26 (-) 
group compared to NC (-) group.
CONCLUSION: The circ-ARHGAP26 is over-expressed and its downregulation inhibits 
cell proliferation and promotes cells apoptosis in GC cells.

DOI: 10.4103/sjg.SJG_283_18
PMCID: PMC6457177
PMID: 30719998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None