1. Persoonia. 2018 Dec;41:56-70. doi: 10.3767/persoonia.2018.41.04. Epub 2018 Feb
 5.

Malassezia vespertilionis sp. nov.: a new cold-tolerant species of yeast 
isolated from bats.

Lorch JM(1), Palmer JM(2), Vanderwolf KJ(1)(3), Schmidt KZ(1), Verant ML(1)(3), 
Weller TJ(4), Blehert DS(1).

Author information:
(1)U.S. Geological Survey, National Wildlife Health Center, 6006 Schroeder Road, 
Madison, WI 53711, USA.
(2)United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Center for Forest 
Mycology Research, Northern Research Station, USDA Forest Service, 1 Gifford 
Pinchot Drive, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1656 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(4)United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Research Station, 1700 Bayview Drive, Arcata, CA 95521, USA.

Malassezia is a genus of medically-important, lipid-dependent yeasts that live 
on the skin of warm-blooded animals. The 17 described species have been 
documented primarily on humans and domestic animals, but few studies have 
examined Malassezia species associated with more diverse host groups such as 
wildlife. While investigating the skin mycobiota of healthy bats, we isolated a 
Malassezia sp. that exhibited only up to 92% identity with other known species 
in the genus for the portion of the DNA sequence of the internal transcribed 
spacer region that could be confidently aligned. The Malassezia sp. was cultured 
from the skin of nine species of bats in the subfamily Myotinae; isolates 
originated from bats sampled in both the eastern and western United States. 
Physiological features and molecular characterisation at seven additional loci 
(D1/D2 region of 26S rDNA, 18S rDNA, chitin synthase, second largest subunit of 
RNA polymerase II, β-tubulin, translation elongation factor EF-1α, and 
minichromosome maintenance complex component 7) indicated that all of the bat 
Malassezia isolates likely represented a single species distinct from other 
named taxa. Of particular note was the ability of the Malassezia sp. to grow 
over a broad range of temperatures (7-40 °C), with optimal growth occurring at 
24 °C. These thermal growth ranges, unique among the described Malassezia, may 
be an adaptation by the fungus to survive on bats during both the host's 
hibernation and active seasons. The combination of genetic and physiological 
differences provided compelling evidence that this lipid-dependent yeast 
represents a novel species described herein as Malassezia vespertilionis sp. 
nov. Whole genome sequencing placed the new species as a basal member of the 
clade containing the species M. furfur, M. japonica, M. obtusa, and M. 
yamatoensis. The genetic and physiological uniqueness of Malassezia 
vespertilionis among its closest relatives may make it important in future 
research to better understand the evolution, life history, and pathogenicity of 
the Malassezia yeasts.

DOI: 10.3767/persoonia.2018.41.04
PMCID: PMC6344816
PMID: 30728599