1. Plant Dis. 2013 Jan;97(1):149. doi: 10.1094/PDIS-08-12-0715-PDN.

First Report of Coleus blumei viroid Infecting Coleus in India.

Adkar-Purushothama CR(1), Nagaraja H(2), Sreenivasa MY(2), Sano T(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Agriculture and Life Science, Hirosaki University, Bunkyo-cho 3, 
Hirosaki 036-8561, Japan.
(2)Department of Studies in Microbiology, University of Mysore, Manasagangothri, 
Mysore 570 006, India.

Members of the genus Coleviroid (Coleus blumei viroid [CbVd]), family 
Pospiviroidae have been reported to infect Coleus (Solenostemon sp.). CbVd-1 was 
first reported from Brazil, CbVd-2, -3, and -4 were first reported from Germany, 
whereas CbVd-5 and -6 were recently identified in China (2). In India, Coleus is 
extensively cultivated as an ornamental plant in home gardens. In March to June 
2012, Coleus leaf samples with irregular chlorotic spots/patches were collected 
from home gardens of two different districts of Karnataka (Kodagu and Mysore 
districts), India, suspecting the presence of Coleus blumei viroids (CbVd 1 to 
6). Low molecular weight RNAs were extracted using 2% CTAB buffer containing 1.4 
M NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 and 100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0 (1). Viroid-like RNA was 
enriched by fractionation 2M LiCl soluble nucleic acids (4). A DNA fragment with 
the expected size of CbVd-1 was detected in 10 (including both districts) of 14 
analyzed (incident rate of 71%) from reverse transcription (RT)-PCR assay using 
Coleviroid specific primers (forward 5'-TGGATCCAGCGCTGCAACGGAATCCA-3' and 
reverse 5'-TTGGATCCGCCAGGGAACCCAGGTAAG-3'). RT was performed at 37°C for 60 min 
in 25 μl reaction mix containing 5 μl RNA extracts, 1 μl reverse primer, 1× 
first strand buffer, 10 mM dNTPs, and 200U M-MuLV-RT (Invitrogen, USA). For PCR, 
2 μl RT was mixed in 25 μl PCR mix containing 0.2 μM each forward and reverse 
primers and 2U LA Taq (Takara-Bio, Japan) according to the manufacturer's 
instruction. PCR parameter was one cycle at 94°C for 2 min, 35 cycles at 94°C 
for 45 s, 53°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 60 s, followed by final extension at 72°C 
for 10 min (4). Sequence analysis of cloned amplicons detected CbVd-1 in India. 
To confirm the sequence of the primer regions, an additional set of tail-tail 
primers were designed, CbVd1-136F (5'-CTTCGTGGAACGGCTCCGCG-3') and CbVd1-136Rev 
(5'-GAAGAAGCCGAAGCAACTCTC-3') and were used for RT-PCR. Amplified products were 
cloned, sequenced and compared with previously obtained data. Further, the 
presences of CbVd-1 in Coleus samples was confirmed by a RNA gel blot assay 
using digoxigenin-labeled CbVd-1 cRNA probe (3). Alignment of 19 sequences 
obtained from four representative Coleus samples found the presence of two 
sequence variants of CbVd-1, namely Ind-1 (GenBank Accession No. AB740017) and 
Ind-2 (AB740018). Ind-1 was found to differ from Ind-2 by two nucleotide 
substitutions at position 40 (C to T) and 211 (T to C). BLAST analysis of Ind-1 
showed 100% sequence similarity with CbVd-1 isolates from China (DQ178399) and 
South Korea (EU 410620), whereas Ind-2 was 99% identical to these two Chinese 
and Koreans isolates. Furthermore, 97% and 96% sequence identity with CbVd 1-RL 
RNA (Accession no. X95366) was observed for Ind-1 and Ind-2, respectively. 
Isolates from India were 88% similar with Coleus blumei viroid 1-RG (X95291). To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first molecular evidence for the presence 
of CbVd-1 infecting Coleus in India. Coleus harbors various viroid species and 
CbVd-1, reported widely, can transmit efficiently through seed and also could 
infect the other herbaceous plants (3). This report from India will contribute 
further understanding of a potential risk of Coleus viroids in ornamental 
species. References: (1) J. J. Doyle and J. L. Doyle. Phytochem. Bull. 19:11, 
1987. (2) F. H. Fu et al. Plant Dis. 95:494, 2011. (3) Ishiguro et al. Ann. 
Phytopathol. Soc. Jpn. 62:84, 1996. (4) S.-F. Li et al., Plant Pathol. 55:565, 
2006.

DOI: 10.1094/PDIS-08-12-0715-PDN
PMID: 30722272