1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Feb 6;15(2):e1007583. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007583. 
eCollection 2019 Feb.

TLR4 signaling improves PD-1 blockade therapy during chronic viral infection.

Wang Y(1), Chung YR(1), Eitzinger S(1), Palacio N(1), Gregory S(1), 
Bhattacharyya M(1), Penaloza-MacMaster P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States of America.

CD8 T cells are necessary for the elimination of intracellular pathogens, but 
during chronic viral infections, CD8 T cells become exhausted and unable to 
control the persistent infection. Programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) blockade 
therapies have been shown to improve CD8 T cell responses during chronic viral 
infections. These therapies have been licensed to treat cancers in humans, but 
they have not yet been licensed to treat chronic viral infections because 
limited benefit is seen in pre-clinical animal models of chronic infection. In 
the present study, we investigated whether TLR4 triggering could improve PD-1 
therapy during a chronic viral infection. Using the model of chronic lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection in mice, we show that TLR4 triggering 
with sublethal doses of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) followed by PD-1 blockade 
results in superior improvement in circulating virus-specific CD8 T cell 
responses, relative to PD-1 blockade alone. Moreover, we show that the synergy 
between LPS and PD-1 blockade is dependent on B7 costimulation and mediated by a 
dendritic cell (DC) intrinsic mechanism. Systemic LPS administration may have 
safety concerns, motivating us to devise a safer regimen. We show that ex vivo 
activation of DCs with LPS, followed by adoptive DC transfer, results in a 
similar potentiation of PD-1 therapy without inducing wasting disease. In 
summary, our data demonstrate a previously unidentified role for LPS/TLR4 
signaling in modulating the host response to PD-1 therapy. These findings may be 
important for developing novel checkpoint therapies against chronic viral 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007583
PMCID: PMC6380600
PMID: 30726291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.