1. Nat Commun. 2019 Feb 8;10(1):654. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-08415-7.

Selection of immunoglobulin elbow region mutations impacts interdomain 
conformational flexibility in HIV-1 broadly neutralizing antibodies.

Henderson R(1), Watts BE(1), Ergin HN(1), Anasti K(1), Parks R(1), Xia SM(1), 
Trama A(1), Liao HX(1)(2), Saunders KO(1), Bonsignori M(1), Wiehe K(1), Haynes 
BF(1), Alam SM(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
27710, USA.
(2)College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510632, 
China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
27710, USA. munir.alam@duke.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, 
27710, USA. munir.alam@duke.edu.

Somatic mutations within antibody variable and framework regions (FWR) can alter 
thermostability and structural flexibility, but their impact on functional 
potency is unclear. Here we study thermostability and use molecular dynamics 
(MD) simulations to assess the role of FWR mutations during maturation of HIV-1 
broadly neutralizing antibodies (bnAbs). The tested bnAbs show lower 
thermostability than their unmutated ancestor antibodies. FWR mutations in the 
Fab elbow region are frequently observed in HIV-1 bnAbs and MD simulations show 
that such FWR mutations alter interdomain flexibility in two HIV-1 bnAbs. In a 
CD4-binding site lineage, reversion mutations result in a loss of neutralization 
potency in an early intermediate and affinity-matured bnAb against autologous 
and heterologous Tier-2 viruses, respectively. Elbow region reversion mutations 
in a glycan-V3 bnAb modestly reduces potency against an autologous virus 
isolate. Thus, selection of mutations in the Fab elbow region impacts 
interdomain conformational flexibility and paratope plasticity during bnAb 
development.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-08415-7
PMCID: PMC6368608
PMID: 30737386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.