1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Feb 8;15(2):e1007942. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007942. 
eCollection 2019 Feb.

Rescue of collapsed replication forks is dependent on NSMCE2 to prevent mitotic 
DNA damage.

Pond KW(1), de Renty C(2), Yagle MK(2), Ellis NA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona, United States of America.
(2)University of Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, 
United States of America.

NSMCE2 is an E3 SUMO ligase and a subunit of the SMC5/6 complex that associates 
with the replication fork and protects against genomic instability. Here, we 
study the fate of collapsed replication forks generated by prolonged hydroxyurea 
treatment in human NSMCE2-deficient cells. Double strand breaks accumulate 
during rescue by converging forks in normal cells but not in NSMCE2-deficient 
cells. Un-rescued forks persist into mitosis, leading to increased mitotic DNA 
damage. Excess RAD51 accumulates and persists at collapsed forks in 
NSMCE2-deficient cells, possibly due to lack of BLM recruitment to stalled 
forks. Despite failure of BLM to accumulate at stalled forks, NSMCE2-deficient 
cells exhibit lower levels of hydroxyurea-induced sister chromatid exchange. In 
cells deficient in both NSMCE2 and BLM, hydroxyurea-induced double strand breaks 
and sister chromatid exchange resembled levels found in NSCME2-deficient cells. 
We conclude that the rescue of collapsed forks by converging forks is dependent 
on NSMCE2.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007942
PMCID: PMC6383951
PMID: 30735491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that they have no 
competing interests.