1. Sci Rep. 2019 Feb 11;9(1):1731. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-39429-2.

Global Implications of Local Unfolding Phenomena, Probed by Cysteine Reactivity 
in Human Frataxin.

Faraj SE(1), Noguera ME(1), Delfino JM(1), Santos J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Alejandro Paladini Institute of Biological Chemistry and Chemical Physics 
(UBA-CONICET), Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, 
Junín 956, (C1113AAD), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Alejandro Paladini Institute of Biological Chemistry and Chemical Physics 
(UBA-CONICET), Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, 
Junín 956, (C1113AAD), Buenos Aires, Argentina. javiersantosw@gmail.com.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología y Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de 
Ciencia Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires. Instituto de 
Biociencias, Biotecnología y Biomedicina (iB3). Intendente Güiraldes 2160 - 
Ciudad Universitaria, 1428EGA, C.A.B.A., Argentina. javiersantosw@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 14;10(1):615. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-57572-z.

Local events that affect specific regions of proteins are of utmost relevance 
for stability and function. The aim of this study is to quantitatively assess 
the importance of locally-focused dynamics by means of a simple chemical 
modification procedure. Taking human Frataxin as a working model, we 
investigated local fluctuations of the C-terminal region (the last 16 residues 
of the protein) by means of three L → C replacement mutants: L98C, L200C and 
L203C. The conformation and thermodynamic stability of each variant was 
assessed. All the variants exhibited native features and high stabilities: 9.1 
(wild type), 8.1 (L198C), 7.0 (L200C) and 10.0 kcal mol-1 (L203C). In addition, 
kinetic rates of Cys chemical modification by DTNB and DTDPy were measured, 
conformational dynamics data were extracted and free energy for the local 
unfolding of the C-terminal region was estimated. The analysis of these results 
indicates that the conformation of the C-terminal region fluctuates with partial 
independence from global unfolding events. Additionally, numerical fittings of 
the kinetic model of the process suggest that the local transition occurs in the 
seconds to minutes timescale. In fact, standard free energy differences for 
local unfolding were found to be significantly lower than those of the global 
unfolding reaction, showing that chemical modification results may not be 
explained in terms of the global unfolding reaction alone. These results provide 
unequivocal experimental evidence of local phenomena with global effects and 
contribute to understanding how global and local stability are linked to protein 
dynamics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-39429-2
PMCID: PMC6370780
PMID: 30742023

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.