1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Mar;41:320-332. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.058. Epub 2019
 Feb 7.

POH1 contributes to hyperactivation of TGF-β signaling and facilitates 
hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through deubiquitinating TGF-β receptors and 
caveolin-1.

Wang B(1), Xu X(2), Yang Z(1), Zhang L(1), Liu Y(1), Ma A(1), Xu G(1), Tang 
M(1), Jing T(1), Wu L(1), Liu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji Hospital, School 
of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer 
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address: liuyzg@shsci.org.

BACKGROUND: Hyper-activation of TGF-β signaling is critically involved in 
progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the events that 
contribute to the dysregulation of TGF-β pathway in HCC, especially at the 
post-translational level, are not well understood.
METHODS: Associations of deubiquitinase POH1 with TGF-β signaling activity and 
the outcomes of HCC patients were examined by data mining of online HCC 
datasets, immunohistochemistry analyses using human HCC specimens, spearman 
correlation and survival analyses. The effects of POH1 on the ubiquitination and 
stability of the TGF-β receptors (TGFBR1 and TGFBR2) and the activation of 
downstream effectors were tested by western blotting. Primary mouse liver 
tissues from polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C)- treated Mx-Cre+, 
poh1f/f mice and control mice were used to detect the TGF-β receptors. The 
metastatic-related capabilities of HCC cells were studied in vitro and in mice.
FINDINGS: Here we show that POH1 is a critical regulator of TGF-β signaling and 
promotes tumor metastasis. Integrative analyses of HCC subgroups classified with 
unsupervised transcriptome clustering of the TGF-β response, metastatic 
potential and outcomes, reveal that POH1 expression positively correlates with 
activities of TGF-β signaling in tumors and with malignant disease progression. 
Functionally, POH1 intensifies TGF-β signaling delivery and, as a consequence, 
promotes HCC cell metastatic properties both in vitro and in vivo. The 
expression of the TGF-β receptors was severely downregulated in POH1-deficient 
mouse hepatocytes. Mechanistically, POH1 deubiquitinates the TGF-β receptors and 
CAV1, therefore negatively regulates lysosome pathway-mediated turnover of TGF-β 
receptors.
CONCLUSION: Our study highlights the pathological significance of aberrantly 
expressed POH1 in TGF-β signaling hyperactivation and aggressive progression in 
HCC.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.01.058
PMCID: PMC6441868
PMID: 30745168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]