1. Cell Rep. 2019 Feb 12;26(7):1718-1726.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.069.

Pseudovirus rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP Infects Neurons in Retina and CNS, Causing Apoptosis 
and Neurodegeneration in Neonatal Mice.

McWilliams IL(1), Kielczewski JL(2), Ireland DDC(1), Sykes JS(1), Lewkowicz 
AP(1), Konduru K(3), Xu BC(2), Chan CC(2), Caspi RR(2), Manangeeswaran M(4), 
Verthelyi D(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biotechnology Review and Research-III, Office of Biotechnology 
Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.
(3)Laboratory of Emerging Pathogens, Division of Emerging and Transfusion 
Transmitted Diseases, Office of Blood Research and Review, Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993, 
USA.
(4)Division of Biotechnology Review and Research-III, Office of Biotechnology 
Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA. Electronic address: 
mohanraj.manangeeswaran@fda.hhs.gov.
(5)Division of Biotechnology Review and Research-III, Office of Biotechnology 
Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 
Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA. Electronic address: daniela.verthelyi@fda.hhs.gov.

Zaire Ebola virus (ZEBOV) survivors experience visual and CNS sequelae that 
suggests the ZEBOV glycoprotein can mediate neurotropism. Replication-competent 
rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP vaccine candidate is generally well tolerated; however, its 
potential neurotropism requires careful study. Here, we show that a single 
inoculation of rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP virus in neonatal C57BL/6 mice results in 
transient viremia, neurological symptoms, high viral titers in eyes and brains, 
and death. rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP infects the inner layers of the retina, causing 
severe retinitis. In the cerebellum, rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP infects neurons in the 
granular and Purkinje layers, resulting in progressive foci of apoptosis and 
neurodegeneration. The susceptibility to infection is not due to impaired type I 
IFN responses, although MDA5-/-, IFNβ-/-, and IFNAR1-/- mice have accelerated 
mortality. However, boosting interferon levels by co-administering poly(I:C) 
reduces viral titers in CNS and improves survival. Although these data should 
not be directly extrapolated to humans, they challenge the hypothesis that 
VSV-based vaccines are non-neurotropic.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.069
PMCID: PMC6748882
PMID: 30759384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no 
competing interests.