1. BMC Plant Biol. 2019 Feb 14;19(1):73. doi: 10.1186/s12870-019-1673-6.

Identification and expression analysis of strigolactone biosynthetic and 
signaling genes reveal strigolactones are involved in fruit development of the 
woodland strawberry (Fragaria vesca).

Wu H(1), Li H(2)(3), Chen H(4), Qi Q(5), Ding Q(2), Xue J(2), Ding J(2), Jiang 
X(5), Hou X(2), Li Y(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of 
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
wuhan@njau.edu.cn.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of 
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
(3)Present address: Fuyang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Fuyang, 236065, 
China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for the Research and Utilization of Plant Resources, 
Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, 
210014, China.
(5)National Engineering Laboratory for Tree Breeding, College of Life Sciences 
and Biotechnology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of 
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
yi.li@uconn.edu.
(7)Department of Plant Science and Landscape Architecture, University of 
Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 06269, USA. yi.li@uconn.edu.

BACKGROUND: The development and ripening of fresh fruits is an important trait 
for agricultural production and fundamental research. Almost all plant hormones 
participate in this process. Strigolactones (SLs) are a new class of plant 
hormones that regulate plant organ development and stress tolerance, but little 
is known about their roles in fruit development.
RESULTS: In this study, we identified SL biosynthetic and signaling genes in 
woodland strawberry, a typical non-climacteric fruit, and analyzed the 
expression patterns of these genes in different plant tissues and developing 
fruits. One D27, two MAX1, and one LBO gene were identified as involved in SL 
biosynthesis, and one D14, one D3, and two D53 genes as related to SL signaling. 
The proteins encoded by these genes had similar motifs as SL biosynthetic and 
signaling proteins in rice and Arabidopsis. The genes had different expression 
levels in the root, stem, leaf, and petiole of woodland strawberry. In addition, 
the expression of most SL biosynthetic genes was high in developing carpel, 
anther, and style, while that of SL signaling genes was high in carpel and 
style, but low in anther, suggesting active SL biosynthesis and signaling in the 
developing carpel and style. Notably, the expression of SL biosynthetic and 
signaling genes was significantly increased in the receptacle after pollination 
and decreased during receptacle development. Moreover, low or no expression of 
these genes was detected in ripening fruits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that SLs play a role in the early stages of 
woodland strawberry fruit development. Our findings provide insight into the 
function of SLs and will facilitate further study of the regulation by SLs of 
fresh fruit development.

DOI: 10.1186/s12870-019-1673-6
PMCID: PMC6376702
PMID: 30764758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.