1. Molecules. 2019 Feb 14;24(4):682. doi: 10.3390/molecules24040682.

Synthesis, Characterization, and Biological Activity of a Novel Series of 
Benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole Derivatives as Potential Epidermal Growth 
Factor Receptor Inhibitors.

Deng X(1), Tan X(2), An T(3), Ma Q(4), Jin Z(5), Wang C(6), Meng Q(7), Hu C(8).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
xinshandeng@126.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
tanxiaoyuaikaoyan@163.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
antiantiansyphu@163.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
maqingqing01@163.com.
(5)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
jinzheln@163.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
wangce0412@163.com.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Yantai University, Yantai 264005, China. 
qinggmeng@163.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Structure-Based Drug Design & Discovery, Ministry of 
Education, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, China. 
chunhu@syphu.edu.cn.

Based on the analysis of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) complexes with 
gefitinib with molecular docking, the scaffold-hopping strategy, combination of 
the active substructures, and structural optimization of EGFR inhibitors, a 
novel series of benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole derivatives was designed, 
synthesized, and evaluated for antitumor activity in human cancer cell lines and 
cellular toxicity against human normal cell lines using the 
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) colorimetric 
assay and EGFR inhibitory activities in vitro. Some target compounds such as 
2-(benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazol-3-yl)-N-(2-hydroxyphenyl)acetamide (D04) and 
2-(benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazol-3-yl)-N-(naphthalen-1-yl)acetamide (D08) have 
shown significant antitumor activity against the EGFR high-expressed human cell 
line HeLa. All the target compounds showed hardly any antitumor activity against 
the EGFR low-expressed human cell line HepG2, and nearly no cellular toxicity 
against the human normal cell lines HL7702 and human umbilical vein endothelial 
cell lines (HUVEC). The inhibitory activities against EGFR kinase in vitro of 
the three target compounds were greatly consistent with the anti-proliferative 
activities. The preliminary structure‚Åªactivity relationships of the target 
compounds were summarized. Conclusively, the novel 
benzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]thiazole derivatives as novel potential EGFR inhibitors 
may be used as the potential lead compounds for the development of antitumor 
agents.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24040682
PMCID: PMC6412895
PMID: 30769844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that this article content 
has no conflict of interest.