1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Feb 5;20(3):689. doi: 10.3390/ijms20030689.

Accessibility of Cations to the Selectivity Filter of KcsA in the Inactivated 
State: An Equilibrium Binding Study.

Giudici AM(1), Renart ML(2), Díaz-García C(3), Morales A(4), Poveda JA(5), 
González-Ros JM(6).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación en Biotecnología 
Sanitaria de Elche (IDiBE), and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular 
(IBMC), Universidad Miguel Hernández, Elche, E-03202 Alicante, Spain. 
marcela@umh.es.
(2)Instituto de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación en Biotecnología 
Sanitaria de Elche (IDiBE), and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular 
(IBMC), Universidad Miguel Hernández, Elche, E-03202 Alicante, Spain. 
lrenart@umh.es.
(3)CQFM-IN and IBB-Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Instituto 
Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal. 
clara.dg93@gmail.com.
(4)Departamento de Fisiología, Genética y Microbiología, Universidad de 
Alicante, E-03080 Alicante, Spain. Andres.Morales@ua.es.
(5)Instituto de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación en Biotecnología 
Sanitaria de Elche (IDiBE), and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular 
(IBMC), Universidad Miguel Hernández, Elche, E-03202 Alicante, Spain. 
ja.poveda@umh.es.
(6)Instituto de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación en Biotecnología 
Sanitaria de Elche (IDiBE), and Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular 
(IBMC), Universidad Miguel Hernández, Elche, E-03202 Alicante, Spain. 
gonzalez.ros@umh.es.

Cation binding under equilibrium conditions has been used as a tool to explore 
the accessibility of permeant and nonpermeant cations to the selectivity filter 
in three different inactivated models of the potassium channel KcsA. The results 
show that the stack of ion binding sites (S1 to S4) in the inactivated filter 
models remain accessible to cations as they are in the resting channel state. 
The inactivated state of the selectivity filter is therefore "resting-like" 
under such equilibrium conditions. Nonetheless, quantitative differences in the 
apparent KD's of the binding processes reveal that the affinity for the binding 
of permeant cations to the inactivated channel models, mainly K⁺, decreases 
considerably with respect to the resting channel. This is likely to cause a loss 
of K⁺ from the inactivated filter and consequently, to promote nonconductive 
conformations. The most affected site by the affinity loss seems to be S4, which 
is interesting because S4 is the first site to accommodate K⁺ coming from the 
channel vestibule when K⁺ exits the cell. Moreover, binding of the nonpermeant 
species, Na⁺, is not substantially affected by inactivation, meaning that the 
inactivated channels are also less selective for permeant versus nonpermeant 
cations under equilibrium conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20030689
PMCID: PMC6387330
PMID: 30764559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.