1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Feb 15;15(2):e1007533. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007533. 
eCollection 2019 Feb.

A high rate of polymerization during synthesis of mouse mammary tumor virus DNA 
alleviates hypermutation by APOBEC3 proteins.

Hagen B(1), Kraase M(1), Indikova I(1), Indik S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.

Retroviruses have evolved multiple means to counteract host restriction factors 
such as single-stranded DNA-specific deoxycytidine deaminases (APOBEC3s, A3s). 
These include exclusion of A3s from virions by an A3-unreactive nucleocapsid or 
expression of an A3-neutralizing protein (Vif, Bet). However, a number of 
retroviruses package A3s and do not encode apparent vif- or bet-like genes, yet 
they replicate in the presence of A3s. The mode by which they overcome 
deleterious restriction remains largely unknown. Here we show that the 
prototypic betaretrovirus, mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV), packages similar 
amounts of A3s as HIV-1Î”Vif, yet its proviruses carry a significantly lower 
level of A3-mediated deamination events than the lentivirus. The G-to-A mutation 
rate increases when the kinetics of reverse transcription is reduced by 
introducing a mutation (F120L) to the DNA polymerase domain of the MMTV reverse 
transcriptase (RT). A similar A3-sensitizing effect was observed when the 
exposure time of single-stranded DNA intermediates to A3s during reverse 
transcription was lengthened by reducing the dNTP concentration or by adding 
suboptimal concentrations of an RT inhibitor to infected cells. Thus, the MMTV 
RT has evolved to impede access of A3s to transiently exposed minus DNA strands 
during reverse transcription, thereby alleviating inhibition by A3 family 
members. A similar mechanism may be used by other retroviruses and 
retrotransposons to reduce deleterious effects of A3 proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007533
PMCID: PMC6395001
PMID: 30768644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.