1. Front Immunol. 2019 Feb 1;10:127. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00127. eCollection 
2019.

Deficiency in IL-33/ST2 Axis Reshapes Mitochondrial Metabolism in 
Lipopolysaccharide-Stimulated Macrophages.

Xu H(1), Sun L(1), He Y(2), Yuan X(3), Niu J(4), Su J(1), Li D(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Pathobiology, Ministry of Education, Department of 
Pathophysiology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Changchun University of 
Chinese Medicine, Changchun, China.
(4)Department of Hepatology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, 
China.
(5)Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin 
University, Changchun, China.

The polarization and function of macrophages play essential roles in controlling 
immune responses. Interleukin (IL)-33 is a member of the IL-1 family that has 
been shown to influence macrophage activation and polarization, but the 
underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. Mitochondrial metabolism has 
been reported to be a central player in shaping macrophage polarization; 
previous studies have shown that both aerobic glycolysis and oxidative 
phosphorylation uniquely regulate the functions of M1 and M2 macrophages. 
Whether IL-33 polarizes macrophages by reshaping mitochondrial metabolism 
requires further investigation. In this work, we examined the mitochondrial 
metabolism of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from either wild type 
(WT), Il33-overexpressing, or IL-33 receptor knockout (St2-/-) mice challenged 
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We found that after LPS stimulation, compared 
with WT BMDMs, St2-/- BMDMs had reduced cytokine production and increased 
numbers and activity of mitochondria via the metabolism regulator peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-C coactivator-1 α (PGC1α). This was demonstrated 
by increased mitochondrial DNA copy number, mitochondria counts, mitochondria 
fission- and fusion-related gene expression, oxygen consumption rates, and ATP 
production, and decreased glucose uptake, lactate production, and extracellular 
acidification rates. For Il33-overexpressing BMDMs, the metabolic reprogramming 
upon LPS stimulation was similar to WT BMDMs, and was accompanied by increased 
M1 macrophage activity. Our findings suggested that the pleiotropic IL-33/ST2 
pathway may influence the polarization and function of macrophages by regulating 
mitochondrial metabolism.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00127
PMCID: PMC6367255
PMID: 30774633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]