1. Gene. 2019 May 15;696:88-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.01.040. Epub 2019 Feb
15.

Single and multi-locus association study of TCF7L2 gene variants with 
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus in an Iranian population.

Kalantari S(1), Sharafshah A(2), Keshavarz P(3), Davoudi A(4), Habibipour R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Guilan University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, 
Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Guilan 
University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran.
(3)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Guilan 
University of Medical Sciences, Rasht, Iran. Electronic address: 
keshavarz@gums.ac.ir.
(4)Division of Cytogenetic, Medical Genetic Laboratory of Dr. Keshavarz, Rasht, 
Iran.

Prior studies indicated that some of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene 
variants such as rs7903146, rs12255372 and rs11255372 are constantly associated 
with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in various populations and ethnic groups. 
The purpose of this study was to assess the association between TCF7L2 variants 
(rs7903146, rs11196205, and rs11255372) and T2DM by TaqMan assay. Statistical 
analysis was performed through SNPAlyze and SPSS. Significant associations of 
rs7903146 (P = 1.9 × 10-7), and rs11255372 (P = 2.98 × 10-10) both under a 
dominant model were found. Based on allele frequency, there was a significant 
difference between the two study groups at rs7903146 and rs12255372 variants 
(P = 6.8 × 10-10, and P = 9.3 × 10-11, respectively). Two haplotypes including 
Hap-1 (C-G-G) and Hap-2 (T-G-T) indicated a significant difference between the 
two study groups (P = 1.174 × 10-9and P = 7.432 × 109 respectively). In 
conclusion, rs7903146 and rs12255372 were significantly associated with T2DM in 
the specified Northern Iranian population.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.01.040
PMID: 30776466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]