1. RNA. 2019 May;25(5):539-556. doi: 10.1261/rna.070169.118. Epub 2019 Feb 15.

The search for a PKR code-differential regulation of protein kinase R activity 
by diverse RNA and protein regulators.

Bou-Nader C(1), Gordon JM(1), Henderson FE(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The interferon-inducible protein kinase R (PKR) is a key component of host 
innate immunity that restricts viral replication and propagation. As one of the 
four eIF2Î± kinases that sense diverse stresses and direct the integrated stress 
response (ISR) crucial for cell survival and proliferation, PKR's versatile 
roles extend well beyond antiviral defense. Targeted by numerous host and viral 
regulators made of RNA and proteins, PKR is subject to multiple layers of 
endogenous control and external manipulation, driving its rapid evolution. These 
versatile regulators include not only the canonical double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) 
that activates the kinase activity of PKR, but also highly structured viral, 
host, and artificial RNAs that exert a full spectrum of effects. In this review, 
we discuss our deepening understanding of the allosteric mechanism that connects 
the regulatory and effector domains of PKR, with an emphasis on diverse 
structured RNA regulators in comparison to their protein counterparts. Through 
this analysis, we conclude that much of the mechanistic details that underlie 
this RNA-regulated kinase await structural and functional elucidation, upon 
which we can then describe a "PKR code," a set of structural and chemical 
features of RNA that are both descriptive and predictive for their effects on 
PKR.

Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.070169.118
PMCID: PMC6467004
PMID: 30770398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]