1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2019 May;20(5):656-672. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12783. Epub 2019
Feb  18.

Variation and inheritance of the Xanthomonas raxX-raxSTAB gene cluster required 
for activation of XA21-mediated immunity.

Liu F(1), McDonald M(2), Schwessinger B(1)(2), Joe A(1), Pruitt R(1), Erickson 
T(1), Zhao X(1), Stewart V(3), Ronald PC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and the Genome Center, University of 
California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, 0200, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California, 
Davis, CA, 95616, USA.

The rice XA21-mediated immune response is activated on recognition of the RaxX 
peptide produced by the bacterium Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo). The 
60-residue RaxX precursor is post-translationally modified to form a sulfated 
tyrosine peptide that shares sequence and functional similarity with the plant 
sulfated tyrosine (PSY) peptide hormones. The 5-kb raxX-raxSTAB gene cluster of 
Xoo encodes RaxX, the RaxST tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase, and the RaxA and 
RaxB components of a predicted type I secretion system. To assess raxX-raxSTAB 
gene cluster evolution and to determine its phylogenetic distribution, we first 
identified rax gene homologues in other genomes. We detected the complete 
raxX-raxSTAB gene cluster only in Xanthomonas spp., in five distinct lineages in 
addition to X. oryzae. The phylogenetic distribution of the raxX-raxSTAB gene 
cluster is consistent with the occurrence of multiple lateral (horizontal) gene 
transfer events during Xanthomonas speciation. RaxX natural variants contain a 
restricted set of missense substitutions, as expected if selection acts to 
maintain peptide hormone-like function. Indeed, eight RaxX variants tested all 
failed to activate the XA21-mediated immune response, yet retained peptide 
hormone activity. Together, these observations support the hypothesis that the 
XA21 receptor evolved specifically to recognize Xoo RaxX.

© 2019 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology Published by British Society for 
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12783
PMCID: PMC6637879
PMID: 30773771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]