1. BMC Med Genet. 2019 Feb 19;20(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0766-2.

The association between interleukin-6 gene -174G/C single nucleotide 
polymorphism and sepsis: an updated meta-analysis with trial sequential 
analysis.

Chen Y(1), Hu Y(1), Song Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 
Fenglin Road, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 180 
Fenglin Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. zhenjusong@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: This article intends to explore the association between 
interleukin-6 gene (IL-6) -174 G/C single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and the 
risk and mortality of sepsis by conducting this updated meta-analysis with trial 
sequential analysis.
METHODS: References were made to PubMed, Web of Science, China National 
Knowledge Infrastructure for studies available by September 2018. Each 
publication was screened for its eligibility and data accessible. Statistical 
analysis was conducted on Stata 14.1 and TSA software 0.9.5.10 Beta RESULTS: 
Twenty studies (including 3282 cases and 4926 controls) and eight studies 
(including 610 cases and 1856 controls) were respectively enrolled in the 
analysis on the association between IL-6-174 G/C polymorphism and the risk and 
mortality of sepsis. The results did not present any association between 
IL-6-174 G/C polymorphism and the risk and mortality of sepsis. An exception was 
that IL-6-174 G/C polymorphism was correlated with worse outcome in non-adults 
in recessive model, co-dominant model (CC vs. GG) and allelic model, while trial 
sequential analysis revealed it could be a false positive result nevertheless.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-6-174 G/C polymorphism is not associated with the risk and 
mortality of sepsis. Trial sequential analysis showed that a large sample size 
was needed to get a more reliable result of the association between IL-6-174 G/C 
polymorphism and sepsis in non-adults.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-019-0766-2
PMCID: PMC6379942
PMID: 30782124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: No 
ethical approval and consent to participate were necessary because all sources 
of this analysis were acquired from published studies. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: 
Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that there are no 
conflicts of interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with 
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.