1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Jan;63(1):103635. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.02.007. Epub 
2019 Feb 21.

Exome sequencing reveals a novel splice site variant in HUWE1 gene in patients 
with suspected Say-Meyer syndrome.

Muthusamy B(1), Nguyen TT(2), Bandari AK(1), Basheer S(3), Selvan LDN(4), 
Chandel D(5), Manoj J(3), Gayen S(5), Seshagiri S(2), Chandra Girimaji S(6), 
Pandey A(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, 
560066, India; Center for Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Mental 
Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Hosur Road, Bangalore, 560029, India; 
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, 576104, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Metabolic Disease, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA 
Way, South San Francisco, CA, 94080, USA.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, NIMHANS, Hosur Road, 
Bangalore, 560029, India.
(4)Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, 
560066, India.
(5)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development and Genetics, Division of 
Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(6)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, NIMHANS, Hosur Road, 
Bangalore, 560029, India. Electronic address: girimaji@nimhans.kar.nic.in.
(7)Center for Molecular Medicine, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Hosur Road, Bangalore, 560029, India; Department of 
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA; Center for 
Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Electronic 
address: pandey.akhilesh@mayo.edu.

Say-Meyer syndrome is a rare and clinically heterogeneous syndrome characterized 
by trigonocephaly, short stature, developmental delay and hypotelorism. Nine 
patients with this syndrome have been reported thus far although no causative 
gene has yet been identified. Here, we report two siblings with clinical 
phenotypes of Say-Meyer syndrome with moderate to severe intellectual disability 
and autism spectrum disorder. Cytogenetics and array-based comparative genomic 
hybridization did not reveal any chromosome abnormalities or copy number 
alterations. Exome sequencing of the patients revealed a novel X-linked 
recessive splice acceptor site variant c.145-2A > G in intron 5 of HUWE1 gene in 
both affected siblings. RT-PCR and sequencing revealed the use of an alternate 
cryptic splice acceptor site downstream, which led to deletion of six 
nucleotides resulting loss of two amino acids p.(Cys49-Glu50del) in HUWE1 
protein. Deletion of these two amino acids, which are located in a highly 
conserved region, is predicted to be deleterious and quite likely to affect the 
function of HUWE1 protein. This is the first report of a potential candidate 
gene mutation for Say-Meyer syndrome, which was initially described four decades 
ago.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.02.007
PMCID: PMC6974397
PMID: 30797980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and Conflict of interest SS holds 
Roche shares. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.