1. Cancer Manag Res. 2019 Feb 8;11:1275-1287. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S186416. 
eCollection 2019.

Establishment and characterization of the GC-030-35 cell line derived from 
gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma.

Wei J(1), Xue Y(1), Huo X(1), Han R(1), Su X(1), Jin Y(1), Zhao W(1), Chen Y(1), 
Zhang H(1), Dai J(1), Chen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China, jinfeichen@njmu.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: Gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a rare subtype of primary gastric 
cancer and is a high-grade form of malignancy. However, the pathogenesis and 
molecular biology of gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma remain poorly understood. 
The aim of this study was to establish and characterize a new human gastric 
hepatoid adenocarcinoma cell line, GC-030-35.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The GC-030-35 cell line was established from tumor cells 
from a 58-year-old Chinese man with gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma. The 
cultured cells underwent immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry to confirm the 
tumor cell phenotype. RNA sequencing was performed to analyze the differences in 
gene expression between GC-030-35 cells compared with normal gastric epithelial 
cells. A zebrafish assay was performed. Gene enrichment analysis and 
interrogation of the bioinformatics databases, the Gene Ontology (GO) database 
and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, were used for 
pathway analysis.
RESULTS: Flow cytometry analysis of the GC-030-35 cells showed a positive 
expression rate for CD44+ of 10.7%, high cell clonality, an average plating 
efficiency of 32%, cell-doubling time of 29.2 hours, and cell proliferation for 
>15 generations in serial culture. The zebrafish assay showed the ability of the 
GC-030-35 cells to proliferate, promote angiogenesis, and metastasize. RNA 
sequencing identified the functional clustering of 6,601 differentially 
expressed genes of GC-030-35, which were significantly different when compared 
with nonneoplastic gastric epithelial cells. Pathway enrichment analysis and 
interrogation of the GO and KEGG bioinformatics databases identified genes for 
microbial metabolism in diverse environments (63 genes), metabolism of 
xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 (CYP450; 25 genes), and the drug metabolism 
cytochrome P450 (28 genes).
CONCLUSION: A human gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma cell line, GC-030-35, was 
developed and characterized by comparison with normal gastric epithelial cells. 
Bioinformatics and gene analysis data showed that the CYP450 gene was 
significantly differentially expressed by GC-030-35 cells.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S186416
PMCID: PMC6371931
PMID: 30799954

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of 
interest in this work.