1. Cancer Med. 2019 Mar;8(3):1289-1305. doi: 10.1002/cam4.1972. Epub 2019 Feb 21.

Cumulative evidence for association between genetic polymorphisms and esophageal 
cancer susceptibility: A review with evidence from meta-analysis and genome-wide 
association studies.

Tian J(1), Liu C(1), Liu G(1), Zuo C(1), Chen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

An increasing number of publications had reported the association between 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and esophageal cancer (EC) risk in the 
past decades. Results from these publications were controversial. We used 
PubMed, Medline, and Web of Science to identify meta-analysis articles published 
before 30 July 2018, that summarize a comprehensive investigation for cumulative 
evidence of genetic polymorphisms of EC and its subtype risk. Two methods, 
Venice criteria and false-positive report probability (FPRP) tests, were used to 
assess cumulative evidence of significant associations. At last, 107 
meta-analyses were considered to be in conformity with the inclusion criteria, 
yielding 51 variants associated with EC or esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
(ESCC). Thirty-eight variants were considered to be nominally significant 
associated with risk of EC or ESCC, whereas the rest showed non-association. In 
additional, five variants on five genes were rated as strong cumulative 
epidemiological evidence for a nominally significant association with EC and 
ESCC risk, including CYP1A1 rs1048943, EGF rs444903, HOTAIR rs920778, MMP2 
rs243865, and PLCE1 rs2274223, 10 variants were rated as moderate, and 18 
variants were rated as weak. Additionally, 17 SNPs were verified noteworthy in 
six genomewide association studies (GWAS) using FPRP methods. Collectively, this 
review offered a comprehensively referenced information with cumulative evidence 
of associations between genetic polymorphisms and EC and ESCC risk.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.1972
PMCID: PMC6434199
PMID: 30793520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.