1. Cell Chem Biol. 2019 Apr 18;26(4):559-570.e6. doi: 
10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.01.007. Epub 2019 Feb 21.

Discovery and Characterization of a Nitroreductase Capable of Conferring 
Bacterial Resistance to Chloramphenicol.

Crofts TS(1), Sontha P(2), King AO(2), Wang B(3), Biddy BA(2), Zanolli N(2), 
Gaumnitz J(2), Dantas G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; The Edison Family Center for 
Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University in St Louis School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: 
tcrofts@northwestern.edu.
(2)The Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington 
University in St Louis School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; The Edison Family Center for 
Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University in St Louis School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis 
School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; The Edison Family Center for 
Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University in St Louis School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Molecular Microbiology, 
Washington University in St Louis School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, 
USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St Louis, 
Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: dantas@wustl.edu.

Widespread antibiotic resistance has led to the reappraisal of abandoned 
antibiotics including chloramphenicol. However, enzyme(s) underlying one form of 
chloramphenicol resistance, nitroreduction, have eluded identification. Here we 
demonstrate that expression of the Haemophilus influenzae nitroreductase gene 
nfsB confers chloramphenicol resistance in Escherichia coli. We characterized 
the enzymatic product of H. influenzae NfsB acting on chloramphenicol and found 
it to be amino-chloramphenicol. Kinetic analysis revealed reduction of diverse 
substrates including the incomplete reduction of 5-nitro antibiotics 
metronidazole and nitrofurantoin, likely resulting in activation of these 
antibiotic pro-drugs to their cytotoxic forms. We observed that expression of 
the H. influenzae nfsB gene in E. coli results in significantly increased 
susceptibility to metronidazole. Finally, we found that in this strain 
metronidazole attenuates chloramphenicol resistance synergistically, and 
in vitro metronidazole weakly inhibits chloramphenicol reduction by NfsB. Our 
findings reveal the underpinnings of a chloramphenicol resistance mechanism 
nearly 70 years after its description.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.01.007
PMCID: PMC6474809
PMID: 30799223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.