1. Med Sci Monit. 2019 Feb 23;25:1439-1451. doi: 10.12659/MSM.911489.

Linkage Analysis of the Chromosome 5q31-33 Region Identifies JAKMIP2 as a Risk 
Factor for Graves' Disease in the Chinese Han Population.

Li J(1)(2), Teng W(1), Yu Y(1)(3), Hou X(1)(4), Shan Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Instituite of Endocrinology, 
Liaoning Provincial Key Laboratory of Endocrine Diseases, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China (mainland).
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China (mainland).
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital of 
Dalian University, Dalian, Liaoning, China (mainland).
(4)Department of Geriatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, The First Hospital of 
China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND This study aimed to investigate susceptibility to Graves's disease 
and the association with the 5q32-33.1 region on chromosome 5 in a Chinese Han 
population. MATERIAL AND METHODS Eighty Chinese Han multiplex families included 
first-degree and second-degree relatives with Graves' disease. Eight 
microsatellite markers on chromosome 5 at the 5q32-33.1 region underwent linkage 
analysis and the association between the regions D5S1480-D5S2014 were studied. 
RESULTS The maximal heterogeneity logarithm of the odds (HLOD) score of D5S2090 
was 4.29 (α=0.42) and of D5S2014 was 4.01 (α=0.34). A nonparametric linkage 
(NPL) score of 3.14 (P<0.001) was found for D5S2014. The D5S1480-D5S2014 region 
on chromosome 5 was associated with Graves' disease, with eight haplotype 
domains. There were significant differences in the sixth and eighth haplotype 
domains between patients with Graves' disease compared with normal individuals. 
Tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the sixth and eighth haplotype 
domains showed that individuals with SNP62 (rs12653715 G/C) who were GG 
homozygous had a significantly increased risk of Graves' disease compared GC 
heterozygous or CC homozygous individuals. The transmission disequilibrium test 
(TDT) indicated that SNP62 (rs12653715) and SNP63 (rs12653081) loci in the Janus 
kinase and microtubule interacting protein 2 (JAKMIP2) gene showed dominant 
transmission from heterozygous parents to the affected offspring, and SNPs in 
the secretoglobin family 3A member 2 (SCGB3A2) gene showed no transmission 
disequilibrium. The haplotype JAKMIP2-1 was identified as being particularly 
significant. CONCLUSIONS JAKMIP2 gene polymorphism require further study as 
potential risk factors for Graves' disease in the Chinese Han population.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.911489
PMCID: PMC6397618
PMID: 30796769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None.