1. J Neurosci. 2019 Apr 17;39(16):3081-3093. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1786-18.2019.
 Epub 2019 Feb 22.

Priming of Adult Incision Response by Early-Life Injury: Neonatal Microglial 
Inhibition Has Persistent But Sexually Dimorphic Effects in Adult Rats.

Moriarty O(1), Tu Y(2), Sengar AS(2), Salter MW(2), Beggs S(1)(2)(3), Walker 
SM(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Neurosciences Programme (Pain Research), University College 
London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Neurosciences and Mental Health Program, Hospital for Sick Children, 
Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.
(3)Neuroscience Physiology and Pharmacology, University College London, London 
WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom, and.
(4)Developmental Neurosciences Programme (Pain Research), University College 
London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United 
Kingdom, suellen.walker@ucl.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine, Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
National Health Service Foundation Trust, London WC1N 3JH, United Kingdom.

Neonatal hindpaw incision primes developing spinal nociceptive circuitry, 
resulting in enhanced hyperalgesia following reinjury in adulthood. Spinal 
microglia contribute to this persistent effect, and microglial inhibition at the 
time of adult reincision blocks the enhanced hyperalgesia. Here, we 
pharmacologically inhibited microglial function with systemic minocycline or 
intrathecal SB203580 at the time of neonatal incision and evaluated 
sex-dependent differences following adult reincision. Incision in adult male and 
female rats induced equivalent hyperalgesia and spinal dorsal horn expression of 
genes associated with microglial proliferation (Emr1) and transformation to a 
reactive phenotype (Irf8). In control adults with prior neonatal incision, the 
enhanced degree and duration of incision-induced hyperalgesia and spinal 
microglial responses to reincision were equivalent in males and females. 
However, microglial inhibition at the time of the neonatal incision revealed 
sex-dependent effects: the persistent mechanical and thermal hyperalgesia 
following reincision in adulthood was prevented in males but unaffected in 
females. Similarly, reincision induced Emr1 and Irf8 gene expression was 
downregulated in males, but not in females, following neonatal incision with 
minocycline. To evaluate the distribution of reincision hyperalgesia, prior 
neonatal incision was performed at different body sites. Hyperalgesia was 
maximal when the same paw was reincised, and was increased following prior 
incision at ipsilateral, but not contralateral, sites, supporting a segmentally 
restricted spinal mechanism. These data highlight the contribution of spinal 
microglial mechanisms to persistent effects of early-life injury in males, and 
sex-dependent differences in the ability of microglial inhibition to prevent the 
transition to a persistent pain state span developmental stages.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT Following the same surgery, some patients develop persistent pain. 
Contributory mechanisms are not fully understood, but early-life experience and 
sex/gender may influence the transition to chronic pain. Surgery and painful 
procedural interventions in vulnerable preterm neonates are associated with 
long-term alterations in somatosensory function and pain that differ in males 
and females. Surgical injury in neonatal rodents primes the developing 
nociceptive system and enhances reinjury response in adulthood. Neuroimmune 
interactions are critical mediators of persistent pain, but sex-dependent 
differences in spinal neuroglial signaling influence the efficacy of microglial 
inhibitors following adult injury. Neonatal microglial inhibition has beneficial 
long-term effects on reinjury response in adult males only, emphasizing the 
importance of evaluating sex-dependent differences at all ages in preclinical 
studies.

Copyright Â© 2019 Moriarty et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1786-18.2019
PMCID: PMC6468109
PMID: 30796159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.