1. Lab Chip. 2019 Mar 27;19(7):1217-1225. doi: 10.1039/c8lc01404c.

Lab-on-a-Film disposable for genotyping multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis from sputum extracts.

Kukhtin AC(1), Sebastian T, Golova J, Perov A, Knickerbocker C, Linger Y, Bueno 
A, Qu P, Villanueva M, Holmberg RC, Chandler DP, Cooney CG.

Author information:
(1)Akonni Biosystems, Inc., 400 Sagner Avenue, Suite 300, Frederick, MD 21701, 
USA. cooney@akonni.com.

We describe a Lab-on-a-Film disposable that detects multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis (MDR-TB) from sputum extracts. The Lab-on-a-Film disposable 
consists of 203 gel elements that include DNA sequences (probes) for 37 
mutations, deletions, or insertion elements across 5 genes (including an 
internal control). These gel elements are printed on a flexible film, which 
costs approximately 500 times less than microarray glass. The film with printed 
gel elements is then laminated to additional rollable materials (films) to form 
a microfluidic flow cell. We combined multiplex amplification and hybridization 
steps in a single microfluidic chamber, without buffer exchanges or other 
manipulations up to and throughout hybridization. This flow cell also 
incorporates post hybridization wash steps while retaining an entirely 
closed-amplicon system, thus minimizing the potential for sample or amplicon 
cross-contamination. We report analytical sensitivity of 32 cfu mL-1 across all 
MDR-TB markers and detection of MDR-TB positive clinical specimens using an 
automated TruTip workstation for extraction and the Lab-on-a-Film disposable for 
amplification and detection of the extracts.

DOI: 10.1039/c8lc01404c
PMCID: PMC6461559
PMID: 30801596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest All Akonni-affiliated 
authors are employees of Akonni Biosystems Inc. AK, AP, CK, YL, DPC and CGC are 
also Akonni shareholders.