1. J Proteome Res. 2019 Apr 5;18(4):1582-1594. doi:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00886.  Epub 2019 Mar 15.

Proteomic Analysis Reveals Novel Mechanisms by Which Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
Compromise the Liver Promoting Diet-Induced Steatohepatitis.

Hardesty JE, Wahlang B, Falkner KC, Shi H, Jin J, Zhou Y, Wilkey DW, Merchant 
ML, Watson CT, Feng W, Morris AJ(1), Hennig B(1), Prough RA, Cave MC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Superfund Research Center , University of Kentucky , Lexington , Kentucky 
40536 , United States.
(2)The Robley Rex Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Louisville , Kentucky 40206 
, United States.
(3)The Jewish Hospital Liver Transplant Program , Louisville , Kentucky 40202 , 
United States.

Environmental pollution contributes to fatty liver disease pathogenesis. 
Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) exposures have been associated with liver enzyme 
elevation and suspected steatohepatitis in cohort studies. Male mice treated 
with the commercial PCB mixture, Aroclor 1260 (20 mg/kg), and fed high fat diet 
(HFD) for 12 weeks developed steatohepatitis. Receptor-based modes of action 
including inhibition of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor were 
previously proposed, but other mechanisms likely exist. Objectives were to 
identify and validate the pathways, transcription factors, and mechanisms 
responsible for the steatohepatitis associated with PCB and HFD coexposures. 
Comparative proteomics analysis was performed in archived mouse liver samples 
from the aforementioned chronic exposure study. Pathway and transcription factor 
analysis (TFA) was performed, and selected results were validated. Liver 
proteomics detected 1103 unique proteins. Aroclor 1260 upregulated 154 and 
downregulated 93 of these. Aroclor 1260 + HFD coexposures affected 55 pathways 
including glutathione metabolism, intermediary metabolism, and cytoskeletal 
remodeling. TFA of Aroclor 1260 treatment demonstrated alterations in the 
function of 42 transcription factors including downregulation of NRF2 and key 
nuclear receptors previously demonstrated to protect against steatohepatitis 
(e.g., HNF4α, FXR, PPARα/δ/γ, etc.). Validation studies demonstrated that 
Aroclor 1260 significantly reduced HNF4α protein levels, while Aroclor 1260 + 
HFD reduced expression of the HNF4α target gene, albumin, in vivo. Aroclor 1260 
attenuated EGF-dependent HNF4α phosphorylation and target gene activation in 
vitro. Aroclor 1260 reduced levels of NRF2, its target genes, and glutathione in 
vivo. Aroclor 1260 attenuated EGF-dependent NRF2 upregulation, in vitro. Aroclor 
1260 indirectly activated hepatic stellate cells in vitro via induction of 
hepatocyte-derived TGFβ. PCB exposures adversely impacted transcription factors 
regulating liver protection, function, and fibrosis. PCBs, thus, compromised the 
liver by reducing its protective responses against nutritional stress to promote 
diet-induced steatohepatitis. The identified mechanisms by which environmental 
pollutants influence fatty liver disease pathogenesis require confirmation in 
humans.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00886
PMCID: PMC7059562
PMID: 30807179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]