1. mBio. 2019 Feb 26;10(1):e00144-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00144-19.

HIV-1 Escape from Small-Molecule Antagonism of Vif.

Sharkey M(1), Sharova N(1), Mohammed I(2), Huff SE(2), Kummetha IR(2), Singh 
G(2), Rana TM(3), Stevenson M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, 
Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California, USA trana@ucsd.edu mstevenson@med.miami.edu.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, 
Florida, USA trana@ucsd.edu mstevenson@med.miami.edu.

The HIV-1 accessory protein Vif, which counteracts the antiviral action of the 
DNA-editing cytidine deaminase APOBEC3G (A3G), is an attractive and yet 
unexploited therapeutic target. Vif reduces the virion incorporation of A3G by 
targeting the restriction factor for proteasomal degradation in the 
virus-producing cell. Compounds that inhibit Vif-mediated degradation of A3G in 
cells targeted by HIV-1 would represent a novel antiviral therapeutic. We 
previously described small molecules with activity consistent with Vif 
antagonism. In this study, we derived inhibitor escape HIV-1 variants to 
characterize the mechanism by which these novel agents inhibit virus 
replication. Here we show that resistance to these agents is dependent on an 
amino acid substitution in Vif (V142I) and on a point mutation that likely 
upregulates transcription by modifying the lymphocyte enhancing factor 1 (LEF-1) 
binding site. Molecular modeling demonstrated a docking site in the Vif-Elongin 
C complex that is disrupted by these inhibitors. This docking site is lost when 
Vif acquires the V142I mutation that leads to inhibitor resistance. Competitive 
fitness experiments indicated that the V142I Vif and LEF-1 binding site 
mutations created a virus that is better adapted to growing in the presence of 
A3G than the wild-type virus.IMPORTANCE Although antiretroviral therapy can 
suppress HIV-1 replication effectively, virus reservoirs persist in infected 
individuals and virus replication rapidly rebounds if therapy is interrupted. 
Currently, there is a need for therapeutic approaches that eliminate, reduce, or 
control persistent viral reservoirs if a cure is to be realized. This work 
focuses on the preclinical development of novel, small-molecule inhibitors of 
the HIV-1 Vif protein. Vif inhibitors represent a new class of antiretroviral 
drugs that may expand treatment options to more effectively suppress virus 
replication or to drive HIV-1 reservoirs to a nonfunctional state by harnessing 
the activity of the DNA-editing cytidine deaminase A3G, a potent, intrinsic 
restriction factor expressed in macrophage and CD4+ T cells. In this study, we 
derived inhibitor escape variants to characterize the mechanism by which these 
novel agents inhibit virus replication and to provide evidence for target 
validation.

Copyright Â© 2019 Sharkey et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00144-19
PMCID: PMC6391917
PMID: 30808702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]