1. Exp Mol Med. 2019 Feb 21;51(2):1-12. doi: 10.1038/s12276-019-0211-9.

Downregulation of lysyl oxidase and lysyl oxidase-like protein 2 suppressed the 
migration and invasion of trophoblasts by activating the TGF-β/collagen pathway 
in preeclampsia.

Xu XH(1), Jia Y(1), Zhou X(1), Xie D(1), Huang X(1), Jia L(1), Zhou Q(1), Zheng 
Q(1), Zhou X(1), Wang K(2), Jin LP(3).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center, Shanghai First Maternity and 
Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 2699 West Gaoke Road, 
Shanghai, 201204, P. R. China.
(2)Clinical and Translational Research Center, Shanghai First Maternity and 
Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 2699 West Gaoke Road, 
Shanghai, 201204, P. R. China. kaiwangcn@yahoo.com.
(3)Clinical and Translational Research Center, Shanghai First Maternity and 
Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 2699 West Gaoke Road, 
Shanghai, 201204, P. R. China. jinlp01@163.com.

Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific disorder that is a major cause of maternal 
and fetal morbidity and mortality with a prevalence of 6-8% of pregnancies. 
Although impaired trophoblast invasion in early pregnancy is known to be closely 
associated with preeclampsia, the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Here we 
revealed that lysyl oxidase (LOX) and LOX-like protein 2 (LOXL2) play a critical 
role in preeclampsia. Our results demonstrated that LOX and LOXL2 expression 
decreased in preeclamptic placentas. Moreover, knockdown of LOX or LOXL2 
suppressed trophoblast cell migration and invasion. Mechanistically, collagen 
production was induced in LOX- or LOXL2-downregulated trophoblast cells through 
activation of the TGF-β1/Smad3 pathway. Notably, inhibition of the TGF-β1/Smad3 
pathway could rescue the defects caused by LOX or LOXL2 knockdown, thereby 
underlining the significance of the TGF-β1/Smad3 pathway downstream of LOX and 
LOXL2 in trophoblast cells. Additionally, induced collagen production and 
activated TGF-β1/Smad3 were observed in clinical samples from preeclamptic 
placentas. Collectively, our study suggests that the downregulation of LOX and 
LOXL2 leading to reduced trophoblast cell migration and invasion through 
activation of the TGF-β1/Smad3/collagen pathway is relevant to preeclampsia. 
Thus, we proposed that LOX, LOXL2, and the TGF-β1/Smad3/collagen pathway can 
serve as potential markers and targets for clinical diagnosis and therapy for 
preeclampsia.

DOI: 10.1038/s12276-019-0211-9
PMCID: PMC6389995
PMID: 30804321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.