1. Int J Cancer. 2019 Oct 15;145(8):2070-2081. doi: 10.1002/ijc.32234. Epub 2019 
Mar 21.

Tumor suppressor MCPH1 regulates gene expression profiles related to malignant 
conversion and chromosomal assembly.

Tervasmäki A(1), Mantere T(1), Eshraghi L(1), Laurila N(1), Tuppurainen H(1), 
Ronkainen VP(2), Koivuluoma S(1), Devarajan R(1), Peltoketo H(1), Pylkäs K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics and Tumor Biology, Cancer and Translational 
Medicine Research Unit and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Biocenter Oulu, Light Microscopy Core Facility, University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland.

Strong inherited predisposition to breast cancer is estimated to cause about 
5-10% of all breast cancer cases. As the known susceptibility genes, such as 
BRCA1 and BRCA2, explain only a fraction of this, additional predisposing genes 
and related biological mechanisms are actively being searched for. We have 
recently identified a recurrent MCPH1 germline mutation, p.Arg304ValfsTer3, as a 
breast cancer susceptibility allele. MCPH1 encodes a multifunctional protein 
involved in maintenance of genomic integrity and it is also somatically altered 
in various cancer types, including breast cancer. Additionally, biallelic MCPH1 
mutations are causative for microcephaly and at cellular level premature 
chromosome condensation. To study the molecular mechanisms leading to cancer 
predisposition and malignant conversion, here we have modeled the effect of 
MCPH1 p.Arg304ValfsTer3 mutation using gene-edited MCF10A breast epithelial 
cells. As a complementary approach, we also sought for additional potential 
cancer driver mutations in MCPH1 p.Arg304ValfsTer3 carrier breast tumors. We 
show that mutated MCPH1 de-regulates transcriptional programs related to 
invasion and metastasis and leads to downregulation of histone genes. These 
global transcriptional changes are mirrored by significantly increased migration 
and invasion potential of the cells as well as abnormal chromosomal condensation 
both before and after mitosis. These findings provide novel molecular insights 
to MCPH1 tumor suppressor functions and establish a role in regulation of 
transcriptional programs related to malignant conversion and chromosomal 
assembly. The MCPH1 p.Arg304ValfsTer3 carrier breast tumors showed recurrent 
tumor suppressor gene TP53 mutations, which were also significantly 
over-represented in breast tumors with somatically inactivated MCPH1.

© 2019 The Authors. International Journal of Cancer published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.32234
PMCID: PMC6767439
PMID: 30809794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]