1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Feb 26;116(9):3536-3545. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1805919116. Epub 2019 Feb 11.

M-Ras/Shoc2 signaling modulates E-cadherin turnover and cell-cell adhesion 
during collective cell migration.

Kota P(1), Terrell EM(2), Ritt DA(2), Insinna C(2), Westlake CJ(2), Morrison 
DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, National Cancer 
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702 pkota@email.unc.edu 
morrisod@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, National Cancer 
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702.

Collective cell migration is required for normal embryonic development and 
contributes to various biological processes, including wound healing and cancer 
cell invasion. The M-Ras GTPase and its effector, the Shoc2 scaffold, are 
proteins mutated in the developmental RASopathy Noonan syndrome, and, here, we 
report that activated M-Ras recruits Shoc2 to cell surface junctions where 
M-Ras/Shoc2 signaling contributes to the dynamic regulation of cell-cell 
junction turnover required for collective cell migration. MCF10A cells 
expressing the dominant-inhibitory M-RasS27N variant or those lacking Shoc2 
exhibited reduced junction turnover and were unable to migrate effectively as a 
group. Through further depletion/reconstitution studies, we found that 
M-Ras/Shoc2 signaling contributes to junction turnover by modulating the 
E-cadherin/p120-catenin interaction and, in turn, the junctional expression of 
E-cadherin. The regulatory effect of the M-Ras/Shoc2 complex was mediated at 
least in part through the phosphoregulation of p120-catenin and required 
downstream ERK cascade activation. Strikingly, cells rescued with the 
Noonan-associated, myristoylated-Shoc2 mutant (Myr-Shoc2) displayed a 
gain-of-function (GOF) phenotype, with the cells exhibiting increased junction 
turnover and reduced E-cadherin/p120-catenin binding and migrating as a faster 
but less cohesive group. Consistent with these results, Noonan-associated C-Raf 
mutants that bypass the need for M-Ras/Shoc2 signaling exhibited a similar GOF 
phenotype when expressed in Shoc2-depleted MCF10A cells. Finally, expression of 
the Noonan-associated Myr-Shoc2 or C-Raf mutants, but not their WT counterparts, 
induced gastrulation defects indicative of aberrant cell migration in zebrafish 
embryos, further demonstrating the function of the M-Ras/Shoc2/ERK cascade 
signaling axis in the dynamic control of coordinated cell movement.

Copyright Â© 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1805919116
PMCID: PMC6397545
PMID: 30808747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.