1. Biochemistry. 2019 Apr 2;58(13):1718-1727. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01309. 
Epub 2019 Mar 12.

Differential Misfolding Properties of Glaucoma-Associated Olfactomedin Domains 
from Humans and Mice.

Patterson-Orazem AC(1), Hill SE(1), Wang Y(2), Dominic IM(1), Hall CK(2), 
Lieberman RL(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry & Biochemistry , Georgia Institute of Technology , 
Atlanta , Georgia 30332-0400 , United States.
(2)Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering , North Carolina State 
University , Raleigh , North Carolina 27695-7905 , United States.

Mutations in myocilin, predominantly within its olfactomedin (OLF) domain, are 
causative for the heritable form of open angle glaucoma in humans. Surprisingly, 
mice expressing Tyr423His mutant myocilin, corresponding to a severe 
glaucoma-causing mutation (Tyr437His) in human subjects, exhibit a weak, if any, 
glaucoma phenotype. To address possible protein-level discrepancies between 
mouse and human OLFs, which might lead to this outcome, biophysical properties 
of mouse OLF were characterized for comparison with those of human OLF. The 1.55 
Å resolution crystal structure of mouse OLF reveals an asymmetric 5-bladed 
β-propeller that is nearly indistinguishable from previous structures of human 
OLF. Wild-type and selected mutant mouse OLFs mirror thermal stabilities of 
their human OLF counterparts, including characteristic stabilization in the 
presence of calcium. Mouse OLF forms thioflavin T-positive aggregates with a 
similar end-point morphology as human OLF, but amyloid aggregation kinetic rates 
of mouse OLF are faster than human OLF. Simulations and experiments support the 
interpretation that kinetics of mouse OLF are faster because of a decreased 
charge repulsion arising from more neutral surface electrostatics. Taken 
together, phenotypic differences observed in mouse and human studies of mutant 
myocilin could be a function of aggregation kinetics rates, which would alter 
the lifetime of putatively toxic protofibrillar intermediates.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b01309
PMCID: PMC6815101
PMID: 30802039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]