1. Genome Med. 2019 Feb 25;11(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s13073-019-0621-2.

Impact of the gut microbiome on the genome and epigenome of colon epithelial 
cells: contributions to colorectal cancer development.

Allen J(1), Sears CL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Orleans 
Street, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Orleans 
Street, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA. csears@jhmi.edu.
(3)Bloomberg-Kimmel Institute for Immunotherapy and Department of Oncology, 
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 
North Broadway, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA. csears@jhmi.edu.

In recent years, the number of studies investigating the impact of the gut 
microbiome in colorectal cancer (CRC) has risen sharply. As a result, we now 
know that various microbes (and microbial communities) are found more frequently 
in the stool and mucosa of individuals with CRC than healthy controls, including 
in the primary tumors themselves, and even in distant metastases. We also know 
that these microbes induce tumors in various mouse models, but we know little 
about how they impact colon epithelial cells (CECs) directly, or about how these 
interactions might lead to modifications at the genetic and epigenetic levels 
that trigger and propagate tumor growth. Rates of CRC are increasing in younger 
individuals, and CRC remains the second most frequent cause of cancer-related 
deaths globally. Hence, a more in-depth understanding of the role that gut 
microbes play in CRC is needed. Here, we review recent advances in understanding 
the impact of gut microbes on the genome and epigenome of CECs, as it relates to 
CRC. Overall, numerous studies in the past few years have definitively shown 
that gut microbes exert distinct impacts on DNA damage, DNA methylation, 
chromatin structure and non-coding RNA expression in CECs. Some of the genes and 
pathways that are altered by gut microbes relate to CRC development, 
particularly those involved in cell proliferation and WNT signaling. We need to 
implement more standardized analysis strategies, collate data from multiple 
studies, and utilize CRC mouse models to better assess these effects, understand 
their functional relevance, and leverage this information to improve patient 
care.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-019-0621-2
PMCID: PMC6388476
PMID: 30803449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS: CLS is supported, in part, 
by a grant from Bristol-Myers Squibb; JA declares that he has no competing 
interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.