1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Apr;19(4):2801-2807. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9947. Epub 2019
Feb  8.

Novel compound heterozygous mutations in the SPTA1 gene, causing hereditary 
spherocytosis in a neonate with Coombs‑negative hemolytic jaundice.

Wang X(1), Liu A(2), Lu Y(1), Hu Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.

Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is a common heterogeneous type of inherited 
hemolytic anemia characterized by jaundice and splenomegaly. Diagnosis of HS in 
neonates is considered unreliable, and is generally based on positive family 
history, spherocytes in peripheral smears, increased osmotic fragility, and 
jaundice. In the present study, routine laboratory tests, next‑generation 
sequencing, and Sanger sequencing were applied to diagnose a neonatal patient 
with Coombs‑negative hemolytic jaundice. The neonate had no family history of 
HS; however, spherocytes were observed in peripheral smears, and the patient 
exhibited Coombs‑negative and severe hemolytic jaundice, normal mean corpuscular 
hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and mean corpuscular volume (MCV), normal 
glucose‑6‑phosphate dehydrogenase activity, negative thalassemia genetic 
mutation screening results, and negative autoimmune antibody tests. Novel 
compound heterozygous mutations in the spectrin‑α, erythrocytic 1 (SPTA1) gene 
(c.3897‑1G>C and c.5029G>A) were identified. The SPTA1 c.3897‑1G>C mutation in 
intron 27‑1, which disrupted the consensus splice site, was inherited from his 
asymptomatic mother, and the SPTA1 c.5029G>A (p.Gly1677Arg) mutation in trans 
with the SPTA1 c.3897‑1G>C mutation was inherited from his asymptomatic father. 
Sanger sequencing of mRNA reverse transcribed into cDNA identified a deletion of 
the first 10 nucleotides of exon 28, confirming the splicing mutation. In 
conclusion, the present study reports a rare case of autosomal‑recessive HS with 
a severe clinical phenotype, but normal MCHC and MCV.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.9947
PMCID: PMC6423610
PMID: 30816434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]