1. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Apr;127:171-184. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.02.018. Epub 2019 Feb 25.

Speech motor planning in the context of phonetically similar words: Evidence 
from apraxia of speech and aphasia.

Mailend ML(1), Maas E(2), Beeson PM(2), Story BH(2), Forster KI(2).

Author information:
(1)The University of Arizona, United States. Electronic address: 
mailendm@einstein.edu.
(2)The University of Arizona, United States.

The purpose of this study was to test two competing hypotheses about the nature 
of the impairment in apraxia of speech (AOS). The Reduced Buffer Capacity 
Hypothesis argues that people with AOS can hold only one syllable at a time in 
the speech motor planning buffer. The Program Retrieval Deficit Hypothesis, 
states that people with AOS have difficulty accessing the intended motor program 
in the context where several motor programs are activated simultaneously. The 
participants included eight speakers with AOS, most of whom also had aphasia, 
nine speakers with aphasia without AOS, and 25 age-matched control speakers. The 
experimental paradigm prompted single word production following three types of 
primes. In most trials, prime and target were the same (e.g., bill-bill). On 
some trials, the initial consonant differed in one phonetic feature (e.g., 
bill-dill; Similar) or in all phonetic features (fill-bill; Different). The 
dependent measures were accuracy and reaction time. The results revealed a 
switch cost - longer reaction times in trials where the prime and target 
differed compared to trials where they were the same words - in all groups; 
however, the switch cost was significantly larger in the AOS group compared to 
the other two groups. These findings are in line with the prediction of the 
Program Retrieval Deficit Hypothesis and suggest that speakers with AOS have 
difficulty with selecting one program over another when several programs compete 
for selection.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.02.018
PMCID: PMC6459184
PMID: 30817912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]