1. Exp Neurol. 2019 Jul;317:66-77. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2019.01.014. Epub
2019  Feb 26.

Caffeine inhibits hypoxia-induced nuclear accumulation in HIF-1α and promotes 
neonatal neuronal survival.

Li HL(1), Zaghloul N(2), Ahmed I(3), Omelchenko A(4), Firestein BL(5), Huang 
H(3), Collins L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, SUNY-Downstate Medical Center, New 
York, United States; Department of Biology, Medgar Evers College, City 
University of New York, United States. Electronic address: 
Hsiu-Ling.Li@downstate.edu.
(2)Cohen Children's Medical Center, Northwell Health, New Hyde Park, New York, 
United States; Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Northwell Health, 
Manhasset, New York, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, Medgar Evers College, City University of New York, 
United States.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States; Neuroscience Graduate 
Program, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, 
United States.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States.

Apnea of prematurity (AOP) defined as cessation of breathing for 15-20 s, is 
commonly seen in preterm infants. Caffeine is widely used to treat AOP due to 
its safety and effectiveness. Caffeine releases respiratory arrest by competing 
with adenosine for binding to adenosine A1 and A2A receptors (A1R and A2AR). 
Long before its use in treating AOP, caffeine has been used as a psychostimulant 
in adult brains. However, the effect of caffeine on developing brains remains 
unclear. We found that A1R proteins for caffeine binding were expressed in the 
brains of neonatal rodents and preterm infants (26-27 weeks). Neonatal A1R 
proteins colocalized with PSD-95, suggesting its synaptic localization. In 
contrast, our finding on A2R expression in neonatal neurons was restricted to 
the mRNA level as detected by single cell RT/PCR due to the lack of specific 
A2AR antibody. Furthermore, caffeine (200 μM) at a dose twice higher than the 
clinically relevant dose (36-130 μM) had minor or no effects on several basic 
neuronal functions, such as neurite outgrowth, synapse formation, expression of 
A1R and transcription of CREB-1 and c-Fos, further supporting the safety of 
caffeine for clinical use. We found that treatment with CoCl2 (125 μM), a 
hypoxia mimetic agent, for 24 h triggered neuronal death and nuclear 
accumulation of HIF-1α in primary neuronal cultures. Subsequent treatment with 
caffeine at a concentration of 100 μM alleviated CoCl2-induced cell death and 
prevented nuclear accumulation of HIF-1α. Consistently, caffeine treatment in 
early postnatal life of neonatal mice (P4-P7) also prevented subsequent 
hypoxia-induced nuclear increase of HIF-1α. Together, our data support the 
utility of caffeine in alleviating hypoxia-induced damages in developing 
neurons.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2019.01.014
PMCID: PMC6935249
PMID: 30822423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest All authors have read the 
journal’s policy on disclosure of potential conflicts of interest and have none 
to declare. This study was supported by two non-profit foundations. The funders 
played no role in the design and conclusion of this study.