1. Chirurgia (Bucur). 2019 Jan-Feb;114(1):89-94. doi:
10.21614/chirurgia.114.1.89.

Effect of Genetic Factors on the Etiopathogenesis of Thrombosed Hemorrhoidal 
Disease.

Abuoğlu HH, Gunay E, Uzunoğlu H.

The aim of this study is to investigate whether genetic factors known to 
increase thrombosis risk play a role in the etiopathogenesis of thrombosed 
hemorrhoidal disease. Methods: Genomic DNA from patients with thrombosed 
hemorrhoidal disease was analyzed for the presence of factor V Leiden, 
prothrombin G20210A, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T, and 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase A1298C mutations. Results: No significant 
differences were found in the allele frequencies of factor V Leiden, prothrombin 
G20210A, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T, and 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase A1298C mutations between patients with 
thrombosed hemorrhoidal disease and controls (p 0.05). Moreover, there were no 
significant differences in the genotype (heterozygous and homozygous mutations) 
of factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase 
C677T and A1298C mutations between patients with thrombosed hemorrhoidal disease 
and controls (p 0.05). Conclusions: Our findings indicate that mutations 
associated with venous thromboembolism do not play a role in the 
etiopathogenesis of thrombosed hemorrhoidal disease; however, several 
environmental, mechanical, and hemodynamic factors may contribute to the 
etiopathogenesis of hemorrhoidal disease.

Celsius.

DOI: 10.21614/chirurgia.114.1.89
PMID: 30830849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]