1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Feb 21;10:108. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00108.
eCollection  2019.

Genetic and Phenotypic Features to Screen for Putative Adherent-Invasive 
Escherichia coli.

Camprubí-Font C(1), Ewers C(2), Lopez-Siles M(1), Martinez-Medina M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Department of Biology, Universitat de 
Girona, Girona, Spain.
(2)Institute of Hygiene and Infectious Diseases of Animals, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

To date no molecular tools are available to identify the adherent-invasive 
Escherichia coli (AIEC) pathotype, which has been associated with Crohn's 
disease and colonizes the intestine of different hosts. Current techniques based 
on phenotypic screening of isolates are extremely time-consuming. The aim of 
this work was to search for signature traits to assist in rapid AIEC 
identification. The occurrence of at least 54 virulence genes (VGs), the 
resistance to 30 antibiotics and the distribution of FimH and ChiA amino acid 
substitutions was studied in a collection of 48 AIEC and 56 non-AIEC isolated 
from the intestine of humans and animals. χ2 test was used to find frequency 
differences according to origin of isolation, AIEC phenotype and phylogroup. 
Mann-Whitney test was applied to test association with adhesion and invasion 
indices. Binary logistic regression was performed to search for variables of 
predictive value. Animal strains (N = 45) were enriched in 12 VGs while 7 VGs 
were more predominant in human strains (N = 59). The prevalence of 15 VGs was 
higher in AIEC (N = 49) than in non-AIEC (N = 56) strains, but only pic gene was 
still differentially distributed when analyzing human and animal strains 
separately. Among human strains, three additional VGs presented higher frequency 
in AIEC strains (papGII/III, iss and vat; N = 22) than in non-AIEC strains (N = 
37). No differences between AIEC/non-AIEC were found in FimH variants. In 
contrast, the ChiA sequence of LF82 was shared with the 35.5% of AIEC studied (N 
= 31) and only with the 7.4% of non-AIEC strains (N = 27; p = 0.027). Binary 
logistic regression analysis, using as input variables all the VGs and 
antibiotic resistances tested, revealed that typifying E. coli isolates using 
pic gene and ampicillin resistance was useful to correctly classify strains 
according to the phenotype with a 75.5% of accuracy. Although there is not a 
molecular signature fully specific and sensitive to identify the AIEC pathotype, 
we propose two features easy to be tested that could assist in AIEC screening. 
Future work using additional strain collections would be required to assess the 
applicability of this method.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00108
PMCID: PMC6393329
PMID: 30846972