1. Nutrients. 2019 Mar 5;11(3):550. doi: 10.3390/nu11030550.

Different Temperature Treatments of Millet Grains Affect the Biological Activity 
of Protein Hydrolyzates and Peptide Fractions.

Karaś M(1), Jakubczyk A(2), Szymanowska U(3), Jęderka K(4), Lewicki S(5), Złotek 
U(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Life Sciences, 
Skromna 8, 20-704 Lublin, Poland. monika.karas@up.lublin.pl.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Life Sciences, 
Skromna 8, 20-704 Lublin, Poland. anna.jakubczyk@up.lublin.pl.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Life Sciences, 
Skromna 8, 20-704 Lublin, Poland. urszula.szymanowska@up.lublin.pl.
(4)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Military Institute of 
Hygiene and Epidemiology, Kozielska 4, 01-163 Warsaw, Poland. 
krystyna.jederka@wihe.pl.
(5)Department of Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, Military Institute of 
Hygiene and Epidemiology, Kozielska 4, 01-163 Warsaw, Poland. 
lewickis@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Life Sciences, 
Skromna 8, 20-704 Lublin, Poland. urszula.zlotek@up.lublin.pl.

The objective of this study was to analyze millet protein hydrolyzates and 
peptide fractions with molecular mass under 3.0 kDa obtained from grains treated 
with different temperature values as inhibitors of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE), α-amylase, and α-glucosidase activity. The protein fractions were 
hydrolyzed in vitro in gastrointestinal conditions and the highest degree of 
hydrolysis was noted for globulin 7S obtained from control grains (98.33%). All 
samples were characterized by a high peptide bioaccessibility index, which was 
23.89 for peptides obtained from globulin 11S after treatment with 100 °C. The 
highest peptide bioavailability index was noted for peptides obtained from 
globulin 11S after the treatment with 65 °C (2.12). The highest potential 
metabolic syndrome inhibitory effect was determined for peptide fractions 
obtained from the prolamin control (IC50 for ACE and α-amylase was 0.42 and 0.11 
mg/mL, respectively) and after the 100 °C treatment (IC50 for ACE and 
α-glucosidase was 0.33 and 0.12 mg/mL, respectively) and from globulin 11S after 
the 65 °C treatment (IC50 0.38 and 0.05 for ACE and α-glucosidase, 
respectively). The effect of these samples on endothelial cell HECa10 was 
determined. The sequences of potential inhibitory peptides were identified as 
GEHGGAGMGGGQFQPV, EQGFLPGPEESGR, RLARAGLAQ, YGNPVGGVGH, and GNPVGGVGHGTTGT.

DOI: 10.3390/nu11030550
PMCID: PMC6471899
PMID: 30841527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.