1. Biomolecules. 2019 Mar 5;9(3):88. doi: 10.3390/biom9030088.

Functional Segments on Intrinsically Disordered Regions in Disease-Related 
Proteins.

Anbo H(1), Sato M(2), Okoshi A(3), Fukuchi S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Informatics, Faculty of Engineering, Maebashi 
Institute of Technology, 460-1, Kamisadori, Maebashi, Gunma 371-0816, Japan. 
koume8@icloud.com.
(2)Department of Life Science and Informatics, Faculty of Engineering, Maebashi 
Institute of Technology, 460-1, Kamisadori, Maebashi, Gunma 371-0816, Japan. 
mail_address107@icloud.com.
(3)Department of Life Science and Informatics, Faculty of Engineering, Maebashi 
Institute of Technology, 460-1, Kamisadori, Maebashi, Gunma 371-0816, Japan. 
m1461008@maebashi-it.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Life Science and Informatics, Faculty of Engineering, Maebashi 
Institute of Technology, 460-1, Kamisadori, Maebashi, Gunma 371-0816, Japan. 
sfukuchi@maebashi-it.ac.jp.

One of the unique characteristics of intrinsically disordered proteins (IPDs) is 
the existence of functional segments in intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). 
A typical function of these segments is binding to partner molecules, such as 
proteins and DNAs. These segments play important roles in signaling pathways and 
transcriptional regulation. We conducted bioinformatics analysis to search these 
functional segments based on IDR predictions and database annotations. We found 
more than a thousand potential functional IDR segments in disease-related 
proteins. Large fractions of proteins related to cancers, congenital disorders, 
digestive system diseases, and reproductive system diseases have these 
functional IDRs. Some proteins in nervous system diseases have long functional 
segments in IDRs. The detailed analysis of some of these regions showed that the 
functional segments are located on experimentally verified IDRs. The proteins 
with functional IDR segments generally tend to come and go between the cytoplasm 
and the nucleus. Proteins involved in multiple diseases tend to have more 
protein-protein interactors, suggesting that hub proteins in the protein-protein 
interaction networks can have multiple impacts on human diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9030088
PMCID: PMC6468909
PMID: 30841624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.