1. Microb Cell. 2019 Feb 8;6(3):142-159. doi: 10.15698/mic2019.03.670.

Microevolution of the pathogenic yeasts Candida albicans and Candida glabrata 
during antifungal therapy and host infection.

Pais P(1)(2), Galocha M(1)(2), Viana R(1)(2), Cavalheiro M(1)(2), Pereira 
D(1)(2), Teixeira MC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)iBB - Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Biological Sciences 
Research Group, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal.

Infections by the pathogenic yeasts Candida albicans and Candida glabrata are 
among the most common fungal diseases. The success of these species as human 
pathogens is contingent on their ability to resist antifungal therapy and thrive 
within the human host. C. glabrata is especially resilient to azole antifungal 
treatment, while C. albicans is best known for its wide array of virulence 
features. The core mechanisms that underlie antifungal resistance and virulence 
in these pathogens has been continuously addressed, but the investigation on how 
such mechanisms evolve according to each environment is scarcer. This review 
aims to explore current knowledge on micro-evolution experiments to several 
treatment and host-associated conditions in C. albicans and C. glabrata. The 
analysis of adaptation strategies that evolve over time will allow to better 
understand the mechanisms by which Candida species are able to achieve stable 
phenotypes in real-life scenarios, which are the ones that should constitute the 
most interesting drug targets.

DOI: 10.15698/mic2019.03.670
PMCID: PMC6402363
PMID: 30854392

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.