1. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2019 Feb 3;2019:8783496. doi: 
10.1155/2019/8783496. eCollection 2019.

Metabolite Markers for Characterizing Sasang Constitution Type through GC-MS and 
(1)H NMR-Based Metabolomics Study.

Kim EJ(#)(1), Hong YS(#)(2), Seo SH(1), Park SE(1), Na CS(1), Son HS(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Korean Medicine, Dongshin University, Naju, Jeonnam 58245, Republic 
of Korea.
(2)Division of Food and Nutrition, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, 
Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Sasang constitutional medicine classifies human beings into four types based on 
their physical and psychological characteristics. Despite its potential value in 
achieving personalized medicine, the diagnosis of sasang constitution (SC) type 
is complex and subjective. In this study, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
and 1H nuclear magnetic resonance-based metabolic analyses were conducted to 
find maker metabolites in serum and urine according to different SC types. 
Although some samples were overlapped on orthogonal projection to latent 
structure discriminant analysis score plots, serum samples showed separation 
between different SC types. Levels of lactate, glutamate, triglyceride, and 
fatty acids in serum and glycolic acid in urine of Tae-Eum type were higher than 
those of So-Eum and So-Yang type. Fatty acids, triglyceride, and lactate levels 
were found to be metabolites related to body mass index, indicating that marker 
metabolites for the diagnosis of SC type could be associated with obese. 
However, Tae-Eum type showed higher lactate levels in serum than So-Yang type 
for both normal weight and overweight groups, suggesting that the contents of 
serum lactate might be dependent on the SC type regardless of body weight. These 
results suggest that metabolomics analysis could be used to determine SC type.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8783496
PMCID: PMC6378031
PMID: 30854017