1. Cell. 2019 Apr 4;177(2):384-398.e11. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.039. Epub
2019  Mar 7.

Innate Immune Signaling Organelles Display Natural and Programmable Signaling 
Flexibility.

Tan Y(1), Kagan JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School and Division of Gastroenterology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Harvard Medical School and Division of Gastroenterology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
jonathan.kagan@childrens.harvard.edu.

The signaling organelles of the innate immune system consist of oligomeric 
protein complexes known as supramolecular organizing centers (SMOCs). Examples 
of SMOCs include myddosomes and inflammasomes, which respectively induce 
transcription-dependent and -independent inflammatory responses. The common use 
of oligomeric structures as signaling platforms suggests multifunctionality, but 
each SMOC has a singular biochemically defined function. Here, we report that 
the myddosome is a multifunctional organizing center. In addition to promoting 
inflammatory transcription factor activation, the myddosome drives the rapid 
induction of glycolysis. We identify the kinase TBK1 as a myddosome component 
that promotes glycolysis, but not nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) activation. 
Synthetic immunology approaches further diversified SMOC activities, as we 
created interferon- or necroptosis-inducing myddosomes, inflammasomes that 
induce interferon responses instead of pyroptosis, and a SMOC-like nanomachine 
that induces interferon expression in response to a chemical ligand. These 
discoveries demonstrate the flexibility of immune signaling organelles, which 
permits the design of user-defined innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.039
PMCID: PMC6710629
PMID: 30853218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]