1. J Pediatr Infect Dis. 2019 Feb;14(2):69-77. doi: 10.1055/s-0038-1660818. Epub 
2018 Jul 6.

Biofilm biology and vaccine strategies for otitis media due to nontypeable 
Haemophilus influenzae.

Novotny LA(1), Brockman KL(1), Mokrzan EM(1), Jurcisek JA(1), Bakaletz LO(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital and The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, 
OH, USA.

Otitis media (OM) is one of the most common diseases of childhood, and 
nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHI) is the predominant causative agent of 
chronic and recurrent OM, as well as OM for which treatment has failed. 
Moreover, NTHI is now as important a causative agent of acute OM as the 
pneumococcus. NTHI colonizes the human nasopharynx asymptomatically. However, 
upon perturbation of the innate and physical defenses of the airway by upper 
respiratory tract viral infection, NTHI can replicate, ascend the Eustachian 
tube, gain access to the normally sterile middle ear space, and cause disease. 
Bacterial biofilms within the middle ear, including those formed by NTHI, 
contribute to the chronic and recurrent nature of this disease. These 
multicomponent structures are highly resistant to clearance by host defenses and 
elimination by traditional antimicrobial therapies. Herein, we review several 
strategies utilized by NTHI in order to persist within the human host and 
interventions currently under investigation to prevent and/or resolve 
NTHI-induced diseases of the middle ear and uppermost airway.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1660818
PMCID: PMC6402341
PMID: 30853830

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest LAN, KLB, EMM and JAJ have no 
competing interests. LOB is a Scientific Advisor to, and has equity in, 
ProclaRx, LLC, to whom technology related to the DNABII proteins is licensed. 
LOB is an inventor of technology related to PilA-derived immunogens which is 
licensed to GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals.