1. J Nucl Med. 2019 Sep;60(9):1247-1252. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.118.224667. Epub
2019  Mar 8.

(18)F-Fluoroestradiol PET Imaging of Activating Estrogen Receptor-α Mutations in 
Breast Cancer.

Kumar M(1), Salem K(1), Michel C(1), Jeffery JJ(2), Yan Y(1)(3), Fowler 
AM(4)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin; and.
(3)Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin.
(4)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin afowler@uwhealth.org.

The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of estrogen receptor-α 
gene (ESR1) mutations at the tyrosine (Y) 537 amino acid residue within the 
ligand binding domain on 18F-fluoroestradiol (18F-FES) binding and in vivo tumor 
uptake compared with wild-type (WT)-estrogen receptor α (ER). Methods: 
ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were used to generate stable cell 
lines that express WT-ER, Y537S, or Y537C mutant ER. Receptor expression and 
localization were confirmed by Western blot and immunofluorescence, 
respectively. ER transcriptional function was measured using an estrogen 
response element-luciferase reporter gene assay and quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction analysis of ER-regulated endogenous target genes. Saturation 
binding and competition assays were performed to determine equilibrium 
dissociation constant (Kd) and half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) 
values. 18F-FES uptake was measured in tumor xenografts grown in female athymic 
nude mice by small-animal PET/CT imaging and tissue biodistribution using 5.55 
MBq (150 μCi) of 18F-FES. A 10-fold-lower injected dose of 0.555 MBq (15 μCi) of 
18F-FES was also used for tissue biodistribution. Statistical significance was 
determined using ANOVA. Results: Y537S and Y537C mutations resulted in increased 
ER transcriptional activity in the absence of estrogen compared with WT-ER 
(11.48 ± 2.42 fold; P = 0.0002, and 5.89 ± 0.94 fold; P = 0.04, respectively). 
Constitutive ER activation of two target genes (PGR and TFF1) in the absence of 
estrogen was also observed in Y537S- and Y537C-ER cells compared with WT-ER. Kd 
values for 18F-FES were 0.98 ± 0.54 nM for Y537S-ER (P = 0.27) and 0.24 ± 0.03 
nM for Y537C-ER (P = 0.95) compared with 0.07 ± 0.03 nM for WT-ER. IC50 values 
were 0.22 ± 0.09 nM for Y537S-ER (P = 0.97), 0.18 ± 0.09 nM for Y537C-ER (P = 
0.99), and 0.19 ± 0.11 nM for WT-ER. Tumor xenografts expressing Y537S-ER (mean 
percentage injected dose per gram, 1.45 ± 0.06; P = 0.77) and Y537C-ER (2.09 ± 
0.20; P = 0.21) had similar 18F-FES uptake compared with WT-ER (1.68 ± 0.12). 
Comparable 18F-FES uptake between Y537S-, Y537C-, and WT-ER xenografts was also 
observed using a 10-fold-lower injected dose with the tissue biodistribution 
assay. Conclusion: Since tumoral uptake of 18F-FES is not significantly impacted 
by Y537S-ER or Y537C-ER mutations, the potential diagnostic utility of 18F-FES 
PET imaging is expected to be equally valid for patients with or without these 
activating ESR1 mutations.

© 2019 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.118.224667
PMCID: PMC6735277
PMID: 30850489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]