1. PLoS One. 2019 Mar 11;14(3):e0212936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212936. 
eCollection 2019.

Occurrence and characterization of quinolone resistant Escherichia coli from 
Norwegian turkey meat and complete sequence of an IncX1 plasmid encoding qnrS1.

Slettemeås JS(1), Sunde M(1), Ulstad CR(2), Norström M(3), Wester AL(2)(4), 
Urdahl AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Food Safety and Emerging Health Threats, Department of Animal 
Health and Food Safety, Norwegian Veterinary Institute, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease Control, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, 
Oslo, Norway.
(3)Section of Epidemiology, Department of Analysis and Diagnostics, Norwegian 
Veterinary Institute, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Water and Sanitation Unit, Department for Public Health, Environmental and 
Social Determinants of Human Health, World Health Organization, Genève, 
Switzerland.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2019 May 23;14(5):e0217321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217321.

Plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR) is frequent among Escherichia coli 
from various food products and animals in several countries. The objective of 
this study was to characterize quinolone resistant E. coli (QREC) from Norwegian 
turkey meat regarding resistance profiles, genetic mechanisms for quinolone 
resistance, genetic relatedness, and to investigate whether PMQR genes were 
present. In total, 78 QREC were isolated by a selective method from 156 samples 
throughout 2013. Isolates were subjected to susceptibility testing, 
characterization of resistance mechanisms, serotyping, phylotyping and 
multi-locus variable-tandem repeat analysis (MLVA). All 78 isolates were 
resistant to ciprofloxacin, while 77 were also resistant to nalidixic acid. The 
nalidixic acid sensitive isolate had a resistance profile indicating the 
presence of a PMQR gene. Both PCR and whole genome sequencing confirmed the 
presence of a 47 304 kb IncX1 plasmid containing the qnrS1 gene. The mechanism 
conferring quinolone resistance in the remaining isolates was mediated by 
mutations in the quinolone resistance-determining region of the chromosomal gyrA 
gene and for most of the isolates also in the parC gene. Molecular typing by 
MLVA showed a high degree of genetic diversity, although four clusters 
dominated. Two clusters contained strains belonging to phylogroup D/serogroup 
O176, the third contained isolates of phylogroup B1/serogroup O19, whereas the 
fourth contained isolates of phylogroup B1/non-typeable serogroup. Isolates 
within the latter cluster had MLVA profiles identical to QREC isolated from 
day-old imported turkey parent animals investigated in a preliminary study at 
the Norwegian Veterinary Institute. This finding suggests that QREC obtained 
from turkey may have been introduced via import of breeding animals to Norway. 
This is the first time the qnrS1 gene is described from E. coli isolated from 
Norwegian turkey meat. Compared to available qnrS1 carrying plasmids in Genbank, 
the current IncX1 plasmid showed high degree of similarity to other IncX1 
plasmids containing qnrS1 isolated from both Shigella flexneri and E. coli found 
in different geographical areas and sources. To conclude, this study showed that 
mutations in gyrA and parC are the main mechanism conferring quinolone 
resistance in E. coli isolated from Norwegian turkey meat, and that PMQR has not 
been widely dispersed throughout the E. coli population in Norwegian turkey.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212936
PMCID: PMC6411123
PMID: 30856202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.