1. Oncol Lett. 2019 Mar;17(3):3001-3008. doi: 10.3892/ol.2019.9888. Epub 2019 Jan
 4.

Erastin decreases radioresistance of NSCLC cells partially by inducing 
GPX4-mediated ferroptosis.

Pan X(1)(2), Lin Z(3), Jiang D(1), Yu Y(1), Yang D(1), Zhou H(1), Zhan D(1), Liu 
S(4), Peng G(5), Chen Z(1), Yu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Head and Neck Cancer, Oncology Center, Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518000, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, 
Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524000, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Jingzhou Central Hospital, Jingzhou, Hubei 434020, 
P.R. China.
(5)Department of Head and Neck Cancer, Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 
430030, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to examine whether erastin influences 
radioresistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells and produce a 
preliminary investigation into its mechanism of action. The radioresistant 
subtype of NSCLC cells, A549-R and H460-R, were induced by high-dose 
hypofractionated irradiation. Erastin was used to treat the radioresistant cells 
and radiosensitivity was examined by colony formation assays. Cell death was 
determined after the cells were treated with erastin, irradiation (IR) or 
erastin together with IR. The expression of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) 
expression in the parental cells and radioresistance cells was detected by 
western blotting. GPX4 expression in the radioresistance cells was subsequently 
inhibited, radiosensitivity and cell death was measured, and erastin enhanced 
radiosensitivity in A549-R and H460-R cells. Erastin and IR exhibited a combined 
effect on killing cells, as co-treatment with erastin and IR demonstrated a 
higher effect on killing cells compared with erastin or IR alone. GPX4 
expression was inhibited by erastin in the radioresistant cells. Inhibiting GPX4 
expression also radiosensitized NSCLC cells to radiation in the radioresistant 
cell lines. Erastin-induced and GPX4-inhibition-induced cell death could 
partially be rescued by deferoxamine, but not Z-VAD-FMK and olaparib, which 
indicated that erastin and GPX4-inhibition induced ferroptosis in the 
radioresistant cells. Erastin decreased radioresistance of NSCLC cells partially 
by inducing GPX4-mediated ferroptosis.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2019.9888
PMCID: PMC6365906
PMID: 30854078