1. Neuropharmacology. 2019 Dec 15;161:107564. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.03.007. Epub 2019 Mar 6.

Distinct contribution of axonal and somatodendritic serotonin transporters in 
drosophila olfaction.

Kasture AS(1), Bartel D(2), Steinkellner T(3), Sucic S(3), Hummel T(2), 
Freissmuth M(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and the Gaston H. Glock Research Laboratories for 
Exploratory Drug Development, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Neurobiology, 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Pharmacology and the Gaston H. Glock Research Laboratories for 
Exploratory Drug Development, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology and the Gaston H. Glock Research Laboratories for 
Exploratory Drug Development, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical 
University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
michael.freissmuth@meduniwien.ac.at.

The serotonin transporter (SERT) regulates serotonergic neurotransmission by 
retrieving released serotonin and replenishing vesicular stores. SERT is not 
only delivered to axons but it is also present on the neuronal soma and on 
dendrites. It has not been possible to restrict the distribution of SERT without 
affecting transporter function. Hence, the physiological role of somatodendritic 
SERT remains enigmatic. The SERT C-terminus harbors a conserved RI-motif, which 
recruits SEC24C, a cargo receptor in the coatomer protein-II coat. Failure to 
engage SEC24C precludes axonal enrichment of SERT. Here we introduced a point 
mutation into the RI-motif of human SERT causing confinement of the resulting - 
otherwise fully functional - hSERT-R607A on the somatodendritic membrane of 
primary rat dorsal raphe neurons. Transgenic expression of the corresponding 
Drosophila mutant dSERT-R599A led to its enrichment in the somatodendritic 
compartment of serotonergic neurons in the fly brain. We explored the possible 
physiological role of somatodendritic SERT by comparing flies harboring wild 
type SERT and dSERT-R599A in a behavioral paradigm for serotonin-modulated odor 
perception. When globally re-expressed in serotonergic neurons, wild type SERT 
but not dSERT-R599A restored ethanol preference. In contrast, dSERT-R599A 
restored ethanol preference after targeted expression in contralaterally 
projecting, serotonin-immunoreactive deuterocerebral (CSD) interneurons, while 
expression of wild type SERT caused ethanol aversion. We conclude that, in CSD 
neurons, (i) somatodendritic SERT supports ethanol attraction, (ii) axonal SERT 
specifies ethanol aversion, (iii) the effect of axonal SERT can override that of 
somatodendritic SERT. These observations demonstrate a distinct biological role 
of somatodendritic and axonal serotonin transport. This article is part of the 
issue entitled 'Special Issue on Neurotransmitter Transporters'.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.03.007
PMID: 30851308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]