1. Microb Cell Fact. 2019 Mar 13;18(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12934-019-1104-2.

Increased triacylglycerol production in oleaginous microalga Neochloris 
oleoabundans by overexpression of plastidial lysophosphatidic acid 
acyltransferase.

Chungjatupornchai W(1), Areerat K(2), Fa-Aroonsawat S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya Campus, 
Phutthamonthon, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand. wipa.chu@mahidol.ac.th.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Mahidol University, Salaya Campus, 
Phutthamonthon, Nakhon Pathom, 73170, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Microalgae are promising sources of lipid triacylglycerol (TAG) for 
sustainable production of natural edible oils and biofuels. Nevertheless, 
products derived from microalgal TAG are not yet economically feasible; 
increasing TAG content via targeted genetic engineering of genes in TAG 
biosynthesis pathway are important to achieve economic viability. To increase 
TAG content, oleaginous microalga Neochloris oleoabundans was genetically 
engineered with the endogenous enzyme lysophosphatidic acid acyltransferase 
(NeoLPAAT1) responsible for plastidial TAG biosynthesis RESULTS: NeoLPAAT1 was 
found to contain all canonical motifs attributed to LPAAT proteins, two 
hypothetical membrane-spanning domains and a putative chloroplast transit 
peptide, indicating as a member of plastidial LPAAT type 1 subfamily. The 
NeoLPAAT1-expression cassette integrated in N. oleoabundans transformant was 
confirmed by PCR. The neutral lipid content in the transformant detected by Nile 
red staining was 1.6-fold higher than in wild type. The NeoLPAAT1 transcript was 
twofold higher in the transformant than wild type. Considerably higher lipid 
quantity was found in the transformant than wild type: total lipid content 
increased 1.8- to 1.9-fold up to 78.99 ± 1.75% dry cell weight (DCW) and total 
lipid productivity increased 1.8- to 2.4-fold up to 16.06 ± 2.68 mg/L/day; while 
TAG content increased 2.1- to 2.2-fold up to 55.40 ± 5.56% DCW and TAG 
productivity increased 1.9- to 2.8-fold up to 10.67 ± 2.37 mg/L/day. A slightly 
altered fatty acid composition was detected in the transformant compared to wild 
type; polyunsaturated fatty acid (C18:2) increased to 19% from 11%. 
NeoLPAAT1-overexpression stability was observed in the transformant continuously 
maintained in solid medium over 150 generations in a period of about 6 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate the considerably increased TAG content and 
productivity in N. oleoabundans by overexpression of plastidial NeoLPAAT1 that 
are important for products derived from microalgal TAG to achieve economic 
viability. Plastidial LPAAT1 can be a candidate for target genetic manipulation 
to increase TAG content in other microalgal species with desired characteristics 
for production of natural edible oils and biofuels.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-019-1104-2
PMCID: PMC6415348
PMID: 30866936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]