1. Front Genet. 2019 Feb 26;10:118. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00118. eCollection 
2019.

Association of Candidate Gene Polymorphisms With Chronic Kidney Disease: Results 
of a Case-Control Analysis in the Nefrona Cohort.

Valls J(1), Cambray S(2), Pérez-Guallar C(1), Bozic M(2), Bermúdez-López M(2), 
Fernández E(2), Betriu À(2), Rodríguez I(3), Valdivielso JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics Unit, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida and Redes - 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Lleida, Spain.
(2)Vascular and Renal Translational Research Group, Biomedical Research 
Institute, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida and RedinRen-ISCIII, Lleida, 
Spain.
(3)Bone and Mineral Research Unit, RedinRen-ISCIII, Hospital Universitario 
Central de Asturias, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de 
Asturias, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a major risk factor for end-stage renal disease, 
cardiovascular disease and premature death. Despite classical clinical risk 
factors for CKD and some genetic risk factors have been identified, the residual 
risk observed in prediction models is still high. Therefore, new risk factors 
need to be identified in order to better predict the risk of CKD in the 
population. Here, we analyzed the genetic association of 79 SNPs of proteins 
associated with mineral metabolism disturbances with CKD in a cohort that 
includes 2,445 CKD cases and 559 controls. Genotyping was performed with matrix 
assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. We used 
logistic regression models considering different genetic inheritance models to 
assess the association of the SNPs with the prevalence of CKD, adjusting for 
known risk factors. Eight SNPs (rs1126616, rs35068180, rs2238135, rs1800247, 
rs385564, rs4236, rs2248359, and rs1564858) were associated with CKD even after 
adjusting by sex, age and race. A model containing five of these SNPs 
(rs1126616, rs35068180, rs1800247, rs4236, and rs2248359), diabetes and 
hypertension showed better performance than models considering only clinical 
risk factors, significantly increasing the area under the curve of the model 
without polymorphisms. Furthermore, one of the SNPs (the rs2248359) showed an 
interaction with hypertension, being the risk genotype affecting only 
hypertensive patients. We conclude that 5 SNPs related to proteins implicated in 
mineral metabolism disturbances (Osteopontin, osteocalcin, matrix gla protein, 
matrix metalloprotease 3 and 24 hydroxylase) are associated to an increased risk 
of suffering CKD.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00118
PMCID: PMC6399120
PMID: 30863424