1. Dis Markers. 2019 Feb 4;2019:2067353. doi: 10.1155/2019/2067353. eCollection 
2019.

Pathological Implications of Receptor for Advanced Glycation End-Product (AGER) 
Gene Polymorphism.

Serveaux-Dancer M(1)(2), Jabaudon M(2)(3), Creveaux I(1), Belville C(2), 
Blondonnet R(2)(3), Gross C(2), Constantin JM(2)(3), Blanchon L(2), Sapin 
V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, 63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(2)University Clermont Auvergne, CNRS UMR 6293, INSERM U1103, GReD, 63000 
Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(3)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Department of Perioperative Medicine, 63000 
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

The receptor for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) is a cell surface 
transmembrane multiligand receptor, encoded by the AGER gene. RAGE presents many 
transcripts, is expressed mainly in the lung, and involves multiple pathways 
(such as NFκB, Akt, p38, and MAP kinases) that initiate and perpetuate an 
unfavorable proinflammatory state. Due to these numerous functional activities, 
RAGE is implicated in multiple diseases. AGER is a highly polymorphic gene, with 
polymorphisms or SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism) that could be responsible 
or co-responsible for disease development. This review was designed to shed 
light on the pathological implications of AGER polymorphisms. Five polymorphisms 
are described: rs2070600, rs1800624, rs1800625, rs184003, and a 63 bp deletion. 
The rs2070600 SNP may be associated with the development of human autoimmune 
disease, diabetes complications, cancer, and lung diseases such as chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease and acute respiratory distress syndrome. The 
rs1800624 SNP involves AGER gene regulation and may be related to reduced risk 
of heart disease, cancer, Crohn's disease, and type 1 diabetes complications. 
The rs1800625 SNP may be associated with the development of diabetic 
retinopathy, cancer, and lupus but may be protective against cardiovascular 
risk. The rs184003 SNP seems related to coronary artery disease, breast cancer, 
and diabetes. The 63 bp deletion may be associated with reduced survival from 
heart diseases during diabetic nephropathy. Here, these potential associations 
between AGER polymorphisms and the development of diseases are discussed, as 
there have been conflicting findings on the pathological impact of AGER SNPs in 
the literature. These contradictory results might be explained by distinct AGER 
SNP frequencies depending on ethnicity.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/2067353
PMCID: PMC6378764
PMID: 30863465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]