1. Cells. 2019 Mar 13;8(3):238. doi: 10.3390/cells8030238.

CIDE Proteins in Human Health and Disease.

Slayton M(1), Gupta A(2), Balakrishnan B(3), Puri V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Diabetes Institute, Ohio University 
Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 
slayton@ohio.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Diabetes Institute, Ohio University 
Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 
guptaa2@ohio.edu.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Diabetes Institute, Ohio University 
Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 
balakrib@ohio.edu.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Diabetes Institute, Ohio University 
Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Athens, OH 45701, USA. puri@ohio.edu.

Cell death-Inducing DNA Fragmentation Factor Alpha (DFFA)-like Effector (CIDE) 
proteins have emerged as lipid droplet-associated proteins that regulate fat 
metabolism. There are three members in the CIDE protein family-CIDEA, CIDEB, and 
CIDEC (also known as fat-specific protein 27 (FSP27)). CIDEA and FSP27 are 
primarily expressed in adipose tissue, while CIDEB is expressed in the liver. 
Originally, based upon their homology with DNA fragmentation factors, these 
proteins were identified as apoptotic proteins. However, recent studies have 
changed the perception of these proteins, redefining them as regulators of lipid 
droplet dynamics and fat metabolism, which contribute to a healthy metabolic 
phenotype in humans. Despite various studies in humans and gene-targeting 
studies in mice, the physiological roles of CIDE proteins remains elusive. This 
review will summarize the known physiological role and metabolic pathways 
regulated by the CIDE proteins in human health and disease.

DOI: 10.3390/cells8030238
PMCID: PMC6468517
PMID: 30871156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.