1. Front Psychol. 2019 Feb 20;10:68. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00068. eCollection 
2019.

Affective Language, Interpretation Bias and Its Molecular Genetic Variations: 
Exploring the Relationship Between Genetic Variations of the OXTR Gene (rs53576 
and rs2268498) and the Emotional Evaluation of Words Related to the Self or the 
Other.

Meixner F(1), Montag C(2)(3), Herbert C(1).

Author information:
(1)Applied Emotion and Motivation Psychology, Institute of Psychology and 
Education, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Molecular Psychology, Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm University, 
Ulm, Germany.
(3)The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Lab for 
Neuroinformation, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China.

Several studies have demonstrated links between oxytocin and socio-emotional 
information processing. Regarding the frequently studied single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) rs53576 and the less studied, functional polymorphism 
rs2268498 of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene, previous research suggested that 
their variants might be associated with different proficiency in the processing 
of social information. Differences between the genotype variants are not 
restricted to non-verbal stimulus processing but have also been reported in the 
verbal domain. Moreover, there is evidence that oxytocin expression influences 
empathic communication and language development during childhood, indicating 
that language-based theory-of-mind abilities may be affected by interindividual 
differences in OXTR genotypes as well. The present study therefore investigates 
whether two prominent SNPs of the OXTR gene (rs53576 GG vs. A+; rs2268498 TT vs. 
C+) also play a role in the affective evaluation of verbal stimuli varying in 
emotional valence and in self-other reference. Participants (N = 149 Caucasian 
participants, 104 females; A+: n = 80, GG: n = 69; C+: n = 98, TT: n = 51) were 
presented a series of written, self-, other-, and unreferenced words of 
positive, negative, and neutral valence and asked to affectively evaluate each 
word pair as positive, negative, or neutral by button press. In line with 
previous research, reaction times and accuracy (number of valence-congruent 
responses) showed a self-positivity bias (i.e., preferential processing of 
self-related positive words), which, however, was unaffected by participants' 
genotype. Regarding affective evaluation of neutral words (interpretation bias), 
A+ carriers displayed a weaker positive interpretation bias compared to GG 
carriers in the other- and unreferenced stimulus categories. C+ carriers showed 
a weaker positive interpretation bias than TT carriers in the self-reference 
condition and in the other-reference condition. These effects were independent 
from participants' gender. The present results suggest that the OXTR genotype 
and hence participants' genetic oxytocin sensitivity may cause an interpretation 
bias in the spontaneous appraisal of neutral words.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00068
PMCID: PMC6401597
PMID: 30873056