1. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Apr 18;49(2):472-477. doi: 10.3906/sag-1809-100.

The distribution of MEFV mutations in Turkish FMF patients: multicenter study 
representing results of Anatolia.

Yaşar Bilge Ş, Sarı İ, Solmaz D, Şenel S, Emmungil H, Kılıç L, Yılmaz Öner S, 
Yıldız F, Yılmaz S, Ersözlü Bozkırlı D, Aydın Tufan M, Yılmaz S, Yazısız V, 
Pehlivan Y, Bes C, Yıldırım Çetin G, Erten Ş, Gönüllü E, Şahin F, Akar S, Aksu 
K, Kalyoncu U, Direskeneli H, Erken E, Kısacık B, Sayarlıoğlu M, Çınar M, 
Kaşifoğlu T.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The distribution of Mediterranean fever (MEFV) gene mutations in 
Turkish familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) patients varies according to 
geographic area of Turkey. There is a need for highly representative data for 
Turkish FMF patients. The aim of our study was to investigate the distribution 
of the common MEFV mutations in Turkish FMF patients in a nationwide, 
multicenter study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of the 2246 FMF patients, from 15 adult rheumatology 
clinics located in different parts of the country, were evaluated 
retrospectively. The following mutations have been tested in all patients: 
M694V, M680I, M694I, V726A, and E148Q.
RESULTS: There were 1719 FMF patients with available genetic testing. According 
to the genotyping, homozygous M694V, present in 413 patients (24%), was the most 
common mutation . One hundred and fifty-four (9%) of patients had no detectable 
mutations. Allele frequencies of common mutations were: M694V (n = 1529, 44.5%), 
M680I (n = 423, 12.3%), V726A (n = 315, 9.2%), E148Q (n = 214, 1%), and M694I (n 
= 12, <1%).
CONCLUSION: In this large-scale multicenter study, we provided information about 
the frequencies of common MEFV gene mutations obtained from adult Turkish FMF 
patients. Nearly half of the patients were carrying at least one M694V mutations 
in their alleles.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1809-100
PMCID: PMC7018361
PMID: 30887796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: none declared