1. Int J Mol Med. 2019 May;43(5):2044-2054. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4134. Epub
2019  Mar 14.

Downregulation of Keap1 contributes to poor prognosis and Axitinib resistance of 
renal cell carcinoma via upregulation of Nrf2 expression.

Huang H(1), Wu Y(2), Fu W(3), Wang X(1), Zhou L(1), Xu X(1), Huang F(1), Wu 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530007, P.R. China.
(2)Medical Records Information Management Division, The Second Affiliated 
Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530007, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530007, P.R. China.

Kelch‑like ECH‑associated protein 1 (Keap1)/nuclear factor erythroid 2‑related 
factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling has a protective effect on normal cells. A number of 
previous studies demonstrated that Keap1/Nrf2 signaling is associated with drug 
resistance in numerous tumors. The aim of the present study was to investigate 
the roles of Keap1 in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and its effect on sensitivity 
to chemotherapy. Reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
was used to detect the mRNA expression of Keap1 in 45 cases of RCC tumors and 
adjacent normal tissues. A total of five randomly selected patients with RCC, 
five RCC cell lines and normal renal tubular cells were examined to detect the 
protein and mRNA expressions of Keap1. The 5‑year survival rate was analyzed by 
Kaplan‑Meier analysis. The cell viability was assessed by a Cell Counting kit‑8 
assay. The cell apoptosis and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were determined by 
flow cytometry. The expressions of associated proteins were determined by 
western blot analysis. It was identified that in RCC tissues and RCC cell lines, 
the expression of Keap1 was downregulated, which was considered to be associated 
with poor prognosis. In total, 1 µM Axitinib significantly decreased cell 
viability, promoted ROS release and induced cell apoptosis in ACHN cells. 
Silencing Keap1 was able to reverse the inhibitory effect of Axitinib and 
enhance the protein expressions of Nrf2, NAD(P)H dehydrogenase [quinone] 1 and 
heme oxygenase 1. However, silencing Nrf2 increased the cell sensitivity to 
Axitinib. Under Axitinib condition, overexpressing Nrf2 was able to increase 
cell viability; however, overexpressing Keap1 resulted in an opposite effect. 
Keap1 serves as a tumor suppressor; its low expression was associated with poor 
prognosis and a decreased sensitivity of RCC cells to Axitinib. A possible 
mechanism underlying Axitinib resistance may involve Nrf2 overexpression.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2019.4134
PMCID: PMC6443340
PMID: 30896860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]