1. Dis Model Mech. 2019 Mar 28;12(3):dmm037903. doi: 10.1242/dmm.037903.

Establishment of a zebrafish hematological disease model induced by 
1,4-benzoquinone.

Zhang A(1)(2), Wu M(1), Tan J(2), Yu N(2), Xu M(2), Yu X(2), Liu W(1), Zhang 
Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, School of Medicine, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Zebrafish Modeling and Drug Screening for Human Diseases of 
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Department of Developmental Biology, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, 
China.
(3)Division of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, School of Medicine, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China 
mczhangyy@scut.edu.cn.

Benzene exposure is associated with various hematological disorders, in 
particular leukemia. The reactive metabolite of benzene, 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ), 
generated in bone marrow, is suggested to be a key molecule in mediating 
benzene-induced hematotoxicity and carcinogenicity. However, its pathogenic role 
remains largely unknown due to a lack of suitable vertebrate whole-organism 
models. Here, we present an in vivo study to reveal the effect of BQ exposure on 
hematotoxicity in zebrafish. From embryonic stages to adulthood, BQ exposure 
suppressed erythroid and lymphoid hematopoiesis but led to abnormal accumulation 
of myeloid cells and precursors, which resembles benzene-induced cytopenia and 
myeloid dysplasia in humans. This myeloid expansion is caused by granulocyte, 
but not macrophage, lineage, emphasizing the significant role of lineage 
specificity in BQ-mediated hematopoietic toxicity. Analysis of the c-myb (also 
known as myb)-deficient mutant cmybhkz3 revealed that BQ induced neutrophilia in 
a c-myb-dependent manner, demonstrating that c-myb is a key intrinsic mediator 
of BQ hematotoxicity. Our study reveals that BQ causes lineage-specific 
hematotoxicity in zebrafish from embryonic stages to adulthood. Since c-myb is 
indispensable for BQ to induce neutrophilia, c-myb could serve as a potential 
drug target for reversing BQ hematotoxicity.

Â© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.037903
PMCID: PMC6451425
PMID: 30898970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.