1. Hamostaseologie. 2019 Nov;39(4):404-408. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1679929. Epub
2019  Mar 20.

Fulminant Essential Thrombocythemia Associated with Acquired Von Willebrand 
Syndrome and Bleeding Episodes in a 14-year-old Girl.

Schneider C(1), Stutz-Grunder E(1), Lüer S(1), Keller P(2), Kremer Hovinga 
JA(2), Ammann RA(1), Karow A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Hematology, University Hospital/Inselspital Bern and University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND:  Essential thrombocythemia is a chronic myeloproliferative neoplasm. 
It is extremely rare in children below 15 years of age with an estimated annual 
incidence of only 0.09 per million. Usually, clinical symptoms associated with 
essential thrombocythemia are mild or absent.
CASE:  Here, we present the case of a 14-year-old female patient fulminantly 
presenting with acute symptoms comprising visual impairment, palmar and plantar 
stabbing pain. Blood count revealed massive thrombocytosis of 2373 × 109/L. Bone 
marrow morphology showed elevated numbers of mature megakaryocytes. Von 
Willebrand factor activity/antigen ratio was significantly reduced compatible 
with an acquired Von Willebrand syndrome associated with high platelet counts. 
Molecular analyses for driver mutations of myeloproliferative neoplasms 
including JAK2V617F, CALR and MPL were negative. Acute therapy comprising 
hyperhydration and oxygen supply complemented by acetylsalicylic acid led to 
amelioration of symptoms. Medication with hydroxycarbamide maintained a 
significant reduction of platelet counts but had to be reduced or withheld 
several times due to neutropenia. Repeated bleeding episodes observed in the 
course were clearly associated with increases in platelet counts above 
1200 × 109/L explained by acquired von Willebrand syndrome. Sixteen months after 
diagnosis, therapy was switched to pegylated interferon and platelet counts 
could be stabilized without significant side effects.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1679929
PMID: 30895567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
disclose.