1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Jun;179(6):978-982. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61137. Epub
2019  Mar 26.

Novel mutations causing biotinidase deficiency in individuals identified by the 
newborn screening program in Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Carvalho NO(1), Del Castillo DM(1), Januário JN(1)(2), Starling ALP(1)(3), 
Arantes RR(1)(4), Norton RC(1)(3), Viana MB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Nupad - Center for Newborn Screening and Genetic Diagnostics, UFMG - Federal 
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Department of Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
Brazil.
(4)University Hospital, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
Brazil.

Biotinidase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inherited metabolic disorder 
caused by mutations in the BTD gene. Clinical manifestations can be treated and 
effectively prevented with pharmacological doses of biotin. Nine novel mutations 
in BTD are reported in 14 children diagnosed by the newborn screening program in 
Minas Gerais, Brazil, from June 2013 to December 2017. Serum BTD enzyme activity 
was determined for all cases and some parents. Two of the mutations are 
deletions and seven missense mutations located in the exonic region of the BTD 
gene, mostly in exon 4. Two newborns were profoundly biotinidase-deficient (one 
homozygous p.A534V [c.1601C > T] and another, double heterozygous for a novel 
mutation p.R211S [c.631C > A] co-inherited with an already described mutation 
p.T532 M [c.1595C > T]). Two mutations were associated with a partial deficiency 
of biotinidase (p.F361 V [c.1081 T > G] in two homozygous children, and p.S311 T 
[c.932G > C] in a compound heterozygous child who co-inherited a known severe 
mutation p.Y438X [c.1314 T > A]). The remaining five mutations were found in 
compound heterozygous children. Hence, a definitive conclusion about the degree 
of biotinidase deficiency is not possible yet. These results emphasize the 
importance of sequencing the BTD gene as an important tool to gain a better 
understanding of the correlation between biochemical phenotype and genotype.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61137
PMID: 30912303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]