1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2019 Nov 1;111(11):1228-1231. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djz048.

Association of Indoor Tanning Exposure With Age at Melanoma Diagnosis and BRAF 
V600E Mutations.

Burbidge TE, Bastian BC, Guo D, Li H, Morris DG, Monzon JG, Leung G, Yang H, 
Cheng T.

There is limited information on how indoor tanning promotes melanoma 
development. We investigated indoor tanning use in patients with melanomas in 
sun-exposed skin and studied the clinicopathological and molecular 
characteristics in relation to indoor tanning exposure. Patients from a 
multidisciplinary clinic for cutaneous cancers completed standardized 
questionnaires on risk factors for melanoma as a component of medical history at 
their initial consultations. For this study, we included patients from December 
2013 to May 2015. The 114 patients who reported indoor tanning exposure were 
younger at diagnosis than the 222 patients who did not (51.5 vs 64.0 years, 
two-sided P < .001). BRAF V600E genotype was more prevalent in ever-users than 
in nonusers (42.9% vs 28.3%, two-sided P = .04) and higher in ever-users who 
initiated indoor tanning prior to age 25 years compared with age 25 years or 
older (62.2% vs 31.1%, two-sided P = .003). There were more melanomas in 
intermittently sun-exposed skin in ever-users than nonusers (65.7% vs 51.9%, 
respectively, two-sided P = .02). Our data suggest indoor tanning may promote 
melanomas that arise in skin with low-chronic sun-induced damage through BRAF 
V600E-mediated melanomagenesis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djz048
PMCID: PMC6855935
PMID: 30923800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]