1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Mar 28;17(3):e2006859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006859. 
eCollection 2019 Mar.

Prophylactic TLR9 stimulation reduces brain metastasis through microglia 
activation.

Benbenishty A(1)(2)(3), Gadrich M(3)(4), Cottarelli A(5), Lubart A(2)(3), Kain 
D(2), Amer M(6), Shaashua L(1), Glasner A(7), Erez N(6), Agalliu D(5), Mayo 
L(3)(4), Ben-Eliyahu S(1)(3), Blinder P(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Neurobiology Department, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)School for Molecular Cell Biology & Biotechnology, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(5)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New 
York, United States of America.
(6)Department of Pathology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(7)The Lautenberg Centre for General and Tumor Immunology, The Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2019 Jun;19(6):303. doi: 10.1038/s41568-019-0150-8.

Brain metastases are prevalent in various types of cancer and are often 
terminal, given the low efficacy of available therapies. Therefore, preventing 
them is of utmost clinical relevance, and prophylactic treatments are perhaps 
the most efficient strategy. Here, we show that systemic prophylactic 
administration of a toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 agonist, CpG-C, is effective 
against brain metastases. Acute and chronic systemic administration of CpG-C 
reduced tumor cell seeding and growth in the brain in three tumor models in 
mice, including metastasis of human and mouse lung cancer, and spontaneous 
melanoma-derived brain metastasis. Studying mechanisms underlying the 
therapeutic effects of CpG-C, we found that in the brain, unlike in the 
periphery, natural killer (NK) cells and monocytes are not involved in 
controlling metastasis. Next, we demonstrated that the systemically administered 
CpG-C is taken up by endothelial cells, astrocytes, and microglia, without 
affecting blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity and tumor brain extravasation. In 
vitro assays pointed to microglia, but not astrocytes, as mediators of CpG- C 
effects through increased tumor killing and phagocytosis, mediated by direct 
microglia-tumor contact. In vivo, CpG-C-activated microglia displayed elevated 
mRNA expression levels of apoptosis-inducing and phagocytosis-related genes. 
Intravital imaging showed that CpG-C-activated microglia cells contact, kill, 
and phagocytize tumor cells in the early stages of tumor brain invasion more 
than nonactivated microglia. Blocking in vivo activation of microglia with 
minocycline, and depletion of microglia with a colony-stimulating factor 1 
inhibitor, indicated that microglia mediate the antitumor effects of CpG-C. 
Overall, the results suggest prophylactic CpG-C treatment as a new intervention 
against brain metastasis, through an essential activation of microglia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2006859
PMCID: PMC6469801
PMID: 30921319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.