1. Brain Dev. 2019 Jun;41(6):542-545. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2019.03.004. Epub 
2019 Mar 25.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type-11 in an adolescent.

Kamate M(1), Detroja M(2), Hattiholi V(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, KAHER University's 
J N Medical College, Belgaum, India. Electronic address: 
drmaheshkamate@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, KAHER University's 
J N Medical College, Belgaum, India.
(3)Department of Radiology, KAHER University's J N Medical College, Belgaum, 
India.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is a group of progressive neurodegenerative 
disorders characterized by intracellular accumulation of ceroid lipopigments. 
Based on gene defect of NCL-associated proteins, 14 types of NCL have been 
described till date. NCL type 11 was first described in 2014 in two siblings as 
adult-onset NCL and was found to be due to a homozygous progranulin gene 
mutation. These siblings had progressive retinopathy, recurrent generalized 
seizures, moderate ataxia and subtle cognitive dysfunction. Palinopsia was 
present and MRI showed selective and severe cerebellar atrophy which was 
progressive with age. There have been no further reports of NCL 11 in 
literature. We here present a 14-year old girl born to second degree 
consanguineous couple who presented with gradually increasing frequency of 
seizures for the past 1 year without any signs of visual abnormalities and 
dementia. She had an elder sister who had progressive seizures and dementia from 
8 years of age and died after few years. Her electroencephalogram showed 
frequent generalized epileptiform discharges and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) showed pure cerebellar atrophy mainly affecting the vermis. MRI findings 
suggested a neurodegenerative disorder like NCL and prompted us to go for whole 
exome screen which revealed NCL type 11 due to homozygous mutation c.912G>A 
(p.Trp304Ter) in exon 9 of GRN gene (OMIM#614706). To the best of our knowledge 
this is the third case of NCL 11 and the first from Asia.

Copyright © 2019 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2019.03.004
PMID: 30922528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]