1. Physiol Behav. 2019 Jul 1;206:93-105. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2019.03.026. Epub
 2019 Mar 28.

Central GLP-1 receptors: Novel molecular targets for cocaine use disorder.

Hernandez NS(1), Schmidt HD(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Group, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America; Department of 
Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America; Department of 
Biobehavioral Health Sciences, School of Nursing, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States of America. Electronic address: 
hschmidt@nursing.upenn.edu.

Given that the search for effective pharmacotherapies for cocaine use disorder 
has, thus far, been fruitless, there remains a critical need for conceptually 
innovative approaches toward identifying new medications to treat this disease. 
A better understanding of the neurocircuits and neurobiological mechanisms 
underlying cocaine taking and seeking may identify molecular substrates that 
could serve as targets for novel pharmacotherapies to treat cocaine use 
disorder. Recent preclinical evidence suggests that glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1) receptor agonists could be re-purposed to treat cocaine craving-induced 
relapse. This review endeavors to comprehensively summarize the current 
literature investigating the efficacy of GLP-1 receptor agonists in reducing the 
rewarding and reinforcing effects of cocaine in animal models of cocaine use 
disorder. The role of central endogenous GLP-1 circuits in voluntary cocaine 
taking and seeking is also discussed. Behavioral, neurochemical, 
electrophysiological and molecular biology studies indicate that central GLP-1 
receptor activation functionally modulates the mesolimbic reward system and 
decreases addiction-like phenotypes in rodents. Overall, an emerging preclinical 
literature provides compelling evidence to advance GLP-1 receptor agonists into 
clinical trials testing the efficacy of these medications in preventing cocaine 
craving-induced relapse.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2019.03.026
PMCID: PMC6520198
PMID: 30930091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest H.D.S. receives funding 
from Novo Nordisk that was not used to support these studies. The authors 
declare no other competing financial interests.