1. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Mar;24(1):64-67. doi: 
10.6065/apem.2019.24.1.64. Epub 2019 Mar 31.

Infantile hypercalcemia with novel compound heterozygous mutation in SLC34A1 
encoding renal sodium-phosphate cotransporter 2a: a case report.

Kang SJ(1), Lee R(1), Kim HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keimyung University Dongsan Medical Center, 
Keimyung University School of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia is characterized by hypercalcemia, 
dehydration, vomiting, and failure to thrive, and it is due to mutations in 
24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1). Recently, mutations in sodium-phosphate cotransporter 
(SLC34A1) expressed in the kidney were discovered as an additional cause of 
idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia. This report describes a female infant 
admitted for evaluation of nephrocalcinosis. She presented with hypercalcemia, 
hypercalciuria, low intact parathyroid hormone level, and high 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 level. Exome sequencing identified novel compound 
heterozygous mutations in SLC34A1 (c.1337G&gt;A, c.1483C&gt;T). The patient was 
treated with fluids for hydration, furosemide, a corticosteroid, and restriction 
of calcium/vitamin D intake. At the age of 7 months, the patient&apos;s calcium 
level was within the normal range, and hypercalciuria waxed and waned. Renal 
echogenicity improved on the follow-up ultrasonogram, and developmental delay 
was not noted. In cases of hypercalcemia with subsequent hypercalciuria, DNA 
analysis for SLC34A1 gene mutations and CYP24A1 gene mutations should be 
performed. Further studies are required to obtain long-term data on 
hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis.

DOI: 10.6065/apem.2019.24.1.64
PMCID: PMC6449619
PMID: 30943683