1. Virol J. 2019 Apr 3;16(1):43. doi: 10.1186/s12985-019-1154-4.

Molecular and serological characterization of hepatitis B vaccine breakthrough 
infections in serial samples from two plasma donors.

Kuhns MC(1), McNamara AL(2), Holzmayer V(2), Cloherty GA(2).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Research, Diagnostics Division, Abbott Laboratories, Dept. 
09NC, Bldg. AP20, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL, 60064, USA. 
Mary.Kuhns@abbott.com.
(2)Infectious Disease Research, Diagnostics Division, Abbott Laboratories, Dept. 
09NC, Bldg. AP20, 100 Abbott Park Road, Abbott Park, IL, 60064, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although vaccines for hepatitis B virus (HBV) are highly effective, 
HBV infections in vaccinees occur. Index samples of breakthrough infections are 
typically anti-HBc negative but HBV DNA positive with protective anti-HBs levels 
while HBsAg detection may be delayed or absent. HBsAg mutations have been 
associated with some vaccine breakthrough cases.
METHODS: This research characterizes the serological and molecular profiles of 
vaccine breakthrough infections in serial samples from two commercially 
available plasma donor panels. Samples were tested with commercially available 
assays for HBV antigens and antibodies: HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBc, anti-HBc IgM, 
anti-HBe, and anti-HBs. Different immunoassay approaches for earlier detection 
of breakthrough infection were explored including hepatitis B core-related 
antigen (HBcrAg), a research assay for preS2 antigen, and a new prototype 
ARCHITECT HBsAg assay with improved sensitivity. The prototype HBsAg assay is 
fully automated and involves no sample pre-treatment. Molecular testing included 
HBV DNA quantitation and sequencing of preS1, preS2, surface, and basal core 
promoter/core promoter genes.
RESULTS: Although the research preS2 antigen assay allowed earlier detection of 
the breakthrough infections than current HBsAg assays and HBcrAg, the new 
prototype ARCHITECT HBsAg assay provided the earliest serologic detection. The 
ability of the new prototype HBsAg assay to detect HBsAg in the presence of 
anti-HBs was investigated using known concentrations of native HBsAg mixed with 
anti-HBs from a vaccinee. The results demonstrated that the prototype ARCHITECT 
assay is more sensitive in detecting HBsAg in the presence of anti-HBs than 
current HBsAg assays. Sequencing revealed multiple substitutions in preS1, 
preS2, and S regions for one panel including a rare D144N substitution 
associated with vaccine breakthrough that emerged with increasing frequency as 
the breakthrough infection developed.
CONCLUSIONS: When compared with other immunoassay approaches, the new prototype 
ARCHITECT HBsAg assay allows earlier detection of vaccine breakthrough 
infections and more sensitive detection of HBsAg in the presence of anti-HBs. 
Molecular characterization of longitudinal samples demonstrated the progressive 
appearance of a rare HBsAg mutation associated with vaccine breakthrough.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-019-1154-4
PMCID: PMC6448254
PMID: 30943997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. All samples were purchased from commercial vendors as listed in the 
Materials and Methods. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. All samples were 
purchased from commercial vendors as listed in the Materials and Methods. 
COMPETING INTERESTS: MCK, VH, and GAC are employees and stockholders of Abbott 
Laboratories. ALM is an Abbott retiree. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.