1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Apr 5;20(7):1704. doi: 10.3390/ijms20071704.

Improved Prediction of Regulatory Element Using Hybrid Abelian Complexity 
Features with DNA Sequences.

Wu C(1), Chen J(2), Liu Y(3), Hu X(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Informatics, Agricultural Bioinformatics Key Laboratory of Hubei 
Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. 
ccwu@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(2)College of Science, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. 
cj@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(3)College of Informatics, Agricultural Bioinformatics Key Laboratory of Hubei 
Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. 
liuyunxia686@gmail.com.
(4)College of Informatics, Agricultural Bioinformatics Key Laboratory of Hubei 
Province, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. 
huxuehai@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Abstract: Deciphering the code of cis-regulatory element (CRE) is one of the 
core issues of current biology. As an important category of CRE, enhancers play 
crucial roles in gene transcriptional regulations in a distant manner. Further, 
the disruption of an enhancer can cause abnormal transcription and, thus, 
trigger human diseases, which means that its accurate identification is 
currently of broad interest. Here, we introduce an innovative concept, i.e., 
abelian complexity function (ACF), which is a more complex extension of the 
classic subword complexity function, for a new coding of DNA sequences. After 
feature selection by an upper bound estimation and integration with DNA 
composition features, we developed an enhancer prediction model with hybrid 
abelian complexity features (HACF). Compared with existing methods, HACF shows 
consistently superior performance on three sources of enhancer datasets. We 
tested the generalization ability of HACF by scanning human chromosome 22 to 
validate previously reported super-enhancers. Meanwhile, we identified novel 
candidate enhancers which have supports from enhancer-related ENCODE ChIP-seq 
signals. In summary, HACF improves current enhancer prediction and may be 
beneficial for further prioritization of functional noncoding variants.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20071704
PMCID: PMC6480087
PMID: 30959806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.