1. Math Program. 2018;171(1):433-461. doi: 10.1007/s10107-017-1199-3. Epub 2017
Nov  14.

New algorithms for maximum disjoint paths based on tree-likeness.

Fleszar K(1), Mnich M(2)(3), Spoerhase J(4).

Author information:
(1)1Department 1: Algorithms and Complexity, Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, 
Campus E1 4, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)2Department of Quantitative Economics, Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)3Institut für Informatik, Universität Bonn, Friedrich-Ebert-Allee 144, 53113 
Bonn, Germany.
(4)4Lehrstuhl für Informatik I, Universität Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 
Würzburg, Germany.

We study the classical  NP -hard problems of finding maximum-size subsets from 
given sets of k terminal pairs that can be routed via edge-disjoint paths 
(MaxEDP) or node-disjoint paths (MaxNDP) in a given graph. The approximability 
of MaxEDP/MaxNDP is currently not well understood; the best known lower bound 
is  [Formula: see text] , assuming  NP ⊈ DTIME(nO(logn)) . This constitutes a 
significant gap to the best known approximation upper bound of  [Formula: see 
text] due to Chekuri et al. (Theory Comput 2:137-146, 2006), and closing this 
gap is currently one of the big open problems in approximation algorithms. In 
their seminal paper, Raghavan and Thompson (Combinatorica 7(4):365-374, 1987) 
introduce the technique of randomized rounding for LPs; their technique gives 
an  O(1) -approximation when edges (or nodes) may be used by  
O(log,n,/,log,log,n) paths. In this paper, we strengthen the fundamental results 
above. We provide new bounds formulated in terms of the feedback vertex set 
number r of a graph, which measures its vertex deletion distance to a forest. In 
particular, we obtain the following results:For MaxEDP, we give an  [Formula: 
see text] -approximation algorithm. Up to a logarithmic factor, our result 
strengthens the best known ratio  [Formula: see text] due to Chekuri et al., as  
r ≤ n .Further, we show how to route  Ω(OPT∗) pairs with congestion bounded by  
O(log(kr)/loglog(kr)) , strengthening the bound obtained by the classic approach 
of Raghavan and Thompson.For MaxNDP, we give an algorithm that gives the optimal 
answer in time  (k+r)O(r) · n . This is a substantial improvement on the run 
time of  2krO(r) · n , which can be obtained via an algorithm by Scheffler. We 
complement these positive results by proving that MaxEDP is  NP -hard even for  
r = 1 , and MaxNDP is  W[1] -hard when r is the parameter. This shows that 
neither problem is fixed-parameter tractable in r unless  FPT = W[1] and that 
our approximability results are relevant even for very small constant values 
of r.

DOI: 10.1007/s10107-017-1199-3
PMCID: PMC6417437
PMID: 30956356