1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Apr 5;15(4):e1007656. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007656. 
eCollection 2019 Apr.

Supramolecular arrangement of the full-length Zika virus NS5.

Ferrero DS(1), Ruiz-Arroyo VM(1), Soler N(1), Usón I(1)(2), Guarné A(3), 
Verdaguer N(1).

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Unit, Institut de Biología Molecular de Barcelona CSIC, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)ICREA Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Zika virus (ZIKV), a member of the Flaviviridae family, has emerged as a major 
public health threat, since ZIKV infection has been connected to microcephaly 
and other neurological disorders. Flavivirus genome replication is driven by 
NS5, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) that also contains a N-terminal 
methyltransferase domain essential for viral mRNA capping. Given its crucial 
roles, ZIKV NS5 has become an attractive antiviral target. Here, we have used 
integrated structural biology approaches to characterize the supramolecular 
arrangement of the full-length ZIKV NS5, highlighting the assembly and 
interfaces between NS5 monomers within a dimeric structure, as well as the 
dimer-dimer interactions to form higher order fibril-like structures. The 
relative orientation of each monomer within the dimer provides a model to 
explain the coordination between MTase and RdRP domains across neighboring NS5 
molecules and mutational studies underscore the crucial role of the MTase 
residues Y25, K28 and K29 in NS5 dimerization. The basic residue K28 also 
participates in GTP binding and competition experiments indicate that NS5 
dimerization is disrupted at high GTP concentrations. This competition 
represents a first glimpse at a molecular level explaining how dimerization 
might regulate the capping process.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007656
PMCID: PMC6469808
PMID: 30951555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.