1. Neuropathology. 2019 Jun;39(3):194-199. doi: 10.1111/neup.12555. Epub 2019 Apr
 8.

Sural nerve pathology in TFG-associated motor neuron disease with sensory 
neuropathy.

Li J(1), Meng L(1), Wu R(1), Xie Z(1), Gang Q(1), Zhang W(1), Wang Z(1), Yuan 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.

The tropomyosin-receptor kinase fused gene (TFG) functions in vesicles formation 
and egress at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). A heterozygous missense mutation 
c.854C > T (p.Pro285Leu) within TFG has been reported as causative for 
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with proximal predominance. Here, we 
describe two unrelated Chinese pedigrees with 13 affected members harboring the 
same variant. The clinical, electrophysiological and pathological findings are 
consistent with motor neuron disease with sensory neuropathy. The main symptoms 
were painful muscle cramps, slowly progressive proximal predominant weakness, 
muscle atrophy, fasciculation and distal sensory disturbance. Electromyography 
revealed widespread denervation and reinnervation. Sural nerve biopsy revealed 
severe loss of myelinated fibers. Electron microscopy revealed aggregation of ER 
with enlarged lumen and small vesicles in the remaining myelinated and 
unmyelinated axons. The mitochondria are smaller in Schwann cells and axons. 
Some unmyelinated axons showed disappearance of neurofilament and microtubular 
structures. This is the first report of c.854C > T mutation within TFG in 
Chinese population. Our findings not only extend the geographical and phenotypic 
spectrum of TFG-related neurological disorders, but also confirm the 
abnormalities of ER and mitochondria in sural nerves.

© 2019 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12555
PMID: 30957313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]