1. Polymers (Basel). 2019 Mar 13;11(3):487. doi: 10.3390/polym11030487.

Solvent Effects on Radical Copolymerization Kinetics of 2-Hydroxyethyl 
Methacrylate and Butyl Methacrylate.

Idowu LA(1), Hutchinson RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Queen's University, 19 Division St., 
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada. 16lai@queensu.ca.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Queen's University, 19 Division St., 
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada. robin.hutchinson@queensu.ca.

2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) is an important component of many acrylic 
resins used in coatings formulations, as the functionality ensures that the 
chains participate in the cross-linking reactions required to form the final 
product. Hence, the knowledge of their radical copolymerization kinetic 
coefficients is vital for both process and recipe improvements. The pulsed laser 
polymerization (PLP) technique is paired with size exclusion chromatography 
(SEC) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to provide kinetic coefficients for 
the copolymerization of HEMA with butyl methacrylate (BMA) in various solvents. 
The choice of solvent has a significant impact on both copolymer composition and 
on the composition-averaged propagation rate coefficient (kp,cop). Compared to 
the bulk system, both n-butanol and dimethylformamide reduce the relative 
reactivity of HEMA during copolymerization, while xylene as a solvent enhances 
HEMA reactivity. The magnitude of the solvent effect varies with monomer 
concentration, as shown by a systematic study of monomer/solvent mixtures 
containing 50 vol%, 20 vol%, and 10 vol% monomer. The observed behavior is 
related to the influence of hydrogen bonding on monomer reactivity, with the 
experimental results fit using the terminal model of radical copolymerization to 
provide estimates of reactivity ratios and kp,HEMA.

DOI: 10.3390/polym11030487
PMCID: PMC6474149
PMID: 30960471

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.