1. Nat Cell Biol. 2019 May;21(5):592-602. doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0307-4. Epub
2019  Apr 8.

A complex containing lysine-acetylated actin inhibits the formin INF2.

A M(1), Fung TS(1), Kettenbach AN(1), Chakrabarti R(1), Higgs HN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. henry.higgs@dartmouth.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2019 May 20;29(10):R367-R370. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.03.061.

Inverted formin 2 (INF2) is a member of the formin family of actin assembly 
factors. Dominant missense mutations in INF2 are linked to two diseases: focal 
segmental glomerulosclerosis, a kidney disease, and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, 
a neuropathy. All of the disease mutations map to the autoinhibitory diaphanous 
inhibitory domain. Interestingly, purified INF2 is not autoinhibited, suggesting 
the existence of other cellular inhibitors. Here, we purified an INF2 inhibitor 
from mouse brain tissue, and identified it as a complex of lysine-acetylated 
actin (KAc-actin) and cyclase-associated protein (CAP). Inhibition of INF2 by 
CAP-KAc-actin is dependent on the INF2 diaphanous inhibitory domain (DID). 
Treatment of CAP-KAc-actin-inhibited INF2 with histone deacetylase 6 releases 
INF2 inhibition, whereas inhibitors of histone deacetylase 6 block the 
activation of cellular INF2. Disease-associated INF2 mutants are poorly 
inhibited by CAP-KAc-actin, suggesting that focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 
and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease result from reduced CAP-KAc-actin binding. These 
findings reveal a role for KAc-actin in the regulation of an actin assembly 
factor by a mechanism that we call facilitated autoinhibition.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-019-0307-4
PMCID: PMC6501848
PMID: 30962575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT The authors 
declare that they have no financial and non-financial competing interests.