1. Polymers (Basel). 2018 Mar 22;10(4):355. doi: 10.3390/polym10040355.

Investigation and Characterization of Plasma-Treated Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) and 
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) Biopolymers for an In Vitro 
Cellular Study of Mouse Adipose-Derived Stem Cells.

Chang CK(1), Wang HD(2), Lan JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Biorefinery and Bioprocess Engineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical 
Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze University, No. 135, Yuan-Tung Road, 
Chungli, Taoyuan 320, Taiwan. kevinvecent@gmail.com.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Chung Hsing 
University, No. 145, Xing-Da Road, South District, Taichung 402, Taiwan. 
davidw@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.
(3)Biorefinery and Bioprocess Engineering Laboratory, Department of Chemical 
Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze University, No. 135, Yuan-Tung Road, 
Chungli, Taoyuan 320, Taiwan. lanchiwei@saturn.yzu.edu.tw.

Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are a type of thermoprocessable and biodegradable 
polyester, which represent a potential sustainable replacement for fossil-fuel 
synthetic polymers, such as polypropylene and polyethylene. In recent years, 
copolymers of PHAs, i.e., poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV), have received attention for 
medical and packaging industrial applications, due to their biodegradable, 
toxic-free, and biocompatible nature. This study investigated and characterized 
plasma-treated PHB and PHBV films fermented with Ralstonia eutropha H16. The 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and water contact angle analyses on the 
plasma-treated PHB and PHBV film surfaces revealed an increase in the number of 
functional groups and contact angle degree, respectively, compared to that of 
the untreated films. In addition, an in vitro experiment of mouse 
adipose-derived stem cells showed better growth and adhesion of the cells on the 
surface of plasma-treated PHBV film. Overall, these results reveal that plasma 
surface modifications are useful in biomaterial development.

DOI: 10.3390/polym10040355
PMCID: PMC6415170
PMID: 30966390

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.