1. J Mol Neurosci. 2019 Aug;68(4):549-564. doi: 10.1007/s12031-019-01317-9. Epub 
2019 Apr 10.

Separate Gene Transfers into Pre- and Postsynaptic Neocortical Neurons Connected 
by mGluR5-Containing Synapses.

Nagayach A(1), Singh A(1), Geller AI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, USA. agelle@lsuhsc.edu.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, USA. agelle@lsuhsc.edu.

mGluR5-containing synapses have essential roles in synaptic plasticity, circuit 
physiology, and learning, and dysfunction at these synapses is implicated in 
specific neurological disorders. As mGluR5-containing synapses are embedded in 
large and complex distributed circuits containing many neuron and synapse types, 
it is challenging to elucidate the roles of these synapses and to develop 
treatments for the associated disorders. Thus, it would be advantageous to 
deliver different genes into pre- and postsynaptic neurons connected by a 
mGluR5-containing synapse. Here, we develop this capability: The first gene 
transfer, into the presynaptic neurons, uses standard techniques to deliver a 
vector that expresses a synthetic peptide neurotransmitter. This peptide 
neurotransmitter has three domains: a dense core vesicle sorting domain, a 
mGluR5-binding domain composed of a single-chain variable fragment anti-mGluR5, 
and the His tag. Upon release, this peptide neurotransmitter binds to mGluR5, 
predominately located on the postsynaptic neurons. Selective gene transfer into 
these neurons uses antibody-mediated, targeted gene transfer and anti-His tag 
antibodies, as the synthetic peptide neurotransmitter contains the His tag. For 
the model system, we studied the connection between neurons in two neocortical 
areas: postrhinal and perirhinal cortices. Targeted gene transfer was over 80% 
specific for mGluR5-containing synapses, but untargeted gene transfer was only 
~â€‰15% specific for these synapses. This technology may enable studies on the 
roles of mGluR5-containing neurons and synapses in circuit physiology and 
learning and support gene therapy treatments for specific disorders that involve 
dysfunction at these synapses.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-019-01317-9
PMCID: PMC6615967
PMID: 30972540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest A.I.G. has equity in 
Alkermes Inc.