1. Front Pharmacol. 2019 Mar 26;10:149. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00149.
eCollection  2019.

A Screening Test for HLA-B(∗)15:02 in a Large United States Patient Cohort 
Identifies Broader Risk of Carbamazepine-Induced Adverse Events.

Fang H(1), Xu X(1), Kaur K(1), Dedek M(1), Zhu GD(1), Riley BJ(1), Espin FG(1), 
Del Tredici AL(1), Moreno TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Millennium Health, San Diego, CA, United States.

Purpose: HLA-B∗15:02 is strongly associated with life-threatening severe skin 
hypersensitivity reactions in patients treated with carbamazepine (CBZ) and 
structurally related medications. FDA-approved labeling recommends HLA-B∗15:02 
screening before CBZ therapy in patients of Asian ancestry. In this study, we 
aimed to (a) identify a direct method for screening HLA-B∗15:02, and (b) 
evaluate prevalence in a large cohort of United States patients. Methods: 
Candidate genetic markers were identified by mining public data. Association was 
tested in 28,897 individuals by comparing SNP results with high-resolution HLA 
typing. Retrospective analysis of de-identified SNP and ethnicity data from 
130,460 individuals was performed to evaluate the ethnic distribution of 
HLA-B∗15:02 in the United States. Results: 28,897 United States individuals 
showed 100% concordance between HLA-B∗15:02 and the minor allele of rs144012689 
(100% sensitivity/99.97% specificity). Retrospective analysis of 160 positive 
individuals (66 with physician-reported ethnicity) notably included 28 Asians 
(42%), 15 African Americans (22%), 11 Caucasians (17%), 2 Hispanics (3%), and 10 
"Other" (15%). Conclusion: Screening United States patients for HLA-B∗15:02 
without ethnicity-based preselection identifies more than twice the number of 
carriers at risk of CBZ-related adverse events than screening patients of Asian 
ancestry alone. Risk assessment based on ethnicity assumptions may not identify 
a large portion of at-risk patients in the ethnically diverse United States 
population.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2019.00149
PMCID: PMC6443844
PMID: 30971914