1. Cancer Sci. 2019 Jun;110(6):2022-2032. doi: 10.1111/cas.14017. Epub 2019 May
6.

Three novel genetic variants in NRF2 signaling pathway genes are associated with 
pancreatic cancer risk.

Yang W(1)(2), Liu H(3)(4), Duan B(3)(4), Xu X(3)(4), Carmody D(3)(4), Luo S(5), 
Walsh KM(3)(6), Abbruzzese JL(3)(7), Zhang X(3)(8), Chen X(2), Wei Q(3)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Fertility Preservation and Maintenance, School of Basic 
Medicine and the General Hospital, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, China.
(2)Cancer Research Program, Julius L. Chambers Biomedical Biotechnology Research 
Institute, North Carolina Central University, Durham.
(3)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham.
(4)Department of Population Health Sciences, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham.
(5)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham.
(7)Department of Medicine, Population Health Sciences, Duke University School of 
Medicine, Durham.
(8)Department of Pathology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham.

Pancreatic cancer (PanC) is one of the most lethal solid malignancies, and 
metastatic PanC is often present at the time of diagnosis. Although several 
high- and low-penetrance genes have been implicated in PanC, their roles in 
carcinogenesis remain only partially elucidated. Because the nuclear factor 
erythroid2-related factor2 (NRF2) signaling pathway is involved in human 
cancers, we hypothesize that genetic variants in NRF2 pathway genes are 
associated with PanC risk. To test this hypothesis, we assessed associations 
between 31 583 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 164 NRF2-related 
genes and PanC risk using three published genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
datasets, which included 8474 cases and 6944 controls of European descent. We 
also carried out expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis to assess 
the genotype-phenotype correlation of the identified significant SNP using 
publicly available data in the 1000 Genomes Project. We found that three novel 
SNP (ie, rs3124761, rs17458086 and rs1630747) were significantly associated with 
PanC risk (P = 5.17 × 10-7 , 5.61 × 10-4 and 5.52 × 10-4 , respectively). 
Combined analysis using the number of unfavorable genotypes (NUG) of these three 
SNP suggested that carriers of two to three NUG had an increased risk of PanC 
(P < 0.0001), compared with those carrying zero to one NUG. Furthermore, eQTL 
analysis showed that both rs3124761 T and rs17458086 C alleles were associated 
with increased mRNA expression levels of SLC2A6 and SLC2A13, respectively 
(P < 0.05). In conclusion, genetic variants in NRF2 pathway genes could play a 
role in susceptibility to PanC, and further functional exploration of the 
underlying molecular mechanisms is warranted.

© 2019 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14017
PMCID: PMC6550126
PMID: 30972876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflicts of interest for 
this article.