1. Mol Biol Rep. 2019 Jun;46(3):3417-3426. doi: 10.1007/s11033-019-04804-9. Epub 
2019 Apr 13.

Identification of eleven different mutations including six novel, in the 
arylsulfatase B gene in Iranian patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI.

Jafaryazdi R(1), Shams S(2)(3)(4), Isaian A(2)(3), Setoodeh A(5), Teimourian 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Crossroads of Shahid Hemmat & Shahid Chamran Highways, P.O. 
Box 15875-6171, Tehran, 1449614535, Iran.
(2)Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pathology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Pediatric Urology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(5)Division of Pediatrics Endocrinology, Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics 
Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Crossroads of Shahid Hemmat & Shahid Chamran Highways, P.O. 
Box 15875-6171, Tehran, 1449614535, Iran. teimourian.sh@iums.ac.ir.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by the 
deficiency of enzyme Arylsulfatase B. The enzyme deficiency leads to the 
accumulation of dermatan sulfate in connective tissue which causes 
manifestations related to MPS VI. Up to now, three different disease causing 
variants are reported in Iranian patients. In this study, we scanned ARSB gene 
of 13 Iranian patients from 12 families in whom all parents were consanguineous 
and from the same ethnicity except one family that were not consanguineous but 
co-ethnic. We found six not previously reported disease causing variants. We 
extracted DNA from peripheral blood samples of patients that were previously 
confirmed as MPS VI by clinical, biochemical and enzymatic assays including 
berry-spot test and fluorimetry, followed by PCR and direct sequencing. 
Computational approaches were used to analyze novel variants in terms of their 
impact on the protein structure.Â 11 disease causing variants and 15 
polymorphisms were found. Six disease causing variants were novel and five were 
previously reported of which three were in Iranian population. Four of patients, 
who were unrelated, two by two had the same disease causing variant and 
polymorphisms, which indicates a possible founder effect. Our study also 
implicates genotype-phenotype correlation. Computational structural modeling 
indicated these disease causing variants might affect structural stability and 
function of the protein. Data of this study confirms the existence of mutational 
heterogeneity in the ARSB between Iranian patients. Disease causing variants 
with high frequency can be used in the prenatal diagnosis and genetic 
counseling. Also, the existence of the same variants and polymorphisms in some 
of the unrelated patients indicates a possible founder effect.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-019-04804-9
PMID: 30982216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]