1. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 16;14(4):e0215456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215456. 
eCollection 2019.

Investigation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PcyII-10 variants resisting 
infection by N4-like phage Ab09 in search for genes involved in phage 
adsorption.

Latino L(1), Midoux C(1), Vergnaud G(1), Pourcel C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. 
Paris-Sud, Universit√© Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

Bacteria and their bacteriophages coexist and coevolve for the benefit of both 
in a mutualistic association. Multiple mechanisms are used by bacteria to resist 
phages in a trade-off between survival and maintenance of fitness. In vitro 
studies allow inquiring into the fate of virus and host in different conditions 
aimed at mimicking natural environment. We analyse here the mutations emerging 
in a clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain in response to infection by Ab09, a 
N4-like lytic podovirus and describe a variety of chromosomal deletions and 
mutations conferring resistance. Some deletions result from illegitimate 
recombination taking place during long-term maintenance of the phage genome. 
Phage variants with mutations in a tail fiber gene are selected during 
pseudolysogeny with the capacity to infect resistant cells and produce large 
plaques. These results highlight the complex host/phage association and suggest 
that phage Ab09 promotes bacterial chromosome rearrangements. Finally this study 
points to the possible role of two bacterial genes in Ab09 phage adhesion to the 
cell, rpsB encoding protein S2 of the 30S ribosomal subunit and ORF1587 encoding 
a Wzy-like membrane protein involved in LPS biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215456
PMCID: PMC6467409
PMID: 30990839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.