1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Apr 18;15(4):e1007690. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007690. 
eCollection 2019 Apr.

Hepatitis B e antigen induces the expansion of monocytic myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells to dampen T-cell function in chronic hepatitis B virus 
infection.

Yang F(1), Yu X(1), Zhou C(2), Mao R(1)(3), Zhu M(1), Zhu H(1), Ma Z(1), Mitra 
B(3), Zhao G(2), Huang Y(1), Guo H(3), Wang B(2), Zhang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of the Ministry of Health and 
Ministry of Education, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is associated with functionally 
impaired virus-specific T cell responses. Although the myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells (MDSCs) are known to play a critical role in impairing 
antiviral T cell responses, viral factors responsible for the expansion of MDSCs 
in chronic hepatitis B (CHB) remain obscure. In order to elucidate the mechanism 
of monocytic MDSCs (mMDSCs) expansion and T cell function suppression during 
persistent HBV infection, we analyzed the circulation frequency of mMDSCs in 164 
CHB patients and 70 healthy donors, and found that the proportion of mMDSCs in 
HBeAg (+) CHB patients was significantly increased compared to that in HBeAg (-) 
patients, which positively correlated with the level of HBeAg. Furthermore, 
exposure of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from healthy 
donors to HBeAg led to mMDSCs expansion and significant upregulation of IL-1β, 
IL-6 and indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase (IDO), and depletion of the cytokines 
abrogated HBeAg-induced mMDSCs expansion. Moreover, HBeAg-induced mMDSCs 
suppressed the autologous T-cell proliferation in vitro, and the purified mMDSCs 
from HBeAg (+) subjects markedly reduced the proliferation of CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells and IFN-γ production, which could be efficiently restored by inhibiting 
IDO. In summary, HBeAg-induced mMDSCs expansion impairs T cell function through 
IDO pathway and favors the establishment of a persistent HBV infection, 
suggesting a mechanism behind the development of HBeAg-induced immune tolerance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007690
PMCID: PMC6472891
PMID: 30998767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.