1. Front Genet. 2019 Apr 2;10:300. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00300. eCollection
2019.

Deep Genome Resequencing Reveals Artificial and Natural Selection for Visual 
Deterioration, Plateau Adaptability and High Prolificacy in Chinese Domestic 
Sheep.

Wang W(1), Zhang X(1), Zhou X(2)(3), Zhang Y(3), La Y(1), Zhang Y(3), Li C(1), 
Zhao Y(1), Li F(1)(4)(5), Liu B(2), Jiang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
United States.
(4)The State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-Ecosystems, College of Pastoral 
Agriculture Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(5)Engineering Laboratory of Sheep Breeding and Reproduction Biotechnology in 
Gansu Province, Minqin, China.

Sheep were one of the earliest domesticated animals. Both artificial and natural 
selection during domestication has resulted in remarkable changes in behavioral, 
physiological, and morphological phenotypes; however, the genetic mechanisms 
underpinning these changes remain unclear, particularly for indigenous Chinese 
sheep. In the present study, we performed pooled whole-genome resequencing of 
338 sheep from five breeds representative of indigenous Chinese breeds and 
compared them to the wild ancestors of domestic sheep (Asian mouflon, Ovis 
orientalis) for detection of genome-wide selective sweeps. Comparative genomic 
analysis between domestic sheep and Asian mouflon showed that selected regions 
were enriched for genes involved in bone morphogenesis, growth regulation, and 
embryonic and neural development in domestic sheep. Moreover, we identified 
several vision-associated genes with funtional mutations, such as PDE6B 
(c.G2994C/p.A982P and c.C2284A/p.L762M mutations), PANK2, and FOXC1/GMSD in all 
five Chinese native breeds. Breed-specific selected regions were determined 
including genes such as CYP17 for hypoxia adaptability in Tibetan sheep and 
DNAJB5 for heat tolerance in Duolang sheep. Our findings provide insights into 
the genetic mechanisms underlying important phenotypic changes that have 
occurred during sheep domestication and subsequent selection.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00300
PMCID: PMC6454055
PMID: 31001329