1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2019 Nov;17(11):2184-2198. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13131. Epub
2019  May 17.

A gamma-thionin protein from apple, MdD1, is required for defence against 
S-RNase-induced inhibition of pollen tube prior to self/non-self recognition.

Gu Z(1), Li W(1), Doughty J(2), Meng D(1), Yang Q(1), Yuan H(1), Li Y(1), Chen 
Q(1), Yu J(1), Liu CS(1), Li T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Fruit Cell and Molecular Breeding, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Apple exhibits S-RNase-mediated self-incompatibility. Although the cytotoxic 
effect of S-RNase inside the self-pollen tube has been studied extensively, the 
underlying defence mechanism in pollen tube in Rosaceae remains unclear. On 
exposure to stylar S-RNase, plant defence responses are activated in the pollen 
tube; however, how these are regulated is currently poorly understood. Here, we 
show that entry of both self and non-self S-RNase into pollen tubes of apple 
(Malus domestica) stimulates jasmonic acid (JA) production, in turn inducing the 
accumulation of MdMYC2 transcripts, a transcription factor in the JA signalling 
pathway widely considered to be involved in plant defence processes. MdMYC2 acts 
as a positive regulator in the pollen tube activating expression of MdD1, a gene 
encoding a defence protein. Importantly, MdD1 was shown to bind to the RNase 
activity sites of S-RNase leading to inhibition of enzymatic activity. This work 
provides intriguing insights into an ancient defence mechanism present in apple 
pollen tubes where MdD1 likely acts as a primary line of defence to inhibit 
S-RNase cytotoxicity prior to self/non-self recognition.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for 
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13131
PMCID: PMC6790362
PMID: 31001872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.