1. Protein Expr Purif. 2019 Aug;160:73-83. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2019.04.003. Epub 
2019 Apr 17.

Cloning, expression, and purification of the recombinant pro-apoptotic 
dominant-negative survivin T34A-C84A protein in Escherichia coli.

Tsai SL(1), Chang YC(1), Sarvagalla S(2), Wang S(3), Coumar MS(2), Cheung 
CHA(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Centre for Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Pondicherry University, 
Kalapet, Puducherry, 605014, India.
(3)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; Center of Infectious 
Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
acheung@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Survivin is a well-known inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins family member and a 
promising molecular target for anti-cancer treatment. However, it is widely 
accepted that survivin is only a "semi-druggable" target and development of 
survivin-specific small molecule inhibitors has shown to be difficult. In this 
study, we demonstrated that a histidine-tagged survivin T34A-C84A mutated 
protein (T34A-C84A-dNSur-His) can be produced using a bacterial recombinant 
protein expression system [E. coli ArcticExpress (DE3) cells] and solubilized 
using 1% (w/v) Sarkosyl. In addition, we showed that the purified 
T34A-C84A-dNSur-His protein formed dimers as predicted by in silico protein 
structure and molecular dynamics analysis. Importantly, results of the MTT assay 
revealed that the purified recombinant protein was biologically active in 
decreasing the viability of the human MDA-MB-231 breast adenocarcinoma and 
MIA-PaCa pancreatic carcinoma cells in vitro. Furthermore, the purified 
T34A-C84A-dNSur-His protein, but not of the histidine-peptide, induced apoptosis 
(i.e. caspase-9 activation and DNA fragmentation) in MDA-MB-231 cells at 
concentrations from 50 to 400 nM. In conclusion, our study provides a protocol 
of producing a biologically active survivin-targeting macromolecule, 
T34A-C84A-dNSur-His, which can be used as a tool for studying the molecular and 
cellular roles of survivin in cells. T34A-C84A-dNSur-His is also a potential 
therapeutic agent for augmenting cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2019.04.003
PMID: 31004782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]