1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Apr 24;17(4):e2003880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003880. 
eCollection 2019 Apr.

Glutamatergic neurons of the gigantocellular reticular nucleus shape locomotor 
pattern and rhythm in the freely behaving mouse.

Lemieux M(1), Bretzner F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, CHUL-Neurosciences, Québec (QC), 
Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Université 
Laval, Québec (QC), Canada.

Because of their intermediate position between supraspinal locomotor centers and 
spinal circuits, gigantocellular reticular nucleus (GRN) neurons play a key role 
in motor command. However, the functional contribution of glutamatergic GRN 
neurons in initiating, maintaining, and stopping locomotion is still unclear. 
Combining electromyographic recordings with optogenetic manipulations in freely 
behaving mice, we investigate the functional contribution of glutamatergic 
brainstem neurons of the GRN to motor and locomotor activity. Short-pulse 
photostimulation of one side of the glutamatergic GRN did not elicit locomotion 
but evoked distinct motor responses in flexor and extensor muscles at rest and 
during locomotion. Glutamatergic GRN outputs to the spinal cord appear to be 
gated according to the spinal locomotor network state. Increasing the duration 
of photostimulation increased motor and postural tone at rest and reset 
locomotor rhythm during ongoing locomotion. In contrast, photoinhibition 
impaired locomotor pattern and rhythm. We conclude that unilateral activation of 
glutamatergic GRN neurons triggered motor activity and modified ongoing 
locomotor pattern and rhythm.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2003880
PMCID: PMC6502437
PMID: 31017885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.