1. Gene. 2019 Jul 20;706:6-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.04.053. Epub 2019 Apr 22.

Factor XII deficiency is common in domestic cats and associated with two high 
frequency F12 mutations.

Maruyama H(1), Brooks MB(2), Stablein A(3), Frye A(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, Department of Veterinary 
Medicine, Nihon University, Kameino, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0880, Japan.
(2)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States of America. 
Electronic address: mbb9@cornell.edu.
(3)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States of America.

Factor XII (FXII) is a coagulation protein that initiates surface-activation of 
the coagulation cascade in vitro. The protein's in vivo role, however, remains 
poorly defined. Factor XII deficiency, or Hageman trait, is a rare hereditary 
disorder that is not associated with bleeding, and wide variations in FXII 
activity (FXII:C) exist among healthy people. While FXII-deficient knockout mice 
appear to be resistant to arterial thrombosis, human F12 polymorphisms that 
influence FXII:C have not been associated with thrombotic risk in population 
surveys. Factor XII deficiency is a naturally occurring hereditary trait in 
domestic cats. We undertook phenotypic and genotypic analyses of FXII-deficient 
cats for comparative studies with the human disease counterpart. A retrospective 
review of feline submissions to our laboratory revealed that FXII deficiency is 
common in domestic cats, and also present in many different breeds. The trait 
has a geographic bias toward the Midwestern United States. Clinical history, 
coagulation assays, and samples for F12 sequencing were obtained from 26 FXII 
deficient cats. None of the cats had experienced abnormal bleeding and their 
residual FXII:C was related to F12 mutation number and mutation-type. We found 2 
high frequency F12 mutations: an exon 13 missense mutation (c.1631G > C) and an 
exon 11 deletion mutation (c.1321delC), and additional sequence variants 
throughout the gene. Factor XII deficiency in pet cat populations provides an 
animal model system to help clarify the biologic actions and clinical relevance 
of FXII protein.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.04.053
PMID: 31022435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]