1. Front Physiol. 2019 Apr 9;10:390. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00390. eCollection 
2019.

A Single Conserved Amino Acid Residue as a Critical Context-Specific Determinant 
of the Differential Ability of Mdm2 and MdmX RING Domains to Dimerize.

Kosztyu P(1), Slaninová I(1), Valčíková B(1)(2), Verlande A(1)(2), Müller P(3), 
Paleček JJ(4)(5), Uldrijan S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czechia.
(2)International Clinical Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno, 
Czechia.
(3)Regional Centre for Applied Molecular Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer 
Institute, Brno, Czechia.
(4)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czechia.
(5)National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czechia.

Mdm2 and MdmX are related proteins serving in the form of the Mdm2 homodimer or 
Mdm2/MdmX heterodimer as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for the tumor suppressor p53. 
The dimerization is required for the E3 activity and is mediated by the 
conserved RING domains present in both proteins, but only the RING domain of 
Mdm2 can form homodimers efficiently. We performed a systematic mutational 
analysis of human Mdm2, exchanging parts of the RING with the corresponding MdmX 
sequence, to identify the molecular determinants of this difference. Mdm2 can 
also promote MdmX degradation, and we identified several mutations blocking it. 
They were located mainly at the Mdm2/E2 interface and did not disrupt the 
MdmX-Mdm2 interaction. Surprisingly, some mutations of the Mdm2/E2 interface 
inhibited MdmX degradation, which is mediated by the Mdm2/MdmX heterodimer, but 
did not affect p53 degradation, mediated by the Mdm2 homodimer. Only one mutant, 
replacing a conserved cysteine 449 with asparagine (C449N), disrupted the 
ability of Mdm2 to dimerize with MdmX. When we introduced the cysteine residue 
into the corresponding site in MdmX, the RING domain became capable of forming 
dimers with other MdmX molecules in vivo, suggesting that one conserved amino 
acid residue in the RINGs of Mdm2 and MdmX could serve as the determinant of the 
differential ability of these domains to form dimers and their E3 activity. In 
immunoprecipitations, however, the homodimerization of MdmX could be observed 
only when the asparagine residue was replaced with cysteine in both RINGs. This 
result suggested that heterocomplexes consisting of one mutated MdmX RING with 
cysteine and one wild-type MdmX RING with asparagine might be less stable, 
despite being readily detectable in the cell-based assay. Moreover, Mdm2 C449N 
blocked Mdm2-MdmX heterodimerization but did not disrupt the ability of Mdm2 
homodimer to promote p53 degradation, suggesting that the effect of the 
conserved cysteine and asparagine residues on dimerization was context-specific. 
Collectively, our results indicate that the effects of individual exchanges of 
conserved residues between Mdm2 and MdmX RING domains might be context-specific, 
supporting the hypothesis that Mdm2 RING homodimers and Mdm2-MdmX heterodimers 
may not be entirely structurally equivalent, despite their apparent similarity.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00390
PMCID: PMC6465955
PMID: 31024344