1. Mar Drugs. 2019 Apr 25;17(4):247. doi: 10.3390/md17040247.

Anticoagulant and Antithrombotic Properties in Vitro and in Vivo of a Novel 
Sulfated Polysaccharide from Marine Green Alga Monostroma nitidum.

Cao S(1), He X(2)(3), Qin L(4), He M(5), Yang Y(6), Liu Z(7), Mao W(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. 
caosujian@stu.ouc.edu.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. hexiaoxi@ouc.edu.cn.
(3)Laboratory for Marine Drugs and Bioproducts of Qingdao National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China. hexiaoxi@ouc.edu.cn.
(4)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. 
ql1599@stu.ouc.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. hmj@stu.ouc.edu.cn.
(6)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. 
yangyajing@stu.ouc.edu.cn.
(7)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. 
liuzhichun@stu.ouc.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory of Marine Drugs of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Glycoscience and Glycotechnology, School of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. wenjunm@ouc.edu.cn.
(9)Laboratory for Marine Drugs and Bioproducts of Qingdao National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China. wenjunm@ouc.edu.cn.

Sulfated polysaccharides from marine algae have high potential as promising 
candidates for marine drug development. In this study, a homogeneous sulfated 
polysaccharide from the marine green alga Monostroma nitidum, designated MS-1, 
was isolated using water extraction and anion-exchange and size-exclusion 
chromatography. Results of chemical and spectroscopic analyses showed that MS-1 
mainly consisted of →3)-α-l-Rhap-(1→ and →2)-α-l-Rhap-(1→ residues, with 
additional branches consisting of 4-linked β-d-xylose, 4-/6-linked d-glucose, 
terminal β-d-glucuronic acid, and 3-/2-linked α-l-rhamnose. Sulfate ester groups 
substituted mainly at C-2/C-4 of →3)-α-l-Rhap-(1→ and C-4 of →2)-α-l-Rhap-(1→ 
residues, slightly at C-2 of terminal β-d-glucuronic residues. MS-1 exhibited 
strong anticoagulant activity in vitro and in vivo as evaluated by the activated 
partial thromboplastin time and thrombin time assays, and significantly 
decreased platelet aggregation. The anticoagulant activity mechanism of MS-1 was 
mainly attributed to strong potentiation thrombin by heparin cofactor-II, and it 
also hastened thrombin and coagulation factor Xa inhibitions by potentiating 
antithrombin-III. MS-1 possessed markedly thrombolytic activity evaluated by 
plasminogen activator inhibitior-1, fibrin degradation products, and D-dimer 
levels using rats plasma, and recanalization rate by FeCl3-induced carotid 
artery thrombosis in mice. MS-1 exhibited strong antithrombotic activity in 
vitro and in vivo evaluated by the wet weighs and lengths of thrombus, and 
thrombus occlusion time by electrically-induced carotid artery thrombosis in 
rats. These results suggested that MS-1 could be a promising marine drug for 
prevention and therapy of thromboembolic disease.

DOI: 10.3390/md17040247
PMCID: PMC6521212
PMID: 31027312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.