1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2019 Apr 12;10:231. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00231.  eCollection 2019.

Five Neuropeptide Ligands Meet One Receptor: How Does This Tally? A 
Structure-Activity Relationship Study Using Adipokinetic Bioassays With the 
Sphingid Moth, Hippotion eson.

Marco HG(1), GÃ¤de G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, South 
Africa.

Adipokinetic hormones (AKHs) play a major role in mobilizing stored energy 
metabolites during energetic demand in insects. We showed previously (i) the 
sphingid moth Hippotion eson synthesizes the highest number of AKHs ever 
recorded, viz. five, in its corpus cardiacum: two octa- (Hipes-AKH-I and II), 
two nona- (Hipes-AKH-III and Manse-AKH), and one decapeptide (Manse-AKH-II), 
which are all active in lipid mobilization (1). (ii) Lacol-AKH from a noctuid 
moth showed maximal AKH activity in H. eson despite sequence differences and 
analogs based on Lacol-AKH with modifications at positions 2, 3, 8, or at the 
termini, as well as C-terminally shortened analogs had reduced or no activity 
(2). Here we report on N-terminally shortened and modified analogs of the lead 
peptide, as well as single amino acid substitutions at positions 1, 4, 5, 6, and 
7 by an alanine residue. Ala1 and Glu1 instead of pGlu are not tolerated well to 
bind to the H. eson AKH receptor, whereas Gln1 has high activity, suggesting it 
is endogenously cyclized. Replacing residue 5 or 7 with Ala did not alter 
activity much, in contrast with changes at position 4 or 6. Similarly, 
eliminating pGlu1, Leu2, or Thr3 from Lacol-AKH severely interfered with 
biological activity. This indicates that there is no core peptide sequence that 
can elicit the adipokinetic effect and that the overall conformation of the 
active peptide is required for a physiological response. AKHs achieve a 
biological action through binding to a receptor located on fat body cells. To 
date, one AKH receptor has been identified in any given insect species; we infer 
the same for H. eson. We aligned lepidopteran AKH receptor sequences and note 
that these are very similar. The results of our study is, therefore, also 
applicable to ligand-receptor interaction of other lepidopteran species. This 
information is important for the consideration of peptide mimetics to combat 
lepidopteran pest insects.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00231
PMCID: PMC6473027
PMID: 31031708