1. Theranostics. 2019 Feb 28;9(6):1764-1776. doi: 10.7150/thno.31233. eCollection
 2019.

Composition-Tunable Ultrasmall Manganese Ferrite Nanoparticles: Insights into 
their In Vivo T(1) Contrast Efficacy.

Miao Y(1), Xie Q(2), Zhang H(1), Cai J(3), Liu X(1), Jiao J(4), Hu S(5), Ghosal 
A(1), Yang Y(5), Fan H(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Synthetic and Natural Functional Molecule Chemistry of the 
Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Materials Science, Northwest 
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710069, China.
(2)Division of nephrology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 
510060, China.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, 600 Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China.
(5)School of Life Sciences, National Engineering Research Center for 
Miniaturized Detection Systems, Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

The development of a highly efficient, low-toxicity, ultrasmall ferrite 
nanoparticle-based T1 contrast agent for high-resolution magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is highly desirable. However, the correlations between the 
chemical compositions, in vitro T1 relaxivities, in vivo nano-bio interactions 
and toxicities remain unclear, which has been a challenge in optimizing the in 
vivo T1 contrast efficacy. Methods: Ultrasmall (3 nm) manganese ferrite 
nanoparticles (MnxFe3-xO4) with different doping concentrations of the manganese 
ions (x = 0.32, 0.37, 0.75, 1, 1.23 and 1.57) were used as a model system to 
investigate the composition-dependence of the in vivo T1 contrast efficacy. The 
efficacy of liver-specific contrast-enhanced MRI was assessed through systematic 
multiple factor analysis, which included the in vitro T1 relaxivity, in vivo MRI 
contrast enhancement, pharmacokinetic profiles (blood half-life time, 
biodistribution) and biosafety evaluations (in vitro cytotoxicity testing, in 
vivo blood routine examination, in vivo blood biochemistry testing and H&E 
staining to examine the liver). Results: With increasing Mn doping, the T1 
relaxivities initially increased to their highest value of 10.35 mM-1s-1, which 
was obtained for Mn0.75Fe2.25O4, and then the values decreased to 7.64 m M-1s-1, 
which was obtained for the Mn1.57Fe1.43O4 nanoparticles. Nearly linear increases 
in the in vivo MRI signals (Î”SNR) and biodistributions (accumulation in the 
liver) of the MnxFe3-xO4 nanoparticles were observed for increasing levels of Mn 
doping. However, both the in vitro and in vivo biosafety evaluations suggested 
that MnxFe3-xO4 nanoparticles with high Mn-doping levels (x > 1) can induce 
significant toxicity. Conclusion: The systematic multiple factor assessment 
indicated that the MnxFe3-xO4 (x = 0.75-1) nanoparticles were the optimal T1 
contrast agents with higher in vivo efficacies for liver-specific MRI than those 
of the other compositions of the MnxFe3-xO4 nanoparticles. Our work provides 
insight into the optimization of ultrasmall ferrite nanoparticle-based T1 
contrast agents by tuning their compositions and promotes the translation of 
these ultrasmall ferrite nanoparticles for clinical use of high-performance 
contrast-enhanced MRI.

DOI: 10.7150/thno.31233
PMCID: PMC6485191
PMID: 31037137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.