1. Small GTPases. 2021 Jan;12(1):60-66. doi: 10.1080/21541248.2019.1610302. Epub 
2019 May 1.

The UIG-1/CDC-42 guanine nucleotide exchange factor acts in parallel to 
CED-10/Rac1 during axon outgrowth in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Cao W(1), Deng S(1), Pocock R(1).

Author information:
(1)Development and Stem Cells Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute 
and Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University , 
Melbourne, Australia.

During development of the brain, neuronal circuits are formed through the 
projection of axons and dendrites in response to guidance signals. Rho GTPases 
(Rac1/RhoA/Cdc42) are major regulators of axo-dendritic outgrowth and guidance 
due to their role in controlling actin cytoskeletal dynamics, cell adhesion and 
motility. Functional redundancy of Rho GTPase-regulated pathways in neuronal 
development can mask the roles of specific GTPases. To examine potential Rho 
GTPase redundancy, we utilized a recently isolated hypomorphic mutation in a 
Caenorhabditis elegans Rac1 protein - CED-10(G30E) - which reduces the GTP 
binding and inhibits axon outgrowth of the PVQ interneurons. Here, we show that 
the CDC-42-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor UIG-1 acts in parallel to 
CED-10/Rac1 to control PVQ axon outgrowth. UIG-1 performs this function in a 
cell-autonomous manner. Further, we found that transgenic expression of CDC-42 
can compensate for aberrant CED-10(G30E)-regulated signalling during PVQ axon 
outgrowth. Together, our study reveals a previously unappreciated function for 
CDC-42 in PVQ axon outgrowth in C. elegans.

DOI: 10.1080/21541248.2019.1610302
PMCID: PMC7781583
PMID: 31042115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.