1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Jul;179(7):1330-1337. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61163. Epub 
2019 May 1.

Identification of novel pathogenic variants and features in patients with 
pseudohypoparathyroidism and acrodysostosis, subtypes of the newly classified 
inactivating PTH/PTHrP signaling disorders.

Truelove A(1), Mulay A(1), Prapa M(2), Casey RT(3), Adler AI(3), Offiah AC(4), 
Poole KES(5), Trotman J(2), Al Hasso N(2), Park SM(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(2)East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Wolfson Diabetes and Endocrine Clinic, Department of Endocrinology, Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, 
Cambridge, UK.
(4)Paediatric Musculoskeletal Imaging, Academic Unit of Child Health, University 
of Sheffield, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.

Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is a complex disorder defined by the 
presence of a short adult stature relative to the height of an unaffected parent 
and brachydactyly type E, as well as a stocky build, round face, and ectopic 
calcifications. AHO and pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) have been used 
interchangeably in the past. The term PHP describes end-organ resistance to 
parathyroid hormone (PTH), occurring with or without the physical features of 
AHO. Conversely, pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) describes individuals 
with AHO features in the absence of PTH resistance. PHP and PPHP are 
etiologically linked and caused by genetic and/or epigenetic alterations in the 
guanine nucleotide-binding protein alpha-stimulating (Gs α) locus (GNAS) in 
chromosome 20q13. Another less-recognized group of skeletal dysplasias, termed 
acrodysostosis, partially overlap with skeletal, endocrine, and 
neurodevelopmental features of AHO/PHP and can be overlooked in clinical 
practice, causing confusion in the literature. Acrodysostosis is caused by 
defects in two genes, PRKAR1A and PDE4D, both encoding important components of 
the Gs α-cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein kinase A signaling pathway. We 
describe the clinical course and genotype of two adult patients with overlapping 
AHO features who harbored novel pathogenic variants in GNAS (c.2273C > G, 
p.Pro758Arg, NM_080425.2) and PRKAR1A (c.803C > T, p.Ala268Val, NM_002734.4), 
respectively. We highlight the value of expert radiological opinion and 
molecular testing in establishing correct diagnoses and discuss phenotypic 
features of our patients, including the first description of subcutaneous 
ossification and spina bifida occulta in PRKAR1A-related acrodysostosis, in the 
context of the novel inactivating PTH/PTH related peptide signaling disorder 
classification system.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61163
PMID: 31041856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]