1. BMC Med Genet. 2019 May 2;20(1):68. doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0777-z.

Novel Usher syndrome pathogenic variants identified in cases with hearing and 
vision loss.

Pater JA(1), Green J(1), O'Rielly DD(2), Griffin A(1), Squires J(1), Burt T(1), 
Fernandez S(3), Fernandez B(1)(3), Houston J(1), Zhou J(1), Roslin NM(4), Young 
TL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Craig L. Dobbin Research Centre, Discipline of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland & Labrador, AIB 3V6, Canada.
(2)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Eastern Health, Craig L. Dobbin Genetics 
Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, 300 Prince Phillip 
Drive, St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, A1B 3V6, Canada.
(3)Provincial Medical Genetics, Craig L. Dobbin Research Centre, Eastern Health, 
300 Prince Phillip Drive, St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, A1B 3V6, 
Canada.
(4)The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 686 Bay 
Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 0A4, Canada.
(5)Craig L. Dobbin Research Centre, Discipline of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland & Labrador, AIB 3V6, Canada. 
tlyoung@mun.ca.
(6)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Eastern Health, Craig L. Dobbin Genetics 
Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, 300 Prince Phillip 
Drive, St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, A1B 3V6, Canada. tlyoung@mun.ca.

BACKGROUND: Usher syndrome, the most common form of inherited deaf-blindness, is 
unlike many other forms of syndromic hereditary hearing loss in that the extra 
aural clinical manifestations are also detrimental to communication. Usher 
syndrome patients with early onset deafness also experience vision loss due to 
progressive retinitis pigmentosa that can lead to legal blindness in their third 
or fourth decade.
METHODS: Using a multi-omic approach, we identified three novel pathogenic 
variants in two Usher syndrome genes (USH2A and ADGRV1) in cases initially 
referred for isolated vision or hearing loss.
RESULTS: In a multiplex hearing loss family, two affected sisters, the product 
of a second cousin union, are homozygous for a novel nonsense pathogenic variant 
in ADGRV1 (c.17062C > T, p.Arg5688*), predicted to create a premature stop codon 
near the N-terminus of ADGRV1. Ophthalmological examination of the sisters 
confirmed typical retinitis pigmentosa and prompted a corrected Usher syndrome 
diagnosis. In an unrelated clinical case, a child with hearing loss tested 
positive for two novel USH2A splicing variants (c.5777-1G > A, p. 
Glu1926_Ala1952del and c.10388-2A > G, p.Asp3463Alafs*6) and RNA studies 
confirmed that both pathogenic variants cause splicing errors. Interestingly, 
these same USH2A variants are also identified in another family with vision loss 
where subsequent clinical follow-up confirmed pre-existing hearing loss since 
early childhood, eventually resulting in a reassigned diagnosis of Usher 
syndrome.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide empirical evidence to increase Usher syndrome 
surveillance of at-risk children. Given that novel antisense oligonucleotide 
therapies have been shown to rescue retinal degeneration caused by USH2A 
splicing pathogenic variants, these solved USH2A patients may now be eligible to 
be enrolled in therapeutic trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-019-0777-z
PMCID: PMC6498547
PMID: 31046701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: 
Informed consent, family history and permission to access audiology (protocol 
#01.186) and ophthalmology (protocol #06.157) records were obtained from all 
participants per approved institutional review board (Human Research Ethics 
Board, St. John’s, NL, Canada). Parental consent was obtained in the case of 
minors. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.