1. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2019 Apr-Jun;11(2):187-191.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphism of TYK2 Gene and Susceptibility to Rheumatoid 
Arthritis in Iranian Population.

Mohamadhosseini A(1), Mansouri R(1), Javinani A(2), Ganjouei AA(2), Akhlaghi 
M(2), Aslani S(2), Hamzeh E(2), Jamshidi A(2), Ahmadzadeh N(2), Mahmoudi M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University of 
Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(2)Rheumatology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a debilitating disorder in which the 
immune system mainly targets the synovial tissue. Janus kinase family including 
tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2) is one of the crucial mediators of the downstream 
signaling pathway of inflammatory cytokines that further contributes to RA 
pathogenesis. In this study, the association of TYK2 gene rs34536443 
polymorphism, which may affect the function of TYK protein and, hence, the 
inflammatory settings, with RA susceptibility was investigated. Moreover, its 
correlation with demographic and serological features of the patients was 
assessed.
METHODS: In the present study, 700 RA patients and 700 sex, age and 
ethnicity-matched healthy individuals as the control group were included. MGB 
TaqMan real-time allelic discrimination method was used to determine the 
rs34536443 polymorphism. Rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide 
antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were also 
measured.
RESULTS: The frequency of rs34536443 minor allele (C allele) was not different 
between patients and control group [1.7 vs. 2.61 percent, OR (95% CI)=1.35 
(0.78-2.33);p=0.27]. There was not a statistically significant association 
between rs34536443 genotypes and RA susceptibility. Genotypes of rs34536443 
polymorphism were associated nor with demographic neither with serological 
features of RA patients.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, there was not any association between TYK2 
gene rs34536443 polymorphism with either disease susceptibility, demographic and 
serological features of Iranian RA patients. These findings are not compatible 
with previous works from other ethnicities, further supporting the role of 
genetics in disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC6490405
PMID: 31057722

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.