1. J Am Soc Cytopathol. 2014 Mar-Apr;3(2):108-113. doi:
10.1016/j.jasc.2013.12.003.  Epub 2013 Dec 25.

Intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions are a specific feature of intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms that distinguish contaminating gastric epithelium.

Lee PJ(1), Owens CL(2), Hutchinson L(2), Fischer AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Memorial Health Care, 1 
Innovation Drive, Biotech 3, Worcester, MA 01605. Electronic address: 
Paul.Lee@umassmemorial.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Memorial Health Care, 1 
Innovation Drive, Biotech 3, Worcester, MA 01605.

INTRODUCTION: Low-grade intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) are 
challenging to diagnose because of an absence of reliable morphologic or 
immunohistochemical features to distinguish them from contaminating gastric 
foveolar epithelium. After noting intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions (ICIs) in 
some cases of IPMN, we investigated whether ICIs could be used as a specific 
feature to distinguish IPMN from gastric foveolar epithelium.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A consecutive cohort of 61 transduodenal endoscopic 
fine-needle aspirations of histologically or clinically verified pancreatic 
IPMNs without high-grade dysplasia from 2005 to 2012 were identified. A control 
cohort of 24 endoscopic fine-needle aspirations containing gastric epithelium 
was selected from transgastric specimens of nonpancreatic targets from the same 
period. Every fragment of mucinous epithelium in the 2 cohorts was examined in 
alcohol-fixed and cell block sections at high magnification to identify ICIs.
RESULTS: ICIs were observed in 31% (19 of 61) of cases in mucinous epithelial 
fragments obtained by fine-needle aspirations from low-grade IPMNs. When 
present, they were seen in about 1% of all cells. No ICIs were identified in the 
control cohort of 24 patients with normal gastric epithelium (P = 0.001 Fisher 
exact test). BRAF mutation (V600E) testing was performed on 5 IPMN cases, and 
was negative in all cases including 2 with and 3 without ICIs. KRAS mutation 
testing was performed on 9 cases of IPMN cases. Two cases with ICIs tested 
positive for KRAS mutations. Four cases without ICIs also tested positive, and 3 
cases without ICIs tested negative.
CONCLUSIONS: ICIs are a specific morphologic feature found in about one third of 
low-grade IPMNs, but absent in gastric foveolar epithelium. There is no obvious 
molecular correlate with the presence of ICIs.

Copyright Â© 2014 American Society of Cytopathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jasc.2013.12.003
PMID: 31051700