1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2019 Apr;55(4):231-236. doi:
10.1358/dot.2019.55.4.2965337.

Dacomitinib, a second-generation irreversible epidermal growth factor receptor 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) to treat non-small cell lung cancer.

Nagano T(1), Tachihara M(2), Nishimura Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan. 
tnagano@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Dacomitinib (PF-00299804, Vizimpro) was developed as a second-generation, oral, 
irreversible inhibitor of human epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)- 1, -2 
and -4 tyrosine kinase. On September 27, 2018, the United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approved dacomitinib for the first-line treatment of 
patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR exon 19 
deletion or exon 21 L858R substitution mutations. On January 8, 2019, the 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan approved this second-generation 
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) for the treatment of EGFR mutation-positive 
inoperable or recurrent NSCLC. The European Commission also approved dacomitinib 
on April 3, 2019, as monotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients 
with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with EGFR activating mutations. 
Approval of dacomitinib was based on a randomized, multicenter, open-label, 
active-controlled trial (ARCHER 1050; ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT01774721) 
which demonstrated the safety and efficacy of dacomitinib compared to gefitinib 
in 452 patients with unresectable and metastatic NSCLC. Dacomitinib represents a 
powerful new treatment option compared with first-generation EGFR-TKIs. In this 
paper, we review the clinical and preclinical studies of dacomitinib and discuss 
the drug's clinical value.

Copyright 2019 Clarivate Analytics.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2019.55.4.2965337
PMID: 31050691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]