1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 May 1;20(9):2164. doi: 10.3390/ijms20092164.

ERK: A Key Player in the Pathophysiology of Cardiac Hypertrophy.

Gallo S(1), Vitacolonna A(2)(3), Bonzano A(4), Comoglio P(5), Crepaldi T(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo (TO), Italy. 
simona.gallo@ircc.it.
(2)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo (TO), Italy. 
annapia.vitacolonna@ircc.it.
(3)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, 10143 Orbassano (TO), Italy. 
annapia.vitacolonna@ircc.it.
(4)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo (TO), Italy. 
alessandro.bonzano@ircc.it.
(5)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo (TO), Italy. 
pcomoglio@gmail.com.
(6)Candiolo Cancer Institute, FPO-IRCCS, 10060 Candiolo (TO), Italy. 
tiziana.crepaldi@unito.it.
(7)Department of Oncology, University of Turin, 10143 Orbassano (TO), Italy. 
tiziana.crepaldi@unito.it.

Cardiac hypertrophy is an adaptive and compensatory mechanism preserving cardiac 
output during detrimental stimuli. Nevertheless, long-term stimuli incite 
chronic hypertrophy and may lead to heart failure. In this review, we analyze 
the recent literature regarding the role of ERK (extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase) activity in cardiac hypertrophy. ERK signaling produces beneficial 
effects during the early phase of chronic pressure overload in response to G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and integrin stimulation. These functions 
comprise (i) adaptive concentric hypertrophy and (ii) cell death prevention. On 
the other hand, ERK participates in maladaptive hypertrophy during hypertension 
and chemotherapy-mediated cardiac side effects. Specific ERK-associated scaffold 
proteins are implicated in either cardioprotective or detrimental hypertrophic 
functions. Interestingly, ERK phosphorylated at threonine 188 and activated ERK5 
(the big MAPK 1) are associated with pathological forms of hypertrophy. Finally, 
we examine the connection between ERK activation and hypertrophy in (i) 
transgenic mice overexpressing constitutively activated RTKs (receptor tyrosine 
kinases), (ii) animal models with mutated sarcomeric proteins characteristic of 
inherited hypertrophic cardiomyopathies (HCMs), and (iii) mice reproducing 
syndromic genetic RASopathies. Overall, the scientific literature suggests that 
during cardiac hypertrophy, ERK could be a "good" player to be stimulated or a 
"bad" actor to be mitigated, depending on the pathophysiological context.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20092164
PMCID: PMC6539093
PMID: 31052420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.