1. Front Genet. 2019 Apr 24;10:366. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00366. eCollection 
2019.

An Ensemble Strategy to Predict Prognosis in Ovarian Cancer Based on Gene 
Modules.

Gao YC(1), Zhou XH(1), Zhang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, College of Informatics, 
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Due to the high heterogeneity and complexity of cancer, it is still a challenge 
to predict the prognosis of cancer patients. In this work, we used a clustering 
algorithm to divide patients into different subtypes in order to reduce the 
heterogeneity of the cancer patients in each subtype. Based on the hypothesis 
that the gene co-expression network may reveal relationships among genes, some 
communities in the network could influence the prognosis of cancer patients and 
all the prognosis-related communities could fully reveal the prognosis of cancer 
patients. To predict the prognosis for cancer patients in each subtype, we 
adopted an ensemble classifier based on the gene co-expression network of the 
corresponding subtype. Using the gene expression data of ovarian cancer patients 
in TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas), three subtypes were identified. Survival 
analysis showed that patients in different subtypes had different survival 
risks. Three ensemble classifiers were constructed for each subtype. 
Leave-one-out and independent validation showed that our method outperformed 
control and literature methods. Furthermore, the function annotation of the 
communities in each subtype showed that some communities were cancer-related. 
Finally, we found that the current drug targets can partially support our 
method.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00366
PMCID: PMC6491874
PMID: 31068972