1. Front Neurol. 2019 Apr 24;10:411. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00411. eCollection 
2019.

A Novel Homozygous Non-sense Mutation in the Catalytic Domain of MTHFR Causes 
Severe 5,10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Deficiency.

Massadeh S(1)(2), Umair M(3), Alaamery M(1)(2), Alfadhel M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Medicine Department, King Abdullah International Medical 
Research Center, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, King 
Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(2)Joint Centers of Excellence Program, KACST-BWH/Harvard Center of Excellence 
for Biomedicine, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(3)Medical Genomics Research Department, King Abdullah International Medical 
Research Center (KAIMRC), King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, King Abdullah Specialized 
Children's Hospital, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Background: Severe 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency 
is a heterogeneous metabolic disorder inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. Pathogenic mutations in MTHFR gene have been associated with severe 
MTHFR deficiency. The clinical presentation of MTHFR deficiency is highly 
variable and associated with several neurological anomalies. Methods: Direct 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed in all the five available individuals 
from the family, including the affected individual (III-7) using standard 
procedures. Results: We observed a proband (III-7) with an abnormality in the 
cerebral white matter, apnoea, and microcephaly. WES analysis identified a novel 
homozygous non-sense mutation (c.154C>T; p.Arg52*) in MTHFR gene that segregated 
with the disease phenotype within the family. Conclusion: We identified a novel 
non-sense mutation in MTHFR gene in a single Egyptian family with severe MTHFR 
deficiency. The present investigation is clinically important, as it adds to the 
growing list of MTHFR mutations, which might help in genetic counseling of 
families of affected children and proper genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2019.00411
PMCID: PMC6491806
PMID: 31068897