1. Plant J. 2019 Sep;99(6):1047-1065. doi: 10.1111/tpj.14379. Epub 2019 Jul 11.

Enhancement of vitamin B(6) levels in rice expressing Arabidopsis vitamin B(6) 
biosynthesis de novo genes.

Mangel N(1), Fudge JB(2), Li KT(1), Wu TY(1), Tohge T(3), Fernie AR(3), Szurek 
B(4), Fitzpatrick TB(2), Gruissem W(1)(5), Vanderschuren H(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biotechnology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Botany and Plant Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, 1211, 
Switzerland.
(3)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam-Gölm, 14476, 
Germany.
(4)IRD, Cirad, University of Montpellier, IPME, Montpellier, 34394, France.
(5)Advanced Plant Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung City, 40227, Taiwan.
(6)Plant Genetics Lab, TERRA Research and Teaching Centre, Gembloux Agro 
BioTech, University of Liège, Gembloux, 5030, Belgium.

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) is vital for key metabolic reactions and reported to 
have antioxidant properties in planta. Therefore, enhancement of vitamin B6 
content has been hypothesized to be a route to improve resistance to biotic and 
abiotic stresses. Most of the current studies on vitamin B6 in plants are on 
eudicot species, with monocots remaining largely unexplored. In this study, we 
investigated vitamin B6 biosynthesis in rice, with a view to examining the 
feasibility and impact of enhancing vitamin B6 levels. Constitutive expression 
in rice of two Arabidopsis thaliana genes from the vitamin B6 biosynthesis de 
novo pathway, AtPDX1.1 and AtPDX2, resulted in a considerable increase in 
vitamin B6 in leaves (up to 28.3-fold) and roots (up to 12-fold), with minimal 
impact on general growth. Rice lines accumulating high levels of vitamin B6 did 
not display enhanced tolerance to abiotic stress (salt) or biotic stress 
(resistance to Xanthomonas oryzae infection). While a significant increase in 
vitamin B6 content could also be achieved in rice seeds (up to 3.1-fold), the 
increase was largely due to its accumulation in seed coat and embryo tissues, 
with little enhancement observed in the endosperm. However, seed yield was 
affected in some vitamin B6 -enhanced lines. Notably, expression of the 
transgenes did not affect the expression of the endogenous rice PDX genes. 
Intriguingly, despite transgene expression in leaves and seeds, the 
corresponding proteins were only detectable in leaves and could not be observed 
in seeds, possibly pointing to a mode of regulation in this organ.

© 2019 The Authors. The Plant Journal published by Society for Experimental 
Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.14379
PMCID: PMC6852651
PMID: 31063672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.