1. Gene. 2019 Jul 30;707:151-171. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.003. Epub 2019 May
7.

Type III collagen (COL3A1): Gene and protein structure, tissue distribution, and 
associated diseases.

Kuivaniemi H(1), Tromp G(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address: 
hkuivaniemi@sun.ac.za.
(2)Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; Bioinformatics Unit, 
South African Tuberculosis Bioinformatics Initiative, Stellenbosch University, 
Cape Town, South Africa; DST-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical 
Tuberculosis Research, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Stellenbosch 
University, Cape Town, South Africa; Centre for Bioinformatics and Computational 
Biology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.

Collagen alpha-1(III) chain, also known as the alpha 1 chain of type III 
collagen, is a protein that in humans is encoded by the COL3A1 gene. Three alpha 
1 chains are required to form the type III collagen molecule which has a long 
triple-helical domain. Type III collagen, an extracellular matrix protein, is 
synthesized by cells as a pre-procollagen. It is found as a major structural 
component in hollow organs such as large blood vessels, uterus and bowel. Other 
functions of type III collagen include interaction with platelets in the blood 
clotting cascade and it is also an important signaling molecule in wound 
healing. Mutations in the COL3A1 gene cause the vascular type of Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome (vEDS; OMIM 130050). It is the most serious form of EDS, since patients 
often die suddenly due to a rupture of large arteries. Inactivation of the 
murine Col3a1 gene leads to a shorter life span in homozygous mutant mice. The 
mice die prematurely from a rupture of major arteries mimicking the human vEDS 
phenotype. The biochemical and cellular effects of COL3A1 mutations have been 
studied extensively. Most of the glycine mutations lead to the synthesis of type 
III collagen with reduced thermal stability, which is more susceptible for 
proteinases. Intracellular accumulation of this normally secreted protein is 
also found. Ultrastructural analyses have demonstrated dilated rough endoplasmic 
reticulum and changes in the diameter of collagen fibers. Other clinical 
conditions associated with type III collagen are several types of fibroses in 
which increased amounts of type III collagen accumulate in the target organs.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.003
PMCID: PMC6579750
PMID: 31075413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare that they have no commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.