1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2019 May 14;20(1):237. doi: 10.1186/s12859-019-2866-6.

Variable cellular decision-making behavior in a constant synthetic network 
topology.

Shah NA(1), Sarkar CA(2).

Author information:
(1)Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate Group, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Science and Engineering, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. csarkar@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Modules of interacting components arranged in specific network 
topologies have evolved to perform a diverse array of cellular functions. For a 
network with a constant topological structure, its function within a cell may 
still be tuned by changing the number of instances of a particular component 
(e.g., gene copy number) or by modulating the intrinsic biochemical properties 
of a component (e.g., binding strength or catalytic efficiency). How such 
perturbations affect cellular response dynamics remains poorly understood. Here, 
we explored these effects in a common decision-making motif, cross-antagonism 
with autoregulation, by synthetically constructing this network in yeast.
RESULTS: We employed the engineering design strategy of reuse to build this 
topology with a single protein building block, TetR, creating necessary 
components through TetR mutations and fusion partners. We then studied the 
impact of several topology-preserving perturbations - strength of 
cross-antagonism, number of operator sites in a promoter, and gene dosage - on 
decision-making behavior. We found that reducing TetR repression strength, which 
hinders cross-antagonism, resulted in a loss of mutually exclusive cell 
responses. Unexpectedly, increasing the number of operator sites also impeded 
decision-making exclusivity, which may be a consequence of the averaging effect 
that arises when multiple transcriptional activators and repressors are 
accommodated at a given locus. Stochastic simulations of this topology revealed 
that, even for networks with high TetR repression strength and a low number of 
operator sites, increasing gene dosage can reduce exclusivity in response 
dynamics. We further demonstrated this result experimentally by quantifying gene 
copy numbers in selected yeast clones with differing phenotypic responses.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study illustrates how parameters that do not change the 
topological structure of a decision-making network can nonetheless exert 
significant influence on its response dynamics. These findings should further 
inform the study of native motifs, including the effects of topology-preserving 
mutations, and the robust engineering of synthetic networks.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-019-2866-6
PMCID: PMC6515661
PMID: 31088350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHERâ€™S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.