1. J Bacteriol. 2019 Aug 22;201(18):e00110-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00110-19. Print
2019  Sep 15.

Causes and Biophysical Consequences of Cellulose Production by Pseudomonas 
fluorescens SBW25 at the Air-Liquid Interface.

Ardré M(1), Dufour D(2), Rainey PB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique de l'Evolution, Ecole Supérieure de Physique et de 
Chimie Industrielles de la Ville de Paris (ESPCI), CNRS UMR 8231, PSL Research 
University, Paris, France maxime.ardre@espci.psl.eu rainey@evolbio.mpg.de.
(2)Laboratoire de Génétique de l'Evolution, Ecole Supérieure de Physique et de 
Chimie Industrielles de la Ville de Paris (ESPCI), CNRS UMR 8231, PSL Research 
University, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Microbial Population Biology, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.

Cellulose-overproducing wrinkly spreader mutants of Pseudomonas fluorescens 
SBW25 have been the focus of much investigation, but conditions promoting the 
production of cellulose in ancestral strain SBW25 and its effects and 
consequences have escaped in-depth investigation through lack of an in vitro 
phenotype. Here, using a custom-built device, we reveal that in static broth 
microcosms, ancestral SBW25 encounters environmental signals at the air-liquid 
interface that activate, via three diguanylate cyclase-encoding pathways (Wsp, 
Aws, and Mws), production of cellulose. Secretion of the polymer at the meniscus 
leads to modification of the environment and growth of numerous microcolonies 
that extend from the surface. Accumulation of cellulose and associated microbial 
growth leads to Rayleigh-Taylor instability resulting in bioconvection and rapid 
transport of water-soluble products over tens of millimeters. Drawing upon data, 
we built a mathematical model that recapitulates experimental results and 
captures the interactions between biological, chemical and physical 
processes.IMPORTANCE This work reveals a hitherto unrecognized behavior that 
manifests at the air-liquid interface that depends on production of cellulose 
and hints at undiscovered dimensions to bacterial life at surfaces. 
Additionally, the study links activation of known diguanylate cyclase-encoding 
pathways to cellulose expression and to signals encountered at the meniscus. 
Further significance stems from recognition of the consequences of fluid 
instabilities arising from surface production of cellulose for transport of 
water-soluble products over large distances.

Copyright © 2019 Ardré et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00110-19
PMCID: PMC6707908
PMID: 31085696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]