1. Front Genet. 2019 Apr 26;10:392. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00392. eCollection 
2019.

GhWRKY6 Acts as a Negative Regulator in Both Transgenic Arabidopsis and Cotton 
During Drought and Salt Stress.

Li Z(1)(2), Li L(3), Zhou K(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Han X(1)(2), Din Y(1)(2), Ge 
X(1)(2), Qin W(1)(2), Wang P(1)(2), Li F(1)(2), Ma Z(1), Yang Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology (Hebei Base), College of Agronomy, 
Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding, China.
(2)Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Anyang, China.
(3)Anyang Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Anyang, China.

Drought and high salinity are key limiting factors for cotton production. 
Therefore, research is increasingly focused on the underlying stress response 
mechanisms of cotton. We first identified and cloned a novel gene encoding the 
525 amino acids in cotton, namely GhWRKY6. qRT-PCR analysis indicated that 
GhWRKY6 was induced by NaCl, PEG 6000 and ABA. Analyses of germination rate and 
root length indicated that overexpression of GhWRKY6 in Arabidopsis resulted in 
hypersensitivity to ABA, NaCl, and PEG 6000. In contrast, the loss-of-function 
mutant wrky6 was insensitive and had slightly longer roots than the wild-type 
did under these treatment conditions. Furthermore, GhWRKY6 overexpression in 
Arabidopsis modulated salt- and drought-sensitive phenotypes and stomatal 
aperture by regulating ABA signaling pathways, and reduced plant tolerance to 
abiotic stress through reactive oxygen species (ROS) enrichment, reduced proline 
content, and increased electrolytes and malondialdehyde (MDA). The expression 
levels of a series of ABA-, salt- and drought-related marker genes were altered 
in overexpression seedlings. Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) technology 
revealed that down-regulation of GhWRKY6 increased salt tolerance in cotton. 
These results demonstrate that GhWRKY6 is a negative regulator of plant 
responses to abiotic stress via the ABA signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00392
PMCID: PMC6497802
PMID: 31080461