1. Nutrients. 2019 May 10;11(5):1047. doi: 10.3390/nu11051047.

Dietary and Sentinel Factors Leading to Hemochromatosis.

Oh CK(1), Moon Y(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, Korea. a_x_is@hanmail.net.
(2)Laboratory of Mucosal Exposome and Biomodulation, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, Korea. moon@pnu.edu.
(3)BioMedical Research Institute, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, 
Korea. moon@pnu.edu.
(4)Program of Food Health Sciences, Busan 46241, Korea. moon@pnu.edu.

Although hereditary hemochromatosis is associated with the mutation of genes 
involved in iron transport and metabolism, secondary hemochromatosis is due to 
external factors, such as intended or unintended iron overload, hemolysis-linked 
iron exposure or other stress-impaired iron metabolism. The present review 
addresses diet-linked etiologies of hemochromatosis and their pathogenesis in 
the network of genes and nutrients. Although the mechanistic association to 
diet-linked etiologies can be complicated, the stress sentinels are pivotally 
involved in the pathological processes of secondary hemochromatosis in response 
to iron excess and other external stresses. Moreover, the mutations in these 
sentineling pathway-linked genes increase susceptibility to secondary 
hemochromatosis. Thus, the crosstalk between nutrients and genes would verify 
the complex procedures in the clinical outcomes of secondary hemochromatosis and 
chronic complications, such as malignancy. All of this evidence provides crucial 
insights into comprehensive clinical or nutritional interventions for 
hemochromatosis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu11051047
PMCID: PMC6566178
PMID: 31083351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest associated with the contents of this article.