1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 May 15;15(5):e1007788. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007788. 
eCollection 2019 May.

Activity of CK2α protein kinase is required for efficient replication of some 
HPV types.

Piirsoo A(1), Piirsoo M(1), Kala M(1), Sankovski E(1), Lototskaja E(1), Levin 
V(1), Salvi M(2), Ustav M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Inhibition of human papillomavirus (HPV) replication is a promising therapeutic 
approach for intervening with HPV-related pathologies. Primary targets for 
interference are two viral proteins, E1 and E2, which are required for HPV 
replication. Both E1 and E2 are phosphoproteins; thus, the protein kinases that 
phosphorylate them might represent secondary targets to achieve inhibition of 
HPV replication. In the present study, we show that CX4945, an ATP-competitive 
small molecule inhibitor of casein kinase 2 (CK2) catalytic activity, suppresses 
replication of different HPV types, including novel HPV5NLuc, HPV11NLuc and 
HPV18NLuc marker genomes, but enhances the replication of HPV16 and HPV31. We 
further corroborate our findings using short interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated 
knockdown of CK2 α and α' subunits in U2OS and CIN612 cells; we show that while 
both subunits are expressed in these cell lines, CK2α is required for HPV 
replication, but CK2α' is not. Furthermore, we demonstrate that CK2α acts in a 
kinase activity-dependent manner and regulates the stability and nuclear 
retention of endogenous E1 proteins of HPV11 and HPV18. This unique feature of 
CK2α makes it an attractive target for developing antiviral agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007788
PMCID: PMC6538197
PMID: 31091289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.