1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987 Jul 7;913(3):377-85. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4838(87)90149-x.

Purification and active site modification studies on glyoxalase I from monkey 
intestinal mucosa.

Baskaran S, Balasubramanian KA.

Glyoxalase I ((R)-S-lactoylglutathione methylglyoxal-lyase (isomerizing), EC 
4.4.1.5) from monkey intestinal mucosa was purified to homogeneity. The purified 
enzyme had a molecular weight of 48,000, composed of two apparently identical 
subunits. Active-site modification was carried out on the purified enzyme in 
presence and absence of S-hexylglutathione, a reversible competitive inhibitor 
of glyoxalase I. Modification by tetranitromethane and N-acetylimidazole caused 
inactivation of the enzyme. Inactivation by N-acetylimidazole was reversible 
with hydroxylamine treatment, suggesting the importance of tyrosine residues for 
the activity of the enzyme. The enzyme was inactivated by 
2-hydroxy-5-nitrobenzyl bromide, N-bromosuccinimide, 
2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulphonic acid, pyridoxal phosphate and 
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide, indicating the importance of 
tryptophan, lysine and glutamic acid/aspartic acid residues for the activity of 
the enzyme. The enzyme was inactivated by diethyl pyrocarbonate and the activity 
was not restored by hydroxylamine treatment, suggesting that histidine residues 
may not be important for activity. Modification by N-ethylmaleimide and 
p-hydroxymercuribenzoate did not affect its activity, indicating that sulphydryl 
groups may not be important for activity. These studies indicated that the amino 
acids present in the active site of glyoxalase I from intestinal mucosa which 
may be important for activity are tyrosine, tryptophan, lysine and glutamic 
acid/aspartic acid residues.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4838(87)90149-x
PMID: 3109489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]