1. Genomics. 2020 Jan;112(1):764-768. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2019.05.013. Epub 2019
 May 16.

Sex-specific role of CYP24A1 rs2762939 in the risk of essential hypertension 
based on the serum vitamin D and total renin concentrations.

Varakantham V(1), Ale K(1), Sailoo AKK(2), Nagalla B(3), Bharatraj DK(4).

Author information:
(1)Food and Drug Toxicology Research Centre, National Institute of Nutrition, 
Hyderabad, India.
(2)Former Head of Department, Department of General Medicine, Gandhi Hospital, 
Secunderabad, India.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, 
India.
(4)Food and Drug Toxicology Research Centre, National Institute of Nutrition, 
Hyderabad, India. Electronic address: nindineshpct@gmail.com.

CYP24A1, Vitamin D 24-hydroxylase catabolizes 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D to 24-hydroxylated vitamin D products. It is widely 
known that low Vitamin D can lead to increased renal renin and angiotensin II 
production, consequently elevating blood pressure or development of essential 
hypertension (EH). We have conducted an investigation on hypertensives and 
controls to evaluate the association of the gene variant, CYP24A1 rs2762939 and 
25(OH)D in an Indian population with EH. On gender-based stratification, with 
multivariate logistic analysis after adjustment for covariates, the CYP24A1 
rs2762939 CC variant showed a higher risk of EH in males (aOR = 3.141, CI 
1.164-8.478, P = .024) while females illustrated an inverse association with EH 
(aOR = 0.398, CI 0.172-0.092, P = .031). The 25(OH)D levels among the three 
genotypes of hypertensives substantiate these results. Our results clearly 
suggest that gender, CYP24A1 rs2762939, and Vitamin D status may play a 
significant role in disease susceptibility towards EH in Indian population.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2019.05.013
PMID: 31102703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]