1. Cancer Sci. 2019 Jul;110(7):2080-2089. doi: 10.1111/cas.14069. Epub 2019 Jun
18.

Regulatory T (Treg) cells in cancer: Can Treg cells be a new therapeutic target?

Ohue Y(1), Nishikawa H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Immunology, Research Institute/Exploratory Oncology 
Research & Clinical Trial Center (EPOC), National Cancer Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Immunology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.

Regulatory T (Treg) cells suppress abnormal/excessive immune responses to self- 
and nonself-antigens to maintain immune homeostasis. In tumor immunity, Treg 
cells are involved in tumor development and progression by inhibiting antitumor 
immunity. There are several Treg cell immune suppressive mechanisms: inhibition 
of costimulatory signals by CD80 and CD86 expressed by dendritic cells through 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4, interleukin (IL)-2 consumption by 
high-affinity IL-2 receptors with high CD25 (IL-2 receptor α-chain) expression, 
secretion of inhibitory cytokines, metabolic modulation of tryptophan and 
adenosine, and direct killing of effector T cells. Infiltration of Treg cells 
into the tumor microenvironment (TME) occurs in multiple murine and human 
tumors. Regulatory T cells are chemoattracted to the TME by chemokine gradients 
such as CCR4-CCL17/22, CCR8-CCL1, CCR10-CCL28, and CXCR3-CCL9/10/11. Regulatory 
T cells are then activated and inhibit antitumor immune responses. A high 
infiltration by Treg cells is associated with poor survival in various types of 
cancer. Therefore, strategies to deplete Treg cells and control of Treg cell 
functions to increase antitumor immune responses are urgently required in the 
cancer immunotherapy field. Various molecules that are highly expressed by Treg 
cells, such as immune checkpoint molecules, chemokine receptors, and 
metabolites, have been targeted by Abs or small molecules, but additional 
strategies are needed to fine-tune and optimize for augmenting antitumor effects 
restricted in the TME while avoiding systemic autoimmunity. Here, we provide a 
brief synopsis of these cells in cancer and how they can be controlled to 
achieve therapeutic outcomes.

© 2019 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14069
PMCID: PMC6609813
PMID: 31102428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was disclosed 
by YO. HN has received honoraria and grants from Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Chugai, 
and Ono and grants from Astellas, BD Japan, Daiichi Sankyo, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, 
Sysmex, Taiho, Asahikasei, and Zenyaku Kogyo.