1. Am J Cancer Res. 2019 Apr 1;9(4):730-739. eCollection 2019.

HMGB1 regulates erastin-induced ferroptosis via RAS-JNK/p38 signaling in 
HL-60/NRAS(Q61L) cells.

Ye F(1), Chai W(2), Xie M(1), Yang M(1), Yu Y(1), Cao L(1), Yang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha 
410008, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hunan Cancer Hospital Changsha 410008, Hunan, 
People's Republic of China.

Ferroptosis is emerging as a new form of regulated cell death driven by 
oxidative injury promoting lipid peroxidation in an iron-dependent manner. High 
mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) plays an important role in leukemia pathogenesis 
and chemotherapy resistance. The mechanisms of ferroptosis in tumor pathogenesis 
and treatment have been a recent research focus but the role of HMGB1 in 
regulating ferroptosis especially in leukemia still remains largely unknown. 
Here, we shown that HMGB1 is a critical regulator of eratin-induced ferroptosis 
in HL-60 cell line expressing NRASQ61L (HL-60/NRASQ61L). Erastin enhanced ROS 
levels, thereby promoting cytosolic translocation of HMGB1 and enhancing cell 
death. Knockdown of HMGB1 decreased erastin-induced ROS generation and cell 
death in an iron-mediated lysosomal pathway in HL-60/NRASQ61L cells. Knockdown 
of HMGB1 or rat sarcoma (RAS), or pharmacological inhibition of JNK and p38 
decreased TfR1 levels in HL-60/NRASQ61L cells. Importantly, these data were 
further supported by our in vivo experiment, in which xenografts formed by HMGB1 
knockdown HL-60/NRASQ61L cells had lower PTGS2 and TfR1 expression than that in 
control mice. Taken together, these results suggest that HMGB1 is a novel 
regulator of ferroptosis via the RAS-JNK/p38 pathway and a potential drug target 
for therapeutic interventions in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC6511643
PMID: 31105999

Conflict of interest statement: None.