1. Hepatology. 2019 Dec;70(6):2171-2184. doi: 10.1002/hep.30778. Epub 2019 Jun
24.

Glucose-6-Phosphate Regulates Hepatic Bile Acid Synthesis in Mice.

Hoogerland JA(1), Lei Y(1), Wolters JC(1), de Boer JF(1)(2), Bos T(1), Bleeker 
A(1), Mulder NL(1), van Dijk TH(2), Kuivenhoven JA(1), Rajas F(3), Mithieux 
G(3), Haeusler RA(4), Verkade HJ(1), Bloks VW(1), Kuipers F(1)(2), Oosterveer 
MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory Medicine, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1213, Université 
Claude Bernard Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(4)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY.

It is well established that, besides facilitating lipid absorption, bile acids 
act as signaling molecules that modulate glucose and lipid metabolism. Bile acid 
metabolism, in turn, is controlled by several nutrient-sensitive transcription 
factors. Altered intrahepatic glucose signaling in type 2 diabetes associates 
with perturbed bile acid synthesis. We aimed to characterize the regulatory role 
of the primary intracellular metabolite of glucose, glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), 
on bile acid metabolism. Hepatic gene expression patterns and bile acid 
composition were analyzed in mice that accumulate G6P in the liver, that is, 
liver-specific glucose-6-phosphatase knockout (L-G6pc-/- ) mice, and mice 
treated with a pharmacological inhibitor of the G6P transporter. Hepatic G6P 
accumulation induces sterol 12α-hydroxylase (Cyp8b1) expression, which is 
mediated by the major glucose-sensitive transcription factor, carbohydrate 
response element-binding protein (ChREBP). Activation of the G6P-ChREBP-CYP8B1 
axis increases the relative abundance of cholic-acid-derived bile acids and 
induces physiologically relevant shifts in bile composition. The 
G6P-ChREBP-dependent change in bile acid hydrophobicity associates with elevated 
plasma campesterol/cholesterol ratio and reduced fecal neutral sterol loss, 
compatible with enhanced intestinal cholesterol absorption. Conclusion: We 
report that G6P, the primary intracellular metabolite of glucose, controls 
hepatic bile acid synthesis. Our work identifies hepatic G6P-ChREBP-CYP8B1 
signaling as a regulatory axis in control of bile acid and cholesterol 
metabolism.

© 2019 The Authors. Hepatology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc., on behalf 
of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.30778
PMCID: PMC6859192
PMID: 31102537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]