1. Cerebellum. 2019 Aug;18(4):817-822. doi: 10.1007/s12311-019-01036-2.

Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 28-Phenotypic and Molecular Characterization of a 
Family with Heterozygous and Compound-Heterozygous Mutations in AFG3L2.

Tunc S(1)(2), Dulovic-Mahlow M(1), Baumann H(1), Baaske MK(1)(2), Jahn M(1), 
Junker J(1)(2), Münchau A(1), Brüggemann N(1)(2), Lohmann K(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 
23538, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 
23538, Lübeck, Germany. katja.lohmann@neuro.uni-luebeck.de.

While heterozygous mutations in the AFG3L2 gene have been linked to 
spinocerebellar ataxia 28 (SCA28), homozygous mutations in the same gene can 
cause spastic ataxia 5 (SPAX5). AFG3L2 encodes a mitochondrial ATP-dependent 
metalloprotease. We here report a SCA28 patient with biallelic AFG3L2 variants 
and his heterozygous mother. The patient and his mother underwent a detailed 
neurological examination and fibroblast lines were established. The effect of 
the two missense variants on mitochondria was assessed by form factor analysis 
and quantification of mitochondrial proteins (TOMM70, complex V). The 
39-year-old index patient presented with a slowly progressive cerebellar gait 
disorder for 19 years, bilateral ptosis, and dysarthria. A cranial MRI showed 
mild cerebellar atrophy. He carried two compound-heterozygous, rare, missense 
variants (c.1847A>G [p.Y616C], c.2167G>A [p.V723M]) in AFG3L2, while his mother 
was heterozygous for the first change that had previously been described in 
SPAX5. Altered mitochondrial morphology and interconnectivity, together with 
reduced protein levels of TOMM70 and complex V (ATPase), suggest mitochondrial 
structural defects in the patient's fibroblasts. No significant abnormalities 
were found in his mother's fibroblast cultures albeit all measurements were 
slightly below the control level. We here present a SCA28 patient with 
compound-heterozygous AFG3L2 variants and demonstrate mitochondrial 
abnormalities in skin fibroblast cultures from this patient. Thus, AFG3L2 
variants should be considered in both slowly progressive ataxias and phenotypes 
with clinical features reminiscent of mitochondrial disease. Of note, ptosis was 
present in both mutation carriers and may serve as a red flag in the diagnosis 
of SCA28.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-019-01036-2
PMID: 31111429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]