1. Cancer Manag Res. 2019 Apr 18;11:3419-3432. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S200819. 
eCollection 2019.

Statins may have double-edged effects in patients with lung adenocarcinoma after 
lung resection.

Nishikawa S(1), Menju T(1), Takahashi K(1), Miyata R(1), Chen-Yoshikawa TF(1), 
Sonobe M(1), Yoshizawa A(2), Sabe H(3), Sato T(4), Date H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Kyoto University School of Public Health, Kyoto, 
Japan.

Purpose: The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is pivotal for driving 
metastasis and recurrence in lung cancer. Some in vitro reports have shown that 
statins suppress EMT by inactivating mutant p53 functions. Several clinical 
trials of conventional treatments with statins have been performed, but the 
effect of these drugs on prognosis is still uncertain. The purpose of this study 
is to examine the impact of statins on EMT and the prognosis of patients with 
lung adenocarcinoma. Materials and methods: Morphological changes were evaluated 
and EMT markers (E-cadherin, vimentin) were analyzed by Western blotting in 
p53-overexpressing H1650 and mutant p53-harboring H1975 lung adenocarcinoma 
cells, with and without simvastatin administration. The invasive ability of 
these cells was analyzed in a Matrigel chemoinvasion assay. A total of 250 lung 
adenocarcinoma specimens were also collected from patients who underwent surgery 
in our institute. EMT markers in these tumor specimens were evaluated by 
immunostaining and p53 mutation status was determined by direct sequencing. 
Associations among EMT status, p53 mutation status, and statin use were 
evaluated, and prognosis was analyzed using a marginal structural model. 
Results: Mutant p53 induced EMT and increased the invasive ability of H1650 
cells. Simvastatin restored the epithelial phenotype and decreased the invasive 
ability of both H1650 and H1975 cells. Statin administration was associated with 
inactivation of EMT only in patients with mutant p53, which was consistent with 
the in vitro results. Moreover, in patients with mutant p53, statin users had 
significantly better survival than non-statin users. In contrast, statins 
significantly worsened the prognosis of patients with wild type p53 (HR 2.10, 
95% CI 1.14-3.85). Conclusion: Statins suppress EMT and change the prognosis of 
patients with lung adenocarcinoma in a p53 mutation-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S200819
PMCID: PMC6497483
PMID: 31114376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.