1. Front Immunol. 2019 May 1;10:853. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00853. eCollection 
2019.

Rare Functional Variants in Complement Genes and Anti-FH 
Autoantibodies-Associated aHUS.

Valoti E(1), Alberti M(1), Iatropoulos P(1), Piras R(1), Mele C(1), Breno M(1), 
Cremaschi A(1), Bresin E(1), Donadelli R(1), Alizzi S(2), Amoroso A(2), Benigni 
A(1), Remuzzi G(1)(3), Noris M(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center for Rare Diseases 'Aldo e Cele Daccò', Istituto di 
Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Bergamo, Italy.
(2)Azienda Ospedaliera-Universitaria, Città della Salute e della Scienza and 
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(3)'L. Sacco' Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of 
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare disease characterized by 
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and renal failure. It is 
caused by genetic or acquired defects of the complement alternative pathway. 
Factor H autoantibodies (anti-FHs) have been reported in 10% of aHUS patients 
and are associated with the deficiency of factor H-related 1 (FHR1). However, 
FHR1 deficiency is not enough to cause aHUS, since it is also present in about 
5% of Caucasian healthy subjects. In this study we evaluated the prevalence of 
genetic variants in CFH, CD46, CFI, CFB, C3, and THBD in aHUS patients with 
anti-FHs, using healthy subjects with FHR1 deficiency, here defined 
"supercontrols," as a reference group. "Supercontrols" are more informative than 
general population because they share at least one risk factor (FHR1 deficiency) 
with aHUS patients. We analyzed anti-FHs in 305 patients and 30 were positive. 
The large majority were children (median age: 7.7 [IQR, 6.6-9.9] years) and 83% 
lacked FHR1 (n = 25, cases) due to the homozygous CFHR3-CFHR1 deletion (n = 20), 
or the compound heterozygous CFHR3-CFHR1 and CFHR1-CFHR4 deletions (n = 4), or 
the heterozygous CFHR3-CFHR1 deletion combined with a frameshift mutation in 
CFHR1 that generates a premature stop codon (n = 1). Of the 960 healthy adult 
subjects 48 had the FHR1 deficiency ("supercontrols"). Rare likely pathogenetic 
variants in CFH, THBD, and C3 were found in 24% of cases (n = 6) compared to 
2.1% of the "supercontrols" (P-value = 0.005). We also found that the CFH H3 and 
the CD46GGAAC haplotypes are not associated with anti-FHs aHUS, whereas these 
haplotypes are enriched in aHUS patients without anti-FHs, which highlights the 
differences in the genetic basis of the two forms of the disease. Finally, we 
confirm that common infections are environmental factors that contribute to the 
development of anti-FHs aHUS in genetically predisposed individuals, which fits 
with the sharp peak of incidence during scholar-age. Further studies are needed 
to fully elucidate the complex genetic and environmental factors underlying 
anti-FHs aHUS and to establish whether the combination of anti-FHs with likely 
pathogenetic variants or other risk factors influences disease outcome and 
response to therapies.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00853
PMCID: PMC6504697
PMID: 31118930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]