1. Sci Rep. 2019 May 23;9(1):7739. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-44230-2.

Genetic structure and forensic characteristics of Tibeto-Burman-speaking Ü-Tsang 
and Kham Tibetan Highlanders revealed by 27 Y-chromosomal STRs.

He G(1), Wang Z(1), Su Y(2), Zou X(1), Wang M(1), Chen X(3), Gao B(4), Liu J(1), 
Wang S(1), Hou Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Forensic Medicine, West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & 
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, China.
(2)Forensic Identification Center, Public Security Bureau of Tibet Tibetan 
Autonomous Region, Lhasa, Tibet Tibetan Autonomous Region, 850000, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the First People's Hospital of Liangshan 
Yi Autonomous Prefecture, Xichang, Sichuan, 615000, China.
(4)Yili Public Security Bureau, Yili, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, 418000, 
China.
(5)Institute of Forensic Medicine, West China School of Basic Medical Sciences & 
Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, China. 
forensic@scu.edu.cn.

Culturally diverse Tibetans (Ü-Tsang, Kham and Ando) harboring a unique 
molecular mechanism that allows them to successfully adapt to hypoxic 
environments in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau have been a subject of great interest 
in medical genetics, linguistics, archeology and forensic science. However, 
forensic characteristics and genetic variations of the Y-chromosomal 27-marker 
haplotype included in the Yfiler Plus system in the Ü-Tsang and Kham 
Tibeto-Burman-speaking Tibetans remain unexplored. Thus, we genotyped 27 Y-STRs 
in 230 Shigatse Ü-Tsang Tibetans (SUT) and 172 Chamdo Kham Tibetans (CKT) to 
investigate the forensic characterization and genetic affinity of Chinese 
Tibetan Highlanders. The haplotype diversities were 0.999962028 in SUT and 
0.999796002 in CKT. Forensic diversity measures indicated that this 27-Y-STR 
amplification system is appropriate for routine forensic applications, such as 
identifying and separating unrelated males in deficiency paternity cases, male 
disaster victims and missing person identification and determining male 
components in sexual assault cases. Moreover, the genetic relationships among 63 
worldwide populations (16,282 individuals), 16 Asian populations, and 21 Chinese 
populations were analyzed and reconstructed using principal component analysis, 
multidimensional scaling plots and a phylogenetic tree. Considerable genetic 
differences were observed between Tibetan populations and other 
geographically/ethnically diverse populations (Han Chinese). Our studied SUT and 
CKT have a genetically closer relationship with Gansu Ando Tibetans than with 
other Asians. In total, our analyses indicated that subpopulation structures 
exist among Asian and Chinese populations, and population-specific reference 
databases should be established for forensic applications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-44230-2
PMCID: PMC6533295
PMID: 31123281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.