1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2019 May 7;13:1545-1554. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S196040. 
eCollection 2019.

Glibenclamide alleviates inflammation in oleic acid model of acute lung injury 
through NLRP3 inflammasome signaling pathway.

Chen H(1)(2), Ding Y(1)(2), Chen W(1)(2), Feng Y(1)(2), Shi G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiration and Critical Care Disease, Ruijin Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 20025, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, Shanghai 20025, People's Republic of China.

Background: Pulmonary fat embolism (PFE) is one of the important causes of acute 
lung injury (ALI), but its pathogenesis is unclear. In recent years, it has been 
found that the NLRP3 inflammasome is closely related to inflammatory response. 
However, there are no reports about the involvement of NLRP3 in PFE- associated 
ALI. Glibenclamide is a kind of hypoglycaemic drug with anti-inflammatory 
effect. It has been reported to have the anti-inflammatory effect related to 
inhibiting NLRP3. Objective: To determine whether NLRP3 inflammasome was 
involved in ALI induced by PFE or whether glibenclamide had therapeutic effects 
on such lung injury, we designed this experiment. Materials and methods: The rat 
model of intravenous injection of oleic acid (OA) was used to simulate PFE. Rats 
were divided into three groups: control, OA and glibenclamide treatment group. 
Blood free fatty acid (FFA) concentration was determined by ACS-ACOD. 
Histopathological examinations were taken to assess the severity of lung injury. 
The expression of NLRP3 pathway and its downstream products were analyzed by 
IHC, WB, qPCR and ELISA. Results: Four hours after intravenous OA injection, the 
typical pathological manifestations of ALI accompanied by elevated levels of 
plasma FFAs were found. The activity of NLRP3 inflammasomes increased in OA 
group, too. Pretreatment with glibenclamide partly inhibited the increase in 
NLRP3, caspase-1 and IL-1β expression induced by OA, simultaneously attenuated 
the lung injury. But it has little effect on the expression of Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) expression in this experiment. Conclusion: NLRP3 inflammasome, 
one of the main components of innate immune response, involved in ALI induced by 
OA. Glibenclamide can alleviate this kind of ALI by inhibiting rather the 
NLRP3/caspase-1/IL-1β signaling pathway than the levels of FFAs or TLR4 pathway.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S196040
PMCID: PMC6511253
PMID: 31123394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.