1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 May 22;20(10):2520. doi: 10.3390/ijms20102520.

Bone Metastasis Phenotype and Growth Undergo Regulation by Micro-Environment 
Stimuli: Efficacy of Early Therapy with HGF or TGFβ1-Type I Receptor Blockade.

Bendinelli P(1), Maroni P(2), Dall'Olio V(3), Matteucci E(4), Desiderio MA(5).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Molecular Pathology 
Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via L. Mangiagalli 31, 20133 
Milano, Italy. paola.bendinelli@unimi.it.
(2)IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Via R. Galeazzi 4, 20161 Milano, Italy. 
paola.maroni@grupposandonato.it.
(3)Cogentech S.c.a.r.l., Via Adamello 16, 20139 Milano, Italy. 
qPCR-service@cogentech.it.
(4)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Molecular Pathology 
Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via L. Mangiagalli 31, 20133 
Milano, Italy. emanuela.matteucci@unimi.it.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Molecular Pathology 
Laboratory, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via L. Mangiagalli 31, 20133 
Milano, Italy. a.desiderio@unimi.it.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and transforming growth factor β1 (TGFβ1) are 
biological stimuli of the micro-environment which affect bone metastasis 
phenotype through transcription factors, but their influence on the growth is 
scarcely known. In a xenograft model prepared with 1833 bone metastatic cells, 
derived from breast carcinoma cells, we evaluated mice survival and Twist and 
Snail expression and localization after competitive inhibition of HGF with NK4, 
or after blockade of TGFβ1-type I receptor (RI) with SB431542: in the latter 
condition HGF was also measured. To explain the in vivo data, in 1833 cells 
treated with SB431542 plus TGFβ1 we measured HGF formation and the transduction 
pathway involved. Altogether, HGF seemed relevant for bone-metastatic growth, 
being hampered by NK4 treatment, which decreased Twist more than Snail in the 
metastasis bulk. TGFβ1-RI blockade enhanced HGF in metastasis and adjacent bone 
marrow, while reducing prevalently Snail expression at the front and bulk of 
bone metastasis. The HGF accumulation in 1833 cells depended on an auxiliary 
signaling pathway, triggered by TGFβ1 under SB431542, which interfered in the 
transcription of HGF activator inhibitor type 1 (HAI-1) downstream of 
TGFβ-activated kinase 1 (TAK1): HGF stimulated Twist transactivation. In 
conclusion, the impairment of initial outgrowth with NK4 seemed therapeutically 
promising more than SB431542 chemotherapy; a functional correlation between 
Twist and Snail in bone metastasis seemed to be influenced by the biological 
stimuli of the micro-environment, and the targeting of these phenotype 
biomarkers might inhibit metastasis plasticity and colonization, even if it 
would be necessary to consider the changes of HGF levels in bone metastases 
undergoing TGFβ1-RI blockade.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20102520
PMCID: PMC6567054
PMID: 31121879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
V.D.O. from Cogentech performed RT-PCR experiments, and the Company neither 
provided Funds nor had profits.