1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 May;98(21):e15796. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000015796.

KEGG-expressed genes and pathways in intervertebral disc degeneration: Protocol 
for a systematic review and data mining.

Mo S(1), Liu C, Chen L, Ma Y, Liang T, Xue J, Zeng H, Zhan X.

Author information:
(1)Spine and Osteopathy Ward, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

miRNAs and genes play significant roles in the etiology and pathogenesis of 
intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD). This study aimed to identify aberrantly 
expressed miRNAs, genes, and pathways in IDD through a comprehensive 
bioinformatics analysis.Data of miRNAs expression microarrays (GSE63492) and 
genes microarrays (GSE23130) were obtained from GEO database. Similarly, 
aberrantly expressed miRNAs and genes were obtained using GEO2R. In addition, 
functional and enrichment analyses of selected miRNAs and genes were performed 
using the DAVID database. Meanwhile, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network 
was constructed using STRING, and then visualized in Cytoscape.A total of 98 
upregulated miRNAs were identified. They were enriched in biological processes 
of response to organelle, ion binding, cellular nitrogen compound metabolic 
process, biosynthetic process, small molecule metabolic process, cellular 
protein modification process, catabolic process, molecular function, 
neurotrophin TRK receptor signaling pathway, and protein complex. In addition, 
1405 high expression protein genes were detected. It indicated enrichment in 
biological processes, such as translational initiation, nonsense-mediated decay, 
viral transcription, cell-cell adhesion, rRNA processing, translation, 
RP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane, nuclear-transcribed 
mRNA catabolic process, regulation of mRNA stability, and mRNA splicing via 
spliceosome and extracellular matrix organization. In addition, pathway analysis 
exhibited the common enrichment in focal adhesion, Hippo signaling pathway, 
ECM-receptor interaction, Wnt signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, 
endocytosis, proteoglycans in cancer, and so on. The top 10 central genes of PPI 
network were POTEE, PPP2CA, RPL17, HSP90AA1, POTEF, RPL13A, ACTB, RPL18, RPS24, 
and HSPA1A.In conclusion, our research proposed abnormally expressed miRNAs, 
genes, and pathways in IDD through bioinformatics methods, which may provide new 
insights into the pathogenesis of IDD. Thus, the Hub gene involving POTEE, 
PPP2CA, RPL17, HSP90AA1, POTEF, RPL13A, ACTB, RPL18, RPS24, and HSPA1A may be 
biomarkers for accurate diagnosis and treatment of IDD in the future.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000015796
PMCID: PMC6571259
PMID: 31124977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.