1. Front Microbiol. 2019 May 3;10:989. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00989. eCollection
 2019.

LmbU, a Cluster-Situated Regulator for Lincomycin, Consists of a DNA-Binding 
Domain, an Auto-Inhibitory Domain, and Forms Homodimer.

Hou B(1), Zhu X(1), Kang Y(1), Wang R(1), Wu H(1)(2), Ye J(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of 
Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Applied Biology, East China University of Science and 
Technology, Shanghai, China.

Few studies were reported about the regulatory mechanism of lincomycin 
biosynthesis since it was found in 1962. Although we have proved that a 
cluster-situated regulator (CSR) LmbU (GenBank Accession No. ABX00623.1) 
positively modulates lincomycin biosynthesis in Streptomyces lincolnensis NRRL 
2936, the molecular mechanism of LmbU regulation is still unclear. In this 
study, we demonstrated that LmbU binds to the target lmbAp by a central 
DNA-binding domain (DBD), which interacts with the binding sites through the 
helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif. N-terminal of LmbU includes an auto-inhibitory 
domain (AID), inhibiting the DNA-binding activity of LmbU. Without the AID, LmbU 
variant can bind to its own promoter. Interestingly, compared to other LmbU 
homologs, the homologs within the biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs) of known 
antibiotics generally contain N-terminal AIDs, which offer them the abilities to 
play complex regulatory functions. In addition, cysteine 12 (C12) has been 
proved to be mainly responsible for LmbU homodimer formation in vitro. In 
conclusion, LmbU homologs naturally exist in hundreds of actinomycetes, and 
belong to a new regulatory family, LmbU family. The present study reveals the 
DBD, AID and dimerization of LmbU, and sheds new light on the regulatory 
mechanism of LmbU and its homologs.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00989
PMCID: PMC6510168
PMID: 31130942