1. Hereditas. 2019 May 23;156:15. doi: 10.1186/s41065-019-0092-x. eCollection
2019.

Polymorphism of the PPARD Gene and Dynamic Balance Performance in Han Chinese 
Children.

Cao Y(1), Zhang Q(1), Chen J(1)(2), Li Z(3), Zhou Z(1), Shen J(1), Wang D(1), 
Pan D(1), Wang Z(1), Ke D(4), Wang X(4), Lu D(4), Zhao Y(5), Cheng S(5), Shi 
Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)1Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Bio-X Institutes, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shanghai, 200030 China.
(2)2Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health 
Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200030 
China.
(3)3Qingdao University, Metabolic Disease Institute, Qingdao, 266003 China.
(4)4Department of Human Sports Science, Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai, 
200438 China.
(5)5Physical Education Department, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
200240 China.
(6)6Shanghai Key Laboratory of Sleep Disordered Breathing, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, 200233 China.

BACKGROUND: Athletic performances are complex traits with heritability of ~66%. 
Dynamic balance is one of the most important athletic performances, and there 
has been little studies for it in sports genomics. The candidate PPARD gene was 
reported to be able to affect muscle development for balance predisposition and 
influence the athletic performance including skiing triumph in the Caucasian 
population. This study aims to investigate whether the PPARD gene is a 
susceptibility gene for dynamic balance performance in Han Chinese children.
RESULTS: A total 2244 children were recruited and their balance beam 
performances were measured. Five polymorphisms in the PPARD gene were genotyped 
through the MassARRAY Sequenom platform. Rs2016520 exerted significant 
association with dynamic balance performance (minor allele C, P = 0.015, 
Pcorrected < 0.05) and was affirmed in a meta-analysis by combining previously 
reported Caucasian cohorts (OR = 1.57, 95% CI = [1.30, 1.91], P < 10 -5) . 
Another polymorphism, rs2267668, was also significantly associated with dynamic 
balance performance (minor allele G, P = 0.015, Pcorrected < 0.05). In the 
dichotomous study, 321 cases (61% boys and 39% girls) and 370 controls (49% boys 
and 51% girls) in our samples were selected as representatives, and the 
thresholds were the mean velocity (0.737 m/s) Â± standard deviation (0.264 m/s), 
in which rs2016520-C and rs2267668-G still remained significant (CI =1.41 
[1.11~1.79], P = 0.004, Pcorrected < 0.016; CI =1.45 [1.14~1.86], P = 0.002, 
Pcorrected < 0.016). In different genders, consistent OR direction was observed 
for each variant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that the PPARD gene is associated with 
dynamic balance performance of human being, and further studies to reveal its 
etiology is strongly suggested.

DOI: 10.1186/s41065-019-0092-x
PMCID: PMC6533762
PMID: 31148953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.