1. Addict Biol. 2019 Nov;24(6):1138-1152. doi: 10.1111/adb.12747. Epub 2019 May
30.

Naltrexone effects on subjective responses to alcohol in the human laboratory: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Ray LA(1)(2), Green R(1), Roche DJO(3), Magill M(4), Bujarski S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Center for Alcohol and Addiction Studies, Brown University, Providence, RI, 
USA.

Naltrexone (NTX) has been widely studied for the treatment of alcohol use 
disorder with overall support for its efficacy. The mechanisms of action of 
naltrexone are thought to involve attenuation of the hedonic effects of alcohol 
and potentiation of its aversive effects. In order to provide a quantitative 
estimate of the effects of naltrexone on subjective response to alcohol, the 
aims of this meta-analytic review are to examine the effects of naltrexone 
across four domains of subjective response. Meta-analyses of naltrexone effects 
on alcohol craving (k = 16, N = 686), stimulation (k = 15, N = 675), sedation 
(k = 18, N = 777), and negative mood (k = 9, N = 281) suggested that under 
laboratory conditions and compared with placebo, naltrexone reduces craving 
(Hedges g = -0.252; SE = 0.054; 95% CI, -0.375 to -0.130; P < 0.01), reduces 
stimulation (g = -0.223; SE = 0.067; 95% CI, -0.372 to -0.074; P < 0.01), 
increases sedation (g = 0.251; SE = 0.064; 95% CI, 0.112-0.389; P < 0.01), and 
increases negative mood (g = 0.227; SE = 0.047; 95% CI, 0.100-0.354; P < 0.01). 
Results were robust when drinks per month and alcohol dose were added to the 
models as covariates. The effects of naltrexone varied by severity of alcohol 
use with medication effects on craving and stimulation being observed in sample 
of both heavy drinkers and AUD individuals. These results are consistent with 
the hypothesized mechanisms of action of NTX, although the effects are of small 
magnitude. This meta-analysis aggregates across multiple human laboratory 
studies of NTX's effects on subjective response to alcohol, providing a 
comprehensive summary of a key mechanism of NTX efficacy, namely, alteration of 
the subjective experience of alcohol.

© 2019 Society for the Study of Addiction.

DOI: 10.1111/adb.12747
PMCID: PMC6819195
PMID: 31148304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have conflicts of interest 
to disclose.