1. Asian J Neurosurg. 2019 Apr-Jun;14(2):589-592. doi: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_18_19.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Early-Stage Glioblastoma.

Hishii M(1), Matsumoto T(2), Arai H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Juntendo University Nerima Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Juntendo 
University, Tokyo, Japan.

Early-stage glioblastoma has few identifiable findings; clinical significance of 
its early diagnosis and treatment remains unclear as no report has described 
treatment and long-term follow-up for early-stage glioblastoma. Here, we report 
a case of a 69-year-old woman with early-stage glioblastoma treated by 
microsurgical resection and chemoradiotherapy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
revealed a small high-intensity lesion in the right temporal lobe on T2-weighted 
imaging. Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI revealed ring enhancement. On 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, the lesion demonstrated increased choline and 
reduced N-acetyl-aspartate levels compared with the normal brain. Positron 
emission tomography with 11C-methionine (MET) revealed 11C-methionine uptake in 
the lesion. Microsurgical resection was performed, and glioblastoma was 
pathologically diagnosed. The patient was treated with local radiotherapy and 
temozolomide chemotherapy postoperatively. Eight years postoperatively, the 
patient is surviving without tumor recurrence, but progressive cognitive 
impairment developed 6 years' postoperatively. Aggressive treatment of 
early-stage glioblastoma may improve its extremely poor prognosis. Conversely, 
cognitive impairment may become a significant medical and social problem when 
effective therapies for glioblastoma are developed.

DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_18_19
PMCID: PMC6516039
PMID: 31143291

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.