1. Materials (Basel). 2019 May 30;12(11):1753. doi: 10.3390/ma12111753.

Micro-Scale Surface Patterning of Titanium Dental Implants by Anodization in the 
Presence of Modifying Salts.

Marenzi G(1), Spagnuolo G(2)(3), Sammartino JC(4), Gasparro R(5), Rebaudi A(6), 
Salerno M(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. 
gaetano.marenzi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. 
gianrico.spagnuolo@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Dentistry, I. M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, 
119146 Moscow, Russia. gianrico.spagnuolo@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University of 
Pavia, Via Ferrata 1, 27100 Pavia, Italy. jose.sammartino@iusspavia.it.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences, 
University of Naples "Federico II", Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. 
roberta.gasparro@unina.it.
(6)Rebaudi Dental Office, Piazza della Vittoria 8, 16121 Genova, Italy. 
alberto.rebaudi@gmail.com.
(7)Materials Characterization Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via 
Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy. marco.salerno@iit.it.

The bone-implant interface influences peri-implant bone healing and 
osseointegration. Among various nano-engineering techniques used for titanium 
surface modification, anodization is a simple, high-throughput and low-cost 
process, resulting in a nanoporous oxide coating which can promote 
osseointegration and impart antimicrobial and immunomodulatory properties. We 
anodized rounded tip dental implants of commercial grade titanium in aqueous 
phosphoric acid modified with calcium and potassium acetate, and characterized 
the resulting surface morphology and composition with scanning electron 
microscopy and energy dispersive spectrometry. The appearance of nanopores on 
these implants confirmed successful nanoscale morphology modification. 
Additionally, the metal cations of the used salts were incorporated into the 
porous coating together with phosphate, which can be convenient for 
osseointegration. The proposed method for surface nanostructuring of titanium 
alloy could allow for fabrication of dental implants with improved 
biocompatibility in the next stage of research.

DOI: 10.3390/ma12111753
PMCID: PMC6600742
PMID: 31151141

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.