1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Jun 4;15(6):e1007817. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007817. 
eCollection 2019 Jun.

Schistosoma japonicum extracellular vesicle miRNA cargo regulates host 
macrophage functions facilitating parasitism.

Liu J(1), Zhu L(1), Wang J(2), Qiu L(3), Chen Y(1), Davis RE(2), Cheng G(1).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Key Laboratory of Animal Parasitology of Ministry of Agriculture, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, RNA Bioscience 
Initiative, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, United 
States of America.
(3)Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.

Schistosome infection persists for decades. Parasites are in close contact with 
host peripheral blood immune cells, yet little is known about the regulatory 
interactions between parasites and these immune cells. Here, we report that 
extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from Schistosoma japonicum are taken up 
primarily by macrophages and other host peripheral blood immune cells and their 
miRNA cargo transferred into recipient cells. Uptake of S. japonicum EV miR-125b 
and bantam miRNAs into host cells increased macrophage proliferation and TNF-α 
production by regulating the corresponding targets including Pros1, Fam212b, and 
Clmp. Mice infected with S. japonicum exhibit an increased population of 
monocytes and elevated levels of TNF-α. Reduction of host monocytes and TNF-α 
level in S. japonicum infected mice led to a significant reduction in worm and 
egg burden and pathology. Overall, we demonstrate that S. japonicum EV miRNAs 
can regulate host macrophages illustrating parasite modulation of the host 
immune response to facilitate parasite survival. Our findings provide valuable 
insights into the schistosome-host interaction which may help to develop novel 
intervention strategies against schistosomiasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007817
PMCID: PMC6548406
PMID: 31163079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.