1. Genes Dev. 2019 Jun 1;33(11-12):591-609. doi: 10.1101/gad.324301.119.

Glioblastoma stem cells: lessons from the tumor hierarchy in a lethal cancer.

Gimple RC(1)(2), Bhargava S(1), Dixit D(1), Rich JN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California at San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Glioblastoma ranks among the most lethal of all human cancers. Glioblastomas 
display striking cellular heterogeneity, with stem-like glioblastoma stem cells 
(GSCs) at the apex. Although the original identification of GSCs dates back more 
than a decade, the purification and characterization of GSCs remains 
challenging. Despite these challenges, the evidence that GSCs play important 
roles in tumor growth and response to therapy has grown. Like normal stem cells, 
GSCs are functionally defined and distinguished from their differentiated tumor 
progeny at core transcriptional, epigenetic, and metabolic regulatory levels, 
suggesting that no single therapeutic modality will be universally effective 
against a heterogenous GSC population. Glioblastomas induce a systemic 
immunosuppression with mixed responses to oncoimmunologic modalities, suggesting 
the potential for augmentation of response with a deeper consideration of GSCs. 
Unfortunately, the GSC literature has been complicated by frequent use of 
inferior cell lines and a lack of proper functional analyses. Collectively, 
glioblastoma offers a reliable cancer to study cancer stem cells to better model 
the human disease and inform improved biologic understanding and design of novel 
therapeutics.

Â© 2019 Gimple et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.324301.119
PMCID: PMC6546059
PMID: 31160393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]