1. PLoS One. 2019 Jun 4;14(6):e0217925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217925. 
eCollection 2019.

Low extracellular magnesium does not impair glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion.

Gommers LMM(1)(2), Hill TG(2), Ashcroft FM(2), de Baaij JHF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

There is an increasing amount of clinical evidence that hypomagnesemia (serum 
Mg2+ levels < 0.7 mmol/l) contributes to type 2 diabetes mellitus pathogenesis. 
Amongst other hypotheses, it has been suggested that Mg2+ deficiency affects 
insulin secretion. The aim of this study was, therefore, to investigate the 
acute effects of extracellular Mg2+ on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in 
primary mouse islets of Langerhans and the rat insulinoma INS-1 cell line. Here 
we show that acute lowering of extracellular Mg2+ concentrations from 1.0 mM to 
0.5 mM did not affect glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in islets or in 
insulin-secreting INS-1 cells. The expression of key genes in the insulin 
secretory pathway (e.g. Gck, Abcc8) was also unchanged in both experimental 
models. Knockdown of the most abundant Mg2+ channel Trpm7 by siRNAs in INS-1 
cells resulted in a 3-fold increase in insulin secretion at stimulatory glucose 
conditions compared to mock-transfected cells. Our data suggest that insulin 
secretion is not affected by acute lowering of extracellular Mg2+ 
concentrations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0217925
PMCID: PMC6548430
PMID: 31163064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.