1. Chembiochem. 2019 Nov 18;20(22):2834-2840. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201900300. Epub 
2019 Sep 20.

Impact of Substitution Registry on the Receptor-Activation Profiles of 
Backbone-Modified Glucagon-like Peptide-1 Analogues.

Cary BP(1), Hager MV(1), Gellman SH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 53706, 
USA.

Family B G protein-coupled receptors play important physiological roles and 
possess large extracellular domains (ECDs) that aid in binding the long 
polypeptide hormones that are their natural agonists. We have previously shown 
that agonist analogues in which subsets of native α-amino acid residues are 
replaced with β-amino acid residues can retain activity while avoiding 
proteolytic degradation. This study focuses on eight new α/β analogues of 
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) that each contain five α-to-β replacements in 
the C-terminal half of the peptide. This portion of GLP-1 is known to adopt an 
α-helical conformation and contact the ECD. All four registries of the αααβ 
backbone pattern were evaluated; previous work has shown that the αααβ pattern 
supports adoption of an α-helix-like conformation. Two α-to-β replacement 
formats were employed, one involving β3 homologues of the native residues 
replaced and the other involving a cyclic β residue. GLP-1R response was 
characterized in terms of stimulation of cAMP production and β-arrestin 
recruitment. Some of the backbone-modified GLP-1 analogues display biased 
agonism of the GLP-1R. This study helps to establish the scope of the α→β 
backbone modification strategy.

© 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201900300
PMCID: PMC6861653
PMID: 31172641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest S.H.G. is a cofounder of 
Longevity Biotech, Inc., which is pursuing biomedical applications for 
α/β-peptides.