1. Biomed Res Int. 2019 Apr 23;2019:3238719. doi: 10.1155/2019/3238719.
eCollection  2019.

N-Methyl-N-Nitrosourea-Induced Photoreceptor Degeneration Is Inhibited by 
Nicotinamide via the Blockade of Upstream Events before the Phosphorylation of 
Signalling Proteins.

Sugano E(1), Tabata K(1), Takezawa T(1), Shiraiwa R(1), Muraoka H(2), Metoki 
T(3), Kudo A(3), Iwama Y(1), Nakazawa M(3), Tomita H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Visual Neuroscience, Graduate Course in Biological Sciences, 
Iwate University Division of Science and Engineering, 4-3-5 Ueda, Morioka, Iwate 
020-8551, Japan.
(2)Iwate University Division of Science and Engineering, 4-3-5 Ueda, Morioka, 
Iwate 020-8551, Japan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, 5 
Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8562, Japan.
(4)Clinical Research, Innovation and Education Center, Tohoku University 
Hospital, 1-1 Seiryo, Aoba, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8574, Japan.

N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU), a known carcinogen, is generally used in animal 
models to chemically induce photoreceptor degeneration. It has been reported 
that nicotinamide (NAM) exerts a protective effect on MNU-induced photoreceptor 
degeneration. We investigated the molecular mechanisms on MNU-induced 
photoreceptor degeneration. Intraperitoneal MNU injection (75 mg/kg) in rats 
induced selective photoreceptor degeneration in 7 days. NAM administration 
completely inhibited photoreceptor degeneration. Photoreceptor layer abnormality 
was observed within 6 hours after MNU injection, whereas it was restored in the 
NAM-treated retina, as detected by optical coherence tomography. One day 
following MNU administration, phosphorylation of the cell death-associated 
signalling proteins c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (p38) increased, while the apoptosis-related proteins, 
full-length poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and apoptosis-inducing factor 
(AIF), were depleted. These changes were not observed in the NAM-treated 
retinas. Cell survival signalling, such as extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK), Akt, and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation, 
increased in the MNU- but not in the NAM-treated rat retinas. Increased 
phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) levels were observed within 6 hours after MNU 
administration, suggestive of cell survival signalling activation. This did not 
occur in NAM-treated retinas. These results indicate that NAM regulates upstream 
cellular events prior to the activation of cell death-related signalling events, 
such as JNK and p38 phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/3238719
PMCID: PMC6507250
PMID: 31179317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]