1. Thromb Res. 2019 Aug;180:32-36. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2019.05.021. Epub 2019
 Jun 3.

Influence of genetic polymorphisms in DICER and XPO5 genes on the risk of 
coronary artery disease and circulating levels of vascular miRNAs.

Borghini A(1), Pulignani S(2), Mercuri A(2), Vecoli C(2), Turchi S(2), 
Carpeggiani C(2), Andreassi MG(2).

Author information:
(1)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: 
aborghini@ifc.cnr.it.
(2)CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in microRNA (miRNA) 
machinery genes may affect the regulatory capacity of miRNAs by impacting their 
biogenesis. The aim of the study was to analyze the association between SNPs in 
two key genes (DICER rs1057035T>C and XPO5 rs11077A>C) and coronary artery 
disease (CAD) risk as well as to examine their effects on circulating levels of 
vascular miRNAs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Within the Italian GENOCOR cohort, we studied a cohort of 
557 patients (502 males, 57 ± 9 years) with angiographically documented CAD. A 
total of 443 healthy controls (262 males, 56 ± 12 years) was also enrolled. 
Genotyping was determined by using a TaqMan®SNP genotyping assay. Analysis of 
miR-132 and miR-140-3p was assessed in a subset of 70 CAD patients by using 
qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: There were statistically significant differences between CAD patients 
and healthy controls in the distribution of both DICER and XPO5 genotypes 
(p = 0.03 and p = 0.02, respectively). Multivariate analysis showed a 
significantly decreased risk of CAD by 50% in patients with DICER rs105703CC 
genotype as compared to TC heterozygote and TT homozygote patients 
(ORadjusted = 0.50; CI: 0.30-0.83, p = 0.007). In a recessive model, the XPO5 
rs11077CC genotype was associated with a 32% reduced risk of CAD 
(ORadjusted = 0.68; CI: 0.30-0.99 p = 0.047). XPO5 rs11077CC genotype was 
significantly associated with higher levels of both miRNA-132 (p = 0.04) and 
miRNA-140-3p (p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic polymorphisms in DICER and XPO5 genes are associated with a 
decreased risk of CAD, probably by impacting expression levels of vascular and 
cardiac-specific miRNAs. Further studies are needed to better elucidate the 
biological relevance of both variants in CAD development.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2019.05.021
PMID: 31185329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]