1. Mod Pathol. 2019 Nov;32(11):1657-1665. doi: 10.1038/s41379-019-0284-y. Epub
2019  Jun 12.

High frequency of GNA14, GNAQ, and GNA11 mutations in cherry hemangioma: a 
histopathological and molecular study of 85 cases indicating GNA14 as the most 
commonly mutated gene in vascular neoplasms.

Liau JY(1)(2), Lee JC(3)(4), Tsai JH(3)(4), Chen CC(4), Chung YC(4), Wang YH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. 019188@ntuh.gov.tw.
(2)Graduate Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. 019188@ntuh.gov.tw.
(3)Department of Pathology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Cherry hemangioma is the most common hemangioma in adult life. Neoplastic and 
non-neoplastic theories had both been proposed for its pathogenesis, but its 
nature is still poorly understood. We noted a significant subset of anastomosing 
hemangiomas and congenital hemangiomas harbored a population of small 
capillaries surrounded by a perivascular hyaline layer, reminiscent of the 
vessels seen in cherry hemangioma. Both anastomosing hemangioma and congenital 
hemangioma harbor recurrent mutations in exon 5 of GNAQ and its paralogues. In 
this study, we analyzed 68 cherry hemangiomas and 17 cherry hemangioma-like 
hemangiomas exhibiting additional non-classical features including markedly 
dilated, cavernous vessels, and/or a deep component extending to the deep 
dermis. By Sanger sequencing, GNAQ, GNA11, and GNA14 exon 5 mutations were 
identified in 12, 4, and 32 cherry hemangiomas, respectively, and 5, 3, and 3 
cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas, respectively. MassARRAY analysis detected 
mutations (including exon 2 GNAQG48V mutations) in additional 8 cherry 
hemangiomas and 3 cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas. Overall, the cherry 
hemangiomas and cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas had equal GNA mutation rates 
(82%), and GNA14 and GNAQ mutations were present in approximately half of cherry 
hemangiomas and cherry hemangioma-like hemangiomas, respectively. All mutations 
were mutually exclusive. KRASG12V mutation was also detected in one cherry 
hemangioma-like hemangioma without GNA mutations. In summary, our study 
demonstrated recurrent GNA14/GNAQ/GNA11 mutations were present in the majority 
of this very common hemangioma and established its neoplastic nature. Our 
results also expanded the morphological spectrum of GNA-mutated hemangiomas to 
include tumors composed of cavernous-like vessels and indicated GNA14 was the 
most commonly mutated gene in vascular tumors.

DOI: 10.1038/s41379-019-0284-y
PMID: 31189994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]