1. IUBMB Life. 2019 Aug;71(8):1088-1098. doi: 10.1002/iub.2094. Epub 2019 Jun 13.

Class I and II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase tRNA groove discrimination created the 
first synthetase-tRNA cognate pairs and was therefore essential to the origin of 
genetic coding.

Carter CW Jr(1), Wills PR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Physics and Te Ao Marama Centre for Fundamental Inquiry, 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

The genetic code likely arose when a bidirectional gene replicating as a 
quasi-species began to produce ancestral aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) 
capable of distinguishing between two distinct sets of amino acids. The 
synthetase class division therefore necessarily implies a mechanism by which the 
two ancestral synthetases could also discriminate between two different kinds of 
tRNA substrates. We used regression methods to uncover the possible patterns of 
base sequences capable of such discrimination and find that they appear to be 
related to thermodynamic differences in the relative stabilities of a hairpin 
necessary for recognition of tRNA substrates by Class I aaRS. The thermodynamic 
differences appear to be exploited by secondary structural differences between 
models for the ancestral aaRS called synthetase Urzymes and reinforced by 
packing of aromatic amino acid side chains against the nonpolar face of the 
ribose of A76 if and only if the tRNA CCA sequence forms a hairpin. The patterns 
of bases 1, 2, and 73 and stabilization of the hairpin by structural 
complementarity with Class I, but not Class II, aaRS Urzymes appear to be 
necessary and sufficient to have enabled the generation of the first two 
aaRS-tRNA cognate pairs, and the launch of a rudimentary binary genetic coding 
related recognizably to contemporary cognate pairs. As a consequence, it seems 
likely that nonrandom aminoacylation of tRNAs preceded the advent of the tRNA 
anticodon stem-loop. Consistent with this suggestion, coding rules in the 
acceptor-stem bases also reveal a palimpsest of the codon-anticodon interaction, 
as previously proposed. © 2019 IUBMB Life, 2019 © 2019 IUBMB Life, 
71(8):1088-1098, 2019.

© 2019 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.2094
PMCID: PMC6642019
PMID: 31190358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no known conflicts of interest.