1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jun 15;20(12):2932. doi: 10.3390/ijms20122932.

Migraine: Experimental Models and Novel Therapeutic Approaches.

Tardiolo G(1), Bramanti P(2), Mazzon E(3).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino Pulejo", 98124 Messina, Italy. 
giuseppe.tardiolo@irccsme.it.
(2)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino Pulejo", 98124 Messina, Italy. 
placido.bramanti@irccsme.it.
(3)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino Pulejo", 98124 Messina, Italy. 
emanuela.mazzon@irccsme.it.

Migraine is a disorder affecting an increasing number of subjects. Currently, 
this disorder is not entirely understood, and limited therapeutic solutions are 
available. Migraine manifests as a debilitating headache associated with an 
altered sensory perception that may compromise the quality of life. Animal 
models have been developed using chemical, physical or genetic modifications, to 
evoke migraine-like hallmarks for the identification of novel molecules for the 
treatment of migraine. In this context, experimental models based on the use of 
chemicals as nitroglycerin or inflammatory soup were extensively used to mimic 
the acute state and the chronicity of the disorder. This manuscript is aimed to 
provide an overview of murine models used to investigate migraine 
pathophysiology. Pharmacological targets as 5-HT and calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) receptors were evaluated for their relevance in the development 
of migraine therapeutics. Drug delivery systems using nanoparticles may be 
helpful for the enhancement of the brain targeting and bioavailability of 
anti-migraine drugs as triptans. In conclusion, the progresses in migraine 
management have been reached with the development of emerging agonists of 5-HT 
receptors and novel antagonists of CGRP receptors. The nanoformulations may 
represent a future perspective in which already known anti-migraine drugs showed 
to better exert their therapeutic effects.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20122932
PMCID: PMC6628212
PMID: 31208068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.