1. Biosci Rep. 2019 Jun 28;39(6):BSR20191298. doi: 10.1042/BSR20191298. Print
2019  Jun 28.

ATM rs189037 significantly increases the risk of cancer in non-smokers rather 
than smokers: an updated meta-analysis.

He X(1), Wang P(2), Li Y(1), Shen N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
(2)Institute and Department of Infectious Disease, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China 
shenna@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

Rs189037 (G>A) is an important functional variant with ataxia telangiectasia 
mutated (ATM) gene, which might affect ATM's expression involvement in several 
human cancers. Increasing evidence reveals that smoking-related cancers have 
distinct molecular characteristics from non-smoking cancers. Until now, the role 
of ATM rs189037 in cancer risk stratified by smoking status still remains 
unclear. To evaluate the association between ATM rs189037 and cancer risk based 
on smoking status, we performed this meta-analysis by a comprehensive literature 
search via databases of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and CNKI, updated till 
January 2019. Multivariate-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were extracted from eligible studies if available, to assess the 
relationship strengths. A total of seven eligible studies were included, 
comprising 4294 cancer patients (smokers: 1744 [40.6%]) and 4259 controls 
(smokers: 1418 [33.3%]). Results indicated a significant association of ATM 
rs189037 with cancer risk. In non-smokers, compared with GG genotype, AA 
genotype increased a 1.40-fold risk of overall cancer (OR = 1.40, 95% CI = 
1.15-1.70, Pheterogeneity=0.433, I2 = 0.0%). Subgroup analysis in lung cancer 
(LC) also exhibited a significant result (OR = 1.41, 95% CI = 1.15-1.73, 
Pheterogeneity=0.306, I2 = 17.0%) only in non-smokers. However, the association 
was not observed in smokers, no matter for overall cancer or for LC. Our 
findings highlight that ATM rs189037 significantly increases cancer 
susceptibility in non-smokers, rather than in smokers. The association is 
prominent in LC.

Â© 2019 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20191298
PMCID: PMC6597848
PMID: 31201228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.