1. Andrologia. 2019 Oct;51(9):e13344. doi: 10.1111/and.13344. Epub 2019 Jun 17.

Effect of low androgen status on the expression of adenosine A(2A) and A(2B) 
receptors in rat penile corpus cavernosum.

Kong X(1), Jiang J(2), Cheng B(1), Jiang R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Nephropathy Clinical Medical Research Center of 
Sichuan Province, Affiliated Hospital, Southwest medical University, Luzhou, 
China.
(2)Department of Thyroid Surgery, Affiliated Hospital, Southwest Medical 
University, Luzhou, China.

To investigate whether low androgen status affects erectile function by 
regulating the expression of adenosine A2A and A2B receptors in rat penile 
corpus cavernosum. Thirty-six 8-week-old male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly 
divided into six groups: sham-operated group (4w-sham, 8w-sham), castration 
group (4w-cast, 8w-cast) and androgen replacement group (4w-cast+T, 8w-cast+T). 
The rats in the androgen replacement groups were subcutaneously injected with 
testosterone propionate (3 mg/kg) every other day after castration. The maximum 
intracavernous pressure/mean arterial pressure (ICPmax/MAP), the expression of 
A2A , A2B , AKT and eNOS and the concentrations of cAMP and cGMP in the corpus 
cavernosum were detected at the 4th and 8th weeks after the operation. The serum 
testosterone level and the ratio of ICPmax/MAP decreased significantly in the 
castration group as compared to other groups (p < 0.01). There was no 
significant difference in the expression of A2A receptor among groups, while the 
expression of A2B , AKT and eNOS and the concentrations of cAMP and cGMP in the 
castration group were significantly lower than in other groups (p < 0.01). Low 
androgen status inhibits the AKT/eNOS/cGMP signalling pathways and the 
production of cAMP in the corpus cavernosum of castrated rats by down-regulating 
the expression of A2B receptor, and results in decreased of ICPmax/MAP.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/and.13344
PMID: 31206753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]