1. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2019 Oct 1;282:113204. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2019.06.008. 
Epub 2019 Jun 12.

SIFamide peptides modulate cardiac activity differently in two species of Cancer 
crab.

Dickinson PS(1), Samuel HM(2), Stemmler EA(3), Christie AE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Bowdoin College, 6500 College Station, Brunswick, ME 
04011, USA. Electronic address: pdickins@bowdoin.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, Bowdoin College, 6500 College Station, Brunswick, ME 
04011, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Bowdoin College, 6600 College Station, Brunswick, ME 
04011, USA.
(4)Békésy Laboratory of Neurobiology, Pacific Biosciences Research Center, 
School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 
1993 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.

The SIFamides are a broadly conserved arthropod peptide family characterized by 
the C-terminal motif -SIFamide. In decapod crustaceans, two isoforms of SIFamide 
are known, GYRKPPFNGSIFamide (Gly1-SIFamide), which is nearly ubiquitously 
conserved in the order, and VYRKPPFNGSIFamide (Val1-SIFamide), known only from 
members of the astacidean genus Homarus. While much work has focused on the 
identification of SIFamide isoforms in decapods, there are few direct 
demonstrations of physiological function for members of the peptide family in 
this taxon. Here, we assessed the effects of Gly1- and Val1-SIFamide on the 
cardiac neuromuscular system of two closely related species of Cancer crab, 
Cancer borealis and Cancer irroratus. In each species, both peptides were 
cardioactive, with identical, dose-dependent effects elicited by both isoforms 
in a given species. Threshold concentrations for bioactivity are in the range 
typically associated with hormonal delivery, i.e., 10-9 to 10-8 M. 
Interestingly, and quite surprisingly, while the predicted effects of SIFamide 
on cardiac output are similar in both C. borealis and C. irroratus, frequency 
effects predominate in C. borealis, while amplitude effects predominate in C. 
irroratus. These findings suggest that, while SIFamide is likely to increase 
cardiac output in both crabs, the mechanism through which this is achieved is 
different in the two species. Immunohistochemical/mass spectrometric data 
suggest that SIFamide is delivered to the heart hormonally rather than locally, 
with the source of hormonal release being midgut epithelial endocrine cells in 
both Cancer species. If so, midgut-derived SIFamide may function as a regulator 
of cardiac output during the process of digestion.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2019.06.008
PMCID: PMC6719312
PMID: 31201801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]