1. J Cancer. 2019 Apr 20;10(7):1764-1771. doi: 10.7150/jca.26481. eCollection
2019.

Molecular Mechanisms and Countermeasures of Immunotherapy Resistance in 
Malignant Tumor.

Jiang X(1), Li L(1), Li Y(1)(2), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, 100050, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan,030000, China.

Tumor immunotherapy inhibits the proliferation and invasion of tumor cells by 
inducing or enhancing anti-tumor immune responses in active or passive ways. It 
is the fourth therapeutic method with efficiency and safety in addition to 
surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. At present, anti-tumor immune related 
clinical trials have made promising achievements in prolonging progression free 
survival and overall survival, therefore, FDA approved a variety of immune 
checkpoint blockers (ICBs) such as nivolumab, pembrolizumab, ipilimumab. 
However, primary or acquired resistance results in massive perplexity to 
oncologist and patients. In order to bring further clinical benefit to tumor 
patients, study on mechanisms of immunotherapy resistance is extremely urgent. 
This review summarizes related mechanisms of tumor immunotherapy resistance, 
including MITF suppression, Ezh2 upregulation, TIM-3 upregulation, 
microRNA-driven deregulation of cytokine expression and et al. Genetic mutations 
such as PTEN loss, JAK1/2 loss-of-function mutations and Cbl-b deficiency are 
also involved. Moreover, we have discussed feasible countermeasures, for 
instance, combining ICBs with PRRs agonists, ARNAX, CpG oligonucleotide, 
oncolytic peptide LTX-315 and indoleamine 2, 3-dioxygenase inhibitors, 
respectively. Other methods include combined ICBs with radiotherapy, combined 
ICBs with blockade of PI3K-AKT, TIM-3 pathway; blockade of FcÎ³ receptors before 
anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies administration and modulation of the gut 
microbiome, et al. Mechanisms and countermeasures of immunotherapy resistance 
still requires further exploration, in expectation to provide novel ideals and 
basis for tolerant patients.

DOI: 10.7150/jca.26481
PMCID: PMC6548000
PMID: 31205532

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.