1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019 May 12;2019:2084805. doi: 10.1155/2019/2084805. 
eCollection 2019.

Intramelanocytic Acidification Plays a Role in the Antimelanogenic and 
Antioxidative Properties of Vitamin C and Its Derivatives.

Miao F(1), Su MY(1), Jiang S(1), Luo LF(1), Shi Y(1), Lei TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, 
China.

Although vitamin C (VC, L-ascorbic acid) has been widely used as a skin 
lightening agent for a long time, the mechanism by which it inhibits 
melanogenesis remains poorly understood. It is well-documented that the 
intramelanocytic pH is an important factor in regulating tyrosinase function and 
melanosome maturation. The activity of tyrosinase, the rate-limiting enzyme 
required for melanin synthesis, is generally minimal in an acidic environment. 
Given that VC is an acidic compound, we might speculate that the intracellular 
acidification of melanocytes induced by VC likely reduces melanin content 
through the suppression of tyrosinase activity. The results of this study reveal 
that treatment of melanocytes with VC or its derivatives, magnesium ascorbyl 
phosphate (MAP) and 3-O-ethyl-L-ascorbic acid (AAE), resulted in significant 
decreases in the tyrosinase activity and melanin content and in the levels of 
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), indicating that VC and its 
derivatives possess antimelanogenic and antioxidative activities. Western 
blotting analysis indicated that VC, MAP, and AAE exert their antimelanogenic 
activity by inhibiting the tyrosinase activity rather than by downregulating the 
expression of melanogenic proteins such as tyrosinase, premelanosome protein 17 
(Pmel17) and microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF). Further, we 
found that the reduced tyrosinase activity of melanocytes treated with VC or its 
derivatives could be reactivated following intracellular neutralization induced 
by ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) or concanamycin A (Con A). Finally, we examined the 
expression of sodium-dependent VC transporter-2 (SVCT-2) using western blotting 
and qPCR, which revealed that there was a significant increase in the expression 
of SVCT-2 in melanocytes following treatment with VC. VC-mediated intracellular 
acidification was neutralized by phloretin (a putative SVCT-2 inhibitor) in a 
dose-dependent manner. Taken together, these data show that VC and its 
derivatives suppress tyrosinase activity through cytoplasmic acidification that 
potentially results from enhanced VC transmembrane transport via the VC 
transporter SVCT-2.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/2084805
PMCID: PMC6535878
PMID: 31214276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]