1. Int J Biol Sci. 2019 May 11;15(6):1276-1286. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.32332. 
eCollection 2019.

A CRISPR Interference of CBP and p300 Selectively Induced Synthetic Lethality in 
Bladder Cancer Cells In Vitro.

Li J(1), Huang C(1)(2), Xiong T(1), Zhuang C(1), Zhuang C(1), Li Y(1)(2), Ye 
J(1), Gui Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and 
Genetics, Institute of Urology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen-Peking University-the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 
Medical Center, Shenzhen 518000, People's Republic of China.
(2)Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230000, Anhui Province, People's Republic of 
China.

Erratum in
    Int J Biol Sci. 2024 Jan 21;20(3):1088-1089. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.91212.

The transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 are 
adenoviral E1A-binding proteins involved in various cellular processes, 
including embryonic development, homeostasis, cell differentiation and 
transcription activation. Previous study suggested that synthetic lethality 
between CBP and p300 inhibition in lung and hematopoietic cancers. However, the 
underlying mechanism of CBP and p300 paralog in bladder cancer remains unknown. 
In this study, we discovered that combined CBP and p300 inhibition impaired cell 
proliferation and induced apoptosis of bladder cancer cells and normal bladder 
urothelial cell via decreasing c-Myc expression. Then, we employed the 
dCas9-KRAB system, hTERT promoter and hUPII promoter to construct an CRISPR 
interference system which could specifically repress CBP and p300 expression and 
cause lethality in bladder cancer cells in vitro. The CRISPR interference system 
we constructed could specifically inhibit the progression of bladder cancer, 
providing a novel strategy to fight against bladder cancer.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.32332
PMCID: PMC6567804
PMID: 31223286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.