1. mBio. 2019 Jun 25;10(3):e00300-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00300-19.

Unique, Diverged, and Conserved Mitochondrial Functions Influencing Candida 
albicans Respiration.

Sun N(1), Parrish RS(1), Calderone RA(1), Fonzi WA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University, Washington, 
DC, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Georgetown University, Washington, 
DC, USA fonziw@georgetown.edu.

Comment in
    mBio. 2019 Oct 1;10(5):e02258-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02258-19.

Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen of major clinical concern. 
The virulence of this pathogen is intimately intertwined with its metabolism. 
Mitochondria, which have a central metabolic role, have undergone many 
lineage-specific adaptations in association with their eukaryotic host. A screen 
for lineage-specific genes identified seven such genes specific to the CTG clade 
of fungi, of which C. albicans is a member. Each is required for respiratory 
growth and is integral to expression of complex I, III, or IV of the electron 
transport chain. Two genes, NUO3 and NUO4, encode supernumerary subunits of 
complex I, whereas NUE1 and NUE2 have nonstructural roles in expression of 
complex I. Similarly, the other three genes have nonstructural roles in 
expression of complex III (QCE1) or complex IV (COE1 and COE2). In addition to 
these novel additions, an alternative functional assignment was found for the 
mitochondrial protein encoded by MNE1MNE1 was required for complex I expression 
in C. albicans, whereas the distantly related Saccharomyces cerevisiae ortholog 
participates in expression of complex III. Phenotypic analysis of deletion 
mutants showed that fermentative metabolism is unable to support optimal growth 
rates or yields of C. albicans However, yeast-hypha morphogenesis, an important 
virulence attribute, did not require respiratory metabolism under hypoxic 
conditions. The inability to respire also resulted in hypersensitivity to the 
antifungal fluconazole and in attenuated virulence in a Galleria mellonella 
infection model. The results show that lineage-specific adaptations have 
occurred in C. albicans mitochondria and highlight the significance of 
respiratory metabolism in the pathobiology of C. albicansIMPORTANCECandida 
albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen of major clinical concern. The 
virulence of this pathogen is intimately intertwined with its metabolic 
behavior, and mitochondria have a central role in that metabolism. Mitochondria 
have undergone many evolutionary changes, which include lineage-specific 
adaptations in association with their eukaryotic host. Seven lineage-specific 
genes required for electron transport chain function were identified in the CTG 
clade of fungi, of which C. albicans is a member. Additionally, examination of 
several highly diverged orthologs encoding mitochondrial proteins demonstrated 
functional reassignment for one of these. Deficits imparted by deletion of these 
genes revealed the critical role of respiration in virulence attributes of the 
fungus and highlight important evolutionary adaptations in C. albicans 
metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2019 Sun et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00300-19
PMCID: PMC6593398
PMID: 31239372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]