1. Surg Case Rep. 2019 Jun 24;5(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s40792-019-0661-2.

A case of biliary adenofibroma of the liver with malignant transformation: a 
morphomolecular case report and review of the literature.

Sturm AK(1), Welsch T(2), Meissner C(3), Aust DE(4), Baretton G(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany. 
anne-kathrin.sturm@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Department of Visceral, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital 
Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Radiology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, 
Fetscherstraße 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Biliary adenofibroma is an exceptionally rare benign liver tumor 
with the potential for malignant transformation. In literature, only 21 cases 
have been described.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: In a healthy 63-year-old woman, a partly solid, partly 
cystic mass in the left lobe of the liver during a routine ultrasound 
examination was found. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a 
6.3 × 5.0-cm multilobulated cystic, partly hypervascularized mass in the liver 
segment IVa, with extension into segments II and IVb. There was no evidence of 
lymph node or distant metastases. Extirpation of the tumor was indicated by the 
multidisciplinary tumorboard. Microscopic examination showed a biphasic composed 
tumor with tubules embedded in fibrous stroma. In addition, there were also 
areas with pseudopapillary projections, as well as parts with focal 
cribriform-like growth pattern, which have been indicated as a possible sign of 
malignant transformation. Additionally, we found two different polymorphisms in 
the encoded TP53 und KIT in both distinct morphology tumor areas by molecular 
analysis, which ensured a tumor in malignant transformation. The patient has 
been alive for 24 months after R0 resection without tumor recurrence. Further 
investigation of more cases of this rare entity is necessary to proof molecular 
genesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a rare case of a biliary adenofibroma with transition to 
an intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma and present a brief literature 
review.

DOI: 10.1186/s40792-019-0661-2
PMCID: PMC6591338
PMID: 31236706

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.