1. mBio. 2019 Jun 25;10(3):e00188-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00188-19.

HIV Silencing and Inducibility Are Heterogeneous and Are Affected by Factors 
Intrinsic to the Virus.

Norton NJ(#)(1), Mok HP(#)(2), Sharif F(1), Hirst JC(1), Lever AML(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
hpm22@cam.ac.uk amll1@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(3)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(#)Contributed equally

Transcriptionally silent HIV proviruses form the major obstacle to eradicating 
HIV. Many studies of HIV latency have focused on the cellular mechanisms that 
maintain silencing of proviral DNA. Here we show that viral sequence variation 
affecting replicative ability leads to variable rates of silencing and ability 
to reactivate. We studied naturally occurring and engineered polymorphisms in a 
recently identified exonic splice enhancer (ESEtat) that regulates tat mRNA 
splicing and constructed viruses with increased (strain M1), reduced (strain 
M2), or completely absent (strain ERK) binding of splicing factors essential for 
optimal production of tat mRNA resulting in a corresponding change in Tat 
activity. The mutations affected viral replication, with M1 having wild-type 
(WT) kinetics, M2 exhibiting reduced kinetics, and ERK showing completely 
abrogated replication. Using single-round infection with green fluorescent 
protein (GFP)-expressing viruses to study proviral gene expression, we observed 
progressively greater rates of silencing relating to the degree of ESEtat 
disruption, with the WT strain at 53%, strain M2 at 69%, and strain ERK at 94%. 
By stimulating infected cells with a latency reversal agent (phorbol myristate 
acetate [PMA], panobinostat, or JQ1), we observed that the dose required to 
achieve 50% of the maximum signal was lowest in the WT, intermediate in M2, and 
highest in ERK, indicating progressively higher thresholds for reactivation. 
These results suggest that the ability of silent proviruses to reactivate from 
latency is variable and that minor differences in the viral sequence can alter 
the proportion of silenced viruses as well as the threshold required to induce 
silenced viruses to reactivate and express.IMPORTANCE A reservoir of infected 
cells in which the HIV genome is transcriptionally silent is acknowledged to be 
the principal barrier to eradicating the virus from an infected person. A number 
of cellular processes are implicated in this silencing; however, the viral 
factors that may contribute remain underexplored. Here we examined mutations 
altering the correct splicing of HIV gene products as a model to study whether 
differences in viral sequence can affect either the proportion of viruses that 
are active or silent or their ability to reactivate. We found that some 
naturally occurring variations result in viruses that are silenced at a higher 
rate and require a proportionally increased stimulus for reactivation from 
latency. These data suggest that the silencing and reactivation behavior of HIV 
exists in a spectrum, influenced by factors intrinsic to the virus.

Copyright Â© 2019 Norton et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00188-19
PMCID: PMC6593397
PMID: 31239371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]