1. Rev Esp Quimioter. 2019 Aug;32(4):296-302. Epub 2019 Jun 21.

Effectiveness of 12 week ledipasvir/sofosbuvir and predictors of treatment 
failure in patients with hepatitis C.

Del Rio-Valencia JC(1), Asensi-Diez R, Tamayo-Bermejo R, Muñoz-Castillo I.

Author information:
(1)Juan Carlos del Rio-Valencia. Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga. 
Avenida de Carlos Haya s/n. CP.29010. Málaga. Spain. 
juancardelrio@telefonica.net.

OBJECTIVE: The efficacy of ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (LDV/SOF) have been 
demonstrated in randomized controlled trials, however,there is an unmet need for 
real-world effectiveness data. It is important to gather data regarding 
potential predictors of treatment failure with (LDV/SOF). Predictors of 
sustained virologic response (SVR) to all-oral HCV regimens can inform nuanced 
treatment decisions. The objectives of this study were to evaluate the 
effectiveness of LDV/SOF, SVR12 as main endpoint and SVR24 as second endpoint, 
and identify predictors of treatment failure.
METHODS: Retrospective and observational study carried out from April 2015 to 
January 2016. Inclusion criteria: patients with HCV infection treated with 
LDV/SOF for 12 weeks during study period. The patients that were treated during 
24 weeks were excluded as well as those treated with peg-interferon. Binary 
logistic regression was used to predict what variable was associated with 
treatment failure.
RESULTS: A total of 122 patients were analyzed achieving SVR12 91.80% (112/122) 
of them. The patients with HCV genotype (GT) 1a or GT1b or GT4 achieved SVR12. 
Only one pre-treated non-cirrhotic HCV GT1 patients relapsed to treatment. The 
lowest SVR12 were obtained for GT3, 43.75%, (7/16). Everybody that got SVR12 
achieved SVR24. None of the variables analyzed significantly influenced the 
SVR12, except GT (p=0.001). Almost all the relapses occurred in GT3.
CONCLUSIONS: LDV/SOF combination has been very effective to treat GT1 and GT4 
infected patients, however, has constituted a suboptimal therapeutic option for 
those patients infected with GT3, regardless of the rest of the variables 
analyzed.

INTRODUCCIÓN: La eficacia de ledipasvir/sofosbuvir (LDV/ SOF) se ha demostrado 
en ensayos clínicos, sin embargo, son necesarios más estudios sobre su eficacia 
en la práctica clínica. Además es importante estudiar los posibles factores 
predictivos de fracaso de tratamiento con LDV/SOF. Los factores predictivos de 
respuesta viral sostenida (RVS) a antivirales de acción directa pueden informar 
sobre decisiones de tratamiento. Los objetivos de este estudio fueron evaluar la 
efectividad de LDV/ SOF, RVS12 como variable principal y RVS24 como secundaria, 
e identificar los factores predictivos de fracaso del tratamiento.
MATERIAL Y MÉTODOS: Estudio retrospectivo y observacional realizado desde abril 
de 2015 a enero de 2016. Criterios de inclusión: pacientes con infección por VHC 
tratados con LDV/ SOF durante 12 semanas. Se excluyeron los pacientes tratados 
durante 24 semanas y los tratados con peg-interferón. Aplicamos el método 
estadístico denominado regresión logística binaria para predecir qué variable 
estaba relacionada con el fracaso del tratamiento.
RESULTADOS: Se analizaron 122 pacientes logrando el 91,80% (112/122) RVS12. Los 
pacientes infectados con genotipo (GT) 1a o GT1b o GT4 lograron RVS12. Solo un 
paciente, no cirrótico y previamente tratado, infectado con GT1 no alcanzó 
RVS12. Las tasas más bajas de RVS12 se obtuvieron para GT3, 43.75%, (7/16). 
Todos los pacientes que obtuvieron RVS12 lograron RVS24. Ninguna de las 
variables analizadas influyó significativamente en la RVS12, excepto GT 
(p=0.001). Casi todas las recaídas ocurrieron en GT3.
CONCLUSIONES: La combinación LDV/SOF ha sido muy efectiva para tratar a los 
pacientes infectados con GT1 y GT4, sin embargo, ha constituido una opción 
terapéutica subóptima para los infectados con GT3, independientemente del resto 
de las variables analizadas.

©The Author 2019. Published by Sociedad Española de Quimioterapia. This article 
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 
4.0 International (CC BY-NC 
4.0)(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

PMCID: PMC6719655
PMID: 31232572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have not conflict 
of interest.