1. Front Syst Neurosci. 2019 May 28;13:22. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2019.00022. 
eCollection 2019.

Unsupervised Temporal Contiguity Experience Does Not Break the Invariance of 
Orientation Selectivity Across Spatial Frequency.

Crijns E(1)(2), Kaliukhovich DA(1), Vankelecom L(1), Op de Beeck H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biological Psychology, Department of Brain and Cognition, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Leuven Brain Institute, Leuven, Belgium.

The images projected onto the retina can vary widely for a single object. 
Despite these transformations primates can quickly and reliably recognize 
objects. At the neural level, transformation tolerance in monkey inferotemporal 
cortex is affected by the temporal contiguity statistics of the visual input. 
Here we investigated whether temporal contiguity learning also influences the 
basic feature detectors in lower levels of the visual hierarchy, in particular 
the independent coding of orientation and spatial frequency (SF) in primary 
visual cortex. Eight male Long Evans rats were repeatedly exposed to a temporal 
transition between two gratings that changed in SF and had either the same 
(control SF) or a different (swap SF) orientation. Electrophysiological evidence 
showed that the responses of single neurons during this exposure were sensitive 
to the change in orientation. Nevertheless, the tolerance of orientation 
selectivity for changes in SF was unaffected by the temporal contiguity 
manipulation, as observed in 239 single neurons isolated pre-exposure and 234 
post-exposure. Temporal contiguity learning did not affect orientation 
selectivity in V1. The basic filter mechanisms that characterize V1 processing 
seem unaffected by temporal contiguity manipulations.

DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2019.00022
PMCID: PMC6558410
PMID: 31231196