1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2019 Sep;142:34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.06.033. 
Epub 2019 Jun 25.

Expression of the p24 silencing suppressor of Grapevine leafroll-associated 
virus 2 from Potato virus X or Barley stripe mosaic virus vector elicits 
hypersensitive responses in Nicotiana benthamiana.

Wang X(1), Luo C(1), Xu Y(2), Zhang C(1), Bao M(1), Dou J(1), Wang Q(3), Cheng 
Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pomology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, 
China; Key Laboratory of Viticulture and Enology, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Beijing, 100083, China.
(2)DeLaval Tianjin Company, Tianjin, 300308, China.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 
100193, China.
(4)Department of Pomology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, 
China; Key Laboratory of Viticulture and Enology, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Beijing, 100083, China. Electronic address: chengyuqin@cau.edu.cn.

The 24-kDa protein (p24) encoded by Grapevine leafroll-associated virus 2 
(GLRaV-2) is an RNA-silencing suppressor (RSS), but its effect on active viral 
infection is unclear. Using a Potato virus X (PVX)-based expression system, we 
demonstrated that p24 elicits lethal systemic necrosis in Nicotiana benthamiana, 
sharing typical characteristics of the hypersensitive response (HR), and that 
NbRAR1 (a cytoplasmic Zn2+-binding protein) is involved in the PVX-p24-mediated 
systemic necrosis. Moreover, expression of p24 from Barley stripe mosaic virus 
(BSMV) vector triggered local necrosis in infiltrated patches of N. benthamiana, 
likely inhibiting viral systemic spread. By deletion analysis, we demonstrated 
that amino acids (aa) 1 to 180, which are located in the region (aa 1-188) 
previously shown to be necessary for p24's RSS activity, is sufficient for p24 
to elicit systemic necrosis in the context of PVX infection. Using substitution 
mutants, we revealed that silencing-suppression-defective mutants R2A and W54A 
induce only a mild necrotic response; two mutants without self-interaction 
ability previously shown to lose or retain weak suppression function also 
displayed decreased pathogenicity: W149A without RSS activity elicited a mild 
necrotic response, whereas V162H/L169H/L170H which retains weak RSS activity was 
able to induce systemic necrosis, but with a 1- to 2-day delay. Taken together, 
p24 plays an important role in GLRaV-2 pathogenesis, triggering HR-like necrosis 
in N. benthamiana plants when expressed from PVX or BSMV vector; both the 
silencing suppression and self-interaction are crucial for p24's pathogenicity 
activity, and the region of p24 for determining systemic necrosis is mapped to 
aa 1-180.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2019.06.033
PMID: 31255907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]