1. Hastings Cent Rep. 2019 May;49 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S44-S52. doi:
10.1002/hast.1016.

Psychosocial Effects of Multigene Panel Testing in the Context of Cancer 
Genomics.

Hamilton JG, Robson ME.

In recent years, with both the development of next-generation sequencing 
approaches and the Supreme Court decision invalidating gene patents, declining 
costs have contributed to the emergence of a new model of hereditary cancer 
genetic testing. Multigene panel testing (or multiplex testing) involves using 
next-generation sequencing technology to determine the sequence of multiple 
cancer-susceptibility genes. In addition to high-penetrance 
cancer-susceptibility genes, multigene panels frequently include genes that are 
less robustly associated with cancer predisposition. Scientific understanding 
about associations between many specific moderate-penetrance gene variants and 
cancer risks is incomplete. The emergence of multigene panel tests has created 
unique challenges that may have meaningful psychosocial implications. Contrasted 
with the serial testing process, wherein patients consider the personal and 
clinical implications of each evaluated gene, with multigene panel testing, 
patients provide broad consent to whichever genes are included in a particular 
panel and then, after the test, receive in-depth genetic counseling to clarify 
the distinct implications of their specific results. Consequently, patients 
undergoing multigene panel testing may have a less nuanced understanding of the 
test and its implications, and they may have fewer opportunities to self-select 
against the receipt of particular types of genetic-risk information. Evidence is 
conflicting regarding the emotional effects of this testing.

Â© 2019 The Hastings Center.

DOI: 10.1002/hast.1016
PMCID: PMC7430497
PMID: 31268573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest.