1. Front Genet. 2019 Jun 19;10:581. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00581. eCollection 
2019.

SNP rs4937333 in the miRNA-5003-Binding Site of the ETS1 3'-UTR Decreases ETS1 
Expression.

Zhang R(1)(2), Pan B(1), Li Y(1), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical 
University, Kunming, China.
(2)Yunnan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Kunming, China.

Mutations in and reduced expression of the ETS1 gene may be associated with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Here, we report a replication study to 
investigate associations of eight ETS1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the 
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) with SLE and their regulation of ETS1 expression 
in a study population. We found that the rs4937333 T allele was associated with 
a significantly increased risk of SLE (odds ratio: 1.800, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.02-3.157, P = 0.040) and with dramatically reduced levels of ETS1 in 
B cells from SLE subjects. Functionally, the rs4937333 T allele alters the 
binding affinity between miR-5003 and its ETS1 3'-UTR target, thus enhancing 
suppression of ETS1 expression. Furthermore, immunoglobulin M-secreting 
plasmacytes were significantly reduced among B cells with the rs4937333 C allele 
versus the T allele according to FACS and ELISA. Additionally, miR-5003 
expression was higher in B cells than in T cells from SLE patients, and a 
negative correlation between miR-5003 and ETS1 was found, especially in B cells 
with the T allele. These findings suggest that the rs4937333 T allele is a risk 
factor for susceptibility to SLE in the studied population. The rs4937333 T 
allele may enhance the binding of miR-5003 to ETS1, which probably promotes the 
involvement of ETS1 in the differentiation of B cells into plasmacytes.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00581
PMCID: PMC6593064
PMID: 31275358