1. J Oncol. 2019 Jun 2;2019:8340926. doi: 10.1155/2019/8340926. eCollection 2019.

Anoikis Resistance as a Further Trait of Acidic-Adapted Melanoma Cells.

Peppicelli S(1), Ruzzolini J(1), Bianchini F(1), Andreucci E(1), Nediani C(1), 
Laurenzana A(1), Margheri F(1), Fibbi G(1), Calorini L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio," 
Section of Experimental Pathology and Oncology, Italy.
(2)Istituto Toscano Tumori and Center of Excellence for Research, Transfer, and 
High Education (DENOTHE), University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

Melanoma is characterized by a low extracellular pH, which contributes to the 
development of an aggressive phenotype characterized by several properties as 
the switch to an epithelial-to-mesenchymal program, the increase of apoptotic 
resistance, and the migratory ability together with the development of drug 
resistance. Here, we demonstrate that melanoma cells grown in low pH medium (pH 
6.7) for a short (24 hours) or long (at least 3 months) period equally express 
an anoikis resistance profile. Anoikis is a form of apoptosis prompted by loss 
of adhesion, particularly requested by aggressive cancer cells to metastasize. 
Anoikis resistance was ascertained in acidic melanoma cells either grown in 
agarose-coated plates or incubated in rocking conditions. Both analyses indicate 
that acidic cells were more able to survive in a nonadherent condition than 
cells grown in standard pH, an effect resulting in a more cloning efficiency and 
migratory ability. Ability to survive during rocking was inhibited using 
mTOR/NF-kB inhibitors. Finally, we checked whether characteristics related to 
the in vitro anoikis resistance acquired by acidic melanoma cells might be also 
suitable for in vivo challenge. We injected acidic melanoma cells into blood 
stream, and then we verify how many cells survived in blood after 15 min from 
the injection. Only acidic cells, transient and chronic, survived, whereas 
melanoma cells grown in standard pH medium did not. Overall, we have had the 
opportunity to demonstrate that low extracellular pH represents an additional 
mechanism able to promote an anoikis resistance in solid tumors.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8340926
PMCID: PMC6582804
PMID: 31275384