1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Oct 1;28(19):3293-3300. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz155.

Integrating Mendelian randomization and multiple-trait colocalization to uncover 
cell-specific inflammatory drivers of autoimmune and atopic disease.

McGowan LM(1), Davey Smith G(2), Gaunt TR(2), Richardson TG(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Life 
Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population Health Sciences Institute, 
University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2BN, UK.

Immune-mediated diseases (IMDs) arise when tolerance is lost and chronic 
inflammation is targeted towards healthy tissues. Despite their growing 
prevalence, therapies to treat IMDs are lacking. Cytokines and their receptors 
orchestrate inflammatory responses by regulating elaborate signalling networks 
across multiple cell types making it challenging to pinpoint therapeutically 
relevant drivers of IMDs. We developed an analytical framework that integrates 
Mendelian randomization (MR) and multiple-trait colocalization (moloc) analyses 
to highlight putative cell-specific drivers of IMDs. MR evaluated causal 
associations between the levels of 10 circulating cytokines and 9 IMDs within 
human populations. Subsequently, we undertook moloc analyses to assess whether 
IMD trait, cytokine protein and corresponding gene expression are driven by a 
shared causal variant. Moreover, we leveraged gene expression data from three 
separate cell types (monocytes, neutrophils and T cells) to discern whether 
associations may be attributed to cell type-specific drivers of disease. MR 
analyses supported a causal role for IL-18 in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
(P = 1.17 × 10-4) and eczema/dermatitis (P = 2.81 × 10-3), as well as 
associations between IL-2rα and IL-6R with several other IMDs. Moloc 
strengthened evidence of a causal association for these results, as well as 
providing evidence of a monocyte and neutrophil-driven role for IL-18 in IBD 
pathogenesis. In contrast, IL-2rα and IL-6R associations were found to be T cell 
specific. Our analytical pipeline can help to elucidate putative molecular 
pathways in the pathogeneses of IMDs, which could be applied to other disease 
contexts.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz155
PMCID: PMC6859431
PMID: 31276585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]