1. Biomolecules. 2019 Jul 8;9(7):265. doi: 10.3390/biom9070265.

Identification of MicroRNA Targeting Mlph and Affecting Melanosome Transport.

Lee JA(1), Hwang SJ(1), Hong SC(1), Myung CH(1), Lee JE(1), Park JI(1), Hwang 
JS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering & Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung 
Hee University, Yongin, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Korea.
(2)Department of Genetic Engineering & Graduate School of Biotechnology, Kyung 
Hee University, Yongin, Gyeonggi-do 446-701, Korea. jshwang@khu.ac.kr.

Melanosomes undergo a complex maturation process and migrate into keratinocytes. 
Melanophilin (Mlph), a protein complex involving myosin Va (MyoVa) and Rab27a, 
enables the movement of melanosomes in melanocytes. In this study, we found six 
miRNAs targeting Mlph in mouse using two programs (http://targetscan.org and 
DianaTools). When melan-a melanocytes were treated with six synthesized 
microRNAs, miR-342-5p, miR-1839-5p, and miR-3082-5p inhibited melanosome 
transport and induced melanosome aggregation around the nucleus. The other 
microRNAs, miR-5110, miR-3090-3p, and miR-186-5p, did not inhibit melanosome 
transport. Further, miR-342-5p, miR-1839-5p, and miR-3082-5p decreased Mlph 
expression. The effect of miR-342-5p was the strongest among the six synthesized 
miRNAs. It inhibited melanosome transport in melan-a melanocytes and reduced 
Mlph expression in mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner; however, 
it did not affect Rab27a and MyoVa expressions, which are associated with 
melanosome transport. To examine miR-342-5p specificity, we performed luciferase 
assays in a mouse melanocyte-transfected reporter vector including Mlph at the 
3'-UTR (untranslated region). When treated with miR-342-5p, luciferase activity 
that had been reduced by approximately 50% was restored after inhibitor 
treatment. Therefore, we identified a novel miRNA affecting Mlph and melanosome 
transport, and these results can be used for understanding Mlph expression and 
skin pigmentation regulation.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9070265
PMCID: PMC6681522
PMID: 31288473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.