1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2019 Jul 1;75(Pt 7):660-669. doi: 
10.1107/S2059798319009094. Epub 2019 Jun 28.

LAT1 (SLC7A5) and CD98hc (SLC3A2) complex dynamics revealed by single-particle 
cryo-EM.

Chiduza GN(1), Johnson RM(2), Wright GSA(1), Antonyuk SV(1), Muench SP(2), 
Hasnain SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Group, Institute of Integrative Biology, Faculty of 
Health and Life Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, England.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences and Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular 
Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England.

Solute carriers are a large class of transporters that play key roles in normal 
and disease physiology. Among the solute carriers, heteromeric amino-acid 
transporters (HATs) are unique in their quaternary structure. LAT1-CD98hc, a 
HAT, transports essential amino acids and drugs across the blood-brain barrier 
and into cancer cells. It is therefore an important target both biologically and 
therapeutically. During the course of this work, cryo-EM structures of 
LAT1-CD98hc in the inward-facing conformation and in either the substrate-bound 
or apo states were reported to 3.3-3.5 Å resolution [Yan et al. (2019), Nature 
(London), 568, 127-130]. Here, these structures are analyzed together with our 
lower resolution cryo-EM structure, and multibody 3D auto-refinement against 
single-particle cryo-EM data was used to characterize the dynamics of the 
interaction of CD98hc and LAT1. It is shown that the CD98hc ectodomain and the 
LAT1 extracellular surface share no substantial interface. This allows the 
CD98hc ectodomain to have a high degree of movement within the extracellular 
space. The functional implications of these aspects are discussed together with 
the structure determination.

open access.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798319009094
PMCID: PMC7285653
PMID: 31282475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]