1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Aug 30;294(35):12957-12974. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008100. 
Epub 2019 Jul 11.

Temporal and differential regulation of KAISO-controlled transcription by 
phosphorylated and acetylated p53 highlights a crucial regulatory role of 
apoptosis.

Choi SH(1), Koh DI(1), Cho SY(1), Kim MK(1), Kim KS(1), Hur MW(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei 
University School of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 03722, 
Korea.
(2)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei 
University School of Medicine, 50-1 Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 03722, 
Korea. Electronic address: mwhur2@yuhs.ac.

Transcriptional regulator KAISO plays a critical role in cell cycle arrest and 
apoptosis through modulation of p53 acetylation by histone acetyltransferase 
p300. KAISO potently stimulates apoptosis in cells expressing WT p53, but not in 
p53-mutant or p53-null cells. Here, we investigated how KAISO transcription is 
regulated by p53, finding four potential p53-binding sites (p53-responsive DNA 
elements; p53REs) located in a distal 5'-upstream regulatory element, intron 1, 
exon 2 coding sequence, and a 3'-UTR region. Transient transcription assays of 
pG5-p53RE-Luc constructs with various p53REs revealed that p53 activates KAISO 
(ZBTB33) transcription by acting on p53RE1 (-4326 to -4227) of the 5'-upstream 
region and on p53RE3 (+2929 to +2959) of the exon 2 coding region during early 
DNA damage responses (DDRs). ChIP and oligonucleotide pulldown assays further 
disclosed that p53 binds to the p53RE1 and p53RE3 sites. Moreover, ataxia 
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) or ATM-Rad3-related (ATR) kinase-mediated p53 
phosphorylation at Ser-15 or Ser-37 residues activated KAISO transcription by 
binding its p53RE1 or p53RE3 sites during early DDR. p53RE1 uniquely contained 
three p53-binding half-sites, a structural feature important for transcriptional 
activation by phosphorylated p53 Ser-15·Ser-37. During the later DDR phase, a 
KAISO-mediated acetylated p53 form (represented by a p53QRQ acetyl-mimic) 
robustly activated transcription by acting on p53RE1 in which this structural 
feature is not significant, but it provided sufficient KAISO levels to confer a 
p53 "apoptotic code." These results suggest that the critical apoptosis 
regulator KAISO is a p53 target gene that is differently regulated by 
phosphorylated p53 or acetylated p53, depending on DDR stage.

© 2019 Choi et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008100
PMCID: PMC6721929
PMID: 31296660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article