1. PLoS Biol. 2019 Jul 11;17(7):e3000045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000045. 
eCollection 2019 Jul.

Macaque anterior cingulate cortex deactivation impairs performance and alters 
lateral prefrontal oscillatory activities in a rule-switching task.

Ma L(1), Chan JL(2), Johnston K(3), Lomber SG(3)(4)(5), Everling S(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Western Ontario, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

In primates, both the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) are key regions of the frontoparietal 
cognitive control network. To study the role of the dACC and its communication 
with the dlPFC in cognitive control, we recorded local field potentials (LFPs) 
from the dlPFC before and during the reversible deactivation of the dACC, in 
macaque monkeys engaging in uncued switches between 2 stimulus-response rules, 
namely prosaccade and antisaccade. Cryogenic dACC deactivation impaired response 
accuracy during maintenance of-but not the initial switching to-the cognitively 
demanding antisaccade rule, which coincided with a reduction in task-related 
theta activity and the correct-error (C-E) difference in dlPFC beta-band power. 
During both rule switching and maintenance, dACC deactivation prolonged the 
animals' reaction time and reduced task-related alpha power in the dlPFC. Our 
findings support a role of the dACC in prefrontal oscillatory activities that 
are involved the maintenance of a new, challenging task rule.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000045
PMCID: PMC6650082
PMID: 31295254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.