1. J Am Chem Soc. 2019 Aug 7;141(31):12406-12412. doi: 10.1021/jacs.9b06183. Epub
 2019 Jul 23.

Characterization and Crystal Structure of a Nonheme Diiron Monooxygenase 
Involved in Platensimycin and Platencin Biosynthesis.

Dong LB, Liu YC, Cepeda AJ, Kalkreuter E, Deng MR, Rudolf JD, Chang C(1), 
Joachimiak A(1), Phillips GN Jr(2), Shen B.

Author information:
(1)Midwest Center for Structural Genomics and Structural Biology Center, 
Biosciences Division , Argonne National Laboratory , Argonne , Illinois 60439 , 
United States.
(2)Department of Biosciences , Rice University , Houston , Texas 77030 , United 
States.

Nonheme diiron monooxygenases make up a rapidly growing family of oxygenases 
that are rarely identified in secondary metabolism. Herein, we report the in 
vivo, in vitro, and structural characterizations of a nonheme diiron 
monooxygenase, PtmU3, that installs a C-5 β-hydroxyl group in the unified 
biosynthesis of platensimycin and platencin, two highly functionalized 
diterpenoids that act as potent and selective inhibitors of bacterial and 
mammalian fatty acid synthases. This hydroxylation sets the stage for the 
subsequent A-ring cleavage step key to the unique diterpene-derived scaffolds of 
platensimycin and platencin. PtmU3 adopts an unprecedented triosephosphate 
isomerase (TIM) barrel structural fold for this class of enzymes and possesses a 
noncanonical diiron active site architecture with a saturated six-coordinate 
iron center lacking a μ-oxo bridge. This study reveals the first member of a 
previously unidentified superfamily of TIM-barrel-fold enzymes for 
metal-dependent dioxygen activation, with the majority predicted to act on 
CoA-linked substrates, thus expanding our knowledge of nature's repertoire of 
nonheme diiron monooxygenases and TIM-barrel-fold enzymes.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b06183
PMCID: PMC6743330
PMID: 31291107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]