1. Cell Rep. 2019 Jul 9;28(2):498-511.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.039.

Acute Iron Deprivation Reprograms Human Macrophage Metabolism and Reduces 
Inflammation In Vivo.

Pereira M(1), Chen TD(2), Buang N(1), Olona A(1), Ko JH(1), Prendecki M(1), 
Costa ASH(3), Nikitopoulou E(3), Tronci L(3), Pusey CD(1), Cook HT(1), McAdoo 
SP(1), Frezza C(3), Behmoaras J(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Inflammatory Disease, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK.
(2)Centre for Inflammatory Disease, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK; 
Department of Anatomic Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Medical Research Council Cancer Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
0XZ, UK.
(4)Centre for Inflammatory Disease, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK. 
Electronic address: jacques.behmoaras@imperial.ac.uk.

Iron is an essential metal that fine-tunes the innate immune response by 
regulating macrophage function, but an integrative view of transcriptional and 
metabolic responses to iron perturbation in macrophages is lacking. Here, we 
induced acute iron chelation in primary human macrophages and measured their 
transcriptional and metabolic responses. Acute iron deprivation causes an 
anti-proliferative Warburg transcriptome, characterized by an ATF4-dependent 
signature. Iron-deprived human macrophages show an inhibition of oxidative 
phosphorylation and a concomitant increase in glycolysis, a large increase in 
glucose-derived citrate pools associated with lipid droplet accumulation, and 
modest levels of itaconate production. LPS polarization increases the 
itaconate:succinate ratio and decreases pro-inflammatory cytokine production. In 
rats, acute iron deprivation reduces the severity of macrophage-dependent 
crescentic glomerulonephritis by limiting glomerular cell proliferation and 
inducing lipid accumulation in the renal cortex. These results suggest that 
acute iron deprivation has in vivo protective effects mediated by an 
anti-inflammatory immunometabolic switch in macrophages.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.039
PMCID: PMC6635384
PMID: 31291584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.