1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Jul 30;116(31):15514-15523. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1905015116. Epub 2019 Jul 11.

Functional divergence caused by mutations in an energetic hotspot in ERK2.

Taylor CA 4th(1), Cormier KW(1), Keenan SE(2), Earnest S(1), Stippec S(1), 
Wichaidit C(1), Juang YC(1), Wang J(3), Shvartsman SY(2), Goldsmith EJ(3), Cobb 
MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Lewis-Sigler Institute for 
Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544.
(3)Department of Biophysics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; 
melanie.cobb@utsouthwestern.edu.

The most frequent extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) mutation 
occurring in cancers is E322K (E-K). ERK2 E-K reverses a buried charge in the 
ERK2 common docking (CD) site, a region that binds activators, inhibitors, and 
substrates. Little is known about the cellular consequences associated with this 
mutation, other than apparent increases in tumor resistance to pathway 
inhibitors. ERK2 E-K, like the mutation of the preceding aspartate (ERK2 D321N 
[D-N]) known as the sevenmaker mutation, causes increased activity in cells and 
evades inactivation by dual-specificity phosphatases. As opposed to findings in 
cancer cells, in developmental assays in Drosophila, only ERK2 D-N displays a 
significant gain of function, revealing mutation-specific phenotypes. The 
crystal structure of ERK2 D-N is indistinguishable from that of wild-type 
protein, yet this mutant displays increased thermal stability. In contrast, the 
crystal structure of ERK2 E-K reveals profound structural changes, including 
disorder in the CD site and exposure of the activation loop phosphorylation 
sites, which likely account for the decreased thermal stability of the protein. 
These contiguous mutations in the CD site of ERK2 are both required for docking 
interactions but lead to unpredictably different functional outcomes. Our 
results suggest that the CD site is in an energetically strained configuration, 
and this helps drive conformational changes at distal sites on ERK2 during 
docking interactions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1905015116
PMCID: PMC6681740
PMID: 31296562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.