1. J Ginseng Res. 2019 Jul;43(3):377-384. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2017.11.008. Epub
2017  Dec 20.

Dammarane-type triterpene oligoglycosides from the leaves and stems of Panax 
notoginseng and their antiinflammatory activities.

Li J(1)(2), Wang RF(2), Zhou Y(2), Hu HJ(2), Yang YB(2), Yang L(2), Wang 
ZT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)The MOE Key Laboratory for Standardization of Chinese Medicines and the 
SATCM, Key Laboratory for New Resources and Quality Evaluation of Chinese 
Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, Shanghai University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is widespread in the clinical pathology and closely 
associated to the progress of many diseases. Triterpenoid saponins as a key 
group of active ingredients in Panax notoginseng (Burk.) F.H. Chen were 
demonstrated to show antiinflammatory effects. However, the chemical structures 
of saponins in the leaves and stems of Panax notoginseng (PNLS) are still not 
fully clear. Herein, the isolation, purification and further evaluation of the 
antiinflammatory activity of dammarane-type triterpenoid saponins from PNLS were 
conducted.
METHODS: Silica gel and reversed-phase C8 column chromatography were used. 
Furthermore, preparative HPLC was used as a final purification technique to 
obtain minor saponins with high purities. MS, NMR experiments, and chemical 
methods were used in the structural identifications. The antiinflammatory 
activities of the isolated saponins were assessed by measuring the nitric 
oxide production in RAW 264.7 cells stimulated by lipopolysaccharides. Real-time 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to measure the gene 
expressions of inflammation-related gene.
RESULTS: Eight new minor dammarane-type triterpene oligoglycosides, namely 
notoginsenosides LK1-LK8 (1-8) were obtained from PNLS, along with seven known 
ones. Among the isolated saponins, gypenoside IX significantly suppressed the 
nitric oxide production and inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis 
factor-α, interleukin 10, interferon-inducible protein 10 and interleukin-1β.
CONCLUSION: The eight saponins may enrich and expand the chemical library of 
saponins in Panax genus. Moreover, it is reported for the first time that 
gypenoside IX showed moderate antiinflammatory activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgr.2017.11.008
PMCID: PMC6606971
PMID: 31308809