1. J Gen Virol. 2019 Sep;100(9):1273-1281. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.001294. Epub 2019
Jul  15.

Prevailing I292V PB2 mutation in avian influenza H9N2 virus increases viral 
polymerase function and attenuates IFN-β induction in human cells.

Gao W(1), Zu Z(1), Liu J(1), Song J(1), Wang X(1), Wang C(1), Liu L(1), Tong 
Q(1), Wang M(1), Sun H(1), Sun Y(1), Liu J(1), Chang KC(2), Pu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology, Ministry of Agriculture, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, PR China.
(2)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton 
Bonington Campus, Loughborough, UK.

Adaptation of PB2 protein is important for the establishment of avian influenza 
viruses in mammalian hosts. Here, we identify I292V as the prevalent mutation in 
PB2 of circulating avian H9N2 and pandemic H1N1 viruses. The same dominant PB2 
mutation is also found in most human isolates of emergent avian H7N9 and H10N8 
viruses. In human cells, PB2-292V in H9N2 virus has the combined ability of 
conferring higher viral polymerase activity and stronger attenuation of IFN-β 
induction than that of its predecessor PB2-292I. IFN-β attenuation is 
accompanied by higher binding affinity of PB2-292V for host mitochondrial 
antiviral signalling protein, an important intermediary protein in the induction 
of IFN-β. In the mouse in vivo model, PB2-292V mutation increases H9N2 virus 
replication with ensuing increase in disease severity. Collectively, PB2-292V is 
a new mammalian adaptive marker that promotes H9N2 virus replication in 
mammalian hosts with the potential to improve transmission from birds to humans.

DOI: 10.1099/jgv.0.001294
PMCID: PMC7414430
PMID: 31305236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.