1. Autism Res Treat. 2019 Jun 18;2019:7486431. doi: 10.1155/2019/7486431. 
eCollection 2019.

Improving Outcome in Infantile Autism with Folate Receptor Autoimmunity and 
Nutritional Derangements: A Self-Controlled Trial.

Ramaekers VT(1), Sequeira JM(2), DiDuca M(1), Vrancken G(1), Thomas A(1), 
Philippe C(1), Peters M(1), Jadot A(1), Quadros EV(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Autism, University Hospital Liège (CHU), Belgium.
(2)Department of Medicine, SUNY-Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: In contrast to multiple rare monogenetic abnormalities, a common 
biomarker among children with infantile autism and their parents is the 
discovery of serum autoantibodies directed to the folate receptor alpha (FRα) 
localized at blood-brain and placental barriers, impairing physiologic folate 
transfer to the brain and fetus. Since outcome after behavioral intervention 
remains poor, a trial was designed to treat folate receptor alpha (FRα) 
autoimmunity combined with correction of deficient nutrients due to abnormal 
feeding habits.
METHODS: All participants with nonsyndromic infantile autism underwent a routine 
protocol measuring CBC, iron, vitamins, coenzyme Q10, metals, and trace 
elements. Serum FRα autoantibodies were assessed in patients, their parents, and 
healthy controls. A self-controlled therapeutic trial treated nutritional 
derangements with addition of high-dose folinic acid if FRα autoantibodies 
tested positive. The Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS) monitored at baseline 
and following 2 years of treatment was compared to the CARS of untreated 
autistic children serving as a reference.
RESULTS: In this self-controlled trial (82 children; mean age ± SD: 4.4 ± 2.3 
years; male:female ratio: 4.8:1), FRα autoantibodies were found in 75.6 % of the 
children, 34.1 % of mothers, and 29.4 % of fathers versus 3.3 % in healthy 
controls. Compared to untreated patients with autism (n=84) whose CARS score 
remained unchanged, a 2-year treatment decreased the initial CARS score from 
severe (mean ± SD: 41.34 ± 6.47) to moderate or mild autism (mean ± SD: 34.35 ± 
6.25; paired t-test p<0.0001), achieving complete recovery in 17/82 children 
(20.7 %). Prognosis became less favorable with the finding of higher FRα 
autoantibody titers, positive maternal FRα autoantibodies, or FRα antibodies in 
both parents.
CONCLUSIONS: Correction of nutritional deficiencies combined with high-dose 
folinic acid improved outcome for autism, although the trend of a poor prognosis 
due to maternal FRα antibodies or FRα antibodies in both parents may warrant 
folinic acid intervention before conception and during pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/7486431
PMCID: PMC6604479
PMID: 31316831