1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Sep 5;47(15):7767-7780. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz620.

DNA complexes with human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1: structural 
insights revealed by pulsed dipolar EPR with orthogonal spin labeling.

Krumkacheva OA(1)(2)(3), Shevelev GY(2)(4), Lomzov AA(2)(4), Dyrkheeva NS(4), 
Kuzhelev AA(1)(2)(3), Koval VV(2)(4), Tormyshev VM(1)(2), Polienko YF(1)(2), 
Fedin MV(2)(3), Pyshnyi DV(2)(4), Lavrik OI(2)(4), Bagryanskaya EG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)N. N. Vorozhtsov Novosibirsk Institute of Organic Chemistry SB RAS, 9 
Lavrentiev ave, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(2)Novosibirsk State University, Pirogova Str. 2, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
(3)International Tomography Center SB RAS, Institutskaya Str. 3a, Novosibirsk 
630090, Russia.
(4)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine SB RAS, 8 Lavrentiev 
ave, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

A DNA molecule is under continuous influence of endogenous and exogenous 
damaging factors, which produce a variety of DNA lesions. Apurinic/apyrimidinic 
sites (abasic or AP sites) are among the most common DNA lesions. In this work, 
we applied pulse dipolar electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy in 
combination with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate in-depth 
conformational changes in DNA containing an AP site and in a complex of this DNA 
with AP endonuclease 1 (APE1). For this purpose, triarylmethyl (TAM)-based spin 
labels were attached to the 5' ends of an oligonucleotide duplex, and nitroxide 
spin labels were introduced into APE1. In this way, we created a system that 
enabled monitoring the conformational changes of the main APE1 substrate by EPR. 
In addition, we were able to trace substrate-to-product transformation in this 
system. The use of different (orthogonal) spin labels in the enzyme and in the 
DNA substrate has a crucial advantage allowing for detailed investigation of 
local damage and conformational changes in AP-DNA alone and in its complex with 
APE1.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz620
PMCID: PMC6735896
PMID: 31329919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]