1. Am J Med Genet A. 2019 Nov;179(11):2228-2232. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61297. Epub 
2019 Jul 18.

Expansion of the Primrose syndrome phenotype through the comparative analysis of 
two new case reports with ZBTB20 variants.

Ferreira LD(1), Borges-Medeiros RL(1), Thies J(2), Schnur RE(3), Lam C(2)(4), de 
Oliveira JRM(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Keizo Asami Laboratory, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brazil.
(2)Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, 
Washington.
(3)Clinical Genomics Program, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(4)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(5)Neuropsychiatry Department, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, 
Brazil.

Primrose syndrome (PRIMS), a rare genetic disorder with several clinical 
findings including intellectual disability, macrocephaly, typical facial 
features, and muscle wasting, is caused by heterozygous variants in the ZBTB20 
gene. We report the cases of two males diagnosed with PRIMS at different ages, 
emphasizing the likely progressive nature of the disorder, as well as the 
differences and similarities of presentation during infancy and adulthood. 
Patient 1 is a 2-year-old American male with a medical history marked by 
impaired hearing, developmental delays, and fainting spells. Patient 2 is a 
28-year-old Brazilian male, who presents with a phenotype similar to that seen 
in Patient 1 with additional features of ectopic calcifications and prominent 
muscular and skeletal abnormalities. Additionally, Patient 2 has a history of 
fainting spells and diminished body height and weight, with the latter features 
having only been reported in one PRIMS patient so far. Both Patients 1 and 2 
were found to carry heterozygous likely pathogenic missense variants, detected 
in the last coding exon of ZBTB20 (c.1822T>C, p.Cys608Arg, de novo, and 
c.1873A>G, p.Met625Val, respectively), consistent with PRIMS. Overall, these 
case reports highlight PRIMS's likely progressive nature and contribute to the 
understanding of the natural history of this condition.

Â© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61297
PMID: 31321892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]