1. J Cell Mol Med. 2019 Oct;23(10):6766-6774. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.14554. Epub 2019 
Jul 21.

Regulatory T cells protected against abdominal aortic aneurysm by suppression of 
the COX-2 expression.

Liu B(1), Kong J(1)(2), An G(1)(2), Zhang K(1)(2), Qin W(1)(3), Meng X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Chinese Ministry of Health and Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, The State and Shandong Province Joint Key Laboratory of Translational 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, China.

CD4+ CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been shown to protect against the 
development of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a 
pro-inflammatory protein, can convert arachidonic acid into prostaglandins 
(PGs). The present study was aimed to investigate the effect of Tregs on COX-2 
expression in angiotension II (Ang II)-induced AAA in ApoE-/- mice. Tregs were 
injected via tail vein in every 2 weeks. Ang II was continuously infused by a 
micropump for 28 days to induce AAA. In vivo, compared with the control group, 
adoptive transfer of Tregs significantly reduced the incidence of AAA, maximal 
diameter, and the mRNA and protein expression of COX-2 in mice. 
Immunofluorescence showed that Tregs treatment reduced COX-2 expression both in 
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and macrophages in AAA. In vitro, the Western blot 
analysis showed that Tregs reduced Ang II-induced COX-2 expression in 
macrophages and SMCs. Meanwhile, ELISA showed that Tregs reduced Ang II-induced 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2 ) secretion. Moreover, Tregs increased SMC viability and 
induced transition of macrophages phenotype from M1 to M2. In conclusion, Tregs 
treatment dramatically decreased the expression of COX-2 in vivo and in vitro, 
suggesting that Tregs could protect against AAA through inhibition of COX-2. The 
study may shed light on the immune treatment of AAA.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.14554
PMCID: PMC6787467
PMID: 31328426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflicts of interest.