1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jul 19;20(14):3535. doi: 10.3390/ijms20143535.

RNase L Induces Expression of A Novel Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase, DRAK1, to 
Promote Apoptosis.

Manivannan P(1), Reddy V(1), Mukherjee S(1), Clark KN(1), Malathi K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, 2801 West Bancroft 
Street, Toledo, OH 43606, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, 2801 West Bancroft 
Street, Toledo, OH 43606, USA. Malathi.Krishnamurthy@utoledo.edu.

Apoptosis of virus-infected cells is an effective antiviral mechanism in 
addition to interferon induction to establish antiviral state to restrict virus 
spread. The interferon-inducible 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase/RNase L pathway 
results in activation of RNase L in response to double stranded RNA and cleaves 
diverse RNA substrates to amplify interferon induction and promote apoptosis. 
Here we show that RNase L induces expression of Death-associated protein 
kinase-Related Apoptosis-inducing protein Kinase 1 (DRAK1), a member of the 
death-associated protein kinase family and interferon-signaling pathway is 
required for induction. Overexpression of DRAK1 triggers apoptosis in the 
absence of RNase L activation by activating c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), 
translocation of BCL2 Associated X (Bax) to the mitochondria accompanied by 
cytochrome C release and loss of mitochondrial membrane potential promoting 
cleavage of caspase 3 and Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1 (PARP). Inhibitors of 
JNK and caspase 3 promote survival of DRAK1 overexpressing cells demonstrating 
an important role of JNK signaling pathway in DRAK1-mediated apoptosis. DRAK1 
mutant proteins that lack kinase activity or nuclear localization fail to induce 
apoptosis highlighting the importance of cellular localization and kinase 
function in promoting cell death. Our studies identify DRAK1 as a mediator of 
RNase L-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20143535
PMCID: PMC6679093
PMID: 31330998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.