1. Molecules. 2019 Jul 12;24(14):2546. doi: 10.3390/molecules24142546.

The Nervous System Relevance of the Calcium Sensing Receptor in Health and 
Disease.

Giudice ML(1)(2), Mihalik B(2), Dinnyés A(1)(2), Kobolák J(3).

Author information:
(1)BioTalentum Ltd., H-2100 Gödöllő, Hungary.
(2)Molecular Animal Biotechnology Laboratory, Szent István University, H-2100 
Gödöllő, Hungary.
(3)BioTalentum Ltd., H-2100 Gödöllő, Hungary. julianna.kobolak@biotalentum.hu.

The calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) was first identified in parathyroid glands, 
and its primary role in controlling systemic calcium homeostasis by the 
regulation of parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion has been extensively described 
in literature. Additionally, the receptor has also been investigated in cells 
and tissues not directly involved in calcium homeostasis, e.g., the nervous 
system (NS), where it plays crucial roles in early neural development for the 
differentiation of neurons and glial cells, as well as in the adult nervous 
system for synaptic transmission and plasticity. Advances in the knowledge of 
the CaSR's function in such physiological processes have encouraged researchers 
to further broaden the receptor's investigation in the neuro-pathological 
conditions of the NS. Interestingly, pre-clinical data suggest that receptor 
inhibition by calcilytics might be effective in counteracting the pathomechanism 
underlying Alzheimer's disease and ischemia, while a CaSR positive modulation 
with calcimimetics has been proposed as a potential approach for treating 
neuroblastoma. Importantly, such promising findings led to the repurposing of 
CaSR modulators as novel pharmacological alternatives for these disorders. 
Therefore, the aim of this review article is to critically appraise evidence 
which, so far, has been yielded from the investigation of the role of the CaSR 
in physiology of the nervous system and to focus on the most recent emerging 
concepts which have reported the receptor as a therapeutic target for 
neurodegeneration and neuroblastic tumors.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24142546
PMCID: PMC6680999
PMID: 31336912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.