1. Front Chem. 2019 Jul 9;7:479. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00479. eCollection 2019.

Synthesis and Pharmacological Evaluation of a Novel Peptide Based on Anemonia 
sulcata BDS-I Toxin as a New K(V)3.4 Inhibitor Exerting a Neuroprotective Effect 
Against Amyloid-β Peptide.

Ciccone R(1), Piccialli I(1), Grieco P(2), Merlino F(2), Annunziato L(3), 
Pannaccione A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive and 
Dentistry Sciences, School of Medicine, Federico II University of Naples, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCSS SDN Napoli, Naples, Italy.

There is increasing evidence that the fast-inactivating potassium current IA, 
encoded by KV3. 4 channels, plays an important role in Alzheimer's Disease (AD), 
since the neurotoxic β-amyloid peptide1-42 (Aβ1-42) increases the IA current 
triggering apoptotic processes. The specific inhibition of KV3.4 by the marine 
toxin extracted from Anemonia sulcata, named blood depressing substance-I 
(BDS-I), reverts the Aβ peptide-induced cell death. The aim of the present study 
was to identify the smallest fragments of BDS-I, obtained by peptide synthesis, 
able to inhibit KV3.4 currents. For this purpose, whole-cell patch clamp 
technique was used to evaluate the effects of BDS-I fragments on KV3.4 currents 
in CHO cells heterologously expressing KV3.4. We found that BDS-I[1-8] fragment, 
containing the N-terminal octapeptide sequence of full length BDS-I, was able to 
inhibit KV3.4 currents in a concentration dependent manner, whereas the 
scrambled sequence of BDS-I[1-8] and all the other fragments obtained from BDS-I 
full length were ineffective. As we demonstrated in a previous study, BDS-I full 
length is able to counteract Aβ1-42-induced enhancement of KV3.4 activity, 
preventing Aβ1-42-induced caspase-3 activation and the abnormal nuclear 
morphology in NGF-differentiated PC-12 cells. Similarly to BDS-I, we found that 
BDS-I[1-8] blocking KV3.4 currents prevented Aβ1-42-induced caspase-3 activation 
and apoptotic processes. Collectively, these results suggest that BDS-I[1-8] 
could represent a lead compound to be developed as a new drug targeting KV3.4 
channels.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2019.00479
PMCID: PMC6629785
PMID: 31338361