1. Commun Biol. 2019 Jul 19;2:267. doi: 10.1038/s42003-019-0519-y. eCollection 
2019.

Amplification-free library preparation with SAFE Hi-C uses ligation products for 
deep sequencing to improve traditional Hi-C analysis.

Niu L(#)(1)(2), Shen W(#)(3)(4), Huang Y(#)(1), He N(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun J(1), 
Wan J(3)(4), Jiang D(1), Yang M(1), Tse YC(1), Li L(3)(4), Hou C(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, 518055 
Shenzhen, China.
(2)2Department of Biology, Nankai University, 300071 Tianjin, China.
(3)3Department of Bioinformatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 
Wuhan, China.
(4)4Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, 430070 Wuhan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

PCR amplification of Hi-C libraries introduces unusable duplicates and results 
in a biased representation of chromatin interactions. We present a simplified, 
fast, and economically efficient Hi-C library preparation procedure, SAFE Hi-C, 
which generates sufficient non-amplified ligation products for deep sequencing 
from 30 million Drosophila cells. Comprehensive analysis of the resulting data 
shows that amplification-free Hi-C preserves higher complexity of chromatin 
interaction and lowers sequencing depth for the same number of unique paired 
reads. For human cells which have a large genome, SAFE Hi-C recovers enough 
ligated fragments for direct high-throughput sequencing without amplification 
from as few as 250,000 cells. Comparison with published in situ Hi-C data from 
millions of human cells demonstrates that amplification introduces 
distance-dependent amplification bias, which results in an increased background 
noise level against genomic distance. With amplification bias avoided, SAFE Hi-C 
may produce a chromatin interaction network more faithfully reflecting the real 
three-dimensional genomic architecture.

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-019-0519-y
PMCID: PMC6642088
PMID: 31341966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.