1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2019 Nov;79:102346. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2019.102346. Epub
 2019 Jul 17.

Combined genetic disruption of K-Cl cotransporters and Gardos channel KCNN4 
rescues erythrocyte dehydration in the SAD mouse model of sickle cell disease.

Shmukler BE(1), Rivera A(2), Bhargava P(3), Nishimura K(4), Hsu A(4), Kim EH(4), 
Trudel M(5), Rust MB(6), Hubner CA(7), Brugnara C(8), Alper SL(9).

Author information:
(1)Renal Division and Vascular Biology Research Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States of America; Department of Laboratory 
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, United States of 
America.
(2)Renal Division and Vascular Biology Research Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States of America; Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, United States of America; Department 
of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States of 
America.
(4)Renal Division and Vascular Biology Research Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States of America.
(5)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montreal, Molecular Genetics and 
Development, Faculte de Medecine, Universite of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(6)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, 
Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, Universitatsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, United States of America; Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, United States of America.
(9)Renal Division and Vascular Biology Research Center, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States of America; Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, United States of America. Electronic 
address: salper@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2020 Mar;81:102390. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2019.102390.

Excessive red cell dehydration contributes to the pathophysiology of sickle cell 
disease (SCD). The densest fraction of sickle red cells (with the highest 
corpuscular hemoglobin concentration) undergoes the most rapid polymerization of 
deoxy-hemoglobin S, leading to accelerated cell sickling and increased 
susceptibility to endothelial activation, red cell adhesion, and vaso-occlusion. 
Increasing red cell volume in order to decrease red cell density can thus serve 
as an adjunct therapeutic goal in SCD. Regulation of circulating mouse red cell 
volume and density is mediated largely by the Gardos channel, KCNN4, and the 
K-Cl cotransporters, KCC3 and KCC1. Whereas inhibition of the Gardos channel in 
subjects with sickle cell disease increased red cell volume, decreased red cell 
density, and improved other hematological indices in subjects with SCD, specific 
KCC inhibitors have not been available for testing. We therefore investigated 
the effect of genetic inactivation of KCC3 and KCC1 in the SAD mouse model of 
sickle red cell dehydration, finding decreased red cell density and improved 
hematological indices. We describe here generation of mice genetically deficient 
in the three major red cell volume regulatory gene products, KCNN4, KCC3, and 
KCC1 in C57BL6 non-sickle and SAD sickle backgrounds. We show that combined 
loss-of-function of all three gene products in SAD mice leads to incrementally 
increased MCV, decreased CHCM and % hyperchromic cells, decreased red cell 
density (phthalate method), increased resistance to hypo-osmotic lysis, and 
increased cell K content. The data show that combined genetic deletion of the 
Gardos channel and K-Cl cotransporters in a mouse SCD model decreases red cell 
density and improves several hematological parameters, supporting the strategy 
of combined pharmacological inhibition of these ion transport pathways in the 
adjunct treatment of human SCD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2019.102346
PMCID: PMC6744291
PMID: 31352162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors report no 
conflicts of interest related to this work.