1. J Adv Res. 2019 Jul 4;20:129-139. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2019.06.003. eCollection
 2019 Nov.

Preclinical studies of toxicity and safety of the AS-48 bacteriocin.

Cebrián R(1), Rodríguez-Cabezas ME(2)(3), Martín-Escolano R(4), Rubiño S(5), 
Garrido-Barros M(2)(3), Montalbán-López M(5), Rosales MJ(4), Sánchez-Moreno 
M(4), Valdivia E(5), Martínez-Bueno M(5), Marín C(4), Gálvez J(2)(3), Maqueda 
M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Science and Engineering, 
Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)CIBER-EHD, Department of Pharmacology. Centre for Biomedical Research (CIBM), 
Avda del Conocimiento s/n, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria de Granada (Ibs.GRANADA), Granada, 
Spain.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria 
(ibs.Granada), Hospitales Universitarios de Granada/University of Granada, 
Severo Ochoa s/n, E-18071 Granada, Spain.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Sciences, Avda Fuentenueva s/n, 
University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain.

The in vitro antimicrobial potency of the bacteriocin AS-48 is well documented, 
but its clinical application requires investigation, as its toxicity could be 
different in in vitro (haemolytic and antibacterial activity in blood and 
cytotoxicity towards normal human cell lines) and in vivo (e.g. mice and 
zebrafish embryos) models. Overall, the results obtained are promising. They 
reveal the negligible propensity of AS-48 to cause cell death or impede cell 
growth at therapeutic concentrations (up to 27 μM) and support the suitability 
of this peptide as a potential therapeutic agent against several microbial 
infections, due to its selectivity and potency at low concentrations (in the 
range of 0.3-8.9 μM). In addition, AS-48 exhibits low haemolytic activity in 
whole blood and does not induce nitrite accumulation in non-stimulated RAW 
macrophages, indicating a lack of pro-inflammatory effects. The unexpected 
heightened sensitivity of zebrafish embryos to AS-48 could be due to the low 
differentiation state of these cells. The low cytotoxicity of AS-48, the absence 
of lymphocyte proliferation in vivo after skin sensitization in mice, and the 
lack of toxicity in a murine model support the consideration of the broad 
spectrum antimicrobial peptide AS-48 as a promising therapeutic agent for the 
control of a vast array of microbial infections, in particular, those involved 
in skin and soft tissue diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jare.2019.06.003
PMCID: PMC6637140
PMID: 31360546