1. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2019 Sept.;20(9):713-727. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1900105.

Antepenultimate residue at the C-terminus of NADPH oxidase RBOHD is critical for 
its function in the production of reactive oxygen species in Arabidopsis.

Li QY(1), Li P(1), Myint Phyu Sin Htwe N(1), Shangguan KK(1), Liang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Agriculture Key Lab of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and 
Insects, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310058, China.

Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a conserved immune response 
primarily mediated by NADPH oxidases (NOXs), also known in plants as respiratory 
burst oxidase homologs (RBOHs). Most microbe-associated molecular patterns 
(MAMPs) trigger a very fast and transient ROS burst in plants. However, 
recently, we found that lipopolysaccharides (LPS), a typical bacterial MAMP, 
triggered a biphasic ROS burst. In this study, we isolated mutants defective in 
LPS-triggered biphasic ROS burst (delt) in Arabidopsis, and cloned the DELT1 
gene that was shown to encode RBOHD. In the delt1-2 allele, the antepenultimate 
residue, glutamic acid (E919), at the C-terminus of RBOHD was mutated to lysine 
(K). E919 is a highly conserved residue in NADPH oxidases, and a mutation of the 
corresponding residue E568 in human NOX2 has been reported to be one of the 
causes of chronic granulomatous disease. Consistently, we found that residue 
E919 was indispensable for RBOHD function in the MAMP-induced ROS burst and 
stomatal closure. It has been suggested that the mutation of this residue in 
other NADPH oxidases impairs the protein's stability and complex assembly. 
However, we found that the E919K mutation did not affect RBOHD protein abundance 
or the ability of protein association, suggesting that the residue E919 in RBOHD 
might have a regulatory mechanism different from that of other NOXs. Taken 
together, our results confirm that the antepenultimate residue E is critical for 
NADPH oxidases and provide a new insight into the regulatory mechanisms of 
RBOHD.

DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1900105
PMCID: PMC6700349
PMID: 31379142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethics guidelines: Qiu-ying LI, 
Ping LI, Nang MYINT PHYU SIN HTWE, Ke-ke SHANGGUAN, and Yan LIANG declare that 
they have no conflict of interest. This article does not contain any studies 
with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.