1. Curr Diab Rep. 2019 Aug 3;19(9):77. doi: 10.1007/s11892-019-1195-5.

Regulation of Glucose Production in the Pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes.

Sargsyan A(1), Herman MA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. 
mark.herman@duke.edu.
(3)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Duke University, Durham, 
NC, USA. mark.herman@duke.edu.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Increased glucose production associated with hepatic insulin 
resistance contributes to the development of hyperglycemia in T2D. The molecular 
mechanisms accounting for increased glucose production remain controversial. Our 
aims were to review recent literature concerning molecular mechanisms regulating 
glucose production and to discuss these mechanisms in the context of 
physiological experiments and observations in humans and large animal models.
RECENT FINDINGS: Genetic intervention studies in rodents demonstrate that 
insulin can control hepatic glucose production through both direct effects on 
the liver, and through indirect effects to inhibit adipose tissue lipolysis and 
limit gluconeogenic substrate delivery. However, recent experiments in canine 
models indicate that the direct effects of insulin on the liver are dominant 
over the indirect effects to regulate glucose production. Recent molecular 
studies have also identified insulin-independent mechanisms by which hepatocytes 
sense intrahepatic carbohydrate levels to regulate carbohydrate disposal. 
Dysregulation of hepatic carbohydrate sensing systems may participate in 
increased glucose production in the development of diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-019-1195-5
PMCID: PMC6834297
PMID: 31377934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Ashot Sargsyan declares 
that he has no conflict of interest.