1. Insects. 2019 Aug 1;10(8):232. doi: 10.3390/insects10080232.

A Re-Evaluation of Olive Fruit Fly Organophosphate-Resistant Ace Alleles in 
Iberia, and Field-Testing Population Effects after in-Practice Dimethoate Use.

Nobre T(1), Gomes L(2), Rei FT(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Entomology, ICAAM-Instituto de Ciências Agrárias e Ambientais 
Mediterrânicas, Universidade de Évora, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal. 
tnobre@uevora.pt.
(2)Laboratory of Entomology, ICAAM-Instituto de Ciências Agrárias e Ambientais 
Mediterrânicas, Universidade de Évora, 7006-554 Évora, Portugal.

The management of the olive fruit fly (Bactrocera oleae, Dacus oleae) is 
traditionally based upon the use of organophosphate insecticides, mainly 
dimethoate. In this evolutionary arms race between man and pest, the flies have 
adapted a pesticide resistance, implying two point-mutations of the Ace gene 
-I214V and G488S- and a 9bp deletion -Δ3Q. We revisited 11 Iberian locations to 
evaluate this adaptation of organophosphate (OP)-resistant alleles through 
amplicon sequencing. Screening for populations where the wild type is prevalent 
allows an identification of hotspots for targeted mitigation measures; we have 
hence refined the scale to the region with the lowest OP-resistant alleles 
frequency 71 locations were sampled and individuals checked using a fast and 
low-cost allele-specific-primer polymerase chain reaction (ASP-PCR) method]. An 
increase in Ace gene point-mutations was observed, and the Δ3Q mutation remains 
undetected. The lowest frequencies of the OP-resistant alleles remain in the 
west, underlining the hypothesis of an introduction of resistance from eastern 
Mediterranean areas. A field test was performed by sampling the fly population 
before and after in-practice dimethoate application. A clear reduction in olive 
fruit fly numbers was observed, with no relevant changes in the genotypic 
frequencies of the resistance alleles. The findings are discussed in frame of 
the type and intensity of the selection pressure that has led to the adaptation 
to resistance and its consequences from the producer perspective.

DOI: 10.3390/insects10080232
PMCID: PMC6723829
PMID: 31374903

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.