1. Pediatr Res. 1988 Jul;24(1):95-100. doi: 10.1203/00006450-198807000-00022.

A deficiency of both subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase which is not expressed 
in fibroblasts.

Kerr DS(1), Berry SA, Lusk MM, Ho L, Patel MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) deficiency usually has been detected by 
decreased activity in cultured skin fibroblasts. We investigated two brothers in 
whom PDC activity was less than 10% of controls in lymphocytes but normal in 
skin fibroblasts. They both had abnormal neuromuscular development and lactic 
acidosis which was aggravated by ingestion of carbohydrate. One brother died at 
age 3 yr and tissues were obtained at autopsy soon after death. The brain was 
swollen with diffuse acute hemorrhages but without the lesions characteristic of 
Leigh's disease. PDC activity was virtually undetectable in mitochondria or 
homogenates of liver, skeletal muscle, and heart, but was about 30% of controls 
in kidney. The activity of the first component E1 was not detectable in 
mitochondria from liver, whereas the activities of the second and third 
components were normal; the activities of all components were normal in 
fibroblasts. Western immunoblot analysis showed absent to trace amounts of both 
the E1 alpha and E1 beta subunits in liver, skeletal muscle, and heart, with 
normal amounts of the second and third components. About one-fourth of control 
amounts of E1 alpha and E1 beta were present in kidney and normal levels were 
present in fibroblasts. PDC activity in lymphocytes from the mother was 35% of 
controls; she had normal PDC activity in her fibroblasts. PDC activity was 
normal in lymphocytes from the brothers' sister, father, and maternal 
grandparents and great-grandmother. The mode of inheritance was not established. 
In conclusion, PDC deficiency may not be detected in skin fibroblasts in some 
cases; the mechanism of variable tissue expression of E1 remains to be 
delineated.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-198807000-00022
PMID: 3137520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]