1. Polymers (Basel). 2019 Aug 2;11(8):1293. doi: 10.3390/polym11081293.

TiO(2)-Doped Chitosan Microspheres Supported on Cellulose Acetate Fibers for 
Adsorption and Photocatalytic Degradation of Methyl Orange.

Shi X(1), Zhang X(1), Ma L(1), Xiang C(2), Li L(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, and College of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130022, China.
(2)Department of Apparel, Events and Hospitality Management, 31 MacKay Hall, 
Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(3)Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, and College of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130022, China. 
lilyllee@jlu.edu.cn.

Chitosan/cellulose acetate (CS/CA) used as a biopolymer systema, with the 
addition of TiO2 as photocatalyst (C-T/CA) were fabricated by alternating 
electrospinning/electrospraying technology. The uniform dispersion of TiO2 and 
its recovery after the removal of methyl orange (MO) was achieved by 
incorporating TiO2 in CS electrosprayed hemispheres. The effects of pH values, 
contact time, and the amount of TiO2 on adsorption and photocatalytic 
degradation for MO of the C-T/CA were investigated in detail. When TiO2 content 
was 3 wt %, the highest MO removal amount for fiber membranes (C-T-3/CA) reached 
98% at pH value 4 and MO concentration of 40 mg/L. According to the data 
analysis, the pseudo-second-order kinetic and Freundlich isotherm model were 
well fitted to kinetic and equilibrium data of MO removal. Especially for 
C-T-3/CA, the fiber membrane exhibited multiple layers of adsorption. All these 
results indicated that adsorption caused by electrostatic interaction and 
photocatalytic degradation were involved in the MO removal process. This work 
provides a potential method for developing a novel photocatalyst with excellent 
catalytic activity, adsorbing capability and recycling use.

DOI: 10.3390/polym11081293
PMCID: PMC6723085
PMID: 31382392

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.