1. Pathog Dis. 2019 Oct 1;77(7):ftz035. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftz035.

Genetic association between mannose-binding lectin polymorphisms and viral 
hepatitis: a meta-analysis.

Qie C(1), Liu Y(1), Ma P(1), Wu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tianjin Second People's Hospital, Tianjin 
300192, China.

Some previous genetic association studies have tried to investigate potential 
associations between mannose-binding lectin (MBL) polymorphisms and viral 
hepatitis. However, the results of those studies were not consistent. Therefore, 
we performed the current meta-analysis to explore associations between MBL 
polymorphisms and viral hepatitis in a large pooled population. A systematic 
literature research of PubMed, Web of Science, Embase and CNKI was performed to 
identify eligible studies for pooled analyses. We used Review Manager version 
5.3.3 to conduct statistical analyses. In total, 27 studies were included for 
analysis (4840 cases and 5729 controls). The pooled analyses showed that MBL 
promoter (-211C/G, dominant model: P = 0.0002, I2 = 40%; over-dominant model: 
P = 0.0001, I2 = 22%) and exon 1 (codon 52, 54 and 57, dominant model: P = 0.04, 
I2 = 49%; allele model: P = 0.01, I2 = 48%) polymorphisms were both 
significantly associated with viral hepatitis in the overall population. Further 
subgroup analyses revealed similarly significant findings for MBL promoter 
polymorphism in HBV and HCV, but no positive results were detected in subgroup 
analyses for MBL exon 1 polymorphism. These results suggested that MBL promoter 
and exon 1 polymorphisms could be used to identify individuals at higher 
susceptibility to HBV and HCV.

© FEMS 2019.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftz035
PMID: 31381758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]