1. Sci Rep. 2019 Aug 6;9(1):11371. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-47882-2.

Simultaneous quantification of alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde, 
piperideine-6-carboxylate, pipecolic acid and alpha-aminoadipic acid in 
pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy.

Xue J(1), Wang J(2), Gong P(1), Wu M(2), Yang W(3), Jiang S(3), Wu Y(1), Jiang 
Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Yuzyuk T(4)(5), Li H(6), Yang Z(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Zhejiang Biosan Biochemical Technologies Co., Ltd, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)ARUP Laboratories, ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, School of Medicine, America, 
Atlanta, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China. 
zhixian.yang@163.com.

The measurements of lysine metabolites provide valuable information for the 
rapid diagnosis of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy (PDE). Here, we aimed to 
develop a sensitive method to simultaneously quantify multiple lysine 
metabolites in PDE, including α-aminoadipic semialdehyde (a-AASA), 
piperideine-6-carboxylate (P6C), pipecolic acid (PA) and α-aminoadipic acid 
(α-AAA) in plasma, serum, dried blood spots (DBS), urine and dried urine spots 
(DUS). Fifteen patients with molecularly confirmed PDE were detected using 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method. Compared to the 
control groups, the concentrations of a-AASA, P6C and the sum of a-AASA and P6C 
(AASA-P6C) in all types of samples from PDE patients were markedly elevated. The 
PA and a-AAA concentrations ranges overlapped partially between PDE patients and 
control groups. The concentrations of all the analytes in plasma and serum, as 
well as in urine and DUS were highly correlated. Our study provided more options 
for the diverse sample collection in the biochemical tests according to 
practical requirements. With treatment modality of newly triple therapy 
investigated, biomarker study might play important role not only on diagnosis 
but also on treatment monitoring and fine tuning the diet. The persistently 
elevated analytes with good correlation between plasma and DBS, as well as urine 
and DUS made neonatal screening using DBS and DUS possible.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-47882-2
PMCID: PMC6684619
PMID: 31388081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.