1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2019 Aug 3;8(3):110. doi: 10.3390/antibiotics8030110.

Mitochondrial Toxicity of Azithromycin Results in Aerobic Glycolysis and DNA 
Damage of Human Mammary Epithelia and Fibroblasts.

Jiang X(1), Baucom C(2), Elliott RL(2).

Author information:
(1)Breast Cancer Research, Sallie A. Burdine Breast Foundation, Baton Rouge, LA 
70806, USA. jiang2003x@yahoo.com.
(2)Elliott Mastology Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70806, USA.

Mitochondria evolved from free-living bacteria via endocytosis within eukaryotic 
host cells millions of year ago. We hypothesized that antibiotics cause 
mammalian mitochondrial damage while causing bacterial lethality. Mitochondrial 
toxicity of azithromycin in human mammary epithelia MCF-12A and fibroblasts were 
tested by fluorescent and transmission electron microscopy. Gene expression and 
DNA damage were tested by real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and ELISA. 
We found azithromycin suppressed the mitochondrial membrane potential gradient 
of MCF-12A cells and fibroblasts. Ultrastructure exams showed that the 
antibiotic caused vacuolated and swollen mitochondria with disrupted cristae in 
MCF-12A cells and fibroblasts compared to the morphology of mitochondria in the 
cells without antibiotic treatment. Fluorescent microscopy also showed 
azithromycin-induced mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), superoxide, 
after 3 h of culture. The DNA oxidative damage product, 
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG, significantly increased in the media after 
MCF-12A cells and fibroblasts were cultured in the media containing azithromycin 
for 24 h. Azithromycin upregulated gene expression of hypoxia inducible factor 1 
alpha (HIF1a), glycolytic enzymes including hexokinase 2 (HK2), 
phosphofructokinase 1 (PFKM), pyruvate kinase muscle isozyme M2 (PKM2), and 
glucose transporters in MCF-12A cells and fibroblasts. Lactate production also 
increased in the culture media. After treatment with azithromycin, healthy 
MCF-12A and fibroblast cells increased aerobic glycolysis-the "Warburg 
Effect"-to generate energy. In summary, azithromycin caused mitochondrial 
toxicity, ROS overproduction, DNA oxidative damage, upregulation of the HIF1a 
gene, and aerobic glycolysis in healthy mammalian cells. Over-usage of 
antibiotics could contribute to tumorigenesis and neurodegeneration and 
aggravate existing mitochondria-associated diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics8030110
PMCID: PMC6784251
PMID: 31382608

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.