1. Cell Res. 2019 Sep;29(9):711-724. doi: 10.1038/s41422-019-0202-3. Epub 2019
Aug  9.

Coagulation factors VII, IX and X are effective antibacterial proteins against 
drug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria.

Chen J(1), Li X(1), Li L(1)(2), Zhang T(1), Zhang Q(1), Wu F(3), Wang D(1), Hu 
H(4), Tian C(3)(5), Liao D(1), Zhao L(1), Song D(1), Zhao Y(1), Wu C(1), Song 
X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Key Laboratory of 
Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life 
Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610064, Sichuan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, China.
(3)High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, 
Anhui, China.
(4)CAS key Laboratory of Soft Matter Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, 
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, Anhui, China.
(5)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and School 
of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, 
Anhui, China.
(6)Center for Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Key Laboratory of 
Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life 
Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610064, Sichuan, China. 
xusong@scu.edu.cn.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, China. xusong@scu.edu.cn.

Infections caused by drug-resistant "superbugs" pose an urgent public health 
threat due to the lack of effective drugs; however, certain mammalian proteins 
with intrinsic antibacterial activity might be underappreciated. Here, we reveal 
an antibacterial property against Gram-negative bacteria for factors VII, IX and 
X, three proteins with well-established roles in initiation of the coagulation 
cascade. These factors exert antibacterial function via their light chains 
(LCs). Unlike many antibacterial agents that target cell metabolism or the 
cytoplasmic membrane, the LCs act by hydrolyzing the major components of 
bacterial outer membrane, lipopolysaccharides, which are crucial for the 
survival of Gram-negative bacteria. The LC of factor VII exhibits in vitro 
efficacy towards all Gram-negative bacteria tested, including extensively 
drug-resistant (XDR) pathogens, at nanomolar concentrations. It is also highly 
effective in combating XDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii 
infections in vivo. Through decoding a unique mechanism whereby factors VII, IX 
and X behave as antimicrobial proteins, this study advances our understanding of 
the coagulation system in host defense, and suggests that these factors may 
participate in the pathogenesis of coagulation disorder-related diseases such as 
sepsis via their dual functions in blood coagulation and resistance to 
infection. Furthermore, this study may offer new strategies for combating 
Gram-negative "superbugs".

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-019-0202-3
PMCID: PMC6796875
PMID: 31399697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.