1. Front Oncol. 2019 Jul 23;9:660. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00660. eCollection
2019.

Flavonoid Derivative of Cannabis Demonstrates Therapeutic Potential in 
Preclinical Models of Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer.

Moreau M(1)(2), Ibeh U(1)(3), Decosmo K(1)(4), Bih N(1), Yasmin-Karim S(1), 
Toyang N(5), Lowe H(5), Ngwa W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, United 
States.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(4)Department of CaNCURE Program, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, United 
States.
(5)Flavocure Biotech Inc., Baltimore, MD, United States.

Erratum in
    Front Oncol. 2020 Aug 21;10:1434. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.01434.

Pancreatic cancer is particularly refractory to modern therapies, with a 5-year 
survival rate for patients at a dismal 8%. One of the significant barriers to 
effective treatment is the immunosuppressive pancreatic tumor microenvironment 
and development of resistance to treatment. New treatment options to increase 
both the survival and quality of life of patients are urgently needed. This 
study reports on a new non-cannabinoid, non-psychoactive derivative of cannabis, 
termed FBL-03G, with the potential to treat pancreatic cancer. In vitro results 
show major increase in apoptosis and consequential decrease in survival for two 
pancreatic cancer models- Panc-02 and KPC pancreatic cancer cells treated with 
varying concentrations of FBL-03G and radiotherapy. Meanwhile, in vivo results 
demonstrate therapeutic efficacy in delaying both local and metastatic tumor 
progression in animal models with pancreatic cancer when using FBL-03G 
sustainably delivered from smart radiotherapy biomaterials. Repeated experiments 
also showed significant (P < 0.0001) increase in survival for animals with 
pancreatic cancer compared to control cohorts. The findings demonstrate the 
potential for this new cannabis derivative in the treatment of both localized 
and advanced pancreatic cancer, providing impetus for further studies toward 
clinical translation.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00660
PMCID: PMC6663976
PMID: 31396485