1. Molecules. 2019 Aug 7;24(16):2860. doi: 10.3390/molecules24162860.

High Expression Achievement of Active and Robust Anti-β2 microglobulin 
Nanobodies via E.coli Hosts Selection.

Li D(1), Ji F(1), Huang C(1), Jia L(2).

Author information:
(1)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Molecular Recognition and imaging, School of 
Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, No.2 Linggong Road, Dalian 
116023, China.
(2)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Molecular Recognition and imaging, School of 
Bioengineering, Dalian University of Technology, No.2 Linggong Road, Dalian 
116023, China. lyjia@dlut.edu.cn.

Nanobodies (VHHs) overcome many of the drawbacks of conventional antibodies, and 
the related technologies represent state-of-the-art and advanced applications in 
scientific research, pharmaceuticals, and therapies. In terms of productivity 
and economic cost, the cytoplasmic expression of VHHs in Escherichia coli (E. 
coli) is a good process for their recombinant production. The cytoplasmic 
environment of the host is critical to the affinity and stability of the 
recombinant VHHs in soluble form, yet the effects have not been studied. For 
this purpose, recombinant anti-β2 microglobulin VHHs were constructed and 
expressed in four commercialized E. coli hosts, including BL21 (DE3), 
Rosetta-gami B (DE3) pLysS, Origami 2 (DE3) and SHuffle T7 Express. The results 
showed that anti-β2 microglobulin (β2MG) VHHs expressed in different hosts 
exhibited distinctive differences in the affinity and structural 
characteristics. The VHHs expressed in Rosetta-gami B (DE3) pLysS possessed not 
only the greatest affinity of (equilibrium dissociation constant) KD = 4.68 × 
10-8 M but also the highest yields compared with the VHHs expressed in BL21 
(DE3), Origami 2 (DE3) and SHuffle T7 Express. In addition, the VHHs expressed 
in Rosetta-gami B (DE3) pLysS were more stable than the VHHs expressed in the 
rest three hosts. Thus far, we have successfully realized the high expression of 
the active and robust anti-β2MG VHHs in Rosetta-gami B (DE3) pLysS. The 
underlying principle of our study is able to guide the expression strategies of 
nanobodies on the context of industrial large-scale production.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24162860
PMCID: PMC6720793
PMID: 31394739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.