1. BioDrugs. 2019 Oct;33(5):539-553. doi: 10.1007/s40259-019-00370-5.

Mission Possible: Advances in MYC Therapeutic Targeting in Cancer.

Allen-Petersen BL(1), Sears RC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, 2730 SW Moody Ave, RLSB, Portland, OR, 97201, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, 2730 SW Moody Ave, RLSB, Portland, OR, 97201, USA. searsr@ohsu.edu.

MYC is a master transcriptional regulator that controls almost all cellular 
processes. Over the last several decades, researchers have strived to define the 
context-dependent transcriptional gene programs that are controlled by MYC, as 
well as the mechanisms that regulate MYC function, in an effort to better 
understand the contribution of this oncoprotein to cancer progression. There are 
a wealth of data indicating that deregulation of MYC activity occurs in a large 
number of cancers and significantly contributes to disease progression, 
metastatic potential, and therapeutic resistance. Although the therapeutic 
targeting of MYC in cancer is highly desirable, there remain substantial 
structural and functional challenges that have impeded direct MYC-targeted drug 
development and efficacy. While efforts to drug the 'undruggable' may seem 
futile given these challenges and considering the broad reach of MYC, 
significant strides have been made to identify points of regulation that can be 
exploited for therapeutic purposes. These include targeting the deregulation of 
MYC transcription in cancer through small-molecule inhibitors that induce 
epigenetic silencing or that regulate the G-quadruplex structures within the MYC 
promoter. Alternatively, compounds that disrupt the DNA-binding activities of 
MYC have been the long-standing focus of many research groups, since this method 
would prevent downstream MYC oncogenic activities regardless of upstream 
alterations. Finally, proteins involved in the post-translational regulation of 
MYC have been identified as important surrogate targets to reduce MYC activity 
downstream of aberrant cell stimulatory signals. Given the complex regulation of 
the MYC signaling pathway, a combination of these approaches may provide the 
most durable response, but this has yet to be shown. Here, we provide a 
comprehensive overview of the different therapeutic strategies being employed to 
target oncogenic MYC function, with a focus on post-translational mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-019-00370-5
PMCID: PMC6790341
PMID: 31392631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Rosalie C. Sears is a partial owner in RAPPTA 
Therapeutics, Inc., which is working to develop small-molecule activators of 
Protein PhosphataseÂ 2A. Rosalie C. Sears does not receive funding from this 
relationship and the company is not public and therefore does not own publicly 
traded stock. Brittany L. Allen-Petersen declares she has no conflicts of 
interest that might be relevant to the contents of this review.