1. J Bacteriol. 1988 Oct;170(10):4493-500. doi: 10.1128/jb.170.10.4493-4500.1988.

Expression of the gene encoding the 17-kilodalton antigen from Rickettsia 
rickettsii: transcription and posttranslational modification.

Anderson BE(1), Baumstark BR, Bellini WJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, Georgia State University, 
Atlanta 30303.

Recently, we reported the molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence analysis of 
a gene from Rickettsia rickettsii that codes for a 17-kilodalton antigen (17K 
antigen) and is preceded by sequences closely resembling the -10 and -35 
consensus sequences for recognition by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase (Anderson 
et al., J. Bacteriol. 169:2385-2390, 1987). Experiments described in this report 
indicate that the start sites for initiating transcription of the 17K antigen 
gene are identical in the E. coli clone and in intact R. rickettsii. In each 
case, initiation was shown to begin 9 bases downstream of the presumed Pribnow 
box sequence (TATACT). A 169-base-pair fragment containing the promoter sequence 
initiated transcription in both directions when cloned into an E. coli promoter 
probe vector. The rickettsial fragment was found to contain sequences identical 
to the -10 region (but not the -35 region) of the E. coli promoter consensus 
sequence directed away from the 17K antigen gene. The amino-terminal portion 
(residues 17 to 20) of the deduced amino acid sequence for the 17K antigen 
contained the tetrapeptide Leu-Gln-Ala-Cys, a sequence that conforms favorably 
to those described for lipid modification and cleavage by lipoprotein signal 
peptidase II. The 17K antigen produced by the E. coli clone was shown to be 
labeled with [3H]palmitate and [3H]glycerol, indicative of lipid modification. 
In vitro mutagenesis designed to alter the cysteine at residue 20 to a glycine 
abolished incorporation of [3H]palmitate, suggesting that posttranslational 
modification occurs via a mechanism similar to that described for other 
gram-negative bacterial lipoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.170.10.4493-4500.1988
PMCID: PMC211481
PMID: 3139629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]