1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2019 Oct;45(7):751-756. doi: 10.1055/s-0039-1692977. Epub
 2019 Aug 12.

Innovative Molecular Testing Strategies for Adjunctive Investigations in 
Hemostasis and Thrombosis.

Ghorbanpour E(1), Lillicrap D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada.

Clinicians and scientists in the fields of hemostasis and thrombosis have been 
among those first to integrate new molecular strategies for the purpose of 
enhancing disease diagnosis and treatment. The molecular diagnosis and 
introduction of gene therapy approaches for hemophilia are obvious examples of 
this tendency. In this review, the authors summarize information concerning 
three molecular technologies that have reached various stages of translational 
potential for their incorporation into the clinical management of disorders of 
hemostasis. Chromatin conformation assays are now being used to capture 
structural knowledge of long-range genomic interactions that can alter patterns 
of gene expression and contribute to quantitative trait pathogenesis. Liquid 
biopsies in various forms are providing opportunities for early cancer 
detection, and in the context of tumor-educated platelets, as described here, 
can also characterize tumor type and the extent of tumor progression. This 
technology is already being trialed in patients with unprovoked venous 
thrombosis to assess the potential for occult malignancies. Lastly, advances in 
single cell transcriptome analysis, provide opportunities to definitively 
determine molecular events in rare cells, such as antigen-specific regulatory T 
cells, within the context of heterogeneous cell populations.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1692977
PMCID: PMC7594468
PMID: 31404933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.