1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2019 Nov 1;143:176-192. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.08.007. Epub 2019 Aug 8.

Pyruvate kinase M2: A simple molecule with complex functions.

Alquraishi M(1), Puckett DL(1), Alani DS(1), Humidat AS(1), Frankel VD(1), 
Donohoe DR(1), Whelan J(1), Bettaieb A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of Tennessee Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
37996-0840, USA.
(2)Department of Nutrition, University of Tennessee Knoxville, Knoxville, TN, 
37996-0840, USA; Department of Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 37996-0840, USA; Graduate School of 
Genome Science and Technology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 
37996-0840, USA. Electronic address: abettaie@utk.edu.

Pyruvate kinase M2 is a critical enzyme that regulates cell metabolism and 
growth under different physiological conditions. In its metabolic role, pyruvate 
kinase M2 catalyzes the last glycolytic step which converts phosphoenolpyruvate 
to pyruvate with the generation of ATP. Beyond this metabolic role in 
glycolysis, PKM2 regulates gene expression in the nucleus, phosphorylates 
several essential proteins that regulate major cell signaling pathways, and 
contribute to the redox homeostasis of cancer cells. The expression of PKM2 has 
been demonstrated to be significantly elevated in several types of cancer, and 
the overall inflammatory response. The unusual pattern of PKM2 expression 
inspired scientists to investigate the unrevealed functions of PKM2 and the 
therapeutic potential of targeting PKM2 in cancer and other disorders. 
Therefore, the purpose of this review is to discuss the mechanistic and 
therapeutic potential of targeting PKM2 with the focus on cancer metabolism, 
redox homeostasis, inflammation, and metabolic disorders. This review highlights 
and provides insight into the metabolic and non-metabolic functions of PKM2 and 
its relevant association with health and disease.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.08.007
PMCID: PMC6848794
PMID: 31401304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this article.