1. Infect Drug Resist. 2019 Jul 23;12:2259-2268. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S171338. 
eCollection 2019.

Profile of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir in the treatment of hepatitis C.

Childs-Kean LM(1), Brumwell NA(1), Lodl EF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of 
Florida College of Pharmacy, Gainesville, FL, USA.

The treatment of chronic hepatitis C has been revolutionized with the 
introduction of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs). However, some patients are not 
cured with first-line treatment. Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir is a 
fixed-dose combination of a polymerase inhibitor, an NS5A inhibitor, and a 
protease inhibitor with activity against strains of the hepatitis C virus that 
show resistance to other first-line antiviral regimens. 
Sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir has been studied in four Phase III 
randomized trials: POLARIS-1, -2, -3, and -4, which enrolled both treatment 
na√Øve and experienced patients with and without compensated cirrhosis. In these 
trials, at least 95% of patients treated with 
sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir achieved sustained virological response 
(SVR). This includes favorable treatment outcomes in patients who had previously 
failed a regimen containing sofosbuvir or an NS5A inhibitor. Patient-reported 
outcomes also improved during and after treatment with 
sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir. Treatment with 
sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir is well tolerated, with the most commonly 
reported adverse events being headache, fatigue, diarrhea, and nausea. The 
approval of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir/voxilaprevir allows a treatment option for 
patients who have failed treatment with certain DAA regimens.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S171338
PMCID: PMC6662169
PMID: 31413603

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.