1. Cureus. 2019 Jun 13;11(6):e4897. doi: 10.7759/cureus.4897.

Esthesioneuroblastoma: Summary of Single-center Experiences with Focus on 
Adjuvant Therapy and Overall Survival.

Alotaibi HA(1), Priola SM(2), Bernat AL(3), Farrash F(4).

Author information:
(1)Miscellaneous, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, SAU.
(2)Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, CAN.
(3)Neurosurgery, Lariboisi√®re Hospital, Paris, FRA.
(4)Neurosurgery, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, 
SAU.

Esthesioneuroblastoma (ENB) is a rare malignant tumor of the nasal cavity. The 
genetic basis of its development is still under study and has not been fully 
delineated. It has varying symptoms depending on the lesion's location within 
the nasal cavity. The most commonly used systems for such lesions are the Kadish 
staging and Haymes grading systems. The objectives are to review the most recent 
published literature evaluating the different treatments/ combination of 
treatment and assess the most appropriate treatment modality that can provide 
the longest progression-free survival and overall survival for ENB patients. 
Moreover, a look at what the latest literature suggests when it comes to 
adjuvant treatments and their effect on survival is also key to further the body 
of knowledge for neurosurgeons, Ears, Nose, and Throat (ENT) physicians and all 
the different subspecialties that deal and serve these population of patients. 
The published literature was reviewed starting from 1990. The focus was made on 
single-center experiences given their availability and easy access. The most 
recently published systematic review was used as the benchmark; research 
published after that was included in this study. The database search in OVID was 
conducted using the following keywords: "Esthesioneuroblastoma", "ENB", 
"Olfactory Neuroblastoma", Nose neoplasm", skull base neoplasm", "radiation", 
and "resection". The database search found 17 papers which included 14 
single-center reports, one systematic review, and two nationwide multi-center 
reviews. Surgery plus adjuvant radiation therapy appears to provide the best 
overall survival and progression-free survival especially in patients with high 
Kadesh grade. On the other hand, surgery alone or biopsy followed with radiation 
therapy provided the lower progression-free survival and overall survival from 
time of diagnosis. The role of chemotherapy, however, requires further 
investigation to assess its potentially harmful effects. The use of surgery as a 
stand-alone modality of treatment should be cautiously and rarely used in 
patients with lower staging scores and multiple negative resection margins.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4897
PMCID: PMC6689473
PMID: 31423376

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.