1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019 Oct;16(10):589-604. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-019-0186-y. Epub 2019 Aug 22.

A global view of hepatocellular carcinoma: trends, risk, prevention and 
management.

Yang JD(1)(2)(3)(4), Hainaut P(5), Gores GJ(1), Amadou A(5), Plymoth A(6), 
Roberts LR(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Comprehensive Transplant Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(4)Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Tumor Molecular Biology and Biomarkers Group, Institute for Advanced 
Biosciences, Inserm U 1209 CNRS UMR5309, Universit√© Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, 
France.
(6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, Rochester, MN, USA. roberts.lewis@mayo.edu.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fourth most common cause of cancer-related 
death worldwide. Risk factors for HCC include chronic hepatitis B and hepatitis 
C, alcohol addiction, metabolic liver disease (particularly nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease) and exposure to dietary toxins such as aflatoxins and 
aristolochic acid. All these risk factors are potentially preventable, 
highlighting the considerable potential of risk prevention for decreasing the 
global burden of HCC. HCC surveillance and early detection increase the chance 
of potentially curative treatment; however, HCC surveillance is substantially 
underutilized, even in countries with sufficient medical resources. Early-stage 
HCC can be treated curatively by local ablation, surgical resection or liver 
transplantation. Treatment selection depends on tumour characteristics, the 
severity of underlying liver dysfunction, age, other medical comorbidities, and 
available medical resources and local expertise. Catheter-based locoregional 
treatment is used in patients with intermediate-stage cancer. Kinase and immune 
checkpoint inhibitors have been shown to be effective treatment options in 
patients with advanced-stage HCC. Together, rational deployment of prevention, 
attainment of global goals for viral hepatitis eradication, and improvements in 
HCC surveillance and therapy hold promise for achieving a substantial reduction 
in the worldwide HCC burden within the next few decades.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-019-0186-y
PMCID: PMC6813818
PMID: 31439937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.