1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019 Sep 28;29(9):1375-1382. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.1906.06060.

Catalytic Ability Improvement of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase from Chromobacterium 
violaceum by N-Terminal Truncation and Proline Introduction.

Liu Z(1), Cheng Z(1), Ye S(1), Zhou L(1), Zhou Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology (Ministry of Education), School of 
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, P.R. China.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase from Chromobacterium violaceum (CvPAH) is a monomeric 
enzyme that converts phenylalanine to tyrosine. It shares high amino acid 
identity and similar structure with a subunit of human phenylalanine hydroxylase 
that is a tetramer, resulting in the latent application in medications. In this 
study, semirational design was applied to CvPAH to improve the catalytic ability 
based on molecular dynamics simulation analyses. Four Nterminal truncated 
variants and one single point variant were constructed and characterized. The 
D267P variant showed a 2.1-fold increased thermal stability compared to the wild 
type, but lower specific activity was noted compared with the wild type. The 
specific activity of all truncated variants was a greater than 25% increase 
compared to the wild type, and these variants showed similar or slightly 
decreased thermostability with the exception of the N-Δ9 variant. Notably, the 
N-Δ9 variant exhibited a 1.2-fold increased specific activity, a 1.3-fold 
increased thermostability and considerably increased catalytic activity under 
the neutral environment compared with the wild type. These properties of the 
N-Δ9 variant could advance medical and pharmaceutical applications of CvPAH. Our 
findings indicate that the N-terminus might modulate substrate binding, and are 
directives for further modification and functional research of PAH and other 
enzymes.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1906.06060
PMID: 31434173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]