1. Oncol Rep. 2019 Nov;42(5):1725-1734. doi: 10.3892/or.2019.7291. Epub 2019 Aug 
22.

Dehydrogenase/reductase SDR family member 2 silencing sensitizes an 
oxaliplatin‑resistant cell line to oxaliplatin by inhibiting excision repair 
cross‑complementing group 1 protein expression.

Li JM(1), Jiang GM(2), Zhao L(1), Yang F(1), Yuan WQ(1), Wang H(1), Luo YQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Affiliated Anhui Provincial Hospital 
of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230000, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat‑sen 
University, Zhuhai, Guangdong 510140, P.R. China.

Oxaliplatin (Oxa)‑based chemotherapy is widely used as the first‑line treatment 
for colorectal cancer (CRC). However, Oxa‑resistance is common for many 
postoperative CRC patients. To explore drug resistance in CRC, an Oxa‑resistant 
cell line, HCT116/Oxa, was established from parental HCT116 cells. These 
Oxa‑resistant cells exhibited characteristics of epithelial‑mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) and a higher migratory capacity than parental cells. Protein 
profiles of HCT116/Oxa and HCT116 cells were compared using a tandem mass 
tag‑based quantitative proteomics technique. The protein dehydrogenase/reductase 
SDR family member 2 (DHRS2) was revealed to be highly expressed in HCT116/Oxa 
cells. Silencing of DHRS2 in HCT116/Oxa cells effectively restored 
Oxa‑sensitivity by suppressing the expression of excision repair 
cross‑complementing group 1 protein via a p53‑dependent pathway, and reversed 
the EMT phenotype. Overall, the suppression of DHRS2 expression may be a 
promising strategy for the prevention of Oxa‑resistance in CRC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2019.7291
PMCID: PMC6775812
PMID: 31436301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]