1. Dis Model Mech. 2019 Sep 24;12(9):dmm040550. doi: 10.1242/dmm.040550.

Insoluble Aβ overexpression in an App knock-in mouse model alters microstructure 
and gamma oscillations in the prefrontal cortex, affecting anxiety-related 
behaviours.

Pervolaraki E(1), Hall SP(2), Foresteire D(3), Saito T(4), Saido TC(4), 
Whittington MA(2), Lever C(3), Dachtler J(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
(2)Hull York Medical School, University of York, Heslington, YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)Department of Psychology, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
(4)Laboratory for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, 
Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.
(5)Department of Psychology, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK 
James.dachtler@durham.ac.uk.

We studied a new amyloid-beta precursor protein (App) knock-in mouse model of 
Alzheimer's disease (AppNL-G-F ), containing the Swedish KM670/671NL mutation, 
the Iberian I716F mutation and the Artic E693G mutation, which generates 
elevated levels of amyloid beta (Aβ)40 and Aβ42 without the confounds associated 
with APP overexpression. This enabled us to assess changes in anxiety-related 
and social behaviours, and neural alterations potentially underlying such 
changes, driven specifically by Aβ accumulation. AppNL-G-F knock-in mice 
exhibited subtle deficits in tasks assessing social olfaction, but not in social 
motivation tasks. In anxiety-assessing tasks, AppNL-G-F knock-in mice exhibited: 
(1) increased thigmotaxis in the open field (OF), yet; (2) reduced closed-arm, 
and increased open-arm, time in the elevated plus maze (EPM). Their ostensibly 
anxiogenic OF profile, yet ostensibly anxiolytic EPM profile, could hint at 
altered cortical mechanisms affecting decision-making (e.g. 'disinhibition'), 
rather than simple core deficits in emotional motivation. Consistent with this 
possibility, alterations in microstructure, glutamatergic-dependent gamma 
oscillations and glutamatergic gene expression were all observed in the 
prefrontal cortex, but not the amygdala, of AppNL-G-F knock-in mice. Thus, 
insoluble Aβ overexpression drives prefrontal cortical alterations, potentially 
underlying changes in social and anxiety-related behavioural tasks.This article 
has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.040550
PMCID: PMC6765200
PMID: 31439589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.