1. Cancer Control. 2019 Jan-Dec;26(1):1073274819862784. doi: 
10.1177/1073274819862784.

Biomarkers for Stratification in Colorectal Cancer: MicroRNAs.

Fadaka AO(1), Pretorius A(1), Klein A(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of the 
Western Cape, Cape Town, South Africa.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most widely recognized and deadly 
malignancies worldwide. In spite of the fact that the death rates have declined 
over the previous decade, particularly because of enhanced screening or 
potential treatment alternatives, CRC still remains the third leading cause of 
cancer-related mortality in the world, with an estimated incidence of over 1 
million new cases and approximately 600 000 deaths estimated yearly. Unlike 
prostate and lung cancer, CRC is not easily detectable in its early stage, which 
may also account for its high mortality rate. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of 
noncoding RNAs. The roles of these noncoding RNAs have been implicated in cancer 
pathogenesis, most especially CRC, due to their ability to posttranscriptionally 
regulate the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Dysregulated 
expression of many miRNAs regulates the expression of hundreds of growth 
regulatory genes and pathways that are important in the multistep model of 
colorectal carcinogenesis. If CRC is detected early, it is a largely treatable 
disease. Early diagnosis, including the identification of premalignant adenomas, 
is regarded a major concept for improving patient survival in CRC treatment. 
Several lines of research suggest that miRNAs are closely implicated in the 
metastatic process in CRC and some of these miRNAs could be useful as promising 
clinical tools for identifying specific stages of CRC due to their differential 
expression. This review discusses the correlation between CRC staging relative 
to the specific expression of miRNA for early detection, treatment, and disease 
management.

DOI: 10.1177/1073274819862784
PMCID: PMC6704426
PMID: 31431043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.