1. Viruses. 2019 Aug 22;11(9):770. doi: 10.3390/v11090770.

Structural Insights on Retroviral DNA Integration: Learning from Foamy Viruses.

Lee GE(1), Mauro E(2)(3), Parissi V(2)(3), Shin CG(1), Lesbats P(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biotechnology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong 17546, 
Korea.
(2)Fundamental Microbiology and Pathogenicity Laboratory, UMR 5234 
CNRS-University of Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France.
(3)Viral DNA Integration and Chromatin Dynamics Network (DyNAVir), 33076 
Bordeaux, France.
(4)Fundamental Microbiology and Pathogenicity Laboratory, UMR 5234 
CNRS-University of Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France. Paul.lesbats@u-bordeaux.fr.
(5)Viral DNA Integration and Chromatin Dynamics Network (DyNAVir), 33076 
Bordeaux, France. Paul.lesbats@u-bordeaux.fr.

Foamy viruses (FV) are retroviruses belonging to the Spumaretrovirinae 
subfamily. They are non-pathogenic viruses endemic in several mammalian hosts 
like non-human primates, felines, bovines, and equines. Retroviral DNA 
integration is a mandatory step and constitutes a prime target for 
antiretroviral therapy. This activity, conserved among retroviruses and long 
terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons, involves a viral nucleoprotein complex 
called intasome. In the last decade, a plethora of structural insights on 
retroviral DNA integration arose from the study of FV. Here, we review the 
biochemistry and the structural features of the FV integration apparatus and 
will also discuss the mechanism of action of strand transfer inhibitors.

DOI: 10.3390/v11090770
PMCID: PMC6784120
PMID: 31443391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.