1. ACS Omega. 2019 Jan 11;4(1):961-970. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03052.
eCollection  2019 Jan 31.

Structural Modeling and in Silico Screening of Potential Small-Molecule 
Allosteric Agonists of a Glucagon-like Peptide 1 Receptor.

Redij T(1), Chaudhari R(1), Li Z(1), Hua X(2), Li Z(1)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, 
and Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of the Sciences in 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, Diabetes Research Center (DRC), University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States.

The glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP-1R) belongs to the pharmaceutically 
important class B family of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), and its 
incretin peptide ligand GLP-1 analogs are adopted drugs for the treatment of 
type 2 diabetes. Despite remarkable antidiabetic effects, GLP-1 peptide-based 
drugs are limited by the need of injection. On the other hand, developing 
nonpeptidic small-molecule drugs targeting GLP-1R remains elusive. Here, we 
first constructed a three-dimensional structure model of the transmembrane (TM) 
domain of human GLP-1R using homology modeling and conformational sampling 
techniques. Next, a potential allosteric binding site on the TM domain was 
predicted computationally. In silico screening of druglike compounds against 
this predicted allosteric site has identified nine compounds as potential GLP-1R 
agonists. The independent agonistic activity of two compounds was subsequently 
confirmed using a cAMP response element-based luciferase reporting system. One 
compound was also shown to stimulate insulin secretion through in vitro assay. 
In addition, this compound synergized with GLP-1 to activate human GLP-1R. These 
results demonstrated that allosteric regulation potentially exists in GLP-1R and 
can be exploited for developing small-molecule agonists. The success of this 
work will help pave the way for small-molecule drug discovery targeting other 
class B GPCRs through allosteric regulations.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.8b03052
PMCID: PMC6648429
PMID: 31459371

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.