1. J Biol Methods. 2017 Dec 15;4(4):e82. doi: 10.14440/jbm.2017.207. eCollection 
2017.

A bi-functional IL-6-HaloTag(®) as a tool to measure the cell-surface expression 
of recombinant odorant receptors and to facilitate their activity 
quantification.

Noe F(1), Geithe C(1), Fiedler J(1), Krautwurst D(1).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute for Food Systems Biology at the Technical University of 
Munich, D-85354 Freising, Germany.

The functional cell surface expression of recombinant odorant receptors 
typically has been investigated by expressing N-terminally extended, "tagged" 
receptors in test cell systems, using antibody-based immunocytochemistry or flow 
cytometry, and by measuring odorant/receptor-induced cAMP signaling, mostly by 
an odorant/receptor-induced and cAMP signaling-dependent transcriptional 
activation of a luciferase-based luminescence assay. In the present protocol, we 
explain a method to measure the cell-surface expression and signaling of 
recombinant odorant receptors carrying a bi-functional, N-terminal 
'IL-6-HaloTag®'. IL-6, being a secreted cytokine, facilitates functional cell 
surface expression of recombinant HaloTag®-odorant receptors, and the HaloTag® 
protein serves as a highly specific acceptor for cell-impermeant or 
cell-permeant, fluorophore-coupled ligands, which enable the quantification of 
odorant receptor expression by antibody-independent, chemical live-cell staining 
and flow cytometry. Here, we describe how to measure the cell surface expression 
of recombinant IL-6-HaloTag®-odorant receptors in HEK-293 cells or NxG 108CC15 
cells, by live-cell staining and flow cytometry, and how to measure an 
odorant-induced activation of these receptors by the fast, real-time, 
luminescence-based GloSensor® cAMP assay.

DOI: 10.14440/jbm.2017.207
PMCID: PMC6706140
PMID: 31453236

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.