1. Org Biomol Chem. 2019 Sep 21;17(35):8125-8139. doi: 10.1039/c9ob01645g. Epub 
2019 Aug 28.

Z-isomerization of retinoids through combination of monochromatic 
photoisomerization and metal catalysis.

Kahremany S(1), Sander CL(2), Tochtrop GP(3), Kubas A(4), Palczewski K(1).

Author information:
(1)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute and the Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA. kpalczew@uci.edu skahrema@uci.edu.
(2)Gavin Herbert Eye Institute and the Department of Ophthalmology, University 
of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA. kpalczew@uci.edu skahrema@uci.edu 
and Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.
(4)Institute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 
01-224 Warsaw, Poland. akubas@ichf.edu.pl.

Catalytic Z-isomerization of retinoids to their thermodynamically less stable 
Z-isomer remains a challenge. In this report, we present a photochemical 
approach for the catalytic Z-isomerization of retinoids using monochromatic 
wavelength UV irradiation treatment. We have developed a straightforward 
approach for the synthesis of Z-retinoids in high yield, overcoming common 
obstacles normally associated with their synthesis. Calculations based on 
density functional theory (DFT) have allowed us to correlate the experimentally 
observed Z-isomer distribution of retinoids with the energies of chemically 
important intermediates, which include ground- and excited-state potential 
energy surfaces. We also demonstrate the application of the current method by 
synthesizing gram-scale quantities of 9-cis-retinyl acetate 9Z-a. Operational 
simplicity and gram-scale ability make this chemistry a very practical solution 
to the problem of Z-isomer retinoid synthesis.

DOI: 10.1039/c9ob01645g
PMCID: PMC6739180
PMID: 31455964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.