1. ACS Omega. 2018 Feb 9;3(2):1770-1782. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01723.
eCollection  2018 Feb 28.

Further Insight into the Interactions of the Cytotoxic Macrolides Laulimalide 
and Peloruside A with Their Common Binding Site.

Castro-Alvarez A(1), Pineda O(1), Vilarrasa J(1).

Author information:
(1)Organic Chemistry Section, Facultat de Química, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Diagonal 645, 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

The binding site of the macrolides laulimalide and peloruside A, which is 
different from that of the clinically useful drugs paclitaxel/taxol and 
ixabepilone (tax site), is known to be between two adjacent β-tubulin units (ext 
site). Here, we report our study of the binding of these molecules to an 
α1β1/α2β2-tubulin "tetramer" model. AutoDock 4.2.6//AutoDock Vina dockings 
predicted that the affinities of laulimalide and peloruside A for the tax site 
are quite similar to those for the ext site. However, molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulations indicated that only when these two ligands are located at the ext 
site, there are contacts that help stabilize the system, favoring the β1/β2 
interactions. The binding affinity of laulimalide for this site is stronger than 
that of peloruside A, but this is compensated for by additional β1/β2 contacts 
that are induced by peloruside A. MD studies also suggested that epothilones at 
the tax site and either laulimalide or peloruside A at the ext site cause 
similar stabilizing effects (mainly linking the M-loop of β1 and loop H1-B2 of 
β2). In a "hexamer" model (3 units of αβ-tubulin), the effects are confirmed. 
Metadynamics simulations of laulimalide and peloruside A, which are reported for 
the first time, suggest that peloruside A produces a stronger change in the 
M-loop, which explains the stabilization of the β1/β2 interaction.

DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.7b01723
PMCID: PMC6641392
PMID: 31458493

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.