1. Virus Evol. 2019 Aug 21;5(2):vez034. doi: 10.1093/ve/vez034. eCollection 2019 
Jul.

Conserved structural RNA domains in regions coding for cleavage site motifs in 
hemagglutinin genes of influenza viruses.

Gultyaev AP(1)(2), Richard M(1), Spronken MI(1), Olsthoorn RCL(3), Fouchier 
RAM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, Dr. Molewaterplein 40, 
3015 GD Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Group Imaging and Bioinformatics, Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer 
Science (LIACS), Leiden University, PO Box 9512, 2300 RA Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, PO Box 9502, 2300 RA 
Leiden, The Netherlands.

The acquisition of a multibasic cleavage site (MBCS) in the hemagglutinin (HA) 
glycoprotein is the main determinant of the conversion of low pathogenic avian 
influenza viruses into highly pathogenic strains, facilitating HA cleavage and 
virus replication in a broader range of host cells. In nature, substitutions or 
insertions in HA RNA genomic segments that code for multiple basic amino acids 
have been observed only in the HA genes of two out of sixteen subtypes 
circulating in birds, H5 and H7. Given the compatibility of MBCS motifs with HA 
proteins of numerous subtypes, this selectivity was hypothesized to be 
determined by the existence of specific motifs in HA RNA, in particular 
structured domains. In H5 and H7 HA RNAs, predictions of such domains have 
yielded alternative conserved stem-loop structures with the cleavage site codons 
in the hairpin loops. Here, potential RNA secondary structures were analyzed in 
the cleavage site regions of HA segments of influenza viruses of different types 
and subtypes. H5- and H7-like stem-loop structures were found in all known 
influenza A virus subtypes and in influenza B and C viruses with homology 
modeling. Nucleotide covariations supported this conservation to be determined 
by RNA structural constraints that are stronger in the domain-closing bottom 
stems as compared to apical parts. The structured character of this region in 
(sub-)types other than H5 and H7 indicates its functional importance beyond the 
ability to evolve toward an MBCS responsible for a highly pathogenic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/ve/vez034
PMCID: PMC6704317
PMID: 31456885