1. JOR Spine. 2018 Jun 19;1(2):e1017. doi: 10.1002/jsp2.1017. eCollection 2018
Jun.

Isolation of high-quality RNA from intervertebral disc tissue via pronase 
predigestion and tissue pulverization.

Caprez S(1), Menzel U(1), Li Z(1), Grad S(1), Alini M(1), Peroglio M(1).

Author information:
(1)AO Research Institute Davos Davos Switzerland.

The isolation of high-quality RNA from the intervertebral disc and especially 
from the nucleus pulposus is challenging due to the low cellularity and high 
proteoglycan content of this tissue. In this study, we report a simple 
modification of the standard guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform 
extraction method, which involves enzymatic predigestion of the tissue prior to 
standard RNA isolation. Yield, purity and integrity of RNA isolated from bovine 
nucleus pulposus, inner annulus fibrosus and outer annulus fibrosus were 
compared among complete matrix digestion, predigestion and pulverization, 
pulverization alone, and pulverization followed by on-column purification. With 
predigestion, the average yield of RNA obtained from bovine nucleus pulposus was 
8.82 ± 2.05 ng/mg of wet tissue with 260/280 and 260/230 optical density ratios 
of 1.91 ± 0.15 and 1.84 ± 0.30, respectively. RIN analysis indicated that RNA 
quality was best preserved with the predigestion method (RNA integrity 
number > 7), and the extracted RNA was suitable for real-time polymerase chain 
reaction. This method is of importance for gene expression studies on 
intervertebral disc development, degeneration and repair, and we anticipate that 
it may be further applied to other tissues rich in proteoglycans.

DOI: 10.1002/jsp2.1017
PMCID: PMC6686795
PMID: 31463444

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.