1. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Aug 29;19(1):165. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-0922-7.

DNA-PKcs modulates progenitor cell proliferation and fibroblast senescence in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Habiel DM(1), Hohmann MS(2), Espindola MS(1), Coelho AL(1), Jones I(1), Jones 
H(1), Carnibella R(3), Pinar I(3), Werdiger F(3), Hogaboam CM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Women's Guild Lung 
Institute, 127 S San Vicente Blvd., AHSP A9315, Los Angeles, CA, 90048, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Women's Guild Lung 
Institute, 127 S San Vicente Blvd., AHSP A9315, Los Angeles, CA, 90048, USA. 
miriam.hohmann@cshs.org.
(3)Laboratory of Dynamic Imaging, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Monash 
University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Women's Guild Lung 
Institute, 127 S San Vicente Blvd., AHSP A9315, Los Angeles, CA, 90048, USA. 
cory.hogaboam@cshs.org.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have highlighted the contribution of senescent 
mesenchymal and epithelial cells in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF), but 
little is known regarding the molecular mechanisms that regulate the 
accumulation of senescent cells in this disease. Therefore, we addressed the 
hypothesis that the loss of DNA repair mechanisms mediated by DNA protein kinase 
catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) in IPF, promoted the accumulation of mesenchymal 
progenitors and progeny, and the expression of senescent markers by these cell 
types.
METHODS: Surgical lung biopsy samples and lung fibroblasts were obtained from 
patients exhibiting slowly, rapidly or unknown progressing IPF and lung samples 
lacking any evidence of fibrotic disease (i.e. normal; NL). The expression of 
DNA-Pkcs in lung tissue was assessed by quantitative immunohistochemical 
analysis. Chronic inhibition of DNA-PKcs kinase activity was mimicked using a 
highly specific small molecule inhibitor, Nu7441. Proteins involved in DNA 
repair (stage-specific embryonic antigen (SSEA)-4+ cells) were determined by 
quantitative Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of transcriptomic datasets (GSE103488). 
Lastly, the loss of DNA-PKc was modeled in a humanized model of pulmonary 
fibrosis in NSG SCID mice genetically deficient in PRKDC (the transcript for 
DNA-PKcs) and treated with Nu7441.
RESULTS: DNA-PKcs expression was significantly reduced in IPF lung tissues. 
Chronic inhibition of DNA-PKcs by Nu7441 promoted the proliferation of SSEA4+ 
mesenchymal progenitor cells and a significant increase in the expression of 
senescence-associated markers in cultured lung fibroblasts. Importantly, 
mesenchymal progenitor cells and their fibroblast progeny derived from IPF 
patients showed a loss of transcripts encoding for DNA damage response and DNA 
repair components. Further, there was a significant reduction in transcripts 
encoding for PRKDC (the transcript for DNA-PKcs) in SSEA4+ mesenchymal 
progenitor cells from IPF patients compared with normal lung donors. In SCID 
mice lacking DNA-PKcs activity receiving IPF lung explant cells, treatment with 
Nu7441 promoted the expansion of progenitor cells, which was observed as a mass 
of SSEA4+ CgA+ expressing cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results show that the loss of DNA-PKcs promotes the 
expansion of SSEA4+ mesenchymal progenitors, and the senescence of their 
mesenchymal progeny.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-0922-7
PMCID: PMC6716822
PMID: 31464599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.