1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Sep 17;116(38):19077-19082. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1910713116. Epub 2019 Sep 4.

Molecular basis for retinol binding by serum amyloid A during infection.

Hu Z(1)(2), Bang YJ(3), Ruhn KA(3), Hooper LV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390; Zehan.Hu@utsouthwestern.edu Lora.Hooper@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX 75390.

Serum amyloid A (SAA) proteins are strongly induced in the liver by systemic 
infection and in the intestine by bacterial colonization. In infected mice, SAA 
proteins circulate in association with the vitamin A derivative retinol, 
suggesting that SAAs transport retinol during infection. Here we illuminate a 
structural basis for the retinol-SAA interaction. In the bloodstream of infected 
mice, most SAA is complexed with high-density lipoprotein (HDL). However, we 
found that the majority of the circulating retinol was associated with the small 
fraction of SAA proteins that circulate without binding to HDL, thus identifying 
free SAA as the predominant retinol-binding form in vivo. We then determined the 
crystal structure of retinol-bound mouse SAA3 at a resolution of 2.2 Å. 
Retinol-bound SAA3 formed a novel asymmetric trimeric assembly that was 
generated by the hydrophobic packing of the conserved amphipathic helices α1 and 
α3. This hydrophobic packing created a retinol-binding pocket in the center of 
the trimer, which was confirmed by mutagenesis studies. Together, these findings 
illuminate the molecular basis for retinol transport by SAA proteins during 
infection.

Copyright © 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1910713116
PMCID: PMC6754605
PMID: 31484771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.