1. Genetics. 2019 Oct;213(2):651-663. doi: 10.1534/genetics.119.302419. Epub 2019
 Sep 6.

Interpreting Coronary Artery Disease Risk Through Gene-Environment Interactions 
in Gene Regulation.

Findley AS(1), Richards AL(1), Petrini C(1), Alazizi A(1), Doman E(1), Shanku 
AG(1), Davis GO(1), Hauff N(2), Sorokin Y(2), Wen X(3), Pique-Regi R(4)(2), Luca 
F(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201 rpique@wayne.edu fluca@wayne.edu.

GWAS and eQTL studies identified thousands of genetic variants associated with 
complex traits and gene expression. Despite the important role of environmental 
exposures in complex traits, only a limited number of environmental factors were 
measured in these studies. Measuring molecular phenotypes in tightly controlled 
cellular environments provides a more tractable setting to study 
gene-environment interactions in the absence of other confounding variables. We 
performed RNA-seq and ATAC-seq in endothelial cells exposed to retinoic acid, 
dexamethasone, caffeine, and selenium to model genetic and environmental effects 
on gene regulation in the vascular endothelium-a common site of pathology in 
cardiovascular disease. We found that genes near regions of differentially 
accessible chromatin were more likely to be differentially expressed [OR = 
(3.41, 6.52), [Formula: see text]]. Furthermore, we confirmed that 
environment-specific changes in transcription factor binding are a key mechanism 
for cellular response to environmental stimuli. Single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in these transcription response factor footprints for dexamethasone, 
caffeine, and retinoic acid were enriched in GTEx eQTLs from artery tissues, 
indicating that these environmental conditions are latently present in GTEx 
samples. Additionally, SNPs in footprints for response factors in caffeine are 
enriched in colocalized eQTLs for coronary artery disease (CAD), suggesting a 
role for caffeine in CAD risk. By combining GWAS, eQTLs, and response genes, we 
annotated environmental components that can increase or decrease disease risk 
through changes in gene expression in 43 genes. Interestingly, each treatment 
may amplify or buffer genetic risk for CAD, depending on the particular SNP or 
gene considered.

Copyright Â© 2019 by the Genetics Society of America.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.119.302419
PMCID: PMC6781890
PMID: 31492806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]