1. Sci Rep. 2019 Sep 6;9(1):12823. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49219-5.

Whole-genome sequencing-based epidemiological analysis of anti-tuberculosis drug 
resistance genes in Japan in 2007: Application of the Genome Research for Asian 
Tuberculosis (GReAT) database.

Takii T(1), Seki K(2), Wakabayashi Y(2), Morishige Y(2), Sekizuka T(3), 
Yamashita A(3), Kato K(3), Uchimura K(4), Ohkado A(4), Keicho N(5), Mitarai 
S(2), Kuroda M(3), Kato S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mycobacteriology, Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Japan 
Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 3-1-24 Matsuyama, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8533, Japan. 
t-takii@jata.or.jp.
(2)Department of Mycobacteriology, Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Japan 
Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 3-1-24 Matsuyama, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8533, Japan.
(3)Pathogen Genomics Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1 
Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8640, Japan.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Research Institute of 
Tuberculosis, Japan Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 3-1-24 Matsuyama, Kiyose, 
Tokyo, 204-8533, Japan.
(5)Research Institute of Tuberculosis, Japan Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 
3-1-24 Matsuyama, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8533, Japan.

We investigated the lineages of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) isolates from 
the RYOKEN study in Japan in 2007 and the usefulness of genotypic drug 
susceptibility testing (DST) using the Genome Research for Asian Tuberculosis 
(GReAT) database. In total, 667 isolates were classified into lineage 1 (4.6%), 
lineage 2 (0.8%), lineage 2/Beijing (72.1%), lineage 3 (0.5%), and lineage 4 
(22.0%). The nationality, gender, and age groups associated with the isolates 
assigned to lineage 1 were significantly different from those associated with 
other lineages. In particular, isolates of lineage 1.2.1 (EAI2) formed 
sub-clusters and included a 2,316-bp deletion in the genome. The proportion of 
the isolates resistant to at least one anti-tuberculosis (TB) drug was 10.8%, as 
determined by either the genotypic or phenotypic method of DST. However, the 
sensitivities to isoniazid, streptomycin, and ethambutol determined by the 
genotypic method were low. Thus, unidentified mutations in the genome 
responsible for drug resistance were explored, revealing previously unreported 
mutations in the katG, gid, and embB genes. This is the first nationwide report 
of whole-genome analysis of TB in Japan.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-49219-5
PMCID: PMC6731343
PMID: 31492902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.