1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2019 Sep 7;16(18):3295. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph16183295.

A Hybrid Decision-Making Approach for the Service and Financial-Based 
Measurement of Universal Health Coverage for the E7 Economies.

Shi X(1), Li J(2), Wang F(3), Dinçer H(4), Yüksel S(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Physical Education, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China. 
shixf@sxu.edu.cn.
(2)Sports Science Institute, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China. 
jianyingli1959@163.com.
(3)Sports Science Institute, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China. 
sxdxsxf@163.com.
(4)School of Business, İstanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, 34810, Turkey. 
hdincer@medipol.edu.tr.
(5)School of Business, İstanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, 34810, Turkey. 
serhatyuksel@medipol.edu.tr.

The aim of this study is to measure universal health coverage in Emerging 7 (E7) 
economies. Within this framework, five different dimensions and 14 different 
criteria are selected by considering the explanations of World Health 
Organization and United Nations regarding universal health coverage. While 
weighting the dimensions and criteria, the Decision-making Trial and Evaluation 
Laboratory (DEMATEL) is considered with the triangular fuzzy numbers. 
Additionally, Multi-Objective Optimization on the basis of Ratio Analysis 
(MOORA) approach is used to rank E7 economies regarding Universal Health 
Coverage (UHC) performance. The novelty of this study is that both service and 
financial based factors are taken into consideration at the same time. 
Additionally, fuzzy DEMATEL and MOORA methodologies are firstly used in this 
study with respect to the evaluation of universal health coverage. The findings 
show that catastrophic out of pocket health spending, pushed below an 
international poverty line and annual growth rate of real Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) per capita are the most significant criteria for universal health coverage 
performance. Moreover, it is also concluded that Russia is the country that has 
the highest universal health coverage performance whereas China, India and 
Brazil are in the last ranks. It can be understood that macroeconomic conditions 
play a very significant role on the performance of universal health coverage. 
Hence, economic conditions should be improved in these countries to have better 
universal health coverage performance. Furthermore, it is necessary to establish 
programs that provide exemptions or lower out-of-pocket expenditures which will 
not prevent the use of health services. This situation can protect people 
against the financial risks related to health expenditures. In addition to them, 
it is also obvious that high population has also negative influence on the 
countries such as, China and India. It indicates that it would be appropriate 
for these countries to make population planning for this purpose.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph16183295
PMCID: PMC6765831
PMID: 31500288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.