1. Virology. 2019 Nov;537:186-197. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2019.09.001. Epub 2019
Sep  3.

Structural characterization of the PCV2d virus-like particle at 3.3 Å resolution 
reveals differences to PCV2a and PCV2b capsids, a tetranucleotide, and an 
N-terminus near the icosahedral 3-fold axes.

Khayat R(1), Wen K(2), Alimova A(3), Gavrilov B(4), Katz A(5), Galarza JM(2), 
Gottlieb P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The City College of New York, New 
York, NY, 10031, USA; Graduate Program in Biochemistry, The Graduate Center of 
the City University of New York, New York, NY, 10016, USA. Electronic address: 
rkhayat@ccny.cuny.edu.
(2)TechnoVax, Inc., 6 Westchester Plaza, Elmsford, NY, 10523, USA.
(3)CUNY School of Medicine, City College of New York, NY, 10031, USA.
(4)Biologics Development, Huvepharma, 3A Nikolay Haytov Street, Sofia, 1113, 
Bulgaria.
(5)Department of Physics, City College of New York, New York, NY, 10031, USA.

Porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) has a major impact on the swine industry. Eight PCV2 
genotypes (a-h) have been identified using capsid sequence analysis. PCV2d has 
been designated as the emerging genotype. The cryo-electron microscopy molecular 
envelope of PCV2d virus-like particles identifies differences between PCV2a, b 
and d genotypes that accompany the emergence of PCV2b from PCV2a, and PCV2d from 
PCV2b. These differences indicate that sequence analysis of genotypes is 
insufficient, and that it is important to determine the PCV2 capsid structure as 
the virus evolves. Structure-based sequence comparison demonstrate that each 
genotype possesses a unique combination of amino acids located on the surface of 
the capsid that undergo substitution. We also demonstrate that the capsid 
N-terminus moves in response to increasing amount of nucleic acid packaged into 
the capsid. Furthermore, we model a tetranucleotide between the 5- and 2-fold 
axes of symmetry that appears to be responsible for capsid stability.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virol.2019.09.001
PMCID: PMC6958667
PMID: 31505320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]