1. Front Oncol. 2019 Aug 23;9:800. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00800. eCollection
2019.

Rethink of EGFR in Cancer With Its Kinase Independent Function on Board.

Thomas R(1), Weihua Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, College of Natural Science and 
Mathematics, University of Houston, Houston, TX, United States.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one of most potent oncogenes that 
are commonly altered in cancers. As a receptor tyrosine kinase, EGFR's kinase 
activity has been serving as the primary target for developing cancer 
therapeutics, namely the EGFR inhibitors including small molecules targeting its 
ATP binding pocket and monoclonal antibodies targeting its ligand binding 
domains. EGFR inhibitors have produced impressive therapeutic benefits to 
responsive types of cancers. However, acquired and innate resistances have 
precluded current anti-EGFR agents from offering sustainable benefits to 
initially responsive cancers and benefits to EGFR-positive cancers that are 
innately resistant. Recent years have witnessed a realization that EGFR 
possesses kinase-independent (KID) pro-survival functions in cancer cells. This 
new knowledge has offered a different angle of understanding of EGFR in cancer 
and opened a new avenue of targeting EGFR for cancer therapy. There are already 
many excellent reviews on the role of EGFR with a focus on its kinase-dependent 
functions and mechanisms of resistance to EGFR targeted therapies. The present 
opinion aims to initiate a fresh discussion about the function of EGFR in cancer 
cells by laying out some unanswered questions pertaining to EGFR in cancer 
cells, by rethinking the unmet therapeutic challenges from a view of EGFR's KID 
function, and by proposing novel approaches to target the KID functions of EGFR 
for cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00800
PMCID: PMC6716122
PMID: 31508364