1. Front Genet. 2019 Aug 22;10:762. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00762. eCollection 
2019.

Two Novel NF1 Pathogenic Variants Causing the Creation of a New Splice Site in 
Patients With Neurofibromatosis Type I.

Setrajcic Dragos V(1), Blatnik A(2), Klancar G(1), Stegel V(1), Krajc M(2), 
Blatnik O(3), Novakovic S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Cancer Genetics Clinic, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department of Pathology, Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal dominant 
disorders, since the estimated incidence is one in 3,500 births. In this study, 
we present bioinformatical and functional characterization of two novel splicing 
NF1 variants, detected in NF1 patients. Patient 1, carrying NF1:c.122A>T, which 
introduces a new exonic 5' donor splice site, was diagnosed with 
hormone-positive, Her-2-negative breast cancer at the age of 47. She had an 
atypical presentation of NF1, with few café-au-lait spots and no Lisch nodules. 
Patient developed a hemothorax due to subclavian artery rupture, which has 
previously been described as an extremely rare complication of NF1. Patient 2, 
carrying NF1:c.7395-17T>G that creates a new intronic 3' acceptor splice site, 
had quite a typical clinical presentation of NF1: formations on her tongue in 
the region of her left metacarpal bones and on her left foot, plexiform 
neurofibroma in her pelvis, several café-au-lait spots, and axillary freckling. 
She was also diagnosed with cognitive impairment. In the report, we are 
presenting two novel variants which were successfully classified based on NGS 
and mRNA analysis. Based on results of mRNA analysis, both variants were 
classified as likely pathogenic according to ACMG guidelines applying evidence 
categories PS3, PM2, PP3, and PP1 supporting. By characterizing those two novel 
NF1 splicing variants, we have confirmed the neurofibromatosis type I phenotype 
in the two probands.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00762
PMCID: PMC6714493
PMID: 31507634