1. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 12;14(9):e0222329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222329. 
eCollection 2019.

Identification of bovine CpG SNPs as potential targets for epigenetic regulation 
via DNA methylation.

Maldonado MBC(1), de Rezende Neto NB(2), Nagamatsu ST(3)(4), Carazzolle 
MF(3)(5), Hoff JL(6), Whitacre LK(6), Schnabel RD(6)(7), Behura SK(6), McKay 
SD(8), Taylor JF(6), Lopes FL(1).

Author information:
(1)São Paulo State University (Unesp), School of Veterinary Medicine, Araçatuba, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Natural and Human Sciences Center, ABC Federal University, Santo André, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Genomics and Expression Laboratory, University of Campinas, Campinas, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Brazilian Bioethanol Science and Technology Laboratory (CTBE), Brazilian 
Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(5)National Center for High Performance Computing (CENAPAD-SP), University of 
Campinas, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Division of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 
United States of America.
(7)Informatics Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United 
States of America.
(8)Department of Animal and Veterinary Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, United States of America.

Methylation patterns established and maintained at CpG sites may be altered by 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within these sites and may affect the 
regulation of nearby genes. Our aims were to: 1) identify and generate a 
database of SNPs potentially subject to epigenetic control by DNA methylation 
via their involvement in creating, removing or displacing CpG sites (meSNPs), 
and; 2) investigate the association of these meSNPs with CpG islands (CGIs), and 
with methylation profiles of DNA extracted from tissues from cattle with 
divergent feed efficiencies detected using MIRA-Seq. Using the variant 
annotation for 56,969,697 SNPs identified in Run5 of the 1000 Bull Genomes 
Project and the UMD3.1.1 bovine reference genome sequence assembly, we 
identified and classified 12,836,763 meSNPs according to the nature of variation 
created at CpGs. The majority of the meSNPs were located in intergenic regions 
(68%) or introns (26.3%). We found an enrichment (p<0.01) of meSNPs located in 
CGIs relative to the genome as a whole, and also in differentially methylated 
sequences in tissues from animals divergent for feed efficiency. Seven meSNPs, 
located in differentially methylated regions, were fixed for methylation site 
creating (MSC) or destroying (MSD) alleles in the differentially methylated 
genomic sequences of animals differing in feed efficiency. These meSNPs may be 
mechanistically responsible for creating or deleting methylation targets 
responsible for the differential expression of genes underlying differences in 
feed efficiency. Our methyl SNP database (dbmeSNP) is useful for identifying 
potentially functional "epigenetic polymorphisms" underlying variation in bovine 
phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0222329
PMCID: PMC6742455
PMID: 31513639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.