1. Biomolecules. 2019 Sep 11;9(9):474. doi: 10.3390/biom9090474.

Connexin43 is Dispensable for Early Stage Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell Adipogenic 
Differentiation But is Protective against Cell Senescence.

Shao Q(1), Esseltine JL(2), Huang T(3)(4), Novielli-Kuntz N(5), Ching JE(6), 
Sampson J(7), Laird DW(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
cindy.shao@schulich.uwo.ca.
(2)Division of BioMedical Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. 
John's, NL A1B 3V6, Canada. jesseltine@med.mun.ca.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
huangtaorrr@163.com.
(4)Department of Pathology, Shenyang Medical College, Shenyang 110034, China. 
huangtaorrr@163.com.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
nicole.kuntz@uwo.ca.
(6)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
jching8@uwo.ca.
(7)Department of Neurology, Stanford University Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA 
94304, USA. jacindas@stanford.edu.
(8)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
dale.laird@schulich.uwo.ca.
(9)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada. 
dale.laird@schulich.uwo.ca.

In the last couple of decades, there has been a growing optimism surrounding the 
potential transformative use of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) for regenerative medicine and 
disease treatment. In order for this to occur, it is first essential to 
understand the mechanisms underpinning their cell-fate specification, which 
includes cell signaling via gap junctional intercellular communication. Here, we 
investigated the role of the prototypical gap junction protein, connexin43 
(Cx43), in governing the differentiation of iPSCs into MSCs and MSC 
differentiation along the adipogenic lineage. We found that control iPSCs, as 
well as iPSCs derived from oculodentodigital dysplasia patient fibroblasts 
harboring a GJA1 (Cx43) gene mutation, successfully and efficiently 
differentiated into LipidTox and perilipin-positive cells, indicating cell 
differentiation along the adipogenic lineage. Furthermore, the complete 
CRISPR-Cas9 ablation of Cx43 from iPSCs did not prevent their differentiation 
into bona fide MSCs or pre-adipocytes, strongly suggesting that even though Cx43 
expression is upregulated during adipogenesis, it is expendable. Interestingly, 
late passage Cx43-ablated MSCs senesced more quickly than control cells, 
resulting in failure to properly differentiate in vitro. We conclude that 
despite being upregulated during adipogenesis, Cx43 plays no detectable role in 
the early stages of human iPSC-derived MSC adipogenic differentiation. However, 
Cx43 may play a more impactful role in protecting MSCs from premature 
senescence.

DOI: 10.3390/biom9090474
PMCID: PMC6770901
PMID: 31514306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest with the contents of this article.