1. PLoS One. 2019 Sep 12;14(9):e0216013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216013. 
eCollection 2019.

Enhanced detection of prion infectivity from blood by preanalytical enrichment 
with peptoid-conjugated beads.

Hornemann S(1), Schwarz P(1), Rushing EJ(1), Connolly MD(2), Zuckermann RN(2), 
Yam AY(3), Aguzzi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Biological Nanostructures Facility, The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(3)Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics Inc., Emeryville, California, United States 
of America.

Prions cause transmissible infectious diseases in humans and animals and have 
been found to be transmissible by blood transfusion even in the presymptomatic 
stage. However, the concentration of prions in body fluids such as blood and 
urine is extremely low; therefore, direct diagnostic tests on such specimens 
often yield false-negative results. Quantitative preanalytical prion enrichment 
may significantly improve the sensitivity of prion assays by concentrating trace 
amounts of prions from large volumes of body fluids. Here, we show that beads 
conjugated to positively charged peptoids not only captured PrP aggregates from 
plasma of prion-infected hamsters, but also adsorbed prion infectivity in both 
the symptomatic and preclinical stages of the disease. Bead absorbed prion 
infectivity efficiently transmitted disease to transgenic indicator mice. We 
found that the readout of the peptoid-based misfolded protein assay (MPA) 
correlates closely with prion infectivity in vivo, thereby validating the MPA as 
a simple, quantitative, and sensitive surrogate indicator of the presence of 
prions. The reliable and sensitive detection of prions in plasma will enable a 
wide variety of applications in basic prion research and diagnostics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216013
PMCID: PMC6742390
PMID: 31513666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was supported by the Novartis 
Research Foundation. Parts of the work was employed in a patent penned by the 
Novartis Research Foundation (US20130109581 A1, CA2721982 A1). This does not 
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.