1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Oct 1;116(40):20141-20150. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1901931116. Epub 2019 Sep 16.

αvβ3-integrin regulates PD-L1 expression and is involved in cancer immune 
evasion.

Vannini A(1), Leoni V(1), Barboni C(2), Sanapo M(2), Zaghini A(2), Malatesta 
P(3)(4), Campadelli-Fiume G(5), Gianni T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, 40064 
Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, 16132 Genova, 
Italy.
(4)Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere 
Scientifico (IRCCS), 16132 Genova, Italy
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy; gabriella.campadelli@unibo.it.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019 Oct 22;116(43):21950. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1916790116.

Tumors utilize a number of effective strategies, including the programmed death 
1/PD ligand 1 (PD-1/PD-L1) axis, to evade immune-mediated control of their 
growth. PD-L1 expression is mainly induced by IFN receptor signaling or 
constitutively induced. Integrins are an abundantly expressed class of proteins 
which play multiple deleterious roles in cancer and exert proangiogenic and 
prosurvival activities. We asked whether αvβ3-integrin positively regulates 
PD-L1 expression and the anticancer immune response. We report that 
αvβ3-integrin regulated constitutive and IFN-induced PD-L1 expression in human 
and murine cancerous and noncancerous cells. αvβ3-integrin targeted STAT1 
through its signaling C tail. The implantation of β3-integrin-depleted tumor 
cells led to a dramatic decrease in the growth of primary tumors, which 
exhibited reduced PD-L1 expression and became immunologically hot, with 
increased IFNγ content and CD8+ cell infiltration. In addition, the implantation 
of β3-integrin-depleted tumors elicited an abscopal immunotherapeutic effect 
measured as protection from the challenge tumor and durable splenocyte and serum 
reactivity to B16 cell antigens. These modifications to the immunosuppressive 
microenvironment primed cells for checkpoint (CP) blockade. When combined with 
anti-PD-1, β3-integrin depletion led to durable therapy and elicited an abscopal 
immunotherapeutic effect. We conclude that in addition to its previously known 
roles, αvβ3-integrin serves as a critical component of the cancer immune evasion 
strategy and can be an effective immunotherapy target.

Copyright © 2019 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1901931116
PMCID: PMC6778255
PMID: 31527243

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.