1. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2020 May 1;27(5):418-428. doi: 10.5551/jat.49619. Epub 
2019 Sep 13.

Association of Fetuin-B with Subclinical Atherosclerosis in Obese Chinese 
Adults.

Li Z(1), He C(2), Liu Y(3), Wang D(4), Lin M(5), Liu C(5)(6), Shi X(5), Chen 
Z(5), Li X(5), Yang S(2), Li W(7).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Research Unit, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen 
University.
(2)Xiamen Diabetes Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen 
University.
(3)Department of Nursing, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University.
(4)School of Medicine, Xiamen University of Xiamen.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Xiamen University.
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, the Teaching Hospital of Fujian 
Medical University.
(7)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University.

AIM: We aimed to explore the independent associations of serum Fetuin-B and 
common genetic variants in FETUB locus with subclinical atherosclerosis.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 1,140 obese adults, who underwent serum 
Fetuin-B testing, hepatic ultrasonography scanning, genotyping on four tagging 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in FETUB locus and atherosclerosis 
detection, was conducted in Xiamen, China.
RESULTS: Increasing tertiles of brachial ankle pulse wave velocity (ba-PWV) were 
significantly associated with higher prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) (48.8%, 61.5%, and 70.5% for tertiles of 1-3, respectively, 
p＜0.001) and serum Fetuin-B (3.85±1.39, 4.09±1.40, and 4.27±1.46 µg/ml, 
p=0.047). Multivariable linear regression analyses with adjustment for potential 
confounding factors, even NAFLD per se, showed that serum Fetuin-B were 
significantly and positively associated with ba-PWV, with standardized 
regression coefficients (β) ranging from 0.055 to 0.075 (all p-values ＜0.05) in 
different models. However, the significant relationship between serum Fetuin-B 
and ba-PWV disappeared with further adjustment for insulin resistance. Serum 
Fetuin-B was not significantly associated with ankle-brachial index (ABI). All 
genotypes of the four tested FETUB tagging SNPs were not significantly 
associated with either ba-PWV or ABI with adjustment for potential confounding 
factors.
CONCLUSION: Serum Fetuin-B was positively associated with ba-PWV and may link 
liver fat accumulation to subclinical atherosclerosis via insulin resistance.

DOI: 10.5551/jat.49619
PMCID: PMC7242228
PMID: 31527322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.