1. Exp Eye Res. 2019 Nov;188:107798. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107798. Epub 2019
Sep  11.

Novel anti-angiogenic PEDF-derived small peptides mitigate choroidal 
neovascularization.

Sheibani N(1), Wang S(1), Darjatmoko SR(1), Fisk DL(1), Shahi PK(2), Pattnaik 
BR(2), Sorenson CM(2), Bhowmick R(3), Volpert OV(3), Albert DM(1), 
Melgar-Asensio I(4), Henkin J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Biomedical Engineering, and 
Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Center for Developmental Therapeutics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 
USA.
(5)Center for Developmental Therapeutics, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 
USA. Electronic address: j-henkin@northwestern.edu.

Abnormal migration and proliferation of endothelial cells (EC) drive neovascular 
retinopathies. While anti-VEGF treatment slows progression, pathology is often 
supported by decrease in intraocular pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), 
an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis. A surface helical 34-mer peptide of 
PEDF, comprising this activity, is efficacious in animal models of neovascular 
retina disease but remains impractically large for therapeutic use. We sought 
smaller fragments within this sequence that mitigate choroidal 
neovascularization (CNV). Expecting rapid intravitreal (IVT) clearance, we also 
developed a method to reversibly attach peptides to nano-carriers for extended 
delivery. Synthetic fragments of 34-mer yielded smaller anti-angiogenic 
peptides, and N-terminal capping with dicarboxylic acids did not diminish 
activity. Charge restoration via substitution of an internal aspartate by 
asparagine improved potency, achieving low nM apoptotic response in 
VEGF-activated EC. Two optimized peptides (PEDF 335, 8-mer and PEDF 336, 9-mer) 
were tested in a mouse model of laser-induced CNV. IVT injection of either 
peptide, 2-5 days before laser treatment, gave significant CNV decrease at day 
+14 post laser treatment. The 8-mer also decreased CNV, when administered as eye 
drops. Also examined was a nanoparticle-conjugate (NPC) prodrug of the 9-mer, 
having positive zeta potential, expected to display longer intraocular 
residence. This NPC showed extended efficacy, even when injected 14 days before 
laser treatment. Neither inflammatory cells nor other histopathologic 
abnormalities were seen in rabbit eyes harvested 14 days following IVT injection 
of PEDF 336 (>200 μg). No rabbit or mouse eye irritation was observed over 12-17 
days of PEDF 335 eye drops (10 mM). Viability was unaffected in 3 retinal and 2 
choroidal cell types by PEDF 335 up to 100 μM, PEDF 336 (100 μM) gave slight 
growth inhibition only in choroidal EC. A small anti-angiogenic PEDF epitope 
(G-Y-D-L-Y-R-V) was identified, variants (adipic-Sar-Y-N-L-Y-R-V) mitigate CNV, 
with clinical potential in treating neovascular retinopathy. Their shared active 
motif, Y - - - R, is found in laminin (Ln) peptide YIGSR, which binds Ln 
receptor 67LR, a known high-affinity ligand of PEDF 34-mer.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2019.107798
PMCID: PMC7032632
PMID: 31520600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]