1. Int J Genomics. 2019 Aug 18;2019:5459190. doi: 10.1155/2019/5459190.
eCollection  2019.

Molecular Characterization of a Multidrug-Resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae Strain 
R46 Isolated from a Rabbit.

Wu F(1), Ying Y(1), Yin M(1), Jiang Y(1), Wu C(1), Qian C(1), Chen Q(1), Shen 
K(1), Cheng C(2), Zhu L(2), Li K(1), Xu T(3), Bao Q(1), Lu J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences/Institute of Biomedical 
Informatics, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China.
(2)College of Medicine and Health, Lishui University, Lishui 323000, China.
(3)Institute of Translational Medicine, Baotou Central Hospital, Baotou 014040, 
China.

To investigate the mechanisms of multiple resistance and the horizontal transfer 
of resistance genes in animal pathogens, we characterized the molecular 
structures of the resistance gene-related sequences in a multidrug-resistant 
Klebsiella pneumoniae strain R46 isolated from a rabbit. Molecular cloning was 
performed to clone the resistance genes, and minimum inhibitory concentrations 
(MICs) were measured to determine the resistance characteristics of the cloned 
genes and related strains. A conjugation experiment was conducted to assess the 
transferability of the resistance plasmids. Sequencing and comparative genomic 
methods were used to analyze the structures of the resistance gene-related 
sequences. The K. pneumoniae R46 genome consisted of a chromosome and three 
resistance plasmids named pR46-27, pR46-42, and pR46-270, respectively. The 
whole genome encoded 34 antibiotic resistance genes including a newly identified 
chromosome-encoded florfenicol resistance gene named mdfA2. pR46-270, besides 
encoding 26 antibiotic resistance genes, carried four clusters of heavy metal 
resistance genes and several virulence-related genes or gene clusters. The 
plasmid-encoded resistance genes were mostly associated with mobile genetic 
elements. The plasmid with the most similarity to the floR gene-harboring 
plasmid pR46-27 was pCTXM-2271, a plasmid from Escherichia coli. The results of 
this work demonstrated that the plasmids with multidrug resistance genes were 
present in animal-derived bacteria and more florfenicol resistance genes such as 
mdfA2 could be present in bacterial populations. The resistance genes encoded on 
the plasmids may spread between the bacteria of different species or genera and 
cause the resistance dissemination.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/5459190
PMCID: PMC6721500
PMID: 31531339

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.