1. Cancer Manag Res. 2019 Aug 1;11:7253-7262. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S165706. 
eCollection 2019.

Treatment of non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer: focus on 
apalutamide.

Gul A(1), Garcia JA(1), Barata PC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Medical Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer 
Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is an important component of systemic therapy 
in advanced prostate cancer; however, resistance to ADT is inevitable. Three 
large studies demonstrated the efficacy of novel androgen receptor (AR)-targeted 
therapies in prolonging metastasis-free survival and time to symptomatic 
progression in patients with non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer 
(nmCRPC). Enzalutamide and apalutamide have been approved by the FDA in the 
nmCRPC setting. This review discusses the role of AR and ADT in prostate cancer, 
mechanism of ADT resistance and the nmCRPC stage. In addition, pharmacologic 
characteristics and clinical development of apalutamide, role of apalutamide in 
nmCRPC, and ongoing clinical studies of apalutamide in different stages of 
prostate cancer are discussed.

DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S165706
PMCID: PMC6682169
PMID: 31534371

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Garcia has disclosed to be a paid 
consultant/speaker for Clovis, Sanofi, Merck, Janssen, Eisai, Bayer and received 
institutional research support from Genentech, Merck, Clovis, and Pfizer. Dr 
Barata disclosed to be a paid consultant to Bayer, BMS, EMD, and Pfizer and 
received institutional research support from Blue Earth Diagnostics. Dr Gul 
reports no conflicts of interest in this work.