1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2019 Sep 20;55(10):612. doi: 10.3390/medicina55100612.

Pathogenic APC Variants in Latvian Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Patients.

Daneberga Z(1), Berzina D(2), Borosenko V(3), Krumina Z(4), Kokaine-Sapovalova 
L(3), Gardovskis A(2)(3), Berga-Svitina E(2), Gardovskis J(5), Miklasevics E(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Oncology, Riga Stradiņš University, LV-1007 Riga, Latvia. 
zanda.daneberga@rsu.lv.
(2)Institute of Oncology, Riga Stradiņš University, LV-1007 Riga, Latvia.
(3)Department of Surgery, Pauls Stradiņš Clinical University Hospital, LV-1002 
Riga, Latvia.
(4)Department of Biology and Microbiology, Riga Stradiņš University, LV-1007 
Riga, Latvia.
(5)Department of Surgery, Riga Stradiņš University, LV-1007, Riga, Latvia.

Background and objectives: Familial adenomatous polyposis is one of the 
APC-associated polyposis conditions described as genetically predetermined 
colorectal polyposis syndrome with a variety of symptoms. The purpose of this 
study was to determine sequence variants of the APC gene in patients with 
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) phenotype and positive or negative family 
history. Materials and Methods: Eight families with defined criteria of 
adenomatous polyposis underwent molecular genetic testing. Coding regions and 
flanking intron regions of the APC gene were analyzed by Sanger sequencing. 
Results: Eight allelic variants of the APC gene coding sequence were detected. 
All allelic variants of the APC gene were predicted to be pathogenic based on 
criteria according to the "Joint Consensus Recommendation of the American 
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular 
Pathology" (2015), four of them c.1586_1587insAT, c.2336delT, c.3066_3067insGA, 
and c.4303_4304insC, were considered novel. Conclusions: The timely molecular 
genetic analysis of APC germline variants and standardized interpretation of the 
pathogenicity of novel allelic variants has a high impact on choice for 
treatment, cancer prevention, and family genetic counseling.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina55100612
PMCID: PMC6843383
PMID: 31547110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.