1. G3 (Bethesda). 2019 Nov 5;9(11):3801-3812. doi: 10.1534/g3.119.400579.

Genetic Dissection Reveals the Role of Ash1 Domains in Counteracting Polycomb 
Repression.

Dorafshan E(1), Kahn TG(1), Glotov A(1), Savitsky M(1), Schwartz YB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden 
yuri.schwartz@umu.se.

Antagonistic functions of Polycomb and Trithorax proteins are essential for 
proper development of all metazoans. While the Polycomb proteins maintain the 
repressed state of many key developmental genes, the Trithorax proteins ensure 
that these genes stay active in cells where they have to be expressed. Ash1 is 
the Trithorax protein that was proposed to counteract Polycomb repression by 
methylating lysine 36 of histone H3. However, it was recently shown that genetic 
replacement of Drosophila histone H3 with the variant that carried Arginine 
instead of Lysine at position 36 did not impair the ability of Ash1 to 
counteract Polycomb repression. This argues that Ash1 counteracts Polycomb 
repression by methylating yet unknown substrate(s) and that it is time to look 
beyond Ash1 methyltransferase SET domain, at other evolutionary conserved parts 
of the protein that received little attention. Here we used Drosophila genetics 
to demonstrate that Ash1 requires each of the BAH, PHD and SET domains to 
counteract Polycomb repression, while AT hooks are dispensable. Our findings 
argue that, in vivo, Ash1 acts as a multimer. Thereby it can combine the input 
of the SET domain and PHD-BAH cassette residing in different peptides. Finally, 
using new loss of function alleles, we show that zygotic Ash1 is required to 
prevent erroneous repression of homeotic genes of the bithorax complex in the 
embryo.

Copyright © 2019 Dorafshan et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.119.400579
PMCID: PMC6829142
PMID: 31540973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]