1. Clin Transl Oncol. 2020 Jun;22(6):908-918. doi: 10.1007/s12094-019-02208-6.
Epub  2019 Sep 24.

Detection of novel mitochondrial mutations in cytochrome C oxidase subunit 1 
(COX1) in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).

Afkhami E(1), Heidari MM(2), Khatami M(1), Ghadamyari F(1), Dianatpour S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran. 
heidarimm@yazd.ac.ir.

BACKGROUND: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an Autosomal dominant 
inherited disorder and a rare formâ€Œ of colorectal cancer (CRC) that is 
characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of adenomas in the 
rectum and colon. Mostly, cancers develop after the advent of the polyps. It 
appears in both sexes evenly, and the occurrence of the disease is in the second 
decade of life. Mitochondrial genome mutations have been reported with a variety 
of Tumors, but the precise role of these mutations in the pathogenicity and 
tumor progression is not exactly clear. Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COX1) is 
the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. The present study 
aims at assessing the occurrence of mtDNA mutations in COX1 gene in FAP patients 
and attempts to find out the cause and effect relationship between mitochondrial 
mutations and tumor progression.
METHODS: In this study, 56 FAP patients were investigated for the presence of 
the mutations in mitochondrial COX1 coding gene by PCR and sequencing analysis. 
All sequences that differed from the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) 
were classified as missense/ nonsense or silent mutations. Functional genomic 
studies using Bio-informatics tools were performed on the founded mutations to 
understand the downstream alterations in structure and function of protein.
RESULTS: We identified 38 changes in the COX1 gene in patients with FAP 
symptoms. Most of them were heteroplasmic changes of missense type (25/38). Tree 
of the changes (G6145A, C6988A, and T7306G) were nonsense mutations and had not 
been reported in the literature before. Our results of bioinformatics 
predictions showed that the identified mutations can affect mitochondrial 
functions, especially if the conservative domain of the protein is concerned.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate a high frequency of mtDNA mutations in all of 
the FAP cases compared to matched controls. These data significantly enhance our 
understanding of how such mutations contribute to cancer pathologies and develop 
the cancer treatment methods by new diagnostic biomarkers, and new drugs for 
gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s12094-019-02208-6
PMID: 31552592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]