1. Oman Med J. 2019 Sep;34(5):412-419. doi: 10.5001/omj.2019.76.

Outcome of Omani Women with Breast Cancer-associated Brain Metastases Experience 
from a University Hospital.

Zahid KF(1), Kumar S(2), Al-Bimani K(2), Ahmed T(2), Al-Ajmi A(3), Burney IA(2), 
Al-Moundhri M(4).

Author information:
(1)Oncology Department, Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, East Riding of 
Yorkshire, UK.
(2)Unit of Medical Oncology, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(3)Department of Surgery, Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
(4)College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, 
Oman.

OBJECTIVES: Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cancer among women. Almost 20% of 
patients develop brain metastases (BM) and die shortly afterward. There is a 
dearth of data on the survival outcome of BC patients with BM from the Arab 
world.
METHODS: Consecutive women diagnosed with BC who developed 
radiologically-confirmed BM during their illness were identified through the 
hospital's electronic patient's records. Clinicopathological features and 
treatment outcomes were recorded. Survival was calculated using the Kaplan-Meier 
method, and factors affecting survival were studied using log-rank analysis.
RESULTS: Between January 2003 and June 2015, a total of 692 patients were 
treated for BC at our institute. Forty-eight (6.9%) developed BM. The median age 
at the diagnosis of BM was 45.2 years. More than half of cohort (54.2%) had HER2 
positive disease, while 27.1% had the triple-negative disease. The median time 
interval between the diagnosis of BC and the development of BM was 21 months, 
and median survival after development of brain disease was seven months. On 
univariate analysis, pathological grade, previous systemic treatment, brain as 
the first site of metastases, brain as the only site of metastases, treatment of 
BM, systemic treatment after BM, and diagnosis-specific graded prognostic 
assessment (DS-GPA) score significantly affected survival. On multivariate Cox 
regression analysis, the brain as the first site of metastases, treatment for 
brain disease, treatment type, and DS-GPA score significantly affected survival 
post-BM.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that Omani women are diagnosed with BC at a 
younger age, develop BM earlier, and carry a poor outcome.

DOI: 10.5001/omj.2019.76
PMCID: PMC6745425
PMID: 31555417