1. Sci Rep. 2019 Sep 24;9(1):13736. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50085-4.

Olfactory receptor gene abundance in invasive breast carcinoma.

Masjedi S(1), Zwiebel LJ(2), Giorgio TD(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, USA. 
todd.d.giorgio@vanderbilt.edu.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, USA. todd.d.giorgio@vanderbilt.edu.

Expression of olfactory receptors (ORs) has been reported in many human tissues 
outside the nasal epithelium. ORs have been validated as biomarkers in prostate 
cancer. In breast cancer, however, the expression and role of OR genes remain 
understudied. We examined the significance of OR transcript abundance in a large 
invasive breast carcinoma population and identified two OR genes, OR2W3 and 
OR2B6 to be potentially correlated to breast cancer progression. 960 breast 
invasive tumors and 56 human breast cancer cell lines were assessed for OR gene 
expression and 21 OR genes were highly abundant among 198 cases. Our 
transcriptome analysis discovered three significantly abundant OR genes among 
three sub-populations of invasiveÂ breast carcinoma patients. OR2W3 was 
correlated with invasion genes and basal-like subtype whereas OR2B6 was 
correlated with proliferation genes and luminal A subtype. Analyzing the OR gene 
upregulation among breast cancer cell lines showed that OR2B6 and OR2W3 were 
abundant similar to invasive breast tumors. Our study suggests that specific OR 
genes may be correlated with breast cancer characteristics, making ORs potential 
new diagnostic, and/or treatment markers. This study suggests future directions 
for the exploration of a role for ORs in the mechanisms of breast cancer 
proliferation and progression.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50085-4
PMCID: PMC6760194
PMID: 31551495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.