1. Front Oncol. 2019 Aug 28;9:839. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00839. eCollection
2019.

Structural Variants as a Basis for Targeted Therapies in Hematological 
Malignancies.

Schütte J(1), Reusch J(2), Khandanpour C(2), Eisfeld C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology, Oncology and Pneumology, University 
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)Medizinische Fakultät, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.

Structural variants (SV) are changes in the genomic landscape that can alter 
gene expression levels and thus lead to disease development. The most common and 
best studied SVs in hematological malignancies are chromosomal translocations. 
Here, parts of two genes that are normally on different chromosomes come into 
close proximity due to a failure in DNA repair. As a consequence, fusion 
proteins which show a different function and/or cellular localization compared 
to the two original proteins are expressed, sometimes even at different levels. 
The identification of chromosomal translocations is often used to identify the 
specific disease a patient is suffering from. In addition, SVs such as 
deletions, duplications, inversions and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
can occur in hematopoietic cells and lead to their malignant transformations. 
Changes in the 3D genome structure have also recently been shown to impact 
disease development. In this review, we describe a variety of SVs occurring in 
different subtypes of hematological malignancies. Currently, most therapeutic 
approaches target fusion proteins which are the cellular product of chromosomal 
translocations. However, amplifications and SNPs also play a role in disease 
progression and can be targeted. We present some examples for different types of 
structural variants and how they are currently treated.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2019.00839
PMCID: PMC6722867
PMID: 31555592