1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019 Sep 2;2019:8549727. doi: 10.1155/2019/8549727. 
eCollection 2019.

Effect of Zinc on the Oxidative Stress Biomarkers in the Brain of Nickel-Treated 
Mice.

Šulinskienė J(1), Bernotienė R(1), Baranauskienė D(1), Naginienė R(1), 
Stanevičienė I(2), Kašauskas A(2), Ivanov L(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas 
LT-50161, Lithuania.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of Health 
Sciences, Kaunas LT-50161, Lithuania.

The overexposure to nickel due to the extensive use of it in modern technology 
remains a major public health concern. The mechanisms of pathological effects of 
this metal remain elusive. The present study was devoted to evaluate the effect 
of nickel on the oxidative state of the brain cells of mice and to assess 
whether zinc as redox state modulator could efficiently protect cells against 
nickel's neurotoxicity. As oxidative stress biomarkers in the present study, we 
have measured the concentrations of reduced glutathione, metallothioneins, and 
malondialdehyde and the activity of the enzyme δ-aminolevulinate dehydratase. 
For the single metal exposure, mice were i.p. injected once with solutions of 
NiCl2 and/or ZnSO4; repeated exposure was performed i.p. injecting metal salt 
solutions for 14 days (once a day). The control mice received i.p. injections of 
saline. Results of our study demonstrate that single and 14 days of Ni2+ 
exposure decreased reduced glutathione and increased malondialdehyde contents in 
the brain of mice. Repeated Ni2+ administration significantly inhibited 
δ-aminolevulinate dehydratase while increasing brain metallothionein 
concentration at both exposure periods. Zinc exhibited a protective effect 
against nickel-induced glutathione and lipid peroxidation in brain cells of mice 
at both intervals of time, while repeated exposure to this metal significantly 
raised the brain metallothionein content. Repeated Zn2+ pretreatment protected 
δ-aminolevulinate dehydratase from Ni2+-induced inhibition and significantly 
increased metallothionein concentration at both investigated time intervals.

Copyright © 2019 Jurgita Šulinskienė et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/8549727
PMCID: PMC6745131
PMID: 31565155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.