1. J Cell Mol Med. 2019 Dec;23(12):8305-8313. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.14707. Epub 2019 
Oct 1.

TLR5 is a new reporter for triple-negative breast cancer indicated by 
radioimmunoimaging and fluorescent staining.

Shi D(1), Liu W(1), Zhao S(1), Zhang C(1), Liang T(1), Hou G(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and 
Biomedical Isotope Research Center, School of Medicine, Shandong University, 
Jinan, China.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly aggressive tumour that lacks 
marker for targeted diagnosis. Recently, it was reported that toll-like receptor 
5 (TLR5) was associated with some kind of tumours, especially in TNBC, but 
whether it could be used as a non-invasive monitoring target is not fully 
understood. Here, we established TLR5- 4T1 cell line with lentivirus-shRNA-TLR5 
knock-down transfection (with tag GFP, green fluorescent protein, TLR5- 4T1) and 
control TLR5+ 4T1 cell line with negative control lentivirus transfection. The 
effect of TLR5 down-regulation was detected with qPCR and Western blot. 125 
I-anti-TLR5 mAb and control isotype 125 I-IgG were prepared and injected to 
TLR5+/- 4T1-bearing mice models, respectively. Whole-body 
phosphor-autoradiography, fluorescence imaging and biodistribution were 
performed. Furthermore, ex vivo tumour TLR5 expression was proved through 
immunohistochemistry staining. We found that 125 I-anti-TLR5 mAb could bind to 
TLR5+ 4T1 with high affinity and specificity. Whole-body 
phosphor-autoradiography after 125 I-anti-TLR5 mAb injection showed TLR5+ 4T1 
tumour images in 24 hours, more clearly in 48 hours. Radioactivities in tumour 
tissues were positively related with TLR5 expression. Biodistribution assay 
showed that 125 I-anti-TLR5 mAb was mainly metabolized through the liver and 
kidney, and 125 I-anti-TLR5 mAb was much more accumulated in TLR5+ 4T1 tumour 
than TLR5- 4T1. In vivo fluorescence imaging successfully showed tumour tissues 
clearly both in TLR5+ and TLR5- 4T1 mice compared with lentivirus untreated 4T1 
tumour. Immunohistochemistry staining showed that TLR5 expression in tumours was 
indeed down-regulated in TLR5- 4T1 mice. Our results indicated that 125 
I-antiTLR5 mAb was an ideal agent for non-invasive imaging of TLR5+ tumours; 
TLR5 may be as a novel molecular target for TNBC non-invasive diagnosis.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.14707
PMCID: PMC6850942
PMID: 31576678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors confirm that there are no conflicts 
of interest.