1. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2019 Sep 18;14:2145-2162. doi: 
10.2147/COPD.S216050. eCollection 2019.

Roundabout signaling pathway involved in the pathogenesis of COPD by integrative 
bioinformatics analysis.

Lin YZ(1), Zhong XN(1), Chen X(1), Liang Y(1), Zhang H(1), Zhu DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To explore the potential mechanism underpinning the development of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and to investigate the role of the 
Roundabout signaling pathway in COPD.
METHODS: Three microarray datasets (GSE1650, GSE38974 and GSE76925) including 
139 cases of severe COPD and 52 cases of normal smokers without carcinoma, were 
integrated to screen differentially expressed genes (DEGs) using bioinformatics 
methods. Gene ontology (GO) annotations and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) pathway of the DEGs were performed by a DAVID online tool. 
Finally, a cigarette smoke (CS)- induced emphysema mice model was established, 
the lung mRNA expression levels of genes associated with Slit guidance ligand 2 
(SLIT2) -Roundabout (ROBO) signaling pathway were detected by reverse 
transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), and the protein 
level of SLIT2 was examined by immunohistochemistry staining.
RESULTS: A total of 315 DEGs were identified in three databases. GO and KEGG 
pathway analyses suggested that the inflammatory response, extracellular matrix 
disassembly, immune response, the apoptotic signaling pathway, ubiquitination 
and the Roundabout signaling pathway all together were involved in the 
development of COPD. The genes SLIT2 and ROBO2 were decreased in patients with 
COPD and these decreases were significantly negatively correlated with the 
disease stages of COPD. Consistently, the mRNA expression levels of SLIT2, ROBO1 
and ROBO2, and the protein level of SLIT2 were revealed to be lower in the lungs 
of CS-induced emphysema mice compared with the air-exposed control mice. In 
addition, the SLIT2 protein level was negatively associated with alveolar mean 
linear intercept.
CONCLUSION: Integrated bioinformatics analysis may provide novel insights into 
the complicated pathogenesis of COPD, and to the best of our knowledge, this 
study is the first to provide evidence to suggest that the Roundabout signaling 
pathway may be involved in the pathogenesis of COPD.

Â© 2019 Lin et al.

DOI: 10.2147/COPD.S216050
PMCID: PMC6756575
PMID: 31571851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.