1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2019 Oct;98(40):e17313. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000017313.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of Toll-like receptor-4 and of autophagy-related 
gene 16 like-1 gene for predisposition of premature delivery: A prospective 
study.

Liassides C(1), Papadopoulos A(1), Siristatidis C(2), Damoraki G(1), Liassidou 
A(1), Chrelias C(2), Kassanos D(2), Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)4th Department of Internal Medicine.
(2)3rd Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Medical School, Athens, Greece.

To investigate the impact of carriage of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of the Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) and of autophagy-related gene 16-like-1 
(ATG16L1) in preterm delivery (PTD).A prospective cohort of 145 pregnant women 
was studied. Women were prospectively followed-up until delivery. Genotyping for 
rs4986790 (Asp299Gly transition) and rs4986791 (Thr399Ile transition) of TLR4 
and for rs2241880 of ATG16L1 was done by PCR-restriction fragment length 
polymorphism. The primary study endpoint was the impact of carriage of minor 
alleles of TLR4 on early PTD before gestational week 32. Associations with human 
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) were also analyzed. Peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells were isolated from 15 healthy women and stimulated for cytokine 
production.No difference in clinical characteristics was observed between women 
delivering full term and preterm. The frequency of early PTD was 25% among women 
carrying minor alleles of TLR4 and 6.8% among women carrying major alleles (P: 
.032). Odds ratios for PTD were 3.85 among women carrying the GG genotype of 
rs2241880 and major alleles of TLR4 and 0.26 among carriers of GG genotype and 
minor alleles of TLR4 (P: .030). The co-presence of GG genotype of rs2241880 and 
hCG above 70â€ŠU/L was an independent variable for PTD. Stimulated production of 
interleukin-6 was greater among women with GG genotypes of rs2241880.Minor 
alleles of SNPs of TLR4 predispose to early PTD. The GG genotype of rs2241880 of 
ATG16L1 is associated with PTD when hCG is supra-elevated.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000017313
PMCID: PMC6783216
PMID: 31577725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.