1. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2019 Nov;28(6):522-528. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000504.

Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes in lung cancer patients living in a 
coal-mining region.

Minina VI(1)(2), Bakanova ML(1), Soboleva OA(1), Ryzhkova AV(1), Titov RA(1), 
Savchenko YA(1), Sinitsky MY(1)(3), Voronina EN(4)(5), Titov VA(1)(6), Glushkov 
AN(1).

Author information:
(1)The Federal Research Center of Coal and Coal Chemistry of SB RAS.
(2)Department of Genetics, Biology Faculty, Kemerovo State University.
(3)Laboratory of Genome Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of 
Cardiovascular Diseases.
(4)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine of SB RAS.
(5)Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(6)Kemerovo Regional Oncology Center, Kemerovo.

Air pollutants and ionizing radiation are well-known carcinogens involved in the 
pathogenesis of lung cancer, and residents of coal-mining regions are exposed 
routinely to these agents. Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes may be associated 
with an increased risk of malignant transformation. We investigated associations 
between the risk of lung cancer in residents of the coal-mining region and 
polymorphisms in the genes APEX1 (rs1130409), hOGG1 (rs1052133), XRCC1 (rs25489, 
rs25487), XRCC2 (rs3218536), XRCC3 (rs861539), ADPRT/PARP1 (rs1136410), 
XPD/ERCC2 (rs13181), XPG/ERCC5 (rs17655), XPC (rs2228001), ATM (rs1801516), and 
NBS1 (rs1805794). Three hundred and forty residents of the Kemerovo Region (a 
coal-mining region of western Siberia) were lung cancer patients exposed to air 
pollutants and ionizing radiation (case) and 335 were healthy donors (control). 
Genotyping was performed by real-time PCR and allele-specific PCR. We discovered 
that polymorphisms in the XPD gene in men [log-additive model: odds ratio (OR) = 
1.64, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.17-2.31], the ATM gene in women and 
nonsmokers (codominant model: OR = 0.11, 95% CI: 0.02-0.49 and OR = 0.25, 95% 
CI: 0.08-0.72, respectively), the APEX1 gene for smokers (recessive model: OR = 
2.55, 95% CI: 1.34-4.85), and the NBS1 gene for those who work in the coal 
industry (overdominant model: OR = 0.40, 95% CI: 0.21-0.75) are associated with 
an increased risk of lung cancer. Using the multifactor dimensionality reduction 
method, we found a model of gene-gene interactions associated with the risk of 
lung cancer: NBS1 (rs1805794)-XRCC1 (rs25487)-hOGG1 (rs1052133)-XPG (rs17655). 
These results indicate an association between combinations of polymorphisms in 
the studied genes and the risk of lung cancer in residents of a coal-mining 
region.

DOI: 10.1097/CEJ.0000000000000504
PMID: 31584889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]