1. J Chem Theory Comput. 2019 Nov 12;15(11):5872-5882. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00742. Epub 2019 Oct 24.

Solvation Free Energy as a Measure of Hydrophobicity: Application to Serine 
Protease Binding Interfaces.

Kraml J(1), Kamenik AS(1), Waibl F(1), Schauperl M(2), Liedl KR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of General, Inorganic and Theoretical Chemistry and Center for 
Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck (CMBI) , University of Innsbruck , Innsbruck 
6020 , Austria.
(2)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences , University of 
California, San Diego , La Jolla , California 92039-0736 , United States.

Solvation and hydrophobicity play a key role in a variety of biological 
mechanisms. In substrate binding, but also in structure-based drug design, the 
thermodynamic properties of water molecules surrounding a given protein are of 
high interest. One of the main algorithms devised in recent years to quantify 
thermodynamic properties of water is the grid inhomogeneous solvation theory 
(GIST), which calculates these features on a grid surrounding the protein. 
Despite the inherent advantages of GIST, the computational demand is a major 
drawback, as calculations for larger systems can take days or even weeks. Here, 
we present a GPU accelerated version of the GIST algorithm, which facilitates 
efficient estimates of solvation free energy even of large biomolecular 
interfaces. Furthermore, we show that GIST can be used as a reliable tool to 
evaluate protein surface hydrophobicity. We apply the approach on a set of nine 
different proteases calculating localized solvation free energies on the surface 
of the binding interfaces as a measure of their hydrophobicity. We find a 
compelling agreement with the hydrophobicity of their substrates, i.e., 
peptides, binding into the binding cleft, and thus our approach provides a 
reliable description of hydrophobicity characteristics of these biological 
interfaces.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00742
PMCID: PMC7032847
PMID: 31589427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.