1. Cell Host Microbe. 2019 Oct 9;26(4):515-526.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.chom.2019.09.002.  Epub 2019 Oct 1.

Cas9 Cleavage of Viral Genomes Primes the Acquisition of New Immunological 
Memories.

Nussenzweig PM(1), McGinn J(1), Marraffini LA(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bacteriology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Ave., New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Bacteriology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Ave., New 
York, NY 10065, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller 
University, 1230 York Ave., New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: 
marraffini@rockefeller.edu.

Type II CRISPR-Cas systems defend prokaryotes from bacteriophage infection 
through the acquisition of short viral DNA sequences known as spacers, which are 
transcribed into short RNA guides to specify the targets of the Cas9 nuclease. 
To counter the potentially devastating propagation of escaper phages with 
mutations in the target sequences, the host population acquires many different 
spacers. Whether and how pre-existing spacers in type II systems affect the 
acquisition of new ones is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that previously 
acquired spacers promote additional spacer acquisition from the vicinity of the 
target DNA site cleaved by Cas9. Therefore, CRISPR immune cells acquire 
additional spacers at the same time as they destroy the infecting virus. This 
anticipates the rise of escapers or related viruses that could escape targeting 
by the first spacer acquired. Our results thus reveal Cas9's role in the 
generation of immunological memories.

Copyright Â© 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2019.09.002
PMCID: PMC7558852
PMID: 31585845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS. L.A.M. is a cofounder 
and Scientific Advisory Board member of Intellia Therapeutics, and a co-founder 
of Eligo Biosciences.