1. Gene. 2020 Feb 5;726:144135. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144135. Epub 2019 Oct 4.

Two new mutations in dnaJ suppress DNA damage hypersensitivity and capsule 
overproduction phenotypes of Δlon mutant of Escherichia coli by modulating the 
expression of clpYQ (hslUV) and rcsA genes.

Kumaran NAM(1), Karthik M(1), Kumar V(2), Jebasingh T(3), Munavar MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Biological Sciences, Centre for 
Advanced Studies in Functional and Organismal Genomics, Madurai Kamaraj 
University, Palkalai Nagar, Madurai 625021, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)DBT-IPLS-Program, School of Biological Sciences, Centre for Advanced Studies 
in Functional and Organismal Genomics, Madurai Kamaraj University, Palkalai 
Nagar, Madurai 625021, Tamil Nadu, India.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Centre for 
Advanced Studies in Functional and Organismal Genomics, Madurai Kamaraj 
University, Palkalai Nagar, Madurai 625021, Tamil Nadu, India.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Biological Sciences, Centre for 
Advanced Studies in Functional and Organismal Genomics, Madurai Kamaraj 
University, Palkalai Nagar, Madurai 625021, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic 
address: munavar61@gmail.com.

Lon is a major ATP-dependent protease of E. coli involved in degradation of 
abnormal misfolded proteins and specific regulatory proteins. Absence of Lon in 
E. coli results in sensitivity to DNA damaging agents and over-production of 
capsular polysaccharide due to accumulation of Lon substrates, SulA (cell 
division inhibitor induced upon DNA damage) and RcsA (activator of cps genes), 
respectively. In a previous study, we identified that a G232D mutation, termed 
faa (for function affecting alternative-lon-protease), in the E. coli 
co-chaperone DnaJ, results in suppression of lon mutant phenotypes. 
Additionally, inactivation of the trans-translation system was found to have an 
additive effect on faa activity. In the present work, we employed random 
mutagenesis approach to isolate novel mutations in dnaJ which could 
phenotypically compensate the absence of Lon. Using a lacZ-based Lon reporter 
strain, we were able to isolate two new mutations in dnaJ as lon suppressors. 
These mutations, namely, flm-1 (H33Y) and flm-2 (P34S), affected the highly 
conserved HPD motif of DnaJ. Both mutations suppressed lon phenotypes to 
variable extent and the suppression was also differentially modulated by 
mutations in ssrA that affect trans-translation. We show that ClpYQ protease 
up-regulated in both mutants should degrade SulA, since inactivation of clpQ 
abolished the resistance to DNA damaging agents. On the other hand, we found 
suppression of capsule overproduction phenotype was independent of ClpYQ in both 
mutants but resulted due to down-regulation of rcsA in flm-1. Thus, our findings 
highlight the intricate redundancy of cellular proteolysis networks in bacteria 
which can compensate the absence of Lon via distinct mechanisms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2019.144135
PMID: 31589958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]