1. Inorg Chem. 2019 Oct 21;58(20):14085-14106. doi:
10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b02111.  Epub 2019 Oct 7.

A Heme Propionate Staples the Structure of Cytochrome c for Methionine Ligation 
to the Heme Iron.

Deng Y(1), Weaver ML(2), Hoke KR(2), Pletneva EV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry , Dartmouth College , Hanover , New Hampshire 03755 , 
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , Berry College , Mount Berry , 
Georgia 30149 , United States.

Ligand-switch reactions at the heme iron are common in biological systems, but 
their mechanisms and the features of the polypeptide fold that support dual 
ligation are not well understood. In cytochrome c (cyt c), two low-stability 
loops (立-loop C and 立-loop D) are connected by the heme propionate HP6. At 
alkaline pH, the native Met80 ligand from 立-loop D switches to a Lys residue 
from the same loop. Deprotonation of an as yet unknown group triggers the 
alkaline transition. We have created the two cyt c variants T49V/K79G and 
T78V/K79G with altered connections of these two loops to HP6. Electronic 
absorption, NMR, and EPR studies demonstrate that at pH 7.4 ferric forms of 
these variants are Lys-ligated, whereas ferrous forms maintain the native Met80 
ligation. Measurements of protein stability, cyclic voltammetry, pH-jump and 
gated electron-transfer kinetics have revealed that these Thr to Val 
substitutions greatly affect the alkaline transition in both ferric and ferrous 
proteins. The substitutions modify the stability of the Met-ligated species and 
reduction potentials of the heme iron. The kinetics of ligand-switch processes 
are also altered, and analyses of these effects implicate redox-dependent 
differences in metal-ligand interactions and the role of the protein dynamics, 
including cross-talk between the two 立-loops. With the two destabilized 
variants, it is possible to map energy levels for the Met- and Lys-ligated 
species in both ferric and ferrous proteins and assess the role of the protein 
scaffold in redox-dependent preferences for these two ligands. The estimated 
shift in the heme iron reduction potential upon deprotonation of the "trigger" 
group is consistent with those associated with deprotonation of an HP, 
suggesting that HP6, on its own or as a part of a hydrogen-bonded cluster, is a 
likely "trigger" for the Met to Lys ligand switch.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b02111
PMCID: PMC7458101
PMID: 31589413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]