1. Biomedica. 2019 Sep 1;39(3):601-610. doi: 10.7705/biomedica.4636.

Study of the allelic variants CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 in samples of the Peruvian 
mestizo population.

[Article in English, Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Alvarado ÁT(1), Muñoz AM, Loja B, Miyasato JM, García JA, Cerro RA, Quiñones LA, 
Varela NM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología y Química, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad San 
Ignacio de Loyola (USIL), Lima, Perú. biomedica@ins.gov.co.

Introduction: CYP2C9 metabolizes approximately 15% of the prescribed drugs. Its 
gene has alleles whose frequencies differ between ethnic groups and populations. 
The alleles CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 account for an enzyme with decreased activity 
and their frequencies have not been determined in the Peruvian mestizo 
population. Objective: To characterize the frequencies of the allelic variants 
*2 (rs1799853) and *3 (rs1057910) of CYP2C9 gen in the Peruvian mestizo 
population from Lima, Tacna y Junín. Materials and methods: We conducted an 
observational, prospective cross-sectional study with non-probabilistic, by 
convenience, and incidental sampling. We included 218 subjects according to the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, all of whom had signed the informed consent. 
We obtained the genomic DNA from oral mucosa swab. For the detection of the 
CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 genotypes, we used real-time-polymerase chain reaction 
with TaqMan® probes. Results: The genotyping revealed that CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 
variants have low frequencies (0.046 and 0.062, respectively). The frequency of 
intermediate metabolizers was 15.13% (CYP2C9*1/*2: 5.96%; CYP2C9*1/*3: 9.17%) 
and that of slow metabolizers was 3.22% (CYP2C9*2/*2: 1.38%; CYP2C9*3/*3: 1.38%; 
CYP2C9*2/*3: 0.46%). Conclusions: It was possible to determine the genotypic and 
allelic frequencies for the variants *2 and *3 of the CYP2C9 gene in a 
non-probabilistic sample of the Peruvian mestizo population. The frequencies 
obtained (0.046 and 0.062, respectively) corresponded to those expected for a 
South American mestizo population with Amerindian, European, African and Asian 
ancestry.

Publisher: Introducción. El citocromo CYP2C9 metaboliza, aproximadamente, el 15 
% de los fármacos prescritos. Su gen presenta alelos cuyas frecuencias difieren 
entre grupos étnicos y poblaciones. Los alelos CYP2C9*2 y CYP2C9*3 dan cuenta de 
una enzima con actividad disminuida cuya frecuencia no ha sido determinada en la 
población mestiza peruana. Objetivo. Caracterizar la frecuencia de las variantes 
*2 (rs1799853) y *3 (rs1057910) del gen CYP2C9 en muestras de población mestiza 
peruana provenientes de Lima, Tacna y Junín. Materiales y métodos. Se hizo un 
estudio descriptivo, observacional y prospectivo, con muestreo no 
probabilístico, por conveniencia e incidental. Se incluyeron 218 sujetos según 
los criterios de inclusión y exclusión; todos los participantes otorgaron su 
consentimiento informado. El ADN genómico se obtuvo mediante hisopado de mucosa 
oral, y la detección de los genotipos para los alelos CYP2C9*2 y CYP2C9*3 se 
hizo mediante reacción en cadena de la polimerasa (PCR) en tiempo real, 
utilizando sondas TaqMan™. Resultados. Las variantes de CYP2C9*2 y CYP2C9*3 
están presentes en la población mestiza peruana con frecuencias de 0,046 y 
0,062, respectivamente. El análisis de las frecuencias genotípicas observadas 
permitió predecir que la frecuencia de fenotipos metabolismo intermedio sería 
del 15,13 % (CYP2C9*1/*2: 5,96 %; CYP2C9*1/*3: 9,17 %), y la de fenotipos de 
metabolismo lento, del 3,22 % (CYP2C9*2/*2: 1,38 %; CYP2C9*3/*3: 1,38 %; 
CYP2C9*2/*3: 0,46 %). Conclusiones. Se lograron determinar las frecuencias 
genotípicas y alélicas para las variantes *2 y *3 del gen CYP2C9 en una muestra 
no probabilística de población mestiza peruana.

INTRODUCTION: CYP2C9 metabolizes approximately 15% of the prescribed drugs. Its 
gene has alleles whose frequencies differ between ethnic groups and populations. 
The alleles CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 account for an enzyme with decreased activity 
and their frequencies have not been determined in the Peruvian mestizo 
population.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the frequencies of the allelic variants *2 
(rs1799853) and *3 (rs1057910) of CYP2C9 gen in the Peruvian mestizo population 
from Lima, Tacna y Junín.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted an observational, prospective 
cross-sectional study with non-probabilistic, by convenience, and incidental 
sampling. We included 218 subjects according to the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria, all of whom had signed the informed consent. We obtained the genomic 
DNA from oral mucosa swab. For the detection of the CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 
genotypes, we used real-time-polymerase chain reaction with TaqMan® probes.
RESULTS: The genotyping revealed that CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 variants have low 
frequencies (0.046 and 0.062, respectively). The frequency of intermediate 
metabolizers was 15.13% (CYP2C9*1/*2: 5.96%; CYP2C9*1/*3: 9.17%) and that of 
slow metabolizers was 3.22% (CYP2C9*2/*2: 1.38%; CYP2C9*3/*3: 1.38%; 
CYP2C9*2/*3: 0.46%).
CONCLUSIONS: It was possible to determine the genotypic and allelic frequencies 
for the variants *2 and *3 of the CYP2C9 gene in a non-probabilistic sample of 
the Peruvian mestizo population. The frequencies obtained (0.046 and 0.062, 
respectively) corresponded to those expected for a South American mestizo 
population with Amerindian, European, African and Asian ancestry.

DOI: 10.7705/biomedica.4636
PMCID: PMC7357368
PMID: 31584773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicto de intereses: Los autores declaran no 
tener conflictos de intereses.