1. J Virol. 2019 Dec 12;94(1):e01223-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01223-19. Print 2019
Dec  12.

HA-Dependent Tropism of H5N1 and H7N9 Influenza Viruses to Human Endothelial 
Cells Is Determined by Reduced Stability of the HA, Which Allows the Virus To 
Cope with Inefficient Endosomal Acidification and Constitutively Expressed 
IFITM3.

Hensen L(#)(1), Matrosovich T(#)(1), Roth K(2), Klenk HD(1), Matrosovich M(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI), Core Facility Cellular 
Imaging, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Virology, Philipps University, Marburg, Germany 
m.matrosovich@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Previous studies revealed that certain avian influenza A viruses (IAVs), 
including zoonotic H5N1 and H7N9 IAVs, infect cultured human lung microvascular 
endothelial cells (HULEC) more efficiently than other IAVs and that tropism to 
HULEC is determined by viral hemagglutinin (HA). To characterize mechanisms of 
HA-mediated endotheliotropism, we used 2:6 recombinant IAVs harboring HAs from 
distinctive avian and human viruses and found that efficient infection of HULEC 
correlated with low conformational stability of the HA. We next studied effects 
on viral infectivity of single-point amino acid substitutions in the HA of 2:6 
recombinant virus A/Vietnam/1203/2004-PR8 (H5N1). Substitutions H8Q, H103Y, 
T315I, and K582I (K58I in the HA2 subunit), which increased stability of the HA, 
markedly reduced viral infectivity for HULEC, whereas substitutions K189N and 
K218Q, which altered typical H5N1 virus-like receptor specificity and reduced 
binding avidity of the HA, led to only marginal reduction of infectivity. None 
of these substitutions affected virus infection in MDCK cells. We confirmed the 
previous observation of elevated basal expression of IFITM3 protein in HULEC and 
found that endosomal acidification is less efficient in HULEC than in MDCK 
cells. In accord with these findings, counteraction of IFITM3-mediated 
restriction by amphotericin B and reduction of endosomal pH by moderate 
acidification of the extracellular medium enhanced infectivity of viruses with 
stable HA for HULEC without significant effect on infectivity for MDCK cells. 
Collectively, our results indicate that relatively high pH optimum of fusion of 
the HA of zoonotic H5N1 and H7N9 IAVs allows them to overcome antiviral effects 
of inefficient endosomal acidification and IFITM3 in human endothelial 
cells.IMPORTANCE Receptor specificity of the HA of IAVs is known to be a 
critical determinant of viral cell tropism. Here, we show that fusion properties 
of the HA may also play a key role in the tropism. Thus, we demonstrate that 
IAVs having a relatively low pH optimum of fusion cannot efficiently infect 
human endothelial cells owing to their relatively high endosomal pH and 
increased expression of fusion-inhibiting IFITM3 protein. These restrictions can 
be overcome by IAVs with elevated pH of fusion, such as zoonotic H5N1 and H7N9. 
Our results illustrate that the infectivity of IAVs depends on an interplay 
between HA conformational stability, endosomal acidification and IFITM3 
expression in target cells, and the extracellular pH. Given significant 
variation of levels of HA stability among animal, human, and zoonotic IAVs, our 
findings prompt further studies on the fusion-dependent tropism of IAVs to 
different cell types in humans and its role in viral host range and 
pathogenicity.

Copyright Â© 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01223-19
PMCID: PMC6912096
PMID: 31597765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]