1. Aging Dis. 2019 Oct 1;10(5):1037-1048. doi: 10.14336/AD.2018.1216. eCollection
 2019 Oct.

Hydroxyurea Facilitates Manifestation of Disease Relevant Phenotypes in 
Patients-Derived IPSCs-Based Modeling of Late-Onset Parkinson's Disease.

Tan Y(1), Ke M(1), Huang Z(1), Chong CM(1), Cen X(2), Lu JH(1), Yao X(3), Qin 
D(2), Su H(1).

Author information:
(1)1State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of 
Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao, China.
(2)2South China Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, 
Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)3Department of Neurology, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline 
of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 
China.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)-derived dopaminergic neurons might be 
reset back to the fetal state due to reprogramming. Thus, it is a compelling 
challenge to reliably and efficiently induce disease phenotypes of iPSCs-derived 
dopaminergic neurons to model late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we 
applied a small molecule, hydroxyurea (HU), to promote the manifestation of 
disease relevant phenotypes in iPSCs-based modeling of PD. We established two 
iPS cell lines derived from two sporadic PD patients. Both 
patients-iPSCs-derived dopaminergic neurons did not display PD relevant 
phenotypes after 6 weeks culture. HU treatment remarkably induced ER stress on 
patients-iPSCs-derived dopaminergic neurons. Moreover, HU treatment 
significantly reduced neurite outgrowth, decreased the expression of p-AKT and 
its downstream targets (p-4EBP1 and p-ULK1), and increased the expression level 
of cleaved-Caspase 3 in patients-iPSCs-derived dopaminergic neurons. The 
findings of the present study suggest that HU administration could be a 
convenient and reliable approach to induce disease relevant phenotypes in 
PD-iPSCs-based models, facilitating to study disease mechanisms and test drug 
effects.

Copyright: Â© 2019 Tan et al.

DOI: 10.14336/AD.2018.1216
PMCID: PMC6764725
PMID: 31595201

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement The authors declared no 
conflicts of interest.