1. BMJ Open. 2019 Oct 10;9(10):e028634. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028634.

Application of orphan drug designation to cancer treatments (2008-2017): a 
comprehensive and comparative analysis of the USA and EU.

Vokinger KN(1)(2)(3), Kesselheim AS(3).

Author information:
(1)Academic Chair for Public Law, Health Law, and Digitalization, Institute of 
Law, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland kerstinnoelle.vokinger@usz.ch.
(2)Institute for Primary Care and Health Services Research, University Hospital 
of Zurich/University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Program on Regulation, Therapeutics, and Law (PORTAL), Division of 
Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine differences in the characteristics of cancer drugs 
designated as orphan drugs by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
European Medicines Agency (EMA).
DESIGN AND SETTING: Identification of all cancer drugs (initial or supplementary 
indication) with orphan status approved by the FDA between 2008-2017 based on 
publicly accessible reports. The European public assessment reports (EPAR) was 
searched to determine whether these FDA-approved drugs were also approved by the 
EMA.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Extraction of active ingredient, trade name, approval 
date and approved indication from two FDA data sources (Orphan Drug Product 
Designation Database, Drugs@FDA) and comparison with the same data from EPAR.
RESULTS: The FDA approved 135 cancer drugs with orphan indications that met our 
inclusion criteria, of which 101 (75%) were also approved by the EMA. 80/101 
(79%) were first approved in the USA. Only 41/101 (41%) also received orphan 
designation by the EMA. 33/101 (33%) were approved for biomarker-based 
indications in the USA, however, only nine approved cancer drug indications by 
the EMA were biomarker-derived drugs. 78% (47/60) of approved cancer drugs that 
were only approved in the USA with orphan status were indicated for solid 
tumours, 22% (13/60) had indications for non-solid tumours. By contrast, out of 
those approved cancer drugs that received orphan designation by both agencies, 
20% (8/41) were indicated for solid, and 80% (33/41) for non-solid tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: Orphan designation was intended to encourage drug development for 
rare conditions. This study shows that the FDA approves more cancer drugs with 
such designations compared with the EMA, especially for subgroups of more 
prevalent cancers. One reason for the difference could be that the European 
Union requires demonstration of significant benefit for drugs that target the 
same indication as a drug already on the market to earn the orphan designation.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028634
PMCID: PMC6797305
PMID: 31601584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.