1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2020 Jan 1;499:110613. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2019.110613.
Epub  2019 Oct 9.

Lessons from animal models of endocrine disorders caused by defects of protein 
folding in the secretory pathway.

Morishita Y(1), Arvan P(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes, Department of Internal Medicine, Aichi Medical 
University, 1-1 Yazakokarimata, Nagakute, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan. Electronic 
address: ymorishita@aichi-med-u.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Michigan 
School of Medicine, Brehm Tower Room 5112, 1000, Wall St., Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
Electronic address: parvan@umich.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2020 Aug 20;514:110943. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2020.110943.

Most peptide hormones originate from secretory protein precursors synthesized 
within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In this specialized organelle, the 
newly-made prohormones must fold to their native state. Completion of prohormone 
folding usually occurs prior to migration through the secretory pathway, as 
unfolded/misfolded prohormones are retained by mechanisms collectively known as 
ER quality control. Not only do most monomeric prohormones need to fold 
properly, but many also dimerize or oligomerize within the ER. If 
oligomerization occurs before completion of monomer folding then when a poorly 
folded peptide prohormone is retained by quality control mechanisms, it may 
confer ER retention upon its oligomerization partners. Conversely, 
oligomerization between well-folded and improperly folded partners might help to 
override ER quality control, resulting in rescue of misfolded forms. Both 
scenarios appear to be possible in different animal models of endocrine 
disorders caused by genetic defects of protein folding in the secretory pathway. 
In this paper, we briefly review three such conditions, including familial 
neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus, insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus, and 
hypothyroidism with defective thyroglobulin.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2019.110613
PMCID: PMC6886696
PMID: 31605742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]