1. Methods Enzymol. 2019;626:475-498. doi: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.07.036. Epub 2019 
Aug 12.

Quantitative analysis of global protein lysine methylation by mass spectrometry.

Lund PJ(1), Lehman SM(1), Garcia BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Epigenetics Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Penn Epigenetics Institute, Smilow 
Center for Translational Research, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Electronic address: 
bgarci@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Since protein activity is often regulated by posttranslational modifications, 
the qualitative and quantitative analysis of modification sites is critical for 
understanding the regulation of biological pathways that control cell function 
and phenotype. Methylation constitutes one of the many types of 
posttranslational modifications that target lysine residues. Although lysine 
methylation is perhaps most commonly associated with histone proteins and the 
epigenetic regulation of processes involving chromatin, methylation has also 
been observed as an important regulatory modification on other proteins, which 
has spurred the development of methods to profile lysine methylation sites more 
globally. As with many posttranslational modifications, tandem mass spectrometry 
represents an ideal platform for the high-throughput analysis of lysine 
methylation due to its high sensitivity and resolving power. The following 
protocol outlines a general method to assay lysine methylation across the 
proteome using SILAC and quantitative proteomics. First, cells are labeled by 
SILAC to allow for relative quantitation across different experimental 
conditions, such as cells with or without ectopic expression of a 
methyltransferase. Next, cells are lysed and proteins are digested into 
peptides. Methylated peptides are then enriched by immunoprecipitation with 
pan-specific antibodies against methylated lysine. Finally, the enriched 
peptides are analyzed by LC-MS/MS to identify methylated peptides and their 
modification sites and to compare the relative abundance of methylation events 
between different conditions. This approach should yield detection of a couple 
hundred lysine methylation sites, and those showing differential abundance may 
then be prioritized for further study.

Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.07.036
PMCID: PMC8259617
PMID: 31606088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]