1. Hum Mol Genet. 2019 Dec 1;28(23):3928-3939. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz234.

Conditional targeting in mice reveals that hepatic homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase 
activity is essential in reducing circulating homogentisic acid and for 
effective therapy in the genetic disease alkaptonuria.

Hughes JH(1), Liu K(1), Plagge A(2), Wilson PJM(1), Sutherland H(1), Norman 
BP(1), Hughes AT(1)(3), Keenan CM(1), Milan AM(1)(3), Sakai T(2), Ranganath 
LR(1)(3), Gallagher JA(1), Bou-Gharios G(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ageing and Chronic disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, 
L7 8TX, UK.
(2)Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 
3GA, UK.
(3)Liverpool Clinical Laboratories, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and 
Metabolic Medicine, Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen University Hospitals Trust, 
Liverpool, L7 8XP, UK.

Alkaptonuria is an inherited disease caused by homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase 
(HGD) deficiency. Circulating homogentisic acid (HGA) is elevated and deposits 
in connective tissues as ochronotic pigment. In this study, we aimed to define 
developmental and adult HGD tissue expression and determine the location and 
amount of gene activity required to lower circulating HGA and rescue the 
alkaptonuria phenotype. We generated an alkaptonuria mouse model using a 
knockout-first design for the disruption of the HGD gene. Hgd tm1a -/- mice 
showed elevated HGA and ochronosis in adulthood. LacZ staining driven by the 
endogenous HGD promoter was localised to only liver parenchymal cells and kidney 
proximal tubules in adulthood, commencing at E12.5 and E15.5 respectively. 
Following removal of the gene trap cassette to obtain a normal mouse with a 
floxed 6th HGD exon, a double transgenic was then created with Mx1-Cre which 
conditionally deleted HGD in liver in a dose dependent manner. 20% of HGD mRNA 
remaining in liver did not rescue the disease, suggesting that we need more than 
20% of liver HGD to correct the disease in gene therapy. Kidney HGD activity 
which remained intact reduced urinary HGA, most likely by increased absorption, 
but did not reduce plasma HGA nor did it prevent ochronosis. In addition, 
downstream metabolites of exogenous 13C6-HGA, were detected in heterozygous 
plasma, revealing that hepatocytes take up and metabolise HGA. This novel 
alkaptonuria mouse model demonstrated the importance of targeting liver for 
therapeutic intervention, supported by our observation that hepatocytes take up 
and metabolise HGA.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz234
PMCID: PMC7073386
PMID: 31600782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]