1. Mol Oncol. 2020 Jan;14(1):139-158. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.12584. Epub 2019 Oct
 26.

Distinct roles of PIK3CA in the enrichment and maintenance of cancer stem cells 
in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen X(1), Cao Y(1)(2), Sedhom W(1), Lu L(1), Liu Y(1)(3), Wang H(1)(4), Oka 
M(1), Bornstein S(5), Said S(6), Song J(1), Lu SL(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, First Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shengyang, China.
(3)Institute of Integrative Medicine, Dalian Medical University, China.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Second Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, China.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.

Recurrence and metastasis are the major causes of mortality in head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). It is suggested that cancer stem cells (CSCs) 
play pivotal roles in recurrence and metastasis. Thus, a greater understanding 
of the mechanisms of CSC regulation may provide opportunities to develop novel 
therapies for improving survival by controlling recurrence or metastasis. Here, 
we report that overexpression of the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of PI3K 
(PIK3CA), the most frequently amplified oncogene in HNSCC, promotes 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and enriches the CSC population. However, 
PIK3CA is not required to maintain these traits and inhibition of the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway paradoxically promotes 
CSC population. Molecular analysis revealed that overexpression of PIK3CA 
activates multiple receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), in which ephrin receptors 
(Ephs), tropomyosin receptor kinases (TRK) and mast/stem cell growth factor 
receptor (c-Kit) contribute to maintain CSC population. Accordingly, 
simultaneous inhibition of these RTKs using a multi-kinase inhibitor ponatinib 
has a superior effect at eliminating the CSC population and reduces metastasis 
of PIK3CA-overexpressing HNSCC cells. Our result suggests that co-targeting of 
Ephs, TRKs and the c-Kit pathway may be effective at eliminating the 
PI3K-independent CSC population, thereby providing potential targets for future 
development of a novel anti-CSC therapeutic approach for HNSCC patients, 
particularly for patients with PIK3CA amplification.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Published by FEBS Press and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.12584
PMCID: PMC6944113
PMID: 31600013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.