1. Sci Rep. 2019 Oct 16;9(1):14835. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-50747-3.

A Gas Phase Route to [(18)F]fluoroform with Limited Molar Activity Dilution.

Yang BY(1), Telu S(1), Haskali MB(1), Morse CL(1), Pike VW(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room B3 C346A, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 
20892-1003, USA.
(2)Molecular Imaging Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room B3 C346A, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD, 
20892-1003, USA. pikev@mail.nih.gov.

Positron emission tomography (PET) is an important imaging modality for 
biomedical research and drug development. PET requires biochemically selective 
radiotracers to realize full potential. Fluorine-18 (t1/2 = 109.8 min) is a 
major radionuclide for labeling such radiotracers but is only readily available 
in high activities from cyclotrons as [18F]fluoride ion. [18F]fluoroform has 
emerged for labeling tracers in trifluoromethyl groups. Prior methods of 
[18F]fluoroform synthesis used difluoro precursors in solution and led to high 
dilution with carrier and low molar activity (Am). We explored a new approach 
for the synthesis of [18F]fluoroform based on the radiosynthesis of 
[18F]fluoromethane from [18F]fluoride ion and then cobaltIII fluoride mediated 
gas phase fluorination. We estimate that carrier dilution in this process is 
limited to about 3-fold and find that moderate to high Am values can be 
achieved. We show that [18F]fluoroform so produced is highly versatile for 
rapidly and efficiently labeling various chemotypes that carry trifluoromethyl 
groups, thereby expanding prospects for developing new PET radiotracers.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-50747-3
PMCID: PMC6795885
PMID: 31619702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The work in this paper is the subject of a 
patent application by B.Y.Y., M.B.H.,V.W.P., and S.T. All authors declare that 
they have no other competing interests.