1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2019 Sep 18;10:615. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00615.  eCollection 2019.

Evaluation of the Possibility to Detect Circulating Tumor DNA From Pituitary 
Adenoma.

Megnis K(1), Peculis R(1), Rovite V(1), Laksa P(1), Niedra H(1), Balcere I(2), 
Caune O(2), Breiksa A(3), Nazarovs J(3), Stukens J(4), Konrade I(1)(2), Pirags 
V(1)(5)(6), Klovins J(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Latvian Biomedical Research and Study 
Centre, Riga, Latvia.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, 
Latvia.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, 
Riga, Latvia.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, 
Riga, Latvia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia.

Objective: Circulating free DNA (cfDNA) in general and circulating tumor DNA 
(ctDNA) in particular is becoming an increasingly used form of liquid biopsy 
biomarkers. In this study, we are investigating the ability to detect ctDNA from 
the plasma of pituitary adenoma (PA) patients. Design: Tumor tissue samples were 
obtained from planed PA resections, before which blood plasma samples were 
taken. Somatic variants found in PA tissue samples were evaluated in related 
cfDNA, isolated from plasma samples. Methods: Sanger sequencing, as well as 
previously obtained whole-exome sequencing data, were used to evaluate somatic 
variants composition in tumor tissue samples. cfDNA was isolated from the same 
PA patients and competitive allele-specific TaqMan PCR and amplicon-based 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) approach were used for targeted detection of 
variants found in corresponding tumor tissue samples. Results: Using NGS-based 
analysis, we detected five out of 17 somatic variants in 40 to 60% of total 
reads, three variants in 0.50-5.00% of total read count, including GNAS 
c.601C>T, which was detected using ultra-deep NGS (1.78 million X) in 0.77% of 
amplicons reads. Nine variants were not detected. We also detected We were not 
able to detect variant found in PA tissue in cfDNA using cast-PCR, indicating 
that the portion of variant-containing ctDNA in total isolated cfDNA is too 
small to be detected with this method. Conclusions: For the first time, we 
demonstrate the possibility to detect somatic variants of PA in cfDNA isolated 
from patients' blood plasma. Whether the source of variant detected in cfDNA is 
PA should be further tested.

Copyright Â© 2019 Megnis, Peculis, Rovite, Laksa, Niedra, Balcere, Caune, 
Breiksa, Nazarovs, Stukens, Konrade, Pirags and Klovins.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00615
PMCID: PMC6759656
PMID: 31620080