1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2019 Sep 20;6:141. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00141. 
eCollection 2019.

Shear-Dependent Platelet Aggregation: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Opportunities.

Rana A(1), Westein E(1), Niego B(1), Hagemeyer CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Nanobiotechnology Laboratory, Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Central 
Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the number one cause of morbidity and death 
worldwide. As estimated by the WHO, the global death rate from CVD is 31% 
wherein, a staggering 85% results from stroke and myocardial infarction. 
Platelets, one of the key components of thrombi, have been well-investigated 
over decades for their pivotal role in thrombus development in healthy as well 
as diseased blood vessels. In hemostasis, when a vascular injury occurs, 
circulating platelets are arrested at the site of damage, where they are 
activated and aggregate to form hemostatic thrombi, thus preventing further 
bleeding. However, in thrombosis, pathological activation of platelets occurs, 
leading to uncontrolled growth of a thrombus, which in turn can occlude the 
blood vessel or embolize, causing downstream ischemic events. The molecular 
processes causing pathological thrombus development are in large similar to the 
processes controlling physiological thrombus formation. The biggest challenge of 
anti-thrombotics and anti-platelet therapeutics has been to decouple the 
pathological platelet response from the physiological one. Currently, marketed 
anti-platelet drugs are associated with major bleeding complications for this 
exact reason; they are not effective in targeting pathological thrombi without 
interfering with normal hemostasis. Recent studies have emphasized the 
importance of shear forces generated from blood flow, that primarily drive 
platelet activation and aggregation in thrombosis. Local shear stresses in 
obstructed blood vessels can be higher by up to two orders of magnitude as 
compared to healthy vessels. Leveraging abnormal shear forces in the thrombus 
microenvironment may allow to differentiate between thrombosis and hemostasis 
and develop shear-selective anti-platelet therapies. In this review, we discuss 
the influence of shear forces on thrombosis and the underlying mechanisms of 
shear-induced platelet activation. Later, we summarize the therapeutic 
approaches to target shear-sensitive platelet activation and pathological 
thrombus growth, with a particular focus on the shear-sensitive protein von 
Willebrand Factor (VWF). Inhibition of shear-specific platelet aggregation and 
targeted drug delivery may prove to be much safer and efficacious approaches 
over current state-of-the-art antithrombotic drugs in the treatment of 
cardiovascular diseases.

Copyright Â© 2019 Rana, Westein, Niego and Hagemeyer.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00141
PMCID: PMC6763557
PMID: 31620451