1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 21;19(1):866. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-4519-9.

Continuous hemodiafiltration as a rescue therapy for patients with 
cardiopulmonary failure caused by enterovirus-71: a retrospective observational 
study in a PICU.

Wang C(1)(2), Cui Y(1), Zhu Y(1), Wang F(1), Rong Q(1), Zhang Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, No.355 Luding Road, Shanghai, 200062, Putuo District, 
China.
(2)Institute of Pediatric Critical Care, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, 200062, China.
(3)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, No.355 Luding Road, Shanghai, 200062, Putuo District, 
China. zyucai2018@163.com.
(4)Institute of Pediatric Critical Care, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, 200062, China. zyucai2018@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Hand, foot and mouth disease (HFMD) remains a burdensome health 
issue in mainland China. Enterovirus71 (EV-A71) is the main pathogen of severe 
HFMD. Continuous hemofiltration improves fluid overload, restores kidney 
function and alleviates inflammatory reactions. The aim of the present study was 
to evaluate the effects of continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) on 
severe HFMD caused by EV-A71(EV-A71-HFMD) in a pediatric intensive care unit 
(PICU).
METHODS: A retrospective observational study was performed in a tertiary 
university PICU from January 2012 to December 2016. Children with severe 
EV-A71-HFMD complicated by cardiopulmonary failure were included. The patients 
were divided into a CVVHDF group and a conventional therapy (control) group 
(non-CVVHDF). The demographics, characteristics, and outcomes between the groups 
were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients with severe EV-A71-HFMD were enrolled. The 28-day 
mortality was 17.6% (3/17) in the CVVHDF group and 33.3% (4/12) in the 
non-CVVHDF group, with no statistical significance between the two groups 
(P = 0.403). The median interval between CVVHDF initiation and PICU admission 
was 6 (4,8.5) hrs, and the median duration of CVVHDF was 48 (36, 64) hrs. The 
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and cardiac index (CI) in the CVVHDF 
group were improved after treatment. The plasma levels of catecholamines and 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) substances in the CVVHDF group were 
significantly decreased after treatment. The decreased catecholamines and RAAS 
substances included adrenalin (169.8 [145.5, 244.6] vs. 148.0 [109.0, 208.1] 
ng/L, P = 0.033), dopamine (152.7 [97.0, 191.1] vs. 96.0 [68.0, 160.9] ng/L, 
P = 0.026), angiotensin II (185.9 [125.2, 800.0] vs. 106.0 [90.8, 232.5] ng/L, 
P = 0.047), aldosterone (165.7 [94.0, 353.3] vs. 103.3 [84.3, 144.3] ng/L, 
P = 0.033), and renin (1.12 [0.74, 3.45] vs. 0.79 [0.52, 1.25] μg/L/h, 
P = 0.029), CONCLUSIONS: CVVHDF reduced the levels of catecholamines and RAAS 
substances and improved cardiovascular function. Continuous hemodiafiltration 
may represent a potential therapy in patients with severe EV-A71-HFMD 
complicated with cardiopulmonary failure.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-4519-9
PMCID: PMC6805415
PMID: 31638922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests exist.