1. J Phys Chem B. 2019 Nov 21;123(46):9773-9785. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.9b07502. 
Epub 2019 Nov 11.

Salt Dependence of A-Form RNA Duplexes: Structures and Implications.

Chen YL(1), Pollack L(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Applied and Engineering Physics , Cornell University , Ithaca , New 
York 14853 , United States.

The biological functions of RNA range from gene regulation through catalysis and 
depend critically on its structure and flexibility. Conformational variations of 
flexible, non-base-paired components, including RNA hinges, bulges, or 
single-stranded tails, are well documented. Recent work has also identified 
variations in the structure of ubiquitous, base-paired duplexes found in almost 
all functional RNAs. Duplexes anchor the structures of folded RNAs, and their 
surface features are recognized by partner molecules. To date, no consistent 
picture has been obtained that describes the range of conformations assumed by 
RNA duplexes. Here, we apply wide angle, solution X-ray scattering (WAXS) to 
quantify these variations, by sampling length scales characteristic of helical 
geometries under different solution conditions. To identify the radius, helical 
rise, twist, and length of dsRNA helices, we exploit molecular dynamics 
generated structures, explicit solvent models, and ensemble optimization 
methods. Our results quantify the substantial and salt-dependent deviations of 
double-stranded (ds) RNA duplexes from the assumed canonical A-form 
conformation. Recent experiments underscore the need to properly describe the 
structures of RNA duplexes when interpreting the salt dependence of RNA 
conformations.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.9b07502
PMCID: PMC7068736
PMID: 31638810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]