1. Int J Oncol. 2019 Dec;55(6):1194-1212. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2019.4893. Epub 2019
Oct  4.

Assessment of biochemical recurrence of prostate cancer (Review).

Lin X(1), Kapoor A(2), Gu Y(1), Chow MJ(1), Xu H(3), Major P(4), Tang D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada.
(2)The Research Institute of St. Joe's Hamilton, St. Joseph's Hospital, 
Hamilton, ON L8N 4A6, Canada.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON L8V 5C2, Canada.

The assessment of the risk of biochemical recurrence (BCR) is critical in the 
management of males with prostate cancer (PC). Over the past decades, a 
comprehensive effort has been focusing on improving risk stratification; a 
variety of models have been constructed using PC‑associated pathological 
features and molecular alterations occurring at the genome, protein and RNA 
level. Alterations in RNA expression (lncRNA, miRNA and mRNA) constitute the 
largest proportion of the biomarkers of BCR. In this article, we systemically 
review RNA‑based BCR biomarkers reported in PubMed according to the PRISMA 
guidelines. Individual miRNAs, mRNAs, lncRNAs and multigene panels, including 
the commercially available signatures, Oncotype DX and Prolaris, will be 
discussed; details related to cohort size, hazard ratio and 95% confidence 
intervals will be provided. Mechanistically, these individual biomarkers affect 
multiple pathways critical to tumorigenesis and progression, including 
epithelial‑mesenchymal transition (EMT), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), 
Wnt, growth factor receptor, cell proliferation, immune checkpoints and others. 
This variety in the mechanisms involved not only validates their associations 
with BCR, but also highlights the need for the coverage of multiple pathways in 
order to effectively stratify the risk of BCR. Updates of novel biomarkers and 
their mechanistic insights are considered, which suggests new avenues to pursue 
in the prediction of BCR. Additionally, the management of patients with BCR and 
the potential utility of the stratification of the risk of BCR in salvage 
treatment decision making for these patients are briefly covered. Limitations 
will also be discussed.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2019.4893
PMCID: PMC6831208
PMID: 31638194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]