1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2020 May;28(3):330-335. doi: 10.1177/1066896919883013. Epub
 2019 Oct 20.

Primary Low-Grade B-Cell Lymphoma of Skull With Translocation Between 
Immunoglobulin and Interferon Regulatory Factor 4 Genes.

Nasim MM(1), Chalif DJ(1), Demopoulos AM(1), Brody J(1), Lee-Huang R(1), Spitzer 
SG(1), Kolitz JE(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Lake 
Success, NY, USA.

Low-grade B-cell lymphoma with immunoglobulin (IG) and interferon regulatory 
factor 4 (IRF4) gene rearrangement is extremely rare, with only 4 cases being 
previously reported. In this article, we report one additional case that arises 
from the skull and review the literature. The patient was a 69-year-old man who 
presented with recurrent and disabling vertigo and was found to have a 5.0 Ã— 1.7 
cm lesion within the left posterior parietal bone. Histological examination 
revealed a bone lesion with diffuse lymphoid infiltrate comprising of mostly 
small lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm, slightly irregular nuclei and 
inconspicuous nucleoli, and scattered larger cells resembling prolymphocytes and 
paraimmunoblasts. Immunohistochemical studies showed that the neoplastic cells 
were positive for CD20, CD79a, PAX5, CD23, CD43, BCL-2, BCL-6, MUM-1, LEF-1, and 
IgM and negative for CD5, CD10, cyclinD1, SOX11, and IgD. Flow cytometric 
analysis identified CD5 negative and CD10 negative monoclonal B cells with 
lambda light chain restriction. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis 
revealed del(13q) abnormality, but was negative for IGH/BCL2, IGH/CCND1, and 
BIRC3/MALT1 translocations. Next-generation sequencing identified IGK-IRF4 
rearrangement and BRD4 E1113 del abnormalities. Given a low clinical stage (IE) 
of the disease, the patient did not receive additional treatments and was free 
of disease at 1 year after the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1177/1066896919883013
PMID: 31631721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]