1. Plant Direct. 2019 Oct 14;3(10):e00170. doi: 10.1002/pld3.170. eCollection
2019  Oct.

A synthetic peptide encoded by a random DNA sequence inhibits discrete red light 
responses.

Shuipys T(1), Carvalho RF(2), Clancy MA(2), Bao Z(2), Folta KM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genomics Graduate Program University of Florida Gainesville FL 
USA.
(2)Horticultural Sciences Department University of Florida Gainesville FL USA.
(3)Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Program University of Florida 
Gainesville FL USA.

We have identified a synthetic peptide that interrupts discrete aspects of 
seedling development under red light. Previous reports have demonstrated that 
plants transformed with random DNA sequences produce synthetic peptides that 
affect plant biology. In this report, one specific peptide is characterized that 
inhibits discrete aspects of red light-mediated photomorphogenic development 
in Arabidopsis thaliana . Seedlings expressing the PEP6-32 peptide presented 
longer hypocotyls and diminished cotyledon expansion when grown under red light. 
Other red light-mediated seedling processes such as induction of Lhcb (cab) 
transcripts or loss of vertical growth remained unaffected. Long-term responses 
to red light in PEP6-32 expressing plants, such as repression of flowering time, 
did not show defects in red light signaling or integration. A synthesized 
peptide applied exogenously induced the long-hypocotyl phenotype under red light 
in non-transformed seedlings. The results indicate that the PEP6-32 peptide 
causes discrete cell expansion abnormalities during early seedling development 
in red light that mimic weak phyB alleles, yet only in some aspects of seedling 
photomorphogenesis. The findings demonstrate that new chemistries derived from 
random peptide expression can modulate specific facets of plant growth and 
development.

© 2019 The Authors. Plant Direct published by American Society of Plant 
Biologists, Society for Experimental Biology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pld3.170
PMCID: PMC6790650
PMID: 31637368

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest 
associated with the work described in this manuscript.