1. Oncotarget. 2019 Oct 8;10(56):5817-5823. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.27212. 
eCollection 2019 Oct 8.

Fewer actionable mutations but higher tumor mutational burden characterizes 
NSCLC in black patients at an urban academic medical center.

Choudhury NJ(1), Eghtesad M(2), Kadri S(3), Cursio J(4), Ritterhouse L(5), Segal 
J(5), Husain A(6), Patel JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Advocate Illinois Masonic Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA.
(5)Division of Genomic and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, The 
University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Background: Black patients have been historically underrepresented in studies 
investigating molecular patterns in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We aimed 
to investigate differences in actionable mutations among patients at our urban, 
diverse medical center. Results: 146 patients were included (59 black, 76 white, 
7 Asian, 3 Hispanic, 1 mixed). 35 patients had a targetable mutation. Seven 
black patients (11.8%) had a targetable mutation compared to 28 non-black 
patients (32.2%, p = 0.005). 15 black patients had PD-L1 expression ≥50% 
compared to 19 non-black (25.4% vs 21.8%, p = 0.69). Black patients had a higher 
TMB compared to non-black (15.3 mutations/Mb compared to 11.5 mutations/Mb, p = 
0.001). In a multivariate analysis, TMB was driven by smoking (p < 0.01), 
without any additive interaction in black patients who smoke (p = 0.8). 
Conclusion: NSCLC tumors from black patients had a higher TMB and were less 
likely to carry a targetable mutation. The higher TMB seen was driven by a 
higher prevalence of smoking among black patients in our study, which may not 
reflect nationwide trends. Our results serve as a proof of concept that 
differences in molecular markers exist between black and non-black patients, and 
that these differences may impact the treatment options available to black 
patients. Methods: Retrospective chart review of patients with a diagnosis of 
NSCLC who underwent both PD-L1 testing and massively parallel sequencing 
(UCM-OncoPlus) was conducted. We examined whether high PD-L1 expression, tumor 
mutational burden (TMB), and presence of targetable mutations (EGFR, BRAF, 
ERBB2, RET or ALK translocations, ROS1 rearrangements) occur at different 
frequencies in tumors from black patients compared to non-black patients.

Copyright: © 2019 Choudhury et al.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.27212
PMCID: PMC6791384
PMID: 31645901

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, to disclose.