1. Turk J Med Sci. 2019 Oct 24;49(5):1560-1563. doi: 10.3906/sag-1907-67.

Unclassifiable non-CML classical myeloproliferative diseases with microcytosis: 
findings indicating diagnosis of polycythemia vera masked by iron deficiency.

Aladağ E(1), Aksu S(1), Demiroğlu H(1), Sayınalp N(1), Göker H(1), Haznedaroğlu 
İC(1), Özcebe Oİ(1), Büyükaşık Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey

BACKGROUND/AIM: Polycythemia Vera (PV) is a myeloproliferative disorder 
characterized by overproduction of morphologically normal red blood cells 
(RBCs), granulocytes, and platelets, a phenotype that is caused by a mutation 
(V617F) in Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). However, JAK2 V617F is also found in 
approximately 50% of patients with essential thrombocytosis and primary 
myelofibrosis, rendering its presence nonspecific as a diagnostic test. An 
increased red cell mass is a major criterion for the diagnosis of PV according 
to World Health Organization (WHO) 2016 criteria. High hemoglobin (Hgb) or 
Hematocrit (Hct) are universally used as indicators of an increased red cell 
mass for the diagnosis of PV. However, conditions such as iron deficiency (ID) 
with decreased mean cell volume may mask the diagnosis due to nonelevated Hct 
level. The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical characteristics of 
the patients with unclassifiable non-CML classical myeloproliferative disease 
with microcytosis (MPD/M) and nonelevated Hgb and Hct levels at diagnosis and to 
determine if some of these cases could be real PV cases masked due to ID-related 
microcytosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: There were 23 MPD/M cases among 208 non-CML classical MPD 
cases (11%). Among 22 patients who had adequate test results related to the 
cause of microcytosis, ID and beta-thalassemia trait (TT) were the apparent 
causes of microcytosis in 15 and 1 cases, respectively.
RESULTS: Clinicopathological correlations revealed consistently positive JAK2 
V617F mutation status (20/20, 100%), frequently elevated RBC count (17/23, 
73.9%), and PV-compatible bone marrow findings (10/12, 83.3%). These findings 
are compatible with PV instead of essential thrombocytopenia or primary 
myelofibrosis. In spite of frequent cytoreductive treatment, 3 patients 
developed increased Hgb/Htc levels during median 58.2 (279–63) months’ 
follow-up.
CONCLUSION: These data show that the majority of MPD/M cases are PV patients 
masked due to ID-related microcytosis.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License.

DOI: 10.3906/sag-1907-67
PMCID: PMC7018294
PMID: 31652037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: none declared