1. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2020 Feb;37(1):58-75. doi:
10.1080/08880018.2019.1682090.  Epub 2019 Oct 29.

Identification of novel Nrf2/Keap1 pathway mutations in pediatric acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Akın-Balı DF(1), Aktas SH(2)(3), Unal MA(4), Kankılıc T(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Medical Biology, Nigde Omer Halisdemir University, 
Nigde, Turkey.
(2)Vocational School of Health Services, Eskisehir Osmangazi University, 
Eskisehir, Turkey.
(3)Central Research Laboratory Application and Research Center, Eskisehir 
Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey.
(4)Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Faculty of Science Literature, Department of Biotechnology, Nigde Omer 
Halisdemir University, Nigde, Turkey.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a malignancy of lymphoid progenitor cells, 
characterized by a wide range of biological and clinical heterogeneity. 
Oxidative stress is a common problem observed in carcinogenesis and it is 
involved in developing treatment resistance. Nuclear Factor Erythroid-2-Like 2 
(Nrf2) transcription factor is the main regulator of antioxidant responses. The 
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are tightly controlled and regulated by 
Nrf2 and its suppressor protein Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1). 
Recently, many studies have shown that most of the genes in the 
Nrf2/Keap1/nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB)/phosphotyrosine-independent ligand for 
the Lck SH2 domain Of 62 KDa (p62) pathway show abnormally high mutational 
variations in cancer. However, variations in the Nrf2/Keap1/NF-κB1/p62 pathway 
in pediatric ALL have not been thoroughly investigated, yet. Thirty children, 
who were diagnosed with pediatirc ALL were included in the study. The 
Nrf2/Keap1/NF-κB1/p62 pathway variants were analyzed by DNA sequencing analysis. 
The PolyPhen-2 program was used for identifying pathogenic mutations. Our study 
examined the molecular dynamics (MD) perspectives of the effect of A159T and 
E121K mutations on protein stability for the first time in the literature by 
using the GROMACS45 software package utilizing the OPSLAA force field. Of the 
detected 17 nucleotide changes, 6 were novel. The study predicted the potential 
pathological effect of two mutations p. A159T and p.E121K in the Keap1 gene. The 
MD perspectives revealed that the E121K mutant's observed structural behavior 
accounted for the key role of His-129 and E121K, where E121K exhibited much 
higher drift compared to His-129. For a future perspective, it would be 
meaningful to study the protein-small molecule interactions of the Keap1 protein 
to elaborate on the drug effects in patients carrying these mutations.

DOI: 10.1080/08880018.2019.1682090
PMID: 31661353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]