1. Mol Cancer Res. 2020 Feb;18(2):311-323. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-19-0594.
Epub  2019 Oct 29.

miR-29a Is Repressed by MYC in Pancreatic Cancer and Its Restoration Drives 
Tumor-Suppressive Effects via Downregulation of LOXL2.

Dey S(1), Kwon JJ(1), Liu S(1), Hodge GA(1), Taleb S(1), Zimmers TA(2)(3), Wan 
J(1)(2), Kota J(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(2)The Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, IUSM, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(3)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
Indiana.
(4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. jkota@iu.edu.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an intractable cancer with a dismal 
prognosis. miR-29a is commonly downregulated in PDAC; however, mechanisms for 
its loss and role still remain unclear. Here, we show that in PDAC, repression 
of miR-29a is directly mediated by MYC via promoter activity. RNA sequencing 
analysis, integrated with miRNA target prediction, identified global miR-29a 
downstream targets in PDAC. Target enrichment coupled with gene ontology and 
survival correlation analyses identified the top five miR-29a-downregulated 
target genes (LOXL2, MYBL2, CLDN1, HGK, and NRAS) that are known to promote 
tumorigenic mechanisms. Functional validation confirmed that upregulation of 
miR-29a is sufficient to ablate translational expression of these five genes in 
PDAC. We show that the most promising target among the identified genes, LOXL2, 
is repressed by miR-29a via 3'-untranslated region binding. Pancreatic tissues 
from a PDAC murine model and patient biopsies showed overall high LOXL2 
expression with inverse correlations with miR-29a levels. Collectively, our data 
delineate an antitumorigenic, regulatory role of miR-29a and a novel 
MYC-miR-29a-LOXL2 regulatory axis in PDAC pathogenesis, indicating the potential 
of the molecule in therapeutic opportunities. IMPLICATIONS: This study unravels 
a novel functional role of miR-29a in PDAC pathogenesis and identifies an 
MYC-miR-29a-LOXL2 axis in regulation of the disease progression, implicating 
miR-29a as a potential therapeutic target for PDAC. VISUAL OVERVIEW: 
http://mcr.aacrjournals.org/content/molcanres/18/2/311/F1.large.jpg.

Â©2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-19-0594
PMCID: PMC7002266
PMID: 31662451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
potential conflicts of interest.