1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2020 May;77(9):1721-1744. doi: 10.1007/s00018-019-03349-1. 
Epub 2019 Oct 30.

Mechanisms of secretion and spreading of pathological tau protein.

Brunello CA(1), Merezhko M(1), Uronen RL(1), Huttunen HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, 
Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Neuroscience Center, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, 
Haartmaninkatu 8, 00014, Helsinki, Finland. henri.huttunen@helsinki.fi.

Accumulation of misfolded and aggregated forms of tau protein in the brain is a 
neuropathological hallmark of tauopathies, such as Alzheimer's disease and 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Tau aggregates have the ability to transfer 
from one cell to another and to induce templated misfolding and aggregation of 
healthy tau molecules in previously healthy cells, thereby propagating tau 
pathology across different brain areas in a prion-like manner. The molecular 
mechanisms involved in cell-to-cell transfer of tau aggregates are diverse, not 
mutually exclusive and only partially understood. Intracellular accumulation of 
misfolded tau induces several mechanisms that aim to reduce the cellular burden 
of aggregated proteins and also promote secretion of tau aggregates. However, 
tau may also be released from cells physiologically unrelated to protein 
aggregation. Tau secretion involves multiple vesicular and non-vesicle-mediated 
pathways, including secretion directly through the plasma membrane. 
Consequently, extracellular tau can be found in various forms, both as a free 
protein and in vesicles, such as exosomes and ectosomes. Once in the 
extracellular space, tau aggregates can be internalized by neighboring cells, 
both neurons and glial cells, via endocytic, pinocytic and phagocytic 
mechanisms. Importantly, accumulating evidence suggests that prion-like 
propagation of misfolding protein pathology could provide a general mechanism 
for disease progression in tauopathies and other related neurodegenerative 
diseases. Here, we review the recent literature on cellular mechanisms involved 
in cell-to-cell transfer of tau, with a particular focus in tau secretion.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-019-03349-1
PMCID: PMC7190606
PMID: 31667556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HJH is an employee and a shareholder of Herantis 
Pharma Plc, which is not related to the contents of this review.