1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2020 Jan 1;318(1):C191-C204. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00360.2019. Epub 2019 Oct 30.

Identification and characterization of the Atlantic salmon peptide transporter 
1a.

Gomes AS(1), Vacca F(2), Cinquetti R(2), Murashita K(1)(3), Barca A(4), Bossi 
E(2), Rønnestad I(1), Verri T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, 
Varese, Italy.
(3)Research Center for Aquaculture Systems, Japan Fisheries Research and 
Education Agency, National Research Institute of Aquaculture, Tamaki, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of General Physiology, Department of Biological and Environmental 
Sciences and Technologies, University of Salento, Lecce, Italy.

Peptide transporter 1 (PepT1) mediates the uptake of dietary di-/tripeptides in 
vertebrates. However, in teleost fish gut, more than one PepT1-type transporter 
might operate, because of teleost-specific whole gen(om)e duplication event(s) 
that occurred during evolution. Here, we describe a novel teleost di-/tripeptide 
transporter, i.e., the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) peptide transporter 1a 
[PepT1a; or solute carrier family 15 member 1a (Slc15a1a)], which is a paralog 
(77% similarity and 64% identity at the amino acid level) of the well-described 
Atlantic salmon peptide transporter 1b [PepT1b, alias PepT1; or solute carrier 
family 15 member 1b (Slc15a1b)]. Comparative analysis and evolutionary 
relationships of gene/protein sequences were conducted after ad hoc database 
mining. Tissue mRNA expression analysis was performed by quantitative real-time 
PCR, whereas transport function analysis was accomplished by heterologous 
expression in Xenopus laevis oocytes and two-electrode voltage-clamp 
measurements. Atlantic salmon pept1a is highly expressed in the proximal 
intestine (pyloric ceca ≈ anterior midgut > midgut >> posterior midgut), in the 
same gut regions as pept1b but notably ~5-fold less abundant. Like PepT1b, 
Atlantic salmon PepT1a is a low-affinity/high-capacity system. Functional 
analysis showed electrogenic, Na+-independent/pH-dependent transport and 
apparent substrate affinity (K0.5) values for Gly-Gln of 1.593 mmol/L at pH 7.6 
and 0.076 mmol/L at pH 6.5. In summary, we show that a piscine PepT1a-type 
transporter is functional. Defining the role of Atlantic salmon PepT1a in the 
gut will help to understand the evolutionary and functional relationships among 
peptide transporters. Its functional characterization will contribute to 
elucidate the relevance of peptide transporters in Atlantic salmon nutritional 
physiology.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00360.2019
PMID: 31664857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]