1. Sci Data. 2019 Oct 29;6(1):240. doi: 10.1038/s41597-019-0256-6.

Transcriptomic profile of cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells undergoing 
repair.

Zoso A(1), Sofoluwe A(1), Bacchetta M(1), Chanson M(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Gynecology & Obstetrics and of Cell Physiology & 
Metabolism, Geneva University Hospitals and Medical School of the University of 
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics, Gynecology & Obstetrics and of Cell Physiology & 
Metabolism, Geneva University Hospitals and Medical School of the University of 
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. marc.chanson@unige.ch.

Pathological remodeling of the airway epithelium is commonly observed in Cystic 
Fibrosis (CF). The different cell types that constitute the airway epithelium 
are regenerated upon injury to restore integrity and maintenance of the 
epithelium barrier function. The molecular signature of tissue repair in CF 
airway epithelial cells has, however, not well been investigated in primary 
cultures. We therefore collected RNA-seq data from well-differentiated primary 
cultures of bronchial human airway epithelial cells (HAECs) of CF 
(F508del/F508del) and non-CF (NCF) origins before and after mechanical wounding, 
exposed or not to flagellin. We identified the expression changes with time of 
repair of genes, the products of which are markers of the different cell types 
that constitute the airway epithelium (basal, suprabasal, intermediate, 
secretory, goblet and ciliated cells as well as ionocytes). Researchers in the 
CF field may benefit from this transcriptomic profile, which covers the initial 
steps of wound repair and revealed differences in this process between CF and 
NCF cultures.

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-019-0256-6
PMCID: PMC6820749
PMID: 31664037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.