1. Acta Biomater. 2020 Jan 1;101:484-494. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2019.10.037. Epub
 2019 Oct 28.

Carboxylated nanodiamond-mediated CRISPR-Cas9 delivery of human retinoschisis 
mutation into human iPSCs and mouse retina.

Yang TC(1), Chang CY(2), Yarmishyn AA(1), Mao YS(3), Yang YP(1), Wang ML(4), Hsu 
CC(5), Yang HY(6), Hwang DK(5), Chen SJ(7), Tsai ML(1), Lai YH(1), Tzeng Y(8), 
Chang CC(9), Chiou SH(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
11217, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Chiao Tung University, 
Hsinchu, 1001, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
701, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
11217, Taiwan; School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 11221, 
Taiwan; Institute of Environmental Health, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, 11221, Taiwan.
(5)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 11221, Taiwan; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 11217, 
Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
11221, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 11217, 
Taiwan.
(7)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 11221, Taiwan; 
Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 11217, 
Taiwan.
(8)Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
701, Taiwan. Electronic address: tzengyo@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Chiao Tung University, 
Hsinchu, 1001, Taiwan; Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, 
Taiwan; Center for Intelligent Drug Systems and Smart Bio-devices, Chiao Tung 
University, Hsinchu, 1001, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
ccchang01@faculty.nctu.edu.tw.
(10)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
11217, Taiwan; School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 11221, 
Taiwan; Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, 
11217, Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, 11221, Taiwan; Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, 11221, Taiwan; Genomic Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw.

Nanodiamonds (NDs) are considered to be relatively safe carbon nanomaterials 
used for the transmission of DNA, proteins and drugs. The feasibility of 
utilizing the NDs to deliver CRISPR-Cas9 system for gene editing has not been 
clearly studied. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to use NDs as the carriers 
of CRISPR-Cas9 components designed to introduce the mutation in RS1 gene 
associated with X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS). ND particles with a diameter of 
3 nm were functionalized by carboxylation of the surface and covalently 
conjugated with fluorescent mCherry protein. Two linear DNA constructs were 
attached to the conjugated mCherry: one encoded Cas9 endonuclease and GFP 
reporter, another encoded sgRNA and contained insert of HDR template designed to 
introduce RS1 c.625C>T mutation. Such nanoparticles were successfully delivered 
and internalized by human iPSCs and mouse retinas, the efficiency of 
internalization was significantly improved by mixing with BSA. The delivery of 
ND particles led to introduction of RS1 c.625C>T mutation in both human iPSCs 
and mouse retinas. Rs1 gene editing in mouse retinas resulted in several 
pathological features typical for XLRS, such as aberrant photoreceptor 
structure. To conclude, our ND-based CRISPR-Cas9 delivery system can be utilized 
as a tool for creating in vitro and in vivo disease models of XLRS. STATEMENT OF 
SIGNIFICANCE: X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS) is a prevalent hereditary retinal 
disease, which is caused by mutations in RS1 gene, whose product is important 
for structural organization of the retina. The recent development of genome 
editing techniques such as CRISPR-Cas9 significantly improved the prospects for 
better understanding the pathology and development of treatment for this 
disease. Firstly, gene editing can allow development of appropriate in vitro and 
in vivo disease models; secondly, CRISPR-Cas9 can be applied for gene therapy by 
removing the disease-causative mutation in vivo. The major prerequisite for 
these approaches is to develop safe and efficient CRISPR-Cas9 delivery system. 
In this study, we tested specifically modified nanodiamonds for such a delivery 
system. We were able to introduce Rs1 mutation into the mouse retina and, 
importantly, observed several XLRS-specific effects.

Copyright © 2019 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2019.10.037
PMID: 31672582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]