1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2020 Feb;80:102378. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2019.102378. Epub
 2019 Oct 22.

Hereditary xerocytosis - spectrum and clinical manifestations of variants in the 
PIEZO1 gene, including co-occurrence with a novel β-globin mutation.

Maciak K(1), Adamowicz-Salach A(2), Siwicka A(2), Poznanski J(1), Urasinski 
T(3), Plochocka D(1), Gora M(1), Burzynska B(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Hematology and Oncology, Medical University of 
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Hemato-Oncology and Gastroenterology, Pomeranian 
Medical University in Szczecin, Poland.
(4)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland. 
Electronic address: atka@ibb.waw.pl.

Hereditary xerocytosis (HX) is a rare, autosomal dominant congenital hemolytic 
anemia (CHA) characterized by erythrocyte dehydration with presentation of 
various degrees of hemolytic anemia. HX is often misdiagnosed as hereditary 
spherocytosis or other CHA. Here we report three cases of suspected HX and one 
case of HX associated with β-thalassemia. Sanger method was used for sequencing 
cDNA of the PIEZO1 gene. Variants were evaluated for potential pathogenicity by 
MutationTaster, PROVEAN, PolyPhen-2 and M-CAP software, and by molecular 
modeling. Four different variants in the PIEZO1 gene were found, including three 
substitutions (p.D669H, p.D1566G, p.T1732 M) and one deletion (p.745delQ). In 
addition, in the patient with the p.T1732 M variant we detected a 12-nucleotide 
deletion in the β-globin gene leading to a deletion of amino acids 62AHGK65. The 
joint presence of mutations in two different genes connected with erythrocytes 
markedly aggravated the presentation of the disease. Bioinformatic analysis and 
molecular modeling strongly indicated likely deleterious effects of all four 
PIEZO1 variants, but co-segregation analysis showed that the p.D1566G 
substitution is in fact non-pathogenic. Identification of causative mutations 
should improve the diagnosis and management of HX and provide a new insight into 
the molecular basis of this complex red blood cell abnormality.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2019.102378
PMID: 31670187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]