1. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2020 Feb;27(2):280-286. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmig.2019.10.020. Epub 2019 Nov 1.

Should Genetics Now Be Considered the Pre-eminent Etiologic Factor in 
Endometriosis?

Montgomery GW(1), Mortlock S(2), Giudice LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia (Drs. Montgomery and Mortlock). Electronic address: 
g.montgomery1@uq.edu.au.
(2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia (Drs. Montgomery and Mortlock).
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California (Dr. Giudice).

Comment in
    J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2020 Sep - Oct;27(6):1426-1427. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmig.2020.03.015.
    J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2020 Sep - Oct;27(6):1427. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmig.2020.04.021.

Endometriosis is a common, estrogen-dependent, inflammatory disorder 
characterized by the growth of endometrial-like tissue at extrauterine 
locations. Its pathogenesis and mechanisms underlying its pathophysiology are 
poorly understood, although genetic variation is strongly implicated in these 
processes. Genetic studies reveal that approximately 50% of risk for 
endometriosis is due to genetic factors and the other 50% likely owing to 
environmental factors. As with other complex diseases, genetic variants in the 
DNA sequence increasing endometriosis risk all have small effects, unlike most 
single-gene disorders. It is the combinations of these variants adding together 
that contribute to higher risks for individual women. In addition, recent data 
on disease lesions demonstrate a high frequency of somatic (likely acquired) 
mutations, some of which are present in the eutopic endometrium and specifically 
in the epithelial cell compartment, raising the possibility that abnormal 
epithelial progenitors in the eutopic endometrium give rise to ectopic disease. 
Discovery in this field is occurring at a rapid pace, and further definitions of 
genetic (germline) and environmental (somatic) contributions to the pathogenesis 
and pathophysiology of this disorder are anticipated soon. These discoveries are 
expected to increase diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive strategies to 
minimize disease and its associated morbidities.

Copyright Â© 2019 AAGL. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2019.10.020
PMCID: PMC7863762
PMID: 31683028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.