1. Heliyon. 2019 Sep 13;5(9):e02447. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02447. 
eCollection 2019 Sep.

Analysis on biological importance of antiseptic drug, O-Benzyl hydroxylamine, by 
the application of spectroscopic and theoretical tools.

Manthiri AA(1)(2), George G(1), Ramalingam S(3), Aarthi R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, T.B.M.L. College, Porayar, Tamilnadu, India.
(2)Department of Physics, Jamal Mohamed College, Tiruchirappalli, Tamilnadu, 
India.
(3)Department of Physics, A.V.C. College, Mayiladuthurai, Tamilnadu, India.
(4)Department of Physics, ST. Theresa's Arts and Science College, Tharangambadi, 
Tamilnadu, India.

Biological importance of antiseptic drug; O-Benzyl hydroxylamine was explored 
using QSAR studies for ultimate usage for treating fungal infections. In this 
research work, the molecular spectroscopic tool and theoretical calculation 
method of analysis. The data acquired from both tools were evaluated and 
compared to validate structural and vibrational characteristics. Mulliken charge 
displacement around molecular site in order for exploring electronic properties 
to find out the cause of inducement of drug potential. The Lipinski rule of five 
was evaluated for the measurement of biological importance of the drug compound. 
The lipophilicity and topological surface area of the drug was monitored for 
determining biological process activity. The partial involvement of 
compositional bonds of the molecule was appraised for influential vibrational 
characteristics. The chemical environment for making chemical property was 
monitored from the uniform and asymmetrical chemical shift of core and allied 
carbons. The resultant oscillating potential orientation in the molecular site 
was identified and the residing zones were recognized to find out the origin of 
drug potential. The occurrence of CT complex process was studied and the CTC was 
found to be CC and C-N for generating drug activeness. The enhancement of hyper 
active polarization was measured in first and second order from which the charge 
level pulling on different entities were observed for ensuring the biological 
affinity of the compound. The enantiomer characteristics were thoroughly studied 
to measure the level of toxicity.

Â© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02447
PMCID: PMC6819797
PMID: 31687552