1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2019 Oct 11;7:262. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00262. 
eCollection 2019.

Engineering the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the Production of 
L-(+)-Ergothioneine.

van der Hoek SA(1), Darbani B(1), Zugaj KE(1), Prabhala BK(1), Biron MB(1), 
Randelovic M(1), Medina JB(1), Kell DB(1)(2), Borodina I(1).

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

L-(+)-Ergothioneine (ERG) is an unusual, naturally occurring antioxidant 
nutraceutical that has been shown to help reduce cellular oxidative damage. 
Humans do not biosynthesise ERG, but acquire it from their diet; it exploits a 
specific transporter (SLC22A4) for its uptake. ERG is considered to be a 
nutraceutical and possible vitamin that is involved in the maintenance of 
health, and seems to be at too low a concentration in several diseases in vivo. 
Ergothioneine is thus a potentially useful dietary supplement. Present methods 
of commercial production rely on extraction from natural sources or on chemical 
synthesis. Here we describe the engineering of the baker's yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae to produce ergothioneine by fermentation in defined media. After 
integrating combinations of ERG biosynthetic pathways from different organisms, 
we screened yeast strains for their production of ERG. The highest-producing 
strain was also engineered with known ergothioneine transporters. The effect of 
amino acid supplementation of the medium was investigated and the nitrogen 
metabolism of S. cerevisiae was altered by knock-out of TOR1 or YIH1. We also 
optimized the media composition using fractional factorial methods. Our optimal 
strategy led to a titer of 598 ± 18 mg/L ergothioneine in fed-batch culture in 1 
L bioreactors. Because S. cerevisiae is a GRAS ("generally recognized as safe") 
organism that is widely used for nutraceutical production, this work provides a 
promising process for the biosynthetic production of ERG.

Copyright © 2019 van der Hoek, Darbani, Zugaj, Prabhala, Biron, Randelovic, 
Medina, Kell and Borodina.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00262
PMCID: PMC6797849
PMID: 31681742