1. FASEB J. 2019 Dec;33(12):14772-14783. doi: 10.1096/fj.201901404R. Epub 2019
Nov  5.

Neural precursor cell-expressed, developmentally down-regulated 4 (NEDD4) 
regulates hydrogen peroxide-induced cell proliferation and death through 
inhibition of Hippo signaling.

Jeon SA(1), Kim DW(1), Cho JY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, BK21 Plus and Research Institute for 
Veterinary Science, School of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, South Korea.

E3 ubiquitin ligases are involved in the regulation of oxidative stress-induced 
cell death. In this study, we investigated the role of neural precursor 
cell-expressed, developmentally down-regulated protein 4 (NEDD4) in regulation 
of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-induced cell proliferation and apoptosis in human 
bone marrow-derived stem cells (hBMSCs). Cell proliferation was increased in low 
doses of H2O2 (10-4 to 10-2 μM), whereas sublethal concentrations of H2O2 (>200 
μM) induced apoptosis. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay identified that 
recruitment of NF-κB onto the promoter region of NEDD4 mediated H2O2-induced 
NEDD4 expression. The increase of NEDD4 expression by H2O2 induced translocation 
of yes-associated protein (YAP) into the nucleus by decreasing the stability of 
large tumor suppressor kinase (LATS). Thus, the phosphorylation of serine 127 
residue of YAP by LATS upstream kinase is decreased and thereby increased the 
transcriptional activity of YAP. The mRNA expression levels of catalase and 
manganese superoxide dismutase, which are well-known targets of YAP, were 
increased by H2O2 treatment but down-regulated by NEDD4 silencing using a 
specific small interfering RNA targeting NEDD4 (siNEDD4). H2O2-induced 
scavenging capacity of reactive oxygen species was also decreased by siNEDD4 in 
hBMSCs. Finally, hBMSC differentiation into osteoblast was decreased by siNEDD4 
but reverted by reintroduction of the S127A mutant construction of YAP. Taken 
together, these results indicate that NEDD4 regulates H2O2-induced alteration of 
cell status through regulation of the Hippo signaling pathway.-Jeon, S.-A., Kim, 
D. W., Cho, J.-Y. Neural precursor cell-expressed, developmentally 
down-regulated 4 (NEDD4) regulates hydrogen peroxide-induced cell proliferation 
and death through inhibition of Hippo signaling.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201901404R
PMID: 31690112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]