1. Front Physiol. 2019 Oct 22;10:1314. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01314. eCollection
 2019.

Proarrhythmia in the p.Met207Val PITX2c-Linked Familial Atrial 
Fibrillation-Insights From Modeling.

Bai J(1), Lu Y(1), Lo A(2), Zhao J(2), Zhang H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering, College of Information Science and 
Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Auckland Bioengineering Institute, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(3)Biological Physics Group, School of Physics & Astronomy, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Pilot National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.

Functional analysis has shown that the p.Met207Val mutation was linked to atrial 
fibrillation and caused an increase in transactivation activity of PITX2c, which 
caused changes in mRNA synthesis related to ionic channels and intercellular 
electrical coupling. We assumed that these changes were quantitatively 
translated to the functional level. This study aimed to investigate the 
potential impact of the PITX2c p.Met207Val mutation on atrial electrical 
activity through multiscale computational models. The well-known 
Courtemanche-Ramirez-Nattel (CRN) model of human atrial cell action potentials 
(APs) was modified to incorporate experimental data on the expected p.Met207Val 
mutation-induced changes in ionic channel currents (I NaL , I Ks , and I Kr ) 
and intercellular electrical coupling. The cell models for wild-type (WT), 
heterozygous (Mutant/Wild type, MT/WT), and homozygous (Mutant, MT) PITX2c cases 
were incorporated into homogeneous multicellular 1D and 2D tissue models. 
Effects of this mutation-induced remodeling were quantified as changes in AP 
profile, AP duration (APD) restitution, conduction velocity (CV) restitution and 
wavelength (WL). Temporal and spatial vulnerabilities of atrial tissue to the 
genesis of reentry were computed. Dynamic behaviors of re-entrant excitation 
waves (Life span, tip trajectory and dominant frequency) in a homogeneous 2D 
tissue model were characterized. Our results suggest that the PITX2c p.Met207Val 
mutation abbreviated atrial APD and flattened APD restitution curves. It reduced 
atrial CV and WL that facilitated the conduction of high rate atrial excitation 
waves. It increased the tissue's temporal vulnerability by increasing the 
vulnerable window for initiating reentry and increased the tissue spatial 
vulnerability by reducing the substrate size necessary to sustain reentry. In 
the 2D models, the mutation also stabilized and accelerated re-entrant 
excitation waves, leading to rapid and sustained reentry. In conclusion, 
electrical and structural remodeling arising from the PITX2c p.Met207Val 
mutation may increase atrial susceptibility to arrhythmia due to shortened APD, 
reduced CV and increased tissue vulnerability, which, in combination, facilitate 
initiation and maintenance of re-entrant excitation waves.

Copyright Â© 2019 Bai, Lu, Lo, Zhao and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01314
PMCID: PMC6818469
PMID: 31695623