1. J Virol. 2020 Jan 17;94(3):e01353-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01353-19. Print 2020
Jan  17.

Elucidating the Interactions between Influenza Virus Polymerase and Host Factor 
ANP32A.

Mistry B(1), Long JS(1), Schreyer J(1), Staller E(1), Sanchez-David RY(1), 
Barclay WS(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Molecular Virology, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Section of Molecular Virology, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom w.barclay@imperial.ac.uk.

The avian-origin influenza A virus polymerase is restricted in human cells. This 
restriction has been associated with species differences in host factor ANP32A. 
Avian ANP32A supports the activity of an avian-origin polymerase. However, the 
avian-origin polymerase is incompatible with human ANP32A. Avian ANP32A proteins 
harbor an additional 33 amino acids compared to human ANP32A proteins, which are 
crucial for their ability to support the avian-origin influenza virus 
polymerase. Here, we elucidate the interactions between ANP32A proteins and the 
influenza A virus polymerase using split luciferase complementation assays, 
coimmunoprecipitation, and in situ split Venus interaction assays. We show 
greater interaction of chicken ANP32A than human ANP32A with the viral 
polymerase and visualize these interactions in situ in the cell nucleus. We 
demonstrate that the 33 amino acids of chicken ANP32A and the PB2 627 domain of 
viral polymerase complex both contribute to this enhanced interaction. Finally, 
we show how these interactions are affected by the presence of viral RNA and the 
processivity of the polymerase, giving insights into the way that ANP32A might 
act during virus infection.IMPORTANCE Successful zoonotic transmission of 
influenza A virus into humans can lead to pandemics in an immunologically naive 
population. Host-encoded ANP32A proteins are required to support influenza A 
virus polymerase activity, and species differences in ANP32A can restrict the 
host range of influenza virus. Understanding how ANP32A proteins support the 
viral polymerase and how differences in ANP32A affect the ability of the 
polymerase to coopt these proteins will enhance our understanding of viral 
replication and species restriction as well as suggesting targeted antiviral 
approaches to treat influenza virus infection.

Copyright Â© 2020 Mistry et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01353-19
PMCID: PMC7000967
PMID: 31694956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]