1. Ann Hum Genet. 2020 Mar;84(2):161-168. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12359. Epub 2019 Nov
7.

Variant frequencies of KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A in a Chinese inherited arrhythmia 
cohort and other disease cohorts undergoing genetic testing.

Li X(1), Liu N(1), Bai R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, National Clinical Research Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, 
Chaoyang, Beijing, China.

KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A are the most common genes responsible for long QT 
syndrome and Brugada syndrome. However, the genetic variant frequencies of the 
three genes in different Chinese disease cohorts are largely unknown. In this 
study, we analyzed the genetic variants of KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A in patients 
from seven cohorts (total N = 11945, including patients clinically suspected to 
have inherited arrhythmia [n = 122], other cardiovascular diseases [n = 1045], 
epilepsy [n = 4797], or other diseases [n = 5841], and healthy controls 
[n = 140]) who had undergone genetic testing. All of these variants were 
identified via genetic testing by two Chinese companies using the Hi-Seq 2000 
platform. A total of 1018 variants (minor allele frequency <0.01) were 
identified, with 186 (18%), 374 (37%), and 458 (46%) variants in the coding 
exons of KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A, respectively. Of these variants, 84% had 
unknown or uncertain clinical significance. The frequency of identified ClinVar 
pathological/likely pathological variants was higher for KCNQ1 (13/186, 7.0%) 
than for KCNH2 (6/374, 1.6%) or SCN5A (10/458, 2.2%), and KCNH2 held the highest 
number and proportion of radical mutations (30/374, 8%). The prevalence of 
variants was highest in the inherited arrhythmia cohort (35%) and lowest in the 
healthy controls (<4%), as expected. Noticeably, the variant prevalence was 
relatively high in the epilepsy cohort (27%). Finally, only 22 of the 82 
variants (26%) identified by both companies had consistent interpretations of 
pathogenicity between the two companies. Our study demonstrated a comprehensive 
spectrum of variants in KCNQ1, KCNH2, and SCN5A in a large number of Chinese 
individuals, including inherited arrhythmia, cardiovascular diseases, and 
epilepsy. The detailed variant frequency data of each cohort could serve as a 
valuable reference to facilitate further variant classification by others. We 
also found that the interpretations of pathogenicity differed greatly among the 
companies.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12359
PMID: 31696929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]