1. Mol Med Rep. 2019 Nov;20(5):4558-4566. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10700. Epub 2019 
Sep 24.

miR‑483‑3p regulates osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem 
cells by targeting STAT1.

Xiao Y(1), Guo Q(1), Jiang TJ(1), Yuan Y(1), Yang L(1), Wang GW(2), Xiao WF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Endocrinology Research Center, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Hunan University of Medicine, Huaihua, Hunan 418000, 
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

Osteogenic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) is 
regulated by a variety of intracellular regulatory factors including osterix, 
runt‑related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), bone morphogenetic proteins and 
transforming growth factorβ. Recent studies have shown that microRNAs (miRs) 
serve a crucial role in this process. In the present study, miR‑483‑3p levels 
were significantly increased during osteogenic differentiation of mouse and 
human BMSCs. Overexpression of miR‑483‑3p promoted osteogenic differentiation, 
whereas inhibition of miR‑483‑3p reversed these effects. miR‑483‑3p regulated 
osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs by targeting STAT1, and thus enhancing RUNX2 
transcriptional activity and RUNX2 nuclear translocation. In vivo, 
overexpression of miR‑483‑3p using a BMSC‑specific aptamer delivery system 
stimulated bone formation in aged mice. Therefore, the present study suggested 
that miR‑483‑3p promoted osteogenic differentiation of BMSCs by targeting STAT1, 
and miR‑483‑3 prepresent a potential therapeutic target for age‑related bone 
loss.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2019.10700
PMCID: PMC6797999
PMID: 31702021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]