1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2019 Dec;81:101912. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.101912. Epub
2019  Oct 28.

Molecular insight of regorafenib treatment for colorectal cancer.

Arai H(1), Battaglin F(2), Wang J(3), Lo JH(4), Soni S(1), Zhang W(5), Lenz 
HJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States. Electronic address: fbattagl@usc.edu.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States. Electronic address: 1811110576@bjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States. Electronic address: jaeholo@usc.edu.
(5)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States. Electronic address: Wu.Zhang@med.usc.edu.
(6)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1441 Eastlate Avenue, Los 
Angeles, CA 90033, United States. Electronic address: lenz@usc.edu.

Regorafenib is a multi-targeting kinase inhibitor approved for the treatment of 
metastatic colorectal cancer patients in refractory to standard chemotherapy. 
Similarly to sorafenib, this agent was originally developed as a RAF1 inhibitor. 
However, the kinase inhibitory profile is distinct from sorafenib. A 
broad-spectrum of kinase inhibition induces wide-range drug sensitivity, 
irrespective of mutation status of major oncogenes. This agent's main 
therapeutic effects are anti-angiogenesis and the remodeling of tumor 
microenvironment through several mechanisms of action. The dual blockade of VEGF 
receptors and TIE2 can lead to both additive anti-angiogenesis effects and the 
suggestive unique regulation of vessel stability. Additionally, it inhibits 
molecular escape pathways to VEGF inhibition (e.g., FGF, PIGF, and PDGF 
signaling), enabling its continuous antiangiogenic effect even in tumors 
resistant to VEGF inhibitors. Furthermore, regorafenib has the important effect 
of enhancing anti-tumor immunity via macrophage modulation. Based on this 
concept, clinical trials have been recently launched for the development of a 
combination strategy with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Contrary to regorafenib 
induced clinical benefits and advances in the novel strategy, currently no 
predictive biomarkers have been identified. In the present review, we revisit 
and summarize regorafenib's unique mechanisms of action. The review could 
highlight molecular insights and provide some perspective for the search of 
predictive biomarkers used in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with 
regorafenib.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2019.101912
PMCID: PMC7491975
PMID: 31715423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Heinz-Josef 
Lenz reports receiving speakers bureau honoraria from and is a 
consultant/advisory board member for Merck Serono, Bayer, and Genentech. The 
other authors have declared no conflicts of interest.