1. Sci Adv. 2019 Nov 6;5(11):eaay4624. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay4624. eCollection 
2019 Nov.

Integrated proteogenetic analysis reveals the landscape of a 
mitochondrial-autophagosome synapse during PARK2-dependent mitophagy.

Heo JM(1), Harper NJ(1), Paulo JA(1), Li M(2), Xu Q(2), Coughlin M(1), Elledge 
SJ(2), Harper JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute; Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

The PINK1 protein kinase activates the PARK2 ubiquitin ligase to promote 
mitochondrial ubiquitylation and recruitment of ubiquitin-binding mitophagy 
receptors typified by OPTN and TAX1BP1. Here, we combine proximity biotinylation 
of OPTN and TAX1BP1 with CRISPR-Cas9-based screens for mitophagic flux to 
develop a spatial proteogenetic map of PARK2-dependent mitophagy. Proximity 
labeling of OPTN allowed visualization of a "mitochondrial-autophagosome 
synapse" upon mitochondrial depolarization. Proximity proteomics of OPTN and 
TAX1BP1 revealed numerous proteins at the synapse, including both PARK2 
substrates and autophagy components. Parallel mitophagic flux screens identified 
proteins with roles in autophagy, vesicle formation and fusion, as well as PARK2 
targets, many of which were also identified via proximity proteomics. One 
protein identified in both approaches, HK2, promotes assembly of a 
high-molecular weight complex of PINK1 and phosphorylation of ubiquitin in 
response to mitochondrial damage. This work provides a resource for 
understanding the spatial and molecular landscape of PARK2-dependent mitophagy.

Copyright Â© 2019 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 
4.0 (CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aay4624
PMCID: PMC6834391
PMID: 31723608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]