1. Elife. 2019 Nov 14;8:e49257. doi: 10.7554/eLife.49257.

Nitric oxide acts as a cotransmitter in a subset of dopaminergic neurons to 
diversify memory dynamics.

Aso Y(1), Ray RP(1), Long X(1), Bushey D(1), Cichewicz K(2), Ngo TT(1), Sharp 
B(1), Christoforou C(1), Hu A(1), Lemire AL(1), Tillberg P(1), Hirsh J(2), 
Litwin-Kumar A(3), Rubin GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, United 
States.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, United 
States.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, New York, United States.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2020 Oct 22;9:e64094. doi: 10.7554/eLife.64094.

Comment in
    Elife. 2020 Jan 08;9:e53832. doi: 10.7554/eLife.53832.

Animals employ diverse learning rules and synaptic plasticity dynamics to record 
temporal and statistical information about the world. However, the molecular 
mechanisms underlying this diversity are poorly understood. The anatomically 
defined compartments of the insect mushroom body function as parallel units of 
associative learning, with different learning rates, memory decay dynamics and 
flexibility (Aso and Rubin, 2016). Here, we show that nitric oxide (NO) acts as 
a neurotransmitter in a subset of dopaminergic neurons in Drosophila. NO's 
effects develop more slowly than those of dopamine and depend on soluble 
guanylate cyclase in postsynaptic Kenyon cells. NO acts antagonistically to 
dopamine; it shortens memory retention and facilitates the rapid updating of 
memories. The interplay of NO and dopamine enables memories stored in local 
domains along Kenyon cell axons to be specialized for predicting the value of 
odors based only on recent events. Our results provide key mechanistic insights 
into how diverse memory dynamics are established in parallel memory systems.

Â© 2019, Aso et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.49257
PMCID: PMC6948953
PMID: 31724947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YA, RR, XL, DB, KC, TN, BS, CC, AH, AL, PT, JH, 
AL, GR No competing interests declared