1. Mol Neurodegener. 2019 Nov 14;14(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s13024-019-0343-3.

Application of CRISPR genetic screens to investigate neurological diseases.

So RWL(1)(2), Chung SW(1), Lau HHC(1)(2), Watts JJ(3), Gaudette E(1), Al-Azzawi 
ZAM(1), Bishay J(1), Lin LT(1)(2), Joung J(4)(5), Wang X(1)(2), Schmitt-Ulms 
G(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Medical Sciences Building, 6th Floor, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, 
M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of 
Toronto, Krembil Discovery Centre, 6th Floor60 Leonard Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, 
M5T 2S8, Canada.
(3)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Medical 
Sciences Building, 6th Floor, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 
1A8, Canada.
(4)Departments of Biological Engineering and Brain and Cognitive Science, and 
McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Medical Sciences Building, 6th Floor, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, 
M5S 1A8, Canada. g.schmittulms@utoronto.ca.
(7)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of 
Toronto, Krembil Discovery Centre, 6th Floor60 Leonard Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, 
M5T 2S8, Canada. g.schmittulms@utoronto.ca.

The adoption of CRISPR-Cas9 technology for functional genetic screens has been a 
transformative advance. Due to its modular nature, this technology can be 
customized to address a myriad of questions. To date, pooled, genome-scale 
studies have uncovered genes responsible for survival, proliferation, drug 
resistance, viral susceptibility, and many other functions. The technology has 
even been applied to the functional interrogation of the non-coding genome. 
However, applications of this technology to neurological diseases remain scarce. 
This shortfall motivated the assembly of a review that will hopefully help 
researchers moving in this direction find their footing. The emphasis here will 
be on design considerations and concepts underlying this methodology. We will 
highlight groundbreaking studies in the CRISPR-Cas9 functional genetics field 
and discuss strengths and limitations of this technology for neurological 
disease applications. Finally, we will provide practical guidance on navigating 
the many choices that need to be made when implementing a CRISPR-Cas9 functional 
genetic screen for the study of neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/s13024-019-0343-3
PMCID: PMC6857349
PMID: 31727120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.