1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Dec 16;47(22):11807-11825. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1043.

Loss of the ribosomal RNA methyltransferase NSUN5 impairs global protein 
synthesis and normal growth.

Heissenberger C(1), Liendl L(1), Nagelreiter F(1), Gonskikh Y(2), Yang G(3), 
Stelzer EM(1), Krammer TL(1), Micutkova L(4), Vogt S(1), Kreil DP(1), Sekot 
G(1), Siena E(1), Poser I(5), Harreither E(1), Linder A(1), Ehret V(6), Helbich 
TH(6), Grillari-Voglauer R(1), Jansen-Dürr P(4), Koš M(3), Polacek N(2), 
Grillari J(1)(7)(8), Schosserer M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, University 
of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, 1190 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, 
Switzerland.
(3)Biochemistry Center, University of Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, University of Innsbruck, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedical Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Division of 
Molecular and Gender Imaging, Preclinical Imaging Laboratory, Medical University 
of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(7)Christian Doppler Laboratory on Biotechnology of Skin Aging, 1190 Vienna, 
Austria.
(8)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Experimental and Clinical Traumatology, 1200 
Vienna, Austria.

Modifications of ribosomal RNA expand the nucleotide repertoire and thereby 
contribute to ribosome heterogeneity and translational regulation of gene 
expression. One particular m5C modification of 25S ribosomal RNA, which is 
introduced by Rcm1p, was previously shown to modulate stress responses and 
lifespan in yeast and other small organisms. Here, we report that NSUN5 is the 
functional orthologue of Rcm1p, introducing m5C3782 into human and m5C3438 into 
mouse 28S ribosomal RNA. Haploinsufficiency of the NSUN5 gene in fibroblasts 
from William Beuren syndrome patients causes partial loss of this modification. 
The N-terminal domain of NSUN5 is required for targeting to nucleoli, while two 
evolutionary highly conserved cysteines mediate catalysis. Phenotypic 
consequences of NSUN5 deficiency in mammalian cells include decreased 
proliferation and size, which can be attributed to a reduction in total protein 
synthesis by altered ribosomes. Strikingly, Nsun5 knockout in mice causes 
decreased body weight and lean mass without alterations in food intake, as well 
as a trend towards reduced protein synthesis in several tissues. Together, our 
findings emphasize the importance of single RNA modifications for ribosome 
function and normal cellular and organismal physiology.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1043
PMCID: PMC7145617
PMID: 31722427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]