1. PLoS Pathog. 2019 Nov 15;15(11):e1007863. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007863. 
eCollection 2019 Nov.

Electrostatic interactions at the five-fold axis alter heparin-binding phenotype 
and drive enterovirus A71 virulence in mice.

Tee HK(1), Tan CW(1), Yogarajah T(1), Lee MHP(1), Chai HJ(2), Hanapi NA(3), 
Yusof SR(3), Ong KC(4), Lee VS(5), Sam IC(1), Chan YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Centre for Drug Research, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.

Enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) causes hand, foot and mouth disease epidemics with 
neurological complications and fatalities. However, the neuropathogenesis of 
EV-A71 remains poorly understood. In mice, adaptation and virulence determinants 
have been mapped to mutations at VP2-149, VP1-145 and VP1-244. We investigate 
how these amino acids alter heparin-binding phenotype and shapes EV-A71 
virulence in one-day old mice. We constructed six viruses with varying residues 
at VP1-98, VP1-145 (which are both heparin-binding determinants) and VP2-149 
(based on the wild type 149K/98E/145Q, termed KEQ) to generate KKQ, KKE, KEE, 
IEE and IEQ variants. We demonstrated that the weak heparin-binder IEE was 
highly lethal in mice. The initially strong heparin-binding IEQ variant acquired 
an additional mutation VP1-K244E, which confers weak heparin-binding phenotype 
resulting in elevated viremia and increased virus antigens in mice brain, with 
subsequent high virulence. IEE and IEQ-244E variants inoculated into mice 
disseminated efficiently and displayed high viremia. Increasing polymerase 
fidelity and impairing recombination of IEQ attenuated the virulence, suggesting 
the importance of population diversity in EV-A71 pathogenesis in vivo. Combining 
in silico docking and deep sequencing approaches, we inferred that virus 
population diversity is shaped by electrostatic interactions at the five-fold 
axis of the virus surface. Electrostatic surface charges facilitate virus 
adaptation by generating poor heparin-binding variants for better in vivo 
dissemination in mice, likely due to reduced adsorption to heparin-rich 
peripheral tissues, which ultimately results in increased neurovirulence. The 
dynamic switching between heparin-binding and weak heparin-binding phenotype in 
vivo explained the neurovirulence of EV-A71.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007863
PMCID: PMC6881073
PMID: 31730673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.