1. Mol Oncol. 2020 Jan;14(1):54-68. doi: 10.1002/1878-0261.12600. Epub 2019 Dec
3.

TR1801-ADC: a highly potent cMet antibody-drug conjugate with high activity in 
patient-derived xenograft models of solid tumors.

Gymnopoulos M(1), Betancourt O(1), Blot V(1), Fujita R(1), Galvan D(1), Lieuw 
V(1), Nguyen S(1), Snedden J(1), Stewart C(1), Villicana J(1), Wojciak J(1), 
Wong E(1), Pardo R(2), Patel N(2), D'Hooge F(2), Vijayakrishnan B(2), Barry 
C(2), Hartley JA(2), Howard PW(2), Newman R(1), Coronella J(1).

Author information:
(1)Tanabe Research Laboratories U.S.A., Inc., San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Spirogen, a member of the AstraZeneca Group, London, UK.

cMet is a well-characterized oncogene that is the target of many drugs including 
small molecule and biologic pathway inhibitors, and, more 
recently, antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs). However, the clinical benefit from 
cMet-targeted therapy has been limited. We developed a novel cMet-targeted 
'third-generation' ADC, TR1801-ADC, that was optimized at different levels 
including specificity, stability, toxin-linker, conjugation site, and in vivo 
efficacy. Our nonagonistic cMet antibody was site-specifically conjugated to the 
pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) toxin-linker tesirine and has picomolar activity in 
cancer cell lines derived from different solid tumors including lung, 
colorectal, and gastric cancers. The potency of our cMet ADC is independent of 
MET gene copy number, and its antitumor activity was high not only in high 
cMet-expressing cell lines but also in medium-to-low cMet cell lines 
(40 000-90 000 cMet/cell) in which a cMet ADC with tubulin inhibitor payload was 
considerably less potent. In vivo xenografts with low-medium cMet expression 
were also very responsive to TR1801-ADC at a single dose, while a cMet ADC using 
a tubulin inhibitor showed a substantially reduced efficacy. Furthermore, 
TR1801-ADC had excellent efficacy with significant antitumor activity in 90% of 
tested patient-derived xenograft models of gastric, colorectal, and head and 
neck cancers: 7 of 10 gastric models, 4 of 10 colorectal cancer models, and 3 of 
10 head and neck cancer models showed complete tumor regression after a 
single-dose administration. Altogether, TR1801-ADC is a new generation cMet ADC 
with best-in-class preclinical efficacy and good tolerability in rats.

© 2019 The Authors. Published by FEBS Press and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.12600
PMCID: PMC6944112
PMID: 31736230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.