1. Mutagenesis. 2019 Dec 19;34(5-6):395-401. doi: 10.1093/mutage/gez040.

Genetic polymorphisms in inflammatory genes and pancreatic cancer risk: a 
two-phase study on more than 14 000 individuals.

Gentiluomo M(1), Peduzzi G(1), Lu Y(2), Campa D(1), Canzian F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Genomic Epidemiology Group, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

There is overwhelming evidence that inflammation plays a key role in the 
pathogenesis of cancer and its progression. Inflammation is regulated through a 
complex network of genes and polymorphic variants in these genes have been found 
to be associated to risk of various human cancers, alone or in combination with 
environmental variables. Despite this, not much is known on the genetic 
variability of genes that regulate inflammation and risk of pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We performed a two-phase association study considering 
the genetic variability of 76 genes that are key players in inflammatory 
response. We analysed tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 
regulatory SNPs on 7207 PDAC cases and 7063 controls and observed several 
associations with PDAC risk. The most significant association was between the 
carriers of the A allele of the CCL4-rs1719217 polymorphism, which was reported 
to be also associated with the expression level of the CCL4 gene, and increased 
risk of developing PDAC (odds ratio = 1.12, 95% confidence interval = 1.06-1.18, 
P = 3.34 × 10-5). This association was significant also after correction for 
multiple testing, highlighting the importance of using potentially functional 
SNPs in order to discover more genetic variants associated with PDAC risk.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the UK 
Environmental Mutagen Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/gez040
PMID: 31748817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]