1. Transl Psychiatry. 2019 Nov 18;9(1):309. doi: 10.1038/s41398-019-0639-7.

A regulatory variant of CHRM3 is associated with cannabis-induced hallucinations 
in European Americans.

Cheng Z(1), Phokaew C(1), Chou YL(2), Lai D(3), Meyers JL(4), Agrawal A(2), 
Farrer LA(5), Kranzler HR(6), Gelernter J(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Psychiatry, VA CT Healthcare 
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, State University of New York Downstate Medical 
Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(5)Departments of Neurology, Ophthalmology, Genetics & Genomics, Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Boston University Schools of Medicine and Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Center for Studies of Addiction and Crescenz 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Psychiatry, VA CT Healthcare 
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
joel.gelernter@yale.edu.
(8)Departments of Genetics and Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, CT, USA. joel.gelernter@yale.edu.

Cannabis, the most widely used illicit drug, can induce hallucinations. Our 
understanding of the biology of cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) is 
limited. We used the Semi-Structured Assessment for Drug Dependence and 
Alcoholism (SSADDA) to identify cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) among 
long-term cannabis users (used cannabis ≥1 year and ≥100 times). A genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) was conducted by analyzing European Americans (EAs) and 
African Americans (AAs) in Yale-Penn 1 and 2 cohorts individually, then 
meta-analyzing the two cohorts within population. In the meta-analysis of 
Yale-Penn EAs (n = 1917), one genome-wide significant (GWS) signal emerged at 
the CHRM3 locus, represented by rs115455482 (P = 1.66 × 10-10), rs74722579 
(P = 2.81 × 10-9), and rs1938228 (P = 1.57 × 10-8); signals were GWS in 
Yale-Penn 1 EAs (n = 1092) and nominally significant in Yale-Penn 2 EAs 
(n = 825). Two SNPs, rs115455482 and rs74722579, were available from the 
Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism data (COGA; 3630 long-term 
cannabis users). The signals did not replicate, but when meta-analyzing 
Yale-Penn and COGA EAs, the two SNPs' association signals were increased 
(meta-P-values 1.32 × 10-10 and 2.60 × 10-9, respectively; n = 4291). There were 
no significant findings in AAs, but in the AA meta-analysis (n = 3624), nominal 
significance was seen for rs74722579. The rs115455482*T risk allele was 
associated with lower CHRM3 expression in the thalamus. CHRM3 was co-expressed 
with three psychosis risk genes (GABAG2, CHRNA4, and HRH3) in the thalamus and 
other human brain tissues and mouse GABAergic neurons. This work provides strong 
evidence for the association of CHRM3 with Ca-HL and provides insight into the 
potential involvement of thalamus for this trait.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-019-0639-7
PMCID: PMC6861240
PMID: 31740666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed and submitted the 
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Dr. Kranzler has 
been a consultant or advisory board member for Alkermes, Indivior, and Lundbeck. 
He is a member of the American Society of Clinical Psychopharmacology’s Alcohol 
Clinical Trials Initiative, which was supported in the last three years by 
AbbVie, Alkermes, Ethypharm, Indivior, Lilly, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Arbor, 
and Amygdala Neurosciences. Drs. Kranzler and Gelernter are named as inventors 
on PCT patent application #15/878,640 entitled: “Genotype-guided dosing of 
opioid agonists,” filed 24 January 2018. The other authors have no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.