1. Transl Psychiatry. 2019 Nov 20;9(1):310. doi: 10.1038/s41398-019-0613-4.

Identification of novel common variants associated with chronic pain using 
conditional false discovery rate analysis with major depressive disorder and 
assessment of pleiotropic effects of LRFN5.

Johnston KJA(1)(2)(3), Adams MJ(4), Nicholl BI(5), Ward J(5), Strawbridge 
RJ(5)(6), McIntosh AM(4), Smith DJ(5), Bailey MES(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK. 
k.johnston.2@research.gla.ac.uk.
(2)Deanery of Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Sciences, College of 
Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 
k.johnston.2@research.gla.ac.uk.
(3)School of Life Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK. k.johnston.2@research.gla.ac.uk.
(4)Division of Psychiatry, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(5)Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
(6)Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)School of Life Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Chronic pain is a complex trait that is moderately heritable and genetically, as 
well as phenotypically, correlated with major depressive disorder (MDD). Use of 
the conditional false discovery rate (cFDR) approach, which leverages pleiotropy 
identified from existing GWAS outputs, has been successful in discovering novel 
associated variants in related phenotypes. Here, genome-wide association study 
outputs for both von Korff chronic pain grade and for MDD were used to identify 
variants meeting a cFDR threshold for each outcome phenotype separately, as well 
as a conjunctional cFDR (ccFDR) threshold for both phenotypes together. Using a 
moderately conservative threshold, we identified a total of 11 novel single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), six of which were associated with chronic pain 
grade and nine of which were associated with MDD. Four SNPs on chromosome 14 
were associated with both chronic pain grade and MDD. SNPs associated only with 
chronic pain grade were located within SLC16A7 on chromosome 12. SNPs associated 
only with MDD were located either in a gene-dense region on chromosome 1 
harbouring LINC01360, LRRIQ3, FPGT and FPGT-TNNI3K, or within/close to LRFN5 on 
chromosome 14. The SNPs associated with both outcomes were also located within 
LRFN5. Several of the SNPs on chromosomes 1 and 14 were identified as being 
associated with expression levels of nearby genes in the brain and central 
nervous system. Overall, using the cFDR approach, we identified several novel 
genetic loci associated with chronic pain and we describe likely pleiotropic 
effects of a recently identified MDD locus on chronic pain.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-019-0613-4
PMCID: PMC6868167
PMID: 31748543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.M.M. has received research funding from 
Pfizer, Janssen and Lilly in connection with other research. This funding had no 
role in the research presented here.