1. Blood Cancer J. 2019 Nov 20;9(12):90. doi: 10.1038/s41408-019-0253-1.

Transcriptome analysis reveals significant differences between primary plasma 
cell leukemia and multiple myeloma even when sharing a similar genetic 
background.

Rojas EA(1)(2), Corchete LA(1)(2), Mateos MV(1)(2)(3), García-Sanz 
R(1)(2)(3)(4), Misiewicz-Krzeminska I(1)(2)(5), Gutiérrez NC(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Center-IBMCC (USAL-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Hematology Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), CB16/12/00233, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(5)National Medicines Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Cancer Research Center-IBMCC (USAL-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain. normagu@usal.es.
(7)Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain. 
normagu@usal.es.
(8)Hematology Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. 
normagu@usal.es.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), CB16/12/00233, 
Salamanca, Spain. normagu@usal.es.

Primary plasma cell leukemia (pPCL) is a highly aggressive plasma cell dyscrasia 
characterised by short remissions and very poor survival. Although the 17p 
deletion is associated with poor outcome and extramedullary disease in MM, its 
presence does not confer the degree of aggressiveness observed in pPCL. The 
comprehensive exploration of isoform expression and RNA splicing events may 
provide novel information about biological differences between the two diseases. 
Transcriptomic studies were carried out in nine newly diagnosed pPCL and ten MM 
samples, all of which harbored the 17p deletion. Unsupervised cluster analysis 
clearly distinguished pPCL from MM samples. In total 3584 genes and 20033 
isoforms were found to be deregulated between pPCL and MM. There were 2727 
significantly deregulated isoforms of non-differentially expressed genes. 
Strangely enough, significant differences were observed in the expression of 
spliceosomal machinery components between pPCL and MM, in respect of the gene, 
isoform and the alternative splicing events expression. In summary, 
transcriptome analysis revealed significant differences in the relative 
abundance of isoforms between pPCL and MM, even when they both had the 17p 
deletion. The mRNA processing pathway including RNA splicing machinery emerged 
as one of the most remarkable mechanisms underlying the biological differences 
between the two entities.

DOI: 10.1038/s41408-019-0253-1
PMCID: PMC6868169
PMID: 31748515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Mateos reports personal fees from Janssen, 
Celgene, Amgen, Takeda, Pharmamar, GSK, AbbVie and Adaptive, outside the 
submitted work. Dr. Garcia-Sanz reports personal fees from Amgen, Janssen, 
Takeda and Pfizer, outside the submitted work. Dr. Gutiérrez reports honoraria 
from Janssen outside the submitted work. The other authors declare no conflict 
of interest.