1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2019 Dec;26(12):1106-1113. doi:
10.1038/s41594-019-0327-6.  Epub 2019 Nov 18.

Structural basis for tRNA decoding and aminoacylation sensing by T-box 
riboregulators.

Battaglia RA(1), Grigg JC(2), Ke A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Life Sciences Institute, The 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
ailong.ke@cornell.edu.

T-box riboregulators are a class of cis-regulatory RNAs that govern the 
bacterial response to amino acid starvation by binding, decoding and reading the 
aminoacylation status of specific transfer RNAs. Here we provide a 
high-resolution crystal structure of a full-length T-box from Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis that explains tRNA decoding and aminoacylation sensing by this 
riboregulator. Overall, the T-box consists of decoding and aminoacylation 
sensing modules bridged by a rigid pseudoknot structure formed by the mid-region 
domains. Stem-I and the Stem-II S-turn assemble a claw-like decoding module, 
while the antiterminator, Stem-III, and the adjacent linker form a tightly 
interwoven aminoacylation sensing module. The uncharged tRNA is selectively 
recognized by an unexpected set of favorable contacts from the linker region in 
the aminoacylation sensing module. A complex structure with a charged tRNA mimic 
shows that the extra moiety dislodges the linker, which is indicative of the 
possible chain of events that lead to alternative base-pairing and altered 
expression output.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-019-0327-6
PMCID: PMC6953718
PMID: 31740853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]