1. J Cell Biol. 2020 Feb 3;219(2):e201905080. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201905080.

CLASP2 binding to curved microtubule tips promotes flux and stabilizes 
kinetochore attachments.

Girão H(1)(2), Okada N(1)(2), Rodrigues TA(1)(2)(3), Silva AO(1)(2), Figueiredo 
AC(1)(2), Garcia Z(1)(2), Moutinho-Santos T(1)(2), Hayashi I(4), Azevedo 
JE(1)(2)(3), Macedo-Ribeiro S(1)(2), Maiato H(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(2)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar da Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(4)International Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Yokohama City University, 
Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Cell Division Group, Experimental Biology Unit, Department of Biomedicine, 
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

CLASPs are conserved microtubule plus-end-tracking proteins that suppress 
microtubule catastrophes and independently localize to kinetochores during 
mitosis. Thus, CLASPs are ideally positioned to regulate kinetochore-microtubule 
dynamics required for chromosome segregation fidelity, but the underlying 
mechanism remains unknown. Here, we found that human CLASP2 exists predominantly 
as a monomer in solution, but it can self-associate through its C-terminal 
kinetochore-binding domain. Kinetochore localization was independent of 
self-association, and driving monomeric CLASP2 to kinetochores fully rescued 
normal kinetochore-microtubule dynamics, while partially sustaining mitosis. 
CLASP2 kinetochore localization, recognition of growing microtubule plus-ends 
through EB-protein interaction, and the ability to associate with curved 
microtubule protofilaments through TOG2 and TOG3 domains independently sustained 
normal spindle length, timely spindle assembly checkpoint satisfaction, 
chromosome congression, and faithful segregation. Measurements of 
kinetochore-microtubule half-life and poleward flux revealed that CLASP2 
regulates kinetochore-microtubule dynamics by integrating distinctive 
microtubule-binding properties at the kinetochore-microtubule interface. We 
propose that kinetochore CLASP2 suppresses microtubule depolymerization and 
detachment by binding to curved protofilaments at microtubule plus-ends.

© 2019 Girão et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201905080
PMCID: PMC7041679
PMID: 31757788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]