1. Epilepsia. 2019 Dec;60(12):2359-2369. doi: 10.1111/epi.16388. Epub 2019 Nov
22.

Reduced cannabinoid 2 receptor activity increases susceptibility to induced 
seizures in mice.

Shapiro L(1), Wong JC(1), Escayg A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.

OBJECTIVE: The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is comprised of cannabinoid 
receptors 1 and 2 (CB1R and CB2R), endogenous ligands, and regulatory enzymes, 
and serves to regulate several important physiological functions throughout the 
brain and body. Recent evidence suggests that the ECS may be a promising target 
for the treatment of epilepsy, including epilepsy subtypes that arise from 
mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel SCN1A. The objective of this study 
was to explore the effects of modulating CB2R activity on seizure 
susceptibility.
METHODS: We examined susceptibility to induced seizures using a number of 
paradigms in CB2R knockout mice (Cnr2-/- ), and determined the effects of the 
CB2R agonist, JWH-133, and the CB2R antagonist, SR144528, on seizure 
susceptibility in wild-type mice. We also examined seizure susceptibility in 
Cnr2 mutants harboring the human SCN1A R1648H (RH) epilepsy mutation and 
performed Electroencephalography (EEG) analysis to determine whether the loss of 
CB2Rs would increase spontaneous seizure frequency in Scn1a RH mutant mice.
RESULTS: Both heterozygous (Cnr2+/- ) and homozygous (Cnr2-/- ) knockout mice 
exhibited increased susceptibility to pentylenetetrazole (PTZ)-induced seizures. 
The CB2R agonist JWH-133 did not significantly alter seizure susceptibility in 
wild-type mice; however, administration of the CB2R antagonist SR144528 resulted 
in increased susceptibility to PTZ-induced seizures. In offspring from a cross 
between the Cnr2 × RH lines, both Cnr2 and RH mutants were susceptible to 
PTZ-induced seizures; however, seizure susceptibility was not significantly 
increased in mutants expressing both mutations. No spontaneous seizures were 
observed in either RH or Cnr2/RH mutants during 336-504 hours of continuous EEG 
recordings.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our results demonstrate that reduced CB2R activity is associated 
with increased seizure susceptibility. CB2Rs might therefore provide a 
therapeutic target for the treatment of some forms of epilepsy.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2019 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.16388
PMCID: PMC6911915
PMID: 31758544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. We confirm that we have read the 
Journal’s position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that 
this report is consistent with those guidelines.