1. Micromachines (Basel). 2019 Nov 19;10(11):793. doi: 10.3390/mi10110793.

Tetrafluoroethylene-Propylene Elastomer for Fabrication of Microfluidic 
Organs-on-Chips Resistant to Drug Absorption.

Sano E(1), Mori C(1), Matsuoka N(2), Ozaki Y(1), Yagi K(2), Wada A(2), Tashima 
K(2), Yamasaki S(2), Tanabe K(2), Yano K(1), Torisawa YS(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Micro Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8540, Japan.
(2)AGC Inc, Tokyo 100-8405, Japan.
(3)Hakubi Center for Advanced Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8540, Japan.

Organs-on-chips are microfluidic devices typically fabricated from 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). Since PDMS has many attractive properties including 
high optical clarity and compliance, PDMS is very useful for cell culture 
applications; however, PDMS possesses a significant drawback in that small 
hydrophobic molecules are strongly absorbed. This drawback hinders widespread 
use of PDMS-based devices for drug discovery and development. Here, we describe 
a microfluidic cell culture system made of a tetrafluoroethylene-propylene 
(FEPM) elastomer. We demonstrated that FEPM does not absorb small hydrophobic 
compounds including rhodamine B and three types of drugs, nifedipine, coumarin, 
and Bay K8644, whereas PDMS absorbs them strongly. The device consists of two 
FEPM layers of microchannels separated by a thin collagen vitrigel membrane. 
Since FEPM is flexible and biocompatible, this microfluidic device can be used 
to culture cells while applying mechanical strain. When human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVECs) were subjected to cyclic strain (~10%) for 4 h in 
this device, HUVECs reoriented and aligned perpendicularly in response to the 
cyclic stretch. Moreover, we demonstrated that this device can be used to 
replicate the epithelial-endothelial interface as well as to provide 
physiological mechanical strain and fluid flow. This method offers a robust 
platform to produce organs-on-chips for drug discovery and development.

DOI: 10.3390/mi10110793
PMCID: PMC6915658
PMID: 31752314

Conflict of interest statement: E.S., C.M., Y.O., K.Y. (Kayo Yano) and Y.-s.T. 
has nothing to declare. N.M., K.Y. (Keisuke Yagi), A.W., K.T. (Koichi Tashima), 
S.Y., and K.T. (Kana Tanabe) are employees of AGC Inc.