1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Apr;28(4):480-490. doi: 10.1038/s41431-019-0537-8. Epub 
2019 Nov 21.

New frontiers to cure Alport syndrome: COL4A3 and COL4A5 gene editing in 
podocyte-lineage cells.

Daga S(1), Donati F(2)(3), Capitani K(2)(3), Croci S(1), Tita R(4), Giliberti 
A(1), Valentino F(1), Benetti E(1), Fallerini C(1), Niccheri F(2), Baldassarri 
M(4), Mencarelli MA(4), Frullanti E(1), Furini S(3), Conticello SG(2), Renieri 
A(5)(6), Pinto AM(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(2)Core Research Laboratory, ISPRO, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
(4)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. 
alessandra.renieri@unisi.it.
(6)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. 
alessandra.renieri@unisi.it.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2024 Jan;32(1):131. doi: 10.1038/s41431-023-01287-y.

Alport syndrome (AS) is an inherited genetic disorder characterized by range of 
alterations from glomerular basement membrane abnormalities up to end-stage 
renal disease. Pathogenic variants in the collagen α3, α4, and α5 encoding genes 
are causative both of the autosomal dominant and of the X-linked forms of AS. 
Podocytes are the only renal cells that are able to produce the COL(IV)a3-a4a5 
heterotrimer. We have previously demonstrated how it is possible to isolate 
podocyte-lineage cells from urine of patients, providing an easily accessible 
cellular model closer to the podocytes' physiological conditions. Taking 
advantage of disease-relevant cell lines, we employed a two-plasmid approach in 
order to achieve a beneficial and stable variant-specific correction using 
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. One plasmid carries a Donor DNA and a reporter 
system mCherry/GFP to track the activity of Cas9 in cells. The other plasmid 
carries a self-cleaving SpCas9 and the variant-specific sgRNA. We have analyzed 
two stable podocyte-lineage cell lines, harboring a variant in the X-linked 
COL4A5 (p.(Gly624Asp)) and in the autosomal COL4A3 gene (p.(Gly856Glu)). We have 
achieved reversion of variants greater than 40% with undesired 
insertions/deletions lower than 15%. Overall, we have demonstrated a new gene 
therapy approach directly on patients' cells, key players of Alport 
pathogenesis, and we have reverted COL4 causative variants towards the wild type 
state. These results, in combination with preclinical models, could open new 
frontiers in the management and the treatment of the disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-019-0537-8
PMCID: PMC7080842
PMID: 31754267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.