1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Nov 13;20(22):5677. doi: 10.3390/ijms20225677.

Development and Characterization of a Genetic Mouse Model of KRAS Mutated 
Colorectal Cancer.

Maitra R(1)(2), Thavornwatanayong T(1), Venkatesh MK(1), Chandy C(1), Vachss 
D(1), Augustine T(1), Guzik H(3), Koba W(4), Liu Q(5), Goel S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore 
Medical Center, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Yeshiva University, New York, NY 10033, USA.
(3)Analytical Imaging Facility, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology (Nuclear Medicine), Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(5)Department of Surgical Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467, 
USA.

Patients with KRAS mutated colorectal cancer (CRC) represent a cohort with unmet 
medical needs, with limited options of FDA-approved therapies. Representing 
40-45% of all CRC patients, they are considered ineligible to receive anti-EGFR 
monoclonal antibodies that have added a significant therapeutic benefit for KRAS 
wild type CRC patients. Although several mouse models of CRC have been developed 
during the past decade, one genetically resembling the KRAS mutated CRC is yet 
to be established. In this study C57 BL/6 mice with truncated adenomatous 
polyposis coli (APC) floxed allele was crossed with heterozygous KRAS floxed 
outbred mice to generate an APCf/f KRAS+/f mouse colony. In another set of 
breeding, APC floxed mice were crossed with CDX2-Cre-ERT2 mice and selected for 
APCf/f CDX2-Cre-ERT2 after the second round of inbreeding. The final model of 
the disease was generated by the cross of the two parental colonies and viable 
APC f/f KRAS +/f CDX2-Cre-ERT2 (KPC: APC) were genotyped and characterized. The 
model animals were tamoxifen (TAM) induced to generate tumors. Micro-positron 
emission tomography (PET) scan was used to detect and measure tumor volume and 
standard uptake value (SUV). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed 
to establish neoplasm and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to determine 
histological similarities with human FFPE biopsies. The MSI/microsatellite 
stable (MSS) status was determined. Finally, the tumors were extensively 
characterized at the molecular level to establish similarities with human CRC 
tumors. The model KPC: APC animals are conditional mutants that developed 
colonic tumors upon induction with tamoxifen in a dose-dependent manner. The 
tumors were confirmed to be malignant within four weeks of induction by H&E 
staining and higher radioactive [18F] fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) uptake (SUV) 
in micro-PET scan. Furthermore, the tumors histologically and molecularly 
resembled human colorectal carcinoma. Post tumor generation, the KPC: APC 
animals died of cachexia and rectal bleeding. Implications: This model is an 
excellent preclinical platform to molecularly characterize the KRAS mutated 
colorectal tumors and discern appropriate therapeutic strategies to improve 
disease management and overall survival.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20225677
PMCID: PMC6888417
PMID: 31766149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.