1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Nov 13;20(22):5685. doi: 10.3390/ijms20225685.

Recovery in the Myogenic Program of Congenital Myotonic Dystrophy Myoblasts 
after Excision of the Expanded (CTG)n Repeat.

André LM(1), van Cruchten RTP(1), Willemse M(1), Bezstarosti K(2), Demmers 
JAA(2), van Agtmaal EL(1), Wansink DG(1), Wieringa B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 CN Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

The congenital form of myotonic dystrophy type 1 (cDM) is caused by the 
large-scale expansion of a (CTG•CAG)n repeat in DMPK and DM1-AS. The production 
of toxic transcripts with long trinucleotide tracts from these genes results in 
impairment of the myogenic differentiation capacity as cDM's most prominent 
morpho-phenotypic hallmark. In the current in vitro study, we compared the early 
differentiation programs of isogenic cDM myoblasts with and without a (CTG)2600 
repeat obtained by gene editing. We found that excision of the repeat restored 
the ability of cDM myoblasts to engage in myogenic fusion, preventing the 
ensuing myotubes from remaining immature. Although the cDM-typical epigenetic 
status of the DM1 locus and the expression of genes therein were not altered 
upon removal of the repeat, analyses at the transcriptome and proteome level 
revealed that early abnormalities in the temporal expression of differentiation 
regulators, myogenic progression markers, and alternative splicing patterns 
before and immediately after the onset of differentiation became normalized. Our 
observation that molecular and cellular features of cDM are reversible in vitro 
and can be corrected by repeat-directed genome editing in muscle progenitors, 
when already committed and poised for myogenic differentiation, is important 
information for the future development of gene therapy for different forms of 
myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20225685
PMCID: PMC6888582
PMID: 31766224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.