1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019 Oct 22;2019:1968539. doi: 10.1155/2019/1968539. 
eCollection 2019.

Delayed Pulmonary Apoptosis of Diet-Induced Obesity Mice following Escherichia 
coli Infection through the Mitochondrial Apoptotic Pathway.

Wang F(1), Zuo Z(1), Yang Z(2), Chen K(3), Fang J(1), Cui H(1), Shu G(1), Zhou 
Y(4), Geng Y(1), Ouyang P(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 611130, China.
(2)Chengdu Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan 
611130, China.
(3)School of Public Health, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan 610500, 
China.
(4)College of Life Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, Sichuan 
625014, China.

Escherichia coli (E. coli) is one of pathogens causing nosocomial pneumonia and 
could induce pulmonary excessive apoptosis. Although much has been learned about 
metabolic diseases induced by obesity, the information linking bacterial 
pneumonia to obesity is limited. Accordingly, we investigated the apoptosis of 
normal (lean) and diet-induced obesity (DIO, fed a high-fat diet) mice after 
nasal instillation with E. coli. Lung tissues were obtained at 0 (preinfection), 
12, 24, and 72 h after infection, and acute pulmonary inflammation was observed 
at 12 h. Elevated cell apoptosis and percentage of pulmonary cells depolarized 
with collapse of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Δψm) occurred in 
response to bacterial infection. The relative mRNA and protein expressions of 
Bax, caspase-3, and caspase-9 increased, but Bcl-2 decreased in the lung. 
Interestingly, the apoptotic percentage and most of apoptosis-associated factors 
mentioned above peaked at 12 or 24 h in the lean-E. coli group, while at 24 or 
72 h in the DIO-E. coli group. Taken together, these findings indicated that the 
E. coli pneumonia caused excessive pulmonary apoptosis through the 
mitochondria-mediated pathway, and the apoptosis was delayed in the DIO mice 
with E. coli pneumonia.

Copyright © 2019 Fengyuan Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2019/1968539
PMCID: PMC6854188
PMID: 31772700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.