1. Biochemistry. 2019 Dec 17;58(50):5074-5084. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00973. 
Epub 2019 Dec 6.

Selenocysteine Substitution in a Class I Ribonucleotide Reductase.

Greene BL(1), Stubbe J, Nocera DG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of California, Santa 
Barbara , Santa Barbara , California 93106 , United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Harvard University , Cambridge 
, Massachusetts 02138 , United States.

Ribonucleotide reductases (RNRs) employ a complex radical-based mechanism during 
nucleotide reduction involving multiple active site cysteines that both activate 
the substrate and reduce it. Using an engineered allo-tRNA, we substituted two 
active site cysteines with distinct function in the class Ia RNR of Escherichia 
coli for selenocysteine (U) via amber codon suppression, with efficiency and 
selectivity enabling biochemical and biophysical studies. Examination of the 
interactions of the C439U α2 mutant protein with nucleotide substrates and the 
cognate β2 subunit demonstrates that the endogenous Y122• of β2 is reduced under 
turnover conditions, presumably through radical transfer to form a transient 
U439• species. This putative U439• species is formed in a kinetically competent 
fashion but is incapable of initiating nucleotide reduction via 3'-H 
abstraction. An analogous C225U α2 protein is also capable of radical transfer 
from Y122•, but the radical-based substrate chemistry partitions between 
turnover and stalled reduction akin to the reactivity of mechanism-based 
inhibitors of RNR. The results collectively demonstrate the essential role of 
cysteine redox chemistry in the class I RNRs and establish a new tool for 
investigating thiyl radical reactivity in biology.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b00973
PMCID: PMC6994234
PMID: 31774661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]