1. Comput Biol Chem. 2020 Feb;84:107166. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2019.107166.
 Epub 2019 Nov 17.

Cytochrome P450 2C9 polymorphism: Effect of amino acid substitutions on protein 
flexibility in the presence of tamoxifen.

Manish M(1), Lynn AM(2), Mishra S(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Delhi, 110067, India; ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Dwarka, 
Sector-8, New Delhi, 110077, India.
(2)School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Delhi, 110067, India.
(3)School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Delhi, 110067, India. Electronic address: s_mishra@jnu.ac.in.

Tamoxifen is a prodrug and cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9) has a significant role 
in the formation of a therapeutically more potent metabolite 
(4-hydroxytamoxifen) than tamoxifen. Since CYP2C9 exhibits genetic polymorphism, 
it may contribute to different phenotypic drug response. Moreover, it may be 
misleading if the possibility of heterogeneous clinical observations of 
pharmacogenetic investigations is ignored. Above all, clinical investigation of 
all the polymorphic variants is beyond the scope of a pharmacogenetic study. 
Therefore, in order to understand the genotype-phenotype association, it is 
aimed to study the interatomic interactions of amino acid substitutions in 
CYP2C9 variants in the presence of tamoxifen. Computational structural biology 
approach was adopted to study the effect of amino acid substitutions of 
polymorphic variants of CYP2C9 R144C (*2), I359 L (*3), D360E (*5), R150H (*8), 
R335W (*11) and L90 P (*13) on the flexibility of the enzyme in the presence of 
tamoxifen. The mutations were selected based on previously determined 
associations on genotype and clinical outcome of drugs. Against the above plane, 
docking of tamoxifen was performed with the crystal structure representing the 
wild-type form of the enzyme. The docked conformation of tamoxifen was 
favourable for 4-hydroxylation with the site of metabolism within 5 Å of 
oxyferrylheme consistent with the drug metabolism pathway of tamoxifen. Further, 
the effect of amino acid substitutions CYP2C9 variants on the protein 
flexibility in the presence of tamoxifen in 4-hydroxy orientation was evaluated 
by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Distinct protein flexibility modulations 
between variants were observed in F/G segment constituting the substrate 
access/egress channels, helix B' involved with substrate specificity and helix I 
associated with the holding of substrates. Root Mean Square Fluctuation analysis 
of the trajectories of variants exhibited fluctuations in F/G segment, B' and I 
helix. Dominant motions in the structure were identified by performing Principal 
Component Analysis on trajectories and the porcupine plot depicted displaced F/G 
segment in variants. Thus, the interatomic interaction study of CYP2C9 variants 
in the presence of tamoxifen predicts the plausible effect of the investigated 
variants on the therapeutic outcome of tamoxifen. It is presumed that the 
observations of the study would be meaningful to understand tamoxifen 
pharmacogenetics.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2019.107166
PMID: 31785970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]