1. Cell Host Microbe. 2019 Dec 11;26(6):795-809.e5. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2019.10.007. Epub 2019 Nov 26.

Toxin-Triggered Interleukin-1 Receptor Signaling Enables Early-Life 
Discrimination of Pathogenic versus Commensal Skin Bacteria.

Leech JM(1), Dhariwala MO(1), Lowe MM(1), Chu K(1), Merana GR(1), Cornuot C(1), 
Weckel A(1), Ma JM(1), Leitner EG(1), Gonzalez JR(1), Vasquez KS(2), Diep BA(3), 
Scharschmidt TC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases and Global Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: tiffany.scharschmidt@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2019 Dec 11;26(6):705-707. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2019.11.008.

The host must develop tolerance to commensal microbes and protective responses 
to infectious pathogens, yet the mechanisms enabling a privileged relationship 
with commensals remain largely unknown. Skin colonization by commensal 
Staphylococcus epidermidis facilitates immune tolerance preferentially in 
neonates via induction of antigen-specific regulatory T cells (Tregs). Here, we 
demonstrate that this tolerance is not indiscriminately extended to all bacteria 
encountered in this early window. Rather, neonatal colonization by 
Staphylococcus aureus minimally enriches for antigen-specific Tregs and does not 
prevent skin inflammation upon later-life exposure. S. aureus α-toxin 
contributes to this response by stimulating myeloid cell production of IL-1β, 
which limits S. aureus-specific Tregs. Loss of α-toxin or the IL-1 receptor 
increases Treg enrichment, whereas topical application of IL-1β or α-toxin 
diminishes tolerogenic responses to S. epidermidis. Thus, the preferential 
activation of a key alarmin pathway facilitates early discrimination of 
microbial "foe" from "friend," thereby preventing tolerance to a common skin 
pathogen.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2019.10.007
PMCID: PMC6989301
PMID: 31784259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.