1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2019 Nov 6;13:240. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00240. 
eCollection 2019.

LPS-Induced Systemic Neonatal Inflammation: Blockage of P2X7R by BBG Decreases 
Mortality on Rat Pups and Oxidative Stress in Hippocampus of Adult Rats.

da Silva CS(1), Calió ML(2), Mosini AC(1), Pires JM(1), Rêgo DDSB(1), Mello 
LE(1)(3), Leslie ATFS(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo-UNIFESP, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade Federal de São Paulo-UNIFESP, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(3)D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Pediatria, Universidade Federal de São Paulo-UNIFESP, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

Neonatal lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure-induced brain inflammation has been 
associated to neuronal injury and facilitates the development of models of 
neurological disorders in adult rats. The P2X7 receptor (P2X7R) plays a 
fundamental role in the onset and maintenance of the inflammatory cascade. 
Brilliant blue G (BBG), a P2X7R antagonist, has been shown to effectively 
promote neuroinflammatory protection. Here, we have investigated the long-term 
effects of the neonatal systemic inflammation on hippocampal oxidative stress, 
anxiety behavior and pain sensitivity in adulthood. We hypothesized that P2X7R 
blockade is able to modulate the effects of inflammation on these variables. 
Male and female rat pups received LPS and/or BBG solution intraperitoneally on 
the 1st, 3rd, 5th and 7th postnatal days. The survival rate and body weight were 
evaluated during the experimental procedures. The animals were submitted to 
behavioral tests for anxiety (elevated plus maze, EPM) and nociception 
(hot-plate and tail-flick) and the oxidative stress was measured by superoxide 
production in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus using dihydroethidium (DHE) 
probe. BBG increased the survival rate in LPS-treated rats. No significant 
differences were found regarding anxiety behavior and pain sensitivity between 
the experimental groups. Systemic neonatal inflammation leads to a higher 
production of superoxide anion in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus in 
adulthood and BBG inhibited that effect. Our data suggest that blocking the 
activation of the P2X7R during neonatal systemic inflammation may have a 
potential neuroprotective effect in adulthood.

Copyright © 2019 Silva, Calió, Mosini, Pires, Rêgo, Mello and Leslie.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00240
PMCID: PMC6878118
PMID: 31798427