1. Front Genet. 2019 Nov 19;10:1183. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01183. eCollection 
2019.

Transcriptome Analysis Identifies Candidate Genes and Pathways Associated With 
Feed Efficiency in Hu Sheep.

Zhang D(1), Zhang X(1)(2), Li F(1)(2)(3), Li C(1), La Y(1), Mo F(1), Li G(1), 
Zhang Y(1), Li X(1), Song Q(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang W(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(2)Engineering Laboratory of Sheep Breeding and Reproduction Biotechnology in 
Gansu Province, Minqin Zhongtian Sheep Industry Co. Ltd., Minqin, China.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-ecosystems, College of Pastoral 
Agriculture Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.

In the genetic improvement of livestock and poultry, residual feed intake (RFI) 
is an important economic trait. However, in sheep, the genetic regulatory 
mechanisms of RFI are unclear. In the present study, we measured the feed 
efficiency (FE)-related phenotypes of 137 male Hu lambs, and selected six lambs 
with very high (n = 3) and very low (n = 3) RFI values and analyzed their liver 
transcriptomes. A total of 101 differentially expressed genes were identified, 
of which 40 were upregulated and 61 were downregulated in the low-RFI group 
compared with that in the high-RFI group. The downregulated genes were mainly 
concentrated in immune function pathways, while the upregulated genes were 
mainly involved in energy metabolism pathways. Two differentially expressed 
genes, ADRA2A (encoding adrenoceptor alpha 2A) and RYR2 (ryanodine receptor 2), 
were selected as candidate genes for FE and subjected to single nucleotide 
polymorphism scanning and association analysis. Two synonymous mutations, ADRA2A 
g.1429 C > A and RYR2 g.1117 A > C, were detected, which were both significantly 
associated with the feed conversion rate. These findings provide a deeper 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms regulating FE, and reveal key genes 
and genetic variants that could be used to genetically improve FE in sheep.

Copyright Â© 2019 Zhang, Zhang, Li, Li, La, Mo, Li, Zhang, Li, Song, Zhao and 
Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2019.01183
PMCID: PMC6878960
PMID: 31798641