1. Arch Anim Breed. 2019 Mar 25;62(1):113-123. doi: 10.5194/aab-62-113-2019. 
eCollection 2019.

Identification of potential genomic regions and candidate genes for egg albumen 
quality by a genome-wide association study.

Qu L(1)(2), Shen M(2)(3), Guo J(2), Wang X(2), Dou T(2), Hu Y(2), Li Y(2), Ma 
M(2), Wang K(2), Liu H(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science & Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)Jiangsu Institute of Poultry Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Science, Yangzhou, China.
(3)College of Animal Science & Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.

Albumen quality is a leading economic trait in the chicken industry. Major 
studies have paid attention to genetic architecture underlying albumen quality. 
However, the putative quantitative trait locus (QTL) for this trait is still 
unclear. In this genome-wide association study, we used an F2 resource 
population to study longitudinal albumen quality. Seven single-nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) loci were found to be significantly ( p<8.43 × 10-7 ) related 
to albumen quality by univariate analysis, while 11 SNPs were significantly ( 
p<8.43 × 10-7 ) associated with albumen quality by multivariate analysis. A QTL 
on GGA4 had a pervasive function on albumen quality, including a SNP at the 
missense of NCAPG, and a SNP at the intergenic region of FGFPB1. It was further 
found that the putative QTLs at GGA1, GGA2, and GGA7 had the strongest effects 
on albumen height (AH) at 32 weeks, Haugh units (HU) at 44 weeks, and AH at 55 
weeks. Moreover, novel SNPs on GGA5 and GGA3 were associated with AH and HU at 
32, 44, and 48 weeks of age. These results confirmed the regions for egg weight 
that were detected in a previous study and were similar with QTL for albumen 
quality. These results showed that GGA4 had the strongest effect on albumen 
quality. Only a few significant loci were detected for most characteristics 
probably reflecting the attributes of a pleiotropic gene and a minor-polygene in 
quantitative traits.

Copyright: © 2019 Liang Qu et al.

DOI: 10.5194/aab-62-113-2019
PMCID: PMC6853030
PMID: 31807621

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.