1. Arch Anim Breed. 2019 Oct 14;62(2):565-570. doi: 10.5194/aab-62-565-2019. 
eCollection 2019.

Identification of mutations in BMP15 and GDF9 genes associated with prolificacy 
of Markhoz goats.

Ghoreishi H(1), Fathi-Yosefabad S(2), Shayegh J(2), Barzegari A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Tabriz Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Shabestar Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Shabestar, Iran.
(3)School of Advanced Medical Sciences, Research Center for Pharmaceutical 
Nanotechnology, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

The Markhoz is a local goat breed in the Kurdistan region of Iran. The mohair 
obtained from these animals plays an important cultural role and is used for 
making local clothes in the Kurdistan region. This breed is a low-fecundity 
local goat, and searching for genes associated with fertility of these goats is 
important for their breeding. Moreover, this research is complementary to prior 
studies of candidate genes associated with fertility. The growth differentiation 
factor 9 (GDF9) and bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15) are attractive 
candidates expressed by the oocyte and are associated with increased ovulation 
rate in sheep. However, there are no reports on single nucleotide polymorphisms 
associated with fertility of Markhoz goats. Hence, we studied these candidate 
genes and found two novel mutations (g.233C  >  A and g.755T  >  G) in GDF9 exon 
I and in BMP15 exon II, respectively. Furthermore, we investigated their 
association with prolificacy. These nucleotide changes are detectable with the 
PCR-RFLP method and can be used in the screening for highly fecund goats. Both 
of the mutations significantly increased litter size in heterozygote form for 
BMP15 and homozygote form for GDF9 in this goat breed. Homozygote females for 
the BMP15 mutation were not identified in the Markhoz breed, which is similar to 
the situation found in Belclare sheep, small-tailed Han sheep, and Jining Grey 
goats.

Copyright: © 2019 Hourad Ghoreishi et al.

DOI: 10.5194/aab-62-565-2019
PMCID: PMC6853135
PMID: 31807668

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.