1. J Clin Med. 2019 Dec 3;8(12):2133. doi: 10.3390/jcm8122133.

Variation of Genes Encoding Tryptophan Catabolites Pathway Enzymes in Stroke.

Wigner P(1), Saluk-Bijak J(2), Synowiec E(1), Miller E(3), Sliwinski T(1), 
Cichon N(2), Bijak M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Biology and Environmental 
Protection, University of Lodz, Pomorska 141/143, 90-236 Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of General Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology and Environmental 
Protection, University of Lodz, Pomorska 141/143, 90-236 Lodz, Poland.
(3)Department of Neurological Rehabilitation, Medical University of Lodz, 
Poland, Milionowa 14, 93-113 Lodz, Poland.

The abnormal activation of the tryptophan catabolites pathway (TRYCATs) is 
observed in patients suffering from cerebrovascular disease, including stroke. A 
previous study confirmed that lower bioavailability of tryptophan for serotonin 
synthesis was characterized in the patients during the acute stroke phase. 
Interestingly, according to various studies, polymorphisms of the genes involved 
in the TRYCATs pathway may modulate the risk of stroke occurrence. Therefore, 
this study aimed to investigate the association between the occurrence of TPH1, 
TPH2, KAT1, KAT2 and IDO1 polymorphisms and the risk of stroke development.The 
following 10 polymorphisms of the genes encoding enzymes of the TRYCATs pathway 
were selected: c.804-7C > A (rs10488682), c.-1668T > A (rs623580), c.803+221C > 
A (rs1800532), c.-173A > T (rs1799913) - TPH1, c.-1449C > A (rs7963803), and 
c.-844G > T (rs4570625) - TPH2. c.*456G > A of KAT1 (rs10988134), c.975-7T > C 
of KAT2 (rs1480544), c.-1849C > A (rs3824259) and c. -1493G > C (rs10089084) of 
IDO1. The study was carried out on DNA isolated from the peripheral blood taken 
from 107 patients after a stroke and 107 healthy volunteers. All DNA samples 
were genotyped using TaqMan probes. The genotypes of eight studied polymorphisms 
modulated the risk of stroke. No significant difference in genotype and allele 
frequencies of the c.804-7C > A -TPH1 (rs10488682) and c.*456G > A - KAT1 
(rs10988134) polymorphisms were found between patients and controls. Having 
performed haplotype and gen-gen analyses, it was possible to determine that 
patients after a stroke and controls differed in terms of the frequency of 
selected genotypes and haplotypes. Among the studied polymorphisms, eight SNPs 
were linked with stroke risk modulation. The results obtained confirmed our 
hypothesis regarding the involvement of the TRYCATs pathway in the pathogenesis 
of stroke.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8122133
PMCID: PMC6947300
PMID: 31817010

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
and/or non-financial interests.