1. Nat Commun. 2019 Dec 10;10(1):5636. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13561-z.

Atlas of quantitativeÂ single-base-resolution N(6)-methyl-adenine methylomes.

Koh CWQ(1), Goh YT(1), Goh WSS(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, Singapore, 138672, 
Singapore.
(2)Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, Singapore, 138672, 
Singapore. sho.goh.ws@gmail.com.

Various methyltransferases and demethylases catalyse methylation and 
demethylation of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) and N6,2'-O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am) 
but precise methylomes uniquely mediated by each methyltransferase/demethylase 
are still lacking. Here, we develop m6A-Crosslinking-Exonuclease-sequencing 
(m6ACE-seq) to map transcriptome-wide m6A and m6Am at quantitative 
single-base-resolution. This allows for the generation of a comprehensive atlas 
of distinct methylomes uniquely mediated by every individual known 
methyltransferase or demethylase. Our atlas reveals METTL16 to indirectly impact 
manifold methylation targets beyond its consensus target motif and highlights 
the importance of precision in mapping PCIF1-dependent m6Am. Rather than reverse 
RNA methylation, we find that both ALKBH5 and FTO instead maintain their 
regulated sites in an unmethylated steady-state. In FTO's absence, anomalous 
m6Am disrupts snRNA interaction with nuclear export machinery, potentially 
causing aberrant pre-mRNA splicing events.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-13561-z
PMCID: PMC6904561
PMID: 31822664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: W.S.S.G. has filed a technology disclosure to 
the institutional technology transfer office and the office has filed a 
provisional patent application in Singapore on the use of photo-crosslinking 
RNA-modification-specific antibodies and exoribonucleases to sequence RNA 
modifications at high resolution. The remaining authors declare no competing 
interests.