1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Jan 17;295(3):883-895. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011602. Epub 
2019 Dec 10.

In vitro trackable assembly of RNA-specific nucleocapsids of the respiratory 
syncytial virus.

Gao Y(1), Cao D(1), Ahn HM(1), Swain A(1), Hill S(1), Ogilvie C(1), Kurien M(1), 
Rahmatullah T(1), Liang B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30322 bo.liang@emory.edu.

The templates for transcription and replication by respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV) polymerase are helical nucleocapsids (NCs), formed by viral RNAs that are 
encapsidated by the nucleoprotein (N). Proper NC assembly is vital for RSV 
polymerase to engage the RNA template for RNA synthesis. Previous studies of NCs 
or nucleocapsid-like particles (NCLPs) from RSV and other nonsegmented 
negative-sense RNA viruses have provided insights into the overall NC 
architecture. However, in these studies, the RNAs were either random cellular 
RNAs or average viral genomic RNAs. An in-depth mechanistic understanding of NCs 
has been hampered by lack of an in vitro assay that can track NC or NCLP 
assembly. Here we established a protocol to obtain RNA-free N protein (N0) and 
successfully demonstrated the utility of a new assay for tracking assembly of N 
with RNA oligonucleotides into NCLPs. We discovered that the efficiency of the 
NCLP (N-RNA) assembly depends on the length and sequence of the RNA incorporated 
into NCLPs. This work provides a framework to generate purified N0 and 
incorporate it with RNA into NCLPs in a controllable manner. We anticipate that 
our assay for in vitro trackable assembly of RSV-specific nucleocapsids may 
enable in-depth mechanistic analyses of this process.

Â© 2020 Gao et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011602
PMCID: PMC6970927
PMID: 31822560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official 
views of the National Institutes of Health