1. Genes Cells. 2020 Feb;25(2):100-110. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12741. Epub 2020 Jan 20.

RBM10 regulates centriole duplication in HepG2 cells by ectopically assembling 
PLK4-STIL complexes in the nucleus.

Kunimoto H(1), Inoue A(1), Kojima H(1), Yang J(1), Zhao H(1), Tsuruta D(2), 
Nakajima K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University, 
Osaka, Japan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City 
University, Osaka, Japan.

RNA-binding motif protein 10 (RBM10) primarily regulates alternative splicing of 
certain genes. Loss-of-function mutations in RBM10 have been frequently reported 
in patients with various cancers. However, how RBM10 levels affect cell 
proliferation and tumorigenesis remains unknown. To elucidate the role of RBM10 
in cell proliferation, we established HepG2-RBM10 knockout cell lines and 
derivative doxycycline-inducible RBM10-expressing cells. RBM10 over-expression 
caused growth arrest in the M phase with a monopolar spindle because of impaired 
centriole duplication. Two RBM10 splicing mutants, one with F345A/F347A and the 
other with only the C-terminal half (401-930), were sufficient to cause growth 
arrest, whereas an RBM10 mutant with cytoplasmic localization forced by an NES 
did not show growth arrest. RBM10 over-expression induced the formation of many 
large nuclear domains containing RBM10, PLK4, STIL and SAS6, which are the 
regulatory proteins involved in centriole duplication. Consistently, the 
centrioles in the RBM10-over-expressing HepG2 cells lost PLK4 and STIL, 
accounting for the unsuccessful centriole duplication. In contrast, RBM10 
depletion resulted in elevated levels of cytoplasmic PLK4 with a concomitant 
increase in the number of centrioles in HepG2 cells but not in A549 cells. Thus, 
nuclear RBM10 regulates normal chromosomal division in a cell-type-specific 
manner, independent of alternative RNA splicing.

Â© 2019 Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/gtc.12741
PMID: 31820547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]