1. Diabetes. 2020 Feb;69(2):249-258. doi: 10.2337/db19-0447. Epub 2019 Dec 13.

Clinical and Molecular Prevalence of Lipodystrophy in an Unascertained Large 
Clinical Care Cohort.

Gonzaga-Jauregui C(1), Ge W(2), Staples J(3), Van Hout C(3), Yadav A(3), Colonie 
R(4), Leader JB(4), Kirchner HL(4), Murray MF(4), Reid JG(3), Carey DJ(4), 
Overton JD(3), Shuldiner AR(3), Gottesman O(3), Gao S(2), Gromada J(2), Baras 
A(3), Altarejos J; Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR collaboration.

Author information:
(1)Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, NY 
judith.altarejos@regeneron.com clau.gonzagajauregui@regeneron.com.
(2)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, NY.
(3)Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Tarrytown, NY.
(4)Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA.

Lipodystrophies are a group of disorders characterized by absence or loss of 
adipose tissue and abnormal fat distribution, commonly accompanied by metabolic 
dysregulation. Although considered rare disorders, their prevalence in the 
general population is not well understood. We aimed to evaluate the clinical and 
genetic prevalence of lipodystrophy disorders in a large clinical care cohort. 
We interrogated the electronic health record (EHR) information of >1.3 million 
adults from the Geisinger Health System for lipodystrophy diagnostic codes. We 
estimate a clinical prevalence of disease of 1 in 20,000 individuals. We 
performed genetic analyses in individuals with available genomic data to 
identify variants associated with inherited lipodystrophies and examined their 
EHR for comorbidities associated with lipodystrophy. We identified 16 
individuals carrying the p.R482Q pathogenic variant in LMNA associated with 
Dunnigan familial partial lipodystrophy. Four had a clinical diagnosis of 
lipodystrophy, whereas the remaining had no documented clinical diagnosis 
despite having accompanying metabolic abnormalities. We observed a 
lipodystrophy-associated variant carrier frequency of 1 in 3,082 individuals in 
our cohort with substantial burden of metabolic dysregulation. We estimate a 
genetic prevalence of disease of ∼1 in 7,000 in the general population. Partial 
lipodystrophy is an underdiagnosed condition. and its prevalence, as defined 
molecularly, is higher than previously reported. Genetically guided 
stratification of patients with common metabolic disorders, like diabetes and 
dyslipidemia, is an important step toward precision medicine.

© 2019 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db19-0447
PMID: 31836692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]