1. Viruses. 2019 Dec 11;11(12):1146. doi: 10.3390/v11121146.

From a Movement-Deficient Grapevine Fanleaf Virus to the Identification of a New 
Viral Determinant of Nematode Transmission.

Belval L(1), Marmonier A(1), Schmitt-Keichinger C(1)(2), Gersch S(1), 
Andret-Link P(1), Komar V(1), Vigne E(1), Lemaire O(1), Ritzenthaler C(2), 
Demangeat G(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, INRAE, SVQV UMR-A 1131, 68000 Colmar, France.
(2)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IBMP UPR 2357, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

Grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV) and arabis mosaic virus (ArMV) are nepoviruses 
responsible for grapevine degeneration. They are specifically transmitted from 
grapevine to grapevine by two distinct ectoparasitic dagger nematodes of the 
genus Xiphinema. GFLV and ArMV move from cell to cell as virions through tubules 
formed into plasmodesmata by the self-assembly of the viral movement protein. 
Five surface-exposed regions in the coat protein called R1 to R5, which differ 
between the two viruses, were previously defined and exchanged to test their 
involvement in virus transmission, leading to the identification of region R2 as 
a transmission determinant. Region R4 (amino acids 258 to 264) could not be 
tested in transmission due to its requirement for plant systemic infection. 
Here, we present a fine-tuning mutagenesis of the GFLV coat protein in and 
around region R4 that restored the virus movement and allowed its evaluation in 
transmission. We show that residues T258, M260, D261, and R301 play a crucial 
role in virus transmission, thus representing a new viral determinant of 
nematode transmission.

DOI: 10.3390/v11121146
PMCID: PMC6950213
PMID: 31835698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.