1. Pharmacol Ther. 2020 Feb;206:107449. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.107449.
Epub  2019 Dec 11.

Time-dependent enzyme inactivation: Numerical analyses of in vitro data and 
prediction of drug-drug interactions.

Yadav J(1), Paragas E(2), Korzekwa K(2), Nagar S(3).

Author information:
(1)Amgen Inc., 360 Binney Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, United States; Department 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140, United 
States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 
19140, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 
19140, United States. Electronic address: swati.nagar@temple.edu.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme kinetics often do not conform to Michaelis-Menten 
assumptions, and time-dependent inactivation (TDI) of CYPs displays complexities 
such as multiple substrate binding, partial inactivation, quasi-irreversible 
inactivation, and sequential metabolism. Additionally, in vitro experimental 
issues such as lipid partitioning, enzyme concentrations, and inactivator 
depletion can further complicate the parameterization of in vitro TDI. The 
traditional replot method used to analyze in vitro TDI datasets is unable to 
handle complexities in CYP kinetics, and numerical approaches using ordinary 
differential equations of the kinetic schemes offer several advantages. 
Improvement in the parameterization of CYP in vitro kinetics has the potential 
to improve prediction of clinical drug-drug interactions (DDIs). This manuscript 
discusses various complexities in TDI kinetics of CYPs, and numerical approaches 
to model these complexities. The extrapolation of CYP in vitro TDI parameters to 
predict in vivo DDIs with static and dynamic modeling is discussed, along with a 
discussion on current gaps in knowledge and future directions to improve the 
prediction of DDI with in vitro data for CYP catalyzed drug metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.107449
PMCID: PMC6995442
PMID: 31836452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.