1. Hepatol Commun. 2019 Nov 8;3(12):1563-1570. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1449.
eCollection  2019 Dec.

Designing Clinical Trials in Pediatric Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis: Tips for 
Patient Selection and Appropriate Endpoints.

Alkhouri N(1), Kohli R(2), Feldstein AE(3).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Health Center Texas Liver Institute University of Texas Health San 
Antonio San Antonio TX.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Children's Hospital 
Los Angeles Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California Los 
Angeles CA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology University of California San Diego 
La Jolla CA.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is common in children and may progress 
to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), advanced fibrosis, and even cirrhosis in 
childhood or early adulthood, indicating the need for pharmacologic treatment in 
this age group. Multiple trials are evaluating different therapeutic targets for 
NASH with fibrosis in adults, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has 
recently provided clear guidance to the pharmaceutical industry on developing 
drugs for the treatment of noncirrhotic NASH with liver fibrosis. Pediatric 
NAFLD has several unique aspects that distinguish it from the adult disease in 
terms of histology, our understanding of the natural history, and the utility of 
noninvasive tests. These differences have the potential to impact the design of 
clinical trials to test different drugs in the pediatric population. The aim of 
this article is to provide a review of common misconceptions regarding pediatric 
NAFLD and key differences from adult NAFLD. We have provided our recommendations 
on the design of early proof-of-concept and late phase 2 trials based on lessons 
learned from previous clinical trials. We believe that clinical drug development 
for children with NAFLD should happen in parallel with ongoing adult trials.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc., on behalf of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1449
PMCID: PMC6887671
PMID: 31832567