1. Toxicology. 2020 Jan 30;430:152345. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2019.152345. Epub 2019 
Dec 13.

Transcriptomic profile analysis of brain inferior colliculus following acute 
hydrogen sulfide exposure.

Kim DS(1), Anantharam P(1), Padhi P(1), Thedens DR(2), Li G(1), Gilbreath E(3), 
Rumbeiha WK(4).

Author information:
(1)VDPAM, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, 
United States.
(2)Radiology, School of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee 
University, United States.
(4)Molecular Biosciences, SVM, UC Davis, Davis, CA, United States. Electronic 
address: rumbeiha@iastate.edu.

Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a gaseous molecule found naturally in the environment, 
and as an industrial byproduct, and is known to cause acute death and induces 
long-term neurological disorders following acute high dose exposures. Currently, 
there is no drug approved for treatment of acute H2S-induced neurotoxicity 
and/or neurological sequelae. Lack of a deep understanding of pathogenesis of 
H2S-induced neurotoxicity has delayed the development of appropriate therapeutic 
drugs that target H2S-induced neuropathology. RNA sequencing analysis was 
performed to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of H2S-induced 
neurodegeneration, and to identify key molecular elements and pathways that 
contribute to H2S-induced neurotoxicity. C57BL/6J mice were exposed by whole 
body inhalation to 700 ppm of H2S for either one day, two consecutive days or 4 
consecutive days. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan analyses showed H2S 
exposure induced lesions in the inferior colliculus (IC) and thalamus (TH). This 
mechanistic study focused on the IC. RNA Sequencing analysis revealed that mice 
exposed once, twice, or 4 times had 283, 193 and 296 differentially expressed 
genes (DEG), respectively (q-value < 0.05, fold-change> 1.5). Hydrogen sulfide 
exposure modulated multiple biological pathways including unfolded protein 
response, neurotransmitters, oxidative stress, hypoxia, calcium signaling, and 
inflammatory response in the IC. Hydrogen sulfide exposure activated PI3K/Akt 
and MAPK signaling pathways. Pro-inflammatory cytokines were shown to be 
potential initiators of the modulated signaling pathways following H2S exposure. 
Furthermore, microglia were shown to release IL-18 and astrocytes released both 
IL-1β and IL-18 in response to H2S. This transcriptomic analysis data revealed 
complex signaling pathways involved in H2S-induced neurotoxicity and may provide 
important associated mechanistic insights.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2019.152345
PMCID: PMC8324331
PMID: 31843631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any conflict of 
interest.