1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2020 Apr;26(4):704-711. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbmt.2019.12.005. Epub 2019 Dec 14.

Bone Marrow Transplantation in Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria: Sustained 
Efficacy but Unexpected Liver Dysfunction.

Besnard C(1), Schmitt C(2), Galmiche-Rolland L(3), Debray D(4), Fabre M(3), 
Molina T(3), Gouya L(2), Ged C(5), Castelle M(1), Cavazzana M(6), Magrin E(6), 
Neven B(1), Moshous D(1), Blanche S(7), Frémond ML(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Immuno-Hematology and Rheumatology Unit, Necker Enfants Malades 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(2)French Center of Porphyrias, Louis Mourier Hospital, AP-HP, Colombes and 
Research Center of Inflammation, UMR1149 INSERM, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.
(3)Pathology Department, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(4)Pediatric Hepatology Unit, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, 
France.
(5)Biotherapy of Genetic Diseases, Inflammatory Disorders, and Cancers, U1035 
INSERM, Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France.
(6)Biotherapy Unit, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(7)Pediatric Immuno-Hematology and Rheumatology Unit, Necker Enfants Malades 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, AP-HP, Paris, France. 
Electronic address: stephane.blanche@aphp.fr.

Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is a rare disease characterized by 
erosive photosensitivity and chronic hemolysis due to a defect of the enzyme 
uroporphyrinogen-III-synthase (UROS). To date, hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT) is the only curative therapy for the devastating early 
and severe form of the disease. We describe 6 patients with CEP treated with 
HSCT (3 of them twice after failure of a first graft) between 1994 and 2016 in 
our center, including 2 of the very first living patients treated more than 20 
years ago. Four patients are doing well at 6 to 25 years post-HSCT, with 
near-normal biochemical parameters of porphyrin metabolism without the cutaneous 
or hematologic features of CEP. One patient died within the first year after 
HSCT from severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), and 1 child died of 
unexplained acute hepatic failure at 1 year after HSCT, despite full donor 
chimerism. Retrospectively, it appears that all but 1 child had increased 
transaminase activity with onset from the early postnatal period, which was 
significantly more marked in the child who died of liver failure. In contrast, 
liver function values progressively normalized after engraftment in all other 
children. Liver pathology before HSCT for 3 patients revealed varying degrees of 
portal, centrilobular, and perisinusoidal fibrosis; clarification of 
hepatocytes; and cytosolic porphyrin deposits. The liver porphyrin content in 
biopsy specimens was >60 times the normal values. Despite difficult engraftment, 
the long-term efficacy of HSCT in CEP appears to be favorable and reinforces its 
benefits for the severe form of CEP. Hepatic involvement requires careful 
evaluation before and after HSCT and further investigation into its 
pathophysiology and care.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2019.12.005
PMID: 31843562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]