1. J Gen Physiol. 2020 Jan 6;152(1):e201812235. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201812235.

Insights into channel modulation mechanism of RYR1 mutants using Ca2+ imaging 
and molecular dynamics.

Yamazawa T(#)(1)(2), Ogawa H(#)(3), Murayama T(4), Yamaguchi M(1), Oyamada H(5), 
Suzuki J(2)(6), Kurebayashi N(4), Kanemaru K(2)(7), Oguchi K(5), Sakurai T(4), 
Iino M(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(7)Division of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is a Ca2+ release channel in the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum in skeletal muscle and plays an important role in 
excitation-contraction coupling. Mutations in the RYR1 gene cause severe muscle 
diseases such as malignant hyperthermia (MH), which is a disorder of CICR via 
RYR1. Thus far, >300 mutations in RYR1 have been reported in patients with MH. 
However, owing to a lack of comprehensive analysis of the structure-function 
relationship of mutant RYR1, the mechanism remains largely unknown. Here, we 
combined functional studies and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of RYR1 
bearing disease-associated mutations at the N-terminal region. When expressed in 
HEK293 cells, the mutant RYR1 caused abnormalities in Ca2+ homeostasis. MD 
simulations of WT and mutant RYR1s were performed using crystal structure of the 
N-terminal domain (NTD) monomer, consisting of A, B, and C domains. We found 
that the mutations located around the interdomain region differentially affected 
hydrogen bonds/salt bridges. Particularly, mutations at R402, which increase the 
open probability of the channel, cause clockwise rotation of BC domains with 
respect to the A domain by alteration of the interdomain interactions. Similar 
results were also obtained with artificial mutations that mimic alteration of 
the interactions. Our results reveal the importance of interdomain interactions 
within the NTD in the regulation of the RYR1 channel and provide insights into 
the mechanism of MH caused by the mutations at the NTD.

Â© 2019 Yamazawa et al.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.201812235
PMCID: PMC7034096
PMID: 31841587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]