1. Nat Commun. 2019 Dec 16;10(1):5732. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-13480-z.

Insights into malaria susceptibility using genome-wide data on 17,000 
individuals from Africa, Asia and Oceania.

Malaria Genomic Epidemiology Network.

Collaborators: Band G, Le QS, Clarke GM, Kivinen K, Hubbart C, Jeffreys AE, 
Rowlands K, Leffler EM, Jallow M, Conway DJ, Sisay-Joof F, Sirugo G, 
d'Alessandro U, Toure OB, Thera MA, Konate S, Sissoko S, Mangano VD, Bougouma 
EC, Sirima SB, Amenga-Etego LN, Ghansah AK, Hodgson AVO, Wilson MD, Enimil A, 
Ansong D, Evans J, Ademola SA, Apinjoh TO, Ndila CM, Manjurano A, Drakeley C, 
Reyburn H, Phu NH, Quyen NTN, Thai CQ, Hien TT, Teo YY, Manning L, Laman M, 
Michon P, Karunajeewa H, Siba P, Allen S, Allen A, Bahlo M, Davis TME, Simpson 
V, Shelton J, Spencer CCA, Busby GBJ, Kerasidou A, Drury E, Stalker J, Dilthey 
A, Mentzer AJ, McVean G, Bojang KA, Doumbo O, Modiano D, Koram KA, Agbenyega T, 
Amodu OK, Achidi E, Williams TN, Marsh K, Riley EM, Molyneux M, Taylor T, 
Dunstan SJ, Farrar J, Mueller I, Rockett KA, Kwiatkowski DP.

The human genetic factors that affect resistance to infectious disease are 
poorly understood. Here we report a genome-wide association study in 17,000 
severe malaria cases and population controls from 11 countries, informed by 
sequencing of family trios and by direct typing of candidate loci in an 
additional 15,000 samples. We identify five replicable associations with 
genome-wide levels of evidence including a newly implicated variant on 
chromosome 6. Jointly, these variants account for around one-tenth of the 
heritability of severe malaria, which we estimate as ~23% using genome-wide 
genotypes. We interrogate available functional data and discover an 
erythroid-specific transcription start site underlying the known association in 
ATP2B4, but are unable to identify a likely causal mechanism at the chromosome 6 
locus.  Previously reported HLA associations do not replicate in these 
samples. This large dataset will provide a foundation for further research on 
thegenetic determinants of malaria resistance in diverse populations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-13480-z
PMCID: PMC6914791
PMID: 31844061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.C.A.S. is a shareholder in, and current 
employee of, Genomics PLC.