1. Cell Rep. 2019 Dec 17;29(12):3983-3996.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.11.050.

Cellular IP(6) Levels Limit HIV Production while Viruses that Cannot Efficiently 
Package IP(6) Are Attenuated for Infection and Replication.

Mallery DL(1), Faysal KMR(2), Kleinpeter A(3), Wilson MSC(4), Vaysburd M(1), 
Fletcher AJ(5), Novikova M(3), Böcking T(2), Freed EO(3), Saiardi A(4), James 
LC(6).

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 
0QH, UK.
(2)EMBL Australia Node in Single Molecule Science and ARC Centre of Excellence 
in Advanced Molecular Imaging, School of Medical Sciences, UNSW Sydney, Sydney 
NSW, Australia.
(3)Virus-Cell Interaction Section, HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA.
(4)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London, London, 
UK.
(5)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, 
Dundee, UK.
(6)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge, CB2 
0QH, UK. Electronic address: lcj@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

HIV-1 hijacks host proteins to promote infection. Here we show that HIV is also 
dependent upon the host metabolite inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) for viral 
production and primary cell replication. HIV-1 recruits IP6 into virions using 
two lysine rings in its immature hexamers. Mutation of either ring inhibits IP6 
packaging and reduces viral production. Loss of IP6 also results in virions with 
highly unstable capsids, leading to a profound loss of reverse transcription and 
cell infection. Replacement of one ring with a hydrophobic isoleucine core 
restores viral production, but IP6 incorporation and infection remain impaired, 
consistent with an independent role for IP6 in stable capsid assembly. Genetic 
knockout of biosynthetic kinases IPMK and IPPK reveals that cellular IP6 
availability limits the production of diverse lentiviruses, but in the absence 
of IP6, HIV-1 packages IP5 without loss of infectivity. Together, these data 
suggest that IP6 is a critical cofactor for HIV-1 replication.

Copyright © 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.11.050
PMCID: PMC6931105
PMID: 31851928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.