1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2020 Feb;40(2):309-322. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313064. Epub 2019 Dec 19.

2019 Russell Ross Memorial Lecture in Vascular Biology: B Lymphocyte-Mediated 
Protective Immunity in Atherosclerosis.

Upadhye A(1), Sturek JM(2), McNamara CA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center (A.U., C.A.M.), 
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine 
(J.M.S.), University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville.
(3)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine (C.A.M.), University of Virginia School 
of Medicine, Charlottesville.

Atherosclerosis-the major underlying pathology of cardiovascular disease-is 
characterized by accumulation and subsequent oxidative modification of 
lipoproteins within the artery wall, leading to inflammatory cell infiltration 
and lesion formation that can over time result in arterial stenosis, ischemia, 
and downstream adverse events. The contribution of innate and adaptive immunity 
to atherosclerosis development is well established, and B cells have emerged as 
important modulators of both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects in 
atherosclerosis. Murine B cells can broadly be divided into 2 subsets: (1) B-2 
cells, which are bone marrow derived and include conventional follicular and 
marginal zone B cells, and (2) B-1 cells, which are largely fetal liver derived 
and persist in adults through self-renewal. B-cell subsets are developmentally, 
functionally, and phenotypically distinct with unique subset-specific 
contributions to atherosclerosis development. Mechanisms whereby B cells 
regulate vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis will be discussed with a 
particular emphasis on B-1 cells. B-1 cells have a protective role in 
atherosclerosis that is mediated in large part by IgM antibody production. 
Accumulating evidence over the last several years has pointed to a previously 
underappreciated heterogeneity in B-1 cell populations, which may have important 
implications for understanding atherosclerosis development and potential 
targeted therapeutic approaches. This heterogeneity within atheroprotective 
innate B-cell subsets will be highlighted.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313064
PMCID: PMC7398219
PMID: 31852222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]