1. Cancers (Basel). 2019 Dec 17;11(12):2038. doi: 10.3390/cancers11122038.

GSTO1*CC Genotype (rs4925) Predicts Shorter Survival in Clear Cell Renal Cell 
Carcinoma Male Patients.

Radic T(1)(2), Coric V(1)(2), Bukumiric Z(2)(3), Pljesa-Ercegovac M(1)(2), 
Djukic T(1)(2), Avramovic N(2)(4), Matic M(1)(2), Mihailovic S(5), Dragicevic 
D(2)(6), Dzamic Z(2)(6), Simic T(1)(2)(7), Savic-Radojevic A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical and Clinical Biochemistry, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Institute of Medical Statistics and Informatics, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(4)Institute of Medical Chemistry, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Clinic for Gynecology and Obstetrics "Narodni front", 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(6)Clinic of Urology, Clinical Center of Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(7)Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Omega class glutathione transferases, GSTO1-1 and GSTO2-2, exhibit different 
activities involved in regulation of inflammation, apoptosis and redox 
homeostasis. We investigated the the prognostic significance of GSTO1 (rs4925) 
and GSTO2 (rs156697 and rs2297235) polymorphisms in clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (ccRCC) patients. GSTO1-1 and GSTO2-2 expression and phosphorylation 
status of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt)/ /mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR) and Raf/MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK) signaling pathways in non-tumor and tumor ccRCC tissue, as well as 
possible association of GSTO1-1 with signaling molecules were also assessed. 
GSTO genotyping was performed by quantitative PCR in 228 ccRCC patients, while 
expression and immunoprecipitation were analyzed by Western blot in 30 tissue 
specimens. Shorter survival in male carriers of GSTO1*C/C wild-type genotype 
compared to the carriers of at least one variant allele was demonstrated (p = 
0.049). GSTO1*C/C genotype independently predicted higher risk of overall 
mortality among male ccRCC patients (p = 0.037). Increased expression of GSTO1-1 
and GSTO2-2 was demonstrated in tumor compared to corresponding non-tumor tissue 
(p = 0.002, p = 0.007, respectively), while GSTO1 expression was correlated with 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β)/pro-interleukin-1β (pro-IL-1β) ratio (r = 0.260, p = 
0.350). Interaction of GSTO1 with downstream effectors of investigated pathways 
was shown in ccRCC tumor tissue. This study demonstrated significant prognostic 
role of GSTO1 polymorphism in ccRCC. Up-regulated GSTO1-1 and GSTO2-2 in tumor 
tissue might contribute to aberrant ccRCC redox homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers11122038
PMCID: PMC6966599
PMID: 31861116

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.