1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Dec 23;15(12):e1008528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008528. 
eCollection 2019 Dec.

A GWAS approach identifies Dapp1 as a determinant of air pollution-induced 
airway hyperreactivity.

Maazi H(1), Hartiala JA(2)(3), Suzuki Y(1), Crow AL(2)(3), Shafiei Jahani P(1), 
Lam J(1), Patel N(1), Rigas D(1), Han Y(2)(3), Huang P(2)(3), Eskin E(4), Lusis 
AJ(5)(6)(7), Gilliland FD(2), Akbari O(1), Allayee H(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.
(2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of 
America.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Inter-Departmental Program in 
Bioinformatics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 
United States of America.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, United States of America.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways with contributions from 
genes, environmental exposures, and their interactions. While genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) in humans have identified ~200 susceptibility loci, 
the genetic factors that modulate risk of asthma through gene-environment (GxE) 
interactions remain poorly understood. Using the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel 
(HMDP), we sought to identify the genetic determinants of airway hyperreactivity 
(AHR) in response to diesel exhaust particles (DEP), a model traffic-related air 
pollutant. As measured by invasive plethysmography, AHR under control and 
DEP-exposed conditions varied 3-4-fold in over 100 inbred strains from the HMDP. 
A GWAS with linear mixed models mapped two loci significantly associated with 
lung resistance under control exposure to chromosomes 2 (p = 3.0x10-6) and 19 (p 
= 5.6x10-7). The chromosome 19 locus harbors Il33 and is syntenic to asthma 
association signals observed at the IL33 locus in humans. A GxE GWAS for 
post-DEP exposure lung resistance identified a significantly associated locus on 
chromosome 3 (p = 2.5x10-6). Among the genes at this locus is Dapp1, an adaptor 
molecule expressed in immune-related and mucosal tissues, including the lung. 
Dapp1-deficient mice exhibited significantly lower AHR than control mice but 
only after DEP exposure, thus functionally validating Dapp1 as one of the genes 
underlying the GxE association at this locus. In summary, our results indicate 
that some of the genetic determinants for asthma-related phenotypes may be 
shared between mice and humans, as well as the existence of GxE interactions in 
mice that modulate lung function in response to air pollution exposures relevant 
to humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008528
PMCID: PMC6944376
PMID: 31869344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.