1. J Hum Genet. 2020 Mar;65(3):263-270. doi: 10.1038/s10038-019-0700-7. Epub 2019
 Dec 20.

Genotyping of Malaysian G6PD-deficient neonates by reverse dot blot flow-through 
hybridisation.

Alina MF(1)(2), Azma RZ(3), Norunaluwar J(2)(4), Azlin I(2), Darnina AJ(4), 
Cheah FC(5), Noor-Farisah AR(4), Siti-Hawa AA(4), Danny XRK(6), Zulkifli NF(1), 
Ainoon O(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences II, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Sains 
Islam Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Pathology, UKM Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Pathology, UKM Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
zahratul@ppukm.ukm.edu.my.
(4)Department of Laboratory Diagnostic Services, UKM Medical Centre, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, UKM Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(6)School of Biosciences and Biotechnology, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia.
(7)Department of Medical Sciences II, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Sains 
Islam Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. ainoon@usim.edu.my.

Erratum in
    J Hum Genet. 2020 Jul;65(7):635. doi: 10.1038/s10038-020-0766-2.

G6PD deficiency is the commonest enzyme deficiency found in humans. Current 
diagnostic methods lack sensitivity to detect all cases of G6PD deficiency. We 
evaluated the reverse dot blot flow-through hybridisation assay designed to 
detect simultaneously multiple known G6PD mutations in a group of Malaysian 
neonates. Archival DNA samples from 141 G6PD-deficient neonates were subjected 
to reverse dot blot flow-through hybridisation assay using the GenoArray 
Diagnostic Kit (Hybribio Limited, Hong Kong) and DNA sequencing. The method 
involved PCR amplification of 5 G6PD exons using biotinylated primers, 
hybridisation of amplicons to a membrane containing oligoprobes designed for 
G6PD mutations known to occur in the Malaysian population and colour detection 
by enzyme immunoassay. The assay detected 13 of the 14 G6PD mutations and 
genotyped 133 (94.3%) out of 141 (102 males, 39 females) cases. Among the 39 
female G6PD-deficient neonates, there were 7 homozygous and 6 compound 
heterozygous cases. The commonest alleles were G6PD Viangchan 871G > A (21%) and 
G6PD Mahidol 487G > A(20%) followed by G6PD Mediterranean 563C > T, (14%), G6PD 
Vanua Lava 383T > C (12%), G6PD Canton 1376G > T (10%), G6PD Orissa 131C > G 
(6.3%) G6PD Coimbra 592C > T (5.6%) plus 6 other mutations. DNA sequencing of 
remaining cases revealed 6 cases of intron 11 nt 93C > T not previously reported 
in Malaysia and two novel mutations, one case each of nt 1361G > T and nt 
1030G > A. We found the reverse dot blot assay easy to perform, rapid, accurate 
and reproducible, potentially becoming an improved diagnostic test for G6PD 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-019-0700-7
PMID: 31863082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]