1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Mar 18;48(5):2424-2441. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1203.

DNA binding modes influence Rap1 activity in the regulation of telomere length 
and MRX functions at DNA ends.

Bonetti D(1), Rinaldi C(1), Vertemara J(1), Notaro M(1), Pizzul P(1), Tisi R(1), 
Zampella G(1), Longhese MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie e Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano 
- Bicocca, 20126 Milano, Italy.

The cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) is initiated by the 
Mre11-Rad50-Xrs2 (MRX) complex that has structural and catalytic functions. MRX 
association at DSBs is counteracted by Rif2, which is known to interact with 
Rap1 that binds telomeric DNA through two tandem Myb-like domains. Whether and 
how Rap1 acts at DSBs is unknown. Here we show that Rif2 inhibits MRX 
association to DSBs in a manner dependent on Rap1, which binds to DSBs and 
promotes Rif2 association to them. Rap1 in turn can negatively regulate MRX 
function at DNA ends also independently of Rif2. In fact, a characterization of 
Rap1 mutant variants shows that Rap1 binding to DNA through both Myb-like 
domains results in formation of Rap1-DNA complexes that control MRX functions at 
both DSBs and telomeres primarily through Rif2. By contrast, Rap1 binding to DNA 
through a single Myb-like domain results in formation of high stoichiometry 
complexes that act at DNA ends mostly in a Rif2-independent manner. Altogether 
these findings indicate that the DNA binding modes of Rap1 influence its 
functional properties, thus highlighting the structural plasticity of this 
protein.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1203
PMCID: PMC7049697
PMID: 31879780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]