1. Physiol Rep. 2019 Dec;7(24):e14333. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14333.

Impact of sex on diabetic nephropathy and the renal transcriptome in UNx db/db 
C57BLKS mice.

Sembach FE(1)(2), Fink LN(1), Johansen T(1), Boland BB(1), Secher T(1), Thrane 
ST(1), Nielsen JC(1), Fosgerau K(1), Vrang N(1), Jelsing J(1), Pedersen TX(1), 
Østergaard MV(1).

Author information:
(1)Gubra ApS, Hørsholm, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is associated with albuminuria and loss of kidney 
function and is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease. Despite evidence 
of sex-associated differences in the progression of DN in human patients, male 
mice are predominantly being used in preclinical DN research and drug 
development. Here, we compared renal changes in male and female 
uninephrectomized (UNx) db/db C57BLKS mice using immunohistochemistry and RNA 
sequencing. Male and female UNx db/db mice showed similar progression of type 2 
diabetes, as assessed by obesity, hyperglycemia, and HbA1c. Progression of DN 
was also similar between sexes as assessed by kidney and glomerular hypertrophy 
as well as urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio being increased in UNx db/db 
compared with control mice. In contrast, kidney collagen III and glomerular 
collagen IV were increased only in female UNx db/db as compared with respective 
control mice but showed a similar tendency in male UNx db/db mice. Comparison of 
renal cortex transcriptomes by RNA sequencing revealed 66 genes differentially 
expressed (p < .01) in male versus female UNx db/db mice, of which 9 genes were 
located on the sex chromosomes. In conclusion, male and female UNx db/db mice 
developed similar hallmarks of DN pathology, suggesting no or weak sex 
differences in the functional and structural changes during DN progression.

© 2019 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14333
PMCID: PMC6930935
PMID: 31876119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors are current or previous employees of 
Gubra ApS.