1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 25;21(1):159. doi: 10.3390/ijms21010159.

Transcriptome Response to Drought, Rehydration and Re-Dehydration in Potato.

Chen Y(1), Li C(2), Yi J(1), Yang Y(1), Lei C(1), Gong M(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming 650550, China.
(2)Joint Academy of Potato Science, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming 650550, 
China.

Potato is an important food crop and its production is susceptible to drought. 
Drought stress in crop growth is usually multiple- or long-term. In this study, 
the drought tolerant potato landrace Jancko Sisu Yari was treated with drought 
stress, rehydration and re-dehydration, and RNA-seq was applied to analyze the 
characteristics of gene regulation during these treatments. The results showed 
that drought-responsive genes mainly involved photosynthesis, signal 
transduction, lipid metabolism, sugar metabolism, wax synthesis, cell wall 
regulation, osmotic adjustment. Potato also can be recovered well in the 
re-emergence of water through gene regulation. The recovery of rehydration 
mainly related to patatin, lipid metabolism, sugar metabolism, flavonoids 
metabolism and detoxification besides the reverse expression of the most of 
drought-responsive genes. The previous drought stress can produce a positive 
responsive ability to the subsequent drought by drought hardening. Drought 
hardening was not only reflected in the drought-responsive genes related to the 
modified structure and cell components, but also in the hardening of gene 
expression or the "memory" of drought-responsive genes. Abundant genes involved 
photosynthesis, signal transduction, sugar metabolism, protease and protease 
inhibitors, flavonoids metabolism, transporters and transcription factors were 
subject to drought hardening or memorized drought in potato.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21010159
PMCID: PMC6981527
PMID: 31881689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.