1. Trials. 2019 Dec 30;20(1):796. doi: 10.1186/s13063-019-3876-4.

A cognitive behavioral therapy intervention to reduce fear of hypoglycemia in 
young adults with type 1 diabetes (FREE): study protocol for a randomized 
controlled trial.

Martyn-Nemeth P(1), Duffecy J(2), Quinn L(3), Park C(4), Mihailescu D(5), 
Penckofer S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biobehavioral Health Science, University of Illinois at Chicago 
College of Nursing, 845 South Damen Avenue (MC 802), Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. 
pmartyn@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biobehavioral Health Science, University of Illinois at Chicago 
College of Nursing, 845 South Damen Avenue (MC 802), Chicago, IL, 60612, USA.
(4)Department of Health Systems Science, University of Illinois at Chicago 
College of Nursing, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Endocrinology/Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: In persons with type 1 diabetes (T1D), hypoglycemia is the major 
limiting factor in achieving optimal glycemic control. All persons with T1D are 
at risk for hypoglycemia (blood glucose level < 70 mg/dl), which is 
life-threatening and accompanied by serious physical and psychological symptoms, 
resulting in profound fear of hypoglycemia (FOH) and reduced quality of life. 
Young adults with T1D are at risk for FOH and have worse glycemic control and 
self-management behavior than other age groups with T1D. FOH also results in 
increased glycemic variability (GV). A major gap exists in how to manage FOH. 
Our overall objective is to reduce FOH and improve diabetes self-management, 
glycemic control, and GV in young adults with T1D to reduce or delay diabetes 
complications and improve quality of life. We aim to (1) determine the 
feasibility and acceptability of an eight-week cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT)-based Fear Reduction Efficacy Evaluation (FREE) intervention in young 
adults with T1D who experience FOH; and (2) determine the impact of the FREE 
intervention, compared to an attention control group, on the outcomes FOH, 
self-management, glycemic control (A1C), and glycemic variability (continuous 
glucose monitoring recordings).
METHODS/DESIGN: A randomized controlled trial in 50 young adults aged 18 to 
35 years with T1D will be used. Eligible subjects will be randomized to the 
intervention program (Fear Reduction Efficacy Evaluation [FREE]) or attention 
control group. A one-week run-in phase is planned, with baseline measures of 
FOH, self-management behavior, A1C, and real-time continuous glucose monitoring 
recordings (RT-CGM) to calculate GV for both groups. The intervention group will 
participate in eight weekly individual one-hour sessions using CBT and exposure 
treatment for specific fears. RT-CGM and a daily FOH diary will be used as 
feedback cues as part of the FREE program. The attention control group will 
participate in eight weekly individual one-hour diabetes self-management 
education (DSME) sessions and wear a RT-CGM device (to measure GV only) over 8 
weeks. At completion, FOH will be measured, and RT-CGM recordings will be 
analyzed to determine differences between the FREE and control groups.
DISCUSSION: Findings from this proposed pilot study will serve as the foundation 
for a larger trial to reduce FOH and improve self-management, glycemic control, 
and GV.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov: A cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 
intervention to reduce fear of hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes, NCT03549104. 
Registered June 7, 2018.

DOI: 10.1186/s13063-019-3876-4
PMCID: PMC6938021
PMID: 31888691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.