1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Jan;24(2):1360-1369. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.14812. Epub 2019
Dec  28.

Overexpression of B7H5/CD28H is associated with worse survival in human gastric 
cancer.

Hu C(1), Xu Z(2), Chen S(1), Lv H(3), Wang Y(3), Wang X(1), Mo S(1), Shi C(1), 
Wei S(1), Hu L(4), Chen W(4), Cheng X(2).

Author information:
(1)First Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Abdominal Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Digestive System Tumor, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Cancer Institute of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Key 
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy Combining Traditional Chinese and 
Western Medicine, Zhejiang Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China.

Gastric cancer (GC) is a common malignancy with low 5-year overall survival 
(OS). Recently, immune therapy has been used to treat cancer. B7H5 and CD28H are 
novel immune checkpoint molecules. However, the prognostic value of B7H5/CD28H 
expression in patients with GC remains unclear. In this study, seventy-one 
patients diagnosed with GC were included in this study. Patients' GC tissues and 
matched adjacent tissue constructed a tissue microarray. The expression levels 
of B7H5 and CD28H were examined using immunohistochemistry. Correlations between 
the expression of B7H5 and CD28H and the clinical data were evaluated. We found 
that the expression of B7H5 and CD28H (both P = .001) were higher in GC tumour 
tissues than in adjacent noncancerous tissues. B7H5/CD28H expression acted as an 
independent predictive factor in the OS of patients with GC. High expression of 
B7H5 and CD28H predicted poor outcome. Patients in the B7H5+CD28H+ group had a 
lower 5-year OS compared with patients in the B7H5-CD28- group (4.5% vs 55.6%, 
P = .001). A significant difference was found in the 5-year OS between patients 
in the B7H5+CD28H- and B7H5+CD28H+ groups (33.5% vs 4.5%, P = .006). However, 
there was no correlation between B7H5 and CD28H expression (P = .844). 
Therefore, B7H5 and CD28H expression are up-regulated in GC and are independent 
prognostic factors for overall survival in patients with GC. Although there was 
no correlation between B7H5 and CD28H expression, high expression of B7H5 and 
CD28H predicts poor prognosis, especially when both are highly expressed.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by 
Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.14812
PMCID: PMC6991633
PMID: 31883303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflict of interest.