1. PLoS Genet. 2019 Dec 27;15(12):e1008501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008501. 
eCollection 2019 Dec.

The MITF-SOX10 regulated long non-coding RNA DIRC3 is a melanoma tumour 
suppressor.

Coe EA(1), Tan JY(2), Shapiro M(1), Louphrasitthiphol P(3), Bassett AR(4), 
Marques AC(2), Goding CR(3), Vance KW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

The MITF and SOX10 transcription factors regulate the expression of genes 
important for melanoma proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Despite growing 
evidence of the contribution of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in cancer, 
including melanoma, their functions within MITF-SOX10 transcriptional programmes 
remain poorly investigated. Here we identify 245 candidate melanoma associated 
lncRNAs whose loci are co-occupied by MITF-SOX10 and that are enriched at active 
enhancer-like regions. Our work suggests that one of these, Disrupted In Renal 
Carcinoma 3 (DIRC3), may be a clinically important MITF-SOX10 regulated tumour 
suppressor. DIRC3 depletion in human melanoma cells leads to increased 
anchorage-independent growth, a hallmark of malignant transformation, whilst 
melanoma patients classified by low DIRC3 expression have decreased survival. 
DIRC3 is a nuclear lncRNA that activates expression of its neighbouring IGFBP5 
tumour suppressor through modulating chromatin structure and suppressing SOX10 
binding to putative regulatory elements within the DIRC3 locus. In turn, DIRC3 
dependent regulation of IGFBP5 impacts the expression of genes involved in 
cancer associated processes and is needed for DIRC3 control of 
anchorage-independent growth. Our work indicates that lncRNA components of 
MITF-SOX10 networks are an important new class of melanoma regulators and 
candidate therapeutic targets that can act not only as downstream mediators of 
MITF-SOX10 function but as feedback regulators of MITF-SOX10 activity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008501
PMCID: PMC6934268
PMID: 31881017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.