1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 16;20(24):6334. doi: 10.3390/ijms20246334.

Genome- and Transcriptome-Wide Characterization of bZIP Gene Family Identifies 
Potential Members Involved in Abiotic Stress Response and Anthocyanin 
Biosynthesis in Radish (Raphanus sativus L.).

Fan L(1), Xu L(1), Wang Y(1), Tang M(1), Liu L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Key 
Laboratory of Horticultural Crop Biology and Genetic Improvement (East China) of 
MOAR, College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, 
China.

Basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factors play crucial roles in various 
abiotic stress responses as well as anthocyanin accumulation. Anthocyanins are 
most abundant in colorful skin radish, which exhibit strong antioxidant activity 
that offers benefits for human health. Here, a total of 135 bZIP-encoding genes 
were identified from radish genome. Synteny analysis showed that 104 radish and 
63 Arabidopsis bZIP genes were orthologous. Transcriptome analysis revealed that 
10 RsbZIP genes exhibited high-expression levels in radish taproot (RPKM>10). 
Specifically, RsbZIP010 exhibited down-regulated expression under Cd, Cr and Pb 
stresses, whereas RsbZIP031 and RsbZIP059 showed significant down-regulation 
under heat and salt stresses, respectively. RT-qPCR analysis indicated that 
RsbZIP011 and RsbZIP102 were significantly up-regulated in the tissues of radish 
with high anthocyanin contents. Furthermore, the promoter sequences of 39 
anthocyanin-related genes were found to contain G-box or ACE-box elements that 
could be recognized by bZIP family members. Taken together, several RsbZIPs 
might be served as critical regulators in radish taproot under Cd, Cr, Pb, heat 
and salt stresses. RsbZIP011 and RsbZIP102 were the potential participants in 
anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway of radish. These results facilitate further 
investigation on functional characterization of bZIP genes in response to 
abiotic stress and anthocyanin biosynthesis in radish.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20246334
PMCID: PMC6941039
PMID: 31888167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.