1. Addict Biol. 2021 Jan;26(1):e12869. doi: 10.1111/adb.12869. Epub 2019 Dec 27.

Long-lasting microbial dysbiosis and altered enteric neurotransmitters in adult 
rats following adolescent binge ethanol exposure.

Vetreno RP(1)(2), Massey V(1), Crews FT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, School of Medicine, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hi, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Human alcoholism and ethanol exposure of adult mice cause acute microbial 
dysbiosis. Adolescent binge drinking is common, but the effect of adolescent 
ethanol exposure on the adult microbiome and enteric neurotransmitters has not 
been studied. In the current study, male Wistar rats received adolescent 
intermittent ethanol (AIE) treatment, and fecal samples were collected on 
postnatal day (P)54 and P95 for bacterial 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. Cecal 
tissue was collected on P95 for analysis of innate immune and neurotransmitter 
marker expression. At the genus level, AIE treatment altered the relative 
abundance of several microbes, including decreased relative abundance of 
Dehalobacterium and CF231 (a member of the Paraprevotellaceae family) that 
persisted into adulthood. Across aging, the relative abundance of several 
microbes was altered in both control- and AIE-treated rats. At P95, AIE exposure 
was associated with increased cecal serotonin levels and reduced choline 
acetyltransferase gene expression. Taxonomic shifts at P54 and at P95 suggest 
that AIE causes both immediate and lasting microbial dysbiosis. The lasting 
microbial dysbiosis was accompanied by alterations of enteric neurotransmitters.

Â© 2019 Society for the Study of Addiction.

DOI: 10.1111/adb.12869
PMCID: PMC7319904
PMID: 31880056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.