1. Malar J. 2020 Jan 2;19(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12936-019-3075-5.

An in vitro toolbox to accelerate anti-malarial drug discovery and development.

Charman SA(1), Andreu A(2), Barker H(2), Blundell S(2), Campbell A(2), Campbell 
M(2), Chen G(2), Chiu FCK(2), Crighton E(2), Katneni K(2), Morizzi J(2), Patil 
R(2), Pham T(2), Ryan E(2), Saunders J(2), Shackleford DM(2), White KL(2), 
Almond L(3), Dickins M(3), Smith DA(4), Moehrle JJ(5), Burrows JN(5), Abla N(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Drug Candidate Optimisation, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. 
susan.charman@monash.edu.
(2)Centre for Drug Candidate Optimisation, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
(3)Certara UK Limited, Simcyp Division, Level 2-Acero, 1 Concourse Way, 
Sheffield, S1 2BJ, UK.
(4)4 The Maltings, Walmer, Kent, CT14 7AR, UK.
(5)Medicines for Malaria Venture, PO Box 1826, 20 Route de Pré-Bois, CH-1215, 
Geneva 15, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Modelling and simulation are being increasingly utilized to support 
the discovery and development of new anti-malarial drugs. These approaches 
require reliable in vitro data for physicochemical properties, permeability, 
binding, intrinsic clearance and cytochrome P450 inhibition. This work was 
conducted to generate an in vitro data toolbox using standardized methods for a 
set of 45 anti-malarial drugs and to assess changes in physicochemical 
properties in relation to changing target product and candidate profiles.
METHODS: Ionization constants were determined by potentiometric titration and 
partition coefficients were measured using a shake-flask method. Solubility was 
assessed in biorelevant media and permeability coefficients and efflux ratios 
were determined using Caco-2 cell monolayers. Binding to plasma and media 
proteins was measured using either ultracentrifugation or rapid equilibrium 
dialysis. Metabolic stability and cytochrome P450 inhibition were assessed using 
human liver microsomes. Sample analysis was conducted by LC-MS/MS.
RESULTS: Both solubility and fraction unbound decreased, and permeability and 
unbound intrinsic clearance increased, with increasing Log D7.4. In general, 
development compounds were somewhat more lipophilic than legacy drugs. For many 
compounds, permeability and protein binding were challenging to assess and both 
required the use of experimental conditions that minimized the impact of 
non-specific binding. Intrinsic clearance in human liver microsomes was varied 
across the data set and several compounds exhibited no measurable substrate loss 
under the conditions used. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes was minimal for 
most compounds.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first data set to describe in vitro properties for 45 
legacy and development anti-malarial drugs. The studies identified several 
practical methodological issues common to many of the more lipophilic compounds 
and highlighted areas which require more work to customize experimental 
conditions for compounds being designed to meet the new target product profiles. 
The dataset will be a valuable tool for malaria researchers aiming to develop 
PBPK models for the prediction of human PK properties and/or drug-drug 
interactions. Furthermore, generation of this comprehensive data set within a 
single laboratory allows direct comparison of properties across a large dataset 
and evaluation of changing property trends that have occurred over time with 
changing target product and candidate profiles.

DOI: 10.1186/s12936-019-3075-5
PMCID: PMC6941357
PMID: 31898492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.