1. Open Heart. 2019 Dec 2;6(2):e001187. doi: 10.1136/openhrt-2019-001187. 
eCollection 2019.

Twelve-month outcome in patients with stroke and atrial fibrillation not 
suitable to oral anticoagulant strategy: the WATCH-AF registry.

Guidoux C(1), Meseguer E(1), Ong E(2), Lavallée PC(1), Hobeanu C(1), 
Monteiro-Tavares L(1), Charles H(1), Cabrejo L(1), Martin-Bechet A(1), Rigual 
R(1), Nighoghossian N(2), Amarenco P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke center, Paris Univesity, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stroke center, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
de Lyon, Lyon, France.

AIMS: Long-term oral anticoagulant (LTOAC) reduces ischaemic stroke recurrences. 
Because of bleeding history, frailty, cognitive impairment, comorbidities or 
patient refusal, many cannot be discharged from stroke unit on LTOAC. Proportion 
and outcome of these patients is not well known.
METHODS: The Warfarin Aspirin Ten-a inhibitor Cerebral infarction and 
Haemorrhage and atrial fibrillation (AF) prospective registry enrolled 
consecutive patients with an acute stroke associated with AF. Scales to evaluate 
stroke severity, disability, functional independence, cognition, risk of fall, 
ischaemic and haemorrhagic risk stratification were systematically collected at 
admission, discharge, 3 and 12 months poststroke. The two main 12-month 
endpoints were death or dependency (modified Rankin Scale >3) and recurrent 
stroke.
RESULTS: Among 400 patients (370 brain infarctions, 30 brain haemorrhages), 274 
were discharged on LTOAC, 31 died before discharge and 95 (24%) were not 
discharge on anticoagulant (frailty, bedridden or demented, EHRA/ESC 
contraindication to anticoagulant). Death or dependency and recurrent stroke 
occurred in 19.8% and 9.9%, respectively, in patient on anticoagulant, and 33.5% 
and 27.2% in those not on anticoagulant (both p<0.001). Patient not 
anticoagulated at discharge had a 1.6-fold increase in the risk of death or 
dependency at 12 months (HR 1.65; 95% CI 1.05 to 2.61; p=0.032) and a 2.5-fold 
increase in the risk of stroke (HR 2.46; 95% CI 1.36 to 4.44; p=0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: One-fourth of patients with stroke associated with AF are not 
discharged on anticoagulation and have a dramatic increase in the risk of death 
or dependency at 12 months as well as recurrent stroke. Alternative treatments 
should be trialled in these patients.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/openhrt-2019-001187
PMCID: PMC6927512
PMID: 31908815

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: NN reports the following 
relationships: receipt of research grants support from Pfizer, Sanofi, from The 
French National Research Agency and consultancy fees from Boehringer-Ingelheim, 
Bayer et Amgen. PA reports receipt of research grant support from Pfizer, 
Sanofi, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Merck, AstraZeneca, Boston Scientific and from the 
French government, and consulting fees from Pfizer, BMS, Merck, 
Boehringer-Ingelheim, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Daiichi-Sankyo, Edwards, Boston 
Scientific, Kowa, GSK, Fibrogen, Amgen, Shin Poong, Gilead, and lecture fees 
from Bayer, St-Jude Medical, Amgen, Pfizer, Sanofi.