1. Hortic Res. 2020 Jan 1;7:2. doi: 10.1038/s41438-019-0224-5. eCollection 2020.

Divergent molecular and growth responses of young "Cabernet Sauvignon" (Vitis 
vinifera) plants to simple and mixed infections with Grapevine rupestris stem 
pitting-associated virus.

Tobar M(1), Fiore N(2), Pérez-Donoso AG(1), León R(1), Rosales IM(1), 
Gambardella M(1).

Author information:
(1)1Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Facultad de Agronomía e Ingeniería 
Forestal, Vicuña Mackena 4860, Macul, Santiago, 7820436 Chile.
(2)2Universidad de Chile, Facultad de Ciencias Agronómicas, Avenida Santa Rosa 
11315, La Pintana, Santiago, 8820808 Chile.

Grapevine rupestris stem pitting associated virus (GRSPaV) is one of the most 
widely distributed viruses; even so, little is known about its effect on Vitis 
vinifera. To provide new insights, the effects of single and mixed GRSPaV 
infections on the V. vinifera cultivar "Cabernet Sauvignon" were studied by 
evaluating growth parameters, such as measurements of the total plant length, 
the number and distance of internodes and the number of leaves per shoot. In 
addition, parameters relating to gas exchange, i.e., the stomatal conductance, 
net photosynthetic rate, internal CO2 concentration and leaf transpiration, were 
also assessed. All the measurements were performed in one- and two-year-old 
plants with a single GRSPaV infection or mixed infections of GRSPaV and 
Grapevine fanleaf virus (GFLV). The results show that the plant phytosanitary 
status did not significantly alter the growth and gas exchange parameters in 
one-year-old plants. However, in two-year-old plants, single GRSPaV infections 
increased shoot elongation, which was accompanied by the overexpression of genes 
associated with the gibberellic acid response pathway. The gas exchange 
parameters of these plants were negatively affected, despite exhibiting higher 
LHCII gene expression. Plants with mixed infections did not have modified growth 
parameters, although they presented a greater reduction in the primary 
photosynthetic parameters evaluated with no change in LHCII expression. The 
results presented here confirm the co-evolution hypothesis for V. vinifera and 
GRSPaV during the early stages of plant development, and they provide new 
evidence about the effects of GRSPaV and GFLV co-infections on the "Cabernet 
Sauvignon" cultivar.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1038/s41438-019-0224-5
PMCID: PMC6938478
PMID: 31908805

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.