1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Dec 31;21(1):296. doi: 10.3390/ijms21010296.

"Bridging the Gap" Everything that Could Have Been Avoided If We Had Applied 
Gender Medicine, Pharmacogenetics and Personalized Medicine in the Gender-Omics 
and Sex-Omics Era.

Gemmati D(1)(2), Varani K(3)(2), Bramanti B(4)(2), Piva R(4)(2), Bonaccorsi 
G(5)(2), Trentini A(4), Manfrinato MC(4), Tisato V(6), Car√® A(2)(7), Bellini 
T(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical & Specialty Surgical Sciences, and Centre 
Haemostasis & Thrombosis, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(2)University Center for Studies on Gender Medicine, University of Ferrara, 
44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomedical & Specialty Surgical Sciences, University of 
Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(5)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, and Menopause 
and Osteoporosis Centre, University of Ferrara, 44124 Ferrara, Italy.
(6)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, and LTTA Centre, 
University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy.
(7)Center for Gender-specific Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita' (I.S.S.), 
00161 Rome, Italy.

. Gender medicine is the first step of personalized medicine and patient-centred 
care, an essential development to achieve the standard goal of a holistic 
approach to patients and diseases. By addressing the interrelation and 
integration of biological markers (i.e., sex) with indicators of 
psychological/cultural behaviour (i.e., gender), gender medicine represents the 
crucial assumption for achieving the personalized health-care required in the 
third millennium. However, 'sex' and 'gender' are often misused as synonyms, 
leading to frequent misunderstandings in those who are not deeply involved in 
the field. Overall, we have to face the evidence that biological, genetic, 
epigenetic, psycho-social, cultural, and environmental factors mutually interact 
in defining sex/gender differences, and at the same time in establishing 
potential unwanted sex/gender disparities. Prioritizing the role of sex/gender 
in physiological and pathological processes is crucial in terms of efficient 
prevention, clinical signs' identification, prognosis definition, and therapy 
optimization. In this regard, the omics-approach has become a powerful tool to 
identify sex/gender-specific disease markers, with potential benefits also in 
terms of socio-psychological wellbeing for each individual, and 
cost-effectiveness for National Healthcare systems. "Being a male or being a 
female" is indeed important from a health point of view and it is no longer 
possible to avoid "sex and gender lens" when approaching patients. Accordingly, 
personalized healthcare must be based on evidence from targeted research studies 
aimed at understanding how sex and gender influence health across the entire 
life span. The rapid development of genetic tools in the molecular medicine 
approaches and their impact in healthcare is an example of highly specialized 
applications that have moved from specialists to primary care providers (e.g., 
pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic applications in routine medical practice). 
Gender medicine needs to follow the same path and become an established medical 
approach. To face the genetic, molecular and pharmacological bases of the 
existing sex/gender gap by means of omics approaches will pave the way to the 
discovery and identification of novel drug-targets/therapeutic protocols, 
personalized laboratory tests and diagnostic procedures (sex/gender-omics). In 
this scenario, the aim of the present review is not to simply resume the 
state-of-the-art in the field, rather an opportunity to gain insights into 
gender medicine, spanning from molecular up to social and psychological stances. 
The description and critical discussion of some key selected multidisciplinary 
topics considered as paradigmatic of sex/gender differences and sex/gender 
inequalities will allow to draft and design strategies useful to fill the 
existing gap and move forward.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21010296
PMCID: PMC6982247
PMID: 31906252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.