1. J Immunol. 2020 Jan 15;204(2):327-334. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900829.

Desperately Seeking Therapies for Cerebral Malaria.

Riggle BA(1), Miller LH(2), Pierce SK(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852; and.
(2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852.
(3)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852; and 
spierce@nih.gov.

Malaria is a deadly infectious disease caused by parasites of the Plasmodium 
spp. that takes an estimated 435,000 lives each year, primarily among young 
African children. For most children, malaria is a febrile illness that resolves 
with time, but in âˆ¼1% of cases, for reasons we do not understand, malaria 
becomes severe and life threatening. Cerebral malaria (CM) is the most common 
form of severe malaria, accounting for the vast majority of childhood deaths 
from malaria despite highly effective antiparasite chemotherapy. Thus, CM is one 
of the most prevalent lethal brain diseases, and one for which we have no 
effective therapy. CM is, in part, an immune-mediated disease, and to fully 
understand CM, it is essential to appreciate the complex relationship between 
the malarial parasite and the human immune system. In this study, we provide a 
primer on malaria for immunologists and, in this context, review progress 
identifying targets for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1900829
PMCID: PMC6951433
PMID: 31907275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors have no financial 
conflicts of interest to declare.