1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020 Mar 15;147:117-130. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.032. Epub 2020 Jan 7.

Computational insights into mechanism of AIM4-mediated inhibition of aggregation 
of TDP-43 protein implicated in ALS and evidence for in vitro inhibition of 
liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of TDP-43(2C)-A315T by AIM4.

Girdhar A(1), Bharathi V(1), Tiwari VR(1), Abhishek S(1), Deeksha W(1), Mahawar 
US(1), Raju G(2), Singh SK(1), Prabusankar G(2), Rajakumara E(1), Patel BK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Sangareddy, Telangana 502285, India.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Sangareddy, Telangana 502285, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Kandi, 
Sangareddy, Telangana 502285, India. Electronic address: 
basantkpatel@iith.ac.in.

TDP-43 is an RNA/DNA-binding protein which is also implicated in the 
pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) disease. TDP-43's 
cytoplasmic mis-localization, liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) due to RNA 
depletion and aggregation, are proposedly important TDP-43-toxicity causing 
mechanisms. So far, therapeutic options for ALS are extremely ineffective hence, 
multi-faceted approaches such as targeting the oxidative stress and inhibiting 
the TDP-43's aggregation, are being actively pursued. Recently, we have 
identified an acridine derivative, AIM4, as an anti-TDP-43 aggregation molecule 
however, its mechanism is not deciphered. Here, we have utilized computational 
tools to examine binding site(s) of AIM4 in the TDP-43 structure and compared 
with other relevant compounds. We find that AIM4 has a binding site in the 
C-terminal amyloidogenic region (aa: 288-319), with Gly-288 & Phe-289 residues 
which are also important for TDP-43's LLPS. Importantly, alike to previously 
reported effects of RNA, AIM4 could also inhibit the in vitro LLPS of a 
C-terminal fragment TDP-432C bearing an A315T familial mutation. Furthermore, 
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) data also support the binding of AIM4 to 
TDP-432C-A315T. This antagonism of AIM4 towards TDP-43's LLPS and presence of 
binding site of AIM4 on TDP-43 support AIM4's potential to be an important 
molecule towards ALS therapeutic research.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.032
PMID: 31917988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Authors 
declare no competing interests.