1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Feb 28;295(9):2582-2589. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012319. Epub
 2020 Jan 7.

An engineered variant of SETD3 methyltransferase alters target specificity from 
histidine to lysine methylation.

Dai S(1), Horton JR(1), Wilkinson AW(2), Gozani O(2), Zhang X(3), Cheng X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305.
(3)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030. Electronic address: 
xzhang21@mdanderson.org.
(4)Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030. Electronic address: 
xcheng5@mdanderson.org.

Most characterized SET domain (SETD) proteins are protein lysine 
methyltransferases, but SETD3 was recently demonstrated to be a protein (i.e. 
actin) histidine-N3 methyltransferase. Human SETD3 shares a high structural 
homology with two known protein lysine methyltransferases-human SETD6 and the 
plant LSMT-but differs in the residues constituting the active site. In the 
SETD3 active site, Asn255 engages in a unique hydrogen-bonding interaction with 
the target histidine of actin that likely contributes to its >1300-fold greater 
catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km ) on histidine than on lysine. Here, we engineered 
active-site variants to switch the SETD3 target specificity from histidine to 
lysine. Substitution of Asn255 with phenylalanine (N255F), together with 
substitution of Trp273 with alanine (W273A), generated an active site mimicking 
that of known lysine methyltransferases. The doubly substituted SETD3 variant 
exhibited a 13-fold preference for lysine over histidine. We show, by means of 
X-ray crystallography, that the two target nitrogen atoms-the N3 atom of 
histidine and the terminal ϵ-amino nitrogen of lysine-occupy the same position 
and point toward and are within a short distance of the incoming methyl group of 
SAM for a direct methyl transfer during catalysis. In contrast, SETD3 and its 
Asn255 substituted derivatives did not methylate glutamine (another potentially 
methylated amino acid). However, the glutamine-containing peptide competed with 
the substrate peptide, and glutamine bound in the active site, but too far away 
from SAM to be methylated. Our results provide insight into the structural 
parameters defining the target amino acid specificity of SET enzymes.

© 2020 Dai et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012319
PMCID: PMC7049955
PMID: 31911441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: X. C. is a CPRIT Scholar in Cancer Research. O. 
G. is a co-founder of EpiCypher, Inc. and Athelas Therapeutics