1. J Psychiatr Pract. 2020 Jan;26(1):58-62. doi: 10.1097/PRA.0000000000000441.

Commentary on "Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf Optic Atrophy Syndrome Presenting as 
New-Onset Psychosis in a 32-Year-Old Man: A Case Report and Literature Review".

Kahn DA(1).

Author information:
(1)KAHN: Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY.

Comment on
    J Psychiatr Pract. 2020 Jan;26(1):58-62. doi: 10.1097/PRA.0000000000000440.

Bosch-Boonstra-Schaaf optic atrophy syndrome (BBSOAS) is a recently described 
autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the nuclear receptor 
subfamily 2 group F member 1 (NR2F1) gene. Its common features include optic 
atrophy and/or hypoplasia, developmental delay, intellectual disability, 
attention deficit disorder, autism spectrum disorder, seizures, hearing defects, 
spasticity, hypotonia, and thinning of the corpus callosum. Mitochondrial 
involvement has also been described with BBSOAS. Currently, 31 cases of BBSOAS 
have been described in the literature. Here we report a case of undiagnosed 
BBSOAS presenting as psychosis in a 32-year-old man with a history of bilateral 
optic nerve atrophy, intellectual disability, epilepsy, and mitochondrial 
complex I abnormality on muscle biopsy. Whole-genome sequencing identified a 
heterozygous de novo nonsense mutation in the NR2F1 gene [c.253 G>T (guanine to 
thymine mutation in coding position 253) in exon 1, p.E85X variant (GAG>TAG) 
(glutamic acid to stop codon mutation; protein truncated to 85 amino acids)]. A 
pathogenic nonsense mutation has not previously been reported in the literature 
in association with BBSOAS and represents an expansion of clinically relevant 
variants. Psychosis has also not been previously reported in this syndrome and 
may represent a phenotypic expansion of BBSOAS, a manifestation of prolonged 
disease, or a result of disease management.

DOI: 10.1097/PRA.0000000000000441
PMID: 31913972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]