1. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2020;46(2):184-193. doi:
10.1080/00952990.2019.1674864.  Epub 2020 Jan 8.

Doxazosin treatment in cocaine use disorder: pharmacogenetic response based on 
an alpha-1 adrenoreceptor subtype D genetic variant.

Shorter DI(1)(2), Zhang X(1)(2), Domingo CB(1)(2), Nielsen EM(1)(2), Kosten 
TR(1)(2), Nielsen DA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Care Line, Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Background: The α1 antagonist doxazosin reduces cocaine use in individuals with 
cocaine use disorder (CUD) through a functional polymorphism of the α1 
adrenoreceptor. The regulatory role of the α1adrenoreceptor subtype D (ADRA1D) 
gene polymorphism in CUD is uncharacterized.Objectives: To study how the genetic 
variant of ADRA1D gene (T1848A, rs2236554) may affect the treatment efficacy of 
doxazosin in reducing cocaine use.Methods: This 12-week pilot trial included 76 
participants with CUD with ADRA1D (T1848A, rs2236554) AA (N = 40) or AT/TT 
genotype (N = 36). Participants were randomized to doxazosin (8 mg/day, N = 47) 
or placebo (N = 29), and followed with thrice weekly urine toxicology and once 
weekly cognitive behavioral psychotherapy.Results: The AA and the AT/TT groups 
had comparable baseline rates of cocaine positive urines at weeks 1-2 (~ 76%). 
In the placebo group, an increase of cocaine positive urines in the AT/TT group 
was found as compared to the AA group (24% vs. 9%). In the doxazosin group, a 
greater decrease in cocaine positive urines was found in the AT/TT group 
relative to the AA group. The difference between the doxazosin and placebo 
groups in cocaine negative urines became evident at weeks 5-6 and peaked at 
weeks 9-10 (~35% difference). The AT/TT group demonstrated a significant 
medication and time by medication effect (p < .001), whereas the AA group did 
not.Conclusion: The T-allele carriers showed a greater reduction of cocaine use 
after treatment with doxazosin in participants with the ADRA1D gene polymorphism 
(T1848A), suggesting that this SNP may serve as a pharmacogenetic marker in 
pharmacotherapy of CUD.

DOI: 10.1080/00952990.2019.1674864
PMID: 31914324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]