1. Onco Targets Ther. 2019 Dec 24;12:11453-11464. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S223448. 
eCollection 2019.

miR-492 Promotes Cancer Progression by Targeting GJB4 and Is a Novel Biomarker 
for Bladder Cancer.

Wang K(1), Lü H(1), Qu H(1), Xie Q(1), Sun T(1), Gan O(1), Hu B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology Surgery, Liaoning Province Cancer Hospital and 
Institute (Cancer Hospital of China Medical University), Shenyang 110004, 
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Bladder cancer is the most common urinary system malignancy in the 
United States and is characterized by its diverse prognosis and high recurrence 
rate. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying its progression remain 
unknown. Accumulating evidence suggests a critical role for miRNAs in bladder 
cancer progression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we found that miR-492 expression levels were 
significantly higher in bladder cancer tissue and the serum of bladder cancer 
patients by bioinformatics analysis and a panel of clinical samples. The results 
of receiver operating characteristic curve analysis suggested the potential 
diagnostic value of serum miR-492 for bladder cancer. In vitro and in vivo 
functional assays showed that knockdown of miR-492 suppressed proliferation and 
metastasis of bladder cancer cells. Gap junction beta-4 protein was predicted to 
be a direct target of miR-492, which was validated using a luciferase reporter 
assay. Further cellular functional assays showed that suppression of miR-492 
abrogated bladder cancer cell proliferation and metastasis by targeting gap 
junction beta-4 protein.
CONCLUSION: miR-492 promotes cancer progression by targeting GJB4 and is a novel 
biomarker for bladder cancer.

© 2019 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S223448
PMCID: PMC6935362
PMID: 31920334

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.