1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Dec 10;10:2800. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02800.
eCollection  2019.

Baicalin Inhibits Biofilm Formation and the Quorum-Sensing System by Regulating 
the MsrA Drug Efflux Pump in Staphylococcus saprophyticus.

Wang J(1)(2), Jiao H(3), Meng J(1)(2), Qiao M(1)(2), Du H(1)(2), He M(1)(2), 
Ming K(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Wu Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Institute of Traditional Chinese Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tarim Animal Husbandry Science and Technology of Xinjiang 
Production & Construction Corps, College of Animal Science, Tarim University, 
Alar, China.

Staphylococcus saprophyticus (S. saprophyticus) is one of the main pathogens 
that cause serious infection due to its acquisition of antibiotic resistance. 
The efflux pump decreases antibiotic abundance, and biofilm compromises the 
penetration of antibiotics. It has been reported that baicalin is a potential 
agent to inhibit efflux pumps, biofilm formation, and quorum-sensing systems. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate whether baicalin can inhibit S. 
saprophyticus biofilm formation and the quorum-sensing system by inhibiting the 
MsrA efflux pump. First, the mechanism of baicalin inhibiting efflux was 
investigated by the ethidium bromide (EtBr) efflux assay, measurement of ATP 
content, and pyruvate kinase (PK) activities. These results revealed that 
baicalin significantly reduced the efflux of EtBr, the ATP content, and the 
activity of PK. Moreover, its role in biofilm formation and the agr system was 
studied by crystal violet staining, confocal laser scanning microscopy, scanning 
electron microscopy, and real-time polymerase chain reaction. These results 
showed that baicalin decreased biofilm formation, inhibited bacterial 
aggregation, and downregulated mRNA transcription levels of the quorum-sensing 
system regulators agrA, agrC, RNAIII, and sarA. Correlation analysis indicated 
that there was a strong positive correlation between the efflux pump and biofilm 
formation and the agr system. We demonstrate for the first time that baicalin 
inhibits biofilm formation and the agr quorum-sensing system by inhibiting the 
efflux pump in S. saprophyticus. Therefore, baicalin is a potential therapeutic 
agent for S. saprophyticus biofilm-associated infections.

Copyright Â© 2019 Wang, Jiao, Meng, Qiao, Du, He, Ming, Liu, Wang and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02800
PMCID: PMC6915091
PMID: 31921008