1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Jan 8;10(1):102. doi: 10.3390/ani10010102.

Transcriptomic Analysis of Testicular Gene Expression in Normal and Cryptorchid 
Horses.

Han H(1)(2), Dong H(3), Chen Q(2), Gao Y(2), Li J(1), Li W(4), Dang R(2), Lei 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan University of Animal 
Husbandry and Economy, Zhengzhou 450046, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 
712100, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Shihezi 832003, 
China.
(4)Henan Genetic Protection Engineering Research Center for Livestock and 
Poultry, Zhengzhou 450046, China.

Testes produce sperm, and investigations into gene expression in the testes will 
enhance the understanding of the roles of testicular genes in male reproduction. 
Cryptorchidism, the failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotal 
sac, is a common congenital malformation in horses. The major clinical 
consequence of this abnormality is impaired fertility. The aim of this study was 
to analyze the expression patterns of testicular genes and to identify the 
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in testes between cryptorchid and normal 
horses. In this study, the gene expression patterns in equine testes and the 
DEGs between mature descended testes (DTs) and undescended testes (UDTs) were 
identified by RNA-seq and validated by real-time qPCR. Our results provide 
comprehensive transcriptomic data on equine testes. The transcriptomic analysis 
revealed 11 affected genes that were downregulated in UDTs, possibly as a result 
of the higher temperature in the abdomen than in the scrotal sac. These 11 genes 
have previously been associated with male reproduction, and their downregulation 
might explain the impaired fertility of cryptorchid horses. Two homozygous 
missense mutations detected in horses with cryptorchidism were absent in normal 
horses and were listed as potential pathogenic mutations; these mutations should 
be verified in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10010102
PMCID: PMC7022935
PMID: 31936283

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.