1. J Cancer. 2020 Jan 1;11(3):592-598. doi: 10.7150/jca.35411. eCollection 2020.

The Polymorphisms of lncRNA HOXA11-AS and the risk of Lung Cancer in 
Northeastern Chinese population.

Gao M(1), Li H(1), Bi Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang S(1), Li J(1), Yang Z(1), Lv X(1), 
Zhou B(1)(2), Yin Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, China Medical 
University, Shenyang 110122, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cancer Etiology and Intervention, University of Liaoning 
Province, Shenyang 110122, PR China.

Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNA) have been wildly explored in several malignant 
tumors. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of HOXA11-AS polymorphisms 
(rs17427875 and rs11564004) on lung cancer susceptibility and its interaction 
with smoking exposure. This hospital-based case-control study, which included 
466 cases and 557 controls, was carried out in Shenyang City, Liaoning province. 
The genotyping method was TaqMan allelic discrimination assay and all 
statistical analysis were performed by SPSS 20.0 and R (3.5.3). The results 
demonstrated that HOXA11AS-rs17427875 polymorphisms were correlated with the 
susceptibility of lung adenocarcinoma. T alleles of rs17427875 played a portal 
role in increasing lung adenocarcinoma risk. HOXA11AS-rs11564004 polymorphisms 
had the significant association with lung cancer risks, as well as its subtypes 
like non-small cell lung cancer, adenocarcinoma. The allele G of rs11564004 
acted as a protective factor for lung cancer. The similar results were observed 
in the homozygous model and recessive model of rs11564004. Nevertheless, 
interaction analysis of the additive and multiplicative model scales showed no 
statistical significance between HOXA11-AS polymorphisms and smoking exposure in 
the development of lung cancer.

Â© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/jca.35411
PMCID: PMC6959036
PMID: 31942182

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exists.