1. Matern Child Nutr. 2020 Jul;16(3):e12949. doi: 10.1111/mcn.12949. Epub 2020
Jan  13.

Postpartum obesity and weight gain among human immunodeficiency virus-infected 
and human immunodeficiency virus-uninfected women in South Africa.

Bengtson AM(1), Phillips TK(2), le Roux SM(2), Brittain K(2), Buba A(3), Abrams 
EJ(3), Myer L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health, Rhode 
Island.
(2)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health and 
Family Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(3)ICAP, Mailman School of Public Health and Department of Pediatrics, Vagelos 
College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York City, New York, 
USA.

In South Africa, up to 40% of pregnant women are living with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and 30-45% are obese. However, little is known 
about the dual burden of HIV and obesity in the postpartum period. In a cohort 
of HIV-uninfected and HIV-infected pregnant women initiating antiretroviral 
therapy in Cape Town, South Africa, we examined maternal anthropometry (weight 
and body mass index [BMI]) from 6 weeks through 12 months postpartum. Using 
multinomial logistic regression, we estimated associations between baseline 
sociodemographic, clinical, behavioural, and HIV factors and being 
overweight-obese I (BMI 25 to <35), or obese II-III (BMI >35), compared with 
being underweight or normal weight (BMI <25), at 12 months postpartum. Among 877 
women, we estimated that 43% of HIV-infected women and 51% of HIV-uninfected 
women were obese I-III at enrollment into antenatal care, and 51% of women were 
obese I-III by 12 months postpartum. On average, both HIV-infected and 
HIV-uninfected women gained, rather than lost, weight between 6 weeks and 12 
months postpartum, but HIV-uninfected women gained more weight (3.3 kg vs. 1.7 
kg). Women who were obese I-III pre-pregnancy were more likely to gain weight 
postpartum. In multivariable analyses, HIV-infection status, being 
married/cohabitating, higher gravidity, and high blood pressure were 
independently associated with being obese II-III at 12 months postpartum. 
Obesity during pregnancy is a growing public health concern in low- and 
middle-income countries, including South Africa. Additional research to 
understand how obesity and HIV infection affect maternal and child health 
outcomes is urgently needed.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Maternal & Child Nutrition published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mcn.12949
PMCID: PMC7296802
PMID: 31943774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.