1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Apr;63(4):103842. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.103842. Epub 
2020 Jan 13.

Gorlin-like phenotype in a patient with a PTCH2 variant of uncertain 
significance.

Casano K(1), Meddaugh H(2), Zambrano RM(3), Marble M(3), Torres JI(4), Lacassie 
Y(5).

Author information:
(1)LSU Health Sciences Center, School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, New 
Orleans, LA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, LSU 
Health Sciences Center and Children's Hospital, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, LSU Health Sciences Center and Children's 
Hospital, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, LSU 
Health Sciences Center and Children's Hospital, New Orleans, LA, USA. Electronic 
address: ylacas@lsuhsc.edu.

Gorlin syndrome, also known as Nevoid Basal-Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS), is 
an autosomal dominant tumor predisposition syndrome that presents early in life 
with characteristic congenital malformations and tumors. This syndrome most 
commonly results from germline mutations of the PTCH1 tumor suppressor gene, 
which shows high penetrance and great intra and interfamilial phenotypic 
variability, as well as the SUFU tumor suppressor gene. Recently, the PTCH2 gene 
has also been implicated as a cause of Gorlin syndrome. Notably, these patients 
displayed milder phenotypes of Gorlin syndrome when considered against PTCH1 and 
SUFU-related disease. We report a patient with a novel PTCH2 mutation inherited 
from his father. The proband displays several minor diagnostic features of 
Gorlin syndrome, supporting the pathogenic role of this gene. Features in the 
proband include macrocephaly, a wide face, prominent forehead, 
hypertelorism/telecanthus, large eyes, cleft lip and palate, thin vertical 
palmar creases, penoscrotal inversion, and a hyperpigmented spot on his penis. 
His father displays macrocephaly, several nevi on his back and shoulders, and a 
single palmar pit on his left hand, raising suspicion for Gorlin syndrome. Whole 
exome sequence (trio) found that the proband and father are heterozygous for 
NM_003738.4:c.3347C>T;p.(Pro1116Leu) in exon 21 of PTCH2, found also in his 
mildly affected brother. This semi-conservative amino acid substitution has been 
reported in the literature, but its significance is unclear. Notably, the 
proband, brother, and father do not meet clinical criteria for Gorlin syndrome. 
However, the clinical findings described in this family support the association 
between PTCH2 mutations and Gorlin-like phenotypes.

Copyright Â© 2020. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2020.103842
PMID: 31945512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]