1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2018 Aug 1;11(8):4140-4146. eCollection 2018.

A single nucleotide polymorphism of the interferon-γ gene and susceptibility to 
hepatitis B virus-related cirrhosis: a randomized controlled trial.

Wang Q(1), Chang F(2), Li W(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Qingdao Ninth People's Hospital China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Qingdao Hiser Medical Group China.
(3)Department of Hepatology, Qingdao Sixth People's Hospital China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the correlation between a single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the interferon-γ (IFN-γ) gene and 
susceptibility to hepatitis B virus (HBV) -related cirrhosis in the Chinese 
population.
METHOD: PCR-LDR was employed for the genotyping of two SNPs, rs1861494 and 
rs2069718, of the IFN-γ gene in 230 patients with HBV-related cirrhosis and 320 
inactive HBsAg carriers without cirrhosis. It was then determined whether the 
Hardy-Weinberg (H-W) equilibrium was satisfied. The odds ratio (OR) and 95% 
confidence interval (CI) were analyzed using the chi-square test and univariate 
non-conditional logistic regression. Haplotypes were established using SHEsis 
and SNPStats online software and their interaction with non-genetic factors was 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Compared with the AA genotype of rs1861494 SNP, AG+GG genotypes 
increased the risk of HBV-related cirrhosis. There was a significant difference 
in the distribution of A and G alleles between the case group and the control 
group (P<0.05). There was also a significant difference in the distribution of 
AA, AG, GG, AA, and AG+GG genotypes and A/G alleles between the case group and 
the control group (P<0.05). This indicated that the G allele may be a risk 
factor for HBV-related cirrhosis. By analyzing the different distribution of 
haplotypes in the case group and the control group, we observed significant 
differences in the distribution of AA, AG and GA haplotypes between the case and 
control groups (P<0.05). Haplotypes of the IFN-γ gene did not interact with 
other relevant factors.
CONCLUSION: The G allele of rs1861494 SNP as well as AG and GG genotypes and G 
allele of rs2069718 SNP may be risk factors of HBV-related cirrhosis. The AA 
haplotype may be a protective factor for HBV-related cirrhosis, while the AG 
haplotype is a risk factor for HBV-related cirrhosis.

IJCEP Copyright © 2018.

PMCID: PMC6962819
PMID: 31949806

Conflict of interest statement: None.