1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 20;10(1):739. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-57723-2.

The FGF, TGFβ and WNT axis Modulate Self-renewal of Human SIX2(+) Urine Derived 
Renal Progenitor Cells.

Rahman MS(#)(1), Wruck W(#)(1), Spitzhorn LS(1), Nguyen L(1), Bohndorf M(1), 
Martins S(1), Asar F(1), Ncube A(1), Erichsen L(1), Graffmann N(1), Adjaye J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. 
james.adjaye@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Human urine is a non-invasive source of renal stem cells with regeneration 
potential. Urine-derived renal progenitor cells were isolated from 10 
individuals of both genders and distinct ages. These renal progenitors express 
pluripotency-associated proteins- TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, SSEA4, C-KIT and CD133, as 
well as the renal stem cell markers -SIX2, CITED1, WT1, CD24 and CD106. The 
transcriptomes of all SIX2+ renal progenitors clustered together, and distinct 
from the human kidney biopsy-derived epithelial proximal cells (hREPCs). 
Stimulation of the urine-derived renal progenitor cells (UdRPCs) with the 
GSK3β-inhibitor (CHIR99021) induced differentiation. Transcriptome and KEGG 
pathway analysis revealed upregulation of WNT-associated genes- AXIN2, JUN and 
NKD1. Protein interaction network identified JUN- a downstream target of the WNT 
pathway in association with STAT3, ATF2 and MAPK1 as a putative negative 
regulator of self-renewal. Furthermore, like pluripotent stem cells, 
self-renewal is maintained by FGF2-driven TGFβ-SMAD2/3 pathway. The 
urine-derived renal progenitor cells and the data presented should lay the 
foundation for studying nephrogenesis in human.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-57723-2
PMCID: PMC6970988
PMID: 31959818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.