1. EMBO Mol Med. 2020 Mar 6;12(3):e10606. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201910606. Epub 2020
 Jan 17.

Novel Alzheimer risk genes determine the microglia response to amyloid-β but not 
to TAU pathology.

Sierksma A(#)(1)(2), Lu A(#)(1)(2), Mancuso R(1)(2), Fattorelli N(1)(2), Thrupp 
N(1)(2), Salta E(1)(2), Zoco J(1)(2), Blum D(3), Buée L(3), De Strooper 
B(#)(1)(2)(4), Fiers M(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)VIB Center for Brain & Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory for the Research of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of 
Neurosciences, Leuven Brain Institute (LBI), KU Leuven (University of Leuven), 
Leuven, Belgium.
(3)INSERM, CHU Lille, LabEx DISTALZ, UMR-S 1172, Alzheimer & Tauopathies, 
Université Lille, Lille, France.
(4)UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

Polygenic risk scores have identified that genetic variants without genome-wide 
significance still add to the genetic risk of developing Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Whether and how subthreshold risk loci translate into relevant disease 
pathways is unknown. We investigate here the involvement of AD risk variants in 
the transcriptional responses of two mouse models: APPswe/PS1L166P and 
Thy-TAU22. A unique gene expression module, highly enriched for AD risk genes, 
is specifically responsive to Aβ but not TAU pathology. We identify in this 
module 7 established AD risk genes (APOE, CLU, INPP5D, CD33, PLCG2, SPI1, and 
FCER1G) and 11 AD GWAS genes below the genome-wide significance threshold (GPC2, 
TREML2, SYK, GRN, SLC2A5, SAMSN1, PYDC1, HEXB, RRBP1, LYN, and BLNK), that 
become significantly upregulated when exposed to Aβ. Single microglia sequencing 
confirms that Aβ, not TAU, pathology induces marked transcriptional changes in 
microglia, including increased proportions of activated microglia. We conclude 
that genetic risk of AD functionally translates into different microglia pathway 
responses to Aβ pathology, placing AD genetic risk downstream of the amyloid 
pathway but upstream of TAU pathology.

© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.201910606
PMCID: PMC7059012
PMID: 31951107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.D.S. is ad hoc consultant for various 
companies but has no direct financial interest in the current study. L.B. is 
consultant for Servier and Remynd. He receives research funding from UCB Pharma, 
but not for the work presented in the current manuscript. A.S., A.L., E.S., 
R.M., J.Z., D.B., and M.F. report no biomedical financial interests or potential 
conflicts of interest.