1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2020 May;10(5):591-603. doi: 10.1002/alr.22522. Epub
 2020 Jan 17.

Streamlining care in cystic fibrosis: survey of otolaryngologist, pulmonologist, 
and patient experiences.

Farzal Z(1), Dean KM(1), Sreenath SB(1), Hodge SE(1), Thorp BD(1), Ebert CS 
Jr(1), Zanation AM(1), Senior BA(1), Kimple AJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
(2)Marsico Lung Institute/Cystic Fibrosis Center, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.

BACKGROUND: Care coordination for cystic fibrosis (CF) is essential. The 
objectives of this study were to: (1) compare otolaryngologists' and 
pulmonlogists' understanding of long-term chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) 
management; and (2) query patient perceptions of otolaryngologic care and CRS.
METHODS: A cross-sectional survey was administered by the Cystic Fibrosis 
Foundation in 2018 to patients with CF or their caregivers, otolaryngologists, 
and pulmonologists. Statistical analysis was performed comparing specialists. 
Descriptive statistics were computed for patient/caregiver-reported data.
RESULTS: Respondents included 126 otolaryngologists, 115 pulmonologists, and 186 
patients with CF or their caregivers. Pulmonologists had greater experience 
caring for CF patients compared with otolaryngologists (66.7% vs 43.2% with 13+ 
years of experience, respectively), but more otolaryngologists cared for both 
adult and pediatric CF patients (39.2% vs 10.4%, respectively). Significantly 
more otolaryngologists advocated for establishing otolaryngologic care at time 
of CF diagnosis (64.8%) compared with pulmonologists (14.4%, p < 0.001), of whom 
60.4% recommended otolaryngologist referral when sinonasal symptoms affect 
quality of life. More otolaryngologists perceived sinus surgery as beneficial 
for pulmonary function (74.5% vs 57.7%, p = 0.009); 60.8% of patients first 
sought otolaryngologic care in infancy or childhood (<13 years). Median number 
of sinus surgeries was 3 (interquartile range, 2-5). The most common perceived 
benefits of surgery according to patients/caregivers included improved breathing 
(31.2%) and improved sinonasal symptoms (23.7%). Top patients/caregiver 
otolaryngologic priorities included symptom/infection control (49.0%) and care 
coordination (15.0%).
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight variable patient/caregiver experiences, and 
suggest that otolaryngologist and pulmonologist perceptions of CF 
otolaryngologic care also differ in some respects requiring improved 
interspecialty coordination/education.

Â© 2020 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.22522
PMCID: PMC7278084
PMID: 31951081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Conflict of Interest Disclosure: None