1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 20;10(1):691. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-57624-4.

Determination of Somatic Mutations and Tumor Mutation Burden in Plasma by 
CAPP-Seq during Afatinib Treatment in NSCLC Patients Resistance to Osimertinib.

Ishii H(1), Azuma K(2), Sakai K(3), Naito Y(3), Matsuo N(1), Tokito T(1), Yamada 
K(4), Hoshino T(1), Nishio K(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Division of Respirology, Neurology, and Rheumatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan. 
azuma@med.kurume-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Shin Koga Hospital, Kurume, Japan.

Third-generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs) were developed to target the EGFR T790M resistance mutation in 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients resistant to first- or 
second-generation EGFR-TKIs. To investigate the efficacy of afatinib treatment 
for EGFR T790M-positive NSCLC patients showing resistance to osimertinib and 
alterations in somatic mutations and tumor mutation burden (TMB) in plasma 
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) during afatinib treatment, we conducted a 
prospective study using Cancer Personalized Profiling by deep Sequencing 
(CAPP-Seq). Nine NSCLC patients with EGFR T790M mutation who showed resistance 
to third-generation EGFR-TKIs were enrolled in this study and treated with 
afatinib. Plasma samples were collected before treatment, 4 weeks after 
treatment, and at disease progression. The mutation profile and TMB in plasma 
ctDNA were analyzed by CAPP-Seq. The objective response rate and median 
progression-free survival associated with afatinib were 0% and 2.0 months, 
respectively. The C797S mutation-mediated resistance to osimertinib was observed 
in one patient and following afatinib treatment in two patients; the C797S 
mutations occurred in the same allele as the T790M mutation. After afatinib 
treatment, afatinib-sensitive mutant alleles, such as ERBB2, and TMB decreased. 
We have demonstrated that detection of mutant allele frequency and TMB of ctDNA 
by CAPP-Seq could help determine the effectiveness of and resistance to 
afatinib. Although afatinib monotherapy for T790M-positive NSCLC resistant to 
osimertinib was less effective, the action for multiclonal mutant alleles and 
TMB might contribute to further treatment strategy.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-57624-4
PMCID: PMC6971280
PMID: 31959859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hidenobu Ishii has received research funding and 
speaker honoraria from Boerhinger-Ingelheim. Koichi Azuma, Yoshiko Naito, 
Norikazu Matsuo and Kazuhiko Yamada has received speaker honoraria from 
Boerhinger-Ingelheim. Kazuto Nishio has received research funding from 
Boerhinger-Ingelheim. The remaining authors declare no potential interests.