1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2020 Mar;98(3):349-360. doi: 10.1007/s00109-020-01872-4.
Epub  2020 Jan 16.

Intravascular adhesion and recruitment of neutrophils in response to CXCL1 
depends on their TRPC6 channels.

Lindemann O(1), Rossaint J(2), Najder K(1), Schimmelpfennig S(1), Hofschröer 
V(1), Wälte M(1)(3), Fels B(1), Oberleithner H(1), Zarbock A(2), Schwab A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology II, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Anaesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, University 
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(3)Institute of Cell Dynamics and Imaging, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, 
Münster, Germany.
(4)Institute of Physiology II, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, 
Germany. aschwab@uni-muenster.de.

Here we report a novel role for TRPC6, a member of the transient receptor 
potential (TRPC) channel family, in the CXCL1-dependent recruitment of murine 
neutrophil granulocytes. Representing a central element of the innate immune 
system, neutrophils are recruited from the blood stream to a site of 
inflammation. The recruitment process follows a well-defined sequence of events 
including adhesion to the blood vessel walls, migration, and chemotaxis to reach 
the inflammatory focus. A common feature of the underlying signaling pathways is 
the utilization of Ca2+ ions as intracellular second messengers. However, the 
required Ca2+ influx channels are not yet fully characterized. We used WT and 
TRPC6-/- neutrophils for in vitro and TRPC6-/- chimeric mice (WT mice with WT or 
TRPC6-/- bone marrow cells) for in vivo studies. After renal ischemia and 
reperfusion injury, TRPC6-/- chimeric mice had an attenuated TRPC6-/- neutrophil 
recruitment and a better outcome as judged from the reduced increase in the 
plasma creatinine concentration. In the cremaster model CXCL1-induced neutrophil 
adhesion, arrest and transmigration were also decreased in chimeric mice with 
TRPC6-/- neutrophils. Using atomic force microscopy and microfluidics, we could 
attribute the recruitment defect of TRPC6-/- neutrophils to the impact of the 
channel on adhesion to endothelial cells. Mechanistically, TRPC6-/- neutrophils 
exhibited lower Ca2+ transients during the initial adhesion leading to 
diminished Rap1 and β2 integrin activation and thereby reduced ICAM-1 binding. 
In summary, our study reveals that TRPC6 channels in neutrophils are crucial 
signaling modules in their recruitment from the blood stream in response to 
CXCL1. KEY POINT: Neutrophil TRPC6 channels are crucial for CXCL1-triggered 
activation of integrins during the initial steps of neutrophil recruitment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-020-01872-4
PMCID: PMC7080674
PMID: 31950205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
and non-financial conflict of interests.