1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Feb 20;48(3):1551-1571. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz1186.

Dynamics of the nucleosomal histone H3 N-terminal tail revealed by high 
precision single-molecule FRET.

Lehmann K(1)(2), Felekyan S(2), Kühnemuth R(2), Dimura M(2), Tóth K(1), Seidel 
CAM(2), Langowski J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division Biophysics of Macromolecules, German Cancer Research Center, 
Heidelberg D-69120, Germany.
(2)Lehrstuhl für Molekulare Physikalische Chemie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, 
Düsseldorf D-40225, Germany.

Chromatin compaction and gene accessibility are orchestrated by assembly and 
disassembly of nucleosomes. Although the disassembly process was widely studied, 
little is known about the structure and dynamics of the disordered histone 
tails, which play a pivotal role for nucleosome integrity. This is a gap filling 
experimental FRET study from the perspective of the histone H3 N-terminal tail 
(H3NtT) of reconstituted mononucleosomes. By systematic variation of the 
labeling positions we monitored the motions of the H3NtT relative to the dyad 
axis and linker DNA. Single-molecule FRET unveiled that H3NtTs do not diffuse 
freely but follow the DNA motions with multiple interaction modes with certain 
permitted dynamic transitions in the μs to ms time range. We also demonstrate 
that the H3NtT can allosterically sense charge-modifying mutations within the 
histone core (helix α3 of histone H2A (R81E/R88E)) resulting in increased 
dynamic transitions and lower rate constants. Those results complement our 
earlier model on the NaCl induced nucleosome disassembly as changes in H3NtT 
configurations coincide with two major steps: unwrapping of one linker DNA and 
weakening of the internal DNA - histone interactions on the other side. This 
emphasizes the contribution of the H3NtT to the fine-tuned equilibrium between 
overall nucleosome stability and DNA accessibility.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz1186
PMCID: PMC7026643
PMID: 31956896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]