1. J Pathol Clin Res. 2020 Apr;6(2):154-159. doi: 10.1002/cjp2.157. Epub 2020 Jan
 20.

Frequent KRAS and HRAS mutations in squamous cell papillomas of the head and 
neck.

Sasaki E(1), Masago K(1), Fujita S(1), Hanai N(2), Yatabe Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center 
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, 
Japan.

Squamous cell papilloma (SCP) is a benign neoplasm of the head and neck. Human 
papillomavirus (HPV) has been reported to be a tumourigenic factor for SCP. 
However, not all SCPs are positive for HPV, suggesting that other possible 
mechanisms are involved in their development. In this study, we examined the 
mutational status of 51 SCPs using targeted panel sequencing in addition to HPV 
status using GP5+/GP6+ PCR. HPV DNA was detected in 6 (12%) SCPs, while KRAS and 
HRAS mutations were detected in 18 (35%) and 17 (33%) SCPs, respectively. 
Notably, KRAS mutations, HRAS mutations and HPV infection were mutually 
exclusive. The larynx and trachea (4/7, 57%) were more preferentially infected 
by HPV than the other sites (2/44, 5%, p = 0.0019) and HPV was associated with 
multifocal development (4/5, 80%). In contrast, KRAS and HRAS mutations in SCPs 
were evenly distributed across the anatomical sites and found only in single 
SCPs. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that HPV was not frequently 
involved in SCPs and that RAS mutations were more common alterations. In 
contrast to inverted sinonasal papillomas and oncocytic sinonasal papillomas, 
SCP may not be a precursor lesion of carcinoma, because these aetiological 
events in SCP are distinct from squamous cell carcinoma in the same sites.

Â© 2020 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology: Clinical Research published by The 
Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cjp2.157
PMCID: PMC7164371
PMID: 31960612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]