1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Jan 22;16(1):e1008178. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008178. 
eCollection 2020 Jan.

USP44 positively regulates innate immune response to DNA viruses through 
deubiquitinating MITA.

Zhang HY(1)(2), Liao BW(1)(2), Xu ZS(1), Ran Y(1), Wang DP(1)(2), Yang Y(1), Luo 
WW(1), Wang YY(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Special Pathogens and Biosafety, Wuhan Institute of 
Virology, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 
China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Mediator of IRF3 activation (MITA, also known as stimulator of interferon genes, 
STING) senses the second messenger cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) which is synthesized 
upon DNA virus infection and activates innate antiviral immune response. It has 
been demonstrated that the activity of MITA is delicately regulated by various 
post-translational modifications including polyubiquitination. In this study, we 
identified the deubiquitinating enzyme USP44 as a positive regulator of MITA. 
USP44 is recruited to MITA following DNA virus infection and removes K48-linked 
polyubiquitin moieties from MITA at K236, therefore prevents MITA from 
proteasome mediated degradation. USP44-deficiency results in acceleration of 
HSV-1-induced degradation of MITA and reduced induction of type I interferons 
(IFNs) and proinflammatory cytokines. Consistently, Usp44-/- mice are more 
susceptible to HSV-1 infection as indicated by higher tissue viral titers, 
greater tissue damage and lower survival rate. These findings suggest that USP44 
plays a specific and critical role in the regulation of innate immune response 
against DNA viruses.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008178
PMCID: PMC6975528
PMID: 31968013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.