1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 May;113(5):1038-1051. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14473. Epub 2020
Feb  11.

MYXO-CTERM sorting tag directs proteins to the cell surface via the type II 
secretion system.

Sah GP(1), Cao P(1), Wall D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA.

Cells interact with their surrounding environment through surface proteins. 
However, knowledge gaps remain in understanding how these important types of 
proteins are transported and anchored on the cell surface. In the Gram-negative 
social bacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, a putative C-terminal sorting tag 
(MYXO-CTERM) is predicted to help direct 34 different proteins onto the cell 
surface. Here we investigate the sorting pathway for MYXO-CTERM proteins by 
using the TraA cell surface receptor as a paradigm. Deleting this motif from 
TraA abolishes the cell surface anchoring and results in extracellular 
secretion. Our findings indicate that conserved cysteines within the MYXO-CTERM 
are posttranslationally modified and are required for TraA cell surface 
localization and function. A region immediately upstream of these residues is 
predicted to be disordered and removing this motif caused a secretion defect and 
blocked cell surface anchoring. We further show that the type II secretion 
system is required for translocation across the outer membrane and that a 
cysteine-rich region directs TraA to the T2SS. Similar results were found with 
another MYXO-CTERM protein indicating our findings can be generalized. Further, 
we show the universal distribution of MXYO-CTERM motif across the Myxococcales 
order and provide a working model for sorting of these proteins.

Â© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14473
PMCID: PMC7237302
PMID: 31975447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.