1. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2021 Mar 1;40(2):165-168. doi: 
10.1097/PGP.0000000000000663.

Misdiagnosis of High-grade Serous Ovarian Cancer With BRCA Mutation as 
Endometriotic Cyst Due to Its Unique Gross Morphology: A Case Report and 
Literature Review.

Ma Q, Yuan Y, Wang Y, Shao C, Feng W.

It is believed that high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is a solid or 
multilocular-solid cancer. Here, we report the case of a 40-yr-old woman with a 
left ovarian unilocular cyst. Ultrasonography and computed tomographic 
examination confirmed that the cyst was thin-walled and homogenous in thickness 
without mural nodules. It was considered to be an endometriotic cyst. Left 
ovarian cyst excision specimens proved it to be HGSOC after pathologic 
examination. Therefore, the patient underwent radical surgery for HGSOC. 
Pathologic examination of radical resection specimens confirmed that the HGSOC 
was still in FIGO stage IA and no fallopian tube lesion was found. Considering 
that the patient had a history of breast cancer in both the breasts at a young 
age, it was hypothesized that the breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA) gene 
may have a germline mutation. Next-generation sequencing confirmed the BRCA1 
(c.3770_3771delAG) germline mutation in this patient. Previous studies have 
reported the special morphological characteristics and growth pattern of HGSOC 
with BRCA mutation in the advanced stage. Our case demonstrates that HGSOC with 
the BRCA mutation can also be a unilocular cyst with a thin wall and uniform 
thickness without a mural nodule, and in the early stage, may have unique gross 
morphology.

Copyright Â© 2020 by the International Society of Gynecological Pathologists.

DOI: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000663
PMID: 31985581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.