1. Ecol Evol. 2019 Dec 11;10(1):277-291. doi: 10.1002/ece3.5893. eCollection 2020
 Jan.

Using a trait-based approach for assessing the vulnerability and resilience of 
hillslope seep wetland vegetation cover to disturbances in the Tsitsa River 
catchment, Eastern Cape, South Africa.

Libala N(1), Palmer CG(1), Odume ON(1).

Author information:
(1)Unilever Centre for Environmental Water Quality Institute for Water Research 
Rhodes University Makhanda (Grahamstown) South Africa.

Hill slope seep wetlands are ecologically and economically important ecosystems 
as they supply a variety of ecosystem services to society. In South Africa, 
livestock grazing is recognized as one of the most important disturbance factors 
changing the structure and function of hill slope seep wetlands. This study 
sought to investigate the potential effect of livestock grazing on the 
resilience and vulnerability of hillslope seep wetland vegetation cover using a 
trait-based approach (TBA). Changes in vegetation cover were used as a surrogate 
for indicating grazing intensity. The degree of human disturbances was assessed 
using the Anthropogenic Activity Index. A TBA was developed using seven plant 
traits, resolved into 27 trait attributes. Based on the developed approach, 
plant species were grouped into vulnerable and resilient groups in relation to 
grazing pressure. It was then predicted that species belonging to the vulnerable 
group would be less dominant at the highly disturbed sites, as well as in the 
winter season when grazing pressure is at its peak. The approach developed 
enabled accurate predictions of the responses of hillslope plant species to 
grazing pressure seasonally, but spatially, only for the summer season. The 
predicted responses during the winter season across sites did not match the 
observed results, which could be attributed to the difficulty in species 
identification and accurate estimation of vegetation cover during winter. 
Overall, the approach developed here provides a general framework for applying 
the TBA and can thus be tested and applied elsewhere.

Â© 2019 The Authors. Ecology and Evolution published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ece3.5893
PMCID: PMC6972813
PMID: 31988728

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.