1. Biosci Rep. 2020 Feb 28;40(2):BSR20191544. doi: 10.1042/BSR20191544.

Heat stress modulates differential response in skin fibroblast cells of native 
cattle (Bos indicus) and riverine buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis).

Shandilya UK(1), Sharma A(1), Sodhi M(1), Mukesh M(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, ICAR-National Bureau of Animal Genetic 
Resources, Karnal 132001, Haryana, India.

Heat stress in hot climates is a major cause that negatively affects dairy 
animals, leading to substantial economic loss. The present study was aimed to 
analyze the effect of heat stress on cellular and molecular levels in dermal 
fibroblast of cattle and buffaloes. Primary fibroblast culture was established 
using ear pinna tissue samples of cattle (Bos indicus) and riverine buffaloes 
(Bubalus Bubalis). The cells were exposed to thermal stress at 42°C for 1 h and 
subsequently allowed to recover and harvest at 37°C at different time points (0, 
2, 4, 8, 16, and 24 h) along with control samples. Different cellular parameters 
viz., apoptosis, proliferation, mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), 
oxidative stress, along with expression pattern of heat responsive genes and 
miRNAs were determined. Cell viability and proliferation rate of heat-stressed 
fibroblasts decreased significantly (P < 0.05) albeit to a different extent in 
both species. The cell cytotoxicity, apoptosis, production of reactive oxygen 
species, and ΔΨm increased more significantly (P < 0.01) in heat stressed 
fibroblasts of buffalo than cattle. The pattern of heat shock proteins, 
inflammation/immune genes, and heat responsive miRNA showed differences in 
induction of their expression level in buffalo and native cattle fibroblasts. 
Conclusively, finding indicates that heat stress induces more profound impact on 
buffalo fibroblasts than native cattle fibroblasts. The differential response of 
cellular parameters, HSP genes, and miRNA expression could be due to better 
adaptive capacity of skin fibroblast of Bos indicus cattle in comparison with 
riverine buffaloes.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BSR20191544
PMCID: PMC7012655
PMID: 31994693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no competing 
interests associated with the manuscript.