1. Mol Biol Cell. 2020 Apr 1;31(8):725-740. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E19-12-0725. Epub
2020  Jan 29.

Cell cycle oscillators underlying orderly proteolysis of E2F8.

Wasserman D(1), Nachum S(1), Cohen M(1), Enrico TP(2), Noach-Hirsh M(1), Parasol 
J(1), Zomer-Polak S(1), Auerbach N(1), Sheinberger-Chorni E(1), Nevenzal H(1), 
Levi-Dadon N(1), Wang X(2), Lahmi R(1), Michaely E(1), Gerber D(1), Emanuele 
MJ(2), Tzur A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences and Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced 
Materials, Bar-llan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.

E2F8 is a transcriptional repressor that antagonizes E2F1 at the crossroads of 
the cell cycle, apoptosis, and cancer. Previously, we discovered that E2F8 is a 
direct target of the APC/C ubiquitin ligase. Nevertheless, it remains unknown 
how E2F8 is dynamically controlled throughout the entirety of the cell cycle. 
Here, using newly developed human cell-free systems that recapitulate distinct 
inter-mitotic and G1 phases and a continuous transition from prometaphase to G1, 
we reveal an interlocking dephosphorylation switch coordinating E2F8 degradation 
with mitotic exit and the activation of APC/CCdh1. Further, we uncover 
differential proteolysis rates for E2F8 at different points within G1 phase, 
accounting for its accumulation in late G1 while APC/CCdh1 is still active. 
Finally, we demonstrate that the F-box protein Cyclin F regulates E2F8 in 
G2-phase. Altogether, our data define E2F8 regulation throughout the cell cycle, 
illuminating an extensive coordination between phosphorylation, ubiquitination 
and transcription in mammalian cell cycle.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E19-12-0725
PMCID: PMC7185961
PMID: 31995441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]