1. Stem Cells. 2020 May;38(5):683-697. doi: 10.1002/stem.3155. Epub 2020 Feb 8.

MiRNA-137-mediated modulation of mitochondrial dynamics regulates human neural 
stem cell fate.

Channakkar AS(1), Singh T(1)(2), Pattnaik B(3), Gupta K(1), Seth P(1), Adlakha 
YK(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, National Brain Research Centre, Manesar, 
India.
(2)Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(3)Centre of Excellence in Asthma & Lung Disease, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and 
Integrative Biology, Delhi, India.

The role of miRNAs in determining human neural stem cell (NSC) fate remains 
elusive despite their high expression in the developing nervous system. In this 
study, we investigate the role of miR-137, a brain-enriched miRNA, in 
determining the fate of human induced pluripotent stem cells-derived NSCs 
(hiNSCs). We show that ectopic expression of miR-137 in hiNSCs reduces 
proliferation and accelerates neuronal differentiation and migration. TargetScan 
and MicroT-CDS predict myocyte enhancer factor-2A (MEF2A), a transcription 
factor that regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 
coactivator (PGC1α) transcription, as a target of miR-137. Using a reporter 
assay, we validate MEF2A as a downstream target of miR-137. Our results indicate 
that reduced levels of MEF2A reduce the transcription of PGC1α, which in turn 
impacts mitochondrial dynamics. Notably, miR-137 accelerates mitochondrial 
biogenesis in a PGC1α independent manner by upregulating nuclear factor 
erythroid 2 (NFE2)-related factor 2 (NRF2) and transcription factor A of 
mitochondria (TFAM). In addition, miR-137 modulates mitochondrial dynamics by 
inducing mitochondrial fusion and fission events, resulting in increased 
mitochondrial content and activation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and 
oxygen consumption rate. Pluripotency transcription factors OCT4 and SOX2 are 
known to have binding sites in the promoter region of miR-137 gene. Ectopic 
expression of miR-137 elevates the expression levels of OCT4 and SOX2 in hiNSCs 
which establishes a feed-forward self-regulatory loop between miR-137 and 
OCT4/SOX2. Our study provides novel molecular insights into NSC fate 
determination by miR-137.

©2020 The Authors. Stem Cells published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of 
AlphaMed Press 2020.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.3155
PMCID: PMC7217206
PMID: 32012382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest.