1. Commun Integr Biol. 2020 Jan 13;13(1):1-5. doi: 10.1080/19420889.2020.1713426.
 eCollection 2020.

Sound as a stimulus in associative learning for heat stress in Arabidopsis.

Bhandawat A(1), Jayaswall K(2), Sharma H(1), Roy J(1).

Author information:
(1)Agri-Biotechnology Department, National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute, 
Mohali, Punjab, India.
(2)Agriculture Biotechnology Department, ICAR-Directorate of Onion and Garlic 
Research, Rajgurunagar, Pune, Maharashtra, India.

Plants are analogous to animals by responding physiologically and phenotypically 
to environmental changes. Until recently, the meaning of sound in the plant's 
life remains undiscovered. In this study, we investigated the role of music in 
response to heat stress and its application in memory and associative learning 
for stress tolerance in Arabidopsis. Significant upregulation of heat-responsive 
genes (HSFA3, SMXL7, and ATHSP101) in response to music suggests music has an 
advantage during heat stress. Moreover, the defensive conditioning experiment 
showed that plant learns to associate music with stress (heat) and elicit better 
response compared to music alone. Two heat-responsive genes, HSFA3 and ATCTL1, 
which are well known for their interaction and regulation of an array of heat 
shock proteins were found to play a key role in associative learning for heat 
stress in Arabidopsis. Our experiment highlights the application of sound in 
plant conditioning and as a stress reliever. Nonetheless, the persistence of 
memory awaits further experiments. We foresee the potential of artificial sound 
as an environment-friendly stimulus in conditioning the crops for upcoming 
stresses and reduce the yield loss, as an alternative to breeding and genetic 
modifications.

Â© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/19420889.2020.1713426
PMCID: PMC6973327
PMID: 32010424