1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Jan 28;12(2):306. doi: 10.3390/cancers12020306.

Synthetic Lethal Targeting of Mitotic Checkpoints in HPV-Negative Head and Neck 
Cancer.

Deneka AY(1)(2), Einarson MB(1), Bennett J(1)(3), Nikonova AS(1), Elmekawy 
M(1)(4), Zhou Y(5), Lee JW(6), Burtness BA(6), Golemis EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 
19111, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Kazan Federal University, 
420000 Kazan, Russia.
(3)Department of Biology, Chestnut Hill College, Philadelphia, PA 19118, USA.
(4)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141701 Dolgoprudny, Russia.
(5)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Facility, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.
(6)Section of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine and Yale Cancer 
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) affect more than 800,000 people 
annually worldwide, causing over 15,000 deaths in the US. Among HNSCC cancers, 
human papillomavirus (HPV)-negative HNSCC has the worst outcome, motivating 
efforts to improve therapy for this disease. The most common mutational events 
in HPV-negative HNSCC are inactivation of the tumor suppressors TP53 (>85%) and 
CDKN2A (>57%), which significantly impairs G1/S checkpoints, causing reliance on 
other cell cycle checkpoints to repair ongoing replication damage. We evaluated 
a panel of cell cycle-targeting clinical agents in a group of HNSCC cell lines 
to identify a subset of drugs with single-agent activity in reducing cell 
viability. Subsequent analyses demonstrated potent combination activity between 
the CHK1/2 inhibitor LY2606268 (prexasertib), which eliminates a G2 checkpoint, 
and the WEE1 inhibitor AZD1775 (adavosertib), which promotes M-phase entry, in 
induction of DNA damage, mitotic catastrophe, and apoptosis, and reduction of 
anchorage independent growth and clonogenic capacity. These phenotypes were 
accompanied by more significantly reduced activation of CHK1 and its paralog 
CHK2, and enhanced CDK1 activation, eliminating breaks on the mitotic entry of 
cells with DNA damage. These data suggest the potential value of dual inhibition 
of CHK1 and WEE1 in tumors with compromised G1/S checkpoints.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12020306
PMCID: PMC7072436
PMID: 32012873

Conflict of interest statement: Barbara Burtness reports consulting fees from 
Astra-Zeneca. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.