1. J Thromb Haemost. 2020 May;18(5):1075-1080. doi: 10.1111/jth.14757. Epub 2020 
Mar 2.

Blockade of the costimulatory CD28-B7 family signal axis enables repeated 
application of AAV8 gene vectors.

Frentsch M(1), Japp AS(1), Dingeldey M(1), Matzmohr N(1), Thiel A(1), 
Scheiflinger F(2), Reipert BM(2), de la Rosa M(2).

Author information:
(1)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Baxalta Innovations GmbH, A Member of the Takeda Group of Companies, Vienna, 
Austria.

Adeno-associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8) gene therapy has shown efficacy in 
several clinical trials and is considered a highly promising technology to treat 
monogenic diseases such as hemophilia A and B. However, a major drawback of AAV8 
gene therapy is that it can be applied only once because anti-AAV8 immunity 
develops after the first treatment. Readministration may be required in patients 
who are expected to need redosing, eg, due to organ growth, or to boost 
suboptimal expression levels, but no redosing protocol has been established. We 
have developed a preventive immune-suppressive protocol for a human factor IX 
(FIX) vector with an intended dose of ~5 × 1011  vg/kg that inhibits the 
development of anti-AAV8 neutralizing-antibody (NAb) responses and anti-AAV8 
T-cell responses using CTLA4-IgG (abatacept). In a preclinical model, transient 
treatment with abatacept during initial human FIX gene therapy efficiently 
inhibited the generation of AAV8-specific cellular and humoral responses, and 
thus permitted redosing of FIX. Furthermore, our data suggest that by 
suppression of anti-AAV8 NAb responses after the second higher dose (4 × 1012 
 vg/kg) this protocol can be used to enable redosing up to such high doses. An 
additional advantage of CTLA4-IgG blocking CD28-mediated signals is its 
potential suppression of AAV8-specific cytotoxic CD8 T-cell responses, which are 
believed to kill transduced hepatocytes and might interfere with a successful 
readministration. Redosing protocols using approved drugs would be beneficial 
for patients because they could effortlessly be applied in clinical trials and 
enable safe and efficient treatment options for patients undergoing AAV8 gene 
therapy.

© 2020 Zurich Switzerland. Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Society on Thrombosis and 
Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1111/jth.14757
PMCID: PMC7318590
PMID: 32011092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FS, BMR, and M.d.l.R. are employees of Baxalta 
Innovations GmbH, a member of the Takeda group of companies and are Takeda stock 
owners.