1. Front Plant Sci. 2020 Jan 15;10:1668. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01668.
eCollection  2019.

Identification of Loci Through Genome-Wide Association Studies to Improve 
Tolerance to Sulfur Deficiency in Rice.

Pariasca-Tanaka J(1), Baertschi C(1), Wissuwa M(1).

Author information:
(1)Crop, Livestock and Environment Division, Japan International Research Center 
for Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), Tsukuba, Japan.

Sulfur (S) is an essential nutrient for plant growth and development; however, S 
supply for crop production is decreasing due to reduced inputs from atmospheric 
deposition and reduced application of S-containing fertilizers. Sulfur 
deficiency in soil is therefore becoming a widespread cause of reduced grain 
yield and quality in rice (Oryza sativa L). We therefore assessed the genotypic 
variation for tolerance to S deficiency in rice and identified loci associated 
with improved tolerance. Plants were grown in nutrient solution with either low 
(0.01 mM) or high (1.0 mM) supply of S. Plants grown under low-S treatment 
showed a reduction in total biomass, mainly due to a marked reduction in shoot 
biomass, while root biomass and root-to-shoot ratio increased, relative to 
plants under high-S treatment. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified 
loci associated with root length (qSUE2-3, qSUE4, and qSUE9), and root (qSUE1, 
qSUE2-1, and qSUE3-1 and qSUE3-2) or total dry matter (qSUE2, qSUE3-1, and 
qSUE11). Candidate genes identified at associated loci coded for enzymes 
involved in secondary S metabolic pathways (sulfotransferases), wherein the 
sulfated compounds play several roles in plant responses to abiotic stress; cell 
wall metabolism including wall loosening and modification (carbohydrate 
hydrolases: beta-glucosidase and beta-gluconase) important for root growth; and 
cell detoxification (glutathione S-transferase). This study confirmed the 
existence of genetic variation conferring tolerance to S deficiency among 
traditional aus rice varieties. The advantageous haplotypes identified could be 
exploited through marker assisted breeding to improve tolerance to S-deficiency 
in modern cultivars in order to achieve sustainable crop production and food 
security.

Copyright Â© 2020 Pariasca-Tanaka, Baertschi and Wissuwa.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01668
PMCID: PMC6975283
PMID: 32010158