1. Cell Biosci. 2020 Jan 29;10:8. doi: 10.1186/s13578-020-0376-x. eCollection
2020.

ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs kinases-the lessons from the mouse models: 
inhibition ≠ deletion.

Menolfi D(1), Zha S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1Institute for Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032 USA.
(2)2Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032 USA.
(3)3Division of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation, 
Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, 
New York, NY 10032 USA.

DNA damage, especially DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and replication stress, 
activates a complex post-translational network termed DNA damage response (DDR). 
Our review focuses on three PI3-kinase related protein kinases-ATM, ATR and 
DNA-PKcs, which situate at the apex of the mammalian DDR. They are recruited to 
and activated at the DNA damage sites by their respective sensor protein 
complexes-MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 for ATM, RPA/ATRIP for ATR and KU70-KU80/86 
(XRCC6/XRCC5) for DNA-PKcs. Upon activation, ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs phosphorylate 
a large number of partially overlapping substrates to promote efficient and 
accurate DNA repair and to coordinate DNA repair with other DNA metabolic events 
(e.g., transcription, replication and mitosis). At the organism level, robust 
DDR is critical for normal development, aging, stem cell maintenance and 
regeneration, and physiological genomic rearrangements in lymphocytes and germ 
cells. In addition to endogenous damage, oncogene-induced replication stresses 
and genotoxic chemotherapies also activate DDR. On one hand, DDR factors 
suppress genomic instability to prevent malignant transformation. On the other 
hand, targeting DDR enhances the therapeutic effects of anti-cancer 
chemotherapy, which led to the development of specific kinase inhibitors for 
ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs. Using mouse models expressing kinase dead ATM, ATR and 
DNA-PKcs, an unexpected structural function of these kinases was revealed, where 
the expression of catalytically inactive kinases causes more genomic instability 
than the loss of the proteins themselves. The spectrum of genomic instabilities 
and physiological consequences are unique for each kinase and depends on their 
activating complexes, suggesting a model in which the catalysis is coupled with 
DNA/chromatin release and catalytic inhibition leads to the persistence of the 
kinases at the DNA lesion, which in turn affects repair pathway choice and 
outcomes. Here we discuss the experimental evidences supporting this mode of 
action and their implications in the design and use of specific kinase 
inhibitors for ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs for cancer therapy.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13578-020-0376-x
PMCID: PMC6990542
PMID: 32015826

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.