1. J Leukoc Biol. 2020 Sep;108(3):867-882. doi: 10.1002/JLB.4MA0120-115RR. Epub 
2020 Feb 4.

Extracellular adenosine enhances the ability of PMNs to kill Streptococcus 
pneumoniae by inhibiting IL-10 production.

Siwapornchai N(1), Lee JN(1), Tchalla EYI(2), Bhalla M(2), Yeoh JH(2), 
Roggensack SE(1), Leong JM(1), Bou Ghanem EN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo School of 
Medicine, Buffalo, New York, USA.

Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) are crucial for initial control of 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus) lung infection; however, as the 
infection progresses their persistence in the lungs becomes detrimental. Here we 
explored why the antimicrobial efficacy of PMNs declines over the course of 
infection. We found that the progressive inability of PMNs to control infection 
correlated with phenotypic differences characterized by a decrease in CD73 
expression, an enzyme required for production of extracellular adenosine (EAD). 
EAD production by CD73 was crucial for the ability of both murine and human PMNs 
to kill S. pneumoniae. In exploring the mechanisms by which CD73 controlled PMN 
function, we found that CD73 mediated its antimicrobial activity by inhibiting 
IL-10 production. PMNs from wild-type mice did not increase IL-10 production in 
response to S. pneumoniae; however, CD73-/- PMNs up-regulated IL-10 production 
upon pneumococcal infection in vitro and during lung challenge. IL-10 inhibited 
the ability of WT PMNs to kill pneumococci. Conversely, blocking IL-10 boosted 
the bactericidal activity of CD73-/- PMNs as well as host resistance of CD73-/- 
mice to pneumococcal pneumonia. CD73/IL-10 did not affect apoptosis, bacterial 
uptake, and intracellular killing or production of antimicrobial neutrophil 
elastase and myeloperoxidase. Rather, inhibition of IL-10 production by CD73 was 
important for optimal reactive oxygen species (ROS) production by PMNs. ROS 
contributed to PMN antimicrobial function as their removal or detoxification 
impaired the ability of PMNs to efficiently kill S. pneumoniae. This study 
demonstrates that CD73 controls PMN antimicrobial phenotype during S. pneumoniae 
infection.

Â©2020 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/JLB.4MA0120-115RR
PMCID: PMC8314384
PMID: 32017200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.