1. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2020 Feb;18(2):116-119. doi: 10.6004/jnccn.2019.7371.

Clinical Response to T-DM1 in HER2-Amplified, KRAS-Mutated Metastatic Colorectal 
Cancer.

Sandhu J(1), Wang C(1), Fakih M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, 
California.

HER2 amplification has been identified in 2% to 3% of all colorectal cancers 
(CRCs). Although the prognostic role of HER2 amplification in metastatic CRC 
(mCRC) is unclear, studies have highlighted it as a therapeutic target. In 
addition, several studies have shown that HER2 amplification is implicated in 
the resistance to EGFR-targeted therapies. Other studies have provided 
scientific evidence to support the use of HER2-directed therapies in 
HER2-amplified CRC; however, thus far this benefit has been limited to the RAS 
wild-type population. There is an ongoing clinical need to identify novel means 
of targeting HER2 amplifications in the rare settings of HER2-amplified, 
RAS-mutated CRC. This case report presents a 58-year-old man with HER2-amplified 
mCRC and a KRAS G12D mutation whose disease progressed on all standard cytotoxic 
therapies as well as dual HER2 targeting using trastuzumab and pertuzumab. He 
subsequently derived a clinical benefit with metastatic lung disease regression 
on trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1). He eventually experienced disease progression 
in the liver after 6 every-3-week cycles. The patient's response and disease 
progression were associated with ongoing decline in the HER2 copy number on the 
circulating tumor DNA assay, suggesting that the mechanism of resistance was 
related to the loss of HER2 amplification or the emergence of non-HER2-amplified 
CRC clones. This represents the first report of clinical benefit with T-DM1 in 
KRAS-mutated HER2-amplified CRC.

DOI: 10.6004/jnccn.2019.7371
PMID: 32023524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]