1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Jan 21;13:199-206. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S240404. 
eCollection 2020.

Hybrid Genome Assembly and Annotation of a Pandrug-Resistant Klebsiella 
pneumoniae Strain Using Nanopore and Illumina Sequencing.

Ruan Z(1), Wu J(2), Chen H(1), Draz MS(3)(4), Xu J(5), He F(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310016, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Yiwu 322000, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA.
(5)Institute of Hygiene, Zhejiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Hangzhou 310013, 
People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, 
People's Hospital of Hangzhou Medical College, Hangzhou 310014, People's 
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae is 
increasingly being implicated worldwide in a variety of infections with high 
mortalities. Here, we report the complete genome sequence of K. pneumoniae 
strain KP58, a pandrug-resistant K. pneumoniae strain that exhibits high levels 
of resistance to colistin and tigecycline in China.
METHODS: The K. pneumoniae strain KP58 was recovered from a urine sample of a 
female patient hospitalized in a tertiary hospital in Hangzhou, China. 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed and the minimum inhibitory 
concentrations (MICs) were determined. Whole-genome sequencing was performed 
using Illumina and Oxford nanopore sequencing technologies. Genomic features, 
antimicrobial resistance genes and virulence genes were comprehensively analysed 
by various bioinformatics approaches. In addition, genomic epidemiological and 
phylogenetic analyses of K. pneumoniae KP58 and closely related isolates were 
performed using the core genome multilocus sequence typing (cgMLST) analysis in 
BacWGSTdb, an online bacterial whole-genome sequence typing and source tracking 
database.
RESULTS: K. pneumoniae KP58 was resistant to all antimicrobial agents tested, 
including tigecycline and colistin. Combining the two sequencing technologies 
allowed a high-quality complete genome sequence of K. pneumoniae KP58 comprising 
one circular chromosome and five circular plasmids to be obtained. This strain 
harbours a variety of acquired antimicrobial resistance and virulence 
determinants. It also carried an ISKpn26-like insertion in the disrupted mgrB 
gene, which confers colistin resistance. The tigecycline resistance was 
associated with overexpression of the AcrAB efflux system. The closest relative 
of K. pneumoniae KP58 was another clinical isolate recovered from Hangzhou that 
differed by only 10 cgMLST loci.
CONCLUSION: The dataset presented in this study provides essential insights into 
the evolution of antimicrobial-resistant K. pneumoniae in hospital settings and 
assists in the development of effective control strategies. Appropriate 
surveillance and control measures are essential to prevent its further 
dissemination.

Â© 2020 Ruan et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S240404
PMCID: PMC6982529
PMID: 32021334

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.