1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 7;10(1):2066. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-59031-1.

Association of Divergent Carcinoembryonic Antigen Patterns and Lung Cancer 
Progression.

Kuo YS(1), Zheng MY(2), Huang MF(2), Miao CC(2), Yang LH(2), Huang TW(3), Chou 
YT(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General 
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 
ROC.
(3)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General 
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. 
chi-wang@yahoo.com.tw.
(4)Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, 
ROC. ytchou@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Changes in expression patterns of serum carcinoembryonic antigen at initial 
diagnosis (CEAIn) and disease progression (CEAPd) in lung cancer patients under 
EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) treatment may reflect different tumor 
progression profiles. Of the 1736 lung cancer patients identified from the 
cancer registry group between 2011 to 2016, we selected 517 patients with 
advanced stage adenocarcinoma, data on EGFR mutation status and CEAIn, among 
whom were 288 patients with data on CEAPd, eligible for inclusion in the 
correlation analysis of clinical characteristics and survival. Multivariable 
analysis revealed that CEAIn expression was associated with poor 
progression-free survival in patients harboring mutant EGFR. Moreover, CEAIn and 
CEAPd were associated with the good and poor post-progression survival, 
respectively, in the EGFR-mutant group. Cell line experiments revealed that CEA 
expression and cancer dissemination can be affected by EGFR-TKI selection. 
EGFR-mutant patients, exhibiting high CEAIn (≥5 ng/mL) and low CEAPd (<5 ng/mL), 
showed a potential toward displaying new metastasis. Taken together, these 
findings support the conclusion that EGFR mutation status is a critical factor 
in determining prognostic potential of CEAIn and CEAPd in patients under 
EGFR-TKI treatment, and CEAIn and CEAPd are associated with distinct cancer 
progression profiles.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-59031-1
PMCID: PMC7005848
PMID: 32034239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.