1. Nat Biotechnol. 2020 May;38(5):620-628. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0414-6. Epub 
2020 Feb 10.

Evaluation and minimization of Cas9-independent off-target DNA editing by 
cytosine base editors.

Doman JL(#)(1)(2)(3), Raguram A(#)(1)(2)(3), Newby GA(1)(2)(3), Liu DR(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Merkin Institute of Transformative Technologies in Healthcare, Broad 
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Merkin Institute of Transformative Technologies in Healthcare, Broad 
Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. drliu@fas.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA. drliu@fas.harvard.edu.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
drliu@fas.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Cytosine base editors (CBEs) enable targeted C•G-to-T•A conversions in genomic 
DNA. Recent studies report that BE3, the original CBE, induces a low frequency 
of genome-wide Cas9-independent off-target C•G-to-T•A mutation in mouse embryos 
and in rice. Here we develop multiple rapid, cost-effective methods to screen 
the propensity of different CBEs to induce Cas9-independent deamination in 
Escherichia coli and in human cells. We use these assays to identify CBEs with 
reduced Cas9-independent deamination and validate via whole-genome sequencing 
that YE1, a narrowed-window CBE variant, displays background levels of 
Cas9-independent off-target editing. We engineered YE1 variants that retain the 
substrate-targeting scope of high-activity CBEs while maintaining minimal 
Cas9-independent off-target editing. The suite of CBEs characterized and 
engineered in this study collectively offer ~10-100-fold lower average 
Cas9-independent off-target DNA editing while maintaining robust on-target 
editing at most positions targetable by canonical CBEs, and thus are especially 
promising for applications in which off-target editing must be minimized.

DOI: 10.1038/s41587-020-0414-6
PMCID: PMC7335424
PMID: 32042165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare 
competing financial interests. D.R.L. is a consultant and cofounder of Editas 
Medicine, Pairwise Plants, Beam Therapeutics, and Prime Medicine, companies that 
use genome editing. J.L.D., A.R., and D.R.L. through the Broad Institute have 
filed patent applications on aspects of this work.