1. J Cell Mol Med. 2020 Mar;24(6):3611-3624. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.15053. Epub 2020
Feb  12.

P53/PANK1/miR-107 signalling pathway spans the gap between metabolic 
reprogramming and insulin resistance induced by high-fat diet.

Yang L(1), Zhang B(2), Wang X(3), Liu Z(1), Li J(1), Zhang S(1), Gu X(1), Jia 
M(1), Guo H(1), Feng N(1), Fan R(1), Xie M(2), Pei J(1), Chen L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, National Key Discipline of Cell Biology, Fourth 
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Department of Aerospace Physiology, Fourth Military Medical University, 
Xi'an, China.
(3)Battalion 5 of Cadets, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

High-fat diet (HFD) leads to obesity, type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and 
increases the coincidence of cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Insulin 
resistance (IR) is considered as the 'common soil' of those diseases. 
Furthermore, people on HFD showed restrained glycolysis and enhanced fatty acid 
oxidation, which is the so-called metabolic reprogramming. However, the 
relationship between metabolic reprogramming and IR induced by HFD is still 
unclear. Here, we demonstrate that PANK1 and miR-107 were up-regulated in the 
liver tissue of mice on HFD for 16 weeks and involved in metabolic reprogramming 
induced by palmitate acid (PA) incubation. Importantly, miR-107 within an intron 
of PANK1 gene facilitated IR by targeting caveolin-1 in AML12 cells upon PA 
incubation. Moreover, we identify that HFD enhanced P53 expression, and 
activation of P53 with nutlin-3a induced PANK1 and miR-107 expression 
simultaneously in transcriptional level, leading to metabolic reprogramming and 
IR, respectively. Consistently, inhibition of P53 with pifithrin-α hydrobromide 
ameliorated PA-induced metabolic reprogramming and IR. Thus, our results 
revealing a new mechanism by which P53 regulate metabolism. In addition, the 
results distinguished the different roles of PANK1 and its intron miR-107 in 
metabolic regulation, which will provide more accurate intervention targets for 
the treatment of metabolic diseases.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.15053
PMCID: PMC7131928
PMID: 32048816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to 
this article were reported.