1. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2020 Feb 14;9(1):366-377. doi: 
10.1080/22221751.2020.1725398. eCollection 2020.

DHX9 interacts with APOBEC3B and attenuates the anti-HBV effect of APOBEC3B.

Chen Y(1), Shen B(1), Zheng X(1), Long Q(1), Xia J(1), Huang Y(1), Cai X(1), 
Wang D(1), Chen J(1), Tang N(1), Huang A(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases (Ministry of 
Education), Institute for Viral Hepatitis, Department of Infectious Diseases, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
People's Republic of China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a partially double-stranded DNA virus that replicates 
by reverse transcription. We previously demonstrated that the host restriction 
factor-APOBEC3B (A3B) inhibited HBV replication which was dependent on its 
deaminase activity during reverse transcription. However, the host factors 
involved in the process of regulating the anti-HBV function of A3B are less 
known. In this research, to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the 
interaction networks of A3B, we conducted coimmunoprecipitation and mass 
spectrometry to identify A3B-interacting proteins in the presence of HBV. By 
this approach, we determined that DExD/H-box helicase 9 (DHX9) suppressed the 
anti-HBV effect of A3B, and this suppression was dependent on their interaction. 
Although DHX9 did not affect the deamination activity of A3B in vitro assay or 
the viral DNA editing of A3B in HepG2-NTCP cells that support HBV infection, it 
inhibited the binding of A3B with pgRNA. These data suggest that DHX9 can 
interact with A3B and attenuate the anti-HBV efficacy of A3B.Abbreviations: 
3D-PCR: differential DNA denaturation PCR; APOBEC3: apolipoprotein B 
mRNA-editing catalytic polypeptide 3; cccDNA: covalently closed circular DNA; 
co-IP: coimmunoprecipitation; DDX: DExD-box RNA helicases; HBc: HBV core 
protein; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HepAD38: HepG2 cell line stably transfected 
with HBV DNA; HepG2-NTCP: HepG2 cell line stably transfected with 
Na+/taurocholate cotransporter polypeptide; Huh7: human hepatoma cell line; 
pgRNA: pregenomic RNA; PPI: protein-protein interactions; RC DNA: relaxed 
circular DNA.

DOI: 10.1080/22221751.2020.1725398
PMCID: PMC7033728
PMID: 32056513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).