1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2020 Mar;140:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.02.004. Epub 
2020 Feb 11.

Alteration of purinergic signaling in diabetes: Focus on vascular function.

Zhou R(1), Dang X(1), Sprague RS(2), Mustafa SJ(3), Zhou Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Research, The Key Laboratory of Medical 
Electrophysiology of Ministry of Education, Southwest Medical University, 
Luzhou, PR China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Saint Louis University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, WV, USA.
(4)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University 
Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
zhichao.zhou@ki.se.

Diabetes is an important risk factor for the development of cardiovascular 
disease including atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease. Vascular 
complications including macro- and micro-vascular dysfunction are the leading 
causes of morbidity and mortality in diabetes. Disease mechanisms at present are 
unclear and no ideal therapies are available, which urgently calls for the 
identification of novel therapeutic targets/agents. An altered nucleotide- and 
nucleoside-mediated purinergic signaling has been implicated to cause 
diabetes-associated vascular dysfunction in major organs. Alteration of both 
purinergic P1 and P2 receptor sensitivity rather than the changes in receptor 
expression accounts for vascular dysfunction in diabetes. Activation of P2X7 
receptors plays a crucial role in diabetes-induced retinal microvascular 
dysfunction. Recent findings have revealed that both ecto-nucleotidase CD39, a 
key enzyme hydrolyzing ATP, and CD73, an enzyme regulating adenosine turnover, 
are involved in the renal vascular injury in diabetes. Interestingly, 
erythrocyte dysfunction in diabetes by decreasing ATP release in response to 
physiological stimuli may serve as an important trigger to induce vascular 
dysfunction. Nucleot(s)ide-mediated purinergic activation also exerts long-term 
actions including inflammatory and atherogenic effects in hyperglycemic and 
diabetic conditions. This review highlights the current knowledge regarding the 
altered nucleot(s)ide-mediated purinergic signaling as an important disease 
mechanism for the diabetes-associated vascular complications. Better 
understanding the role of key receptor-mediated signaling in diabetes will 
provide more insights into their potential as targets for the treatment.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2020.02.004
PMCID: PMC7425578
PMID: 32057736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Inteterest None.