1. Sci Rep. 2020 Feb 17;10(1):2767. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-59310-x.

A co-culture nanofibre scaffold model of neural cell degeneration in relevance 
to Parkinson's disease.

Chemmarappally JM(1)(2), Pegram HCN(1)(2), Abeywickrama N(1), Fornari E(1), 
Hargreaves AJ(2), De Girolamo LA(2), Stevens B(3).

Author information:
(1)Innovations in Surfaces, Materials and Related Technologies (iSMART), College 
of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton, NG11 8NS, UK.
(2)Interdisciplinary Biomedical Research Centre (IBRC), College of Science and 
Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton, NG11 8NS, UK.
(3)Innovations in Surfaces, Materials and Related Technologies (iSMART), College 
of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton, NG11 8NS, UK. 
bob.stevens@ntu.ac.uk.

Current therapeutic strategies for Parkinson's disease (PD) aim to delay 
progression or replace damaged neurons by restoring the original neuronal 
structures. The poor regenerative capacity of neural tissue highlights the need 
for the development of cellular environments to model the pathogenesis of PD. In 
the current work, we have characterised the growth, survival and response to PD 
mimetics of human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma and U-87MG glioblastoma cell lines 
cultured on polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and JeffamineÂ® doped polyacrylonitrile (PJ) 
nano-scaffolds. Differentiation induced by a range of agents was evaluated by 
immunoassays of neural protein biomarkers. PAN and PJ nanofibre scaffolds 
provided suitable three-dimensional (3D) environment to support the growth, 
differentiation and network formation of dopaminergic neuron- and astrocyte-like 
cell populations, respectively. The scaffolds selectively supported the survival 
and differentiation of both cell populations with prolonged neuronal survival 
when exposed to PD mimetics in the presence of astrocytes in a co-culture model. 
Such 3D nanoscaffold-based assays could aid our understanding of the molecular 
basis of PD mimetic-induced Parkinsonism and the discovery of neuroprotective 
agents.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-59310-x
PMCID: PMC7026118
PMID: 32066745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.