1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Mar 3;117(9):4902-4909. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1920478117. Epub 2020 Feb 19.

Ventral prostate and mammary gland phenotype in mice with complete deletion of 
the ERβ gene.

Warner M(1), Wu WF(2), Montanholi L(3), Nalvarte I(3), Antonson P(3), Gustafsson 
JA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and 
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204; mwarner@central.uh.edu 
jgustafsson@uh.edu.
(2)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and 
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204.
(3)Center for Innovative Medicine, Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, 
Karolinska Institutet, Novum, 14186 Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2020 Apr;17(4):192-193. doi: 10.1038/s41585-020-0302-3.

Disagreements about the phenotype of estrogen receptor β (ERβ) knockout mouse, 
created by removing the DNA-binding domain of the ERβ gene or interruption of 
the gene with a neocassette (Oliver Smithies ERβ knockout mice [ERβOS-/-]), 
prompted us to create an ERβ knockout mouse by deleting the ERβ gene with the 
use of CRISPR/Cas9 technology. We confirmed that the ERβ gene was eliminated 
from the mouse genome and that no ERβ mRNA or protein was detectable in tissues 
of this mouse. Overall the phenotype of the ventral prostate (VP) and mammary 
gland (MG) in ERβcrispr-/- mice was similar to, but more severe than, that in 
the ERβOS-/-mice. In the VP of 6-mo-old ERβcrispr-/- mice there was epithelial 
hyperplasia, fibroplasia, inflammation, stromal overgrowth, and intraductal 
cancer-like lesions. This was accompanied by an increase in Ki67 and P63 and 
loss in DACH1 and PURα, two androgen receptor (AR) repressors. In the MG there 
was overexpression of estrogen receptor α and progesterone receptor, loss of 
collagen, increase in proliferation and expression of metalloproteases, and 
invasive epithelium. Surprisingly, by 18 mo of age, the number of hyperplastic 
foci was reduced, the ducts of the VP and MG became atrophic, and, in the VP, 
there was massive immune infiltration and massive desquamation of the luminal 
epithelial cells. These changes were coincident with reduced levels of androgens 
in males and estrogens in females. We conclude that ERβ is a tumor suppressor 
gene in the VP and MG where its loss increases the activity AR and ERα, 
respectively.

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1920478117
PMCID: PMC7060692
PMID: 32075916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.