1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Feb 13;21(4):1258. doi: 10.3390/ijms21041258.

Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II: One Hundred Years of Research, Diagnosis, and 
Treatment.

D'Avanzo F(1)(2), Rigon L(2)(3), Zanetti A(1)(2), Tomanin R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Lysosomal Disorders, Department of 
Women's and Children's Health, University of Padova, Via Giustiniani 3, 35128 
Padova, Italy.
(2)Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica "Citt√† della Speranza", Corso Stati 
Uniti 4, 35127 Padova, Italy.
(3)Molecular Developmental Biology, Life & Medical Science Institute (LIMES), 
University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome) was first described by 
Dr. Charles Hunter in 1917. Since then, about one hundred years have passed and 
Hunter syndrome, although at first neglected for a few decades and afterwards 
mistaken for a long time for the similar disorder Hurler syndrome, has been 
clearly distinguished as a specific disease since 1978, when the distinct 
genetic causes of the two disorders were finally identified. MPS II is a rare 
genetic disorder, recently described as presenting an incidence rate ranging 
from 0.38 to 1.09 per 100,000 live male births, and it is the only 
X-linked-inherited mucopolysaccharidosis. The complex disease is due to a 
deficit of the lysosomal hydrolase iduronate 2-sulphatase, which is a crucial 
enzyme in the stepwise degradation of heparan and dermatan sulphate. This 
contributes to a heavy clinical phenotype involving most organ-systems, 
including the brain, in at least two-thirds of cases. In this review, we will 
summarize the history of the disease during this century through clinical and 
laboratory evaluations that allowed its definition, its correct diagnosis, a 
partial comprehension of its pathogenesis, and the proposition of therapeutic 
protocols. We will also highlight the main open issues related to the possible 
inclusion of MPS II in newborn screenings, the comprehension of brain 
pathogenesis, and treatment of the neurological compartment.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21041258
PMCID: PMC7072947
PMID: 32070051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.