1. Chem Rev. 2020 Apr 8;120(7):3233-3260. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00547. Epub 
2020 Feb 19.

Gas-Phase Infrared Spectroscopy of Neutral Peptides: Insights from the Far-IR 
and THz Domain.

Bakels S(1), Gaigeot MP(2), Rijs AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University, Institute for Molecules and Materials, FELIX Laboratory, 
Toernooiveld 7-c, 6525 ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)LAMBE CNRS UMR8587, Université d'Evry val d'Essonne, Blvd F. Mitterrand, Bât 
Maupertuis, 91025 Evry, France.

Gas-phase, double resonance IR spectroscopy has proven to be an excellent 
approach to obtain structural information on peptides ranging from single amino 
acids to large peptides and peptide clusters. In this review, we discuss the 
state-of-the-art of infrared action spectroscopy of peptides in the far-IR and 
THz regime. An introduction to the field of far-IR spectroscopy is given, 
thereby highlighting the opportunities that are provided for gas-phase research 
on neutral peptides. Current experimental methods, including spectroscopic 
schemes, have been reviewed. Structural information from the experimental far-IR 
spectra can be obtained with the help of suitable theoretical approaches such as 
dynamical DFT techniques and the recently developed Graph Theory. The aim of 
this review is to underline how the synergy between far-IR spectroscopy and 
theory can provide an unprecedented picture of the structure of neutral 
biomolecules in the gas phase. The far-IR signatures of the discussed studies 
are summarized in a far-IR map, in order to gain insight into the origin of the 
far-IR localized and delocalized motions present in peptides and where they can 
be found in the electromagnetic spectrum.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00547
PMCID: PMC7146864
PMID: 32073261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.