1. Iran J Psychiatry. 2019 Oct;14(4):265-273.

Genotype Variations of rs13381800 in TCF4 Gene and rs17039988 in NRXN1 Gene 
among a Sample of Iranian Patients with Schizophrenia.

Agahi M(1), Noormohammadi Z(1), Salahshourifar I(1), Mahdavi Hezaveh N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Objective: Schizophrenia is a complicated mental disorder that affects about 1% 
of the world's population. It is a complex disease and is approximately 80% 
inherited. One of the candidate genes in schizophrenia is transcription factor 4 
(TCF4), which is positioned on chromosome 18 and is a transcription factor that 
plays a role in the transcription of Neurexin 1(NRXN1) gene, which is one of the 
candidate genes for developing schizophrenia. This case-control study aimed to 
investigate the correlation of TCF4 rs13381800 and NRXN1 rs17039988 
polymorphisms with the risk of schizophrenia in a sample of Iranian patients 
with schizophrenia. Method : A total of 200 individuals were included in this 
study: 100 patients with schizophrenia (65 males and 35 females), with the mean 
age of 40.80 ± 11.298 years, and 100 as a control group (63 males and 37 
females), with the mean age 32.92 ± 7.391 years. Allele specific polymerase 
chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) were 
done, respectively, for genotyping of rs13381800 (T/C) and rs17039988 (A/C) 
polymorphisms. Results: The results showed that the frequency of C / C genotype 
in rs13381800 in patients' group was 9%, while it was 13% in the control group. 
Also, the frequency of C / C genotype in rs17039988 was 9% in patients and 7% in 
control groups. Statistical analysis of polymorphisms showed no correlation 
between patients and controls in rs13381800 (OR = 1.51; CI = 95%; P = 0.366) and 
rs17039988 (OR = 0.76; CI = 95%; P = 0.602). Conclusion: No significant 
difference was found between rs13381800 and rs17039988 genotypes between 
patients and control groups in terms of gender, age and education in the 
patients group. Our study suggests that there was no correlation between desired 
polymorphisms with schizophrenia in the studied population.

Copyright © Psychiatry & Psychology Research Center, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences.

PMCID: PMC7007506
PMID: 32071599