1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Feb 24;12(4):3140-3155. doi: 10.18632/aging.102783.
Epub  2020 Feb 24.

Comparison of BRCA versus non-BRCA germline mutations and associated somatic 
mutation profiles in patients with unselected breast cancer.

Chen B(1), Zhang G(1), Li X(1), Ren C(1), Wang Y(1)(2), Li K(1), Mok H(1), Cao 
L(1), Wen L(1), Jia M(1), Li C(1), Guo L(1)(3), Wei G(1)(2), Lin J(1)(3), Li 
Y(1)(3), Zhang Y(1)(2), Han-Zhang H(4), Liu J(4), Lizaso A(4), Liao N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Cancer, Cancer Center, Guangdong Provincial People's 
Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)School of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(3)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Burning Rock Biotech, Guangzhou, China.

The data on the phenotypes associated with some rare germline mutations in 
Chinese breast cancer patients are limited. The difference in somatic mutation 
profiles in breast cancer patients with germline BRCA and non-BRCA mutations 
remains unexplored. We interrogated the germline and somatic mutational profile 
of 524 Chinese breast cancer patients with various stages unselected for 
predisposing factors using a panel consisting of 520 cancer-related genes 
including 62 cancer susceptibility genes. We divided the patients into three 
groups according to germline mutations: Germline-BRCA1/2, Germline-others 
(non-BRCA) and Others (non-carriers). A total of 58 patients (11.1%) carried 76 
likely pathogenic or pathogenic (LP/P) germline variants in 15 cancer 
predisposition genes. Germline BRCA1/2 mutations were detected from 29 (5.53%) 
patients; with 11 (2.10%) BRCA1 carriers and 18 (3.44%) BRCA2 carriers. In 
addition, LP/P germline mutations were detected in other genes including MUTYH 
(n=4), PALB2 (n=4), ATM (n=3), BRIP1 (n=3), CDH1 (n=3), RAD51C (n=3), CHEK2 
(n=2), FANCA (n=2), PMS2 (n=2), TP53 (n=2), FANCI (n=1), FANCL (n=1) and PTEN 
(n=1). At least one variant of uncertain significance (VUS) was identified in 
490 (93.5%) patients. Young age (P=0.011), premenopausal status (P=0.013), and 
breast/ovarian cancer family history (P=0.001) were correlated with germline 
mutations. Germline-BRCA1/2 group was detected with more missense (P=0.02) and 
less copy-number amplification (P=0.04) than Germline-others group. Meanwhile, 
Germline-others group and Others group are very similar (P>0.05). The mutation 
rates of AKT1, CCND1, FGFR1, and PIK3CA were different among the three groups. 
By investigating all breast and ovarian cancer-related genes listed in the US 
genetic guidelines, we identified 15 cancer susceptibility genes frequently 
mutated in the germline of our population and must be included in cancer 
predisposition screening. Our study contributed a better understanding of the 
tumor characteristics of patients with LP/P germline mutations.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.102783
PMCID: PMC7066887
PMID: 32091409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interests.