1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Apr 3;295(14):4541-4555. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012783. Epub
 2020 Feb 24.

Mammalian lectin arrays for screening host-microbe interactions.

Jégouzo SAF(1), Nelson C(1), Hardwick T(1), Wong STA(1), Lau NKK(1), Neoh 
GKE(1), Castellanos-Rueda R(1), Huang Z(1), Mignot B(1), Hirdaramani A(1), 
Howitt A(1), Frewin K(1), Shen Z(1), Fox RJ(1), Wong R(1), Ando M(1), Emony 
L(1), Zhu H(1), Holder A(2), Werling D(2), Krishnan N(3), Robertson BD(3), 
Clements A(4), Taylor ME(1), Drickamer K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, 
North Mymms, Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease and MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology 
and Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Life Sciences and MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and 
Infection, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United 
Kingdom k.drickamer@imperial.ac.uk.

Many members of the C-type lectin family of glycan-binding receptors have been 
ascribed roles in the recognition of microorganisms and serve as key receptors 
in the innate immune response to pathogens. Other mammalian receptors have 
become targets through which pathogens enter target cells. These receptor roles 
have often been documented with binding studies involving individual pairs of 
receptors and microorganisms. To provide a systematic overview of interactions 
between microbes and the large complement of C-type lectins, here we developed a 
lectin array and suitable protocols for labeling of microbes that could be used 
to probe this array. The array contains C-type lectins from cow, chosen as a 
model organism of agricultural interest for which the relevant pathogen-receptor 
interactions have not been previously investigated in detail. Screening with 
yeast cells and various strains of both Gram-positive and -negative bacteria 
revealed distinct binding patterns, which in some cases could be explained by 
binding to lipopolysaccharides or capsular polysaccharides, but in other cases 
they suggested the presence of novel glycan targets on many of the 
microorganisms. These results are consistent with interactions previously 
ascribed to the receptors, but they also highlight binding to additional sugar 
targets that have not previously been recognized. Our findings indicate that 
mammalian lectin arrays represent unique discovery tools for identifying both 
novel ligands and new receptor functions.

© 2020 Jégouzo et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012783
PMCID: PMC7135977
PMID: 32094229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article