1. Viruses. 2020 Feb 21;12(2):243. doi: 10.3390/v12020243.

Letea Virus: Comparative Genomics and Phylogenetic Analysis of a Novel 
Reassortant Orbivirus Discovered in Grass Snakes (Natrix natrix).

Tomazatos A(1), Marschang RE(2), Maranda I(1), Baum H(1), Bialonski A(1), Spînu 
M(3), Lühken R(1)(4), Schmidt-Chanasit J(1)(4), Cadar D(1).

Author information:
(1)Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, WHO Collaborating Centre for 
Arbovirus and Hemorrhagic Fever Reference and Research, 20359 Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Cell Culture Lab, Microbiology Department, Laboklin GmbH & Co. KG, 97688 Bad 
Kissingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences-Infectious Diseases, University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Medicine, 400372 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(4)Universität Hamburg, Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Natural 
Sciences, 20148 Hamburg, Germany.

The discovery and characterization of novel arthropod-borne viruses provide 
valuable information on their genetic diversity, ecology, evolution and 
potential to threaten animal or public health. Arbovirus surveillance is not 
conducted regularly in Romania, being particularly very scarce in the remote and 
diverse areas like the Danube Delta. Here we describe the detection and genetic 
characterization of a novel orbivirus (Reoviridae: Orbivirus) designated as 
Letea virus, which was found in grass snakes (Natrix natrix) during a 
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic survey conducted between 2014 and 2017. This 
virus is the first orbivirus discovered in reptiles. Phylogenetic analyses 
placed Letea virus as a highly divergent species in the Culicoides-/sand 
fly-borne orbivirus clade. Gene reassortment and intragenic recombination were 
detected in the majority of the nine Letea virus strains obtained, implying that 
these mechanisms play important roles in the evolution and diversification of 
the virus. However, the screening of arthropods, including Culicoides biting 
midges collected within the same surveillance program, tested negative for Letea 
virus infection and could not confirm the arthropod vector of the virus. The 
study provided complete genome sequences for nine Letea virus strains and new 
information about orbivirus diversity, host range, ecology and evolution. The 
phylogenetic associations warrant further screening of arthropods, as well as 
sustained surveillance efforts for elucidation of Letea virus natural cycle and 
possible implications for animal and human health.

DOI: 10.3390/v12020243
PMCID: PMC7077223
PMID: 32098186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.