1. J Am Chem Soc. 2020 Mar 11;142(10):4784-4792. doi: 10.1021/jacs.9b13621. Epub 
2020 Feb 28.

Cell-Penetrating Streptavidin: A General Tool for Bifunctional Delivery with 
Spatiotemporal Control, Mediated by Transport Systems Such as Adaptive 
Benzopolysulfane Networks.

López-Andarias J(1), Saarbach J(1), Moreau D(1), Cheng Y(1), Derivery E(2), 
Laurent Q(1), González-Gaitán M(1), Winssinger N(1), Sakai N(1), Matile S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry and National Centre of Competence in 
Research (NCCR) Chemical Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva 1211, 
Switzerland.
(2)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom.

In this report, cell-penetrating streptavidin (CPS) is introduced to exploit the 
full power of streptavidin-biotin biotechnology in cellular uptake. For this 
purpose, transporters, here cyclic oligochalcogenides (COCs), are covalently 
attached to lysines of wild-type streptavidin. This leaves all four biotin 
binding sites free for at least bifunctional delivery. To maximize the standards 
of the quantitative evaluation of cytosolic delivery, the recent chloroalkane 
penetration assay (CAPA) is coupled with automated high content (HC) imaging, a 
technique that combines the advantages of fluorescence microscopy and flow 
cytometry. According to the resulting HC-CAPA, cytosolic delivery of CPS 
equipped with four benzopolysulfanes was the best among all tested CPSs, also 
better than the much smaller TAT peptide, the original cell-penetrating peptide 
from HIV. HaloTag-GFP fusion proteins expressed on mitochondria were 
successfully targeted using CPS carrying two different biotinylated ligands, 
HaloTag substrates or anti-GFP nanobodies, interfaced with peptide nucleic 
acids, flipper force probes, or fluorescent substrates. The delivered substrates 
could be released from CPS into the cytosol through desthiobiotin-biotin 
exchange. These results validate CPS as a general tool which enables 
unrestricted use of streptavidin-biotin biotechnology in cellular uptake.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b13621
PMCID: PMC7307903
PMID: 32109058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.