1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Feb 24;21(4):1549. doi: 10.3390/ijms21041549.

Remodeling of Intracellular Ca(2+) Homeostasis in Rat Hippocampal Neurons Aged 
In Vitro.

Calvo-Rodriguez M(1), Hernando-Pérez E(2), López-Vázquez S(2), Núñez J(3), 
Villalobos C(2), Núñez L(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Research Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
(2)Institute of Biology and Molecular Genetics (IBGM), University of Valladolid 
and National Research Council (CSIC), 47003 Valladolid, Spain.
(3)Faculty of Odontology, Complutense University of Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Physiology, University 
of Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Spain.

Aging is often associated with a cognitive decline and a susceptibility to 
neuronal damage. It is also the most important risk factor for neurodegenerative 
disorders, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD is related to an excess of 
neurotoxic oligomers of amyloid β peptide (Aβo); however, the molecular 
mechanisms are still highly controversial. Intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis plays 
an important role in the control of neuronal activity, including 
neurotransmitter release, synaptic plasticity, and memory storage, as well as 
neuron cell death. Recent evidence indicates that long-term cultures of rat 
hippocampal neurons, resembling aged neurons, undergo cell death after treatment 
with Aβo, whereas short-term cultures, resembling young neurons, do not. These 
in vitro changes are associated with the remodeling of intracellular Ca2+ 
homeostasis with aging, thus providing a simplistic model for investigating Ca2+ 
remodeling in aging. In vitro aged neurons show increased resting cytosolic Ca2+ 
concentration, enhanced Ca2+ store content, and Ca2+ release from the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Ca2+ transfer from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to 
mitochondria is also enhanced. Aged neurons also show decreased store-operated 
Ca2+ entry (SOCE), a Ca2+ entry pathway related to memory storage. At the 
molecular level, in vitro remodeling is associated with changes in the 
expression of Ca2+ channels resembling in vivo aging, including changes in 
N-methyl-D-aspartate NMDA receptor and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) 
receptor isoforms, increased expression of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter 
(MCU), and decreased expression of Orai1/Stim1, the molecular players involved 
in SOCE. Additionally, Aβo treatment exacerbates most of the changes observed in 
aged neurons and enhances susceptibility to cell death. Conversely, the solely 
effect of Aβo in young neurons is to increase ER-mitochondria colocalization and 
enhance Ca2+ transfer from ER to mitochondria without inducing neuronal damage. 
We propose that cultured rat hippocampal neurons may be a useful model to 
investigate Ca2+ remodeling in aging and in age-related neurodegenerative 
disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21041549
PMCID: PMC7073228
PMID: 32102482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.