1. Lung India. 2020 Mar-Apr;37(2):145-150. doi:
10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_488_19.

Correlation of programmed death-ligand 1 expression with gene expression and 
clinicopathological parameters in Indian patients with non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Kumar M(1), Guleria B(1), Swamy S(1), Soni S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Army Hospital Research and Referral, New 
Delhi, India.
(2)Assistant Professor, Community Medicine, Rama Medical College, Hapur, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is to evaluate the incidence of programmed 
cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
cases and its correlation with gene mutation and clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: Samples from NSCLCs patients were studied for PD-L1 expression through 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) using Rabbit anti-human PDL-1/CD274 Monoclonal 
Antibody. Genetic mutations were studied using IHC/fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) methods (for anaplastic lymphoma kinase [ALK]) or 
polymerase chain reaction/gene sequencing analysis (for epidermal growth factor 
receptor [EGFR]). Pearson's correlation coefficient (r) was used for correlation 
analysis. PD-L1 expression was analyzed for association with clinicopathological 
features.
RESULTS: Of the 101 NSCLC cases, PD-L1 expression was observed in 33.66% 
(34/101) cases; tumor proportion score of <50%: 67.65% (23/34) and â‰¥50%: 32.35% 
(11/34) cases. PD-L1 positivity was seen in; males: 35.5%, females: 28%, 
smokers: 37.7%, cases with brain metastasis: 20%, cases with pleural effusion: 
20.8%, and histopathological evaluation (well-differentiated: 21.42%, 
moderately-differentiated: 13.79%, poorly-differentiated: 36.11%, and 
adenosquamous disease: 40.9%). Genetic mutation studies revealed PD-L1 
positivity in 18.1% cases with EGFR mutation, 50% of ALK-IHC positive cases, and 
33.3% ALK-FISH positive cases. No or very weak correlation (r < 0.3) in PD-L1 
expression with gene mutations or clinicopathological parameters was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrated PD-L1 expression in ~ 1/3rd cases of NSCLC 
patients. No or very weak correlation was observed for PD-L1 expression with 
genetic mutations and other parameters studied. The presence of gene mutations 
in PD-L1 expressed samples suggests further investigation on PD-L1 inhibitors in 
such patients for decisive treatments.

DOI: 10.4103/lungindia.lungindia_488_19
PMCID: PMC7065552
PMID: 32108600

Conflict of interest statement: None