1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Feb 25;12(3):528. doi: 10.3390/cancers12030528.

The Role of p53-Mediated Signaling in the Therapeutic Response of Colorectal 
Cancer to 9F, a Spermine-Modified Naphthalene Diimide Derivative.

Gao L(1), Ge C(1), Wang S(1), Xu X(2), Feng Y(1), Li X(1), Wang C(1), Wang Y(3), 
Dai F(1), Xie S(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Natural Medicine and Immuno-Engineering, Henan University, 
Kaifeng 475004, Henan, China.
(2)Pharmaceutical College, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan, China.
(3)College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Henan University, Kaifeng 
475004, Henan, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent cancers due to its 
frequency and high rate of mortality. Polyamine-vectorized anticancer drugs 
possess multiple biological properties. Of these drugs, 9F has been shown to 
inhibit tumor growth and the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma. This 
current study aims to investigate the effects of 9F on CRC and determine its 
molecular mechanisms of action. Our findings demonstrate that 9F inhibits CRC 
cell growth by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, and suppresses 
migration, invasion and angiogenesis in vitro, resulting in the inhibition of 
tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Based on RNA-seq data, further 
bioinformatic analyses suggest that 9F exerts its anticancer activities through 
p53 signaling, which is responsible for the altered expression of key regulators 
of the cell cycle, apoptosis, the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), 
and angiogenesis. In addition, 9F is more effective than amonafide against CRC. 
These results show that 9F can be considered as a potential strategy for CRC 
treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12030528
PMCID: PMC7139676
PMID: 32106543

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.