1. Nutrients. 2020 Feb 26;12(3):610. doi: 10.3390/nu12030610.

Unripe Rubus coreanus Miquel Extract Containing Ellagic Acid Regulates AMPK, 
SREBP-2, HMGCR, and INSIG-1 Signaling and Cholesterol Metabolism In Vitro and In 
Vivo.

Lee KH(1), Jeong ES(1), Jang G(1), Na JR(1), Park S(1), Kang WS(1), Kim E(1), 
Choi H(1), Kim JS(1), Kim S(1).

Author information:
(1)B&Tech Co., Ltd., Central R&D Center, Gwangju 61239, Korea.

Our previous study demonstrated that a 5% ethanol extract of unripe Rubus 
coreanus (5-uRCK) has hypo-cholesterolemic and anti-obesity activity. However, 
the molecular mechanisms of its effects are poorly characterized. We 
hypothesized that 5-uRCK and one of its major bioactive compounds, ellagic acid, 
decrease cellular and plasma cholesterol levels. Thus, we investigated the 
hypocholesterolemic activity and mechanism of 5-uRCK in both hepatocytes and a 
high-cholesterol diet (HCD)-induced rat model. Cholesterol in the liver and 
serum was significantly reduced by 5-uRCK and ellagic acid. The hepatic 
activities of HMG-CoA and CETP were reduced, and the hepatic activity of LCAT 
was increased by both 5-uRCK extract and ellagic acid, which also caused 
histological improvements. The MDA content in the aorta and serum was 
significantly decreased after oral administration of 5-uRCK or ellagic acid. 
Further immunoblotting analysis showed that AMPK phosphorylation in the liver 
was induced by 5-uRCK and ellagic acid, which activated AMPK, inhibiting the 
activity of HMGCR by inhibitory phosphorylation. In contrast, 5-uRCK and ellagic 
acid suppressed the nuclear translocation and activation of SREBP-2, which is a 
key transcription factor in cholesterol biosynthesis. In conclusion, our results 
suggest that 5-uRCK and its bioactive compound, ellagic acid, are useful 
alternative therapeutic agents to regulate blood cholesterol.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12030610
PMCID: PMC7146129
PMID: 32110925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.