1. Future Med Chem. 2020 Mar;12(6):523-532. doi: 10.4155/fmc-2019-0357. Epub 2020
 Mar 2.

Proton-sensing G protein-coupled receptors: detectors of tumor acidosis and 
candidate drug targets.

Insel PA(1)(2), Sriram K(1), Salmer√≥n C(1), Wiley SZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, 
USA.
(2)Departments of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

Cells in tumor microenvironments (TMEs) use several mechanisms to sense their 
low pH (<7.0), including via proton-sensing G protein-coupled receptors 
(psGPCRs): GPR4, GPR65/TDAG8, GPR68/OGR1 and GPR132/G2A. Numerous cancers have 
increased expression of psGPCRs. The psGPCRs may contribute to features of the 
malignant phenotype via actions on specific cell-types in the TME and thereby 
promote tumor survival and growth. Here, we review data regarding psGPCR 
expression in tumors and cancer cells, impact of psGPCRs on survival in solid 
tumors and a bioinformatics approach to infer psGPCR expression in cell types in 
the TME. New tools are needed to help define contributions of psGPCRs in tumor 
biology and to identify potentially novel therapeutic agents for a variety of 
cancers.

DOI: 10.4155/fmc-2019-0357
PMCID: PMC7607387
PMID: 32116003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure The 
authors would like to acknowledge that the work in their laboratory on this 
topic has previously been supported by the research and training grants from the 
National Institutes of Health, a Padres Pedal the Cause Award and a David Lehr 
Research Award from the American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial 
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or 
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the 
production of this manuscript.