1. Exp Gerontol. 2020 Feb 28;134:110893. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2020.110893. Online
 ahead of print.

MANF delivery improves retinal homeostasis and cell replacement therapies in 
ageing mice.

Neves J(1), Chirco KR(2), Cedron-Craft W(3), Chew S(2), Zhu J(3), Jasper H(4), 
Lamba DA(5).

Author information:
(1)Paul F. Glenn Center for Biology of Aging Research, Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945-1400, USA; Instituto 
de Medicina Molecular (iMM), Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, 
Lisbon 1649-028, Portugal. Electronic address: joana.neves@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(2)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell 
Research, Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, 
SF, USA.
(3)Paul F. Glenn Center for Biology of Aging Research, Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945-1400, USA.
(4)Paul F. Glenn Center for Biology of Aging Research, Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945-1400, USA; 
Immunology Discovery, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA.
(5)Paul F. Glenn Center for Biology of Aging Research, Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945-1400, USA; The Eli 
and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, SF, USA. 
Electronic address: Deepak.Lamba@ucsf.edu.

Ageing is a major risk factor for vision loss, and inflammation is an important 
contributor to retinal disease in the elderly. Regenerative medicine based on 
cell replacement strategies has emerged in recent years as a promising approach 
to restore vision. However, how the ageing process affects retinal homeostasis 
and inflammation in the retina and how this may impose a limitation to the 
success of such interventions remains unknown. Here we report that, in mice and 
humans, retinal ageing is associated with a reduction in MANF protein levels, 
specifically in the choroid, where increased densities of activated macrophages 
can be detected. We further show that the retina of old wild type mice, in the 
absence of any other genetic alteration, has limited homeostatic capacity after 
damage imposed by light exposure and reduced engraftment efficiency of 
exogenously supplied photoreceptors. Finally, we show that supplementation of 
MANF recombinant protein can improve retinal homeostasis and repair capacity in 
both settings, correlating with reduced numbers of activated macrophages in the 
old retina. Our work identifies age-related alterations in retinal homeostasis, 
independent of genetic alterations, leading to age-related retinal inflammation 
and damage susceptibility. We suggest that MANF therapy is a potential 
intervention to maintain retinal homeostasis in the elderly and improve the 
success of retinal regenerative therapies applied to aged individuals.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2020.110893
PMCID: PMC7483617
PMID: 32119994