1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Feb 11;11:144. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00144.
eCollection  2020.

High Levels of miR-483-3p Are Present in Serum Exosomes Upon Infection of Mice 
With Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus.

Maemura T(1)(2), Fukuyama S(1), Kawaoka Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The 
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States.
(3)Department of Special Pathogens, International Research Center for Infectious 
Diseases, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Exosomes, the extracellular vesicles that contain functional proteins and RNAs, 
regulate cell-cell communication. Recently, our group reported that levels of 
various microRNAs (miRNAs) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exosomes were highly 
increased in influenza virus-infected mice and that one of those miRNAs, 
miR-483-3p, was involved in the potentiation of the innate immune responses to 
influenza virus infection in mouse type II pneumocytes. Here, we evaluated 
exosomal miR-483-3p levels in the serum of influenza virus-infected mice and 
found that miR-483-3p levels were significantly increased during infection with 
a highly pathogenic avian H5N1 influenza virus. Moreover, miR-483-3p-enriched 
exosomes derived from type II pneumocytes potentiated the expression of 
proinflammatory cytokine genes in vascular endothelial cells. Our findings 
suggest that serum exosomal transfer of miR-483-3p might be involved in the 
inflammatory pathogenesis of H5N1 influenza virus infection.

Copyright Â© 2020 Maemura, Fukuyama and Kawaoka.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00144
PMCID: PMC7026002
PMID: 32117163