1. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2020 Apr 15;30(8):127048. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2020.127048.  Epub 2020 Feb 18.

Discovery and optimization of 2-aminopyridine derivatives as novel and selective 
JAK2 inhibitors.

Ma X(1), Diao Y(1), Ge H(1), Xu F(1), Zhu L(2), Zhao Z(3), Li H(4).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science & Technology, Shanghai 200237, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science & Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. Electronic address: 
zhulfl@ecust.edu.cn.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science & Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. Electronic address: 
zhjzhao@ecust.edu.cn.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of New Drug Design, School of Pharmacy, East China 
University of Science & Technology, Shanghai 200237, China. Electronic address: 
hlli@ecust.edu.cn.

Janus kinases (JAKs) including JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2 are members of a 
family of intracellular nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, which have been 
demonstrated to be critical in the cell signaling pathway and involved in 
inflammatory diseases and cancer. V617F mutation in JAK2 has been implicated in 
polycythaemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythaemia (ET) and myelofibrosis (MF). 
Here, we described the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of a series 
of 2-aminopyridine derivatives. The results of enzymatic activity assays 
supported compound 16m-(R) as a potential and selective JAK2 inhibitor, which 
exhibited high inhibitory activity with an IC50 of 3 nM against JAK2, and 85- 
and 76-fold selectivity over JAK1 and JAK3, respectively. Structure-activity 
relationships (SAR) and mechanistic analysis demonstrated that 16m-(R) might be 
a promising selective JAK2 inhibitor for further study.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2020.127048
PMID: 32122740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.