1. Sci Adv. 2020 Feb 21;6(8):eaay3178. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay3178. eCollection 
2020 Feb.

Intrinsic disorder controls two functionally distinct dimers of the master 
transcription factor PU.1.

Xhani S(1), Lee S(1), Kim HM(1), Wang S(1), Esaki S(1), Ha VLT(1), Khanezarrin 
M(1), Fernandez GL(1), Albrecht AV(1), Aramini JM(2), Germann MW(1)(3), Poon 
GMK(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.
(2)Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, New York, NY 
10031, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.
(4)Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, 
GA 30303, USA.

Transcription factors comprise a major reservoir of conformational disorder in 
the eukaryotic proteome. The hematopoietic master regulator PU.1 presents a 
well-defined model of the most common configuration of intrinsically disordered 
regions (IDRs) in transcription factors. We report that the structured DNA 
binding domain (DBD) of PU.1 regulates gene expression via antagonistic dimeric 
states that are reciprocally controlled by cognate DNA on the one hand and by 
its proximal anionic IDR on the other. The two conformers are mediated by 
distinct regions of the DBD without structured contributions from the tethered 
IDRs. Unlike DNA-bound complexes, the unbound dimer is markedly destabilized. 
Dimerization without DNA is promoted by progressive phosphomimetic substitutions 
of IDR residues that are phosphorylated in immune activation and stimulated by 
anionic crowding agents. These results suggest a previously unidentified, 
nonstructural role for charged IDRs in conformational control by mitigating 
electrostatic penalties that would mask the interactions of highly cationic 
DBDs.

Copyright Â© 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 
4.0 (CC BY-NC).

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aay3178
PMCID: PMC7034988
PMID: 32128405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]