1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 4;10(1):3978. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-60829-2.

In vitro and intracellular activities of frog skin temporins against Legionella 
pneumophila and its eukaryotic hosts.

Crépin A(1), Jégou JF(2), André S(3), Ecale F(1), Croitoru A(4), Cantereau A(5), 
Berjeaud JM(1), Ladram A(3), Verdon J(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Ecologie & Biologie des Interactions, UMR CNRS 7267, Université 
de Poitiers, 1 Rue Georges Bonnet, TSA 51106, 86073, POITIERS, Cedex 9, France.
(2)Laboratoire Inflammation, Tissus Epithéliaux et Cytokines, UPRES EA4331, 
Université de Poitiers, 1 Rue Georges Bonnet, TSA 51106, 86073, POITIERS, Cedex 
9, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, IBPS, BIOSIPE, 
F-75252, Paris, France.
(4)Laboratoire d'Optique et Biosciences, INSERM U1182 - CNRS UMR7645, Ecole 
polytechnique, 91128, PALAISEAU, Cedex, France.
(5)Laboratoire Signalisation et Transports Ioniques Membranaires, Université de 
Poitiers, 1 Rue Georges Bonnet, TSA 51106, 86073, POITIERS, Cedex 9, France.
(6)Laboratoire Ecologie & Biologie des Interactions, UMR CNRS 7267, Université 
de Poitiers, 1 Rue Georges Bonnet, TSA 51106, 86073, POITIERS, Cedex 9, France. 
julien.verdon@univ-poitiers.fr.

Temporin-SHa (SHa) is a small cationic host defence peptide (HDP) produced in 
skin secretions of the Sahara frog Pelophylax saharicus. This peptide has a 
broad-spectrum activity, efficiently targeting bacteria, parasites and viruses. 
Noticeably, SHa has demonstrated an ability to kill Leishmania infantum 
parasites (amastigotes) within macrophages. Recently, an analog of SHa with an 
increased net positive charge, named [K3]SHa, has been designed to improve those 
activities. SHa and [K3]SHa were both shown to exhibit leishmanicidal activity 
mainly by permeabilization of cell membranes but could also induce 
apoptotis-like death. Temporins are usually poorly active against Gram-negative 
bacteria whereas many of these species are of public health interest. Among 
them, Legionella pneumophila, the etiological agent of Legionnaire's disease, is 
of major concern. Indeed, this bacterium adopts an intracellular lifestyle and 
replicate inside alveolar macrophages likewise inside its numerous protozoan 
hosts. Despite several authors have studied the antimicrobial activity of many 
compounds on L. pneumophila released from host cells, nothing is known about 
activity on intracellular L. pneumophila within their hosts, and subsequently 
mechanisms of action that could be involved. Here, we showed for the first time 
that SHa and [K3]SHa were active towards several species of Legionella. Both 
peptides displayed bactericidal activity and caused a loss of the bacterial 
envelope integrity leading to a rapid drop in cell viability. Regarding amoebae 
and THP-1-derived macrophages, SHa was less toxic than [K3]SHa and exhibited low 
half maximal lethal concentrations (LC50). When used at non-toxic concentration 
(6.25 µM), SHa killed more than 90% L. pneumophila within amoebae and around 50% 
within macrophages. Using SHa labeled with the fluorescent dye Cy5, we showed an 
evenly diffusion within cells except in vacuoles. Moreover, SHa was able to 
enter the nucleus of amoebae and accumulate in the nucleolus. This subcellular 
localization seemed specific as macrophages nucleoli remained unlabeled. 
Finally, no modifications in the expression of cytokines and HDPs were recorded 
when macrophages were treated with 6.25 µM SHa. By combining all data, we showed 
that temporin-SHa decreases the intracellular L. pneumophila load within amoebae 
and macrophages without being toxic for eukaryotic cells. This peptide was also 
able to reach the nucleolus of amoebae but was not capable to penetrate inside 
vacuoles. These data are in favor of an indirect action of SHa towards 
intracellular Legionella and make this peptide a promising template for further 
developments.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-60829-2
PMCID: PMC7055270
PMID: 32132569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.