1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 5;15(3):e0229799. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229799. 
eCollection 2020.

Munc13 mediates klotho-inhibitable diacylglycerol-stimulated exocytotic 
insertion of pre-docked TRPC6 vesicles.

Xie J(1), An SW(1), Jin X(1), Gui Y(1), Huang CL(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America.

α-Klotho is a type 1 transmembrane protein that exhibits aging suppression 
function. The large amino-terminal extracellular domain of α-klotho is shed as 
soluble klotho (sKlotho) and functions as a circulating cardioprotective 
hormone. Diacylglycerol (DAG)-activated calcium-permeable TRPC6 channel plays a 
critical role in stress-induced cardiac remodeling. DAG activates TRPC6 by 
acting directly on the channel to increase its activity and by stimulation of 
channel exocytosis. sKlotho protects the heart by inhibiting DAG stimulation of 
TRPC6 exocytosis. How DAG stimulates TRPC6 exocytosis and thereby inhibition by 
sKlotho are unknown. Using a compound that directly activates TRPC6 without 
affecting channel exocytosis, we validate that sKlotho selectively blocks DAG 
stimulation of channel exocytosis. We further show that DAG stimulates 
exocytosis of TRPC6-containing vesicles pre-docked to the plasma membrane. 
Mnuc13 family proteins play important roles in the proper assembly of SNARE 
proteins and priming the vesicle competent for fusion. We show that DAG 
stimulates TRPC6 exocytosis by targeting to the C1 domain of Munc13-2. The 
results provide fresh insights into the molecular mechanism by which DAG 
regulates vesicle fusion and how sKlotho protects the heart against injury.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229799
PMCID: PMC7058344
PMID: 32134975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.