1. Traffic. 2020 May;21(5):386-397. doi: 10.1111/tra.12727. Epub 2020 Apr 5.

High-content imaging and structure-based predictions reveal functional 
differences between Niemann-Pick C1 variants.

Vanharanta L(1)(2), Peränen J(1)(2), Pfisterer SG(1), Enkavi G(3)(4), 
Vattulainen I(3)(4), Ikonen E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Computational Physics Laboratory, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, 
Finland.

The human Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) gene encoding a 1278 amino acid protein is very 
heterogeneous. While some variants represent benign polymorphisms, NPC disease 
carriers and patients may possess rare variants, whose functional importance 
remains unknown. An NPC1 cDNA construct known as NPC1 wild-type variant (WT-V), 
distributed between laboratories and used as a WT control in several studies, 
also contains changes regarding specific amino acids compared to the NPC1 
Genbank reference sequence. To improve the dissection of subtle functional 
differences, we generated human cells stably expressing NPC1 variants from the 
AAVS1 safe-harbor locus on an NPC1-null background engineered by CRISPR/Cas9 
editing. We then employed high-content imaging with automated image analysis to 
quantitatively assess LDL-induced, time-dependent changes in lysosomal 
cholesterol content and lipid droplet formation. Our results indicate that the 
L472P change present in NPC1 WT-V compromises NPC1 functionality in lysosomal 
cholesterol export. All-atom molecular dynamics simulations suggest that the 
L472P change alters the relative position of the NPC1 middle and the C-terminal 
luminal domains, disrupting the recently characterized cholesterol efflux 
tunnel. These results reveal functional defects in NPC1 WT-V and highlight the 
strength of simulations and quantitative imaging upon stable protein expression 
in elucidating subtle differences in protein function.

© 2020 The Authors. Traffic published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12727
PMID: 32144825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]