1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Mar 6;12(3):164. doi: 10.3390/toxins12030164.

Forty Years of the Description of Brown Spider Venom Phospholipases-D.

Gremski LH(1), da Justa HC(1), da Silva TP(1), Polli NLC(1), Antunes BC(1)(2), 
Minozzo JC(2), Wille ACM(3), Senff-Ribeiro A(1), Arni RK(4), Veiga SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Universidade Federal do Paraná (UFPR), 
Curitiba 81531-980, PR, Brazil.
(2)Centro de Produção e Pesquisa de Imunobiológicos (CPPI), Piraquara 83302-200, 
PR, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Biologia Estrutural, Molecular e Genética, Universidade 
Estadual de Ponta Grossa, Ponta Grossa 84030-900, PR, Brazil.
(4)Centro Multiusuário de Inovação Biomolecular, Departamento de Física, 
Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), São José do Rio Preto 15054-000, SP, 
Brazil.

Spiders of the genus Loxosceles, popularly known as Brown spiders, are 
considered a serious public health issue, especially in regions of hot or 
temperate climates, such as parts of North and South America. Although the 
venoms of these arachnids are complex in molecular composition, often containing 
proteins with distinct biochemical characteristics, the literature has primarily 
described a family of toxins, the Phospholipases-D (PLDs), which are highly 
conserved in all Loxosceles species. PLDs trigger most of the major clinical 
symptoms of loxoscelism i.e., dermonecrosis, thrombocytopenia, hemolysis, and 
acute renal failure. The key role played by PLDs in the symptomatology of 
loxoscelism was first described 40 years ago, when researches purified a 
hemolytic toxin that cleaved sphingomyelin and generated choline, and was 
referred to as a Sphingomyelinase-D, which was subsequently changed to 
Phospholipase-D when it was demonstrated that the enzyme also cleaved other 
cellular phospholipids. In this review, we present the information gleaned over 
the last 40 years about PLDs from Loxosceles venoms especially with regard to 
the production and characterization of recombinant isoforms. The history of 
obtaining these toxins is discussed, as well as their molecular organization and 
mechanisms of interaction with their substrates. We will address cellular 
biology aspects of these toxins and how they can be used in the development of 
drugs to address inflammatory processes and loxoscelism. Present and future 
aspects of loxoscelism diagnosis will be discussed, as well as their 
biotechnological applications and actions expected for the future in this field.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12030164
PMCID: PMC7150852
PMID: 32155765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.