1. Eur Clin Respir J. 2020 Feb 21;7(1):1730137. doi:
10.1080/20018525.2020.1730137.  eCollection 2020.

High-intensity resistance training in newly diagnosed sarcoidosis- an 
exploratory study of effects on lung function, muscle strength, fatigue, 
dyspnea, health-related quality of life and lung immune cells.

Kullberg S(1)(2), Rivera NV(2), Eriksson MJ(3)(4), Grunewald J(1)(2), Eklund 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Respiratory Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Physiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Background: High-intensity resistance training is unexplored in untreated 
patients with newly diagnosed sarcoidosis. Objectives: To evaluate the effects 
of high-intensity resistance training on lung function, muscle strength, 
fatigue, dyspnea, health-related impairments, and lung immune cells. Methods: 
Eleven untreated patients with newly diagnosed sarcoidosis performed 
high-intensity resistance training at an intensity of 80% of 1 Repetition 
Maximum (RM) twice a week and daily inspiratory muscle training at regular 
intensity for 12 weeks. Assessment with spirometry, chest X-ray, questionnaires, 
and BAL (bronchoalveolar lavage) cells was performed before and in close 
adjacent to completed training. A final third assessment except bronchoscopy was 
performed at an average 5 months after the training period. Results: The 
training was well tolerated and muscular strength increased significantly while 
fatigue, dyspnea, and health-related impairments decreased, though not 
significantly in all measures. Mean percentage of lung lymphocytes decreased 
(p = 0.006). Conclusions: High-intensity resistance training and inspiratory 
muscle training at regular intensity in patients with newly diagnosed 
sarcoidosis led to improvements in muscular strength without adverse events and 
seems to be a non-invasive attractive way to improve fatigue, dyspnea, and 
quality of life. Analysis of lung immune cells possibly indicated a decreased 
inflammatory activity. These results provide a basis for larger randomized 
trials.

© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20018525.2020.1730137
PMCID: PMC7048202
PMID: 32158524

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.