1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 9;10(1):4307. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61275-w.

Replicative conditioning of Herpes simplex type 1 virus by Survivin promoter, 
combined to ERBB2 retargeting, improves tumour cell-restricted oncolysis.

Sasso E(1)(2)(3), Froechlich G(4), Cotugno G(5), D'Alise AM(5), Gentile C(6)(4), 
Bignone V(5), De Lucia M(5), Petrovic B(5), Campadelli-Fiume G(7), Scarselli 
E(5), Nicosia A(6)(4)(5), Zambrano N(6)(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via S. Pansini, 5, 80131, Naples, Italy. 
e.sasso@nouscom.com.
(2)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.aR.L., Via G. Salvatore 486, 80145, Naples, 
Italy. e.sasso@nouscom.com.
(3)Nouscom S.R.L., Via di Castel Romano 100, 00128, Rome, Italy. 
e.sasso@nouscom.com.
(4)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.aR.L., Via G. Salvatore 486, 80145, Naples, 
Italy.
(5)Nouscom S.R.L., Via di Castel Romano 100, 00128, Rome, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via S. Pansini, 5, 80131, Naples, Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, Via San Giacomo 12, 40126, Bologna, Italy.

Oncolytic virotherapy is emerging as a promising therapeutic option for solid 
tumours. Several oncolytic vectors in clinical testing are based on attenuated 
viruses; thus, efforts are being taken to develop a new repertoire of oncolytic 
viruses, based on virulent viral genomes. This possibility, however, raises 
concerns dealing with the safety features of the virulent phenotypes. We 
generated a double regulated Herpes simplex type-1 virus (HSV-1), in which 
tumour cell restricted replicative potential was combined to selective entry via 
ERBB2 receptor retargeting. The transcriptional control of the viral alpha4 gene 
encoding for the infected cell protein-4 (ICP4) by the cellular Survivin/BIRC5 
promoter conferred a tumour cell-restricted replicative potential to a virulent 
HSV-1 genome. The combination of the additional ERBB2 retargeting further 
improved the selectivity for tumour cells, conferring to the double regulated 
virus a very limited ability to infect and propagate in non-cancerous cells. 
Accordingly, a suitable replicative and cytotoxic potential was maintained in 
tumour cell lines, allowing the double regulated virus to synergize in vivo with 
immune checkpoint (anti-PD-1) blockade in immunocompetent mice. Thus, 
restricting the replicative spectrum and tropism of virulent HSV-1 genomes by 
combination of conditional replication and retargeting provides an improved 
safety, does not alter the oncolytic strength, and is exploitable for its 
therapeutic potential with immune checkpoint blockade in cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61275-w
PMCID: PMC7062820
PMID: 32152425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.N., E.Sc. and G.C.-F. are founders of and 
shareholders in Nouscom S.R.L. E.Sa., G.C., A.M.D., V.B., M.D.L., B.P. are 
employees of Nouscom S.R.L. All the other Authors declare no competing 
interests.