1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020 Apr 1;12(13):15823-15829. doi: 
10.1021/acsami.9b21131. Epub 2020 Mar 18.

Cytosolic Delivery of Functional Proteins In Vitro through Tunable Gigahertz 
Acoustics.

Pan S(1)(2), Jeon T(1)(3), Luther DC(1), Duan X(2), Rotello VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts, 710 North Pleasant 
Street, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, United States.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Precision Measuring Technology & Instruments, College 
of Precision Instrument and Optoelectronics Engineering, Tianjin University, 
Tianjin 300072, China.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Massachusetts, 
710 North Pleasant Street, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, United States.

Intracellular delivery is essential to therapeutic applications such as genome 
engineering and disease diagnosis. Current methods lack simple, noninvasive 
strategies and are often hindered by long incubation time or high toxicity. 
Hydrodynamic approaches offer rapid and controllable delivery of small 
molecules, but thus far have not been demonstrated for delivering functional 
proteins. In this work, we developed a robust hydrodynamic approach based on 
gigahertz (GHz) acoustics to achieve rapid and noninvasive cytosolic delivery of 
biologically active proteins. With this method, GHz-based acoustic devices 
trigger oscillations through a liquid medium (acoustic streaming), generating 
shear stress on the cell membrane and inducing transient nanoporation. This 
mechanical effect enhances membrane permeability and enables cytosolic access to 
cationic proteins without disturbing their bioactivity. We evaluated the 
versatility of this approach through the delivery of cationic fluorescent 
proteins to a range of cell lines, all of which displayed equally efficient 
delivery speed (â‰¤20 min). Delivery of multiple enzymatically active proteins 
with functionality related to apoptosis or genetic recombination further 
demonstrated the relevance of this method.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.9b21131
PMCID: PMC7392053
PMID: 32150373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest. Supporting Information. The Supporting Information is available free 
of charge on the ACS Publications website. GHz acoustic streaming setup; GHz 
acoustic streaming and the induced cell membrane deformation; Confocal images 
for optimal working conditions; Investigation of cytosolic delivery of proteins 
with different surface charge (PDF) Confocal microscopy Z-stacking for cytosolic 
localization of delivered +25GFP (AVI)