1. Front Chem. 2020 Feb 25;8:100. doi: 10.3389/fchem.2020.00100. eCollection
2020.

Lithium-Ion Transport in Nanocrystalline Spinel-Type Li[In(x)Li(y)]Br(4) as Seen 
by Conductivity Spectroscopy and NMR.

Gombotz M(1), Rettenwander D(1), Wilkening HMR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Technology of Materials, Technical University of 
Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)ALISTORE-European Research Institute, CNRS FR3104, Hub de l'Energie, Amiens, 
France.

Currently, a variety of solid Li+ conductors are being discussed that could 
potentially serve as electrolytes in all-solid-state Li-ion batteries and 
batteries using metallic Li as the anode. Besides oxides, sulfides and 
thioposphates, and also halogenides, such as Li3YBr6, belong to the group of 
such promising materials. Here, we report on the mechanosynthesis of ternary, 
nanocrystalline (defect-rich) Li[In x Li y ]Br4, which crystallizes with a 
spinel structure. We took advantage of a soft mechanochemical synthesis route 
that overcomes the limitations of classical solid-state routes, which usually 
require high temperatures to prepare the product. X-ray powder diffraction, 
combined with Rietveld analysis, was used to collect initial information about 
the crystal structure; it turned out that the lithium indium bromide prepared 
adopts cubic symmetry ( Fd3¯m ). The overall and electronic conductivity were 
examined via broadband conductivity spectroscopy and electrical polarization 
measurements. While electric modulus spectroscopy yielded information on 
long-range ion transport, 7Li nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spin-lattice 
relaxation measurements revealed rapid, localized ionic hopping processes in the 
ternary bromide. Finally, we studied the influence of thermal treatment on 
overall conductivity, as the indium bromide might find applications in cells 
that are operated at high temperatures (330 K and above).

Copyright © 2020 Gombotz, Rettenwander and Wilkening.

DOI: 10.3389/fchem.2020.00100
PMCID: PMC7052269
PMID: 32158744