1. J Virol. 2020 May 18;94(11):e01817-19. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01817-19. Print 2020
May  18.

An R195K Mutation in the PA-X Protein Increases the Virulence and Transmission 
of Influenza A Virus in Mammalian Hosts.

Sun Y(#)(1), Hu Z(#)(2), Zhang X(#)(2), Chen M(2), Wang Z(2), Xu G(2), Bi Y(3), 
Tong Q(2), Wang M(2), Sun H(2), Pu J(2), Iqbal M(4), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China 
sypcau@163.com ljh@cau.edu.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology of the Ministry of Agriculture, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, Institute 
of Microbiology, Center for Influenza Research and Early Warning (CASCIRE), 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)The Pirbright Institute, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

In the 21st century, the emergence of H7N9 and H1N1/2009 influenza viruses, 
originating from animals and causing severe human infections, has prompted 
investigations into the genetic alterations required for cross-species 
transmission. We previously found that replacement of the human-origin PA gene 
segment in avian influenza virus (AIV) could overcome barriers to cross-species 
transmission. Recently, it was reported that the PA gene segment encodes both 
the PA protein and a second protein, PA-X. Here, we investigated the role of 
PA-X. We found that an H9N2 avian influenza reassortant virus bearing a 
human-origin H1N1/2009 PA gene was attenuated in mice after the loss of PA-X. 
Reverse genetics analyses of PA-X substitutions conserved in human influenza 
viruses indicated that R195K, K206R, and P210L substitutions conferred 
significantly increased replication and pathogenicity on H9N2 virus in mice and 
ferrets. PA-X R195K was present in all human H7N9 and H1N1/2009 viruses and 
predominated in human H5N6 viruses. Compared with PA-X 195R, H7N9 influenza 
viruses bearing PA-X 195K showed increased replication and transmission in 
ferrets. We further showed that PA-X 195K enhanced lung inflammatory responses, 
potentially due to decreased host shutoff function. A competitive transmission 
study in ferrets indicated that 195K provides a replicative advantage over 195R 
in H1N1/2009 viruses. In contrast, PA-X 195K did not influence the virulence of 
H9N2 AIV in chickens, suggesting that the effects of the substitution were 
mammal specific. Therefore, future surveillance efforts should scrutinize this 
region of PA-X because of its potential impact on cross-species transmission of 
influenza viruses.IMPORTANCE Four influenza pandemics in humans (the Spanish flu 
of 1918 [H1N1], the Asian flu of 1957 [H2N2], the Hong Kong flu of 1968 [H3N2], 
and the swine origin flu of 2009 [H1N1]) are all proposed to have been caused by 
avian or swine influenza viruses that acquired virulence factors through 
adaptive mutation or reassortment with circulating human viruses. Currently, 
influenza viruses circulating in animals are repeatedly transmitted to humans, 
posing a significant threat to public health. However, the molecular properties 
accounting for interspecies transmission of influenza viruses remain unclear. In 
the present study, we demonstrated that PA-X plays an important role in 
cross-species transmission of influenza viruses. At least three human-specific 
amino acid substitutions in PA-X dramatically enhanced the adaptation of animal 
influenza viruses in mammals. In particular, PA-X 195K might have contributed to 
cross-species transmission of H7N9, H5N6, and H1N1/2009 viruses from animal 
reservoirs to humans.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01817-19
PMCID: PMC7269435
PMID: 32161172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]