1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Mar 31;117(13):7363-7373. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1919709117. Epub 2020 Mar 12.

PIMMS43 is required for malaria parasite immune evasion and sporogonic 
development in the mosquito vector.

Ukegbu CV(1), Giorgalli M(1), Tapanelli S(1), Rona LDP(1), Jaye A(1), Wyer C(1), 
Angrisano F(1), Blagborough AM(1), Christophides GK(2), Vlachou D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, United 
Kingdom g.christophides@imperial.ac.uk d.vlachou@imperial.ac.uk.

After being ingested by a female Anopheles mosquito during a bloodmeal on an 
infected host, and before they can reach the mosquito salivary glands to be 
transmitted to a new host, Plasmodium parasites must establish an infection of 
the mosquito midgut in the form of oocysts. To achieve this, they must first 
survive a series of robust innate immune responses that take place prior to, 
during, and immediately after ookinete traversal of the midgut epithelium. 
Understanding how parasites may evade these responses could highlight new ways 
to block malaria transmission. We show that an ookinete and sporozoite surface 
protein designated as PIMMS43 (Plasmodium Infection of the Mosquito Midgut 
Screen 43) is required for parasite evasion of the Anopheles coluzzii 
complement-like response. Disruption of PIMMS43 in the rodent malaria parasite 
Plasmodium berghei triggers robust complement activation and ookinete 
elimination upon mosquito midgut traversal. Silencing components of the 
complement-like system through RNAi largely restores ookinete-to-oocyst 
transition but oocysts remain small in size and produce a very small number of 
sporozoites that additionally are not infectious, indicating that PIMMS43 is 
also essential for sporogonic development in the oocyst. Antibodies that bind 
PIMMS43 interfere with parasite immune evasion when ingested with the infectious 
blood meal and significantly reduce the prevalence and intensity of infection. 
PIMMS43 genetic structure across African Plasmodium falciparum populations 
indicates allelic adaptation to sympatric vector populations. These data add to 
our understanding of mosquito-parasite interactions and identify PIMMS43 as a 
target of malaria transmission blocking.

Copyright Â© 2020 the Author(s). Published by PNAS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1919709117
PMCID: PMC7132314
PMID: 32165544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.