1. Mol Cell. 2020 Apr 16;78(2):275-288.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.02.017.
Epub  2020 Mar 10.

Stepwise Promoter Melting by Bacterial RNA Polymerase.

Chen J(1), Chiu C(1), Gopalkrishnan S(2), Chen AY(2), Olinares PDB(3), Saecker 
RM(1), Winkelman JT(2), Maloney MF(2), Chait BT(3), Ross W(2), Gourse RL(2), 
Campbell EA(1), Darst SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10065, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry and Gaseous Ion Chemistry, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10065, USA. Electronic address: darst@rockefeller.edu.

Transcription initiation requires formation of the open promoter complex (RPo). 
To generate RPo, RNA polymerase (RNAP) unwinds the DNA duplex to form the 
transcription bubble and loads the DNA into the RNAP active site. RPo formation 
is a multi-step process with transient intermediates of unknown structure. We 
use single-particle cryoelectron microscopy to visualize seven intermediates 
containing Escherichia coli RNAP with the transcription factor TraR en route to 
forming RPo. The structures span the RPo formation pathway from initial 
recognition of the duplex promoter in a closed complex to the final RPo. The 
structures and supporting biochemical data define RNAP and promoter DNA 
conformational changes that delineate steps on the pathway, including previously 
undetected transient promoter-RNAP interactions that contribute to populating 
the intermediates but do not occur in RPo. Our work provides a structural basis 
for understanding RPo formation and its regulation, a major checkpoint in gene 
expression throughout evolution.

Copyright Â© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2020.02.017
PMCID: PMC7166197
PMID: 32160514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.