1. Biotechnol Biofuels. 2020 Mar 6;13:39. doi: 10.1186/s13068-020-01674-3. 
eCollection 2020.

Pathway dissection, regulation, engineering and application: lessons learned 
from biobutanol production by solventogenic clostridia.

Li S(1), Huang L(1), Ke C(1), Pang Z(2), Liu L(3).

Author information:
(1)1College of Light Industry and Food Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning, 
530004 China.
(2)2College of Life Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning, 530005 
China.
(3)3State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, 
Wuxi, 214122 China.

The global energy crisis and limited supply of petroleum fuels have rekindled 
the interest in utilizing a sustainable biomass to produce biofuel. Butanol, an 
advanced biofuel, is a superior renewable resource as it has a high energy 
content and is less hygroscopic than other candidates. At present, the 
biobutanol route, employing acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation in 
Clostridium species, is not economically competitive due to the high cost of 
feedstocks, low butanol titer, and product inhibition. Based on an analysis of 
the physiological characteristics of solventogenic clostridia, current advances 
that enhance ABE fermentation from strain improvement to product separation were 
systematically reviewed, focusing on: (1) elucidating the metabolic pathway and 
regulation mechanism of butanol synthesis; (2) enhancing cellular performance 
and robustness through metabolic engineering, and (3) optimizing the process of 
ABE fermentation. Finally, perspectives on engineering and exploiting clostridia 
as cell factories to efficiently produce various chemicals and materials are 
also discussed.

Â© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13068-020-01674-3
PMCID: PMC7060580
PMID: 32165923

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.