1. J Clin Oncol. 2020 Jun 1;38(16):1836-1848. doi: 10.1200/JCO.19.01410. Epub
2020  Mar 13.

Targets and Antibody Formats for Immunotherapy of Neuroblastoma.

Park JA(1), Cheung NV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is a malignant embryonal tumor of the sympathetic nervous 
system that is most commonly diagnosed in the abdomen, often presenting with 
signs and symptoms of metastatic spread. Three decades ago, high-risk NB 
metastatic to bone and bone marrow in children was not curable. Today, with 
multimodality treatment, 50% of these patients will survive, but most suffer 
from debilitating treatment-related complications. Novel targeted therapies to 
improve cure rates while minimizing toxicities are urgently needed. Recent 
molecular discoveries in oncology have spawned the development of an impressive 
array of targeted therapies for adult cancers, yet the paucity of recurrent 
somatic mutations or activated oncogenes in pediatric cancers poses a major 
challenge to the evolving paradigm of personalized medicine. Although low tumor 
mutational burden is a major hurdle for immune checkpoint inhibitors, an 
immature or impaired immune system and inhibitory tumor microenvironment can 
further complicate the prospects for successful immunotherapy. In this regard, 
despite the poor immunogenic properties of NB, the success of antibody-based 
immunotherapy and radioimmunotherapy directed at single targets (eg, GD2 and 
B7-H3) is both encouraging and surprising, given that most solid tumor 
antibodies that use Fc-dependent mechanisms or radioimmunotargeting have largely 
failed. Here, we summarize the current information on the immunologic properties 
of this tumor, its potential immunotherapeutic targets, and novel antibody-based 
strategies on the horizon.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.19.01410
PMCID: PMC7255979
PMID: 32167865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]