1. Front Genet. 2020 Feb 27;11:97. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00097. eCollection
2020.

Comprehensive Functional Analysis of Escherichia coli Ribosomal RNA 
Methyltransferases.

Pletnev P(1)(2)(3), Guseva E(4), Zanina A(1), Evfratov S(1), Dzama M(4), Treshin 
V(1), Pogorel'skaya A(4), Osterman I(1)(2), Golovina A(5), Rubtsova M(1)(2), 
Serebryakova M(2)(5), Pobeguts OV(6), Govorun VM(6), Bogdanov AA(1)(5), Dontsova 
OA(1)(2)(3)(5), Sergiev PV(1)(2)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Center of Life Sciences, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biololgy, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(6)Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Moscow, 
Russia.
(7)Institute of Functional Genomics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, 
Russia.

Ribosomal RNAs in all organisms are methylated. The functional role of the 
majority of modified nucleotides is unknown. We systematically questioned the 
influence of rRNA methylation in Escherichia coli on a number of characteristics 
of bacterial cells with the help of a set of rRNA methyltransferase (MT) gene 
knockout strains from the Keio collection. Analysis of ribosomal subunits 
sedimentation profiles of the knockout strains revealed a surprisingly small 
number of rRNA MT that significantly affected ribosome assembly. Accumulation of 
the assembly intermediates was observed only for the rlmE knockout strain whose 
growth was retarded most significantly among other rRNA MT knockout strains. 
Accumulation of the 17S rRNA precursor was observed for rsmA(ksgA) knockout 
cells as well as for cells devoid of functional rsmB and rlmC genes. Significant 
differences were found among the WT and the majority of rRNA MT knockout strains 
in their ability to sustain exogenous protein overexpression. While the majority 
of the rRNA MT knockout strains supported suboptimal reporter gene expression, 
the strain devoid of the rsmF gene demonstrated a moderate increase in the yield 
of ectopic gene expression. Comparative 2D protein gel analysis of rRNA MT 
knockout strains revealed only minor perturbations of the proteome.

Copyright © 2020 Pletnev, Guseva, Zanina, Evfratov, Dzama, Treshin, 
Pogorel’skaya, Osterman, Golovina, Rubtsova, Serebryakova, Pobeguts, Govorun, 
Bogdanov, Dontsova and Sergiev.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2020.00097
PMCID: PMC7056703
PMID: 32174967