1. iScience. 2020 Mar 27;23(3):100953. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.100953. Epub 2020
 Feb 29.

Multiplex Stimulated Raman Scattering Imaging Cytometry Reveals Lipid-Rich 
Protrusions in Cancer Cells under Stress Condition.

Huang KC(1), Li J(2), Zhang C(2), Tan Y(1), Cheng JX(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston, 
MA 02215, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA; Photonics Center, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA. Electronic address: jxcheng@bu.edu.

In situ measurement of cellular metabolites is still a challenge in biology. 
Conventional methods, such as mass spectrometry or fluorescence microscopy, 
would either destroy the sample or introduce strong perturbations to target 
molecules. Here, we present multiplex stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) imaging 
cytometry as a label-free single-cell analysis platform with chemical 
specificity and high-throughput capabilities. Using SRS imaging cytometry, we 
studied the metabolic responses of human pancreatic cancer cells under stress by 
starvation and chemotherapeutic drug treatments. We unveiled protrusions 
containing lipid droplets as a metabolic marker for stress-resistant cancer 
cells. Furthermore, by spectroscopic SRS mapping, we unveiled that triglyceride 
in lipid droplets are used for local energy production through lipolysis, 
autophagy, and β-oxidation. Our findings demonstrate the potential of targeting 
lipid metabolism for selective treatment of stress-resistant cancers. 
Collectively, these results highlight SRS imaging cytometry as a powerful 
label-free tool for biological discoveries with a high-throughput, high-content 
capacity.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2020.100953
PMCID: PMC7078382
PMID: 32179477

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.