1. AMB Express. 2020 Mar 16;10(1):51. doi: 10.1186/s13568-020-00983-y.

Evaluation of the yeast surface display system for screening of functional 
nanobodies.

Kajiwara K(1), Aoki W(1)(2), Ueda M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto 
University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.
(2)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science 
and Technology Agency (JST), 7 Goban-cho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-0076, Japan.
(3)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto 
University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan. 
miueda@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(4)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science 
and Technology Agency (JST), 7 Goban-cho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 102-0076, Japan. 
miueda@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Yeast surface display is a powerful technology used to isolate and engineer 
proteins to improve their activity, specificity, and stability. In this method, 
gene expression is regulated by promoters, and secretion efficiency is affected 
by secretion signals. Furthermore, both the accessibility and activity of the 
displayed proteins are affected by the length of anchor proteins. The ideal 
promoter, secretion signal, and anchor protein combination depend on the 
proteins of interest. In this study, we optimized a yeast surface display 
suitable for nanobody evaluation. We designed five display systems that used 
different combinations of promoters, secretion signals, and anchor proteins. 
Anti-hen egg-white lysozyme nanobody was used as the model nanobody. The amount 
of nanobodies displayed on yeast cells, the number of antigens bound to the 
displayed nanobodies, and the display efficiency were quantified. Overall, we 
improved the yeast display system for nanobody engineering and proposed its 
optimization.

DOI: 10.1186/s13568-020-00983-y
PMCID: PMC7076106
PMID: 32180052

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.