1. Viruses. 2020 Mar 9;12(3):298. doi: 10.3390/v12030298.

Evolution and Pathogenicity of the H1 and H3 Subtypes of Swine Influenza Virus 
in Mice between 2016 and 2019 in China.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Sun F(1)(2), Li L(1)(2), Chen T(3), Cao S(1)(2), Ding G(1)(2), 
Cong F(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Qin L(3), Liu S(1)(2), Xiao Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Science and 
Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University, 61 Daizong Street, Tai'an 
271018, China.
(2)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Disease 
Control and Prevention, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai'an 271018, China.
(3)Shandong New Hope Liuhe Group Co., Ltd., Qingdao 266100, China.

Pigs are considered a "mixing vessel" that can produce new influenza strains 
through genetic reassortments, which pose a threat to public health and cause 
economic losses worldwide. The timely surveillance of the epidemiology of the 
swine influenza virus is of importance for prophylactic action. In this study, 
15 H1N1, one H1N2, and four H3N2 strains were isolated from a total of 4080 
nasal swabs which were collected from 20 pig farms in three provinces in China 
between 2016 and 2019. All the isolates were clustered into four genotypes. A 
new genotype represented by the H1N2 strain was found, whose fragments came from 
the triple reassortant H1N2 lineage, classical swine influenza virus (cs-H1N1) 
lineage, and 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus lineage. A/Sw/HB/HG394/2018(H1N1), which 
was clustered into the cs-H1N1 lineage, showed a close relationship with the 
1918 pandemic virus. Mutations determining the host range specificity were found 
in the hemagglutinin of all isolates, which indicated that all the isolates had 
the potential for interspecies transmission. To examine pathogenicity, eight 
isolates were inoculated into 6-week-old female BALB/c mice. The isolates 
replicated differently, producing different viral loadings in the mice; 
A/Swine/HB/HG394/2018(H1N1) replicated the most efficiently. This suggested that 
the cs-H1N1 reappeared, and more attention should be given to the new pandemic 
to pigs. These results indicated that new reassortments between the different 
strains occurred, which may increase potential risks to human health. Continuing 
surveillance is imperative to monitor swine influenza A virus evolution.

DOI: 10.3390/v12030298
PMCID: PMC7150921
PMID: 32182849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.