1. Front Vet Sci. 2020 Feb 28;7:26. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00026. eCollection 
2020.

Identification and Characterization of Bluetongue Virus Serotype 14 in Russia.

Koltsov A(1), Tsybanov S(1), Gogin A(1), Kolbasov D(1), Koltsova G(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal Research Center for Virology and Microbiology, Pokrov, Russia.

This paper reports a case of bluetongue virus (BTV) infection in the Smolensk 
and Kaluga regions of Russia in 2011-2012. The virus was initially detected in 
heifers transferred in Russia from Germany through Poland and Belarus in 2011. 
On day 27 of quarantine, RNA and infectious viruses of BTV were detected in four 
heifers, but five were serologically positive. However, on day 3 before 
shipment, all heifers were seronegative and PCR-negative for BTV. Thus, a few 
animals from this consignment were viremic without any evident subclinical 
infection. Based on Seg-2 (VP2 gene) and Seg-5 (NS1 gene) sequencing, the 
recovered virus had 99.86-100% nucleotide identity with BTV-14-like viruses such 
as the vaccine BTV-14 strain RSArrrr/BTV 14 and the BTV-14 isolates detected in 
Lithuania and Poland in 2012. Subsequently, BTV-14 was also reported in local 
animals in two regions of Russia. During the monitoring survey, 1623 local 
animals within a 300-km radius were tested, of which 471 tested positive by 
ELISA and 183 by PCR for BTV-14 RNA. No other serotypes were identified in 
either imported or aboriginal animals within that radius. The Culicoides midges 
trapped at the site of the outbreak in May 2012 tested positive for the BTV-14 
genome, indicating that the possible mechanism of spread most likely occurs via 
vector bites. However, further investigation is required to confirm this 
hypothesis, which would provide an improved understanding of the circulation and 
overwintering of BTV in northern latitudes.

Copyright Â© 2020 Koltsov, Tsybanov, Gogin, Kolbasov and Koltsova.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00026
PMCID: PMC7059698
PMID: 32181261