1. Microorganisms. 2020 Mar 18;8(3):429. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8030429.

Plasmid-Mediated Colistin Resistance (mcr-1) in Escherichia coli from 
Non-Imported Fresh Vegetables for Human Consumption in Portugal.

Manageiro V(1)(2), Jones-Dias D(1)(2), Ferreira E(1), Caniça M(1).

Author information:
(1)National Reference Laboratory of Antibiotic Resistances and Healthcare 
Associated Infections (NRL-AMR-HAI), Department of Infectious Diseases, National 
Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, 1649-016 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centre for the Studies of Animal Science, Institute of Agrarian and Agri-Food 
Sciences and Technologies, Oporto University, 4051-401 Oporto, Portugal.

In this study, we report the presence of the plasmid-mediated colistin 
resistance (PMCR)-encoding gene mcr-1 in an Escherichia coli isolate, INSali25, 
recovered from lettuce produced and marketed in Portugal. Colistin MIC from the 
vegetable E. coli isolate-determined by microdilution broth method according to 
EUCAST guidelines-revealed a non-wild-type phenotype of colistin (MIC 16 mg/L). 
To understand the genetic background of E. coli INSali25, we performed whole 
genome sequencing. Plasmid sequencing was also performed after plasmid DNA 
extraction from the transconjugant TcINSali25 (mcr-1). Directed bioinformatics 
analysis identified the mcr-1 gene in a 39,998 bp length contig, with an 
upstream region including the antibiotic resistance gene blaTEM-1 in a partial 
transposon Tn2, truncated by the insertion sequence IS26 and showing >99% 
identity with previously described mcr-1-harboring IncHI2 plasmids. Further in 
silico analysis showed the presence of additional genes conferring resistance to 
β-lactams (blaTEM-1), aminoglycosides (aadA1, aph(4)-Ia, aph(6)-Id, aac(3)-Iv), 
macrolides (mdf(A)-type), phenicol (floR-type), tetracycline (tetA), and 
sulphonamides (sul2). INSali25 isolate belonged to the ST1716 lineage and showed 
the fimH54 and fumC27 alleles. Lettuce is a vegetable that is commonly consumed 
fresh and not subjected to any cooking process, which may amplify human food 
safety risks. Moreover, the occurrence of plasmid-mediated colistin resistance 
in a sample that was not imported and was acquired in a large retail store 
reinforces the widespread distribution of mcr-1.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8030429
PMCID: PMC7143947
PMID: 32197505

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.