1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020 Mar 4;8:81. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00081.
eCollection  2020.

Significance of MEF2C and RUNX3 Regulation for Endochondral Differentiation of 
Human Mesenchymal Progenitor Cells.

Dreher SI(1), Fischer J(1), Walker T(2), Diederichs S(1), Richter W(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Experimental Orthopaedics, Heidelberg University 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Heidelberg University Hospital, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Guiding progenitor cell development between chondral versus endochondral 
pathways is still an unachieved task of cartilage neogenesis, and human 
mesenchymal progenitor cell (MPC) chondrogenesis is considered as a valuable 
model to better understand hypertrophic development of chondrocytes. 
Transcription factors Runx2, Runx3, and Mef2c play prominent roles for 
chondrocyte hypertrophy during mouse development, but little is known on the 
importance of these key fate-determining factors for endochondral development of 
human MPCs. The aim of this study was to unravel the regulation of RUNX2, RUNX3, 
and MEF2C during MPC chondrogenesis, the pathways driving their expression, and 
the downstream hypertrophic targets affected by their regulation. RUNX2, RUNX3, 
and MEF2C gene expression was differentially regulated during chondrogenesis of 
MPCs, but remained low and unregulated when non-hypertrophic articular 
chondrocytes were differentiated under the same conditions. RUNX3 and MEF2C mRNA 
and protein levels rose in parallel to hypertrophic marker upregulation, but 
surprisingly, RUNX2 gene expression changed only by trend and RUNX2 protein 
remained undetectable. While RUNX3 expression was driven by TGF-β and BMP 
signaling, MEF2C responded to WNT-, BMP-, and Hedgehog-pathway inhibition. MEF2C 
but not RUNX3 levels correlated significantly with COL10A1, IHH, and IBSP gene 
expression when hypertrophy was attenuated. IBSP was a downstream target of 
RUNX3 and MEF2C but not RUNX2 in SAOS-2 cells, underlining the capacity of RUNX3 
and MEF2C to stimulate osteogenic marker expression in human cells. 
Conclusively, RUNX3 and MEF2C appeared more important than RUNX2 for human 
endochondral MPC chondrogenesis. Pathways altering the speed of chondrogenesis 
(FGF, TGF-β, BMP) affected RUNX2 or RUNX3, while pathways changing hypertrophy 
(WNT, PTHrP/HH) regulated mainly MEF2C. Taken together, reduction of MEF2C 
levels is a new goal to shift human cartilage neogenesis toward the chondral 
pathway.

Copyright © 2020 Dreher, Fischer, Walker, Diederichs and Richter.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2020.00081
PMCID: PMC7064729
PMID: 32195247