1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Mar 18;21(6):2085. doi: 10.3390/ijms21062085.

Adrenoceptor Expression during Intervertebral Disc Degeneration.

Kupka J(1), Kohler A(1), El Bagdadi K(1), Bostelmann R(2), Brenneis M(1), Fleege 
C(1), Chan D(3), Zaucke F(1), Meurer A(1), Rickert M(1), Jenei-Lanzl Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Research Unit for Osteoarthritis, Orthopedic University 
Hospital Friedrichsheim gGmbH, 60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(2)Clinic of Neurosurgery, Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Duesseldorf, 
Germany.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong, China.

Healthy and degenerating intervertebral discs (IVDs) are innervated by 
sympathetic nerves, however, adrenoceptor (AR) expression and functionality have 
never been investigated systematically. Therefore, AR gene expression was 
analyzed in both tissue and isolated cells from degenerated human IVDs. 
Furthermore, human IVD samples and spine sections of wildtype mice (WT) and of a 
mouse line that develops spontaneous IVD degeneration (IVDD, in SM/J mice) were 
stained for ARs and extracellular matrix (ECM) components. In IVD homogenates 
and cells α1a-, α1b-, α2a-, α2b-, α2c-, β1-, and β2-AR genes were expressed. In 
human sections, β2-AR was detectable, and its localization parallels with ECM 
alterations. Similarly, in IVDs of WT mice, only β2-AR was expressed, and in 
IVDs of SM/J mice, β2AR expression was stronger accompanied by increased 
collagen II, collagen XII, decorin as well as decreased cartilage oligomeric 
matrix protein expression. In addition, norepinephrine stimulation of isolated 
human IVD cells induced intracellular signaling via ERK1/2 and PKA. For the 
first time, the existence and functionality of ARs were demonstrated in IVD 
tissue samples, suggesting that the sympathicus might play a role in IVDD. 
Further studies will address relevant cellular mechanisms and thereby help to 
develop novel therapeutic options for IVDD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21062085
PMCID: PMC7139977
PMID: 32197418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.