1. Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2020 Feb;9(1):139-143. doi: 10.21037/tlcr.2020.01.07.

Dynamic changes of acquired T790M mutation and small cell lung cancer 
transformation in a patient with EGFR-mutant adenocarcinoma after first- and 
third-generation EGFR-TKIs: a case report.

Ma S(1), He Z(1), Fu H(1), Wang L(1), Wu X(1), Zhang Z(1), Wang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Henan Cancer Hospital, Affiliated Cancer 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450008, China.

Epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) T790M mutation and small cell lung 
cancer (SCLC) transformation are well-known resistance mechanisms acquired 
during treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Various mechanisms 
sometimes coexist in patients. Here, we report a 57-year-old female diagnosed 
with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma, who harbored an EGFR exon 19 deletion 
mutation. This patient initially received gefitinib and progressed after 14 
months. A repeat biopsy was performed, and the original EGFR exon 19 deletion 
and acquired exon 20 T790M mutation were identified. Then, pemetrexed plus 
carboplatin was administered as second-line and osimertinib as third-line 
treatment. Rapid progression and mixed response were observed after 2 months on 
osimertinib, with stable disease of the primary lung lesion but rapid growth of 
a right lower chest mass. The progressive chest lesion underwent biopsy, and the 
SCLC transformation was revealed. Furthermore, the patient was treated with 
etoposide and cisplatin, and she achieved disease control for 4 months. A fourth 
biopsy both for the primary lung lesion and the chest mass were finally 
conducted. Interestingly, the histopathology of the two different lesions showed 
adenocarcinoma and SCLC, respectively. The patient then rapidly suffered brain 
metastasis, and no EGFR mutations were detected in her cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). Overall survival (OS) of the patient was 29 months. This patient 
experienced concomitant resistance mechanisms of T790M mutation and SCLC 
transformation, which might have resulted from intra-tumor heterogeneity and 
drug-induced selection. Ultimately, this case reminds us that repeat biopsies 
are essential for patients receiving EGFR-TKIs in order to make appropriate 
treatment decisions according to the diverse mechanisms of acquired resistance.

2020 Translational Lung Cancer Research. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/tlcr.2020.01.07
PMCID: PMC7082284
PMID: 32206560

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.