1. Oncotarget. 2020 Mar 17;11(11):969-981. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.27503. 
eCollection 2020 Mar 17.

Targeting PI3Kβ alone and in combination with chemotherapy or immunotherapy in 
tumors with PTEN loss.

Owusu-Brackett N(1), Zhao M(2), Akcakanat A(2), Evans KW(2), Yuca E(2), Dumbrava 
EI(2), Janku F(2), Meric-Bernstam F(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Breast Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)The Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Institute for Personalized Cancer 
Therapy, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.

Background: PTEN-deficient tumors are dependent on PI3Kβ activity, making PI3Kβ 
a compelling target. We evaluated the efficacy of PI3Kβ inhibitor AZD8186 on 
tumors with PTEN loss. Results: In vitro cell viability assay and immunoblotting 
demonstrated that PTEN loss was significantly correlated with AZD8186 
sensitivity in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines. Colony formation 
assay confirmed sensitivity of PTEN-deficient cell lines to AZD8186. AZD8186 
inhibited PI3K signaling in PTEN loss TNBC cells. AZD8186 in combination with 
paclitaxel, eribulin had synergistic effects on growth inhibition in PTEN loss 
cells. AZD8186 promoted apoptosis in PTEN loss cells which was synergized by 
paclitaxel. In vivo, AZD8186 had limited activity as a single agent, but 
enhanced antitumor activity when combined with paclitaxel in MDA-MB-436 and 
MDA-MB-468 cell-line xenografts. AZD8186 significantly enhanced antitumor 
efficacy of anti-PD1 antibodies in the PTEN-deficient BP murine melanoma 
xenograft model, but not in the PTEN-wild-type CT26 xenograft model. Methods: In 
vitro, cell proliferation and colony formation assays were performed to 
determine cell sensitivity to AZD8186. Immunoblotting was performed to assess 
PTEN expression and PI3K signaling activity. FACS was performed to evaluate 
apoptosis. In vivo, antitumor efficacy of AZD8186 and its combinations were 
evaluated. Conclusions: AZD8186 has single agent efficacy in PTEN-deficient TNBC 
cell lines in vitro, but has limited single agent efficacy in vivo. However, 
AZD8186 has enhanced efficacy when combined with paclitaxel and anti-PD1 in 
vivo. Further study is needed to determine optimal combination therapies for 
PTEN-deficient solid tumors.

Copyright: © 2020 Owusu-Brackett et al.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.27503
PMCID: PMC7082117
PMID: 32215185

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST N Owusu-Brackett, M Zhao, 
A Akcakanat, KW Evans, E Yuca, and E Dumbrava have nothing to disclose. F. Janku 
has research support from Novartis, Genentech, BioMed Valley Discoveries, 
Astellas, Agios, Plexxikon, Deciphera, Piqur, Symphogen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Asana, Bayer, Proximagen, Astex, FujiFilm Corporation and Upsher-Smith 
Laboratories; is or has been on the Scientific Advisory Boards of Guardant 
Health, IFM Therapeutics, Synlogic, Ideaya, PureTech Health, Jazz 
Pharmaceuticals and Deciphera; is a paid consultant for Trovagene, Primmune 
Therapeutics, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Sotio and Immunomet; and has ownership 
interests in Trovagene. F. Meric-Bernstam reports receiving commercial research 
grants from Novartis, AstraZeneca, Calithera, Aileron, Bayer, Jounce, CytoMx, 
eFFECTOR, Zymeworks, PUMA Biotechnology, Curis, Millennium, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Abbvie, Guardant Health, Takeda, and GlaxoSmithKline as well as grants and 
travel related fees from Taiho and Seattle Genetics. She also served as a 
consultant to Pieris, Dialectica, Sumitomo Dainippon, Samsung Bioepis, Aduro, 
OrigiMed, Xencor, Jackson Laboratory, Zymeworks, Kolon Life Science, and Parexel 
International, and advisor to Inflection Biosciences, GRAIL, Darwin Health, 
Spectrum, Mersana, Seattle Genetics, and Immunomedics.