1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Apr;19(4):2713-2720. doi: 10.3892/ol.2020.11356. Epub 2020
Jan  28.

Changes in the gene mutation profiles of circulating tumor DNA detected using 
CAPP-Seq in neoadjuvant chemotherapy-treated advanced ovarian cancer.

Noguchi T(1), Sakai K(2), Iwahashi N(1), Matsuda K(1), Matsukawa H(1), Yahata 
T(1), Toujima S(1), Nishio K(2), Ino K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wakayama Medical University, 
Wakayama, Wakayama 641-0012, Japan.
(2)Department of Genome Biology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, 
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka 589-8511, Japan.

Cancer Personalized Profiling by deep Sequencing (CAPP-Seq) is a novel 
ultrasensitive next-generation sequencing-based approach that is used to detect 
circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). The aim of the present study was to compare the 
gene mutation profiles and blood tumor mutation burden (bTMB) measured between 
pre- and post-neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC), utilizing CAPP-seq for plasma 
ctDNA in patients with advanced ovarian cancer. The current study included 10 
patients (6 NAC-sensitive and 4 NAC-resistant) clinically diagnosed as having 
stage III or IV ovarian cancer and were administered NAC between May 2017 and 
February 2019. The plasma ctDNA samples were collected at pre- and post-NAC, and 
comprehensive gene mutation analysis was performed using CAPP-seq. In 5 out of 6 
NAC-sensitive cases, the variant allele frequency (VAF) of non-synonymous 
somatic mutations decreased following NAC. In 2 out of the 4 NAC-resistant 
cases, the VAF of non-synonymous somatic mutations increased, and new somatic 
mutations emerged following NAC. In regard to TP53 mutation, the rate of TP53 
mutation in the NAC-resistant cases was significantly higher compared with 
NAC-sensitive cases. Finally, the bTMB decreased significantly after NAC 
treatment in the NAC-sensitive cases, even though there were no significant 
differences in the pretreatment bTMB levels between the NAC-sensitive and 
NAC-resistant cases. These results indicated that gene mutation can be profiled 
and monitored using liquid biopsy-based CAPP-Seq in patients with advanced 
ovarian cancer with NAC treatment, and TP53 mutation in the ctDNA and bTMB may 
be novel biomarkers that can be used for patient monitoring during NAC 
treatment.

Copyright: Â© Noguchi et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11356
PMCID: PMC7068231
PMID: 32218822