1. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2020 Apr;35(2):239-244. doi:
10.1007/s12291-019-00822-3.  Epub 2019 Mar 5.

Evaluation of Relationship Between Arylesterase-Based Activity and Genetic 
Variants of Paraoxonase1 in T2DM Patients within Golestan Province.

Khajeniazi S(1), Shakeri R(2), Marjani A(2).

Author information:
(1)1Stem Cell Research Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, 
Iran.
(2)2Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Metabolic Disorders Research 
Center, Golestan University of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.

Arylesterase activity of Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) enzyme may be play important role 
in initiation and progression of several diseases. Activity or serum level of 
Arylesterase can be affected by many genetic alterations such as SNPs. The 
reduction in the activity and serum level of Arylesterase could be involved in 
Type2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The aim of this investigation is to examine the 
association between Arylesterase activity and promoter polymorphism (- 108C > T) 
of PON1gene in patients with T2DM in Golestan Province, northern area of Iran. 
Achievement of this purpose was due to DNA obtaining from blood then SNP 
determination using PCR-RFLP and Arylesterase activity measurement in the serum 
of 90 normal individuals and 90patients suffering diabetes. Data was processed 
by SPSS software version 16. The significant association was observed between 
the Arylesterase activity and three genotypes of PON1 gene such as CC, CT, and 
TT in subjects with T2DM. In the present study, it has been shown level of 
Arylestrase activity of PON1 in patients (117.33 ± 63.96) is lower than it in 
control group (289.33 ± 68.38); P < 0.05. Our results declared that activity of 
Arylesterase in diabetic patients was significantly lower than the healthy 
individuals.

© Association of Clinical Biochemists of India 2019.

DOI: 10.1007/s12291-019-00822-3
PMCID: PMC7093650
PMID: 32226257

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interestThe authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.