1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 27;10(1):5617. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-62556-0.

Metabolic and Addiction Indices in Patients on Opioid Agonist 
Medication-Assisted Treatment: A Comparison of Buprenorphine and Methadone.

Elman I(1), Howard M(2), Borodovsky JT(3), Mysels D(4), Rott D(5), Borsook D(6), 
Albanese M(7).

Author information:
(1)Center for Pain and the Brain, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and 
Pain Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
Igor.Elman@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Rhode Island Department of Behavioral Healthcare, Cranston, RI, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Center for Pain and the Brain, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and 
Pain Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Cambridge Health Alliance, Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2020 May 1;10(1):7680. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-64610-3.

Metabolic hormones stabilize brain reward and motivational circuits, whereas 
excessive opioid consumption counteracts this effect and may impair metabolic 
function. Here we addressed the role of metabolic processes in the course of the 
agonist medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorder (OUD) with 
buprenorphine or methadone. Plasma lipids, hemoglobin A1C, body composition, the 
oral glucose tolerance test (oGTT) and the Sweet Taste Test (STT) were measured 
in buprenorphine- (n = 26) or methadone (n = 32)- treated subjects with OUD. On 
the whole, the subjects in both groups were overweight or obese and insulin 
resistant; they displayed similar oGTT and STT performance. As compared to 
methadone-treated subjects, those on buprenorphine had significantly lower rates 
of metabolic syndrome (MetS) along with better values of the high-density 
lipoproteins (HDL). Subjects with- vs. without MetS tended to have greater 
addiction severity. Correlative analyses revealed that more buprenorphine 
exposure duration was associated with better HDL and opioid craving values. In 
contrast, more methadone exposure duration was associated with worse 
triglycerides-, HDL-, blood pressure-, fasting glucose- and hemoglobin A1C 
values. Buprenorphine appears to produce beneficial HDL- and craving effects 
and, contrary to methadone, its role in the metabolic derangements is not 
obvious. Our data call for further research aimed at understanding the 
distinctive features of buprenorphine metabolic effects vis-à-vis those of 
methadone and their potential role in these drugs' unique therapeutic profiles.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-62556-0
PMCID: PMC7101411
PMID: 32221389

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.