1. J Exp Bot. 2020 Jul 6;71(14):4057-4068. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eraa161.

Alternate expression of CONSTANS-LIKE 4 in short days and CONSTANS in long days 
facilitates day-neutral response in Rosa chinensis.

Lu J(1), Sun J(1), Jiang A(1), Bai M(1), Fan C(1), Liu J(1), Ning G(2), Wang 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)College of Horticulture and Forestry Sciences, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, China.

Comment in
    J Exp Bot. 2020 Jul 6;71(14):3923-3926. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eraa270.

Photoperiodic flowering responses are classified into three major types: long 
day (LD), short day (SD), and day neutral (DN). The inverse responses to 
daylength of LD and SD plants have been partly characterized in Arabidopsis and 
rice; however, the molecular mechanism underlying the DN response is largely 
unknown. Modern roses are economically important ornamental plants with 
continuous flowering (CF) features, and are generally regarded as DN plants. 
Here, RcCO and RcCOL4 were identified as floral activators up-regulated under LD 
and SD conditions, respectively, in the CF cultivar Rosa chinensis 'Old-Blush'. 
Diminishing the expression of RcCO or/and RcCOL4 by virus-induced gene silencing 
(VIGS) delayed flowering time under both SDs and LDs. Interestingly, in contrast 
to RcCO-silenced plants, the flowering time of RcCOL4-silenced plants was more 
delayed under SD than under LD conditions, indicating perturbed plant responses 
to day neutrality. Further analyses revealed that physical interaction between 
RcCOL4 and RcCO facilitated binding of RcCO to the CORE motif in the promoter of 
RcFT and induction of RcFT. Taken together, the complementary expression of RcCO 
in LDs and of RcCOL4 in SDs guaranteed flowering under favorable growth 
conditions regardless of the photoperiod. This finding established the molecular 
foundation of CF in roses and further shed light on the underlying mechanisms of 
DN responses.

Â© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/eraa161
PMCID: PMC7475255
PMID: 32227095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]