1. Turk Pediatri Ars. 2020 Mar 9;55(1):72-75. doi: 
10.5152/TurkPediatriArs.2018.6540. eCollection 2020.

A case of Type 1 Dent disease presenting with isolated persistent proteinuria.

Güngör T(1), Eroğlu FK(1), Yazılıtaş F(1), Gür G(1), Çakıcı EK(1), Ludwig M(2), 
Bülbül M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Dr. Sami Ulus Training and Research 
Hospital of Women's and Children's Health and Diseases, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Pharmacology, Germany Bonn University, 
Bonn, Germany.

Dent disease is a rare X-linked recessive tubular disorder, characterized by the 
triad of low molecular-weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis 
and/or nephrolithiasis. It is caused by mutations in the CLCN5 gene or OCRL 
gene. Thirty to 80% of affected males develop end-stage kidney disease between 
the ages of 30 and 50 years. Some children were reported to present with 
isolated persistent proteinuria and a part of these patients were diagnosed as 
having focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with kidney biopsy. Although there is 
no specific treatment, treatment of proteinuria and hypercalciuria is thought to 
delay the progression of the disease. For this reason, awareness of the disease 
findings and early diagnosis are important. In this case report, we present a 
boy followed-up with isolated persistent proteinuria and then diagnosed as 
having Dent disease with mutation analysis that showed c.328_330delT 
(p.Phe110Trpfs27*) in the CLCN5 gene. The importance of researching 
low-molecular- weight proteinuria and considering Dent disease in the 
differential diagnosis of children presenting with isolated persistent 
proteinuria has been emphasized.

Publisher: Dent hastalığı, düşük moleküler ağırlıklı proteinüri, hiperkalsiüri, 
nefrokalsinoz ya/ya da nefrolitiyazis üçlüsü ile belirgin; X’e bağlı çekinik 
geçiş gösteren nadir bir hastalıktır. Hastalığa CLCN5 veya OCRL genlerindeki 
mutasyonlar neden olmaktadır. Klasik üçlüsüne rağmen bazı hastaların izole 
proteinüri ile başvurduğu, bu hastaların bir kısmının böbrek biyopsisi ile fokal 
segmental glomeruloskleroz tanısı aldıkları bildirilmiştir. Etkilenen erkek 
hastaların %30-80’inde 3-5. dekadlarda son dönem böbrek hastalığı gelişmektedir. 
Antiproteinürik tedavi ve hiperkalsiürinin düzeltilmesi ile hastalığın 
ilerlemesinin yavaşlatılabileceği düşünülmektedir. Bu nedenle hastalığa ait 
bulguların farkında olmak ve erken tanı önemlidir. Burada, izole persistan 
proteinüri ile başvuran, düşük moleküler ağırlıklı proteinüri, hiperkalsiüri ve 
medüller nefrokalsinoz saptanarak Dent hastalığı düşünülen ve CLCN5 genindeki 
c.328_330delT (p.Phe110Trpfs27*) mutasyon ile kesin tanı alan bir erkek hasta 
sunulmuştur. Bu olgu ile izole persistan proteinüri ile izlenen hastalarda düşük 
molekül ağırlıklı proteinürinin araştırılması ve Dent hastalığının ayırıcı 
tanıda düşünülmesinin önemi vurgulanmak istenmiştir.

Copyright: © 2020 Turkish Archives of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.5152/TurkPediatriArs.2018.6540
PMCID: PMC7096570
PMID: 32231453