1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 31;15(3):e0230872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230872. 
eCollection 2020.

Exploring the molecular structures that confer ligand selectivity for galanin 
type II and III receptors.

Lee YN(1), Reyes-Alcaraz A(1)(2), Yun S(1), Lee CS(3), Hwang JI(1), Seong JY(1).

Author information:
(1)The GPCR laboratory, Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of 
America.
(3)Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Korea University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Galanin receptors (GALRs) belong to the superfamily of G-protein coupled 
receptors. The three GALR subtypes (GALR1, GALR2, and GALR3) are activated by 
their endogenous ligands: spexin (SPX) and galanin (GAL). The synthetic 
SPX-based GALR2-specific agonist, SG2A, plays a dual role in the regulation of 
appetite and depression-like behaviors. Little is known, however, about the 
molecular interaction between GALR2 and SG2A. Using site-directed mutagenesis 
and domain swapping between GALR2 and GALR3, we identified residues in GALR2 
that promote interaction with SG2A and residues in GALR3 that inhibit 
interaction with SG2A. In particular, Phe103, Phe106, and His110 in the 
transmembrane helix 3 (TM3) domain; Val193, Phe194, and Ser195 in the TM5 
domain; and Leu273 in the extracellular loop 3 (ECL3) domain of GALR2 provide 
favorable interactions with the Asn5, Ala7, Phe11, and Pro13 residues of SG2A. 
Our results explain how SG2A achieves selective interaction with GALR2 and 
inhibits interaction with GALR3. The results described here can be used broadly 
for in silico virtual screening of small molecules for the development of GALR 
subtype-specific agonists and/or antagonists.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230872
PMCID: PMC7108740
PMID: 32231393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.