1. J Clin Med. 2020 Mar 30;9(4):933. doi: 10.3390/jcm9040933.

Active Helicobacter pylori Infection is Independently Associated with 
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis in Morbidly Obese Patients.

Doulberis M(1)(2)(3)(4), Srivastava S(5), Polyzos SA(4), Kountouras J(2), 
Papaefthymiou A(2)(4)(6), Klukowska-Rötzler J(3), Blank A(7), Exadaktylos AK(3), 
Srivastava DS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Zurich, Zurich 
8091, Switzerland.
(2)Second Medical Clinic, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Ippokration Hospital, Thessaloniki 54642, Macedonia, Greece.
(3)Emergency Department, University Hospital Inselspital, Bern 3010, 
Switzerland.
(4)First Laboratory of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, Macedonia, Greece.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Spital Thun, Thun 3600, 
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Larisa, Mezourlo, 
Larisa 41110, Greece.
(7)Institute for Pathology, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) emerges as an important global burden 
and Helicobacter pylori infection (Hp-I) has been suggested as a risk factor of 
NAFLD, although controversy exists. This retrospective study aimed to 
investigate a potential impact of active Hp-I on NAFLD severity in morbidly 
obese patients, subjected to bariatric surgery and gastric biopsy for 
documentation of Hp-I. Of 64 eligible participants, 15 (23.4%) were diagnosed 
with active Hp-I, showing higher rates of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) 
than those without Hp-I (86.7% vs. 26.5%, respectively; p < 0.001). Concerning 
histological lesions, steatosis grade (p = 0.027), ballooning (p < 0.001), 
lobular inflammation (p = 0.003), and fibrosis stage (p < 0.001) were also more 
severe in Hp-I positive patients. Likewise, liver function tests, insulin 
resistance, dyslipidemia, and arterial hypertension were significantly higher in 
Hp-I positive patients. Hp-I was independently positively associated with NASH 
(beta = 3.27; p = 0.002), severe NASH (beta = 2.37; p = 0.018), and the presence 
of fibrosis (beta = 3.86; p = 0.001) in a binary regression model, after 
adjustment for potential confounders. In conclusion, active Hp-Ι was 
independently associated with NASH and fibrosis, findings offering potential 
clinical implication.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9040933
PMCID: PMC7230908
PMID: 32235601

Conflict of interest statement: M. Doulberis has received a travel grant by the 
Gilead Sciences Switzerland Sàrl. The other authors have no conflict of 
interest.