1. Cell Transplant. 2020 Jan-Dec;29:963689720914245. doi:
10.1177/0963689720914245.

A Likely Role for a Novel Cell Therapeutic Target of Transforming Growth 
Factor-β1 on Radiation Pneumonitis in Lung and Nasopharyngeal Cancer Patients.

Yin Q(1), Zhu B(2)(3), Zhang J(1), Yu Y(1), Li P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Hubei Provincial 
Hospital of Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 
China.
(2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hubei Provincial Hospital of Integrated 
Chinese and Western Medicine, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.
(3)Bing Zhu is the co-first author.
(4)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

The association between the polymorphism of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 
and risk of radiation pneumonitis has been extensively investigated; however, 
conclusive results were unavailable. Eligible studies were identified from the 
database of Medline, Web of Science, EMBASE, and CNKI (China Knowledge Resource 
Integrated Database) up to September 2019. The odds ratio (OR) and 95% 
confidence interval (95% CI) were used to assess the strength of the 
relationship. The results showed that there were associations between TGF 869 
T/C (rs1982073) and risks of radiation pneumonitis. Subgroup analyses showed 
that TGF 869 T/C was associated with risk of radiation pneumonitis in Caucasians 
(OR [95% CI]: 0.45 [0.31 to 0.67] for C carriers vs. TT). In addition, subgroup 
analyses also suggested that the C allele was associated with decreased risks of 
radiation pneumonitis among hospital-based case-control studies (0.56 [0.39 to 
0.82] for C carriers vs. TT). Meanwhile, C allele was also suggested to be 
associated with decreased risk of radiation pneumonitis among PCC (0.60 [0.38 to 
0.96] for C carriers vs. TT). Especially, C allele was also found to be 
associated with decreased risk of radiation pneumonitis from the participants 
with lung cancer (0.57 [0.37 to 0.90] for C carriers vs. TT). Our meta-analysis 
shows that T allele in TGF 869 T/C is significantly associated with the 
increased risk of radiation pneumonitis, especially for Caucasians, and for the 
participants with lung cancer.

DOI: 10.1177/0963689720914245
PMCID: PMC7586269
PMID: 32252552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.