1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Mar 18;11:299. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00299.
eCollection  2020.

The Role of the FMN-Domain of Human Cytochrome P450 Oxidoreductase in Its 
Promiscuous Interactions With Structurally Diverse Redox Partners.

Esteves F(1), Campelo D(1), Gomes BC(1), Urban P(2), Bozonnet S(2), Lautier 
T(2), Rueff J(1), Truan G(2), Kranendonk M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Toxicogenomics and Human Health (ToxOmics), Genetics, Oncology and 
Huma Toxicology, NOVA Medical School, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidade 
NOVA de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche, Scientifique, Institut National de la 
Recherche Agronomique, Institut National des Sciences Appliqu es de Toulouse, 
Toulouse Biotechnology Institute, Universit de Toulouse, Toulouse, France.

Erratum in
    Front Pharmacol. 2020 May 21;11:773. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00773.

NADPH cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (CPR) is the obligatory electron supplier 
that sustains the activity of microsomal cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. The 
variant nature of the isoform-specific proximal interface of microsomal CYPs 
indicates that CPR is capable of multiple degenerated interactions with CYPs for 
electron transfer, through different binding mechanisms, and which are still not 
well-understood. Recently, we showed that CPR dynamics allows formation of open 
conformations that can be sampled by its structurally diverse redox partners in 
a CYP-isoform dependent manner. To further investigate the role of the CPR 
FMN-domain in effective binding of CPR to its diverse acceptors and to clarify 
the underlying molecular mechanisms, five different CPR-FMN-domain random mutant 
libraries were created. These libraries were screened for mutants with increased 
activity when combined with specific CYP-isoforms. Seven CPR-FMN-domain mutants 
were identified, supporting a gain in activity for CYP1A2 (P117H, G144C, A229T), 
2A6 (P117L/L125V, G175D, H183Y), or 3A4 (N151D). Effects were evaluated using 
extended enzyme kinetic analysis, cytochrome b 5 competition, ionic strength 
effect on CYP activity, and structural analysis. Mutated residues were located 
either in or adjacent to several acidic amino acid stretches - formerly 
indicated to be involved in CPR:CYP interactions - or close to two tyrosine 
residues suggested to be involved in FMN binding. Several of the identified 
positions co-localize with mutations found in naturally occurring CPR variants 
that were previously shown to cause CYP-isoform-dependent effects. The mutations 
do not seem to significantly alter the geometry of the FMN-domain but are likely 
to cause very subtle alterations leading to improved interaction with a specific 
CYP. Overall, these data suggest that CYPs interact with CPR using an isoform 
specific combination of several binding motifs of the FMN-domain.

Copyright Â© 2020 Esteves, Campelo, Gomes, Urban, Bozonnet, Lautier, Rueff, Truan 
and Kranendonk.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00299
PMCID: PMC7094780
PMID: 32256365