1. Nat Commun. 2020 Apr 7;11(1):1729. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-15537-w.

TrkB-expressing paraventricular hypothalamic neurons suppress appetite through 
multiple neurocircuits.

An JJ(1), Kinney CE(1), Tan JW(1), Liao GY(1), Kremer EJ(2), Xu B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute Florida, Jupiter, 
FL, 33458, USA.
(2)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, University of Montpellier, 
CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, The Scripps Research Institute Florida, Jupiter, 
FL, 33458, USA. bxu@scripps.edu.

The TrkB receptor is critical for the control of energy balance, as mutations in 
its gene (NTRK2) lead to hyperphagia and severe obesity. The main neural 
substrate mediating the appetite-suppressing activity of TrkB, however, remains 
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that selective Ntrk2 deletion within 
paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH) leads to severe hyperphagic obesity. 
Furthermore, chemogenetic activation or inhibition of TrkB-expressing PVH 
(PVHTrkB) neurons suppresses or increases food intake, respectively. PVHTrkB 
neurons project to multiple brain regions, including ventromedial hypothalamus 
(VMH) and lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPBN). We find that PVHTrkB neurons 
projecting to LPBN are distinct from those to VMH, yet Ntrk2 deletion in PVH 
neurons projecting to either VMH or LPBN results in hyperphagia and obesity. 
Additionally, TrkB activation with BDNF increases firing of these PVH neurons. 
Therefore, TrkB signaling is a key regulator of a previously uncharacterized 
neuronal population within the PVH that impinges upon multiple circuits to 
govern appetite.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-020-15537-w
PMCID: PMC7138837
PMID: 32265438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.