1. Front Immunol. 2020 Mar 20;11:415. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00415. eCollection 
2020.

Intact B-Cell Signaling and Function With Host B-Cells 47 Years After 
Transplantation for X-SCID.

Deal C(1), Thauland TJ(1), Stiehm ER(1), Garcia-Lloret MI(1), Butte MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Allergy, and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States.

Introduction: Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) is a life-threatening 
immunodeficiency caused by several pathogenic genetic variants, and it is 
characterized by profound defects in T-cell numbers and immune function. First 
performed in the late 1960's, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation remains 
the standard treatment for most cases of SCID. There is a growing number of 
post-transplant SCID patients, and it is imperative to assess the long-term 
outcomes of these patients. We have reported here the longest follow-up of a 
post-transplant SCID patient who, to our knowledge, bears the first gamma chain 
(γc) variant to show intact IL-21 signaling. Case Presentation: The patient 
presented at 5 months of age with recurrent thrush and Pneumocystis jiroveci 
pneumonia. In 1971, at the age of 11 months, he received an unconditioned, 
matched, related donor transplant comprising whole, unprocessed bone marrow. He 
is now 48 years old without significant illness and has never required 
immunoglobulin replacement. He exhibits T-dependent vaccine responses. He does 
suffer from chronic warts and bacterial infections that have worsened in recent 
years. We confirmed a known pathogenic variant in the IL2RG gene showing a 
hemizygous variant NM_000206.2:c.675C>A, resulting in p.Ser225Arg. His chimerism 
studies revealed donor T cells, host B cells, host myeloid cells, and mixed NK 
cells. Lymphocyte enumeration revealed normal numbers and distribution of B 
cells. The host B cells carry the pathogenic variant in IL2RG, but, when 
stimulated with IL-21, they demonstrated intact, γc-dependent signaling. 
Conclusions: Even with host B cells, reconstitution with donor T cells can be 
sufficient to allow over four decades of survival when B-cell function is 
intact. Our case demonstrates that satisfactory B-cell function can arise as a 
consequence of both intact IL-21 signaling due to a hypomorphic γc variant, and 
close HLA matching with the donor to allow for effective T-cell help.

Copyright © 2020 Deal, Thauland, Stiehm, Garcia-Lloret and Butte.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00415
PMCID: PMC7099040
PMID: 32265911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]