1. Front Pharmacol. 2020 Mar 20;11:343. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00343.
eCollection  2020.

The Drug-Resistance Mechanisms of Five Platinum-Based Antitumor Agents.

Zhou J(1), Kang Y(1), Chen L(1), Wang H(2), Liu J(3), Zeng S(1), Yu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Drug Metabolism and Pharmaceutical Analysis, College of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Cancer Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, China.

Platinum-based anticancer drugs, including cisplatin, carboplatin, oxaliplatin, 
nedaplatin, and lobaplatin, are heavily applied in chemotherapy regimens. 
However, the intrinsic or acquired resistance severely limit the clinical 
application of platinum-based treatment. The underlying mechanisms are 
incredibly complicated. Multiple transporters participate in the active 
transport of platinum-based antitumor agents, and the altered expression level, 
localization, or activity may severely decrease the cellular platinum 
accumulation. Detoxification components, which are commonly increasing in 
resistant tumor cells, can efficiently bind to platinum agents and prevent the 
formation of platinum-DNA adducts, but the adducts production is the determinant 
step for the cytotoxicity of platinum-based antitumor agents. Even if adequate 
adducts have formed, tumor cells still manage to survive through increased DNA 
repair processes or elevated apoptosis threshold. In addition, autophagy has a 
profound influence on platinum resistance. This review summarizes the critical 
participators of platinum resistance mechanisms mentioned above and highlights 
the most potential therapeutic targets or predicted markers. With a deeper 
understanding of the underlying resistance mechanisms, new solutions would be 
produced to extend the clinical application of platinum-based antitumor agents 
largely.

Copyright Â© 2020 Zhou, Kang, Chen, Wang, Liu, Zeng and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2020.00343
PMCID: PMC7100275
PMID: 32265714