1. Am J Pathol. 2020 Jul;190(7):1449-1460. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.03.003.
Epub  2020 Apr 8.

Quantification of Viral and Host Biomarkers in the Liver of Rhesus Macaques: A 
Longitudinal Study of Zaire Ebolavirus Strain Kikwit (EBOV/Kik).

Greenberg A(1), Huber BR(2), Liu DX(3), Logue JP(3), Hischak AMW(3), Hart RJ(3), 
Abbott M(3), Isic N(3), Hisada YM(4), Mackman N(4), Bennett RS(3), Hensley 
LE(3), Connor JH(5), Crossland NA(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Medical Sciences, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Integrated Research Facility, National Institute for Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases (NIAID), Frederick, Maryland.
(4)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(5)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: ncrossla@bu.edu.

Zaire ebolavirus (EBOV) causes Ebola virus disease (EVD), which carries a 
fatality rate between 25% and 90% in humans. Liver pathology is a hallmark of 
terminal EVD; however, little is known about temporal disease progression. We 
used multiplexed fluorescent immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization in 
combination with whole slide imaging and image analysis (IA) to quantitatively 
characterize temporospatial signatures of viral and host factors as related to 
EBOV pathogenesis. Eighteen rhesus monkeys euthanized between 3 and 8 days 
post-infection, and 3 uninfected controls were enrolled in this study. Compared 
with semiquantitative histomorphologic ordinal scoring, quantitative IA detected 
subtle and progressive features of early and terminal EVD that was not feasible 
with routine approaches. Sinusoidal macrophages were the earliest cells to 
respond to infection, expressing proinflammatory cytokine interleukin 6 (IL6) 
mRNA, which was subsequently also observed in fibrovascular compartments. The 
mRNA of interferon-stimulated gene-15 (ISG-15), also known as ISG15 ubiquitin 
like modifier (ISG15), was observed early, with a progressive and ubiquitous 
hybridization signature involving mesenchymal and epithelial compartments. 
ISG-15 mRNA was prominent near infected cells, but not in infected cells, 
supporting the hypothesis that bystander cells produce a robust interferon gene 
response. This study contributes to our current understanding of early EVD 
progression and illustrates the value that digital pathology and quantitative IA 
serve in infectious disease research.

Copyright Â© 2020 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2020.03.003
PMCID: PMC7322367
PMID: 32275904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]